HOw smug this gray-eyde Morning seems to bee,
A pleasant sight; but yet more pleasure have I
To think upon this moystning Southwest Wind,
That drives my laden Ships from fertile Spain:
But come what will, no Wind can come amiss,
For two and thirty Winds that rules the Seas,
And blows about this aerie Region;
Thirty two Ships have I to equal them:
Whose wealthy fraughts doe make Pisaro rich:
Thus every Soil to me is natural:
Indeed by birth, I am a Portugal,
Who driven by Western winds on English shore,
Here liking of the soil, I married,
And have Three Daughters: But impartial Death
Long since, deprived me of her dearest life:
Since whose decease, in London I have dwelt:
And by the sweet loud trade of Ʋsurie,
Letting for Interest, and on Mortgages.
Doe I wax rich, though many Gentlemen
By my extortion comes to misery:
Amongst the rest, three English Gentlemen,
Have pound to me their Livings and their Lands:
Each several hoping, though their hopes are vain,
By marriage of my Daughters, to possess
Their Patrimonies and their Lands again:
But Gold is sweet, and they deceive them-selues;
For though I guild my Temples with a smile,
It is but Iudas-like, to work their ends.
But soft, What noise of footing doe I hear?
Now Moister, what intend you to read to vs?
Pisaro your Father would have me read moral Phi∣losophy.
What's that?
First tell me how you like it?
First tell vs what it is.
They be my Daughters and their Schoolmaster, Pisaro, not a word, but list their talk.
Gentlewomen, to paint Philosophy,
Is to present youth with so sour a dish,
As their abhorring stomachs nill digests.
When first my mother Oxford (Englands pride)
Fostered me puple-like, with her rich store,
My study was to read Philosophy:
But since, my head-strong youths unbridled will,
Scorning the leaden fetters of restraint,
Hath pruned my feahers to a higher pitch.
Gentlewomen, Moral Philosophy is a kind of art,
The most contrary to your tender sexes;
It teaches to be grave: and on that brow,
Where Beauty in her rarest glory shines,
Plants the sad semblance of decayed age:
Those Weeds that with their riches should adorn,
And grace fair Natures curious workmanship,
Must be converted to a black faced veil,
Griefs livery, and Sorrows semblance:
Your food must be your hearts abundant sighs,
Steeped in the brinish licquor of your tears:
Day-light as darke-night, darke-night spent in prayer:
Thoughts your companions, and repentant minds,
The recreation of your tired spirits:
Gentlewomen, if you can like this modesty,
Then will I read to you Philosophy.
Not I.
Fie upon it.
Hang up Philosophy, Isle none of it.
A Tutor said I; a Tutor for the Devil.
No Gentlewomen, Anthony hath learned
To read a Lector of more pleasing worth.
Marina, read these lines, young Haruie sent them,
There every line repugnes Philosophy:
Then love him, for he hates the thing thou hates.
Laurentia, this is thine from Ferdinand:
Think every golden circle that thou see,
The rich unvalued circle of his worth.
Mathea, with these Gloves thy Ned salutes thee;
As often as these, hide these from the Sun,
And Wanton steals a kiss from thy fair hand,
Presents his serviceable true harts zeal,
Which waits upon the censure of thy doom:
What though their Lands be mortgaged to your Father;
Yet may your Dowries redeem that debt:
Think they are Gentlemen, and think they love;
And be that thought, their true loves advocate.
Say you should wed for Wealth; for to that scope
Your Fathers greedy disposition tends,
The world would say, that you were had for Wealth,
And so fair Beauties honour quite distinct:
A mass of Wealth being poured upon another,
Little augments the show, although the sum;
But being lightly scattred by it self,
It doubles what it seemed, although but one:
Even so your selves, for wedded to the Rich,
His stile was as it was, a Rich man still:
But wedding these, to wed true Love, is duty:
You make them rich in Wealth, but more in Beauty:
I need not plead that smile, that smile shows hearts con∣sent,
That kiss showed love, that on that gift was lent:
And last thine Eyes, that tears of true joy sends,
As comfortable tidings for my friends.
Have done, have done; what need thou more procure,
When long ere this I stooped to that fair lure:
Thy ever loving Haruie I delight it:
Marina ever loving shall requite it young.
Teach vs Philosphy? Isle be no Nun;
Age scorns Delight, I love it being:
There's not a word of this, not a words part,
But shall be stamped, sealed, printed on my heart;
On this Isle read, on this my senses ply:
All Arts being vain, but this Philosophy.
Why was I made a Maid, but for a Man?
And why Laurentia, but for Ferdinand?
The chastest Soul these Angels could entice?
Much more himself, an Angel of more price:
were it thy self present, as my heart could wish,
Such usage thou should have, as I give this.
Then you would kiss him?
If I did, how then?
Nay I say nothing to it, but Amen.
The Clarke must have his fees, Isle pay you them.
Good God, how abject is this single life,
Isle not abide it; Father, Friends, nor Kin,
Shall once dissuade me from affecting:
A man's a man; and Ned is more then one:
Y faith Isle have thee Ned, or Isle have none;
Doe what they can, chafe, chide, or storm their fill,
Mathea is resolved to have her will.
I can no longer hold my patience.
Impudent villainy, and lascivious Girls,
I have ore-heard your wild conuersions:
You scorn Philosophy: You'll be no Nun,
You must needs kiss the Purse, because he sent it.
And you forsooth, you flurgill, minion,
A brat scant folded in the dozens at most,
You'll have your will forsooth; What will you have?
But twelve year old? nay Father that's not so,
Our Sexton told me I was three years mo.
I say but twelve: you're best tell me I lye.
What sir Anthony.
Here sir.
Come here sir, &amp; you light housewives get you in:
Stare not upon me, move me not to ire:
Nay sir stay you here, Isle talk with you:
Did I retain thee (villain) in my house,
Gave thee a stipend twenty Marks by year,
And hast thou thus infected my three Girls,
Urging the love of those, I most abhord;
Unthrifts, Beggars; what is worse,
And all because they are your Country-men?
Why sir, I taught them not to keep a Merchants Book, or cast account: yet to a word much like that word Account.
A Knave past grace, is past recovery.
Why sir Fresco, Villain, Loggerhead, where art thou?
Heere's a calling indeed; a man were better to live a Lords life and doe nothing, then a Serving creature, and never be idle. Oh Moister, what a mess of Brews stands now upon the point of spoiling by your hasti∣ness; why they were able to have got a good Stomach with child even with the sight of them; and for a Vapour, oh precious Vapour, let but a Wench come near them with a Painted face, and you should see the Paint drop and curdle on her Cheeks, like a piece of dry Essex Cheese toasted at the fire.
Well sir, leave this thought, &amp; mind my words,
Give diligence, inquire about
For one that is expert in Languages,
A good Musician, and a French-man borne;
And bring him hither to instruct my Daughters,
Isle ne'er trust more a smooth-fac'd English-man.
What, must I bring one that can speak Langua∣ges?
what an old Ass is my Moister; why he may speak flaunte taunt as well as French, for I cannot understand him.
If he speak French, thus he will say, Awee awee:
What, can thou remember it?
Oh, I have it now, for I remember my great Grandfathers Grandmothers sisters cousin told me, that Pigs and French-men, speak one Language, awee awee; I am Dog at this: But what must he speak else?
Dutch.
Let's hear it?
Haunce butterkin slowpin.
Oh this is nothing, for I can speak perfect Dutch when I list.
Can you, I pray let's hear some?
Nay I must have my mouth full of Meat first, and then you shall hear me grumble it forth full mouth, as Haunce Butterkin slowpin frokin: No, I am a simple Dutch∣man: Well, Isle about it.
Stay sir, you are too hasty; for hee must speak one Language more.
More Languages? I trust he shall have Tongues enough for one mouth: But what is the third?
Italian.
Why that is the easiest of all, for I can tell whether he have any Italian in him even by looking on him.
Can you so, as how?
Marry by these three points; a Wanton Eye. Pride in his Apparel, and the Devil in his Countenance. Well, God keep me from the Devil in seeking this French-man: But doe you hear me Moister, what shall my fell∣low Anthony doe, it seems he shall serve for nothing but to put Latin into my young Mistresses.
Hence ass, hence loggerhead, begone I say.
And now to you that reads Philosophy,
Pack from my house, I doe discharge thy service,
And come not near my doors; for if thou dost,
Isle make thee a public example to the world.
Well crafty Fox, you that work by wit,
It may be, I may live to fit you yet.
Ah sir, this trick was spied in time,
For if but two such Lectures more they'd heard,
For ever had their honest names been mart:
Isle in and rate them: yet that's not best,
The Girls are wilful, and severity
May make them careless, mad, or desperate.
What shall I doe? Oh! I have found it now,
There are three wealthy Merchants in the Town,
All Strangers, and my very special friends,
The one of them is an Italian:
A French-man, and a Dutch-man, be the other:
These three entirely doe affect my Daughters,
And therefore mean I, they shall have the tongues,
That they may answer in their several Language:
But what helps that? they must not stay so long,
For whiles they are a learning Languages,
My English Youths, both wed, and bed them too:
Which to prevent, Isle seek the Strangers out,
Let's look: tic past eleven, Exchange time full,
There shall I meet them, and confer with them,
This work craves hast, my Daughters must be Wed,
For one Months stay, saith farewell Maiden head.
Come Gentlemen, w'are almost at the house,
I promise you this walk ore Tower-hill,
Of all the places London can afford,
Hath sweetest Ayre, and fitting our desires.
Good reason, so it leads to Croched-Fryers
Where old Pisaro, and his Daughters dwell,
Look to your feet, the broad way leads to Hell:
They say Hell stands below, down in the deep,
Isle down that Hill, where such good Wenches keep,
But sir Ned, what says Mathea to thee?
Wilt fadge? wilt fadge? What, will it be a match?
A match say you? a mischief twill as soon:
Should I can scarce begin to speak to her,
But I am interrupted by her father.
Ha, what say you? and then put ore his snout,
Able to shadow Powles, it is so great.
Well, tic no matter, sirs, this is his House,
Knock for the Churl bid him bring out his Daughter;
Isle, sbloud I will, though I be hanged for it,
Hoyda, hoyda, nothing with you but up &amp; ride,
You'll be within, ere you can reach the Door,
And have the Wench, before you compass her:
You are too hasty, Pisaro is a man,
Not to be fed with Words, but won with Gold.
But who comes here?
Whom, Anthony our friend?
Say man, how fares our Loves? How doth Mathea?
Can she love Ned? how doth she like my suit?
Will old Pisaro take me for his Son;
For I thank God, he kindly takes our Lands,
Swearing, Good Gentlemen you shall not want,
Whilst old Pisaro, and his credit holds:
He will be damned the Roage, before he do it?
Prethy talk milder: let but thee alone,
And thou in one bare hour will ask him more,
Then heel remember in a hundred years:
Come from him Anthony, and say what news?
The news for me is bad; and this it is:
Pisaro hath discharged me of his service.
Discharged thee of his service; for what cause?
Nothing, but that his Daughters learn Philosophy.
Maids should read, that it teaches modesty.
I, but I left out mediocrity,
And with effectual reasons, urged your loves.
The fault was small, we three will to thy Moister
And beg thy pardon.
Oh, that cannot be,
Hee hates you far worser, then he hates me;
For all the love he shows, is for your Lands,
Which he hopes sure will fall into his hands:
Yet Gentlemen, this comfort take of me,
His Daughters to your loves affected be:
Their father is abroad, they three at home,
Go cheerly in, and cease that is your own:
And for my self, but grace what I intend,
Isle overreach the Churl, and help my Friend.
Build on our helps, and but devise the means.
Pisaro did command Fresco his man,
(A simple sotte, kept only but for mirth)
To inquire about in London for a man,
That were a French-man and Musician,
To be (as I suppose) his Daughters Tutor:
Him if you meet, as like enough you shall,
He will inquire of you of his affairs;
Then make him answer, you three came from Paules,
And in the middle walk, one you espied,
Fit for his purpose; then describe this Cloak,
This Beard and Hat: for in this borrowed shape,
Must I beguile and ouer-reach the Fool:
The Maids must be acquainted with this drift.
The Door doth op, I dare not stay reply,
Least being discride: Gentlemen adieu,
And help him now, that oft hath helped you.
How now sir, whither are you going?
Whither am I going, how shall I tell you, when I doe not know my self, nor understand my self?
What dost thou mean by that?
Marry sir, I am seeking a Needle in a Bottle of Hay, a Monster in the liknesse of a Man: one that in stead of good morrow, asks what Porrage you have to Din∣ner, Parley vous seignior? one that never washes his fingers, but lickes them clean with kisses; a clipper of the Kings English: and to conclude, an eternal enemy to all good Language.
What's this? what's this?
Doe not you smell me? Well, I perceive that wit doth not always dwell in a Satten-dublet: why, tic a French∣man, Bassimon cue, how doe you?
I thank you sir, but tell me what would thou doe with a French-man:
Nay faith, I would doe nothing with him, un∣less I set him to teach Parrets to speak: marry the old Ass my Moister, would have him to teach his Daughters, though I trust the whole world sees, that there be such in his house that can serve his Daughters turn, as well as the proudest French-man: but if you be good lads, tell me where I may find such a man?
We will, go hye thee straight to Paules,
There shalt thou find one fitting thy desire;
Thou soon may know him, for his Beard is black,
Such is his raiment, if thou run oppose,
Thou can not miss him Fresco.
Lord, Lord, how shall poor Phrisco reward your rich tidings Gentlemen: I am yours till Shrouetew∣esday, for then change I my Copy, &amp; look like nothing but Red-Herring Cobs, and Stock-Fish; yet Isle doe somewhat for you in the mean time: my Moister is a∣broad, and my young Mistresses at home: if you can doe any good on them before the French-man corn, why so? Ah Gentlemen, doe not suffer a litter of Languages to spring up amongst vs: I must to the Walk in Paules, you
to the Vestry. Gentlemen, as to my self, and so forth.
Fools tell the truth men say, and so may he:
Wenches we come now, Love our conduct be.
Ned, knock at the door: but soft forbear;
The Cloud breaks up, and our three Suns appear.
To this I fly, shine bright my lives sole stay,
And make griefs night a glorious summers day.
Gentlemen, how welcome you are here,
Guess by our looks, for other means by fear
Prevented is: our fathers quick return
Forbidds the welcome, else we would have done.
Mathea, How these faithful thoughts obey,
No more sweet love, I know what thou would say:
You say you love me, so I wish you still,
Love hath loves hier, being ballancst with good will:
But say; come you to vs, or come you rather
To pawn more Lands for money to our father?
I know tic so, a Gods name spend at large:
What man? our marriage day will all discharge;
Our father (by his leave) must pardon vs,
Age save of age, of nothing can discuss:
But in our loves, the proverb weal fulfil▪
Women and Maids, must always have their will.
Say thou as much, and add life to this Coarse,
Your self &amp; your good news doth more enforce:
How these have set forth love by all their wit,
I swear in heart, I more then double it.
Sisters be glad, for he hath made it plain,
The means to get our Schoolmaster again:
But Gentlemen, for this time cease our loves,
This open street perhaps suspicion moves,
Fain we would stay, bid you walk in more rather,
But that we fear the coming of our father:
Go to the Exchange, crave Gold as you intend,
Pisaro scrapes for vs; for vs you spend:
We say farewell, more sadlier be bold,
Then would my greedy father to his Gold:
Wee here, you there, ask Gold; and Gold you shall:
Weal pay the interest, and the principal.
That's my good Girls, and Isle pay you for all.
Come to the Exchange, and when I feel decay,
Send me such Wenches, Heavens I still shall pray.
Good morrow, M. Strangers.
Good morrow sir.
This (loving friends) hath thus emboldened me,
For knowing the affection and the love
Moister Vandal, that you bear my Daughter:
Likewise, and that with joy considering too,
you Monsieur Delion, would fine dispatch▪
I promise you, me thinks the time did fit,
And does byr'lady too, in mine advice,
This day to clap a full conclusion up:
And therefore made I bold to call on you,
Meaning (our business done here at the Burse)
That you at mine entreaty should walk home,
And take in worth such Viands as I have:
And then we would, and so I hope we shall,
Loosely tie up the knot that you desire,
But for a day or two; and then Church rites
Shall sure conform, confirm, and make all fast.
Seker Master Pisaro, me do so groterly dank you, dat you macke me so sure of de Wench, datt ic can neit dank you genough.
Monsieur Pisaro, mon pere, mon Father, Oh de
grande joy you give me (oconte) me sal go home to your House, sal eat your Bakon, sal eat your Beef, and shall tack de Wench, de fine Damoysella.
You shall, and welcome▪ welcome as my soul:
But were my third Son sweet Alvaro here,
Wee would not stay at the Exchange to day,
But hye vs home and there end our affairs.
Good day moister Pisaro.
Moister Moore, marry with all my heart good morrow sir; What news? What news?
This Merchant here my friend, would speak with you.
Sir, this jolly South-west wind with gentle blast,
Hath driven home our long expected Ships,
All laden with the wealth of ample Spain,
And but a day is past since they arrived
Safely at Plimmouth, where they yet abide.
Thanks is too small a guerdon for such news.
How like you this News friends? Moister Ʋandalle,
Heir's somewhat towards for my Daughters Dowry:
Heir's somewhat more then we did yet expect.
But hear you sir, my business is not done;
From these same Ships I did receive these lines,
And there enclosed this same Bill of exchange,
To pay at sight; if so you please accept it.
Accept it, why? What sir should I accept,
Have you received Letters, and not I?
Where is this lazy villain, this slow Post:
What, brings he every man his Letters home,
And makes me no body; does hee, does hee?
I would not have you bring me counterfeit;
And if you doe, assure you I shall smell it:
I know my Factors writing well enough.
You doe sir; then see your Factors writing:
I scorn as much as you, to counterfeit,
Tic well you doe sir.
What Moister Walgraue, and my other friends:
You are grown strangers to Pisaros house,
I pray make bold with me.
I, with your Daughters
You may be sworn, weal be as bold as may be.
Would you have ought with me, I pray now speak.
Sir, I think you understand our suit,
By the repairing we have had to you:
Gentlemen you know, must want no Coin,
Nor are they slaves unto it, when they have:
You may perceive our minds; What say you to it?
Gentlemen all▪ I love you all:
Which more to manifest, this after noon
Between the hours of two and three repair to me;
And were it half the substance that I have,
Whilst it is mine, tic yours to command.
But Gentlemen, as I have regard to you,
So doe I wish you'll have respect to me:
You know that all of vs are mortal men,
Subject to change and mutability;
You may, or I may, soon pitch ore the Perch▪
Or so, or so, have contrary crosses:
Wherefore I deem but mere equity,
That some thing may betwixt vs be to show.
M. Pisaro, within this two months without fail,
We will repay.
God save you Gentlemen.
Good morrow sin.
What M. Browne, the only man I wished for,
Does your price fall? what shall I have these Clothes?
For I would ship them straight away for Stoade:
I doe wish you my Money fore another.
Faith you know my price sir, if you have them.
You are to dear in sadness, moister Heigham:
You were about to say somewhat, pray proceed.
Then this it was: those Lands that are not mortgaged
God bless your worship.
I must crave pardon; Oh sir, are you come?
Hoyda, hoyda; Whats the matter now;
Sure, yonder fellow will be torn in pieces.
Whats hee, sweet youths; that so they flock about:
What old Pisaro tainted with this madness?
Upon my life, tic some body brings news;
The Court breaks up, and wee shall know their Coun∣sell:
Look, look, how busily they fall to reading.
I am the last▪ you should have kept it still:
Well, we shall see what news you bring with you;
Our duty premised, and we have sent unto your worship Sack, siuill Oils, Pepper, Barbery sugar, and such other commodities as we thought most requisite, we wanted money therefore we are fain to take up 200. l. of Moister Towersons man, which by a bill of Exchange sent to him, we would request your worship pay accordingly. You shall command sir, you shall command sir, The news here is, that the English shipes, the Fortune, your ship, the adventure and good luck of London coa∣sting along by Italy Towards Turkey, were set upon by to Spanish-galleis, what became of them we know not, but doubt much by reason of the weathers calmness.
How first six to one the weather calm,
Now before God who would not doubt their safety,
A plague upon these Spanish-galli Pirates,
Roaring Caribdis, or devouring Scilla,
Were half such terror to the antique world,
As these same antique Villains now of late,
Have made the Straights twixt Spain and Barberry.
Now sir, what doth your Factors letters say?
Marry he saith, these witless luckless dolts,
Have met, and are beset with Spanish Galleys,
As they did sail along by Italy:
What a bots made the dolts near Italy,
Could they not keep the coast of Barberry,
Or having past it, gone for Tripoly,
Being on the other side of Sicily,
As near, as where they were unto the Straights:
For by the Gloabe, both Tripoly and it,
Lie from the Straights some twenty five degrees;
And each degree makes three-score english miles?
Very true sir: But it makes nothing to my Bill of exchange: this dealing fits not one of your account.
And what fits yours? a prating wrangling tongue,
A women's ceaseless and incessant babbling,
That sees the world turned topsy turuie with me;
Yet hath not so much wit to stay a while,
Till I bemoan my late excessive loss.
S'wounds tic dinner time, Isle stay no longer:
Hark you a word sir.
I tell you sir, it would have made you whine
Worse then if shooles of luckless croaking Ravens,
Had ceasd on you to feed their famished paunches:
Had you heard news of such a ravenous rout,
Ready to cease on half the wealth you have.
Sbloud you might have kept at home &amp; be hanged,
What a pox care I.
God save your worship, a littlemony and so forth.
But men are senseless now of others woe,
This stony age is grown so stony hearted,
That none respects their neighbours miseries,
I wish (as Poets doe) that Saturnes times
The long out worn world wear in use again,
That men might sail without impediment.
I marry sir that were a merry world indeed, I would hope to get more money of your worship in one quarter of a year, then I can doe now in a whole twelvemonth.
Moister Pisaro how I have run about,
How I have toyld to day to find you out,
At home, abroad, at this mans house, at that,
Why I was here an hour ago and more,
Where I was told you were, but could not find you.
Faith sir I was here but was driven home,
Here is such a common hant of Crack-rope boys,
That what for fear to have m'apparell spoiled,
Or my Ruffs durted, or Eyes struck out:
I dare not walk where people doe expect me:
Well, things (I think) might be better looked unto,
And such Coin to, which is bestowed on Knaves,
Which should, but doe not see things be reformd,
Might be employed to many better uses:
But what of beardless Boys, or such like trash;
The Spanish Galleys: Oh, a vengeance on them.
Mass, this man hath the luck on it, I think I can scarce ever come to him for money, but this a vengeance on, and that a vengeance on it, doth so trouble him, that I can get no Coin: Well, a vengeance on it for my part; for he shall fetch the next Letters him self.
I prithee, when think thou the Ships will be come about from Plimmouth?
Next week, sir.
Came you sir from Spain lately?
I sir; Why ask you that?
Marry sir, thou seems to have bin in the hot countries, thy face looks so like a piece of rusty Bacon: had thy Host at Plimmoth meat enough in the house, whē thou were there?
What though he had not sir? but he had, how then?
Marry thank God for it; for otherwise, he would doubtless have Cut thee out in Rashers to have eaten thee; thou look as thou weart through broyld already.
You have said sir; but I am no mere for his mo∣ing, nor yours neither: If I had you in place where, you should find me tough enough in digestion, I warrant you.
What will you swagger sir, will ye swagger?
I beseech you Sir, hold your hand; Get home ye patch, cannot you suffer Gentlemen Jest with you?
Id teach him a Gentle trick and I had him of the burse; but Isle watch him a good turn I warrant him.
Assure ye moister Towerson, I cannot blame him,
I warrant you it is no easy loss;
How think you moister Stranger? by my faith sir,
Ther's twenty Merchants will be sorry for it,
That shall be partners with him in his loss.
Why sir, whats the matter.
The Spanish-gallies have beset our ships,
That lately were bound out for Siria.
What not? I promise you I am sorry for it.
What an old Ass is this to keep vs here:
Moister Pisaro, pray dispatch vs hence.
Moister Vandal I confess I wrong you;
But Isle but talk a word or two with him, and straight turn to you.
Ah sir, and how then y faith?
Turn to vs, turn to the Gallows if you will,
Tic Midsomer-Moone with him: let him alone,
He call's Ned Walgraue, Moister Vandal.
Let it be shrouetide, Isle not stay an inch moister Pisaro.
What should you fear: end as I have vowed be∣fore,
So now again; my Daughters shall be yours:
And therefore I beseech you and your friends,
Defer your business till Dinner time;
And what your say, keep it for table talk.
Marry and shall; a right good motion:
Sirs, old Pisaro is grown kind of late,
And in pure love, hath bid vs home to dinner.
Good news in truth: But wherefore art thou sad?
For fear the slave ere it be dinner time,
Remembering what he did, recall his word:
For by his idle speeches, you may swear,
His heart was not confederate with his tongue.
Tut never doubt, keep stomachs till anon,
And then we shall have cates to feed upon.
Well sir, since things doe fall so crossly out,
I must dispose my self to patience:
But for your business, doe you assure your self,
At my repairing home from the Exchange,
Isle set a helping hand unto the same.
Bon iurno signeour Padre, why be de melancholy so much, and grave in you a: wat News make you look so nought?
Nought is too good an epithet by much,
For to distinguish such contrariousnesse:
Hath not swift Fame told you our slow sailed Ships
Have been ore-taken by the swift sail Galleys,
And all my cared-for goods within the lurch
Of that same Caterpillars brood of Spain.
Signor si, how de Spaniola have almost tack de Ship dat go for Turkie: my Peter, hark you me on word, I have receive un litre from my Factor de Venice, dat after un piculo battalion, for un half hour de come a Wind fra de North, &amp; de Sea go tumble here, &amp; tumble dare, dat make de Galleys run away for fear be almost drowned.
How sir; did the Wind rise at North, and Seas wax rough: and were the Galleys therefore glad to fly?
Signior si, &amp; de Ship go drite on de Iscola de Candy.
Were thou not my Alvaro my beloved,
One whom I know does dearly count of me,
Much should I doubt me that some scoffing lack,
Had sent thee in the midst of all my griefs,
To tell a feigned tale of happy luck.
Will you no beleuue me? see dare dan, see de litre.
What is this world? or what this state of man,
How in a moment cursed, in a trice blessed?
But even now my happy state began fade,
And now again, my state is happy made,
My Goods all safe, my Ships all escaped away,
And none to bring me news of such good luck,
But whom the Heavens have marked to be my Son:
Were I a Lord as great as Alexander,
None should more willingly be made mine Heir
Then thee thou golden tongue, thou good-newes teller
Joy stops my mouth.
M. Pisaro, the day is late, the Bell doth ring:
Wilt please you hasten to perform this business?
What business sir? Gods me, I cry you mercy:
Doe it, yes sir, you shall command me more.
But sir, What doe you mean, doe you intend
To pay this Bill, or else to palter with me?
Marry God shield, that I should palter with you:
I doe accept it, and come when you please;
You shall have money, you shall have your money due.
I beseech your worship to consider me.
Oh, you cannot cog: Go to, take that,
Pray for my life: pray that I have good luck,
And thou shalt see, I will not be thy worst moister.
Marry God bless your Worship; I came in happy time: What, a French crown? sure hee knows not what he does: Well, Isle begone, least he remember himself, and take it from me again.
Come on my lads, M. Vandal, sweet son Alvaro:
Come don Balsaro, lets be jogging home
Bear liken sirs, I think tic one a clock.
Come M. Moore, th'Exchange is waxen thin,
I think it best we get vs home to dinner.
I know that I am looked for long ere this:
Come moister Towerson, let's walk along.
And if you be so hot upon your dinner,
Your best way is, to haste Pisaro on,
For he is cold enough, and slow enough;
He hath so late digested such cold news.
Mary and shall: Hear you moister Pisaro.
Many Pisaros here: Why how now Ned;
Where is your Matt 'your welcome, and good cheer?
Swounds, lets follow him; why stay we here?
Nay prithee Ned Walg. lets bethink our selves,
There's no such haste, we may come time enough:
At first Pisaro bade vs come to him
Twixt two or three a clock at after noon?
Then was he old Pisaro: but since then,
What with his grief for loss, and joy for finding,
Hee quite forgot himself, when he did bid vs,
And afterword forgot, that he had bade vs.
I care not, I remember't well enough:
Hee bade vs home; and I will go, that's flat,
To teach him better wit another time.
Heer'le be a gallantiest, when we come there,
To see how mazed the greedy chuff will look
Upon the nations, sects, and factions,
That now have borne him company to dinner:
But hark you, lets not go to vex the man;
Prithee sweet Ned lets tarry, doe not go.
Not go? indeed you may doe what you please;
Isle go, that's flat: nay, I am gon already,
Stay you two, and consider further of it.
Nay all will go, if one: I prithee stay;
You're such a rash and giddy headed youth,
Each Stone's a Thorne: Hoyda, he skips for haste;
Young Haruie did but jest; I know heel go.
Nay, he may choose for me: But if he will,
Why does he not? why stands he prating still?
If you'll go, come: if not, fare-well?
Hier a Poast-horse for him (gentle Frank)
Heir's haste, and more haste then a hasty Pudding:
You mad-man, mad-cap, wild-oates; we are for you,
It boots not stay, when you intend to go.
Come away then.
A thousand welcomes friends: Monsier Delion,
Ten thousand Ben-venues unto your self.
Signior Alvaro, Moister Vandal;
Proud am I, that my roof contains such Friends.
Why Mall, Larentia, Matth; Where be these Girls?
Lively my Girls, and bid these Strangers welcome;
They are my friends, your friends, and our wel-willers:
You cannot tell what good you may have on them.
Gods me, Why stir you not? Hark in your ear,
These be the men the choice of many millions,
That I your careful Father have provided
To be your Husbands: therefore bid them welcome.
Nay by my troth, tic not the guise of maids,
To give a slavering Salute to men:
If these sweet youths have not the wit to doe it,
Wee have the honesty to let them stand.
Gods sekerlin, dats vn-fra meskin, Monsieur Delion dare de Groat freisler, dare wode ic zene, tic vn-fra Daughter, dare hob ic so long loud, dare Hob my desire so long gewest.
Ah Ʋenice, Rome, Italia▪ Frauncia, Anglitera, nor all dis orb can show so much belliza, veremante de secunda, Madonade granda beauty.
Certes me dincke de mine depeteta de little An∣gloise, de me Matresse Pisaro is un net, un becues, un fra, et un tender Damosella.
What Stocks, what stones, what senseless Trunks be these?
When as I bid you speak, you hold your tongue:
When I bid peace, then can you prate, and chat,
And gossip: But go too, speak and bid welcome;
Or (as I live) you were as good you did.
I cannot tell what Language I should speak:
If I speak English (as I can none other)
They cannot understand me, nor my welcome.
Bella Madonna, dare is no language so dulls; dulls, dat is sweet, as de language, dat you shall speak, and de vell come dat you sal say, sal be well know perfaytemente.
Pray sir, What is all this in English?
De vsa sal vell teash you vat dat is; and if you sal please, I will teash you to parlour Italiano.
And that me thinks sir, not without need:
And with Italian, to a Childes obedience,
With such desire to seek to please their Parents,
As others far more virtuous then them selves,
Doe daily strive to doe: But tic no matter,
Isle shortly pull your haughty stomachs down:
Isle teach you urge your Father; make you run,
When I bid run: and speak, when I bid speak:
What greater cross can careful parents have
Then careless Children. Stir and see who knocks?
Good morrow to my good Mistress Mathea.
As good a morrow, to the morrow giver.
A murren, what make these? What do they here?
You see moister Pisaro, we are bold guests▪
You could have bid no surer men then wee.
Hark you Gentlemen; I did expect you
At after noon, not before two a clock.
Why sir, if you please, you shall have vs here at two a clock, at three a clock, at four a clock; nay till to morrow this time: yet I assure you▪ sir, wee came not to your house without inviting.
Why Gentlemen, I pray who bade you now?
Who ever did it, sure hath done you wrong:
For scarcely could you come to worser cheer.
It was your own self bade vs to your cheer,
When you were busy with Balsaro talking;
You bade vs cease our suites till dinner time,
And then to use it for our table talk:
And wee I warrant you, are as sure as Steel.
A murren on your selves, and sureness too:
How am I crossed: Gods me, what shall I doe,
This was that ill news of the Spanish Pirats,
That so disturbed me: well, I must dissemble,
And bid them welcome; but for my Daughters
Isle send them hence, they shall not stand and prate.
Well my Masters, Gentlemen, and Friends,
Though unexpected, yet most heartily welcome;
(Welcome with a vengeance) but for your cheer,
That will be small: yet too too much for you.
Mall, in and get things ready.
Laurentia, bid Maudlin lay the Cloth, take up the Meat:
Look how she stirs; you sullen Elf, you Callet,
Is this the haste you make?
Signor Pisaro, no soiat so malcontento de Gentle∣woman your filigola did parlour but a litella to, de gentle home y our grande amico.
But that grande amico, is your grande inimico:
One, if they be suffered to parlour,
Will poll you, I and pill you of your Wife:
They love together: and the other two,
Loves her two Sisters: but tic only you
Shall crop the flower, that they esteem so much.
Do they so; vell let me lone, sal see me give them de such grand mock, sal be shame of them selves.
Doe sir, I pray you doe; set lustily upon them,
And Isle be ready still to second you.
But Matt, art thou so mad as to turn French?
Yes marry when two Sundays come together;
Think you Isle learn to speak this gibberidge,
Or the Pigs language? Why, if I fall sick,
Theyle say, the French (et-cetera) infected me.
Why how now Minion; what, is this your service?
Your other Sisters busy are employed,
And you stand idle: get you in, or.
If you chide her, chide me (M. Pisaro:
For but for me, she had gon in long since.
I think she had: for we are sprights to scare her;
But er't belong, Isle drive that humour from her.
Signor, me thincks you soud no macke de wen she so hardee, so disobedient to de padre as ditt madonna Matt.
Signor, me thinks you should learn to speak, before you should be so foole-hardy, as to woe such a Maiden as that Madonna Matt?
Warrant you Monsieur, he sal parley wen you sal stand out the doure.
Hark you Monsieur, you would wish your self half hanged, you were as sure to be let in as hee.
Macke no doubt de signor Alua. sal do vel enough
perhaps so: but me thinks your best way were to ship your self for Stoad, and there to batter your self for a commodity; for I can tell you, you are here out of liking.
The worst perhaps dislike him, but the best esteem him best.
But by your patience sir, me thinks none should know better who's Lord, then the Lady.
Den de Lady, vat Lady?
Marry sir, the Lady let her alone: one that means to let you alone for fear of trouble.
Every man as he may: yet sometimes the blind may ketch a Hare.
I sir, but he will first eat many a Fly:
You know it must be a wonder, if a Crab catch a Foul.
Maer hortens; if he &amp; ic &amp; monsier Delion be de Crab, we sal kash de Foul well genough, I warrant you.
I, and the Fool well enough I warrant you;
And much good may it doe ye.
Me dincke such a piculo man as you be, sal have no de such grande luck madere.
Non da Monsieur, and he be so granda amorous op de Damosella, he sal have Maudlin de wit Wench in de Kichine by meeter Pisaros leave.
By M. Pisaros leave, Monsieur Isle mumble you, ex∣cept you learn to know, whom you speak to: I tell thee Francois, Isle have (maugre thy teeth) her that shall make thee gnash thy teeth to want.
Yet a man may want of his will, and bate an Ace of his wish: But Gentlemen, every man as his luck serves, and so agree wee; I would not have you fall out in my house: Come, come, all this was in jest, now lets too't in earnest; I mean with our teeth, and try who's the best Trencher-man.
Ah sir, now I know, what manner of thing Powles is; I did so marle before what it was out of all count: For my moister would say, Would I had Powles full of Gold. My young Mistresses, and Grimkin our Taylor, would wish they had Powles full of Needles: I, one asked my moister half a yard of Freeze to make me a Coat and
hee cried whoop holly-day, it was big enough to make Powles a Night-gowne. I have been told, that Duke Hum∣fry dwells here, and that he keeps open house, and that a brave sort of Cammileres dine with him every day; now if I could see any vision in the world towards dinner, I would set in a foot: But the best is, a the ancient Eng∣lish romaine Orator saith, So-lame-men, Misers, Housewives, and so forth: the best is, that I have great store of comp∣no that doe nothing but go up and down, and go up and down, and make a grumbling together, that the meat is so long making ready: Well, if I could meet this scurvy Frenchman, they should stay me, for I would be gone home.
I beseech you Monsieur, give me audience.
What would you have? What should I give you?
Pardon, sir mine uncivil and presumptuous in∣trusion, who endeavour nothing less, then to provoke or exasperate you against me.
They say, a word to the Wise is enough: so by this little French that he speaks, I see hee is the very man I seek for: Sir, I pray what is your name?
I am nominated Monsieur Le Mouche, and rest at your bon service.
I understand him partly; yea, and partly nay: Can you speak French? Content pore vous monsieur Madomo.
If I could not sir, I should ill understand you: you speak the best French that ever trod upon Shoe of Leather.
Nay, I can speak more Languages then that: This is Italian, is it not? Nella slurde Curt zana.
Yes sir, and you speak it like a very Natural.
I believe you well▪ now for Dutch:
Dusky de doe watt hob ye ge brought.
I pray stop your mouth, foot I never heard such Dutch before broached.
Nay I think you have not met with no peasant: Hear you M. Mouse, (so your name is I take it) I have considered of your learning in these aforesaid Languages, and find you reasonable: So, so, now this is the matter; Can you take the ease to teach these Tongues to two or three Gentlewomen of mine acquaintance, and I will see you paid for your labour.
Yes sir, and that most willingly.
Why then M. Mouse, to their use, I entertain ye, which had not been but for the troubles of the world, that I my self have no leisure to show my skill: Well sir, if you'll please to walk with me, Isle bring you to them.
Sit till dinners done; not I, I swear:
Shall I stay? till he belch into mine ears
Those rustic Phrases, and those Dutch French terms,
Stammering half Sentences dogbolt Eloquence:
And when he hath no love for-sooth, why then
Hee tells me Cloth is dear at Anwerpe, and the men
Of Amsterdam have lately made a law,
That none but Dutch as hee, may traffic there:
Then stands he still and studies what to say;
And after some half hour, because the Ass
Hopes (as he thinks) I shall not contradict him.
Hee tells me that my Father brought him to me,
And that I must perform my Fathers will.
Well good-man Goose-cap, when thou woest again,
Thou shalt have simple ease, for thy Loves pain.
Alas poor Wench, I sorrow for thy hap,
To see how thou art clogged with such a Dunce:
Forsooth my Sire hath fitted me far better,
My Frenchman comes upon me with the Sa, sa, sa;
Sweet Madam pardon moi I pra•:
And then out goes his Hand, down goes his Head,
Swallows his Spittle, frizzles his Beard; and then to me:
Pardon moi mistress Mathea,
If I be bold, to macke so bold met you,
Think it go will dat spurs me dus up you.
Dan cast neit off so good ande true Lover,
Madame celestura de la, (I know not what)
Doe oft pray to God dat me would love her:
And then hee reckons a catalogue of names
of such as love him, and yet cannot get him.
Nay, but your Monsieur's but a Mouse in cheese,
Compared with my Signor; hee can tell
Of Lady Ʋenus, and her Son blind Cupped:
Of the fair Scilla that was loved of Glaucus,
And yet scorned Glaucus, and yet loved King Minos;
Yet Minos hated her, and yet she holp'd him;
And yet he scorned her, yet she kilt her Father
To doe her good; yet he could not abide her:
Nay, heal be bawdy too in his discourse;
And when he is so, he will take my Hand,
And tickle the Palm, wink with his one Eye,
Gape with his Mouth, and
And, hold thy tongue I prithee: here's my father.
Unmannerly, untaught, vnnurtred Girls,
Doe I bring Gentlemen, my very friends
To feast with me, to revel at my House,
That their good likings, may be set on you,
And you like misbehaud and sullen Girls,
Turn tail to such, as may advance your states:
I shall remembered, when you think I doe not.
I am sorry Gentlemen, your cheare's no better;
But what did want at Board, excuse me for,
And you shall have amends be made in Bed.
To them friends, to them; they are none but yours:
For you I bred them, for you brought them up:
For you I kept them, and you shall have them:
I hate all others that resort to them:
Then rouse your bloods▪ be bold with what's your own:
For I and mine (my friends) be yours, or none.
God-gee god-morrow sir, I have brought you M. Mouse here to teach my young Mistresses: I assure you (for-sooth) he is a brave Frenchman.
Welcome friend, welcome: my man (I think)
Hath at the full, resolved thee of my will.
Monsieur Delion, I pray question him:
I tell you sir, tic only for your sake,
That I doe mean to entertain this fellow,
A bots of all ill luck, how came these here?
Now am I post except the Wenches help me:
I have no French to flap them in the mouth,
To see the luck of a good fellow, poor Anthony
Could ne'er have sorted out a worser time:
Now will the pack of all our sly devises
Be quite laid op, as one undoes an Oyster:
Frank, Heigham, and mad Ned, fall to your muses,
To help poor Anthony now at a pinch,
Or all our market will be spoiled and mart.
Tut man, let vs alone, I warrant you.
Monsieur, Vous acts tresbien venue, de quell pais acts vous.
Vous, thats you: sure he says, how do men call you Monsieur le Mouche?
Sister, help sister; that's honest Anthony,
And he answers, your wore cuius contrarium.
Monsieur, Vous n'entens pas, Je no demand puit,
vostre nom?
Monsieur Delion, he that made your Shoes, made them not in fashion: they should have been cut square at the toe.
Madame, my Shoe met de square toe, vat be dat?
Why sauce-box; how now you irreverent mincks
Why? in whose Stable hast thou been brought up,
To interrupt a man in midst of speech?
Monsieur Delion, disquiet not your self,
But as you have begun, I pray proceed
To question with this Countryman of yours.
Dat me sal doe tres been, but de bella Madonna de june Gentlewoman do monstre some singe of amour to speak lot me, epurce monsieur, me sal say but two tree four five word to di• francois: or suss Monsieur Le mouche en quelle party de France esties vous no?
France.
Ned.
Sbloud, let me come.
Moister Pisaro, we have occasion of affairs,
Which calls vs hence with speed; wherefore I pray
Defer this business till some fitter time,
And to perform what at the Exchange we spoke of.
A blessing on that tongue, saith Anthony.
Yes marry Gentlemen, I will, I will.
Alvaro to your task, fall to your task,
Isle bear away those three, who being here,
Would set my Daughters on a merry pin:
Then cheerly try your luckes; but speak, and speed,
For you alone (say I) shall doe the deed.
Hear you M. Mouse, did you dine to day at Paules with the rest of the Gentlemen there?
No sir, I am yet vndined.
Me thinks you should have a reasonable good
stomach then by this time, as for me I can sell nothing within me from my mouth to my Codpiece but all Em∣ptie, wherefore I think a piece of wisdom to go in and see what Maudelin hath provided for our Dinner moister Mouse will you go in?
With as good a stomach and desire as your self.
Let's pass in then
Han seg you Dochtor, for vat cause, voer why bed also much grooterlie strange, Ic seg you wat, if datt ghy speak to me, is datt ghy love me.
First that I care not for you, first that your breath stinks, if that your breath stinks not, you must learn sweeter English or I shall never understand your suite.
Pardon moi Madame.
Withal my heart so you offend no more.
Is dat an offence to be amorous di one belle Gen∣tleawoman.
I sir see your Belle Gentle-woman cannot be a∣morose of you.
Then if I were as that belle Gentlewoman's lover,
I would trouble her no further, nor be amorous any longer.
Madonna yet de Belleza of de face beauty deform of all de Corpo may be such datt no perriculo, nor all de mal shaunce, can make him leave his dulls visage.
But signor Alvaro if the periculo or mal shaunce were such, that she should love and live with an other, then the dulls visage must be left in spite of the lovers teeth, whilst he may whine at his own ill fortune.
Datts waer matresse, for it is untrue saying, they wint he taught they verleift lie scrat sin gatt.
And I think to are like to scratch there but no∣for to claw any of my Sisters love away.
Dan sal your sistree do against her voters will,
or your vader segt dat ec sal hob har for mine wife.
I think not so sir, for I never heard him say so▪ but Isle go in and ask him if his meaning be so.
Hark sister signor Alvaro saith, that I am the fairest of all vs three,
Believe him not for heel tell any lie.
If so he thinks thou may be pleased thereby,
Come go with me and near stand prating here,
I have a jest to tell thee in thine ear,
Shall make you laugh: come let your signor stand,
I know there's not a Wench in all this Town,
Scoffs at him more, or loves him less then thou.
Moister Ʋandalle, as much I say for you;
If needs you marry with an English Lass,
Woe her in English, or sheele call you Ass.
Tut that's a French cog; sure I think,
There's ne'er a Wench in France not half so fond,
To woe and sue so for your Mounsership.
Par may foy Madame, she does tincke dare is no Wench so dure as you: for de Fillee was cry dulls, tender, and amorous for me to love his; now me tincke dat I being such a fine man, you should loua me.
So think not I, sir.
But so tincke esh oder Demoiselles.
Nay Isle lay my love to your command,
That my Sisters think not so: How say you sister Mall?
Why how now Gentlemen, is this your talk?
What beaten in plain field: where be your Maids?
Nay then I see their loving humour fades,
And they resign their interest up to me;
And yet I cannot serve for all you three:
But least two should be mad, that I love one,
You shall be all alike, and Isle love none:
The world is scant, when so many Jack Daws,
Hover about one Coarse with greedy paws:
If needs you'll have me stay till I am dead,
Carrion for Crows, Mathea for her Ned:
And so farewell, wee Sisters doe agree,
To have our wills, but ne'er to have you three.
Madame attends, Madame: is she alle? doe she mockque de nous in such sort?
Oh de pestilence, no if datick can neite this En∣glese spreake vel, it shall his Fader seg how dit is to pass gecomen.
No parlate, see here signors de Fader.
Now Friends, now Gentlemen, how speeds your work; have you not found them shrewd unhappy girls?
Master Pisaro, de Dochter masters Laurentia call me de Dial, den Ass, for that ic can neit english spreken.
Ande dat we sal no parlour, dat we sal no hair den for de wive.
Are they so lusty? Dare they be so proud?
Well, I shall find a time to meet with them:
In the mean season, pray frequent my house.
Ho now sir, whither are you running?
About a little tiny business.
What business, Ass?
Indeed I was not sent to you: and yet I was sent after the three Gen-men that dined here, to bid them come to our house at ten a clock at night, when you were abed.
Ha, what is this? Can this be true?
What, art thou sure the Wenches bade them come?
So they said, unless their minds be changed since: for a Woman is like a Weather-cocke they say, &amp; I am sure of no more then I am certain of: but Isle go in and bid them send you word, whether they shall come or no.
No sir, stay you here; but one word more: Did they appoint thē come one by one, or else al together?
Altogether: Lord that such a young man as you should have no more wit: why if they should come toge∣there, one could not make rome for them; but coming one by one, theyle stand there if there were twenty of them.
How this news glads me, and revives my soul: How say you sirs, what will you have a jest worth the telling; nay worth the acting: I have it Gentlemen, I have it Friends.
Signor Pisaro, I prey de gratia watte maneire sal we have? wat will the parlour? wat bon doe you know Signor Pisaro, dicheti no signor Pisaro.
Oh that youth so sweet, so soon should turn to age; were I as you, why this were sport alone for me to doe.
Hark ye, hark ye; here my man,
Saith, that the Girls have sent for Moister Heigham
And his two friends; I know they love them dear,
And therefore wish them late at night be here
To revel with them: Will you have a jest,
To work my will, and give your longings rest:
Why then M. Ʋandalle, and you two,
Shall soon at midnight come, as they should doe,
And court the Wenches; and to be unknown,
And taken for the men, whom they alone
So much affect; each one shall change his name:
Moister Ʋandalle, you shall take Heigham, and you
Young Haruie, and monsieur Delion Ned,
And under shadows be of substance sped:
How like you this device? how think you of it?
Oh de brave de galliard devise: me sal come by de night and contier fair de Anglois Gentlehomes dictenous ainsi monsieur Pisaro.
You are in the right sir.
And I sall name me de signor Haruy, end mon∣secure Delion sall be de piculo signor Ned, end when mado∣na Laurentia sall say, who be dare? mister Vandal sall say, Oh my sout Laid, hier be your love Mestro Heigham: Is no dis de brauissime, moister Vandal?
Slacked up den tromele, van ec sall come
Up to de camerken, wan my new Wincken
Slacked up den tromele, van ec sall come.
Ha, ha, ha, moister Vandal,
I trow you will be merry soon at night,
When you shall doe in deed, what now you hope of.
I sall v seg vader, Ec sall tesh your Daughrer such a ting, make her laugh too.
Well my Sons all, (for so I count you shall)
What we have here deuis'd, provide me for:
But aboue all, doe not (I pray) forget
To come but one by one, as they did wish.
Mar hortens vader, ec veite neite de wecke to your hoes, horrid ens sall moister Fresco your manikin come to call de me, and bring me to v house.
Yes marry shall hee: see that you be ready,
And at the hour of eleven soon at night:
Hie you to Bucklersburie to his Chamber,
And so direct him straight unto my house:
My Son Alvaro, and monsieur Delion,
I know, doth know the way exceeding well:
Well, weal to the Rose in Barken for an hour:
And sir Fresco, see you prove no blab.
Oh monstrous, who would think my Moister had so much wit in his old rotten budget: and yet in faith he is not much troubled with it neither. Why what wise man in a kingdom would send me for the Dutch-man? Does hee think Isle not cousin him: Oh fine, Isle
have the bravest sport: Oh brave, Isle have the gallentest sport: Oh come; now if I can hold behind, while I may laugh a while, I care not: Ha, ha, ha.
Why how now Fresco, why laugh thou so har∣tily?
Laugh M. Mouse: Laugh, ha, ha, ha.
Laugh, why should I laugh? or why art thou so merry?
Oh moister Mouse, moister Mouse, it would make any Mouse, Ratte, Cat, or Dog, laugh to think, what sport we shall have at our house soon at night: Isle tell you, all, my young Mistresses sent me after M. Heigham and his friends, to pray them come to our house after my old Moister was a bed: Now I went, and I went; and I run, and I went: and whom should I meet, but my Moister and M. Pisaro and the Strangers; so my Moister very worcester∣shipfully (I must needs say) examined me whither I went now? I durst not tell him an untruth, for fear of lying, but told him plainly and honestly mine arrande: Now who would think my Moister had such a monstrous plague wit, hee was as glad as could be; out of all scotch and notch glad, out of all count glad? and so firra he bid the three Vplandish-men come in their steads and woe my young Mistresses: Now it made me so laugh to think how they will be consent, that I could not follow my My∣ster: But Isle follow him, I know he is gone to the Tavern in his merry humour: Now if you will keep this as secret as I have done hitherto, wee shall have the bravest sport soon, as can be. I must be gone, say nothing.
Well it is so:
And we will have good sport, or it shall go hard;
This must the Wenches know, or all is mart.
Hark you Mis. Moll, Mis. Laurentia, Mis. Matt,
I have such news (my Girls) will make you smile.
What be they Moister, how I long to hear it?
A Woman right, still longing, and with child,
For every thing they hear, or light upon:
Well▪ if you be mad Wenches, hear it now,
Now may your knaveries give the deadliest blow
To night-walkers, eauese-droppers, or outlandish love,
That ere was stristen.
Anthony Mowche,
Move but the matter; tell vs but the jest,
And if you find vs slack to execute,
Never give credence, or believe vs more.
Then know: The Strangers your Outlandish loves,
Appointed by your Father, comes this night
In stead of Haruie, Heigham, and young Ned,
Under their shadows to get to your bed:
For Fresco simply told him why he went:
I need not to instruct, you can conceive,
You are not Stocks nor Stones, but have some store
Of wit and knavery too.
Anthony, thanks
Is too too small a guerdon for this news;
You must be English: Well sir signor sows,
Isle teach you tricks for coming to our house.
Are you so crafty, oh that night were come,
That I might hear my Dutchman how he would swear
In his own mother Language, that he loves me:
Well, if I quit him not, I here pray God,
I may lead Apes in Hell, and die a Maid;
And that were worser to me then a hanging.
Well said old honest huddles; here's a heap
Of merry Lasses: Well, for my self,
Isle hie me to your Lovers, bid them mask
With vs at night, and in some corner stay
Near to our house, where they may make some play
Upon your rivals, and when they are gon,
Come to your windows.
Doe so good Moister.
Peace, begone; for this our sport,
Some body soon will moorne.
How favourable Heaven and Earth is seen,
To grace the mirthful complot that is laid,
Nights Candles burn obscure, and the pale Moon
Favouring our drift, lies buried in a Cloud:
I can but smile to see the simple Girls,
Hoping to have their sweete-hearts here to night,
Tickled with extreme joy, laugh in my face:
But when they find, the Strangers in their steads,
Theyle change their note, and sing an other song.
Where be these Girls here? what, to bed, to bed:
Maudlin make fast the Doors, rake up the Fire;
Gods me, tic nine a clock, hark Bow-bell rings:
Some look down below, and see who knocks:
And hark you Girls, settle your hearts at rest,
And full resolve you, that to morrow morn,
You must be wed to such as I prefer;
I mean Alvaro and his other friends:
Let me no more be troubled with your nays.
You shall doe what Isle have, and so resolve.
Welcome M. Moore, welcome,
What wind a-gods name drives you forth so late?
Faith sir, I am come to trouble you,
My wife this present night is brought to bed.
To bed, and what hath God sent you?
A jolly Girl, sir.
And God bless her: But what's your will sir?
Faith sir, my house being full of Friends,
Such as (I thank them) came to see my wife?
I would request you, that for this one night,
My daughter Susan might be lodged here.
Lodge in my house, welcome withal my heart,
Matt hark you, she shall lye with you,
Trust me she could not come in fitter time.
For here you sir, to morrow in the morning.
All my three Daughters must be married,
Good moister Moore lets have your company,
What say you sir; Welcome honest friend.
How now sir whats the news with you?
Mowche hear you, stir betimes to morrow,
For then I mean your Scholars shall be wed:
What news, what news man that you look so sad,
Hee brings me word my wife is new fallen sick,
And that my daughter cannot come to night:
Or if she does, it will be very late.
Believe me I am then more sorry for it.
But for your daughter come she soon or late,
Some of vs will be up to let her in,
For here be three means not to sleep to night:
Well you must be gone? commend me to your wife,
Take heed how you go down, the stairs are bad,
Bring here a light.
Tic well I thank you sir.
Good night moister Moore farewell honest friend,
Come, come to bed, to bed tic nine and past,
Doe not stand prating here to make me fetch you,
But get you to your Chambers.
Byr'lady here is short work, hark you Girls,
Will you to morrow marry with the strangers.
Y faith sir no Isle first leap out at window,
Before Marina marry with a stranger,
Yes but your father swears, you shall have one.
Yes but his daughters, swears they shall have none,
These horizon Cannibals, these Philistines,
These tango mongoose shall not rule Ore me,
Isle have my will and Ned, or Isle have none.
How will you get him? how will you get him?
I know no other way except it be this,
That when your fathers in his soundest sleep,
You op the Door and run away with them,
So wee will rather then miss of them.
Tic well resolude in faith and like your selves,
But hear you? to your Chambers presently,
Least that your father doe descry our drift,
Mistress Susan should come but she cannot,
Nor perhaps shall not, yet perhaps she shall,
Might not a man conceit a pretty jest?
And make as mad a Riddle as this is,
If all things fadge not, as all things should doe,
Wee shall be sped y'fayth, Matt shall have hue.
Wear be you master Fresco.
Here sir, here sir, now if I could cousin him, take heed sir hers a post.
Ec be so groterly hot, datt ec sweat, Oh wen sal we come dare.
Be you so hot sir, let me carry your Cloak, I assure you it will ease you much.
Dare here, dare, tic so Dark ey can neit see.
I, so so: now you may travel in your Hose and Doublet: now look I as like the Dutchman, as if I were spit out of his mouth: Isle straight home, &amp; speak groote and brood, and toot and gibrish; and in the dark Isle have a fling at the Wenches. Well, I say no more; farewell M. Mental, I must go seek my fortune.
Master Fresco, master Fresco, wat sal you no speak; make you de Fool? Why master Fresco; Oh de skellum,
he be ga met de Cloak, me sal seg his master, han master Fresco, waer city master Fresco.
Goes the case so well signor bottle-nose▪
It may be we shall overreach your drift;
This is the time the Wenches sent vs word
Our bombast Dutchman and his mates will come.
Well neat Italian, you must don my shape:
Play your part well, or I may haps pay you.
What, speechless Ned? faith whereon musest thou?
Tic on your French coriuall, for my life:
Hee come ete vostre, and so forth,
Till he hath foisted in a Brat or two?
How then, how then?
Swounds Isle geld him first,
Ere that infectious loszell revel there.
Well Matt, I think thou know what Ned can doe;
Should thou change Ned for Noddy, me for him,
Thou did not know thy loss, in faith thou did not.
Come leave this idle chat, and lets provide
Which of vs shall be scar-crow to these Fools,
And set them out the way?
Why that will I.
Then put a Sword into a mad-mans hand:
Thou art so hasty, that but cross thy humour,
And thou't be ready cross them ore the pates:
Therefore for this time, Isle supply the rome.
And so we shall be sure of chatt enough;
You'll hold them with your sloutes and gulles so long,
That all the night will scarcely be enough
To put in practise, what we have devised:
Come, come, Isle be the man shall doe the deed.
Well, I am content to save your longing.
But soft, where are we? Ha, heere's the house,
Come let vs take our stands: France stand you there,
And Ned and I will cross t'other side.
Doe so: But hush, I hear one passing hither.
Oh de favourable aspect of de heaven, tic so obe∣scure, so dark, so black dat no mortal creature can know de me: I pray a Dio I sal have de reight Wench: Ah si I be reached, here be de hues of signor Pisaro, I sall have de madonna Marina, and daruor I sall knock to de door.
What a pox are you mad or drunk;
What, doe you mean to break my Glasses?
Wat be dat Glass? Wat drunk, wat mad?
What Glasses sir; why my Glasses: and if you be so crancke, Isle call the Constable; you will not enter into a mans house (I hope) in spite of him?
Nor durst you be so bold as to stand there,
If once the Moister of the House did know it.
Is dit your House? be you de Signor of dis Case?
Signor me no signors, nor case me no cassas: but get you hence, or you are like to taste of the Bastinado.
Do, do, good Ferdinand, pummel the logerhead.
Is this neit the House of master Pisaro?
Yes marry when? can you tell: how doe you?
I thank you heartily, my finger in your mouth.
Wat be dat?
Marry that you are an Ass and a Logerhead,
To seek moister Pisaros house here.
I prey de gratia, wat be dis plashy?
Wat doe ye call dit street?
What sir; why Leaden-hall, could you not see the four Spouts as you came along?
Certenemento Leden hall, I hit my head by de way, dare may be de voer Spouts: I prey de gratia, wish be de way to Crochefriers?
How, to Croched-friers? Marry you must go along till you come to the Pump, and then turn on your right hand.
Signor, adio.
Farewell and be hanged Signor:
Now for your fellow, if the Ass would come.
By my trot me doe so mush tincke of dit Gentle-woman de fine Wench, dat me tincke esh hover ten day, and esh day ten year, till I come to her: Here be de hues of sin vader, sall alle and knock.
What a bots aisle you, are you mad?
Will you run over me and break my Glasses?
Glasses, wat Glasses? Prey is monsieur Pisaro to de mayson?
Hark Ned, there's thy substance
Nay by the Mass, the substance's here,
The shaddow's but an Ass.
What Moister Pisaro?
Logerhead, heere's none of your Pisaros?
Yes but dit is the hoes of master Pisaro.
Will not this monsieur Motley take his answer?
Isle go and knock the ass about the pate.
Nay by your leave sir, but Isle hold your worship.
This stir we should have had, had you stood there.
Why, would it not vex one to hear the ass,
Stand prating here of dit and dan, and den and dog?
One of thy mettle Ned, would surely doe it:
But peace, and hark to the rest.
Doe no de fine Gentlewoman matresse Mathea dwell in d•t Plashy?
No sir, here dwells none of your fine Gantle-wo∣man▪ It were a good deed sir, to see who you are;
You come hither to steal my Glasses.
And then counterfeit you are going to your Queens.
I be deceive dis dark neighed; here be no Wench, I be no in de right plashy: I prey Monsieur, wat be name dis Street, and wish be de way to Croshe-friers?
Marry this is Fanchurch-streete,
And the best way to Crotched-friers, is to follow your nose
Ʋanshe, street, how shaunce me come to Vanshe street? vell monsieur, me must alle to Croche-friers.
Farewell fortipence, go seek your Signor,
I hope you'll find your selves two Dolts anon:
Hush Fredinand, I hear the last come stamping hither.
Ha sir, I have left my fat Dutchman, and run my self almost out of breath too: now to my young mis∣tresses go I, some body cast an old shoe after me: but soft, how shall I doe to counterfeit the Dutchman, be cause I speak English so like a natural; Tush, take you no thought for that, let me alone for Squintum squantum: soft, her's my Masters house,
Whose there.
Whose there, why sir here is: Nay thats too good English; Why here be de grout Dutchman.
Then theres not only a grout head, but an Ass also.
What be yoo, yoo be an English Ox to call a gen∣tle moan Ass.
Hark Ned yonders good greeting.
But yoo, and yoo be Moister Mouse that dwell here, tell your mattress Laurentia datt her sweet heart Moister Vandal would speak with horde,
Moister Mental, get you gon, least you get a broken Pate and so mar all: here is no entrance for mis∣stress Laurentios sweet heart.
Gods sacaren watt is the luck now.
Shall not I come to my friend moister Pisar House?
Yes and to moister Pisaros Shoes too, if hee or they were here.
Why my grout friend, M. Pisaro doth dwell here.
Sir, you lye, here dwells no body but I, that have dwelt here this one &amp; forty years, and sold Glasses.
Lye farther, one and fifty at the least.
Hoo, hoo, hoo; do you give the Gentleman the lie?
I sir, and will give you a like of my Cudgel, if ye stay long and trouble the whole street with your bawling: hence dolt, and go seek M. Pisaros House.
Go seek M. Pisaros House;
Where shall I go seek it?
Why, you shall go seek it where it is.
That is here in Crodched-friers.
How Loger-head, is Croched-friers here?
I thought you were some such drunken Ass,
That come to seek Croched-friers in Tower-streete:
But get you along on your left hand, and be hanged;
You have kept me out of my Bed with your bangling,
A good while longer then I would have been.
Ah, ah, How is this? Is not this Croched-friers? Tell me, Isle hold a Crown they gave me so much Wine at the Tavern, that I am drunk, and know not out.
My Dutchman's out his Compass &amp; his Card;
Hoe's reckoning what Wind hath drove him hither:
Isle swear hee thinks never to see Pisaros.
Nay tic so, I am sure drunk: Soft let me see, what was I about? Oh now I have it, I must go to my Masters house and counterfeit the Dutchman, and get my young Mistress: well, and I must turn on my left hand, for I have forgot the way quite and clean: Fare de well good friend, I am a simple Dutchman I.
Fair weather after you. And now my Lads,
Have I not plied my part as I should doe?
It was well, it was well: But now let's cast about,
To set these Woodcocks farther from the House,
And afterwards return unto our Girls.
Content, content; come, come make haste.
I go and turn, and dan I come to dis plashy, I can no tell watt, and sall doe I can no tell watt, turn by the Pump; I pump it fair.
Me alle, end alle &amp; can no come to Croche-friers.
Oh miserable Blacke-pudding, if I can tell which is the way to my Masters house, I am a Red-herring, and no honest Gentleman.
Who parlato daer?
Who be der? who alle der?
How's this? For my life here are the Strangers: Oh that I had the Dutchmans Hose, that I might creep into the Pockets; they'll all three fall upon me &amp; beat me.
Who doe der ander?
Amiss?
Oh brave; it's no body but M. Pharoo and the Frenchman going to our House, on my life: well, Isle have some sport with them, if the Watch hinder me not. Who goes there?
Who parley der, in wat plashy, in wat street be you?
Why sir, I can tell where I am; I am in Tower-streete: Where a Devil be you?
Io be here in Lede-hall.
In Leaden-hall? I trow I shall meet with you a∣none: in Leaden-hall? What a simple Ass is this Frenchman. Some more of this: Where are you sir?
Moi I be here in Vanshe-streete.
This is excellent ynfayth, as fit as a Fiddle: I in Tower-streete, you in Leaden-hall, and the third in Fanchurch-streete; and yet all three hear one another, and all three speak together: either wee must be all three in Leaden-hall, or all three in Tower-streete, or all three in Fanchurch-streete; or all three Fools.
Monsieur Gentle-home, can you well tesh de way to Croshe-frier?
How to Croched-friers? I, I sir, passing well if you will follow me.
I dat me sal monsier Gentle-home, and give you tanks.
And monsiur Pharo, I shall lead you such a iaunt, that you shall scarce give me thanks for. Come sirs follow me: now for a dirty Puddle, the pissing Content, or a great Post, that might turn these two from Asses to Oxen by knocking their Horns to their Fore-heads.
Whaer be de now signor?
Even where you will signor, for I know not:
Soft I smell: Oh pure Nose.
What do you smell?
I have the scent of London-stone as full in my nose, as Abchurch-lane of mother Walls Pasties: Sirs feel a∣bout, I smell London-stone.
Wat be dis?
Soft let me see; feel I should say, for I cannot see: Oh lads pray for my life, for we are almost at Croched-friers.
Dats good: but watt be dis Post?
This Post; why tic the May-pole on Iuie-bridge going to Westminster.
Ho Wesmistere, how come we tol Wesmistere?
Why on your Legs fools, how should you go? Soft, heere's an other: Oh now I know in deed where I am; wee are now at the fardest end of Shoredich, for this is the May-pole.
Sordiche; O dio, dere be some nautie tinge, some
Spirit do lead vs.
You say true sir, for I am afraid your French spirt is up so far already, that you brought me this way, because you would find a Charm for it at the Blew Bore in the Spittle: But soft, who comes here?
Maids in your Smocks, look well to your Locks, Your Fire and your Light; and God give you good night.
Monsieur Gentle-home, I prey parley one, too, tree, fore, words for vs to dis oull man.
Yes marry shall I sir. I pray honest Fellow, in what Street be wee?
Ho Fresco, whither frisk you at this time of night?
What, Monsieur Fresco?
Signor Fresco?
The same, the same: Hark ye honesty, me thinks you might doe well to have an M. under your Girdle, considering how Signor Pifaro, and this other Monsieur doe hold of me.
Oh sir, I cry you mercy; pardon this fault, and Isle doe as much for you the next time.
Well, passing over superfluicall talk, I pray what Street is this; for it is so dark, I know not where I am?
Why art thou drunk, Dost thou not know Fanchurch-streete?
I sir, a good Fellow may sometimes be overseen among Friends; I was drinking with my Moister and these Gentlemen, and therefore no marvel though I be none of the wisest at this present: But I pray thee Good∣man Buttericke, bring me to my Masters House.
Why I will, I will, push that you are so strange now adays: but it is an old said saw, Honours change Manners.
Good-man Buttericke will you walk before:
Come honest Friends, will ye go to our House?
Oy monsieur Fresco.
Si signor Fresco.
Oh de skellam Fresco, ic weit neit waer dat ic be, ic go and hit my nose op dit post, and ic go and hit my nose op danden post; Oh de villain: Well, waer ben ic now? Haw laet syen is dut neit croshe vrier, ya seker so first and dit M. Pisaros hues: Oh de good shaunce, well ic sall now have de Wench Laurentia, mestris Laurentia.
Who's there, Moister Haruie?
Moister Walgraue?
Moister Heigham?
Ya my Louue, here be master Heigham your groot friend.
How, Moister Heigham my grot vrinde?
Out alas, here's one of the Strangers.
Peace you Mammet, let's see which it is; wee may chance teach him a strange trick for his learning: M. Heigham, what wind drives you to our house so late?
Oh my leif Mesken, de love tol v be so groot, dat het bring me out my bed voor you.
Ha, ha, we know the Ass by his ears; it is the Dutchman: what shall we doe with him?
Peace, let him not know, that you are here: M. Heigham, if you will stay awhile that I may se, if my Father be a sleep, and Isle make means we may come together
Dat sal ec my Loua. Is dit no well counterfett I speak so like master Heigham as tic possible.
Well, what shall we doe with this Lubber? (Lover I should say.)
What shall wee doe with him?
Why crown him with a —
Fie Slut: No, wele use him cleanlier; you know we have never a Sign at the door, would not the jest prove
currant, to make the Dutchman supply that want.
Nay, the fool will cry out, &amp; so wake my father.
Why, then wele cut the Rope &amp; cast him down.
And so jest out a hanging; let's rather draw him up in the Basket, and so starve him to death this frosty night.
In sadness, well advised: Sister, doe you hold him in talk, and weal provide it whilst.
Go to then. M. Heigham, oh sweet M Higham, doth my Father think that his unkindness can part you &amp; poor Laurentia? No, no, I have found a drift to bring you to my Chamber, if you have but the heart to venture it.
Ventre, salick go to de see, and be de see, and ore de see and in de see voer my sweet Louue.
Then you dare go into a Basket; for I know no other means to enjoy your company, then so: for my Fa∣there hath the Keys of the Door.
Salick climb up tot you? sal ec fly up tot you? salick, wat segdy?
Bid him doe it Sister, wee shall see his cunning.
Oh no, so you may catch a fall. There M. Heigham, Put your self into that Basket, and I will draw you up: But no words I pray you, for fear my Sister hear you.
No, no; no word: Oh de seete Wench, Ec come, Ec come.
Are you ready moister Heigham?
In ec my sout Lady.
Merrily then my Wenches.
How heavy the Ass is: Moister Heigham, is there any in the Basket but your self?
Neit, neit, dare be no man.
Are you up sir?
Neit, neit.
Nor never are you like to climb more higher: Sisters, the Woodcock's caught, the Fool is caged.
My sout Lady I be nuc neit up, pull me totv.
When can you tell; what moister Ʋandalle,
A whether beaten soldier an old wencher,
Thus to be over reached by three young Girls:
Ah sir now weal brag with Mistress Moore,
To have as fine a Parrot as she hath,
Look sisters what a pretty fool it is:
What a greene greasy shining Coat he hath,
An Almond for Parrot, a Rope for Parrot.
Doe you moc que me sager sager,
I sal seg your vader.
Doe and you dare, you see here is your fortune,
Disquiet not my father; if you doe,
Isle send you with a vengeance to the ground,
Well we must confess we trouble you,
And over watching makes a wiseman mad,
Much more a fool, theres a Cusshon for you.
To bore you through the nose.
To lay your head on.
Couch in your Kennel sleep and fall to rest,
And so good night for London maids scorn still,
A Dutch-man should be seen to curb their will.
Horrid ye Daughter, horrid ye▪ gods se kerr kin? will ye no let me come tot you? ec bid you let me come tot you watt sal ec don, ec would neit for un hundred pound Alvaro &amp; Delion, should see me op dit manner, well wat sal ec don, ec mout neit cal: for de Wenches will cut de rope and break my neck; ec sal here bleauen till de morning, &amp; dan ec sal cal to master Pisaro, &amp; make him shafe &amp; shite his dauctors: Oh de skellum Fresco, Oh des cruel Horse.
Isle put the Light out, least I be espied,
For closely I have stolen me forth a doares,
That I might know, how my three Sons have sped.
Now (before God) my heart is passing light,
That I have overreached the Englishmen:
Ha, ha, Moister Ʋandalle, many such nights
Will swag your big swollen bulk, and make it lancke:
When I was young; yet though my Hairs be gray,
I have a Young mans spirit to the death,
And can as nimbly trip it with a Girl,
As those which fold the spring-tide in their Beards:
Lord how the very thought of former times,
Supples these near dried limbs with actiuenesse:
Well, thoughts are shadows, sooner lost then seen,
Now to my Daughters, and their merry night,
I hope Alvaro and his company,
Have read to them moral Philosophy,
And they are full with it: Here Isle stay,
And tarry till my gallant youths come forth.
You mad-man, wild-oats, mad-cap, where art thou?
Here before.
Oh ware what love is? Ned hath found the scent;
And if the Connie chance to miss her Borough,
Shoe's ouer-borne y faith, she cannot stand it.
I know that voice, or I am much deceived.
Come, why loiter wee? this is the Door:
But soft, heere's one asleep.
Come, let me feel:
Oh tic some Rogue or other; spurn him, spurn him.
Be not so wilful, prithee let him lie.
Come back, come back, for wee are past the house
Yonder's Moths Chamber with the light.
Well fare a head, or I had been discride.
Gods me, what make the Youngsters here so late?
I am a Rouge, and spurn him: well Jack sauce,
The Rogue is waking yet, to mar your sport.
Matt, Mistress Mathea; where be these Girls?
VVho's there below?
Thy Ned, kind Ned, thine honest trusty Ned.
No, no, it is the Frenchman in his stead,
That Monsieur motlicoate that can dissemble:
Hear you Frenchman, pack to your Whores in France;
Though I am Portugal by the Fathers side,
And therefore should be lustful, wanton, light;
Yet goodman Goosecap, I will let you know,
That I have so much English by the Mother,
That no base slavering French shall make me stoop:
And so, sir Dandelion fare you well.
What speechless, not a word: why how now Ned?
The Wench hath tan him down,
He hanges his head.
You Dan-de-lion, you that talk so well:
Hark you a word or two good Mistress Matt,
Did you appoint your Friends to meet you here,
And being come, tell vs of Whores in France,
A Spanish linnet, and an English Mare,
A Mongrel, half a Dog and half a Bitch;
With Tran-dido, Dil-dido, and I know not what?
Hear you, if you'll run away with Ned,
And be content to take me as you find me,
Why so law, I am yours: if otherwise,
You'll change your Ned, to be a Frenchmans Trull?
Why then, Madame Delion, Ie vous lassera a Di•, et la bon fortune.
That voice assures me, that it is my Love:
Say truly, Art thou my Ned? art thou my Love?
Swounds who should I be but Ned?
You make me swear.
Who speak you to? Mathea who's below?
Marina.
Young moister Haruy? for that voice saith so.
Speak sister Matt, is not my true Love there?
Ned is.
Not moister Heigham?
Laurentia, here.
In faith you're welcome.
Better cannot Fall.
Sweet, so art thou.
As much to mine.
Nay Gentles, welcome all.
Here's cunning harlotries, they feed these off
With welcome, and kind words, whilst other Lads.
Revel in that delight they should possess:
Good Girls, I promise you I like you well.
Say moister Haruy, saw you, as you came,
That Lecher, which my Sire appoints my man;
I mean that wanton base Italian,
That Spannish-leather spruce companion:
That antique Ape tricked up in fashion?
Had the Ass come, I'd learn him, difference been
Betwixt an English Gentleman and him.
How would you use him. (sweet).
If he should come?
Nay nothing (sweet) but only wash his crown:
Why the Ass woos in such an amorous key,
That he presumes no Wench should say him nay:
Hee slauers not his Fingers, wipes his Bill,
And swears in faith you shall, in faith I will;
That I am almost mad to bide his wocing.
Look what he said in word, Isle act in doing.
Leave thought of him, for day steals on apace,
And to our Loves: Will you perform your words;
All things are ready, and the Parson stands,
To join as hearts in hearts, our hands in hands,
Night favours vs, the thing is quickly done,
Then truss up bag and Bagages, and be gone:
And ere the morning, to augment your joys,
Weal make you mothers of six goodly Boys.
Promise them three good Ned, and say no more.
But Isle get three, and if I get not four.
Theres a sound Card at Maw, a lusty lad,
Your father thought him well, when one he had,
What say you sweets, will you perform your words?
Love to true love, no lesser mead affords?
Wee say we love you, and that loves fair breath
Shall lead vs with you round about the Earth:
And that our loves, vows, words, may all prove true,
Prepare your Arms, for thus we fly to you.
This works like wax, now ere to morrow day,
If you two ply it but as well as I,
Weal work our lands out of Pisaros Daughters:
And cansell all our bonds in their great Bellies,
When the slave knows it, how the Rog will curse.
Sweet hart.
Matt.
Where art thou.
Here.
Oh Iesus here is our father.
The Devil he is.
Moister Pisaro, twenty times God morrow▪
Good morrow? now I tell you Gentlemen•n,
You wrong and move my patience overmuch,
What will you Rob me, Kill me, Cut my Throat:
And set mine own blood here against me too,
You huswifes? Baggages? or what is worse,
Wilful, stoubborne, disobedient:
Use it not Gentlemen, abuse me not,
Newgate hath rome, theres law enough in England,
Be not so testy, hear what we can say.
Will you be wived? first learn to keep a wife,
Learn to be thrifty, learn to keep your Lands,
And learn to pay your debts to, I advise, else.
What else, what Lands, what Debts, what will you doe?
Have you not Land in Mortgage for your money,
Nay since tic so, we owe you not a Penny,
Fret not, Fume not, never bend the Brow:
You take Tenn in the hundred more then Law,
We can complain, extortion, simony,
Newgate hath Rome, theirs Law enough in England.
Prethe have done.
Prethy me no Prithees.
Here is my wife, Sbloud touch her, if thou dare,
Hearst thou, Isle lie with her before thy face,
Against the Cross in Cheap, here, any where.
What you old crafty Fox you.
Ned, stop there.
Nay, nay speak out, bear witness Gentlemen,
Whirs Mowche, charge my Musket, bring me my Bill,
For here are some that mean to Rob thy moister.
I am a Fox with you, well Jack sauce,
Beware least for a Goose, I pray on you.
In baggages, Mowche make fast the door.
A vengeance on ill luck,
What never storm,
But bridle anger with wise government.
Whom? Anthony our friend, Ah now our hopes,
Are found too light to balance our ill hippos.
Tut ne'er say so, for Anthony
Is not devoid of means to help his Friends.
Swounds, what a devil made he forth so late
Isle lay my life it was hee that fainde to sleep,
And we all unsuspicious, termed a Roage:
Oh God, had I but known him; if I had,
I would have wrote such Letters with my Sword
Upon the bald skin of his parching pate,
That he should ne'er have lived to cross vs more.
These menaces are vain, and helps nought:
But I have in the depth of my conceit
Found out a more material stratagem:
Hark Moister Walgraue, yours craves quick dispatch,
About it straight, stay not to say farewell.
You Moister Heigham, hie you to your Chamber,
And stir not forth, my shadow, or my self,
Will in the morning early visit you;
Build on my promise sir, and good night.
Last, yet as great in love, as to the first:
If you remember, once I told a jest,
How feigning to be sick, a Friend of mine
Possessed the happy issue of his Love:
That counterfeited humour must you play;
I need not to instruct, you can conceive,
Use moister Browne your Host, as chief in this:
But first, to make the matter seem more true,
Sickly and sadly bid the churl good night;
I hear him at the Window, there he is.
Now for a trick to overreach the Devil.
I tell you sir, you wrong my moister much,
And then to make amends, you give hard words:
H'ath been a friend to you; nay more, a Father:
I promise you, tic most ungently done.
I, well said Mouche, now I see thy love,
And thou shalt see mine, one day if I live.
None but my Daughters sir, hanges for your tooth:
I'd rather see them hanged first, ere you get them.
Moister Pisaro, hear a dead man speak,
Who singes the woeful accents of his end.
I doe confess I love; then let not love
Prove the sad engine of my lives remove:
Marinaes rich Possession was my bliss?
Then in her loss, all joy eclipsed is:
As every Plant takes virtue of the Sun;
So from her Eyes, this life and being sprung:
But now debarred of those clear shining Rays,
Death for Earth gapes, and Earth to Death obeys:
Each word thou spakst, (oh speak not so again)
Bore Deaths true image on the Word engraven;
Which as it flue mixed with Heavens aerie breath,
Summoned the dreadful Sessions of my death:
I leave thee to thy wish, and may th'euent
Prove equal to thy hope and hearts content.
Marina to that hap, that happiest is;
My Body to the Grave, my Soul to bliss.
Have I done well?
Excellent well in troth.
I, go; I, go: your words move me as much,
As doth a Stone being cast against the ayre.
But soft, What Light is that? What Folks be those? Oh tic Alvaro &amp; his other Friends, Isle down &amp; let them in.
Where are we now gaffer Buttericke?
Why know you not Croched-friers, where be your wits?
Wat be tic Crosh-viers? vidite padre dare; tack you dat, me fall troble you no far.
I thank you Gentlemen, good night:
Good night Fresco.
Farewell Buttericke, what a Clown it is:
Come on my masters merrily, Isle knock at the door.
Who's theere, our three wise Wooers,
Blockhead our man? had he not been,
They might have hanged them selves,
For any Wenches they had hit upon:
Good morrow, or good den, I know not whether.
Monsieur de Mowche, wat macke you out de Hoes so late?
What, what, young men &amp; sluggards fie for shame
You trifle time at home about vain toys,
Whilst others in the mean time, steal your Brides:
I tell you sir, the English Gentlemen
Had well-nigh mated you, and me, and all;
The Doors were open, and the Girls abroad,
Their Sweet-hearts ready to receive them to:
And gone forsooth they had been, had not I
(I think by revelation) stopped their flight:
But I have cooped them up, and so will keep them.
But sir Fresco, whore's the man I sent for?
Whose Cloak have you got there?
How now, whore's Ʋandalle?
For-sooth he is not here:
Moister Mental you mean, doe you not?
Why logerhead, him I sent for, where is he?
Where hast thou been? How hast thou spent thy time?
Did I not send thee to my Son Vandal?
I M. Mental; why forsooth I was at his Cham∣ber, and wee were coming hitherward, and he was very hot, and bade me carry his Cloak; and I no sooner had it, but he (being very light) sirkes me down on the left hand, and I turned down on the left hand, and so lost him.
Why then you turned together, Ass.
No sir, we never saw one another since.
Why, turned you not both on the left hand?
No for-sooth we turned both on the left hand.
Hoyda, why yet you went both together.
Ah no, we went clean contrary one from another.
Why Dolt, why Patch, why Ass,
On which hand turned ye?
Alas, alas, I cannot tell for-sooth, it was so dark I could not see, on which hand we turned: But I am sure we turned one way.
Was ever creature plagued with such a Dolt?
My Son Vandal now hath lost himself,
And shall all night go straying bout the Town;
Or meet with some strange Watch that knows him not;
And all by such an arrant Ass as this.
No, no, you may soon smell the Dutchmans lodge∣ing: Now for a Figure: Out alas, what's yonder?
Where?
Hoyda, hoyda, a Basket: it turns, hoe.
Peace ye Villain, and let's see who's there? Go look about the House; where are our weapons? What might this mean?
Look, look, look; there's one in it, he peeps out: Is there ne'er a Stone here to hurl at his Nose.
What, would thou break my Windows with a Stone? How now, who's there, who are you sir?
Look, he peepes out again: Oh it's M. Mend∣all, it's M. Mental: how got he up thither?
What, my Son Vandal, how comes this to pass?
Signor Vandal, wat do yo go to de wench in de Basket?
Oh Father, Father, here be such cruel Dochter∣kens, ec ben also weary, also weary, also cold; for be in dit little Basket: lo prey help dene.
He looks like the sign of the Mouth without Bishops gate, gaping, and a great Face, and a great Head,
and no Body.
Why how now Son, what have your Adamants
Drawn you up so far, and there left you hanging
Twixt Heaven and Earth like Mahomets Sepulchre?
They did unkindly, who so ere they were,
That plagued him here, like Tantalus in Hell,
To touch his Lips like the desired Fruit,
And then to snatch it from his gaping Chappes.
A little farther signor Vandal, and dan you may put v head into de windo and cash de Wensh.
Ec prey Vader dat you help de me, Ec prey God Vader.
Help you, but how?
Cut the Rope.
Sir, Isle go in and see,
And if I can, Isle let him down to you.
Doe gentle Mouche: Why but here's a jest;
They say, high climers have the greatest falls:
If you should fall; as how you'll doe I know not,
Byr'lady I should doubt me of my Son:
Pray to the Rope to hold: Art thou there Mouche?
Yes sir, now you may choose, whether you'll stay till I let him down, or whether I shall cut him down?
Cut him down moister Mouse, cut him down And let's see, how heal tumble.
Why sauce, who asked your counsel?
Let him down.
What, with a Cushion too? why you provided
To lead your life as did Diogines;
And for a Tub, to creep into a Basket.
Ec sall seg v Vader, Ec quame here to your Hues and spreake tol de Dochterken.
M. Mental, you are welcome out of the Basket: I smell a Ratt it was not for nothing, that you lost me.
Oh skellum, you run away from me.
I thought so sir, you gave him the flip.
Few, no for-sooth; Isle tell you how it was: when we come from Bucklers-Burie into Corn-Wale, and I had taken the Cloak, then you should have turned down on your left hand and so have gone right forward, and so turned up again, and so have crossed the streate; and you like an Ass.
Why how now Rascal; is your manners such?
You ass, you Dolt, why led you him through Corn-hill,
Your way had been to come through Canning street.
Why so I did sir.
Why thou see ye were in Corn-Hill.
Indeed sir there was three faults, the Night was dark, Moister Mental drunk, and I sleepy, that we could not tell very well, which way we went.
Sir I owe for this a Cudgelling:
But Gentlemen, sith things have fallen out so,
And for I see Vandal quakes for cold,
This night accept your Lodgings in my house,
And in the morning forward with your marriage,
Come on my sons, sir fetch up more wood.
Nay never weep Marina for the matter,
Tears are but signs of sorrow, helping not.
Would it not mad one to be crossed as I,
Being in the very hight of my desire?
The strangers frustrate all: our true loue's come,
Nay more, even at the door, and Haruies arms
Spread as a Rainbow ready to receive me,
And then my Father meet vs: Oh God, oh God.
Weep who that list for me, y faith not I,
Though I am youngest yet my stomack's great:
Nor tic not father, friends, nor any one,
Shall make me wed the man I cannot love:
Isle have my will ynfayth, y'fayth I will.
Let vs determine Sisters what to doe,
My father means to wed vs in the morning,
And therefore something must be thought upon.
Weal to our father and so know his mind,
I and his reason too, we are no fools,
Or Babes neither, to be fed with words.
Agreed, agreed: but who shall speak for all?
I will.
No I.
Thou wilt not speak for crying.
Yes▪ yes I warrant you, that humours left,
Bee I but moved a little, I shall speak,
And anger him I fear, ere I have done.
Whom Anthony our friend, our Schoolmaster?
Now help vs Gentle Anthony, or never.
What is your hasty running changed to prayer,
Say, where were you going?
Even to our father,
To know what he intends to doe with vs.
Tic bootless trust me, for he is resolved
To marry you to.
The Strangers.
Y faith he is.
Y faith he shall not.
Frenchman, be sure weal pluck a Crow together,
Before you force me give my hand at Church.
Come to our Father speech this comfort finds,
That we may scold out grief, and ease our minds.
Stay, Stay Marina, and advise you better,
It is not Force, but Policy must serve:
The Doors are locked, your Father keeps the Key,
Wherefore unpossible to scope away:
Yet have I plotted, and deuis'd a drift,
To frustrate your intended marriages,
And give you full possession of your joys:
Laurentia, ere the mornings light appear,
You must play Anthony in my disguise.
Anthony, what of vs? What shall we wear?
Anthony, what of vs? What shall we wear?
Soft, soft, you are too forward Girls, I swear,
For you some other drift devised must bee?
One shadow for a substance: this is she.
Nay weep not sweets, repose upon my care,
For all alike, or good or bad shall share:
You will have Haruie, you Heigham, and you Ned;
You shall have all your wish, or be I dead:
For sooner may one day the Sea lie still,
Then once restrain a Woman of her will.
Sweet Anthony, how shall we quit thy hire?
Not gifts, but your contentments I desire:
To help my Countrymen I cast about,
For Strangers loves blase fresh, but soon burn out:
Sweet rest dwell here, and frightful fear obiure,
These eyes shall wake to make your rest secure:
For ere again dull night the dull eyes charms,
Each one shall fouled her Husband in her arms:
Which if it chance, we may avouch it still,
Women &amp; Maids will always have their will.
Are Wood &amp; Coals brought up to make a fire?
Is the Meat spitted ready to lie down:
For Bakemeates Isle have none, the world's too hard:
There's Geese too, now I remember me;
Bid Maudlin lay the Giblets in Past,
Here's nothing thought upon, but what I doe.
Stay Fresco, see who rings: look to the Door,
Let none come in I charge, were he my Father,
Isle keep them whilst I have them: Fresco, who is it?
She is come ynfayth.
Who is come?
Mistress Sushaunce, Mistress Moors daughter.
Mistress Susan, Ass? Oh she must come in.
Hang him, if he keep out a Wench:
If the Wench keep not out him, so it is.
Welcome Mistress Susan, welcome;
I little thought you would have come to night;
But welcome (trust me) are you to my house:
What, doth your Mother mend? doth she recover?
I promise you I am sorry for her sickness.
She's better then she was, I thank God for it,
Now before God she is a sweet smug Girl,
One might doe good on her; the flesh is frail,
Man hath infirmity, and such a Bride,
Were able to change Age to hot desire:
Hark you Sweet-heart,
To morrow are my Daughters to be wed,
I pray you take the pains to go with them.
If sir you'll give me leave, Isle weight on them.
Yes marry shall you, and a thousand thanks,
Such company as you my Daughters want,
Maids must grace Maids, when they are married:
First not a merry life (thinks thou) to wed,
For to embrace, and be embraced abed.
I know not what you mean sir.
Heere's an old Ferret Pol-cat.
You may doe, if you'll follow mine advice;
I tell thee Mouse, I knew a Wench as nice:
Well, shoe's at rest poor soul, I mean my Wife,
That thought (alas good heart) Love was a toy,
Until (well, that time is gon and past away)
But why speak I of this: Hark ye Sweating,
There's more in Wedlock, then the name can show;
And now (byr'lady) you are ripe in years:
And yet take heed Wench, there lies a Pad in Straw;
Old Fornicator, had I my Dagger,
Id break his Costard.
Young men are slippery, fickle, wavering;
Constant abiding graces none but Age:
Then Maids should now wax wise, and doe so,
As to choose constant men, let fickle go,
Youth's unregarded, and vnhonoured:
An ancient Man doth make a Maid a Matron:
And is not that an Honour, how say you? how say you?
Yes forsooth.
(Oh old lust will you never let me go.)
You say right well, and doe but think thereon,
How Husbands, honoured years, long card-for wealth,
Wise staidness, Experient government,
Doth grace the Maid, that thus is made a Wise,
And you will wish your self such, on my life.
I think I must turn womankind altogether,
And scratch out his eyes:
For as long as he can see me, heal ne'er let me go.
But go (sweet-heart) to bed, I doe thee wrong,
The lateness now, makes all our talk seem long.
How now Mowche, be the Girls abed?
Mathea (and it like you) fine would sleep, but only tarrieth for her bed-fellow.
Ha, you say well: come, light her to her Chamber,
Good rest wish I to thee; wish so to me,
Then Susan and Pisaro shall agree:
Think but what joy is near your bed-fellow,
Such may be yours; take counsel of your Pillow:
To morrow weal talk more; and so good night,
Think what is said, may bee, if all hit right.
What, have I past the Pikes: knows he not Ned?
I think I have deserved his Daughters bed.
Tic well, tic well: but this let me request,
You keep unknown, till you be laid to rest:
And then a good hand speed you.
Tut, ne'er fear me,
We two abed shall never disagree.
I have stood still all this while, and could not speak for laughing: Lord what a Dialogue hath there bin between Age and Youth. You do good on her? even as much as my Dutchman will doe on my young Mistress: Moister, follow my counsel; then send for M. Heigham to help him, for Isle lay my Cap to two Pence, that hee will be asleep to morrow at night, when he should go to bed to her: Marry for the Italian, he is of an other humour, for there le be no dealings with him, till midnight; for hee must slaver all the Wenches in the house at parting, or he is no body: hee hath been but a little while at our House, yet in that small time, hee hath licked more Grease from our Mawdlins lips, then would have served London Kitchen stuff this tweluemonth. Yet for my money, well fare the Frenchman, Oh hee is a forward Lad, for heel no sooner come from the Church, but heel fly to the Chamber; why heel read his Lesson so often in the day time, that at night like an apt Scholar, heel be ready to sell his old Book to buy him a new. Oh the generation of Languages that our House will bring forth: why every Bed will have a proper speech to himself, and have the Founders name written upon it in fair Cappitall letters, Here lay, and so forth.
You'll be a villain still: Look who's at door?
Nay by the Mass, you are M. Porter, for Isle be hanged if you loose that office, having so pretty a morsel under your keeping: I go (old huddle) for the best Nose at smelling out a Pin-fold, that I know: well, take heed, you may hippos pick up Worms so long, that at length
some of them get into your Nose, and never out after: But what an Ass am I to think so, considering all the Lodge∣inges are taken up already, and there's not a Dog-kennell empty for a strange Worm to breed in.
The day is broke; Mathea and young Ned,
By this time, are so surely linked together,
That none in London can forbid the Banes.
Laurentia she is near provided for:
So that if Haruies policy but hold,
Elce-wheare the Strangers may go seek them Wives:
But here they come.
Six a clock say you; trust me, forward days:
Hark you Mowche, hic you to Church,
Bid M Bewford be in readiness:
Where go you, that way?
For my Cloak, sir.
Oh tic well: and M. Browne,
Trust me, your early stirring makes me muse,
Is it to me your business?
Even to your self:
I come (I think) to bring you welcome news,
And welcome news,
More welcome makes the bringer:
Speak, speak, good M. Browne, I long to hear them.
Then this it is. Young Haruie late last night,
Full weak and sickly came unto his lodging,
From whence this sudden malady proceeds:
Tic all uncertain, the Doctors and his Friends
Affirm his health is unrecoverable:
Young Heigham and Ned Walgraue lately left him,
And I came hither to inform you of it.
Young M. Haruie sick; now before God
The news bites near the Bone: for should he die,
His Living mortgaged would be redeemed,
For not these three months doth the Bond bear date:
Die now, marry God in heaven defend it;
Oh my sweet Lands, loose thee, nay loose my life:
And which is worst, I dare not ask mine own,
For I take two and twenty in the hundred,
When the Law gives but ten: But should he live,
Hee careless would have left the debt unpaid,
Then had the Lands been mine Pisaros own,
Mine, mine own Land, mine own Possession.
Nay hear me out.
You're out too much already,
Unless you give him life, and me his Land.
Whether tic love to you, or to your Daughter,
I know not certain; but the Gentleman
Hath made a deed of gift of all his Lands,
Unto your beauteous Daughter fair Marina.
Ha, say that word again, say it again,
A good thing cannot be too often spoken:
Marina say you, are you sure it was she,
Or Mary, Margery; or some other Maid?
To none but your Daughter fair Marina▪
And for the gift might be more forcible,
Your neighbour moister Moore advised vs,
(Who is a witness of young Haruies Will)
Sick as hee is, to bring him to your house:
I know they are not far, but doe attend,
That they may know, what welcome they shall have.
What welcome sir; as welcome as new life
Given to the poor condemned Prisoner:
Return (good moister Browne) assure their welcome,
Say it, nay swear it; for they are welcome truly:
For welcome are they to me which bring Gold.
See down who knocks; it may be there they are:
Fresco, call down my Sons, bid the Girls rise:
Whore's Mowche; what, is he gon or no?
Oh hear you siera, bring along with you
Moister Balsaro the Spanish Merchant.
Many Balsaros I; Isle to my Love:
And thanks to Anthony for this escape.
Stay, take vs with you. Hark, they knock again,
Come my souls comfort, thou good news bringer,
I must needs hug thee even for pure affection.
Lift softly (good my friends) for hurting him.
Look cheerly sir, you're welcome to my house.
Hark M. Vandal, and my other Sons,
Seem to be sad as grieving for his sickness,
But inwardly rejoice. Moister Ʋandalle,
Signor Alvaro, Monsieur Delion,
Bid my Friend welcome, pray bid him welcome:
Take a good heart; I doubt not (by Gods leave)
You shall recover and doe well enough:
(If I should think so, I should hang my self.)
Fresco, go bid Marina come to me.
You are a Witness sir, of this mans Will:
What think you M. Moore, what say you to it?
Moister Pisaro, follow mine advice:
You see the Gentleman cannot escape,
Then let him straight be wedded to your Daughter;
So during life time, she shall hold his Land,
When now (being nor kith nor kin to him)
For all the deed of Gift, that he hath sealed,
His younger Brother will enjoy the Land.
Marry my Daughter: no byr'lady.
Hear you Alvaro, my Friend counsel me,
Seeing young M. Haruie is so sick,
To marry him incontinent to my Daughter.
Or else the gift he hath bestowed, is vain:
Marry and hee recover; no my Son,
I will not loose thy love, for all his Land.
Here you padre, do no lose his Lands, his hun∣dred pont per anno tic wort to hair; let him have de ma∣tress Marina in de marriage, tic but for me to attendre vne day more: if he will no die, I sal give him such a Drink, such a Potion sal make him give de Bonos noshes to all de world.
Alvaro, here's my Keys, take all I have,
My Money, Plate, Wealth, Jewels, Daughter too:
Now God be thanked, that I have a Daughter, worthy to be Aluaroes bed fellow:
Oh how I doe admire and praise thy wit,
Isle straight about it: Hear you Moister Moore.
Nay saith hoe's sick, therefore though hee be come, yet he can doe you no good; there's no remedy but even to put your self into the hands of the Italian, that by that time that he hath past his grouth, young Haruie will be in case to come upon it with a sis of fresh force.
Is my Love come, &amp; sick? I, now thou love me,
How my heart joys: Oh God, get I my will,
Isle drive away that Sickness with a kiss:
I need not fine, for I could weep for joy.
It shall be so; come hither Daughter.
Moister Haruie, that you may see my love
Comes from a single heart unfeignedly,
See here my Daughter, her I make thine own:
Nay look not strange, before these Gentlemen,
I freely yield Marina for thy Wife.
Stay, stay good sir, forbear this idle work,
My soul, is labouring for a higher place,
Then this vain transitory world can yield:
What, would you wed your Daughter to a Grave?
For this is but Deaths model in mans shape:
You and Alvaro happy live together:
Happy were I, to see you live together.
Come sir, I trust you shall doe well again:
Here, here, it must be so; God give you joy,
And bless you (not a day to live together.)
Horrid ye brother, will ye let den ander hob your Wive? nempt haer, nempt haer your selue?
No, no; tush you be de fool, here be dat sal spoil de marriage of hem: you have deceive me of de fine Wensh signor Haruey, but I sal deceive you of de mush Land.
Are all things sure Father, is all dispatched?
What interest we have, we yield it you:
Are you now satisfied, or rests there ought?
Nay Father, nothing doth remain, but thanks:
Thanks to your self first, that disdaining me,
Yet loud my Lands, and for them gave a Wife.
But next, unto Alvaro let me turn,
To courteous gentle loving kind Alvaro,
That rather then to see me die for love,
For very love, would loose his beauteous Love.
Ha, ha, ha.
Signor Alvaro, give him de ting quickly sal make hem die, autremant you sal lose de fine Wensh.
Oyime che hauesse allhora appressata la mono al mio core, ô suen curato ate, I che longo sei tu arriuato, ô cieli, ô terra.
Am I awake? or doe deluding Dreams
Make that seem true, which most my soul did fear?
Nay faith Father, it's very certain true,
I am as well as any man on earth:
Am I sick sirres? Look here, is Haruie sick?
What shall I doe? What shall I say?
Did not you counsel me to wed my Child?
What Potion? Whore's your help, your remedy.
I hope more happy Stars will reign to day,
And don Alvaro have more company.
Now Anthony, this cottons as it should,
And every thing sorts to his wished effect:
Haruie joys Moll: my Dutchman and the French,
Thinking all sure, laughs at Aluaros hap;
But quickly I shall mar that merry vain,
And make your Fortunes equal with your Friends.
Sir Mowche, what answer brought you back?
Will moister Balsaro come, as I requested?
Moister Balsaro; I know not who you mean.
Know you not Ass, did I not send thee for him?
Did not I bid thee bring him, with the Parson?
What answer made hee, will hee come or no?
Sent me for him: why sir, you sent not me,
I neither went for him, nor for the Parson:
I am glad to see your Worship is so merry.
Hence you forgetful dolt:
Look down who knocks?
Oh Moister, hang your self: nay never stay for a Sessions: Moister Vandal confess your self, desire the people to pray for you; for your Bride she is gone: Lau∣rentia is run away.
Oh de Diabolo, de mal-fortune: is matresse Laurentia gaen awash?
First tell me that I am a lifeless coarse;
Tell me of Doomsday, tell me what you will,
Before you say Laurentia is gone.
Moister Vandal, how doe you feel your self?
What, hang the head? fie man for shame I say,
Look not so heavy on your marriage day.
Oh blame him not, his grief is quickly spied,
That is a Bridegroom, and yet wants his Bride.
Moister Pisaro, and Gentlemen, good day to all:
According sir, as you requested me,
This morn I made repair unto the Tower,
Where as Laurentia now was married:
And sir, I did expect your coming thither;
Yet in your absence, wee performed the rites:
Therefore I pray sir, bid God give them joy.
He tells you true, Laurentia is my Wife;
Who knowing that her Sisters must be wed;
Presuming also, that you'll bid her welcome,
Are come to bear them company to Church.
You come too late, the Marriage rites are done:
Yet welcome twenty-fold unto the Feast.
How say you sirs, did not I tell you true,
These Wenches would have vs, and none of you.
I cannot say for these; but on my life,
This loves a Cushion better then a Wife.
And reason too, that Cushion fell out right,
Else hard had been his lodging all last night.
Moister Pisaro, why stand you speechless thus?
Anger, and extreme grief enforces me.
Pray sir, who bade you meet me at the Tower?
Who sir; your man sir, Mowche; here he is.
Who I sir, mean you me? you are a jesting man.
Thou art a Villain, a dissembling Wretch,
Worser then Anthony whom I kept last:
Fetch me an Officer, Isle hamper you,
And make you sing at Bride-well for this trick:
For well he hath deserved it, that would swear
He went not forth a doors at my appointment.
So swear I still, I went not forth to day.
Why arrant liar, were thou not with me?
How say you moister Browne, went he not forth?
Hee, or his likeness did, I know not whether.
What likeness can there be besides himself?
My self (forsooth) that took his shape upon me,
I was that Mowche that you sent from home:
And that same Mowche that deceived you,
Effected to possess this Gentleman:
Which to attain, I thus be guiled you all.
This is excellent, this is as fine as a Fiddle: you M. Heigham got the Wench in Mowches apparel; now let Mowche put on her apparel, and be married to the Dutch∣man: How think you, is it not a good vize?
Moister Pisaro, shake off melancholy,
When things are helpless, patience must be used.
Talk of Patience? Isle not bear these wrongs:
Go call down Matt, and mistress Susan Moore,
Tic well that of all three, wee have one sure.
Mistress Susan Moore, who doe you mean sir?
Whom should I mean sir, but your Daughter?
You're very pleasant sir: but tell me this,
When did you see her, that you speak of her?
I, late yesternight, when she came here to bed.
You are deceived, my Daughter lay not here,
But watched with her sick mother all last night.
I am glad you are so pleasant M Moore,
You're loath that Susan should be held a sluggard:
What man, t'was late before she went to bed,
And therefore time enough to rise again.
Moister Pisaro, doe you flout your friends;
I well perceive if I had troubled you,
I should have had it in my dish ere now:
Susan lie here? 'am sure when I came forth,
I left her fast asleep in bed at home;
Tic more then neighbour-hood to use me thus.
A bed at your house? tell me I am mad,
Did not I let her in adores my self,
Spoke to her, talked with her, and canuast with her;
And yet she lay not here? What say you sir?
She did, she did; I brought her to her Chamber.
I say he lies (that saith so) in his throat.
Mass now I remember me, I lye indeed.
Oh how this frets me: Fresco, what say you?
What say I? Marry I say, if she lay not here, there was a familiar in her likeness; for I am sure my My∣ster and she were so familiar together, that he had almost shot the Gout out of his Toes ends, to make the Wench believe he had one trick of youth in him. Yet now I re∣member me she did not lye here; and the reason is, be∣cause she doth lye here, and is now abed with mistress Mathea; witness whereof, I have set to my Hand &amp; Seal, and mean presently to fetch her.
Doe so Fresco. Gentlemen and Friends,
Now shall you see how I am wronged by him.
Lay she not here? I think the world's grown wise,
Plain folks (as I) shall not know how to live.
She comes, she comes: a Hall, a Hall.
Nay blush not wench, fear not, look cheerfully.
Good morrow Father; Good morrow Gentlemen:
Nay stare not, look you here, no monster I,
But even plain Ned: and here stands Matt my Wife.
Know you her Frenchman? But she knows me better.
Father, pray Father, let me have your blessing,
For I have blessed you with a goodly Son;
Tic breeding here in faith, a jolly Boy.
I am undone, a reprobate, a slave;
A scorn, a laughter, and a jesting stock:
Give me my Child, give me my Daughter from you.
Moister Pisaro, tic in vain to fret,
And fume, and storm, it little now avails:
These Gentlemen have with your Daughters help,
Outstripped you in your subtle enterprises:
And therefore, seeing they are well descended,
Turn hate to love, and let them have their Loves,
Is it even so; why then I see that still,
Doe what we can, Women will have their Will.
Gentlemen, you have outreached me now,
Which ne'er before you, any yet could doe:
You, that I thought should be my Sons indeed,
Must be content, since there's no hope to speed:
Others have got, what you did think to gain;
And yet believe me, they have took some pain.
Well, take them, there; and with them, God give joy.
And Gentlemen, I doe entreat to morrow,
That you will Feast with me, for all this sorrow:
Though you are wedded, yet the Feast's not made:
Come let vs in, for all the storms are past,
And heaps of joy will follow on as fast.

TRuth says, of old, the art of making plays
Was to content the people; &amp; their praise
Was to the Poet money, wine, and baize.
But in this age, a sect of writers are,
That, only, for particular likings care,
And will taste nothing that is popular.
With such we mingle neither brains, nor breasts;
Our wishes, like to those (make public feasts)
Are not to please the cooks tastes, but the guests.
Yet, if those cunning palates hither come,
They shall find guests entreaty, and good room;
And though all relish not, sure, there will be some,
That, when they leave their seats, shall make 'hem say,
Who wrote that piece, could so have wroten a play:
But that, he knew, this was the better way.
For, to present all custard, or all tart,
And have no other meats, to bear a part,
Or to want bread, and salt, were but course art.
The Poet prays you then, with better thought
To sit; and, when his cares are all in brought,
Though there be none far fet, there will deare-bought
Be sit for ladies: some for lords, knights, squires,
Some for your waiting wench, and citie-wires,
Some for your men, and daughters of White-Friars.
Nor is it, only, while you keep your seat
Here, that his feast will last; but you shall eat
A week at ord'naries, on his broken meat:
If his Muse be true,
Who commends her to you.
THe ends of all, who for the Scene doe write,
Are, or should be, to profit, and delight.
And still't hath been the praise of all best times,
So persons were not touched, to tax the crimes.
Then, in this play, which we present to night,
And make the object of your ear, and sight,
On forfeit of your selves, think nothing true:
Lest so you make the maker to judge you.
For he knows, Poet never credit gained
By writing truths, but things (like truths) well feigned.
If any, yet, will (with particular slight
Of application) wrest what he doth write;
And that he meant or him, or her, will say:
They make a libel, which he made a play.
HAVE you got the song yet perfect I ga'you, boy?
Yes, sir.
Let me hear it.
You shall, sir, but in faith let no body else.
Why, I pray?
It will get you the dangerous name of a Poet in town, sir, be∣sides me a perfect deal of ill will at the mansion you wot of, whose lady is the argument of it: where now I am the welcom'st thing under a man that comes there.
I think, and aboue a man too, if the truth were racked out of you.
No faith, I'll confess before, sir. The gentlewomen play with me, and throw me of the bed; and carry me in to my lady; and she kisses me with her oiled face; and puts a peruke of my head; and asks mean' I will wear her gown; and I say, no: and then she hits me a blow of the ear, and calls me innocent, and lets me go.
No marvel, if the door bee kept shut against your master, when the entrance is so easy to you—well sir, you shall go there no more, lest
I bee fine to seek your voice in my ladies rushes, a fortnight hence. Sing, sir.
Why, here's the man that can melt away his time, and never feels it! what, between his mistress abroad, and his angle at home, high fare, soft lodging, fine clothes, and his fiddle; hee thinks the hours have no wings, or the day no post-horse. Well, sir gallant, were you struck with the plague this minute, or condemned to any capital punishment to morrow, you would begin then to think, and value every article of your time, esteem it at the true rate, and give all for it.
Why, what should a man doe?
Why, nothing: or that, which when it is done, is as idle. Harken after the next horse-race, or hunting-match; lay wagers, praise Puppy, or Pepper-corne, White-foote, Franklin; swear upon White-maynes party; spend aloud, that my lords may hear you; visit my ladies at night, and bee able to give 'hem the character of every bowler, or better of the greene. These be the things, wherein your fashionable men exercise them∣selves, and I for company.
Nay, if I have thy authority, I'll not leave yet. Come, the o∣there are considerations, when wee come to have gray heads, and weak hams, moist eyes, and shrunk members. We'll think on 'hem then; then we'll pray, and fast.
I, and destine only that time of age to goodness, which our want of ability will not let vs employ in evil?
Why, then it is time enough.
Yes: as if a man should sleep all the term, and think to of∣fact his business the last day. O, CLERIMONT, this time, because it is an incorporeal thing, and not subject to sense, we mock our selves the fine∣least out of it, with vanity, and misery indeed: not seeking an end of wretchedness, but only changing the matter still.
Nay, thou'lt not leave now—
See but our common disease! with what justice can wee com∣plain, that great men will not look upon vs, nor be at leisure to give our affairs such dispatch, as wee expect, when wee will never doe it to our selves: nor hear, nor regard our selves.
Foh, thou hast read PLVTARCHS morals, now, or some such tedious fellow; and it shows so vilely with thee: Before god, twill spoil thy wit utterly. Talk me of pins, and feathers, and ladies, and rushes, and such things: and leave this Stoicitie alone, till thou make sermons.
Well, sir. If it will not take, I have learned to loose as little of my kindness, as I can. I'll doe good to no man against his will, certain∣lie. When were you at the college?
What college?
As if you knew not!
No faith, I came but from court, yesterday.
Why, is it not arrived there yet, the news? A new foundation,
sir, here in the town, of ladies, that call themselves the Collegiates, an or∣der between courtiers, and country-madames, that live from their hus∣bands; and give entertainment to all the Wits, and Braueries of the time, as they call 'hem: cry down, or up, what they like, or dislike in a brain, or a fashion, with most masculine, or rather hermaphroditicall authority: and, every day, gain to their college some new probationer.
Who is the President?
The grave, and youthful matron, the lady HAVGHTY.
A pox of her autumnal face, her pieced beauty: there's no man can bee admitted till she be ready, now adays, till she has painted, and perfumed, and washed, and scoured, but the boy here; and him she wipes her oiled lips upon, like a sponge. I have made a song, I pray thee hear it, of the subject.
STill to be neat, still to be dressed,
As, you were going to a feast;
Still to be pou'dred, still perfumed:
Lady, it is to be presumed,
Though arts hid causes are not found,
All is not sweet, all is not sound.
Give me a look, give me a face,
That makes simplicity a grace;
Robes loosely flowing, hair as free:
Such sweet neglect more takes me,
Then all th'adulteries of art.
Thy strike mine eyes, but not my heart.
And I am, clearly, of the other side: I love a good dressing, be∣fore any beauty of the world. O, a woman is, then, like a delicate garden; nor, is there one kind of it: she may vary, every hour; take often coun∣sell of her glass, and choose the best. If she have good ears, show 'hem; good hair, lay it out; good legs, wear short clothes; a good hand, dis∣cover it often; practise any art, to mend breath, cleanse teeth, repair eye-browes, paint, and profess it.
How? publicly?
The doing of it, not the manner: that must bee private. Ma∣ny things, that seem foul, in the doing, doe please, done. A lady should, indeed, study her face, when wee think she sleeps: nor, when the doors are shut, should men bee inquiring, all is sacred within, then. Is it for vs to see their perrukes put on, their false teeth, their complexion, their eye-browes, their nails? you see guilders will not work, but enclosed. They must not discover, how little serves, with the help of art, to adorn a great deal. How long did the canvas hang before
Ald-gate? were the people suffered to see the cities Love, and Charity, while they were rude stone, before they were painted, and burnished? No. No more should servants approach their mistresses, but when they are com∣pleat, and finished.
Well said, my TRVE-WIT.
And a wise lady will keep a guard always upon the place, that she may doe things securely. I once followed a rude fellow into a cham∣ber, where the poor madame, for haste, and troubled, snatched at her per∣ruke, to cover her baldness: and put it on, the wrong way.
O prodigy!
And the unconscionable knave held her in complement an hour, with that reversed face, when I still looked when she should talk from the t'other side.
Why, thou should have relieved her.
No faith, I let her alone, as we'll let this argument, if you please, and pass to another. When saw you DAUPHIN EVGENIE?
Not these ••ee days. Shall we go to him this morning? he is very melancholic, I hear.
Sick of the uncle? is hee? I met that stiff piece of formality, his uncle, yesterday, with a huge turban of night-caps on his head, buck∣led over his cares.
O, that's his custom when he walks abroad. Hee can endure no noise, man.
So I have heard. But is the disease so ridiculous in him, as it is made? they say, hee has been upon divers treaties with the Fish-wiues, and Orenge-women; and articles propounded between them: mary, the Chimney-sweepers will not be drawn in.
No, nor the Broome-men: they stand out stiffly. He cannot endure a Costard-monger, he swoons if he hear one.
Me thinks, a Smith should be ominous.
Or any Hāmer-man. A Brasier is not suffered to dwell in the pa∣rich, nor an Armourer. He would have hanged a Pewterers apprentice once up¦on a shroue-tuesdaies riot, for being of that trade, when the rest were quit.
A Trumpet should fright him terribly, or the Hau'-boyes?
Out of his senses. The Weights of the city have a pension of him, not to come near that ward. This youth practised on him, one night, like the Bell-man; and never left till hee had brought him down to the door, with a long-sword: and there left him flourishing with the air.
Why, sir! hee hath chosen a street to lie in, so narrow at both ends, that it will receive no coaches, nor carts, nor any of these common noises: and therefore, we that love him, devise to bring him in such as we may, now and then, for his exercise, to breath him. Hee would grow resty else in his ease. His virtue would rust without action. I entreated a Beare-ward, one day, to come down with the dogs of some four pa∣riches that way, and I thank him, he did; &amp; cried his games under master
MOROSE'S window: till he was sent crying away, with his head made a most bleeding spectacle to the multitude. And, another time, a Fencer, marching to his prize, had his drum most tragically run through, for ta∣king that street in his way, at my request.
A good wag. How do's he for the bells?
O, in the Queens time, he was wont to go out of town every saturday at ten a clock, or on holy-day-eues. But now, by reason of the sickness, the perpetuity of ringing has made him devise a room, with double walls, and treble feelings; the windores close shut, and calk'd: and there he lives by candle-light. He turned away a man, last week, for having a pair of new shoes that creak'd. And this fellow waits on him, now, in tennis-court socks, or slippers sol'd with wool: and they talk each to other, in a trunk. See, who comes here.
HOw now! what ail you sirs? dumb?
Struck into stone, almost, I am here, with tales of thine uncle! There was never such a prodigy heard of.
I would you would once loose this subject, my masters, for my sake. They are such as you are, that have brought me into that predica∣meant, I am, with him.
How is that?
Mary, that he will dis-inherit me, no more. Hee thinks, I, and my company are authors of all the ridiculous acts, and moniments are told of him.
S'lid, I would be the author of more, to vex him, that pur∣pose, deserves it: it gives thee law of plaguing him. I'll tell thee what I would doe. I would make a false almanac; get it printed: and then have him drawn out on a coronation day to the tower-wharfe, and kill him with the noise of the ordinance. Dis-inherit thee! hee cannot, man. Art not thou next of blood, and his sisters son?
I, but he will thrust me out of it, he vows, and marry.
How! that's a more portent. Can he endure no noise, and will venture on a wife?
Yes▪ why, thou art a stranger, it seems, to his best trick, yet. He has employed a fellow this half year, all over England, to harken him out a dumb woman; bee she of any form, or any quality, so she bee able to bear children: her silence is dowry enough, he says.
But, I trust to god, he has found none.
No, but hee has heard of one that's lodged in the next street to him, who is exceedingly soft-spoken; thrifty of her speech; that spends but six words a day. And her hoe's about now, and shall have her.
Is it possible! who is his agent in the business?
Mary, a Barber, one CVT-BERD: an honest fellow, one that tells DAUPHIN all here.
Why, you oppress me with wonder! A woman, and a bar∣ber, and love no noise!
Yes faith. The fellow trims him silently, and has not the knack with his shears, or his fingers: and that continence in a bar∣ber hee thinks so eminent a virtue, as it has made him chief of his counsel.
Is the barber to be seen? or the wench?
Yes, that they are.
I pray thee, DAUPHIN, let's go thither.
I have some business now: I cannot i'faith.
You shall have no business shall make you neglect this, sir, we'll make her talk, believe it; or if she will not, wee can give out, at least so much as shall interrupt the treaty: wee will break it. Thou art bound in conscience, when hee suspects thee without cause, to tor∣meant him.
Not I, by any means. I'll give no suffrage to it. He shall never have that plea against me, that I opposed the least phant'sie of his. Let it lie upon my stars to be guilty, I'll be innocent.
Yes, and be poor, and beg; doe, innocent: when some groom of his has got him an heir, or this barber, if hee himself cannot. Inno∣cent! I pray thee, NED, where lies she? let him be innocent, still.
Why, right over against the barbers; in the house, where sir IOHN DAW lies.
You doe not mean to confound me!
Why?
Do's he, that would marry her, know so much?
I cannot tell.
It were enough of imputation to her, with him.
Why?
The only talking sir in the town! JACK DAW! And he teach her not to speak—God b'w'you. I have some business too.
Will you not go thither then?
Not with the danger to meet DAW, for mine ears.
Why? I thought you two had been upon very good terms.
Yes, of keeping distance.
They say he is a very good scholar.
I, and hee says it first. A pox on him, a fellow that pretends only to learning, buys titles, and nothing else of books in him.
The world reports him to be very learned.
I am sorry, the world should so conspire to belie him.
Good faith, I have heard very good things come from him.
You may. There's none so desperately ignorant to deny that:
would they were his own. God b'w' you, gentlemen.
This is very abrupt!
COme, you are a strange open man, to tell every thing, thus.
Why, believe it DAUPHIN, TRVE-WIT'S a very ho∣nest fellow.
I think no other: but this frank nature of his is not for secrets.
Nay, then, you are mistaken DAUPHIN: I know where he has been well trusted, and discharged the trust very truly, and heartily.
I contend not, NED, but, with the fewer a business is carried, it is ever the safer. Now we are alone, if you'll go thither, I am for you.
When were you there?
Last night: and such a decameron of sport fallen out! BOCCACE never thought of the like. DAW do's nothing but court her; and the wrong way. Hee would lie with her, and praises her modesty; desires that she would talk, and bee free, and commends her silence in verses: which hee reads, and swears, are the best that ever man made. Then rails at his fortunes, stamps, and muteness, why he is not made a counsel∣lore, and called to affairs of state.
I pray thee let's go. I would fine partake this. Some water, Boy.
Wee are invited to dinner together, he and I, by one that came thither to him, sir LA-FOOLE.
O, that's a precious manikin!
Doe you know him?
I, and he will know you too, if ere he saw you but once, though you should meet him at church in the midst of prayers. Hee is one of the Braueries, though he be none of the Wits. He will salute a Judge upon the bench, and a Bishop in the pulpit, a Lawyer when hee is pleading at the bar, and a Lady when she is dancing in a masque, and put her out. He do's give plays, and suppers, and invites his guests to 'hem, aloud, out of his window, as they ride by in coaches. He has a lodging in the Strand for the purpose. Or to watch when ladies are gone to the China houses, or the Exchange, that hee may meet 'hem by chance, and give 'hem presents, some two or three hundred pounds-worth of toys, to be laughed at. He is never without a spare banquet, or sweet-meats in his chamber, for their women to alight at, and come up to, for a bait.
Excellent! He was a fine youth last night, but now he is much siner! what is his christen-name? I have forgot.
Sir AMOROUS LA-FOOLE.
The gentleman is here below, that owns that name.
Hart, hoe's come, to inuit me to dinner, I hold my life.
Like enough: pray thee, let's have him up.
Boy, marshall him.
With a truncheon, sir?
Away, I beseech you. I'll make him tell vs his pedigree, now; and what meat he has to dinner; and, who are his guests; and, the whole course of his fortunes: with a breath.
S'Aue, dear sir DAUPHIN, honoured master CLERIMONT.
Sir AMOROUS! you have very much honested my lodge∣ing, with your presence.
Good faith, it is a fine lodging! almost, as delicate a lodging, as mine.
Not so, sir.
Excuse me, sir, if it were in the Strand, I assure you. I am come, master CLERIMONT, to entreat you wait upon two or three ladies, to dinner, to day.
How, sir! wait upon 'hem? did you ever see me carry dishes?
No, sir, dispense with me; I meant, to bear 'hem company.
O, that I will, sir. The doubtfulness of your phrase, believe it, sir, would breed you a quarrel, once an hour, with the terrible boys, if you should but keep 'hem fellowship a day.
It should be extremely against my will, sir, if I contested with any man.
I believe it, sir; where hold you your feast?
At TOM OTTERS, sir.
TOM OTTER? what's he?
Captain OTTER, sir; he is a kind of gamester: but he has had command, both by sea, and by land.
O, then he is animal amphibium?
I, sir: his wife was the rich China-woman, that the courtiers visi∣ted so often, that gave the rare entertainment. She commands all at home.
Then, she is Captain OTTER?
You say very well, sir: she is my kins-woman, a LA-FOOLE by the mother side, and will inuit, any great ladies, for my sake.
Not of the LA-FOOLES of Essex?
No, sir, the LA-FOOLES of London.
Now, h'is in.
They all come out of our house, the LA-FOOLES of the north, the LA-FOOLES of the west, the LA-FOOLES of the east, and south—we
are as ancient a family, as any is in Europe—but I my self am descended lineally of the french LA-FOOLES—and, wee doe bear for our coat Yellow, or Or, checkered Azure, and Gulls, and some three or four colours more, which is a very noted coat, and has, some-times, been solemnly worn by divers nobility of our house—but let that go, antiquity is not respected now—I had a brace of fat Does sent me, gentlemen, &amp; half a dozen of pheasants, a dozen or two of godwits, and some other foul, which I would have eaten, while they are good, and in good company— there will bee a great lady, or two, my lady HAVGHTY, my lady CEN∣TAVRE, mistress DOL MOVES—and they come a'purpose, to see the si∣lent gentlewoman, mistress EPICOENE, that honest sir IOHN DAW has promised to bring thither—and then, mistress TRVSTY, my ladies wo∣man, will be there too, and this honourable Knight, sir DAUPHIN, with your self, master CLERIMONT—and we'll bee very merry, and have fiddlers, and dance—I have been a mad wag, in my time, and have spent some crowns since I was a page in court, to my lord LOFTY, and after, my ladies gentleman-vsher, who got me knighted in Ireland, since it pleased my elder brother to die—I had as fair a gold jerkin on that day, as any was worn in the Iland-voyage, or at Caliz, none dispraised, and I came over in it hither, showed my self to my friends, in court, and after went down to my tenants, in the country, and surveyed my lands, let new leases, took their money, spent it in the eye of the land here, upon la∣dies— and now I can take up at my pleasure.
Can you take up ladies, sir?
O, let him breath, he has not recovered.
Would I were your half, in that commodity—
No, sir, excuse me: I meant money, which can take up any thing. I have another guest, or two, to inuit, and say as much to, gen∣tlemen. I'll take my leave abruptly, in hope you will not fail—Your servant.
Wee will not fail you, sir precious LA-FOOLE; but she shall, that your ladies come to see: if I have credit, before sir DAW.
Did you ever hear such a wind-fucker, as this?
Or, such a rooke, as the other! that will betray his mistress, to be seen. Come, it is time, we prevented it.
Go.
CAnnot I, yet, find out a more compendious method, then by this trunk, to save my servants the labour of speech, and mine ears, the discord of sounds? Let me see: all discourses, but mine own, afflict me, they seem harsh, impertinent, and irksome. Is it not
possible, that thou should answer me, by signs, and, I apprehend thee, fellow? speak not, though I question you. You have taken the ring, off from the street door, as I bad you? answer me not, by speech, but by si∣lence; unless, it be otherwise (—) very good. And, you have fastened on a thick quilt, or flock-bed, on the out-side of the door; that if they knock with their daggers, or with bricke-bats, they can make no noise? but with your leg, your answer, unless it be otherwise (—) very good. This is not, only, fit modesty in a servant, but good state, and discretion in a master. And you have been with CVTBERD, the barber, to have him come to me? (—) good. And, he will come presently? answer me not but with your leg, unless it be otherwise: if it be otherwise, shake your head, or shrug (—) so. Your Italian, and Spaniard, are wise in these! and it is a frugal, and comely gravity. How long will it bee, ere CVTBERD come? stay, if an hour, hold up your whole hand; if half an hour, two singers; if a quarter, one; (—) good: half a quarter? it is well. And have you given him a key, to come in without knocking? (—) good. And, is the lock oild, and the hinges, to day? (—) good. And the quilting of the stairs no where worn out, and bare? (—) very good. I see, by much doctrine, and impulsion, it may be effected: stand by. The Turk, in this divine discipline, is admirable, exceeding all the potentates of the earth; still waited on by mutes; and all his commands so executed; yea, even in the war (as I have heard) and in his marches, most of his charges, and directions, given by signs, and with silence: an exquisite art! and I am heartily ashamed, and angry often-times, that the Princes of Christendom, should suffer a Barbarian, to transcend 'hem in so high a point of felicity. I will practise it, hereafter. How now? oh! oh! what villain? what pro∣digie of mankind is that? look. Oh! cut his throat, cut his throat: what murderer, hell-hound, devil can this be?
It is a post from the court—
Out rogue, and must thou blow thy horn, too?
Alas, it is a post from the court, sir, that says, hee must speak with you, pain of death—
Pain of thy life, be silent.
BY your leave, sir (I am a stranger here) is your name, master MO∣ROSE? is your name, master MOROSE? fishes! Pythagoreans all! this is strange! What say you, sir, nothing? Has HARPOCRATES been here, with his club, among you? well sir, I will believe you to bee the man, at this time: I will venture upon you, sir. Your friends at court commend 'hem to you, sir—
O men! Ô manners! was there ever such an impudence?)
And are extremely solicitous for you, sir.
Whose knave are you!
Mine own knave, and your compare, sir.
Fetch me my sword—
You shall taste the one half of my dagger, if you do (groom) and you, the other, if you stir, sir: be patient, I charge you, in the kings name, and hear me without insurrection. They say, you are to marry? to marry! doe you mark, sir?
How then, rude companion!
Mary, your friends doe wonder, sir, the Thames being so near, wherein you may drown so handsomely; or London-bridge, at a low fall, with a fine leap, to hurry you down the stream; or, such a delicate steeple, in the town, as Bow, to vault from; or, a braver height, as Pals, or, if you affected to doe it nearer home, and a shorter way, an excellent garret window, into the street; or, a beam, in the said garret, with this halter; which they have sent, and desire, that you would sooner commit your grave head to this knot, then to the wed-lock noose; or, take a little sublimate, and go out of the world, like a rat; or a fly (as one said) with a straw in your arse: any way, rather, then to follow this goblin matrimony. Alas, sir, doe you ever think to find a chaste wife, in these times? now? when there are so many masques, plays, puritan preachings, mad-folkes, and other strange sights to be seen daily, private and pub∣lique? if you had lived in king ETHELDRED'S time, sir, or EDWARD the Confessors, you might, perhaps, have found in some cold countrey-ham∣let, then, a dull frosty wench, would have been contented with one man: now, they will as soon be pleased with one leg, or one eye. I'll tell you, sir, the monstrous hazards you shall run with a wife.
Good sir! have I ever cozened any friends of yours of their land? bought their possessions? taken forfeit of their mortgage? begged a reversion from 'hem? bastarded their issue? what have I done, that may deserve this?
Nothing, sir, that I know, but your itch of marriage.
Why? if I had made an assassinate upon your father; vitiated your mother; ravished your sisters—
I would kill you, sir, I would kill you, if you had.
Why? you doe more in this, sir: It were a vengeance centuple, for all facinorous acts, that could be named, to doe that you doe—
Alas, sir, I am but a messenger: I but tell you, what you must hear. It seems, your friends are careful after your souls health, sir, and would have you know the danger (but you may doe your pleasure, for all them, I persuade not, sir) If, after you are married, your wife doe run away with a vaulter, or the Frenchman that walks upon ropes, or him that dances the jig, or a sencer for his skill at his weapon, why it is not their fault; they have discharged their consciences: when you know
what may happen. Nay, suffer valiantly, sir, for I must tell you, all the perils that you are obnoxious too. If she be fair, young, and vegetous, no sweet meats ever drew more flies; all the yellow doublets, and great roses in the town will bee there. If foul, and crooked, she'll bee with them, and buy those doublets and roses, sir. If rich, and that you marry her dowry, not her; she'll reign in your house, as imperious as a widow. If noble, all her kindred will be your tyrannes. If fruitful, as proud as May, and humorous as April; she must have her doctors, her midwives, her nurses, her longings every hour: though it be for the dearest morsel of man. If learned, there was never such a parrot; all your patrimony will be too little for the guests, that must be invited, to hear her speak Latin and Greek: and you must lie with her in those languages too, if you will please her. If precise, you must feast all the silenced brethren, once in three days; salute the sisters; entertain the whole family, or wood of 'hem; and hear long-winded exercises, singings, and catechisings, which you are not given to, and yet must give for: to please the zealous ma∣tron your wife, who, for the holy cause, will cousin you, over and aboue. You begin to sweat, sir? but this is not half, i'faith: you may do your pleasure notwithstanding, as I said before, I come not to persuade you. Upon my faith, master serving man, if you doe stir, I will beat you.
O, what is my sin! what is my sin?
Then, if you love your wife, or rather, dote on her, sir: Ô, how she'll torture you! and take pleasure i'your torments! you shall lye with her but when she lists; she will not hurt her beauty, her complexion; or it must be for that jewel, or that pearl, when she do's; every half hours pleasure must be bought anew: and with the same pain, and charge, you wooed her at first. Then, you must keep what servants she please; what company she will; that friend must not visit you without her licence; and him she loves most she will seem to hate eagerliest, to decline your jealousy; or, feign to bee jealous of you first; and for that cause go live with her she-friend, or cousin at the college, that can instruct her in all the mysteries, of writing letters, corrupting servants, taming spies; where she must have that rich goune for such a great day; a new one for the next; a richer for the third; bee served in silver; have the chamber sill'd with a succession of grooms, foot-men, ushers, and other messengers; besides embroyderers, jewellers, tyre-women, sempsters, fether-men, per∣fumers; while she feels not how the land drops away; nor the acres melt; nor forces the change, when the mercer has your woods for her veluets; never weighs what her pride costs, sir: so she may kiss a page, or a smooth chin, that has the despair of a beard; bee a states-woman, know all the news, what was done at Salisbury, what at the Bath, what at court, what in progress; or, so she may censure poets, and authors, and stiles, and compare 'hem, DANIEL with SPENSER, IONSON with the tother youth, and so forth; or, be thought cunning in controversies, or the very knots of divinity; and have, often in her mouth, the state of
the question: and then skip to the Mathematiques, and demonstration and answer, in religion to one; in state, to another, in baud'ry to a third.
O, Ô!
All this is very true, sir. And then her going in disguise to that conjurer, and this cunning woman: where the first question is, how soon you shall die? next, if her present servant love her? next that, if she shall have a new servant? and how many? which of her family would make the best baud, male, or female? what precedence she shall have by her next match? and sets down the answers, and believes 'hem aboue the scriptures. Nay, perhaps she'll study the art.
Gentle sir, have you done? have you had your pleasure of me? I'll think of these things.
Yes sir: and then comes reeking home of vapor and sweat, with going afoot, and lies in, a month, of a new face, all oil, and birdlime; and rises in asses milk, and is cleansed with a new fucus: god b'w' you, sir. One thing more (which I had almost forgot.) This too, with whom you are to marry, may have made a conveyance of her virginity before hand, as your wise widows doe of their states, before they marry, in trust to some friend, sir: who can tell? or if she have not done it yet, she may doe, upon the wedding day, or the night before, and antidate you cuckold. The like has been heard of, in nature. It is no deuis'd impossible thing, sir. God b'w' you: I'll be bold to leave this rope with you, sir, for a remem∣bronco. Farewell MVTE.
Come, have me to my chamber: but first shut the door. O, shut the door, shut the door: Is he come again?
It is I, sir, your barber.
O CVTBERD, CVTBERD, CVTBERD! here has bin a cut-throat with me: help me in to my bed, and give me physic with thy counsel.
NAy, and she will, let her refuse, at her own charges: it is nothing to me, gentlemen. But she will not bee invited to the like feasts, or guests, every day.
O, by no means, she may not refuse—to stay at home, if you love your reputation: Slight, you are invited thither of purpose to bee seen, and laughed at by the lady of the college, and her shadows. This trumpeter hath proclaimed you.
You shall not go; let him be laughed at in your stead, for not bringing you: and put him to his extemporal faculty of fooling, and tal∣king loud to satisfy the company.
He will suspect vs, talk aloud. Pray mistress EPICOENE, let's see
your verses; we have sir IOHN DEW'S leave: doe not conceal your ser∣uants merit, and your own glories.
They'll prove my servants glories, if you have his leave so soon.
His vain glories, lady!
Show 'hem, show 'hem, mistress, I dare own 'hem.
Judge you, what glories?
Nay, I'll read 'hem my self, too: an author must recite his own works. It is a madrigal of modesty.
Modest, and fair, for fair and good are near
Neighbours, how ere.—
Very good.
I, Is it not?
No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.
Excellent!
That again, I pray'sir IOHN.
It has some thing in it like rare wit, and sense.
Peace.
No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.
Then, when I praise sweet modesty, I praise
Bright beauties rays:
And having praised both beauty' and modestee,
I have praised thee.
Admirable!
How it chimes, and cries think in the close, divinely!
I, it is SENECA.
No, I think it is PLVTARCH.
The dor on PLVTARCH, and SENECA, I hate it: they are mine own imaginations, by that light. I wonder those fellows have such cre∣dit with gentlemen.
They are very grave authors.
Grave asses! mere Essaists! a few loose sentences, and that's all. A man would talk so, his whole age, I doe utter as good things every hour, if they were collected, and observed, as either of'hem.
Indeed! sir IOHN?
Hee must needs, living among the Wits, and Braueries too.
I, and being president of'hem, as he is.
There is ARISTOTLE, a mere common place-fellow; PLATO, a discourser; THVCIDIDES, and LIVIE, tedious and dry; TACITVS, an entire knot: sometimes worth the untying, very seldom.
What doe you think of the Poets, sir IOHN?
Not worthy to be named for authors. HOMER, an old tedious prolix ass, talks of curriers, and chines of beef. VIRGIL, of dung∣ing of land, and bees. HORACE, of I know not what.
I think so.
And so PINDARVS, LYCOPHRON, ANACREON, CATVLLVS, SENECA the tragoedian, LVCAN, PROPERTIVS, TIBVLLVS, MARTIAL, IVVENAL, AVSONIVS, STATIVS, POLITICIAN, VALERIVS FLACCVS, and the rest—
What a sack full of their names he has got!
And how he pores 'hem out! POLITICIAN, with VALERIVS FLACCVS!
Was not the character right, of him?
As could be made, in faith.
And PERSIVS, a crabbed cockescombe, not to be endured.
Why? whom do you account for authors, sir IOHN DAW?
Syntagma Iuris ciuilis, Corpus Iuris ciuilis, Corpus Iuris canonise, the King of Spaines bible.
Is the King of Spaines bible an author?
Yes, and Syntagma.
What was that Syntagma, sir?
A civil lawer, a Spaniard.
Sure, Corpus was a Dutch-man.
I, both the Corpusses, I knew 'hem: they were very corpulent au∣thors.
And, then there's VATABLVS, POMPONATIVS, SYMANCHA, the other are not to be received, within the thought of a scholar.
Fore god, you have a simple learned servant, lady, in titles.
I wonder that hee is not called to the helm, and made a coun∣cellor!
He is one extraordinary.
Nay, but in ordinary! to say truth, the state wants such.
Why, that will follow.
I muse, a mistress can be so silent to the dotes of such a servant.
It is her virtue, sir. I have written somewhat of her silence too.
In verse, sir IOHN?
What else?
Why? how can you justify your own being of a Poet, that so slight all the old Poets?
Why? every man, that writes in verse, is not a Poet; you have of the Wits, that write verses, and yet are no Poets: they are Poets that live by it, the poor fellows that live by it.
Why? would not you live by your verses, sir IOHN.
No, it were pity he should. A knight live by his verses? he did not make 'hem to that end, I hope.
And yet the noble SIDNEY lives by his, and the noble family not ashamed.
I, he professed himself; but sir IOHN DAW has more caution: he will not hinder his own rising in the state so much! doe you think hee will? Your verses, good sir IOHN, and no poems.
Silence in woman, is like speech in man,
Deny it who can.
Not I, believe it: your reason, sir.
Nor, i'st a tale,
That female vice should be a virtue male,
Or masculine vice, a female virtue be:
You shall it see
Proved with increase,
I know to speak, and she to hold her peace.
Do you conceive me, gentlemen?
No faith, how mean you with increase, sir IOHN?
Why, with increase is, when I court her for the common cause of mankind; and she says nothiug, but consentire videtur: and in time is grauida.
Then, this is a ballad of procreation?
A madrigal of proceation, you mistake.
'Pray give me my verses again, servant.
If you you'll ask 'hem aloud, you shall.
See, here's TRVE-WIT again!
WHere hast thou been, in the name of madness! thus ac∣coutred with thy horn?
Where the sound of it might have pierced your senses, with gladness, had you been in eare-reach of it. DAUPHIN, fall down and worship me: I have forbid the banes, lad. I have been with thy virtuous uncle, and have broke the match.
You haven't, I hope.
Yes faith; and thou should hope otherwise, I should repent me: this horn got me entrance, kiss it. I had no other way to get in, but by faining to be a post; but when I got in once, I proved none, but rather the contrary, turned him into a post, or a stone, or what is stiffer, with thundering into him the incommodities of a wife, and the miseries of marriage. If ever GORGON were seen in the shape of a woman, hee hath seen her in my description. I hane put him off o'that sent, for ever. Wby doe you not applaud, and adore me, sirs? why stand you mute? Are you stupid? you are not worthy of the benefit.
Did not I tell you? mischief!—
I would you had placed this benefit somewhere else.
Why so?
Slight, you have done the most inconsiderate, rash, weak thing, that ever man did to his friend.
Friend! if the most malicious enemy I have, had studied to
inflict an injury upon me, it could not bee a greater.
Wherein? for gods-sake! Gent: come to your selves again.
But I presaged thus much before, to you.
Would my lips had been soldred, when I spak on it. Slight, what moved you to be thus impertinent?
My masters, doe not put on this strange face to pay my court∣sie: off with this visor. Have good turns done you, and thank 'hem this way?
Fore heaven, you have undone me. That, which I have plotted for, and been maturing now these four months, you have blasted in a minute: now I am lost, I may speak. This gentlewoman was lodged here by me o'purpose, and, to be put upon my uncle, hath professed this obstinate silence for my sake, being my entire friend; and one, that for the requital of such a fortune, as to marry him, would have made me very ample conditions: where now, all my hopes are utterly miscarried by this unlucky accident.
Thus it is, when a man will be ignorantly officious; doe serve∣ces, and not know his why: I wonder what courteous itch possessed you! you never did absurder part in your life, nor a greater trespass to friend∣ship, to humanity.
Faith, you may forgive it, best: it was your cause principally.
I know it, would it had not.
How now CVTBERD? what news?
The best, the happiest that ever was, sir. There has been a mad gentleman with your uncle, this morning (I think this be the gen∣tleman) that has almost talked him out of his wits, with threatening him from marriage—
On, I pray thee.
And your uncle, sir, hee thinks it was done by your procure∣meant; therefore he will see the party, you wot of, presently: and if he like her, he says, and that she be so inclining to dombe, as I have told him, he swears hee will marry her, to day, instantly, and not defer it a minute longer.
Excellent! beyond our expectation!
Beyond your expectation? by this light, I knew it would bee thus.
Nay, sweet TRVE-WIT, forgive me.
No, I was ignorantly officious, impertinent: this was the absurd, weak part.
Wilt thou ascribe that to merit, now, was mere fortune?
Fortune? mere providence. Fortune had not a finger in it. I saw it must necessarily in nature fall out so: my genius is never false to me in these things. Show me, how it could be otherwise.
Nay, gentlemen, contend not, tic well now.
Alas, I let him go on with inconsiderate, and rash, and what he pleased.
Away thou strange iustifier of thy self, to bee wiser then thou were, by the event.
Event! By this light, thou shalt never persuade me, but I fore∣saw it, as well as the stars themselves.
Nay, gentlemen, it is well now: doe you two entertain sir IOHN DAW, with discourse, while I send her away with instructions.
I'll be acquainted with her, first, by your favour.
Master TRVE-WIT, lady, a friend of ours.
I am sorry, I have not known you sooner, lady, to celebrate this rare virtue of your silence.
Faith, and you had come sooner, you should ha'seene, and heard her well celebrated in sir IOHN DEW'S madrigals.
JACK DAW, god save you, when saw you LA-FOOLE?
Not since last night, master TRVE-WIT.
That's miracle! I thought you two had been inseparable.
Hoe's gone to inuit his guests.
Gods so! tic true! what a false memory have I towards that man! I am one: I met him even now, upon that he calls his delicate fine black horse, rid into a foam, with posting from place to place, and person to person, to give 'hem the cue—
Lest they should forget?
Yes: there was never poor captain took more pains at a muster to show men, then he, at this meal, to show friends.
It is his quarter-feast, sir.
What! doe you say so, sir IOHN?
Nay, JACK DAW will not be out, at the best friends hee has, to the talent of his wit: whore's his mistress, to hear and applaud him? is she gone!
Is mistress EPICOENE gone?
Gone before, with sir DAUPHIN, I warrant, to the place.
Gone before! that were a manifest injury; a disgrace and a half: to refuse him at such a festival time, as this, being a Bravery, and a Wit too.
Tut, he will swallow it like cream: hoe's better read in jure ciui∣li, then to esteem any thing a disgrace is offered him from a mistress.
Nay, let her even go; she shall sit alone, and bee dumb in her chamber, a week together, for IOHN DAW, I warrant her: do's she re∣fuse me?
No, sir, doe not take it so to heart: she do's not refuse you, but a little neglect you. Good faith, TRVE-WIT, you were too blame to put it into his head, that she do's refuse him.
She do's refuse him, sir, palpably: how ever you mince it. And I were as hee, I would swear to speak ne'er a word to her, to day, for it.
By this light, no more I will not.
Nor to any body else, sir.
Nay, I will not say so, gentlemen.
It had been an excellent happy condition for the company, if you could have drawn him to it.
I'll be very melancholic, i'faith.
As a dog, if I were as you, sir IOHN.
Or a snail, or a hog-louse: I would roll my self up for this day, in truth, they should not unwind me.
By this pick-tooth, so I will.
It is well done: he begins already to be angry with his teeth.
Will you go, gentlemen?
Nay, you must walk alone, if you bee right melancholic, sir IOHN.
Yes sir, we'll dog you, we'll follow you a far off.
Was there ever such a two yards of knighthood, measured out by Time, to be sold to laughter?
A mere talking mole! hang him: no mushrome was ever so fresh. A fellow so utterly nothing, as he knows not what he would be.
Let's follow him: but first, let's go to DAUPHIN, hoe's ho∣uering about the house, to hear what news.
Content.
WElcome CVTBERD; draw near with you fair chardge: and, in her ear, softly entreat her to vnmasque (—) So. Is the door shut? (—) enough. Now, CVTBERD, with the same discipline I use to my family, I will question you. As I conceive, CVTBERD, this gentlewoman is she, you have provided, and brought, in hope she will sit me in the place and person of a wife? Answer me not, but with your leg, unless it be otherwise: (—) very well done CVTBERD. I conceive, besides, CVTBERD, you have been pre-acquainted with her birth, educa∣tion, and qualities, or else you would not prefer her to my acceptance, in the weighty consequence of marriage. (—) this I conceive, CVT∣BERD. Answer me not but with your leg, unless it bee otherwise. (—) Very well done CVTBERD. Give aside now a little, and leave me to ex∣amin her condition, and aptitude to my affection. She is exceeding fair, and of a special good favour; a sweet composition, or harmony of limbs: her temper of beauty has the true height of my blood. The knave hath exceedingly well fitted me without: I will now try her within. Come near, fair gentlewoman: let not my behaviour seem rude, though unto you, being rare, it may happily appear strange. (—(Nay,
lady, you may speak, though CVTBERD, and my man, might not: for, of all sounds, only, the sweet voice of a fair lady has the just length of mine ears. I beseech you, say lady, out of the first fire of meeting eyes, (they say) love is stricken: doe you feel any such motion, suddenly shot into you, from any part you see in me? ha, lady? (—) Alas, lady, these answers by silent curtsies, from you, are too courtlesse, and simple. I have ever had my breeding in court: and she that shall bee my wife, must bee accomplished with courtly, and audacious ornaments. Can you speak lady?
Judge you, forsooth.
What say you, lady? speak out, I beseech you.
Judge you, forsooth.
O'my judgment, a divine softness! but can you naturally, lady, as I enjoin these by doctrine &amp; industry, refer your self to the search of my judgment, and (not taking pleasure in your tongue, which is a wo∣mans chiefest pleasure) think it plausible, to answer me by silent ge∣stirs, so long as my speeches jump right, with what you conceive? (—) Excellent! divine! if it were possible she should hold out thus! Peace CVTBRD, thou art made for ever, as thou hast made me, if this felicity have lasting: but I will try her further. Dear lady, I am courtly, I tell you, and I must have mine ears banqueted with pleasant, and witty con∣ferences, pretty girds, scoffs, and dalliance in her, that I mean to choose for my bedpheere. The ladies in court, think it a most desperate impair to their quickenesse of wit, and good carriage, if they cannot give occa∣zion for a man to court 'hem; and, when an amorous discourse is set on foot, minister as good matter to continue it, as himself: and doe you a∣lone so much differ from all them, that, what they (with so much circum∣stance) affect, and toil for, to seem learned, to seem judicious, to seem sharpe, and conceited, you can bury in your self, with silence? and rather trust your graces to the fair conscience of virtue, then to the worlds, or your own proclamation?
I should be sorry else.
What say you, lady? good lady, speak out.
I should be sorry, else
That sorrow doth fill me with gladness! O MOROSE! thou art happy aboue mankind! pray that thou majesty contain thy self. I will only put her to it once more, and it shall be with the utmost touch, and test of their sex. But hear me, fair lady, I doe also love to see her, whom I shall choose for my heicfar, to be the first and principal in all fa∣shions; praecede all the dames at court, by a fortnight; have her coun∣sell of taylors, linneners, lace-women, embroyderers, and sit with 'hem sometimes twice a day, upon French intelligences; and then come forth, varied like Nature, or oftner then she, and better, by the help of Art, her emulous servant. This doe I affect. And how will you be able, lady, with this frugality of speech, to give the manifold (but necessary) instructions,
for that bodies, these sleeves, those skirts, this cut, that stitch, this em∣broyderie, that lace, this wire, those knots, that ruff, those roses, this girdle, that fan, the tother scarf, these gloves? ha! what say you, lady.
I'll leave it to you, sir.
How lady? pray you, rise a note.
I leave it to wisdom, and you sir.
Admirable creature! I will trouble you no more: I will not sin against so sweet a simplicity. Let me now be bold to print on those divine lips, the seal of being mine. CVTBERD, I give thee the lease of thy house free: thank me not, but with thy leg (—) I know what thou would say, shoe's poor, and her friends deceased; she has brought a wealthy dowr•e in her silence, CVTBERD: and in respect of her poverty, CVTBERD, I shall have her more loving, and obedient, CVTBERD. Go thy ways, and get me a minister presently, with a soft-low voice to marry vs, and pray him he will not be impertinent, but brief as he can; away: softly, CVTBERD. Sirrah, conduct your mistress into the dining room, your now—mistress. O my felicity! how I shall bee revenged on mine inso∣lent kinsman, and his plots, to fright me from marrying! This night I will get an heir, and thrust him out of my blood like a stranger; he would be knighted, forsooth, and thought by that means to reign over me, his title must doe it: no kinsman, I will now make you bring me the tenth lords, and the sixteenth ladies letter, kinsman; and it shall doe you no good kinsman. Your knighthood it self shall come on it's knees, and it shall be rejected; it shall bee sued for it's fees to execution, and not bee re∣deemed; it shall cheat at the tweluepeny ordinary, it knighthood, for it's diet all the term time, and tell tales for it in the vacation, to the hostess: or it knighthood shall doe worse; take sanctuary in Coleharbor, and fast. It shall fright all it friends, with borrowing letters; and when one of the foure-score hath brought it knighthood ten shillings, it knighthood shall go to the Cranes, or the Bear at the Bridge-foot, and be drunk in fear: it shall not have money to discharge one tavern reckoning, to inuit the old creditors, to forbear it knighthood; or the new, that should be, to trust it knighthood. It shall be the tenth name in the bond, to take up the com∣moditie of pipkins, and stone jugs; and the part thereof shall not furnish it knighthood forth, for the attempting of a bakers widow, a browne bakers widow. It shall give it knighthoods name, for a stallion, to all gamesome citizens wives, and bee refused; when the master of a dancing school, or (How do you call him) the worst reveller in the town is taken: it shall want clothes, and by reason of that, wit, to fool to lawyers. It shall not have hope to repair it self by Constantinople, Ireland, or Verge∣nia; but the best, and last fortune to it knighthood shall be, to make DOL TEARE-SHEET, or KATE COMMON, a lady: and so, it knighthood may eat.
ARe you sure he is not gone by?
No, I staid in the shop ever since.
But, he may take the other end of the lane.
No, I told him I would be here at this end: I appointed him hither.
What a barbarian it is to stay then!
Yonder he comes.
And his charge left behind him, which is a very good sign, DAUPHIN.
How now CVTBERD, succeeds it, or no?
Past imagination, sir, omnia secunda; you could not have prayed, to have had it so well: Saltat senex, as it is in the proverb, he do's triumph in his felicity; admires the party! he has given me the lease of my house too! and, I am now going for a silent minister to marry 'hem, and away.
Slight, get one of the silenced ministers, a zealous brother would torment him purely.
Cum priuilegio, sir.
O, by no means, let's doe nothing to hinder it now when it is done and finished, I am for you: for any devise of vexation.
And that shall be, within this half hour, upon my dexterity, gentlemen. Contrive what you can, in the mean time, bones auibus.
How the slave doth latin it!
It would be made a jest to posterity, sirs, this days mirth, if ye will.
Beshrew his heart that will not, I pronounce.
And, for my part. What is it?
To translate all LA-FOOLES company, and his feast hither, to day, to celebrate this bride-ale.
I mary, but how will it be done?
I'll undertake the directing of all the ladie-guests thither, and then the meat must follow.
For gods sake, let's effect it: it will be an excellent comoedy of af∣fliction, so many several noises.
But are they not at the other place already, think you?
I'll warrant you for the colledge-honors: one of their faces has not the priming color laid on yet, nor the other her smock sleeked.
O, but they'll rise earlier then ordinary, to a feast.
Best go see, and assure our selves.
Who knows the house?
I'll lead you, were you never there yet?
Not I.
Nor I.
Where ha'you lived then? not know TOM OTTER!
No: for gods sake, what is he?
An excellent animal, equal with your DAW, or LA-FOOLE, if not transcendent; and do's latin it as much as your barber: hee is his wives Subject, he calls her Princess, and at such times as these, follows her up and down the house like a page, with his hat off, partly for heate, partly for reverence. At this instant, hee is marshaling of his bull, bear, and horse.
What be those, in the name of Sphinx?
Why sir? hee has been a great man at the bear-garden in his time: and from that subtle sport, has tan the witty denomination of his chief carousing cups. One he calls his bull, another his bear, another his horse. And then hee has his lesser glasses, that hee calls his dear, and his ape; and several degrees of'hem too: and never is well, nor thinks any entertainment perfect, till these be brought out, and set of the cupbord.
For gods love! we should miss this, if we should not go.
Nay, he has a thousand things as good, that will speak him all day. He will rail on his wife, with certain common places, behind her back; and to her face—
No more of him. Let's go see him, I petition you.
NAy, good Princess, hear me pauca verb.
By that light, I'll ha'you chained up, with your bul-dogs, and beare-dogges, if you be not civil the sooner. I'll send you to kennel, i'faith. You were best bait me with your bull, bear, and horse? Never a time, that the courtiers, or collegiates come to the house, but you make it a shrouetuesday! I would have you get your whitsontide-veluet-cap, and your staff i'your hand, to entertain 'hem: yes in truth, doe.
Not so, Princess, neither, but under correction, sweet Princess, gi'me leave—these things I am known to the courtiers by. It is reported to them for my humour, and they receive it so, and doe ex∣pect it. TOM OTTERS bull, bear, and horse is known all over England, in rerum nature.
Fore me, I will na-ture 'hem over to Paris-garden, and na-ture you thither too, if you pronounce 'hem again. Is a bear a fit beast, or a bull, to mix in society with great ladies? think in your discretion, in any good polity.
The horse then, good Princess.
Well, I am contented for the horse: they love to bee well horsed, I know. I love it my self.
And it is a delicate fine horse this. Poetarum Pegasus. Under correction, Princess, IVPITER did turn himself into a—Taurus, or Bull, under correction, good Princess.
By my integrity, I'll send you over to the banke-side, I'll commit you to the Master of the garden, if I hear but a syllable more. Must my house, or my roof, be polluted with the sent of bears, and bulls, when it is perfumed for great ladies? Is this according to the instrument, when I married you? That I would bee Princess, and reign in mine own house: and you would be my subject, and obey me? What did you bring me, should make you thus peremptory? Do I allow you your halfe-crowne a day, to spend, where you will, among your gamsters, to vex and torment me, at such times as these? Who gives you your maintenance, I pray you? who allows you your horse-meat, and mans-meat? your three suits of apparel a year? your four pair of stockings, one silk, three worsted? your clean linen, your bands, and cuffs when I can get you to wear 'hem? It is mar'l you ha'hem on now. Who graces you with courtiers, or great personages, to speak to you out of their coaches, and come home to your house? Were you ever so much as looked upon by a lord, or a lady, before I married you: but on the Easter or Whitson-holy-daies? and then out at the banquetting-house window, when NED WHITING, or GEORGE STONE, were at the stake?
For gods sake, let's go staue her off him.)
Answer me to that. And did not I take you up from thence, in an old greasy buffe-doublet, with points; and greene valet sleeves, out at the elbows? you forget this.
She'll worry him, if we help not in time.)
O, here are some of the gallants! Go to, behave your self distinctly, and with good morality; Or, I protest, I'll take away your exhibition.
BY your leave, fair mistress OTTER, I'll be bold to enter these gen∣tlemen in your acquaintance.
It shall not be obnoxious, or difficill, sir.
How do's my noble Captain? Is the bull, bear, and horse, in rerum nature still?
Sir, Sic visum superis.
I would you would but intimate 'hem, doe. Go your ways in, and get tosts, and butter, made for the wood-cocks. That's a sit pro∣uince for you.
Alas, what a tyranny, is this poor fellow married too.
O, but the sport will be anon, when we get him loose.
Dares he ever speak?
No Anabaptist ever railed with the like licence: but mark her language in the mean time, I beseech you.
Gentlemen, you are very aptly come. My cousin, sir AMO∣ROVS, will be here briefly.
In good time lady. Was not sir IOHN DAW here, to ask for him, and the company?
I cannot assure you, Mr. TRVE-WIT. Here was a very melan∣choly knight in a ruff, that demanded my subject for some body, a gentle∣man, I think.
I, that was he, lady.
But he departed straight, I can resolve you.
What an excellent choice phrase, this lady expresses in!
O, sir! she is the only authentical courtier, that is not na∣turally bred one, in the city.
You have taken that report upon trust, gentlemen.
No, I assure you, the court governs it so, lady, in your behalf.
I am the servant of the court, and courtiers, sir.
They are rather your idolaters.
Not so, sir.
How now, CVTBERD? Any cross?
O, no sir: Omnia been. It was never better of the hinges, ell's sure. I have so pleased him with a curate, that hoe's gone too't almost with the delight he hopes for soon.
What is he, for a vicar?
One that has caught a cold, sir, and can scarce bee heard six inches off; as if he spoke out of a bull-rush, that were not picked, or his throat were full of pith: a fine quick fellow, and an excellent barber of prayers. I came to tell you, sir, that you might omnem mouere lapidem (as they say) be ready with your vexation.
Gramercy, honest CVTBERD, be there abouts with thy key to let vs in.
I will not fail you, sir: Ad manum.
Well, I'll go watch my coaches.
Doe; and we'll send DAW to you, if you meet him not.
Is master TRVE-WIT gone?
Yes, lady, there is some vnfortnnate business fallen out.
So I judged by the physiognomy of the fellow, that came in; and I had a dream last night too of the new pageant, and my lady Maio∣resse, which is always very ominous to me. I told it my lady HAVGHTY t'other day; when her honour came hither to see some China stuffs: and she expounded it, out of ARTEMIDORVS, and I have found it since ve∣rye true. It has done me many affronts.
Your dream, lady?
Yes, sir, anything I doe but dream of the city. It stained me a damasque table-cloth, cost me eighteen pound at one time; and burnt me
a black satin gown, as I stood by the fire, at my lady CENTAVRES chamber in the college, another time. A third time, at the Lords masque, it dropped all my wire, and my ruff with waxe-candle, that I could not go up to the banquet. A fourth time, as I was taking coach to go to Ware, to meet a friend, it dashed me a new suit all over (a crimson satin doublet, and black velvet skirts) with a brewers horse, that I was fine to go in and shift me, and kept my chamber a leash of days for the anguish of it.
These were dire mischances, lady.
I would not dwell in the city, and it were so fatal to me.
Yes sir, but I doe take advise of my doctor, to dream of it as little, as I can.
You doe well, mistress OTTER.
Will it please you to enter the house farther, gentlemen?
And your favour, lady: but we stay to speak with a knight, sir IOHN DAW, who is here come. We shall follow you, lady.
At your own time, sir. It is my cousin sir AMOROUS his feast.—
I know it lady.
And mine together. But it is for his honour; and therefore I take no name of it, more then of the place.
You are a bounteous kinswoman.
Your servant, sir.
WHy doe not you know it, sir IOHN DAW?
No, I am a rooke if I doe.
I'll tell you then, shoe's married by this time! And whereas you were put in the head, that she was gone with sir DAVPHI∣NO, I assure you, sir DAUPHIN has been the noblest, honestest friend to you, that ever gentleman of your quality could boast off. He has disco∣uer'd the whole plot, and made your mistress so acknowledging, and in∣deed, so ashamed of her injury to you, that she desires you to forgive her, and but grace her wedding with your presence to day— She is to be mar∣ried to a very good fortune, she says, his uncle, old MOROSE: and she willed me in private to tell you, that she shall be able to doe you more fa∣uours, and with more security now, then before.
Did she say so, i'faith?
Why, what doe you think of me, sir IOHN! ask sir DAV∣PHINE.
Nay, I believe you. Good sir DAUPHIN, did she desire me to forgive her?
I assure you, sir IOHN, she did.
Nay then, I doe with all my heart, and I'll be jovial.
Yes, for look you sir, this was the injury to you. LA-FOOLE intended this feast to honour her bridal day, and made you the proper∣tie to inuit the college ladies, and promise to bring her: and then at the time, she should have appeared (as his friend) to have given you the dor. Whereas now, sir DAUPHIN has brought her to a feeling of it, with this kind of satisfaction, that you shall bring all the ladies to the place where she is, and be very jovial; and there, she will have a din∣ner, which shall be in your name: and so dis-appoint LA-FOOLE, to make you good again, and (as it were) a saver in the man.
As I am a knight, I honour her, and forgive her heartily.
About it then presently, TRVE-WIT is gone before to con∣front the coaches, and to acquaint you with so much, if hee meet you. Join with him, and it is well. See, here comes your Antagonist, but take you no notice, but be very jovial.
Are the ladies come, sir IOHN DAW, and your mistress? sir DAV∣PHINE! you are exceeding welcome, and honest master CLERIMONT. Whore's my cousin? did you see no collegiats, gentlemen?
Collegiats! Doe you not hear, sir AMOROUS, how you are abused?
How sir!
Will you speak so kindly to sir IOHN DAW, that has done you such an affront?
Wherein, gentlemen? let me be a suitor to you to know, I be∣seech you!
Why sir, his mistress is married to day, to sir DAUPHINS uncle, your cousins neighbour, and hee has diverted all the ladies, and all your company thither, to frustrate your provision, and stick a digrace upon you. He was here, now, to have enticed vs away from you too: but we told him his own, I think.
Has sir IOHN DAW wronged me so in-humanely?
He has done it, sir AMOROUS, most maliciously, and treacherous∣lie: but if you'll be ruled by vs, you shall quit him in faith.
Good gentlemen! I'll make one, believe it. How I pray?
Mary sir, get me your pheasants, and your godwits, and your best meat, and dish it in silver dishes of your cousins presently, and say nothing, but clap me a clean towel about you, like a sewer; and bare-headed, march before it with a good confidence (it is but over the way, hard by) and we'll second you, where you shall set it of the board, and bid 'hem welcome to it, which shall show it is yours, and disgrace his preparation utterly: and, for your cousin, whereas she should bee troubled here at home with care of making and giving welcome, she shall transfer all that labour thither, and bee a principal guest her self, sit ranked with the colledge-Honors, and bee honoured, and have her health drunk as often, as bare, and as loud as the best of 'hem.
I'll go tell her presently. It shall be done, that's resolved.
I thought he would not hear it out, but it would take him.
Well, there be guests, &amp; meat now; how shall we do for musique?
The smell of the venison, going through the street, will inuit one noise of fiddlers, or other.
I would it would call the trumpeters thither.
Faith, there is hope, they have intelligence of all feasts. There's good correspondence betwixt them, and the London-cookes. It is twenty to one but we have 'hem.
Twill be a most solemn day for my uncle, and an excellent fit of mirth for vs.
I, if we can hold up the aemulation betwixt FOOL, and DAW, and never bring them to expostulate.
Tut, flatter 'hem both (as TRVE-WIT says) and you may take their understandings in a purse-net. They'll believe themselves to be just such men as we make 'hem, neither more nor less. They have nothing, not the use of their senses, but by tradition.
See! Sir AMOROUS has his towel on already. Have you per∣swaded your cousin?
Yes, it is very feasible: she'll do any thing she says, rather then the LA-FOOLES shall be disgraced.
She is a noble kinswoman. It will be such a pest'ling device, sir AMOROUS! It will pound all your enemies practises to poulder, and blow him up with his own mine, his own train.
Nay, we'll give fire, I warrant you.
But you must carry it privately, without any noise, and take no notice by any means—
Gentlemen, my Princess says, you shall have all her silver dishes, festinate: and she's gone to alter her tyre a little, and go with you—
And yourself too, captain OTTER.
By any means, sir.
Yes sir, I doe mean it: but I would entreat my cousin sir A∣MOROVS, and you gentlemen, to be suitors to my Princess, that I may carry my bull, and my bear, as well as my horse.
That you shall doe, captain OTTER.
My cousin will never consent, gentlemen.
She must consent, sir AMOROUS, to reason.
Why, she says they are no decorum among ladies.
But they are decor, and that's better, sir.
I, she must hear argument. Did not PASIPHAE, who was a queen, love a bull? and was not CALISTO, the mother of ARSES, turned into a bear, and made a star, mistress VRSVLA, in the heavens?
O God! that I could have said as much! I will have these stories painted in the bear-garden, ex Ouidij metamorphose.
Where is your Princess, Captain? pray be our leader.
That I shall, sir.
Make haste, good sir AMOROUS.
SIr, there's an angel for your self, and a brace of angels for your cold. Muse not at this manage of my bounty. It is fit wee should thank fortune, double to nature, for any benefit she confers upon vs; be∣sides, it is your imperfection, but my solace.
I thank your worship, so is it mine, now.
What says he, CVTBERD?
He says, Praesto, sir, whenever your worship needs him, hee can be ready with the like. He got this cold with sitting up late, and sing∣ing catches with cloth-workers.
No more. I thank him.
God keep your worship, and give you much joy with your fair spouse. (Vmh, vmh.)
O, Ô, stay CVTBERD! let him give me five shillings of my mo∣ney back. As it is bounty to reward benefits, so is it equity to mulct injuries. I will have it. What says he?
He cannot change it, sir.
It must be changed.
Cough again.
What says he?
He will cough out the rest, sir.
(Vmh, vmh, vmh.)
Away, away with him, stop his mouth, away, I forgive it.—
Fie, master MOROSE, that you will use this violence to a man of the church.
How!
It do's not become your gravity, or breeding, (as you pretend in court) to have offered this outrage on a water-man, or any more boy∣strous creature, much less on a man of his civil coat.
You can speak then!
Yes, sir.
Speak out I mean.
I sir. Why, did you think you had married a statue? or a mote∣on, only? one of the French puppets, with the eyes turned with a wire? or some innocent out of the hospital, that would stand with her hands thus, and a playse mouth, and look upon you.
O immodesty! a manifest woman! what CVTBERD?
Nay, never quarrel with CVTBERD, sir, it is too late now. I
confess, it doth bate somewhat of the modesty I had, when I writ simply maid: but I hope, I shall make it a stock still competent, to the e∣state, and dignity of your wife.
She can talk!
Yes indeed, sir.
What, sirrah. None of my knaves, there? where is this impo∣stor, CVTBERD?
Speak to him, fellow, speak to him. I'll have none of this coa∣cted, unnatural dumbness in my house, in a family where I govern.
She is my Regent already! I have married a PENTHESILEA, a SEMIRAMIS, sold my liberty to a distaff!
Whore's master MOROSE?
Is he come again! lord have mercy upon me.
I wish you all joy, mistress EPICOENE, with your grave and honourable match.
I return you the thanks, master TRVE-WIT, so friendly a wish deserves.
She has acquaintance, too!
God save you, sir, and give you all contentment in your fair choice, here. Before I was the bird of night to you, the owl but now I am the messenger of peace, a dove, and bring you the glad wishes of many friends, to the celebration of this good hour.
What hour, sir?
Your marriage hour sir. I commend your resolution, that (notwithstanding all the dangers I laid before you, in the voice of a night-crow) would yet go on, and bee your self. It shows you are a man con∣stant to your own ends, and upright to your purposes, that would not be put off with left-handed cries.
How should you arrive at the knowledge of so much!
Why, did you ever hope, sir, committing the secrecy of it to a barber, that less then the whole town should know it? you might as well have told it the conduit, or the bake-house, or the infant'ry that follow the court, and with more security. Could your gravity forget so old and noted a remnant, as lips &amp; tonsoribus notum. Well sir, forgive it your self now, the fault, and be communicable with your friends. Here will bee three or four fashionable ladies, from the college to visit you presently, and their train of minions, and followers.
Bar my doors! bar my doors! where are all my eaters? my mouths now? bar up my doors, you varlets.
He is a varlet, that stirs to such an office. Let 'hem stand open.
I would see him that dares move his eyes toward it. Shall I have a barri∣cado made against my friends, to be barred of any pleasure they can bring in to me with honourable visitation.
O Amazonian impudence!
Nay faith, in this, sir, she speaks but reason: and me thinks is more continent then you. Would you go to bed so presently, sir, a∣fore noon? a man of your head, and hair, should owe more to that re∣ueuerend ceremony, and not mount the marriage-bed, like a towne-bul, or a mountaine-goate; but stay the due season; and ascend it then with religion, and fear. Those delights are to be steeped in the humour, and si∣lence of the night; and give the day to other open pleasures, and jollities of feast, or musique, of revels, of discourse: we'll have all, sir, that may make your Hymen high, and happy.
O, my torment, my torment!
Nay, if you endure the first half hour, sir, so tediously, and with this irksomeness; what comfort, or hope, can this fair gentlewo∣man make to her self hereafter, in the consideration of so many years as are to come—
Of my affliction. Good sir, depart, and let her doe it alone.
I have done, sir.
That cursed barber!
(Yes faith, a cursed wretch indeed, sir.)
I have married his citterne, that's common to all men. Some plague, aboue the plague—
(All Egypt ten plagues)
Revenge me on him.
It is very well, sir. If you laid on a curse or two, more, I'll as∣sure you he will bear 'hem. As, that he may get the pox with seeking to cure it, sir? Or, that while he is curling another mans hair, his own may drop off? Or, for burning some male-baudes lock, he may have his brain beat out with the curling-iron?
No, let the wretch live wretched. May he get the itch, and his shop so lousy, as no man dare come at him, nor he come at no man.
(I, and if he would swallow all his balls for pills, let not them purge him)
Let his warning pan be ever cold.
(A perpertuall frost underneath it, sir)
Let him never hope to see fire again.
(But in hell, sir)
His chairs be always empty, his scissors rust, and his combs mould in their cases.
Very dreadful that! (And may hee loose the invention, sir, of carving lanterns in paper)
Let there be no baud carted that year, to employ a basin of his: but let him be glad to eat his sponge, for bread.
And drink lotium to it, and much good doe him.
Or, for want of bread—
Eat eare-waxe, sir. I'll help you. Or, draw his own teeth, and add them to the lute-string.
No, beat the old ones to poulder, and make bread of them.
(Yes, make meal of the millstones.)
May all the botches, and burns, that he has cured on others, break out upon him.
And he now forget the cure of 'hem in himself, sir: or, if he do remember it, let him have scraped all his linen into lint for it, and have not a rag left him, to set up with.
Let him never set up again, but have the gout in his hands for ever. Now, no more, sir.
O that last was too high set! you might go less with him i'faith, and bee revenged enough: as, that he be never able to new-paint his pole—
Good sir, no more. I forgot my self.
Or, want credit to take up with a combe-maker—
No more, sir.
Or, having broken his glass in a former despair, fall now into a much greater, of ever getting another—
I beseech you, no more.
Or, that he never be trusted with trimming of any but chim∣ney-sweepers —
Sir—
Or, may he cut a colliers throat with his razor, by chance-med∣lee, and yet hang for it.
I will forgive him, rather then hear any more. I beseech you, sir.
THis way, madame.
O, the sea breaks in upon me! another flood! an in∣undation! I shall be orewhelm'd with noise. It beats already at my shores. I feel an earthquake in my self, for it.
Give you joy, mistress.
Has she servants too!
I have brought some ladies here to see, and know you. My lady HAVGHTY, this my lady CENTAVRE, mistress DOL MOVES, mistress TRVSTIE my lady HAVGHTIES woman. Whore's your husband? let's see him: can he endure no noise? let me come to him.
What nomenclator is this!
Sir IOHN DAW, sir, your wives servant, this.
A DAW, and her servant! O, it is decreed, it is decreed of me, and she have such servants.
Nay sir, you must kiss the ladies, you must not go away, now; they come toward you, to seek you out.
I'faith, master MOROSE, would you steal a marriage thus, in the midst of so many friends, and not acquaint vs? Well, I'll kiss you, notwithstanding the justice of my quarrel: you shall give me leave, mi∣stress, to use a becoming familiarity with your husband.
Your ladyship do's me an honour in it, to let me know hee is so worthy your favour: as, you have done both him and me grace, to visit so unprepared a pair to entertain you.
Complement! complement!
But I must lay the burden of that, upon my servant, here.
It shall not need, mistress MOROSE, we will all bear, rather then one shall be oppressed.
I know it: and you will teach her the faculty, if she bee to learn it.
Is this the silent woman?
Nay, she has found her tongue since she was married, master TRVE-WIT says.
O, master TRVE-WIT! 'saue you. What kind of creature is your bride here? she speaks, me thinks!
Yes madame, believe it, she is a gentlewoman of very absolute behaviour, and of a good race.
And JACK DAW told vs, she could not speak.
So it was carried in plot, madam, to put her upon this old fellow, by sir DAUPHIN, his nephew, and one or two more of vs: but she is a woman of an excellent assurance, and an extraordinary happy wit, and tongue. You shall see her make rare sport with DAW, ere night.
And he brought vs to laugh at her!
That falls out often, madame, that he that thinks himself the master-wit, is the master-foole. I assure your lady-ship, ye cannot laugh at her.
No, well have her to the college: and she have wit, she shall bee one of vs! shall she not CENTAVRE? we'll make her a collegiate.
Yes faith, madame, and MOVES, and she will set up a side.
Believe it madame, and mistress MOVES, she will sustain her part.
I'll tell you that, when I have talked with her, and tried her.
Use her very civilly, MOVES.
So I will, madame.
Blessed minute, that they would whisper thus ever.
In the mean time, madame, would but your lady-ship help to
vex him a little: you know his disease, talk to him about the wedding ceremonies, or call for your gloves, or—
Let me alone. CENTAVRE, help me. Mr. bridegroom, where are you?
O, it was too miraculously good to last!
Wee see no ensigns of a wedding, here; no character of a brideale: where be our skarfes, and our gloves? I pray you, give 'hem vs. Let's know your brides colours, and yours, at least.
Alas, madame, he has provided none.
Had I known your ladyships painter, I would.
He has given it you, CENTAVRE, in faith. But, doe you hear, M. MOROSE, a jest will not absolve you in this manner. You that have sucked the milk of the court, and from thence have been brought up to the very strong meates, and wine, of it; been a courtier from the big∣gen, to the night-cap: (as we may say) and you, to offend in such a high point of ceremony, as this! and let your nuptials want all marks of solemnity! How much plate have you lost to day (if you had but regar∣ded your profit) what gifts, what friends, through your mere rue∣sticitie?
Madame—
Pardon me, sir, I must insinuate your errors to you. No gloves? no garters? no skarfes? no epithalamium? no masque?
Yes, madame, I'll make an epithalamium, I promised my mi∣stress, I have begun it already: will your ladyship hear it?
I, good JACK DAW.
Will it please your ladyship command a chamber, and be pri∣uate with your friend? you shall have your choice of rooms, to retire to after: my whole house is yours. I know, it hath been your ladyships er∣rand, into the city, at other times, how ever now you have been unhap∣pily diverted upon me: but I shall be loath to break any honourable cu∣stome of your ladyships. And therefore, good madame—
Come, you are a rude bridegroom, to entertain ladies of honour in this fashion.
He is a rude groom, indeed.
By that light, you deserve to be grafted, and have your horns reach from one side of the Island, to the other. Doe not mistake me, sir, I but speak this, to give the ladies some heart again, not for any ma∣lice to you.
Is this your Bravo, ladies?
As god help me, if you utter such another word, I'll take mistress bride in, and begin to you, in a very sad cup, doe you see? Go too, know your friends, and such, as love you.
BY your leave, ladies. Doe you want any musique? I have brought you variety of noises. Play, sirs, all of you.
O, a plot, a plot, a plot, a plot upon me! This day, I shall be their anvil to work on, they will grate me asunder. It is worse then the noise of a saw.
No, they are hair, rosin, and guts. I can give you the receipt.
Peace, boys.
Play, I•say.
Peace, rascals. You see who's your friend now, sir? Take cou∣rage, put on a martyrs resolution. Mock down all their attemptings, with patience. It is but a day, and I would suffer heroically. Should an ass exceed me in fortitude? No. You betray your infirmity with your hanging dull ears, and make them insult: bear up bravely, and constant∣lie. Look you here, sir, what honour is done you unexpected, by your nephew; a wedding dinner come, and a Knight sewer before it, for the more reputation: and fine Mrs. OTTER, your neighbour, in the rump, or tail of it.
Is that Gorgon, that Medusa come? Hide me, hide me.
I warrant you, sir, she will not transform you. Look upon her with a good courage. Pray you entertain her, and conduct your guests in. No? Mistress bride, will you entreat in the ladies? your bride∣groom is so shame-fac'd, here—
Will it please your ladyship, madame?
With the benefit of your company, mistress.
Servant, pray you perform your duties.
And glad to be commanded, mistress.
How like you her wit, MOVES.
Very prettily, absolutely well.
It is my place.
You shall pardon me, mistress OTTER.
Why I am a collegiate.
But not in ordinary.
But I am.
We'll dispute that within.
Would this had lasted a little longer.
And that they had sent for the Heralds. Captain OTTER, what news?
I have brought my bull, bear, and horse, in private, and yon∣der are the trumpeters without, and the drum, gentlemen.
O, Ô, Ô.
And we will have a rouse in each of'hem, anon, for bold Bri∣tons, in faith.
O, Ô, Ô.
Follow, follow, follow.
WAs there ever poor bridegroom so tormented? or man indeed?
I have not read of the like, in the chronicles of the land.
Sure, hee cannot but go to a place of rest, after all this purgatory.
He may presume it, I think.
The spitting, the coughing, the laughter, the neesing, the far∣ting, dancing, noise of the musique, and her masculine, and loud com∣manding, and urging the whole family, makes him think he has married a fury.
And she carries it up bravely.
I, she takes any occasion to speak: that's the height on it.
And how soberly DAUPHIN labours to satisfy him, that it was none of his plot!
And has almost brought him to the faith, in the article. Here he comes. Where is he now? what's become of him, DAUPHIN?
O, hold me up a little, I shall go away in the jest else. Hee has got on his whole nest of night-caps, and locked himself up, in the top of the house, as high, as ever he can climb from the noise. I peeped in at a crony, and saw him fitting over a crosse-beame of the roof, like him of the sadlers horse in Fleetstreet, vp-right: and he will sleep there.
But where are your collegiates?
Withdrawn with the bride in private.
O, they are instructing her in the colledge-Grammar. If she have grace with them, she knows all their secrets instantly.
Methinks, the lady HAVGHTY looks well to day, for all my dispraise of her in the morning. I think, I shall come about to thee again, TRVE-WIT.
Believe it, I told you right. Women ought to repair the losses, time and years have made in their features, with dressings. And an intel∣ligent woman, if she know by her self the least defect, will bee most cu∣rios, to hide it: and it becomes her. If she be short, let her sit much, lest when she stands, she be thought to sit. If she have an ill foot, let her wear her gown the longer, and her shoo the thinner. If a fat hand, and scald nails, let her carve the less, and act in gloves. If a sour breath, let
her never discourse fasting: and always talk at her distance. If she have black and rugged teeth, let her offer the less at laughter, especially if she laugh wide, and open.
O, you shall have some women, when they laugh, you would think they brayed, it is so rude, and —
I, and others, that will stalk in their gait like an Ostrich, and take huge strides. I cannot endure such a sight. I love measure in the feet, and number in the voice: they are gentleness, that oft-times draw no less then the face.
How came thou to study these creatures so exactly? I would thou would make me a proficient.
Yes, but you must leave to live i'your chamber then a month to∣gether upon AMADIS de Gaul, or Don QVIXOTE, as you are wont; and come abroad where the matter is frequent, to court, to tiltings, public shows, and feasts, to plays, and church sometimes: thither they come to show their new tyres too, to see, and to be seen. In these places a man shall find whom to love, whom to play with, whom to touch once, whom to hold ever. The variety arrests his judgment. A wench to please a man comes not down dropping from the seeling, as he lies on his back dro∣ning a tobacco pipe. He must go where she is.
Yes, and be never the near.
Out heretic. That diffidence makes thee worthy it should bee so.
He says true to you, DAUPHIN.
Why?
A man should not doubt to ouer-come any woman. Think he can vanquish 'hem, and he shall: for though they deny, their desire is to be tempted. PENELOPE her self cannot hold out long. Ostend, you saw, was taken at last. You must persevere, and hold to your purpose. They would solicit vs, but that they are afraid. Howsoever, they wish in their hearts we should solicit them. Praise 'hem, flatter 'hem, you shall never want eloquence, or trust: even the chastest delight to feel them∣selves that way rubbed. With praises you must mix kisses too. If they take them, they'll take more. Though they strive, they would bee o∣uer-come.
O, but a man must beware of force.
It is to them an acceptable violence, and has oft-times the place of the greatest curtsy. She that might have been forced, and you let her go free without touching, though she then seem to thank you, will ever hate you after: and glad in the face, is assuredly sad at the heart.
But all women are not to be taken always.
It is true. No more then all birds, or all fishes. If you appear learned to an ignorant wench, or jocund to a sad, or witty to a foolish, why she presently begins to mistrust her self. You must approach them in their own height, their own line: for the contrary makes many that fear to
commit themselves to noble and worthy fellows, run into the embraces of a rascal. If she love wit, give verses, though you borrow 'hem of a friend, or buy 'hem, to have good. If valour, talk of your sword, and be frequent in the mention of quarrels, though you be staunch in fighting. If activity, be seen of your barberry often, or leaping over stools, for the credit of your back. If she love good clothes or dressing, have your lear∣ned counsel about you every morning, your french taylor, barber, lin∣nener, &amp;c. Let your poulder, your glass, and your comb, be your dearest acquaintance. Take more care for the ornament of your head, then the safety: and wish the common-wealth rather troubled, then a hair about you. That will take her. Then if she be covetous and craving, doe you promise any thing, and perform sparingly: so shall you keep her in ap∣petite still. Seem as you would give, but be like a barren field that yields little, or unlucky dice, to foolish, and hoping gamesters. Let your gifts be slight, and dainty, rather then precious. Let cunning be aboue cost. Give cherries at time of year, or apricots; and say they were sent you out of the country, though you bought 'hem in Cheap-side. Admire her tyres; like her in all fashions; compare her in every habit to some deity; invent excellent dreams to slatter her, and riddles; or, if she bee a great one, perform always the second parts to her: like what she likes, praise whom she praises, and fail not to make the household and servants yours, yea the whole family, and salute 'hem by their names: (it is but light cost if you can purchase 'hem so) and make her physician your pensioner, and her chief woman. Nor will it bee out of your gain to make love to her too, so she follow, no usher, her ladies pleasure. All blabbing is taken a∣way, when she comes to be a part of the crime.
On what courtly lap hast thou late slept, to come forth so sud∣den and absolute a courtling?
Good faith, I should rather question you, that are so harkening after these mysteries. I begin to suspect your diligence. DAUPHIN. Speak, art thou in love in earnest?
Yes by my troth am I: it were ill dissembling before thee.
With which of 'hem, I pray thee?
With all the collegiates.
Out on thee. We'll keep you at home, believe it, in the stable, and you be such a stallion.
No. I like him well. Men should love wisely, and all women: some one for the face, and let her please the eye; another for the skin, and let her please the touch; a third for the voice, and let her please the ear; and where the objects mix, let the senses so too. Thou would think it strange, if I should make 'hem all in love with thee before night!
I would say thou had the best philtre in the world, and could doe more then madame MEDEA, or Doctor FOREMAN.
If I doe not, let me play the mounte-banke for my meat while I live, and the bawd for my drink.
So be it, I say.
O Lord, gentlemen, how my knights and I have mist you here!
Why, Captain, what service? what service?
To see me bring up my bull, bear, and horse to fight.
Yes faith, the Captain says we shall be his dogs to bait 'hem.
A good employment.
Come on, let's see a course then.
I am afraid my cousin will be offended if she come.
Be afraid of nothing. Gentlemen, I have placed the drum and the trumpets, and one to give 'hem the sign when you are ready. Here's my bull for my self, and my bear for sir IOHN DAW, and my horse for sir AMOROUS. Now set your foot to mine, and yours to his, and —
Pray god my cousin come not.
Saint GEORGE, and saint ANDREW, fear no cousins. Come, sound, sound. Et rauco strepuerunt cornua cantu.
Well said, Captain, in faith: well fought at the bull.
Well held at the bear.
Low, low, Captain.
O, the horse has kicked off his dog already.
I cannot drink it, as I am a Knight.
Gods so, off with his spurs, some-body.
It goes again my conscience. My cousin will bee angry with it.
I have done mine.
You fought high and fair, sir IOHN.
At the head.
Like an excellent beare-dog.
You take no notice of the business, I hope.
Not a word, sir, you see we are jovial.
Sir AMOROUS, you must not aequiuocate. It must bee pulled down, for all my cousin.
Sfoot, if you take not your drink, they'll think you are dis∣contented wit some thing: you'll betray all, if you take the least notice.
Not I, I'll both drink, and talk then.
You must pull the horse on his knees, sir AMOROUS: fear no cousins. Iacta est alea.
O, now hoe's in his vain, and bold. The least hint given him of his wife now, will make him rail desperately.
Speak to him of her.
Doe you, and I'll fetch her to the hearing of it.
Captain hee-OTTER, your shee-OTTER is coming, your wife.
Wife! Buzz. Titiuilitium. There's no such thing in nature. I confess, gentlemen, I have a cook, a laundress, a house-drudge, that serves my necessary turns, and goes under that title: But hoe's an ass that will be so vxorious, to tie his affections to one circle. Come, the name dulls appetite. Here, replenish again: another bout. Wives are nasty sluttish animals.
O, Captain.
As ever the earth bare, tribus verbis. Whore's master TRVE-WIT?
Hoe's slipped aside, sir.
But you must drink, and be jovial.
Yes, give it me.
And me, too.
Let's be jovial.
As jovial as you will.
Agreed. Now you shall have the bear, cousin, and sir IOHN DAW the horse, and I'll have the bull still. Sound Tritons of the Thames. Nuns est bibendum, nuns pede libero—
Villains, murderers, sons of the earth, and traitors, what doe you there?
O, now the trumpets have waked him, we shall have his com∣panie.
A wife is a sciruy clogdogdo; an unlucky thing, a very foresaid beare-whelpe, without any good fashion or breeding: mala bestia.
Why did you marry one then, Captain?
A pox—I married with six thousand pound, I▪ I was in love with that. I have not kissed my fury, these forty weeks.
The more to blame you, Captain.
Nay, mistress OTTER, hear him a little first.
She has a breath worse then my grand-mothers, profecto.
O treacherous liar. Kiss me, sweet master TRVE-WIT, and prove him a slandering knave.
I'll rather believe you, lady.
And she has a peruke, that's like a pound of hemp, made up in shoo-thrids.
O viper, mandrake!
A most vile face! and yet she spends me forty pound a year in mercury, and hogs-bones. All her teeth were made in the Blacke-Friers: both her eye-browes in the Strand, and her hair in Siluer-street. Every part of the town owns a piece of her.
I cannot hold.
She takes her self asunder still when she goes to bed, into some
twenty boxes; and about next day noon is put together again, like a great Germane clock: and so comes forth and rings a tedious larum to the whole house, and then is quiet again for an hour, but for her quar∣ters. Have you done me right, gentlemen?
No, sir, I'll do you right with my quarters, with my quarters.
O, hold, good Princess.
Sound, sound.
A battle, a battle.
You notorious stinkardly beareward, do's my breath smell?
Under correction, dear Princess: look to my bear, and my horse, gentlemen.
Doe I want teeth, and eye-browes, thou bull-dog?
Sound, sound still.
No, I protest, under correction—
I, now you are under correction, you protest: but you did not protest before correction, sir. Thou IVDAS, to offer to betray thy Princess! I'll make thee an example—
I will have no such examples in my house, lady OTTER.
Ah—
Mrs. MARY AMBREE, your examples are dangerous. Rogues, Hell-hounds, Stentors, out of my doors, you sons of noise and tumult, begot on an ill May-day, or when the Gally-foist is afloat to Westminster! A trumpeter could not be conceived, but then!
What ails you, sir?
They have rent my roof, walls, and all my windores asunder, with their brazen throats.
Best follow him, DAUPHIN.
So I will.
Whore's DAW, and LA-FOOLE?
They are both run away, sir. Good gentlemen, help to paci∣fie my Princess, and speak to the great ladies for me. Now must I go lie with the bears this fortnight, and keep out of the way, till my peace be made, for this scandal she has taken. Did you not see my bull-head, gentlemen?
Is it not on, Captain?
No: but he may make a new one, by that, is on.
O, here it is. And you come over, gentlemen, and ask for TOM OTTER, we'll go down to Rat•liffe, and have a course ysaith: for all these disasters. There's bone spes left.
Away, Captain, get off while you are well.
I am glad we are rid of him.
You had never been, unless wee had put his wife upon him. His humour is as tedious at last, as it was ridiculous at first.
WE wondered why you shrieked so, Mrs. OTTER.
O god, madame, he came down with a huge long naked weapon in both his hands, and looked so dread∣fully! Sure, hoe's beside himself.
Why what made you there, mistress OTTER?
Alas, mistress MOVES, I was chastising my subject, and thought nothing of him.
Faith, mistress, you must doe so too. Learn to chastise. Mi∣stress OTTER corrects her husband so, hee dares not speak, but under correction.
And with his hat off to her: it would doe you good to see.
In sadness it is good, and mature counsel: practise it, MO∣ROSE. I'll call you MOROSE still now, as I call CENTAVRE, and MOVES: we four will be all one.
And you'll come to the college, and live with vs?
Make him give milk, and honey.
Look how you manage him at first, you shall have him e∣for after.
Let him allow you your coach, and four horses, your woman, your chamber-maid, your page, your gentleman-vsher, your french cooke, and four grooms.
And go with vs, to Bed'lem, to the China houses, and to the Exchange.
It will open the gate to your fame.
Here's CENTAVRE has immortalised her self, with taming of her wilde male.
I, she has done the miracle of the kingdom.
But ladies, doe you count it lawful to have such plurality of servants, and doe 'hem all graces?
Why not? why should women deny their favours to men? Are they the poorer, or the worse?
Is the Thames the less for the dyers water, mistress?
Or a torch, for lighting many torches?
Well said, LA-FOOLE; what a new one he has got?
They are empty losses, women fear, in this kind.
Besides, ladies should be mindful of the approach of age, and let no time want his due use. The best of our days pass first.
We are rivers, that cannot be called back, madame: she that
now excludes her lovers, may live to lie a forsaken beldam, in a fro∣zen bed.
It is true, MOVES: and who will wait on vs to coach then? or write, or tell vs the news then? Make anagrammes of our names, and in∣uite vs to the cock-pit, and kiss our hands all the play-time, and draw their weapons for our honours?
Not one.
Nay, my mistress is not altogether vn-intelligent of these things; here be in presence have tasted of her favours.
What a neighing hobby-horse is this!
But not with intent to boast 'hem again, servant. And have you those excellent receipts, madame, to keep your selves from bearing of children?
O yes, MOROSE. How should we maintain our youth and beauty, else? Many births of a woman make her old, as many crops make the earth barren.
O My cursed angel, that instructed me to this fate!
Why, sir?
That I should bee seduced by so foolish a devil, as a barber will make!
I would I had been worthy, sir, to have partaken your coun∣sell, you should never have trusted it to such a minister.
Would I could redeem it with the loss of an eye (nephew) a hand, or any other member.
Mary, god forbid, sir, that you should geld your self, to an∣ger your wife.
So it would rid me of her! and, that I did supererogatorie pe∣nonce, in a belfry, at Westminster-hall, in the cock-pit, at the fall of a stag; the tower-whar•e (what place is there else?) London-bridge, Paris-gar∣den, Belins-gate, when the noises are at their height and loudest. Nay, I would sit out a play, that were nothing but fights at sea, drum, trumpet, and target!
I hope there shall be no such need, sir. Take patience, good uncle. This is but a day, and it is well worn too now.
O, twill bee so for ever, nephew, I foresee it, for ever. Strife and tumult are the dowry that comes with a wife.
I told you so, sir, and you would not believe me.
Alas, doe not rub those wounds, master TRVE-WI•, to blood again: it was my negligence. Add not affliction to affliction. I have per∣ceiu'd the effect of it, too late, in madamme OTTER.
How doe you, sir?
Did you ever hear a more unnecessary question? as if she did not see! Why, I doe as you see, Empress, Empress.
You are not well, sir! you look very ill! something has distem∣pered you.
O horrible, monstrous impertinencies! would not one of these have served? doe you think, sir? would not one of these have served?
Yes, sir, but these are but notes of female kindness, sir: cer∣taine tokens that she has a voice, sir.
O, is it so? come, and 't be no otherwise—what say you?
How doe you feel your self, sir?
Again, that!
Nay, look you, sir: you would be friends with your wife up∣on unconscionable terms, her silence—
They say you are run mad, sir.
Not for love, I assure you, of you; doe you see?
O lord, gentlemen! Lay hold on him for gods sake: what shall I doe? who's his physician (can you tel) that knows the state of his body best, that I might send for him? Good sir, speak. I'll send for one of my doctors else.
What, to poison me, that I might die intestate, and leave you possessed of all?
Lord, how idly he talks, and how his eyes sparkle! He looks greene about the temples! Doe you see what blue spots he has?
I, it's melancholy.
Gentlemen, for heavens sake counsel me. Ladies! Servant, you have read PLINY, and PARACELSVS: Ne'er a word now to comfort a poor gentlewoman? Ay me! what fortune had I to marry a distra∣cted man?
I'll tell you, mistress—
How rarely she holds it up!
What mean you, gentlemen?
What will you tell me, servant?
The disease in Greek is called 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, in Latin, Insania, Furor, vel Ecstasis melancholica, that is, Egressio, when a man ex melancholico, eua∣dit fanaticus.
Shall I have a lecture read upon me alive?
But he may be but Phreneticus, yet, mistress? and Phrenetis is on∣lie delirium, or so—
I, that is for the disease, servant: but what is this to the cure? we are sure enough of the disease.
Let me go.
Why, we'll entreat her to hold her peace, sir.
O, no. Labour not to stop her. She is like a conduit-pipe, that will gush out with more force, when she opens again.
I'll tell you, MOROSE, you must talk divinity to him altoge∣there, or moral philosophy.
I, and there's an excellent book of moral philosophy, ma∣dame, of RAYNARD the fox, and all the beasts, called, DONES philosophy.
There is, indeed, sir AMOROUS LA-FOOLE.
O misery!
I have read it, my lady CENTAVRE, all over to my cousin, here.
I, and it is a very good book as any is, of the Modernes.
Tut, hee must have SENECA read to him, and PLVTARCH, and the Ancients; the Modernes are not for this disease.
Why, you discommended them too, to day, sir IOHN.
I, in some cases: but in these they are best, and ARISTOTLES Ethics.
Say you so, sir IOHN? I think you are deceived: you took it upon trust.
Whore's TRVSTY, my woman? I'll end this difference. I prithee, OTTER, call her. Her father and mother were both mad, when they put her to me.
I think so. Nay, gentlemen, I am tame. This is but an exer∣cise, I know, a marriage ceremony, which I must endure.
And one of 'hem (I know not which) was cured with the Sick∣mans salve; and the other with GREENES groates-worth of wit.
A very cheap cure, madame.
I, it very feasible.
My lady called for you, mistress TRVSTY: you must decide a controversy.
O TRVSTY, which was it you said, your father, or your mo∣there, that was cured with the Sicke-mans salve?
My mother, madame, with the salve.
Then it was the Sicke-womans salve.
And my father with the Groates-worth of wit. But there was o∣there means used: we had a Preacher that would preach folk asleep still; and so they were prescribed to go to church, by an old woman that was their physician, thrice a week—
To sleep?
Yes forsooth: and every night they read themselves asleep on those books.
Good faith, it stands with great reason. I would I knew where to procure those books.
Oh.
I can help you with one of 'hem, mistress MOROSE, the groats∣worth of wit.
But I shall disfurnish you, sir AMOROUS: can you spare it?
O, yes, for a week, or so; I'll read it my self to him.
No, I must doe that, sir: that must be my office.
Oh, oh!
Sure, he would doe well enough, if he could sleep.
No, I should doe well enough, if you could sleep. Have I no friend that will make her drunk? or give her a little ladanum? or opium?
Why, sir, she talks ten times worse in her sleep.
How!
Doe you not know that, sir? never ceases all night.
And snores like a pore•pisce.
O, redeem me, fate, redeem me, fate. For how many causes may a man be divorced, nephew?
I know not truly, sir.
Some Divine must resolve you in that, sir, or canon-Lawyer.
I will not rest, I will not think of any other hope or comfort, till I know.
Alas, poor man.
You'll make him mad indeed, ladies, if you pursue this.
No, we'll let him breathe, now, a quarter of an hour, or so.
By my faith, a large truce.
Is that his keeper, that is gone with him?
It is his nephew, madame.
Sir DAUPHIN EVGENIE.
He looks like a very pitiful knight—
As can be. This marriage, has put him out of all.
He has not a penny in his purse, madame—
He is ready to cry all this day.
A very shark, he set me in the nick t'other night at primero.
How these swabbers talk!
I, OTTERS wine has swelled their humours aboue a spring∣tide.
Good MOROSE, let's go in again. I like your couches ex∣ceeding well: we'll go lie, and talk there.
I wait on you, madame.
Slight, I will have 'hem as silent as Signs, &amp; their posts too, ever I have done. Doe you hear, lady-bride? I pray thee now, as thou art a noble wench, continue this discourse of DAUPHIN within: but praise him ex∣ceedingly. Magni•ie him with all the height of affection thou can. (I have some purpose in it) and but beat off these two rooks, JACK DAW, and his fellow, with any discontentment hither, and I'll honour thee for ever.
I was about it, here. It angered me to the soul, to hear 'hem
begin to talk so malapert.
Pray thee perform it, and thou win'st me an idolater to thee, everlasting.
Will you go in, and hear me doe it?
No, I'll stay here. Drive 'hem out of your company, it is all I ask: which cannot bee any way better done, then by extolling DAV∣PHINE, whom they have so slighted.
I warrant you: you shall expect one of 'hem presently.
What a cast of kestrels are these, to hawk after ladies, thus?
I, and strike at such an eagle as DAUPHIN.
He will be mad, when we tell him. Here he comes.
O Sir, you are welcome.
Whore's thine uncle?
Run out of doors in's night-caps, to talk with a Casuist about his divorce. It works admirably.
Thou would have said so, and thou had been here! The ladies have laughed at thee, most comically, since thou went, DAUPHIN.
And asked, if thou were thine uncles keeper?
And the brace of Babouns answered, yes; and said, thou were a pitiful poor fellow, and did live upon posts: and had nothing but three suits of apparel, and some few benevolences that lords ga' thee to fool to 'hem, and swagger.
Let me not live, I'll beat 'hem. I'll bind 'hem both to grand Madams bed-postes, and have 'hem baited with monkeys.
Thou shalt not need, they shall be beaten to thy hand, DAV∣PHINE. I have an execution to serve upon 'hem, I warrant thee shall serve: trust my plot.
I, you have many plots! So you had one, to make all the wen∣ches in love with me.
Why, if I doe not yet before night, as near as it is; and that they doe not every one inuit thee, and be ready to scratch for thee: take the mortgage of my wit.
Before god, I'll be his witness; thou shalt have it, DAUPHIN: thou shalt be his fool for ever, if thou doest not.
Agreed. Perhaps twill bee the better estate. Doe you observe this gallery? or rather lobby, indeed? Here are a couple of studies, at each end one: here will I act such a tragi-comoedy between the Guelphes, and the Ghibellines, DAW and LA-FOOLE—which of 'hem comes out first, will I
seize on: (you two shall be the chorus behind the arras, and whip out be∣tweene the acts, and speak.) If I doe not make 'hem keep the peace, for this remnant of the day, if not of the year, I have failed once—I hear DAW coming: Hide, and doe not laugh, for gods sake.
Which is the way into the garden, trow▪
O, JACK DAW! I am glad I have met with you. In good faith, I must have this matter go no further between you. I must have it ta∣ken up.
What matter, sir? Between whom?
Come, you disguise it—Sir AMOROUS and you. If you love me JACK, you shall make use of your philosophy now, for this once, and de∣liver me your sword. This is not the wedding the CENTAVRES were at, though there be a shee-one here. The bride has entreated me I will see no blood shed at her bridal, you saw her whisper me ere-while.
As I hope to finish TACITVS, I intend no murder.
Doe you not wait for sir AMOROUS?
Not I, by my knight-hood.
And your scholarship too?
And my scholarship too.
Go to, then I return you your sword, and ask you mercy; but put it not up, for you will be assaulted. I understood that you had ap∣prehended it, and walked here to brave him: and that you had held your life contemptible, in regard of your honour.
No, no, no such thing I assure you. He and I parted now, as good friends as could be.
Trust not you to that visor. I saw him since dinner with an∣other face: I have known many men in my time vexed with losses, with deaths, and with abuses, but so offended a wight as sir AMO∣ROVS, did I never see, or read of. For taking away his guests, sir, to day, that's the cause: and hee declares it behind your back, with such threatenings and contempts— He said to DAUPHIN, you were the errandst ass—
I, he may say his pleasure.
And swears, you are so protested a coward, that hee knows you will never doe him any manly or single right, and therefore hee will take his course.
I'll give him any satisfaction, sir—but fighting.
I, sir, but who knows what satisfaction he will take? blood he thirsts for, and blood he will have: and where-abouts on you he will have it, who knows, but himself?
I pray you, master TRVE-WIT, be you a mediator.
Well, sir, conceal your self then in this study, till I return. Nay, you must bee content to bee locked in: for, for mine own repute∣tion I would not have you seen to receive a public disgrace, while I have the matter in managing. Gods so, here hee comes: keep your
breath close, that hee doe not hear you sigh. In good faith, sir AMO∣ROVS, hee is not this way, I pray you bee merciful, doe not murder him; hee is a christian as good as you: you are armed as if you sought a revenge on all his race. Good DAUPHIN, get him away from this place. I never knew a mans choler so high, but hee would speak to his friends, hee would hear reason. JACK DAW, JACK DAW! asleep?
Is he gone, master TRVE-WIT?
I, did you hear him?
O god, yes.
What a quick ear fear has?
But is he so armed, as you say?
Armed? did you ever see a fellow, set out to take possession?
I, sir.
That may give you some light, to conceive of him: but it is nothing to the principal. Some false brother in the house has furnished him strangely▪ Or, if it were out of the house, it was TOM OTTER.
Indeed, hoe's a Captain, and his wife is his kinswoman.
Hee has got some-bodies old two-hand-sword, to mow you off at the knees. And that sword hath spawned such a dagger!—but then he is so hung with pikes, halberds, peitronells, calliuers, and muskets, that he looks like a Justice of peace's hall: a man of two thousand a year, is not sassed at so many weapons, as he has on. There was never fencer chal∣longed at so many several foils. You would think hee meant to mur∣der all Saint PVLCHRES parish. If hee could but victual himself for half a year, in his breeches, hee is sufficiently armed to ouer-runne a country.
Good lord, what means he, sir! I pray you, master TRUE∣WIT, be you a mediator.
Well, I'll try if he will be appeased with a leg or an arm, if not, you must die once.
I would be loath to loose my right arm, for writing madrigals.
Why, if he will be satisfied with a thumb, or a little finger, ell's one to me. You must think, I'll doe my best.
Good sir, doe.
What hast thou done?
He will let me doe nothing, man, he do's all before me, he offers his left arm.
His left wing, for a JACK DAW.
Take it, by all means.
How! Maim a man for ever, for a jest? what a conscience hast thou?
It is no loss to him: he has no employment for his arms, but to eat spoone-meate. Beside, as good maim his body as his repu∣tation.
He is a scholar, and a Wit, and yet he do's not think so. But he looses no reputation with vs, for we all resolved him an ass before. To your places again.
I pray thee, let me be in at the other a little.
Look, you'll spoil all: these be ever your tricks.
No, but I could hit of some things that thou wilt miss, and thou wilt say are good ones.
I warrant you. I pray forbear, I'll leave it off, else.
Come away, CLERIMONT.
Sir AMOROUS!
Master TRVE-WIT.
Whether were you going?
Down into the court, to make water.
By no means, sir, you shall rather tempt your breeches.
Why, sir?
Enter here, if you love your life.
Why! why!
Question till your throat bee cut, doe: dally till the enraged soul find you.
Who's that?
DAW it is: will you in?
I, I, I'll in: what's the matter?
Nay, if hee had been cool enough to tell vs that, there had been some hope to atone you, but he seems so implacably enraged.
Slight, let him rage. I'll hide my self.
Doe, good sir. But what have you done to him within, that should provoke him thus? you have broke some jest upon him, before the ladies—
Not I, never in my life, broke jest upon any man. The bride was praising sir DAUPHIN, and he went away in snuff, and I followed him, unless he took offence at me, in his drink ere while, that I would not pledge all the horse full.
By my faith, and that may bee, you remember well: but hee walks the round up and down, through every room of the house, with a towel in his hand, crying, whore's LA-FOOLE? who saw LA-FOOLE? and when DAUPHIN, and I, demanded the cause, wee can force no an∣swear from him, but (Ô revenge, how sweet art thou! I will strangle him in this towel) which leads vs to conjecture, that the maine cause of his fury is for bringing your meat to day, with a towel about you, to his discredit.
Like enough. Why, and he be angry for that, I'll stay here, till his anger be blown over.
A good becoming resolution, sir. If you can put it on of the sudden.
Yes, I can put it on. Or, I'll away into the country presently.
How will you get out of the house, sir? Hee knows you are in the house, and he will watch you this seven-night but he will have you. He will out-wait a sergeant for you.
Why, then I'll stay here.
You must think, how to victual your self in time, then.
Why, sweet master TRVE-WIT, will you entreat my cousin OTTER, to send me a cold venison pasty, a bottle or two of wine, and a chamber pot.
A stool were better, sir, of sir A-IAX his invention.
I, that will be better indeed: and a palate to lie on.
O, I would not advise you to sleep by any means.
Would you not, sir? why, then I will not.
Yet, there's another fear—
Is there, sir? What is it?
No, he cannot break open this door with his foot, sure.
I'll set my back against it, sir. I have a good back.
But, then if he should batter.
Batter! if he dare, I'll have an action of battery, against him.
Cast you the worst. He has sent for poulder already, and what he will doe with it, no man knows: perhaps blow up the corner of the house, where he suspects you are. Here he comes, in quickly. I protest, sir IOHN DAW, he is not this way: what will you doe? before god, you shall hang no petard here. I'll die rather. Will you not take my word? I never knew one but would be satisfied. Sir AMOROUS, there's no stan∣ding out. He has made a petard of an old brass pot, to force your door. Think upon some satisfaction, or terms, to offer him.
Sir, I'll give him any satisfaction. I dare give any terms.
You'll leave it to me, then?
I, sir. I'll stand to any conditions.
How now, what think you, sirs? were it not a difficult thing to determine, which of these two feared most.
Yes, but this fears the bravest: the other a whiniling da∣stard, JACK DAW! but LA-FOOLE, a brave heroic coward! and is a∣afraid in a great look, and a stout accent. I like him rarely.
Had it not been pity, these two should have been concealed?
Shall I make a motion?
Briefly. For I must strike while it is hot.
Shall I go fetch the ladies to the catastrophe?
Vmh? I, by my troth.
By no mortal means. Let them continue in the state of igno∣rance, and err still: think 'hem wits, and fine fellows, as they have done. It were sin to reform them.
Well, I will have 'hem fetched, now I think on it, for a private purpose of mine: doe, CLERIMONT, fetch 'hem, and discourse to hem all that's past, and bring 'hem into the gallery here.
This is thy extreme vanity, now: thou think thou were un∣done, if every jest thou make were not published.
Thou shalt see, how unjust thou art, presently. CLERIMONT, say it was DAVPHINE'S plot. Trust me not, if the whole drift be not for thy good. There's a carpet in the next room, put it on, with this scarf o∣for thy face, and a cushion of thy head, and bee ready when I call AMO∣ROVS. Away—IOHN DAW.
What good news, sir.
Faith, I have followed, and argued with him hard for you. I told him, you were a knight, and a scholar; and that you knew fortitude did consist magic patiendo quam faciendo, magic ferendo quam feriendo.
It doth so indeed, sir.
And that you would suffer, I told him: so, at first he demanded, by my troth, in my conceit, too much.
What was it, sir.
Your upper lip, and six o'your fore-teeth.
It was unreasonable.
Nay, I told him plainly, you could not spare 'hem all. So af∣la long argument (pro &amp; con, as you know) I brought him down to your two butter-teeth, and them he would have.
O, did you so? why, he shall have 'hem.
But he shall not, sir, by your leave. The conclusion is this, sir, because you shall be very good friends hereafter, and this never to bee re∣membred, or vp-braided; besides, that he may not boast, he has done any such thing to you in his own person: hee is to come here in disguise, give you five kicks in private, sir, take your sword from you, and lock you up in that study, during pleasure. Which will be but a little while, we'll get it released presently.
Five kicks? he shall have six, sir, to be friends.
Believe me, you shall not ouer-shoot your self, to send him that word by me.
Deliver it, sir. He shall have it with all my heart, to be friends.
Friends? Nay, and he should not be so, and heartily too, up∣on these terms, he shall have me to enemy while I live. Come, sir, bear it bravely.
O god, sir, it is nothing.
True. What's six kicks to a man, that reads SENECA?
I have had a hundred, sir.
Sir AMOROUS. No speaking one to another, or rehearsing old matters.
One, two, three, four, five. I protest, sir AMOROUS, you shall have six.
Nay, I told you should not talk. Come, give him six, &amp; he will needs. Your sword. Now return to your safe custody: you shall presently meet before the ladies, and be the dearest friends one to another—Give me
the scarf, now, thou shalt beat the other bare-fac'd. Stand by, sir A∣MOROVS.
What's here? A sword.
I cannot help it, without I should take the quarrel upon my self: here he has sent you his sword—
I'll receive none on it.
And he wills you to fasten it against a wall, and break your head in some few several places against the hilts.
I will not: tell him roundly. I cannot endure to shed my own blood.
Will you not?
No. I'll beat it against a fair flat wall, if that will satisfy him: If not, he shall beat it himself, for AMOROUS.
Why, this is strange starting off, when a man vnder-takes for you! I offered him another condition: Will you stand to that?
I, what is it.
That you will be beaten, in private.
Yes. I am content, at the blunt.
Then you must submit your self to bee hood-wink'd in this scarf, and bee led to him, where hee will take your sword from you, and make you bear a blow, over the mouth, gulls, and tweakes by the nose, sans number.
I am content. But why must I be blinded?
That's for your good, sir: because, if hee should grow insolent upon this, and publish it hereafter to your disgrace (which I hope he will not doe) you might swear safely and protest, hee never beat you, to your knowledge.
O, I conceive.
I doe not doubt, but you'll be perfect good friends upon it, and not dare to utter an ill thought one of another, in future.
Not I, as god help me, of him.
Nor he of you, sir. If he should— Come, sir. All hid, sir IOHN.
Oh, sir IOHN, sir IOHN. Oh, Ô-Ô-Ô-Ô-Ô-Oh—
Good, sir IOHN, leave tweaking, you'll blow his nose off. It is sir IOHN'S pleasure, you should retire into the study. Why, now you are friends. All bitterness between you, I hope, is buried; you shall come forth by and by, DEMON &amp; PYTHIAS upon it: and embrace with all the rankness of friendship that can be. I trust, wee shall have 'hem ta∣mer in their language hereafter. DAUPHIN, I worship thee. Gods will, the ladies have surprised vs!
CENTAVRE, how our judgements were imposed on by these adul∣terate knights!
Nay, madame, MOVES was more deceived then we, it was her commendation uttered 'hem in the college.
I commended but their wits, madame, and their braueries. I never looked toward their valours.
Sir DAUPHIN is valiant, and a wit too, it seems?
And a bravery too.
Was this his project?
So master CLERIMONT intimates, madame.
Good MOROSE, when you come to the college, will you bring him with you? He seems a very perfect gentleman.
He is so, madame, believe it.
But when will you come, MOROSE?
Three or four days hence, madame, when I have got me a coach, and horses.
No, to morrow, good MOROSE, CENTAVRE shall send you her coach.
Yes faith, doe, and bring sir DAUPHIN with you.
She has promised that, MOVES.
He is a very worthy gentleman, in his exteriors, madame.
I, he shows he is judicial in his clothes.
And yet not so superlatiuely neat as some, madame, that have their faces set in a brake!
I, and have every hair in form!
That wear purer linen then our selves, and profess more neatness, then the french hermaphrodite!
I ladies, they, what they tell one of vs, have told a thousand, and are the only thieves of our fame: that think to take vs with that per∣fume, or with that lace, and laugh at vs unconscionably when they have done.
But, sir DAUPHINS carelessness becomes him.
I could love a man, for such a nose!
Or such a leg!
He has an exceeding good eye, madame!
And a very good lock!
Good MOROSE, bring him to my chamber first.
Please your honours, to meet at my house, madame?
You shall find none, sir: but heaped, heaped plenty of vexation.
What wilt thou doe now, WIT?
Recover me hither OTTER, and the Barber, if you can, by a∣ny means, presently.
Why? to what purpose?
O, I'll make the deepest Divine, and gravest Lawyer, out of them two, for him—
Thou can not man, these are waking dreams.
Doe not fear me. Clap but a civil gown with a welt, of the one; and a canonical cloak with sleeves, of the other: and give 'hem a few terms in their mouths, if there come not forth as able a Doctor, and complete a Parson, for this turn, as may be wished, trust not my election. And, I hope, without wronging the dignity of either profession, since they are but persons put on, and for mirths sake, to torment him. The Barber smatters latin, I remember.
Yes, and OTTER too.
Well then, if I make 'hem not wrangle out this case, to his no comfort, let me be thought a JACK DAW, or LA-FOOLE, or any thing worse. Go you to your ladies, but first send for them.
I will.
WHere had you our swords, master CLERIMONT?
Why, DAUPHIN took 'hem from the mad-man.
And he took 'hem from our boys, I warrant you?
Very like, sir.
Thank you, good master CLERIMONT. Sir IOHN DAW, and I are both beholden to you.
Would I knew how to make you so, gentlemen.
Sir AMOROUS, and I are your servants, sir.
Gentlemen, have any of you a pen-and-inke. I would fine write out a riddle in Italian, for sir DAUPHIN, to translate.
Not I, in troth lady, I am no scrivener.
I can furnish you, I think, lady.
He has it in the haft of a knife, I believe!
No, he has his box of instruments.
Like a surgeon!
For the mathematiques: his squire, his compasses, his brass pens, and black-lead, to draw maps of every place, and person, where he comes.
How, maps of persons!
Yes, sir, of NOMENTACK, when he was here, and of the Prince of Moldauia, and of his mistress, mistress EPICoeNE.
Away! he has not found out her latitude, I hope.
You are a pleasant gentleman, sir.
Faith, now we are in private, let's wanton it a little, and talk waggishly. Sir IOHN, I am telling sir AMOROUS here, that you two go∣uerne the ladies, where ever you come, you carry the feminine gender a∣fore you.
They shall rather carry vs before them, if they will, sir.
Nay, I believe that they doe, withal—But, that you are the prime-men in their affections, and direct all their actions—
Not I: sir AMOROUS is.
I protest, sir IOHN is.
As I hope to rise in the state, sir AMOROUS, you have the person.
Sir IOHN, you have the person, and the discourse too.
Not I, sir. I have no discourse—and then you have activity beside.
I protest, sir IOHN, you come as high from Tripoly, as I doe e∣very whit: and lift as many joined stools, and leap over 'hem, if you would use it—
Well, agree on it together knights; for between you, you di∣uide the kingdom, or common-wealth of ladies affections: I see it, and can perceive a little how they observe you, and fear you, indeed. You could tell strange stories, my masters, if you would, I know.
Faith, we have seen somewhat, sir.
That we have—valet petticoats, &amp; wrought smocks, or so.
I, and—
Nay, out with it, sir IOHN: doe not envy your friend the plea∣sure of hearing, when you have had the delight of tasting.
Why—a—doe you speak, sir AMOROUS.
No, doe you, sir IOHN DAW.
I'faith, you shall.
I'faith, you shall.
Why, we have been—
In the great bed at Ware together in our time. On, sir IOHN.
Nay, doe you, sir AMOROUS.
And these ladies with you, Knights?
No, excuse vs, sir.
We must not wound reputation.
No matter—they were these, or others. Our bath cost vs fife∣teene pound, when we came home.
Doe you hear, sir IOHN, you shall tell me but one thing true∣lie, as you love me.
If I can, I will, sir.
truth: and, for the bride, they have made their affidauit against her di∣rectly—
What, that they have lain with her?
Yes, and tell times, and circumstances, with the cause why, and the place where. I had almost brought 'hem to affirm that they had done it, to day.
Not both of 'hem.
Yes faith: with a sooth or two more I had effected it. They would have set it down under their hands.
Why, they will be our sport, I see, still! whether we will, or no.
O, Are you here? Come DAUPHIN. Go, call your uncle pre∣sently. I have fitted my Divine, &amp; my Canonised, died their beards and all: the knaves doe not know themselves they are so exalted, and altered. Preferment changes any man. Thou shalt keep one door, and I another, and then CLERIMONT in the midst, that he may have no means of escape from their cavilling, when they grow hot once. And then the women (as I have given the bride her instructions) to break in upon him, in the l'enuoy. O, twill be full and twanging! Away, fetch him. Come, master Doctor, and master Parson, look to your parts now, and discharge 'hem bravely: you are well set forth, perform it as well. If you chance to be out, doe not confess it with standing still, or humming, or gaping one at another: but go on, and talk aloud, and eagerly, use vehe∣meant action, and only remember your terms, and you are safe. Let the matter go where it will: you have many will doe so. But at first, bee very solemn, and grave like your garments, though you loose your selves after, and skip out like a brace of iugglers on a table. Here hee comes! set your faces, and look superciliously, while I present you.
Are these the two learned men?
Yes, sir, please you salute 'hem?
Salute 'hem? I had rather doe any thing, then wear out time so unfruitfully, sir. I wonder, how these common forms, as god save you, and you are well-come, are come to be a habit in our lives! or, I am glad to see you! when I cannot see, what the profit can bee of these words, so long as it is no whit better with him, whose affairs are sad, &amp; grievous, that he hears this salutation.
It is true, sir, we'll go to the matter then. Gentlemen, master Doctor, and master Pastor, I have acquainted you sufficiently with the business, for which you are come hither. And you are not now to inform
your selves in the state of the question, I know. This is the gentleman, who expects your resolution, and therefore, when you please, begin.
Please you, master Doctor.
Please you, good master Parson.
I would hear the Canon-law speak first.
It must give place to positive Divinity, sir.
Nay, good gentlemen, doe not throw me into circumstances. Let your comforts arrive quickly at me, those that are. Be swift in affoor∣ding me my peace, if so I shall hope any. I love not your disputations, or your court-tumults. And that it be not strange to you, I will tell you. My father, in my education, was wont to advise me, that I should always collect, and contain my mind, not suffering it to •low loosely; that I should look to what things were necessary to the carriage of my life, and what not: embracing the one and eschewing the other. In short, that I should endear my self to rest, and avoid turmoil: which now is grown to be another nature to me. So that I come not to your public pleadings, or your places of noise; not that I neglect those things, that make for the dignity of the common-wealth: but for the mere avoiding of clamours, &amp; impertinencies of Orators, that know not how to be silent. And for the cause of noise, am I now a suitor to you. You doe not know in what a mi∣serie I have been exercised this day, what a torrent of evil! My very house turns round with the tumult! I dwell in a wind-mill! The perpe∣tuall motion is here, and not at Eltham.
Well, good master Doctor, will you break the ice? master Par∣son will wade after.
Sir, though unworthy, and the weaker, I will presume.
It is no presumption, domino Doctor.
Yet again!
Your question is, for how many causes a man may have diuor∣tium legitimum, a lawful divorce. First, you must understand the nature of the word divorce, à diuertendo—
No excursions upon words, good Doctor, to the question briefly.
I answer then, the Canon-law affords divorce but in few cases, and the principal is in the common case, the adulterous case. But there are duodecim impedimenta, twelve impediments (as we call 'hem) all which doe not dirimere contractum, but irritum redder matrimonium, as wee say in the Canon-law, not take away the bond, but cause a nullity therein.
I understood you, before: good sir, avoid your impertinence of translation.
He cannot open this too much, sir, by your favour.
Yet more!
O, you must give the learned men leave, sir. To your impede∣mints, master Doctor.
The first is impedimentum error is.
post matrimonium: that frigiditate praeditus (doe you conceive me, sir?)
Very well, sir.
Who cannot vti vxore pro vxore, may habere eam pro sorore.
Absurd, absurd, absurd, and merely apostaticall.
You shall pardon me, master Parson, I can prove it.
You can prove a Will, master Doctor, you can prove nothing else. Do's not the verse of your own canon say. Haec socianda vetant co∣nubia, facta retractant—
I grant you, but how doe they retractare, master Parson?
(O, this was it, I feared.)
In aeternum, sir.
That's false in divinity, by your favour.
It is false in humanity, to say so. Is hee not prorsus invtilis ad thorum? Can he praestare fidem datam? I would fine know.
Yes: how if he doe conualere?
He can not conualere, it is impossible.
Nay, good sir, attend the learned men, they'll think you no∣glect 'hem else.
Or, if he doe similar himself frigidum, odio vxoris, or so?
I say, he is adulter manifestus, then.
(They dispute it very learnedly, in faith.)
And prostitutor vxoris, and this is positive.
Good sir, let me escape.
You will not doe me that wrong, sir?
And therefore, if he be manifest frigidus, sir—
I, if he be manifest frigidus, I grant you—
Why, that was my conclusion.
And mine too.
Nay, hear the conclusion, sir.
Then, frigiditatis causa—
Yes, causa frigiditatis—
O, mine ears!
She may have libellum diuortij, against you.
I, diuortij libellum she will sure have.
Good eccho's, forbear.
If you confess it.
Which I would doe, sir—
I will doe any thing—
And clear my self in foro conscientiae—
Because you want indeed—
Yet more?
Exercendi potestate.
I Will not endure it any longer. Ladies, I beseech you help me. This is such a wrong, as never was offered to poor bride before. Upon her marriage day, to have her husband conspire against her, and a couple of mercenary companions, to be brought in for forms sake, to persuade a separation! If you had blood, or virtue in you, gentlemen, you would not suffer such eare-wigs about a husband, or scorpions, to creep between man and wife—
O, the variety and changes of my torment!
Let 'hem be cudgell'd out of doors, by our grooms.
I'll lend you my foot-man.
We'll have our men blanket 'hem in the hall.
As there was one, at our house, madame, for peeping in at the door.
Content, in faith.
Stay, ladies, and gentlemen, you'll hear, before you proceed?
I'd have the bridegroom blanketed, too.
Begin with him first.
Yes, by my troth.
O, mankind generation!
Ladies, for my sake forbear.
Yes, for sir DAUPHINS sake.
He shall command vs.
He is as fine a gentleman of his inches, madame, as any is about the town, and wears as good colours when he list.
Be brief, sir, and confess your infirmity, she'll be afire to be quit of you, if she but hear that named once, you shall not entreat her to stay. She'll fly you, like one that had the marks upon him.
Ladies, I must crave all your pardons—
Silence, ladies.
For a wrong I have done to your whole sex, in marrying this fair, and virtuous gentlewoman—
Hear him, good ladies.
Being guilty of an infirmity, which before I conferred with these learned men, I thought I might have concealed—
But now being better informed in his conscience by them, hee is to declare it, &amp; give satisfaction, by asking your public forgiveness.
Parson, to abuse a gentleman. You study his affliction. I pray bee gone companions. And gentlemen, I begin to suspect you for having parts with 'hem. Sir, will it please you hear me?
O, doe not talk to me, take not from me the pleasure of die∣ing in silence, nephew.
Sir, I must speak to you. I have been long your poor despised kins-man, and many a hard thought has strengthened you against me: but now it shall appear if either I love you or your peace, and prefer them to all the world beside. I will not bee long or grievous to you, sir. If I free you of this unhappy match absolutely, and instantly after all this trouble, and almost in your despair, now—
(It cannot be.)
Sir, that you bee never troubled with a murmur of it more, what shall I hope for, or deserve of you?
O, what thou wilt, nephew! thou shalt deserve me, and have me.
Shall I have your favour perfect to me, and love hereafter?
That, and any thing beside. Make thine own conditions. My whole estate is thine. Manage it, I will become thy Ward.
Nay, sir, I will not be so vn-reasonable.
Will sir DAUPHIN be mine enemy too?
You know, I have been long a suitor to you, uncle, that out of your estate, which is fifteen hundred a year, you would allow me but five hundred during life, and assure the rest upon me after: to which I have of∣ten, by my self and friends tendered you a writing to sign, which you would never consent, or incline too. If you please but to effect it now—
Thou shalt have it, nephew. I will doe it, and more.
If I quit you not presently? and for-euer of this cumber, you shall have power instantly, before all these, to revoke your act, and I will become, whose slave you will give me to, for-euer.
Where is the writing? I will seal to it, that, or to a blank, and write thine own conditions.
O me, most unfortunate wretched gentlewoman!
Will sir DAUPHIN doe this?
Good sir, have some compassion on me.
O, my nephew knows you belike: away crocodile.
He do's it not sure, without good ground.
Here, sir.
Come, nephew: give me the pen. I will subscribe to any thing, and seal to what thou wilt, for my deliverance. Thou art my restorer. Here, I deliver it thee as my deed. If there bee a word in it lacking, or writ with false orthography, I protest before—I will not take the advantage.
Then here is your release, sir; you have married a boy: a gen∣tlemans son, that I have brought up this half year, at my great charges, and for this composition, which I have now made with you. What say
you, master Doctor? this is iustum impedimentum, I hope, error personae?
Yes sir, in primo gradu.
In primo gradu.
I thank you, good Doctor CVTBERD, and Parson OTTER. You are beholden to 'hem, sir, that have taken this pains for you: and my friend, master TRVE-WIT, who enabled 'hem for the business. Now you may go in and rest, be as private as you will, sir. I'll not trouble you, till you trouble me with your funeral, which I care not how soon it come. CVTBERD, I'll make your lease good. Thank me not, but with your leg, CVTBERD. And TOM OTTER, your Princess shall be reconciled to you. How now, gentlemen! doe you look at me?
A boy.
Yes, mistress EPICOENE.
Well, DAUPHIN, you have lurched your friends of the better half of the garland, by concealing this part of the plot! but much good doe it thee, thou deserve it, lad. And CLERIMONT, for thy unexpected bringing in these two to confession, wear my part of it freely. Nay, sir DAW, and sir LA-FOOLE, you see the gentlewoman that has done you the favours! we are all thankful to you, and so should the woman-kind here, specially for lying on her, though not with her! You meant so, I am sure? But, that we have stuck it upon you to day, in your own imagined persons, and so lately; this Amazon, the champion of the sex, should beat you now thriftily, for the common slanders, which ladies receive from such cuckowes, as you are. You are they, that when no merit or fortune can make you hope to enjoy their bodies, will yet lie with their reputations, and make their fame suffer. Away you common moths of these, and all ladies honours. Go, travail to make legs and faces, and come home with some new matter to be laughed at: you deserve to live in an air as corrup∣ted, as that wherewith you feed rumour. Madams, you are mute, upon this new metamorphosis! but here stands she, that has vindicated your fems. Take heed of such insectae hereafter. And let it not trouble you that you have discovered any mysteries to this young gentleman. He is (a'most) of years, &amp; will make a good visitant within this twelue-month. In the mean time, we'll all undertake for his secrecy, that can speak so well of his silence. Spectators, if you like this comoedie, rise cheerfully, and now MOROSE is gone in, clap your hands. It may be, that noise will cure him, at least please him.

THe Scene presented it self in a square and flat upright, like to the side of a City: the top thereof, aboue the Vent, and Crest, adorned with houses, towers, and steeples, set off in prospective. Upon the battlements in a great capital letter was inscribed,
LONDINIVM:
According to TACITVS: At SVETO∣NIVS mirâ constantiâ, medios inter hosteis Londinium perrexit, cognomento quidem Co∣loniae non ensign, sed copiâ Negotiatorum, &amp; commeatu maxim celebre. Be∣neath that, in a less and different character, was written
CAMERA REGIA,
Which title immediately after the Norman conquest it began to have; and by the indulgence of succeeding Princes, hath been hitherto continued. In the Freeze over the gate, it seems to speak this verse:
PAR DOMVS HAEC COELO,
SED MINOR EST DOMINO.
Taken out of MARTIAL, and implying, that though this city (for the state, and magnificence) might (by Hyperbole) be said to touch the stars, and reach up to heaven, yet was it far inferior to the master thereof, who was his Majesty; and in that respect unworthy to receive him. The high∣est person advanced therein, was
MONARCHY BRITANNICA,
and fitly: applying to the aboue mentioned title of the city, THE KINGS CHAMBER, and therefore here placed as in the proper seat of the empire: for, so the glory and light of our kingdom M. CAMDEN, speaking of London, saith, she is, totius Britannia Epitome, Britannici{que} Imperij sedes, Regum{que} Anglia Camera, tantum inter omneis eminet, quantum (vt ait ille) in∣la viburna Cupressus. She was a woman, richly attired, in cloth of gold
and tissue; a rich mantle; over her state two crowns hanging, with pen∣sile shields thorough them; the one limed with the particular coat of Eng∣land, the other of Scotland: on either side also a crown, with the like Sued∣chions, and peculiar coats of France, and Ireland▪ In her hand she holds a sceptre; on her head a fillet of gold, inter-wouen with palm and law∣rell; her hair bound into four several points, descending from her crowns; and in her lap a little globe, inscribed upon
ORBS BRITANNICVS.
And beneath, the word
DIVISVS ABORBE.
To show, that this empire is a world divided from the world, and allu∣ding to that of  CLAV.
—Et nostro diducta Britannia mundo.
And VERGE.
—Et penitus toto diuisos orb Britannos.
The wreathe denotes victory and happiness. The sceptre and crowns sovereignty. The shields the precedence of the countries, and their di∣stinctions. At her feet was set
THEOSOPHIA,
or divine Wisdom, all in white, a blue mantle seeded with stars, a crown of stars on her head. Her garments figured truth, innocence, and clear∣ness. She was always looking up; in her one hand she sustained a dove, in the other a serpent: the last to show her subtlety, the first her simon∣plicitie; alluding to that text of Scripture, Estote ergo prudentes sicut ser∣pentes, &amp; simplices sicut columbia. Her word,
PER ME REGES REGNANT.
Intimating, how by her, all kings doe govern, and that she is the foun∣dation and strength of kingdoms, to which end, she was here placed, up∣on a cube, at the foot of the Monarchy, as her base and stay. Directly be∣neath her stood
GENIVS VRBIS,
A person attired rich, reverend, and antique: his hair long and white, crowned with a wreathe of Plane tree, which is said to be Arbor genialis; his mantle of purple, and buskins of that colour: He held in one hand a goblet, in the other a branch full of little twigs, to signify increase and in∣dulgence. His word
HIS ARMS:
pointing to the two that supported him, whereof the one on the right hand, was
BOVLEVTES.
Figuring the council of the city, and was suited in black and purple; a
wreathe of  ok upon his head; sustaining for his ensigns, on his left arm a scarlet robe, and in his right hand the  Fasces, as tokens of magi∣stracie, with this inscription;
SERVARE CIVES.
The other on the left hand.
POLEMIVS,
The warlike force of the city, in an antique coat, or armour, with a target and sword; his helm on, and crowned with laurel, implying strength and conquest: in his hand he bore the standard of the city, with this word,
EXTINGVERE ET HOSTEIS.
Expressing by those several mots, connexed, that with those arms of council and strength, the Genius was able to extinguish the kings enemies, and preserve his citizens, alluding to those verses in SENECA,
Extinguere hostem, maxima est virtus Ducis.
Seruare Ciues, mayor est patriae, patri.
Vnder-neath these, in an Aback thrust out before the rest, lay
TAMESIS.
The river, as running along the side of the city; in a skin-coate made like flesh, naked, and blue. His mantle of sea-greene or water colour, thin, and bolne out like a sail; bracelets about his wrests, of willow and sedge, a crown of sedge and reed upon his head, mixed with water-lillies; allu∣ding to VIRGILS description of Tyber;
—Deus ipse loci, fluuio Tyberinus amoeno,
Populeas inter senior se attollere frondes
Visus, eum tenuis glauco velabat amictu
Carbasus, &amp; crineis vmbrosa tegebat Arundo.
His beard, and hair long, and ouer-growne. He leanes his arm upon an earthen pot, out of which, water, with live fishes, are seen to run forth, and play about him. His word,
FLVMINA SENSERVNT IPSA.
A hemistich of OVIDS: The rest of the verse being,
—quid asset amor
Affirming, that rivers themselves, and such inanimate creatures, have heretofore been made sensible of passions, and affections; and that hee now, no less partook the joy of his majesties grateful ap∣proch to this city, than any of those persons, to whom hee pointed, which were the daughters of the Genius, and six in number: who, in a
spreading ascent, upon several grices, help to beautify both the sides, The first,
EVPHROSYNE,
or Gladness: was suited in greene, a mantle of divers colours, embroidered with all variety of flowers: on her head a gyrland of myrtle, in her right hand a crystal cruz filled with wine, in the left a cup of gold: at her feet a tymbrell, harp, and other instruments, all ensigns of gladness,
Natis in vsum laetitiae scyphis, &amp;c.
And in another place,
Nuns est •ibendum, nuns pede libero
Pulsanda Tellus, &amp;c.
Her word,
HAEC AEVI MIHI PRIME DIES.
As if this were the first hour of her life, and the minute wherein she began to be; beholding so long coveted, and looked for a presence. The second.
SEBASIS, or Veneratio, was varied in an ash-colour'd suit, and dark mantle, a veil over her head of ash colour: her hands crossed before her, and her eyes half closed. Her word,
MIHI SEMPER DEVS.
Implying both her office of reverence, and the dignity of her object, who being as god on earth, should never be less in her thought. The third.
PROTHYMIA, or Promptitude, was attired in a short tuck't garment of flame-colour, wings at her back; her hair bright, and bound up with ribands; her breast open, virago-like; her buskins so ribanded: She was crowned with a chaplet of trifoly, to express readiness, and openness every way; in her right hand she held a squirrel, as being the creature most full of life and quickness: in the left a close round censor, with the perfume suddenly to be vented forth at the sides. Her word,
QVA DATA PORT.
Taken from an other place in VIRGIL, where EOLVS at the com∣mand of IVNO, lets forth the wind;
—ac vent valued agmine facto
Quâ data port ruunt, &amp; terrace turbine perflant.
And showed that she was no less prepared with promptitude, and a∣lacritic, then the winds were, upon the least gate that shall be opened to his high command. The fourth.
AGRYPNIA, or Vigilance, in yellow, a sable mantle, seeded with waking eyes, and silver fringe: her chaplet of Heliotropium, or turnesole; in her one hand a lamp,
or cresset, in her other a bell. The lamp signified search and sight, the bell warning. The Heliotropium care; and respecting her object. Her word,
SPECVLAMVR IN OMNEIS.
Alluding to that of OVID, where he describes the office of ARGVS.
—Ipse procul montis sublime cacumen
Occupied, vnde sedens parts speculatur in omneis.
and implying the like duty of care and vigilance in her self. The fifth,
AGAPE,
Or loving affection, in crimson fringed with gold, a mantle of flame-co∣lore, her chaplet of red and white roses; in her hand a flaming heart: The flame expressed zeal, the red and white roses, a mixture of simplici∣tie with love: her robes freshness and fervency. Her word,
NON SIC EXCVBIAE.
Out of CLAVDIAN, in following.
— Nec circum stantiapcila
Quàm tutatur amor.
Inferring, that though her sister before had protested watchfulness, and circumspection, yet no watch or guard could be so safe to the estate, or per∣son of a Prince, as the love and natural affection of his subjects: which she in the cities behalf promised. The sixth,
OMOTHYMIA,
Or unanimity in blew, her robe blew, and buskins. A chaplet of blew lil∣lies, showing one truth and entireness of mind. In her lap lies a sheaf of arrows bound together, and she her self sits weaving certain small silver twists. Her word,
FIRM CONSENSVS FACET.
Auxilia humilia firm, &amp;c.
Intimating, that even the smallest and weakest aids, by consent, are made strong: her self personating the unanimity, or consent of soul, in all inhabitants of the city to his service.
¶ These are all the personages, or live figures, whereof only two were speakers (GENIVS and TAMESIS) the rest were mutes. Other dumb complements there were, as the arms of the kingdom on the one side, with this inscription.
HIS VIREOS.
With these moist thou flourish.
On the other side the arms of the city, with
HIS VINCAS.
With these moist thou conquer.
In the centre, or midst of the Pygmy, there was an Aback, or Square▪ wherein this Elegy was written:
MAXIMVS HIC REX EST, ET LVCE SERENIOR IPSA
PRINCIPE QVAE TALEM CORNET IN VRBE DVCEM;
CVIVS FORTVNAM SVPERAT SIC VNICA VIRTVS,
VNVS VT IS RELIQVOS VINCIT VTRAQVE VIROS.
PRAECEPTIS ALLY POPVLOS, MVLTAQVE FATIGANT
LEG; SED EXEMPLO NOS REPEAT ILLE SVO.
CVIQVE FRVI TOTA FAS EST VXORE MARITO,
ET SVA FAS SIMILE PIGNORA NOSSE PATRI.
ASS VBI PIGNORIBVS CIRCVMSTIPATA CORVSCIS
IT COMES, ET TANTO VEX MINOR ANNA VIRO.
HAVD METVS EST, REGIME POSTHAC NO PROXIMVS HAERES,
NEV SVCCESSOREM NON AMET ILLE SVVM.
This, and the whole frame, was covered with a curtain of silk, pain∣ted like a thick cloud, and at the approach of the K. was instantly to be drawn. The Allegory being, that those clouds were gathered upon the face of the City, through their long want of his most wished sight: but now, as at the rising of the Sun, all mists were dispersed and fled. When suddenly, upon silence made to the Musickes, a voice was heard to utter this verse;
Totus adest oculis, aderat queen mentibus olim,
Signifying, that he now was really objected to their eyes, who before had been only, but still, present in their minds.
¶ Thus far the complemental part of the first; wherein was not only laboured the expression of state and magnificence (as proper to a tri∣umphall Arch) but the very site, fabric, strength, policy, dignity, and affections of the City were all laid down to life: The nature and pro∣pertie of these Devices being, to present always some one entire body, or figure, consisting of distinct members, and each of those expressing it self, in the own active sphere, yet all, with that general harmony so con∣nixed, and disposed, as no one little part can be missing to the illustration of the whole: where also is to be noted, that the Symboles used, are not, neither ought to be, simply Hieroglyphics, Emblems, or Impress, but a mixed character, partaking somewhat of all, and peculiarly opted to these more magnificent Inventions: wherein, the garments and ensigns deli∣for the nature of the person, and the word the present office. Neither was it becoming, or could it stand with the dignity of these shows (af∣la the most miserable and desperate shift of the Puppets) to require a Truch-man, or (with the ignorant Painter) one to write, This is a Dog; or, This is a Hare: but so to be presented, as upon the view, they might, without cloud, or obscurity, declare themselves to the sharpe and lear∣ned:
And for the multitude, no doubt but their grounded judgements did gaze, said it was fine, and were satisfied.
TIme, Fate, and Fortune have at length conspired,
To give our Age the day so much desired.
What all the minutes, hours, weeks, months, and years,
That hang in file upon these silver hairs,
Could not produce, beneath the  Britain stroke,
The Roman, Saxon, Dane, and Norman  yoke,
This point of Time hath done. Now London rear
Thy forehead high, and on it strive to wear
Thy choicest gems; teach thy steep Towers to rise
Higher with people: set with sparkling eyes
Thy spacious windows; and in every street,
Let thronging joy, love, and amazement meet.
Cleave all the ayre with shouts, and let the cry
Strike through as long, and universally,
As thunder; for, thou now art blist to see
That sight, for which thou did begin to be.
When  BRVTVS plough first gave thee infant bounds,
And I, thy GENIVS walked auspicious rounds
In every  furrow; then did I forelooke,
And saw this day  marked white in  CLOTHO'S book.
The several  circles, both of change and sway,
Within this Isle, there also figured lay:
Of which the greatest, perfectest, and last
Was this, whose present happiness we taste.
Why keep you silence daughters? What dull peace
Is this inhabits you? Shall office cease
Upon th'aspect of him, to whom you owe
More then you are, or can be? Shall TIME know
That article, wherein your flame stood still,
And not aspi'rd? Now heaven avert an ill
Of that black look. Ere pause possess your breasts
I wish you more of plagues: "Zeal when it rests,
Leaves to be zeal. Up thou tame RIVER, wake;
And from the liquid limbs this slumber shake:
Thou drown'st thy self in inofficious sleep;
And these thy sluggish waters seem to creep,
Rather than flow. Up, rise, and swell with pride
Aboue thy banks. "Now is not every tide.
TO what vain end should I contend to show
My weaker powers, when seas of pomp o'reflow
The cities face: and cover all the shore
With sands more rich than  TAGVS wealthy ore?
When in the flood of joy, that comes with him,
He drowns the world; yet makes it live and swim,
And spring with gladness: not my fishes here,
Though they be dumb, but doe express the cheer
Of these bright streams. No less may  these, and I
Boast our delights, albe't we silent lie.
Indeed, true gladness doth not always speak:
"Joy bred, and borne but in the tongue, is weak.
Yet (lest the fervor of so pure a flame
As this my city bears, might lose the name,
Without the apt euenting of her heate)
Know greatest IAMES (and no less good, than great.)
In the behalf of all my virtuous sons,
Whereof my  eldest there, thy pomp forerunnes,
(A man without my flattering, or his pride,
As worthy, as he's  blessed to be thy guide)
In his grave name, and all his brethrens right,
(Who thirst to drink the nectar of thy sight)
The council, commoners, and multitude;
(Glad, that this day so long denied, is viewed)
I tender thee the heartiest welcome, yet
That ever king had to his  empires seat:
Never came man, more longed for, more desired:
And being come, more reverenced, loved, admired:
Hear, and record it: "In a prince it is
"No little virtue, to know who are his.
 With like devotions, doe I stoop to embrace
This springing glory of thy  godlike race;
His countries wonder, hope, love, joy and pride:
How well doth he become the royal side
Of this erected, and broad spreading Tree,
Under whose shade, may Britain ever be.
And from this branch, may thousand branches more
Shoot o'er the maine, and knit with every shore
In bonds of marriage, kindred, and increase;
And stile this land, the  nauill of their peace.
This is your servants wish, your cities vow,
Which still shall propagate it self, with you;
And free from spurs of hope, that slow minds move:
"He seeks no hire, that owes his life to love.
 And here she comes that is no less a part
In this days greatness, then in my glad heart.
Glory of queens, and  glory of your name,
Whose graces doe as far out-speake your fame,
As fame doth silence, when her trumpet rings
You  daughter, sister, wife of several kings:
Besides alliance, and the stile of mother,
In which one title you drown all your other.
Instance, be  that fair shoot, is gone before,
Your eldest joy, and top of all your store,
With  those, whose sight to vs is yet denied,
But not our zeal to them, or ought beside
This city can to you: For whose estate
She hopes you will be still good advocate
To her best lord. So, whilst you mortal are,
No taste of sour mortality once dare
Approach your house; nor fortune greet your grace
But coming on, and with a forward face.
TARACHE, or Tumult, in a garment of divers, but dark colours, her hair wilde, and disordered, a foul and troubled face, about her lay s•aves, swords, ropes, chains, hammers, stones, and such like to express Turmoil. The word was,
PERAGIT TRANQVILLA POTESTAS.
Claud.
Quote violenta nequit: mandate{que} fortius urgent Imperiosa quies.
To show the benefits of a calm and facile power, being able to effect in a state that, which no violence can. On the other side the second hand∣maid was
ELEVTHERIA,
or Liberty, her dressing white, and some-what antique, but loose and free: her hair flowing down her back, and shoulders: In her right hand she bare a club, on her left a hat, the Characters of freedom, and power: At her feet a cat was placed, the creature most affecting, and expressing liberty. She trod on
DOVLOSIS,
or Servitude, a woman in old and worn garments, lean and meager, bea∣ring fetters on her feet, and hands, about her neck a yoke to insinuate bondage, and the word
NEC VNQVAM GRATIOR.
Alluding to that other of Claud.
Nunquam libertas gratior extat,
Quam sub Rege pio.
And intimated, that liberty could never appear more graceful, and love∣lie, then now under so good a prince. The third hand-maid was
SOTERIA,
or Safety, a damsel in carnation, the colour signifying cheer, and life, she sat high: upon her head she wore an antique helm, and in her right hand a spear for defence, in her left a cup for Medicine: at her feet was set a pe∣destall upon which a serpent rolled up did lie. Beneath was
PEIRA,
or Danger, a woman despoiled, and almost naked, the little garment she hath left her, of several colours, to note her various disposition. Besides her lies a torch out, and a sword broken (the instruments of her fury) with a net and wolves skin (the ensigns of her malice) rent in pieces. The word,
TERGA DEDERE METVS.
Borrowed from Mart. and implying that now all fears have turned their
backs, and our safety might become security, danger being so wholly de∣pressed, and vnfurnisht of all means to hurt. The fourth attendant is,
EVDAIMONIA,
or Felicity, varied on the second hand, and apparelled richly; in an embroi∣dered robe, and mantle: a fair golden tress. In her right hand a Cadu∣cause, the note of peaceful wisdom: in her left, a Cornucopia filled only with flowers, as a sign of flourishing blessedness; and crowned with a gar∣land of the same. At her feet,
DYSPRAGIA,
or Unhappiness, a woman bareheaded, her neck, arms, breast, and feet na∣ked, her look hollow and pale; she holds a Cornucopia turned downward with all the flowers fallen out and scattered, upon her sits a raven, as the augury of ill fortune: and the soul was
REDEVNT SATVRNIA REGNA.
Out of Virgil, to show that now those golden times were returned again, wherein Peace was with vs so advanced, Rest received, Liberty restored, Safety assured, and all Blessedness appearing in every of these virtues her particular triumph over her opposite evil. This is the dumb argument of the frame, and illustrated with this verse of Virgil, written in the under freeze.
NVLLA SALVS BELLO:
PACEM TE POSCIMVS OMNES.
The speaking part was performed, as within the temple where there was erected an altar, to which at the approach of the king appears the Flamen
 MARTIALIS.
And to him,
GENIVS VRBIS.
The Genius we attired before: To the Flamen we appoint this habit. A long crimson robe to witness his nobility, his typpet and sleeves white, as reflecting on purity in his religion, a rich mantle of gold with a train to express the dignity• of his function. Upon his head a  hat of delicate wool, whose top ended in a cone, and was thence called Apex, according to that of Lucan. lib. 1.
Attollens{que} Apicem generoso vertice Flamen.
This Apex was covered with a  fine net of yearn which they named Api∣culum, and was sustained with a  bowd twig of Pomegranate tree, it was also in the hot time of Summer to be bound with ribands, and thrown be∣hind them as  Scaliger teaches. In his hand he bore a golden censor with perfume, and censing about the altar (having first kindled his fire on the top) is interrupted by the Genius.
Begin our spring, and with our spring the prime,
And  first account of years, of months,  of time:
And may these Ides as fortunate appear
To thee, as they to  CAESAR fatal were.
Be all thy thoughts borne perfect, and thy hopes
In their events still crowned beyond their scopes.
Let not wide heaven that secret blessing know
To give, which she on thee will not bestow.
Blind Fortune be thy slave; and may her store
(The less thou seek it) follow thee the more.
Much more I would: but see, these brazen gates
Make haste to close, as urged by thy fates;
Here ends my cities office, here it breaks:
Yet with my tongue, and this pure heart, she speaks
A short farewell; and lower then thy feet,
With fervent thanks, thy royal pains doth greet.
Pardon, if my abruptness breed disease;
,,He merits not t'offend, that hastes to please.
D. I. O. M. BRITANNIARVM. IMP. PACIS. VINDICI. MART. MAIORI. P. P. F. S. AVGVSTO. NOVO. GENTIVM. CON∣IVNCTARVM. NVMINI. TVTELARI.
D. A. CONSERVATRICI. ANNAE. IPSAE. PERENNAE. DEABVSQVE. VNIVERSIS. OPTATIORI. SVI FORTVNATISSIMI. THALAMI. SOCIAE. ET CONSORT. PVLCHERIMAE. AVGVSTISSIMAE.
ET H. F. P. FILIO. SVO. NOBILISSIMO. OBE. ADVENTVM. AD VRBEM. HANC. SVAM. EXPECTATISSIMVM. GRATISSIMVM. CELEBRATISSIMVM. CVIVS. NON. RADII. SED SOLES. POTIVS. FVNESSIMAM. NVPER. AERIS. INTEMPERIEM. SERENARVNT
S. P. Q. L. VOTES. X. VOTES. XX. ARDENTISSIMIS.
L. M. HANC. ARAM. P.
And upon the Gate, being shut, IMP. IACOBVS MAX. CAESAR AVG. P. P.
PACE POPVLO BRITANNICO TERRA MARIQVE PARTA IANVM CLVSIT. S. C.
 
All ills shall fly the light: Thy court be free
No less from envy, then from flattery;
All tumult, faction, and harsh discord cease,
That might perturb the musique of thy peace:
The querulous nature shall no longer find
Room for his thoughts: One pure consent of mind
Shall flow in every breast, and not the ayre,
Sun, moon, or stars shine more serenely fair.
This from that loud, blessed Oracle, I sing,
Who here, and first, pronounced, thee Britains king
Long moist thou live, and see me thus appear,
As ominous  a comet, from my sphere,
Unto thy reign; as that  did auspicate
So lasting glory to AVGVSTVS state.

THe honour, and splendour of these spectacles was such in the performance, as could those hours have lasted, this of mine, now, had been a most unprofitable work. But (when it is the fate, even of the greatest, and most absolute births, to need, and borrow a life of posterity) little had been done to the stu∣die of magnificence in these, if presently with the rage of the people, who (as a part of greatness) are privileged by custom, to deface their carcasses, the spirits had also pe∣rished. In duty, therefore, to that Majesty, who gave them their authori∣tie, and grace; and, no less then the most royal of predecessors, deserves eminent celebration for these-solemnities: I add this later hand, to re∣deem them as well from Ignorance, as Envy, two common evils, the one of censure, the other of oblivion.
 PLINY,  SOLINVS,  PTOLOMEY, and of late LEO  the African, remember unto vs a river in Aethiopia, famous by the name of Niger; of which the people were called Nigritae, now Negro's: and are the blackest nation of the world. This  river takes spring out of a certain lake, east-ward; and after a long race, falls into the western Ocean. Hence (because it was her Majesties will, to have them Black-mores at first) the invention was derived by me, and presented thus.
First, for the Scene, was drawn a Landtschap, consisting of small woods, and here and there a void place filled with huntings; which falling, an are∣tificiall sea was seen to shoot forth, as if it flowed to the land, raised with waives, which seemed to move, and in some places the billow to
But, what's the end of thy Herculean labours,
Extended to these calm, and blessed shores?
TO do a kind, and careful fathers part,
In satisfying every pensive heart
Of these my Daughters, my most loved birth:
Who though they were the  first formed dames of earth,
And in whose sparkling, and refulgent eyes,
The glorious Sun did still delight to rise;
Though he (the best judge, and most formal cause
Of all dames beauties) in their firm hiewes, draws
Signs of his feruent'st love; and thereby shows
That, in their black, the perfectst beauty grows;
Since the fixed colour of their curled hair,
(Which is the highest grace of dames most fair)
No cares, no age can change; or there display
The fearful tincture of abhorred Gray;
Since Death her self (her self being pale and blue)
Can never alter their most faithful hew;
All which are arguments, to prove, how far
Their beauties conquer, in great beauties war;
And more, how near Divinity they be,
That stand from passion, or decay so free.
Yet, since the fabulous voices of some few
Poor brain-sicke men, styled Poets, here with you,
Have, with such envy of their graces, sung
The painted Beauties, other Empires sprung;
Letting their loose, and winged fictions fly
To infect all climates, yea our purity;
As of one  PHAETON, that fired the world
And, that, before his heedless flames were hurled
About the Globe, the Aethiopes were as fair,
As other Dames; now black, with black despair:
And in respect of their complexions changed,
Are each where, since, for  luckless creatures ranged.
Which, when my Daughters heard, (as women are
Most jealous of their beauties) fear, and care
Possessed them whole; yea, and believing  them,
They wept such ceaseless tears, into my stream,
That it hath, thus far, overflowed his shore
To seek them patience: who have since, ere more
As the Sun rises,  chardg'd his burning throne
With volleys of revilings; cause he shone
On their scorched cheeks, with such intemperate fires,
And other Dames, made queens of all desires.
To frustrate which strange error, oft, I sought,
(Though most in vain, against a settled thought
As women's are) till they confirmed at length
By miracle, what I, with so much strength
Of argument resisted; else they feigned:
For in the Lake, where their first spring they gained,
As they sate, cooling their soft Limbs, one night,
Appeared a face, all circumfus'd with light;
(And sure they saw't, for Aethiopes  never dream)
Wherein they might decipher through the stream,
These words.
That they a Land must forthwith seek,
Whose termination (of the Greek)
Sounds TANIA; where bright Sol, that heat
Their bloods, doth never  rise, or set,
But in his Journey passes by,
And leaves that Climate of the sky,
To comfort of a greater Light,
Who forms all beauty, with his sight.
In search of this, have we three Princedomes past,
That speak out Tania, in their accents last;
Black Mauritania, first; and secondly,
Swarth Lusitania; next, we did descry
Rich Aquitania: and, yet, cannot find
The place unto these longing Nymphs designed.
Instruct, and aid me, great OCEANVS,
What land is this, that now appears to vs?
This Land, that lifts into the temperate ayre
His snowy cliff, is  Albion the fair;
So called of  Neptunes son, who rules here:
For whose dear guard, my self, (four thousand year)
Since old Deucalion's days, have walked the round
About his empire, proud, to see him crowned
About my waives.
Whose pure, auspicious light greetes vs, thus far!
Great Aethiopia, Goddess of our shore,
Since, with particular worship we adore
Thy general brightness, let particular grace
Shyne on my zealous Daughters: Show the place,
Which, long, their longings vrdg'd their eyes to see▪
Beautify them, which long have Deified thee.
NIGER, be glad: Resume the native cheer.
Thy Daughters labours have their period here,
And so thy errors. I was that bright face
Reflected by the Lake, in which thy Race
Read mystic lines; (which skill PITHAGORAS
First taught to men, by a reuerberate glass)
This blessed Isle doth with that TANIA end,
Which there they saw inscribed, and shall extend
Wished satisfaction to their best desires.
BRITANIA, which the triple world admires
This Isle hath now recovered for her name;
Where reign those beauties, that with so much fame
The sacred MVSES sons have honoured,
And from bright HESPERVS to EOVS spread.
With that great name BRITANIA, this blessed Isle
Hath won her ancient dignity, and stile,
A world, divided from the world: and tried
The abstract of it, in his general pride.
For were the world, with all his wealth, a ring,
BRITANIA (whose new name makes all tongues sing)
Might be a Diamant worthy to inches it,
Ruled by a SUN, that to this height doth grace it:
Whose beams shine day, and night, and are of force
To blanch an AETHIOPE, and revive a Cor's.
His light scientiall is, and (past more nature)
Can salve the rude defects of every creature.
Call forth thy honoured Daughters, then;
And let them, before the Britain men,
Indent the Land, with those pure traces
They flow with, in their native graces.
Inuit them, boldly, to the shore,
Their beauties shall be scorched no more:
This sun is temperate, and refines
All things, on which his radiance shines.
 
The Names.
The Symboles.
The Queen.
1.
EUPHORIC.
1.
A golden tree, la∣den with fruit.
Co. of Bedford.
AGLAIA.
La. Herbert.
2.
DIAPHANE.
2.
The figure Isocae∣drone of crystal.
Co. of Derby.
EVCAMPSE.
La. Rich.
3.
OCYTE.
3.
A pair of naked feet, in a river.
Co. of Suffolk.
KATHARE.
La. Bouilli.
4.
NOTIS.
4.
The SOLOMON∣DER simple.
La. Effingham.
PSYCHROTE.
La. El. Howard.
5.
GLYCYTE.
5.
A cloud full of rain, dropping.
La. Suss. Vere.
MALACIA.
La. Wroth.
6.
BARYTE.
6.
An vrne' spheard with wine.
La. Walsingham.
PERIPHERE.
COme away, come away,
We grow jealous of your stay:
If you doe not stop your ear,
We shall have more cause to fear
To which limits, when I had opted my invention, and being to bring news of them from the Sea, I induced Bores, one of the winds, as my fit∣test Messenger; presenting him thus.
In a robe of Russet and White mixed, full, and bagg'd; his hair and beard rough, and horrid; his wings gray, and full of snow, and ycicles: his mantle borne from him with wires, and in several puffs; his feet  en∣ding in Serpents tails; and in his hand a leaue-lesse Branch, laden with ycicles.
But before, in midst of the Hall, to keep the state of the Feast, and Sea∣son, I had placed  January, in a throne of silver; his robe of ash-colour, long, fringed with silver; a white mantle; his wings white, and his bus∣kins; in his hand a Laurel bough; upon his head an Anademe of Laurel, fronted with the sign Aquarius, and the Character. Who, as Bores blue∣ster'd forth, discovered himself.
WHich, among these, is ALBION, NEPTVNES son?
WHat ignorance dares make that question?
Would any ask, who MARS were, in the wars?
Or, which is HESPERVS, among the stars?
Of the bright Planets, which is SOL? Or can
A doubt arise, among creatures, which is Man?
Behold, whose eyes doe dart Promethean fire
Throughout this all; whose precepts do inspire
The rest with duty; yet commanding, cheer:
And are obeyed, more with love, then fear.
WHat Power art thou, that thus inform me?
Dost thou not know me? I too well know thee
By thy  rude voice, that doth so hoarsely blow;
Thy hair, thy beard, thy wings, ore-hil'd with snow,
Thy serpent feet, to be that rough North-wind,
BORES, that to my reign art still unkind.
I am the Prince of Months, called IANVARIE;
Because by me  IANVS the year doth vary,
Shutting up wars, proclaiming peace, and feasts,
Freedom, and triumphs; making Kings his guests.
TO thee then, thus, and by thee, to that King,
That doth thee present honours, doe I bring
Present remembrance of twelve Aethiope Dames:
Who, guided hither by the Moons bright flames,
To see his brighter light, were to the Sea
Enjoined again, and (thence assigned a day
For their return) were in the waives to leave
Their blackness, and true beauty to receive.
WHich they received, but broke their day: and yet
Have not returned a look of grace for it,
Showing a course, and most unfit neglect.
Twice have I come, in pomp here, to expect
Their presence; Twice deluded, have been fine
With  other Rites my Feasts to entertain:
And, now the third time, turned about the year,
Since they were looked for; and, yet, are not here.
IT was nor Will, nor Sloth, that cause their stay;
For they were all prepared by their day,
And, with religion, forward on their way:
When PROTEVS,  the gray Prophet of the Sea,
Met them, and made report, how other four
Of their black kind (whereof their Sire had store)
Faithful to that great wonder, so late done
Upon their Sisters, by bright Albion,
Had followed them to seek BRITANIA forth,
And there to hope like favour, as like worth.
Which NIGHT envied, as done  in her despite,
And (mad to see an Aethiope washed white)
Thought to prevent in these; lest men should deem
Her colour, if thus changed, of small esteem.
And so, by malice, and her magic, tossed
The Nymphs at sea, as they were almost lost,
Till, on an Island, they by chance arrived,
That  floted in the mayne; where, yet, she'had gived
Them so, in charms of darkness, as no might
Should loose them thence, but their changed Sisters sight.
Whereat the Twelve (in piety moved, and kind)
Straight put themselves in act, the place to find;
Which was the NIGHTS sole trust they so will doe,
That she, with labour, might confound them too.
For ever since with error hath she held
Them wandering in the Ocean, and so quelled
Their hopes beneath their toil, as (desperate now
Of any least success unto their vow;
Nor knowing to return to express the grace,
Wherewith they labour to this Prince, and place)
One of them, meeting me at sea, did pray,
That for the love of my  ORYTHYIA,
(Whose very name did heat my frosty breast,
And make me shake my snow-fill'd wings and crest)
To bear this sad report I would be won,
And frame their just excuse; which here I have done.
WOuld thou had not begun, unlucky Wind,
That never yet blow goodness to mankind;
But with thy bitter, and too piercing breath,
Strik'st  horrors through the ayre, as sharpe as death.
ALl horrors vanish, and all name of Death,
Be all things here as calm as is my breath.
A gentler Wind, VVLTVRNVS, brings you news
The Isle is found, and that the Nymphs now use
Their rest, and joy. The Nights black charms are flown.
For, being made unto their Goddess known,
Bright AETHIOPIA, the silver Moon,
As she was  HECATE, she brake them soon:
And now by virtue of their light, and grace,
The glorious Isle, wherein they rest, takes place
Of all the earth for Beauty.  There, their Queen
Hath raised them a Throne, that still is seen
To turn unto the motion of the World;
Wherein they sit, and are, like Heaven, whirled
About the Earth; whilst, to them contrary,
(Following those nobler torches of the Sky)
A world of little Loves, and chaste Desires,
Doe light their beauties, with still moving fires.
And who to Heavens consent can better move,
Then those that are so like it, Beauty and Love?
Hither, as to their new Elysium,
The spirits of the antique Greeks are come,
Poets and Singes, Linus, Orpheus, all
That have excelled in  knowledge musical;
Where, set in arbors made of myrtle, and gold,
They live, again, these beauties to behold.
And thence in flowery mazes walking forth,
Sing hymns in celebration of their worth.
Whilst, to their songs, two fountains flow, one height
Of lasting Youth, the other chaste Delight,
That at the closes, from their bottoms spring,
And strike the ayre to echo what they sing.
But, why doe I describe what all must see?
By this time, near the coast, they floating be;
For, so their virtuous Goddess, the chaste Moon,
Told them, the fate of th'Iland should, and soon
Would fix it self unto thy continent,
As being the place, by destiny fore-ment,
Where they should flow forth, dressed in her attires:
And, that the influence of those holy fires,
(First rapt from hence) being multiplied upon
The other four, should make their beauties one.
Which now expect to see, great Neptunes son,
And love the miracle, which thy self hast done.
In a robe of flame colour, naked breasted; her bright hair loose slowing: She was drawn in a circle of clouds, her face, and body breaking through; and in her hand a branch, with two  Roses, a white, and a red. The next to her was
SERENITAS.
In a garment of bright skie-colour, a long tress, and waued with a veil
As now! Echo. As now! Ecch. As now!
Yield Night, then, to the light,
As Blackness hath to Beauty;
Which is but the same duty.
It was  for Beauty, that the World was made,
And where she reigns,  Loves lights admit no shade.
Ecch. Loves lights admit no shade.
Echo. Admit no shade.
Which ended, Vulturnus the Wind spake to the River Thamesis, that lay along between the shores, leaning upon his Urn (that flowed with wa∣la,) and crowned with flowers: with a blue cloth of Silver robe about him: and was personated by Master THOMAS GILES, who made the Dances.
RIse aged Thames, and by the hand
Receive these Nymphs, within the land:
And, in those curious Squares, and Rounds,
Where with thou flow'st betwixt the grounds
Of fruitful Kent, and Essex fair,
That lend thee gyrlands for thy hair;
Instruct their silver feet to tread,
Whilst we, again to sea, are fled.
With which the Winds departed; and the River received them into the Land, by couples and foures, their Cupids coming before them.
These dancing forth a most curious Dance, full of excellent device, and change, ended it in the figure of a Diamant, and so, standing still, were by the Musicians, with a second Song (sung by a loud Tenor) celebrated.
SO beauty on the waters stood,
(When love had  severed earth, from flood!
So when he parted ayre, from fire▪
He did with concord all inspire!
And then a motion he them taught,
That elder then himself was thought.
Which thought was, yet,  the child of earth,
For love is elder then his birth.
IF all these CUPIDS, now, were blind
As is  their wanton brother;
Or play should put it in their mind
To shoot at one another:
What pretty battle they would make,
If they their objects should mistake
And each one wound his mother!
IT was no polity of court,
Albee' the place were charmed,
To let in earnest, or in sport,
So many Loves in, armed.
For say, the Dames should, with their eyes,
Upon the hearts, here, mean surprise;
Were not the men like harmed?
YEs, were the Loves or false, or straying;
Or beauties not their beauty weighing:
But here, no such deceit is mixed,
Their flames are pure, their eyes are fixed:
They doe not war, with different darts,
But strike a musique of like harts.
HAd those, that dwell in error foul,
And hold  that women have no soul,
But seen these move; they would have, then
Said, Women were the souls of men.
So they doe move each heart, and eye
With the  worlds soul, true harmony.
YOur grace is great, as is your beauty, Dames;
Enough my feasts have proved your thankful flames.
Now use your seat: that seat which was, before,
Thought stray'ing, uncertain, floating to each shore,
And to whose having  every clime laid claim,
Each land, and nation urged as the aim
Of their ambition, beauties perfect throne,
Now made peculiar, to this place, alone;
And that, by'impulsion of your destinies,
And his attractive beams, that lights these skies:
Who (though with th'Ocean compassed) never wets
His hair therein, nor wears a beam that sets.
Long may his light adorn these happy rites
As I renew them; and your gracious sights
Enjoy that happiness, eu'en to envy, 'as when
Beauty, at large, brake forth, and conquered men.
STill turn, and imitate the heaven
In motion swift and even;
And as his Planets go,
Your brighter lights doe so:
May youth and pleasure ever flow.
But let your state, the while,
Be fixed as the Isle.
CHO. So all that see your beauties sphere,
May know the'Elysian fields are here.
Ecch. Th'Elysian fields are here.
Ecch. 'Elysian fields are here.
IT is a noble and just advantage, that the things subjected to understanding have of those which are objected to sense, that the one sort are but momentary, and merely taking; the other impressing, and lasting: Else the glory of all these solemnities had perished like a blaze, and gone out, in the be∣holders eyes. So short-liu'd are the bodies of all things, in comparison of their souls. And, though bodies oft-times have the ill luck to be sensually preferred, they find af∣terwards, the good fortune (when souls live) to be utterly forgotten. This it is hath made the most royal Princes, and greatest persons (who are commonly the personaters of these actions) not only studious of riches, and magnificence in the outward celebration, or show; (which rightly be∣comes them) but curious after the most high, and hearty inventions, to furnish the inward parts: (and those grounded upon antiquity, and solide learnings) which, though their voice be taught to sound to present occasi∣once, their sense, or doth, or should always lay hold on more removed my∣steries. And, howsoever some may squeamishly cry out, that all endeavour of learning, and sharpness in these transitory devices especially, where it steps beyond their little, or (let me not wrong 'hem) no brain at all is su∣per•luous; I am contented, these fastidious stomachs should leave my full tables, and enjoy at home, their clean empty trenchers, fittest for such airy tastes: where perhaps a few Italian herbs, picked up, and made into a salad, may find sweeter acceptance, than all, the most nourishing, and sound meates of the world.
For these men's palates, let not me answer, O Muses. It is not my fault, if I fill them out Nectar, and they run to Metheglin.
Vaticana bibant, si delectentur.
All the courtesy I can doe them, is to cry, again;
〈1 page missing〉
Sit now propitious Aides,
To Rites, so duly prized;
And view two noble Maids,
Of different sex, to UNION sacrificed.
In honour of that blessed Estate,
Which all good minds should celebrate.
Here out of a Microcosm, or Globe, (figuring Man) with a kind of conten∣tious Musique, issued forth the first Masque, of eight men.
These represented the four  Humours, and four Affections, all gloriously attired, distinguished only by their several Ensigns and Colours; and, dancing out on the Stage, in their return, at the end of their dance, drew all their swords, offered to encompass the Altar, and disturb the Ceremonies. At which, HYMEN troubled, spake:
Save, save the virgins; keep your hallowed lights
Untouched; and with their flame defend our Rites.
The four vntemp'red Humours are broke out,
And, with their wild affections, go about
To ravish all Religion. If there be
A Power, like REASON, left in that huge Body,
Or little world of Man, from whence these came,
Look forth, and with thy bright and  numerous flame
Instruct their darkness, make them know, and see,
In wronging these, they have rebelled against thee.
Forbear your rude attempt; what ignorance
Could yield you so profane, as to advance
One thought in act, against these mysteries?
Are VNION'S  orgies of so slender price?
She that makes souls, with bodies, mix in love,
Contracts the world in one, and therein JOVE;
Is  spring, and end of all things: yet, most strange!
Her self nor suffers spring, nor end, nor change.
No wonder, they were you, that were so bold;
For none but Humours and Affections would
Have dared so rash a venture. You will say
It was your zeal, that gave your powers the sway;
And urge the masked, and disguised pretence,
Of saving blood, and succ'ring innocence?
So want of knowledge, still begets jars,
When humorous earthlings will control the stars.
Inform your selves, with safer reverence,
To these mysterious rites, whose mystic sense,
REASON (which all things, but it self, confounds)
Shall clear unto you, from th'authentique grounds.
THe Pair, which doe each other side,
Though (yet) some space doth them divide,
This happy Night must both make one
Blessed sacrifice, to UNION.
Nor is this Altar but a sign
Of one more soft, and more divine.
The  Genial bed, where HYMEN keeps
The solemn Orgies, void of sleeps:
And wildest CUPID, waking, hovers
With adoration twixt the lovers.
The Dead of white and blooming Thorne,
In token of increase is borne:
As  also, with the ominous light,
To fright all malice from the Night.
Like are the  fire, and water, set;
That, even as moisture, mixed with heat,
Helps every natural birth, to life;
So, for their Race, join man and wife.
Who come to deck the genial Bower,
And bring, with them, the grateful Hour
That crowns such meetings, and excites
The married Pair to fresh delights:
As Courtings, Kissings, Coyings, Oaths, and Vows,
Soft Whisperings, Embraces, all the Joys,
And melting Toys,
That chaster LOVE allows.
CHO, Haste, haste, for HESPERVS his head down bows.
Convey them, ORDER, to their places,
And rank them so, in several traces,
As they may set their mixed Powers
Unto the Musique of the Hours;
And THESE, by joining with them, know
In better temper how to flow:
Whilst I (from their abstracted Names)
Report the virtues of the Dames.
First  CVRIS comes to deck the Brides fair Tress.
Care of the ointments  VNXIA doth profess.
 IVGA, her office to make one of twain:
 GAMELIA sees that they should so remain.
Fair  ITERDVCA leads the Bride her way;
And  DOMIDVCA home her steppes doth stay;
 CINXIA the m•id, quit of her Zone, defends;
 TELIA (for HYMEN) perfects all, and ends.
NOw, now, begin to set
Your spirits in active heate;
And, since your hands are met,
Instruct your nimble feet,
In motions, swift, and meet,
The happy ground to beat:
Whilst all this Roof doth ring,
And each discording string.
With •very varied voice,
In UNION doth rejoice.
Such was  the Golden Chain let down from Heaven;
And not those links more even,
Then these: so sweetly tempered, so combined
By UNION, and refined.
Here no contention, envy, grief, deceit,
Fear, jealousy have weight;
But all is peace, and love, and faith, and bliss:
What harmony like this?
The gall, behind the altar quite is thrown;
This sacrifice hath none.
Now no affections rage, nor humours swell;
But all composed dwell.
O IVNO, HYMEN, HYMEN, IVNO! who
Can merit with you two?
Without your presence, VENVS can doe nought,
Save what with shame is bought;
No father can himself a parent show,
Nor any house with prospe'rous issue grow.
O then! What deities will dare
With HYMEN, or with IVNO to compare?
Think, yet, how night doth wast,
How much of time is past,
What more then winged hast
Your selves would take,
If you were but to taste
The joy, the night doth cast
(O might it ever last)
On this bright virgin, and her happy make.
SEe, see! the bright  Italian star,
That lights lovers to their war,
Complains, that you her influence loose;
While thus the night-sports you abuse.
THe longing bridegroom,  in the porch,
Shows you again, the bated torch;
And thrice hath IVNO  mixed her ayre
With fire, to summon your repair.
SEe, now she clean withdraws her light;
And (as you should) gives place to night,
That spreads her broad, and blackest wing
Upon the world, and comes to bring
A  thousand several coloured loves,
Some like sparrows, some like doves,
That hop about the nuptiall-roome,
And fluttering there (against you come)
Warm the chaste bower, which  CYPRIA strowes,
With many a lily, many a rose.
HAste therefore, haste, and call, away:
The gentle night is pressed to pay
The usury of long delights,
She owes to these protracted rites.
O Know to end, as to begin:
A minutes loss, in love, is sin.
These humours will the night out-weare
In their own pastimes here;
You doe our rites much wrong,
In seeking to prolong
These outward pleasures:
The night hath other treasures
Then these (though long concealed)
Ere day, to be reueal'd.
Then, know to end, as to begin;
A minutes loss, in love, is sin.
HEre stay, and let your sports be crowned:
The perfect'st figure is the round.
Nor fell you in it by aduenter,
When REASON was your guide, and center.
This, this that beauteous  CESTON is
Of lovers many-colour'd bliss.
Come HYMEN, make an inner ring,
And let the sacrificers sing;
Cheer up the faint, and trembling Bride,
That quakes to touch her Bridegroom's side:
Tell her, what IVNO is to JOVE,
The same shall she be to her love;
His wife: which we doe rather measure
 A name of dignity, then pleasure.
Up youths, hold up your lights in ayre,
And shake abroad  their flaming hair.
Now move united, and, in gate,
As you (in pairs) doe front the state,
With grateful honours, thank his grace
That hath so glorified the place:
And as, in circle, you depart
Linked hand in hand; So, heart in heart,
May all those bodies still remain
Whom he (with so much sacred payne)
No less hath bound within his realms
Then they are with the OCEANS streams.
Long may his UNION find increase
As he, to ours, hath deigned his peace.
GLad time is at his point arrived,
For which loves hopes were so long-liu'd.
Lead HYMEN, lead away;
And let no object stay,
Nor banquets (but sweet kisses)
The turtles from their blisses.
 It is CUPID calls to arm;
And this his last alarm.
Shrink not, soft Virgin, you will love,
Anon, what you so fear to prove.
This is no killing war,
To which you pressed are;
But fair and gentle strife
Which lovers call their life.
It is CUPID cries to arm;
And this his last alarm.
Help youths, and virgins, help to sing
The prize, which HYMEN here doth bring,
And did so lately  rap
From forth the mothers lap,
To place her by that side
Where she must long abide.
On HYMEN, HYMEN call,
This night is HYMEN'S all.
See, HESPERVS is yet in view!
What star can so deserve of you?
Whose light doth still adorn
Your Bride, that, ere the morn,
Shall far more perfect be,
And rise as bright as he;
When  (like to him) her name
Is changed, but not her flame.
Haste, tender lady, and aduenter;
The covetous house would have you enter,
That it might wealthy bee,
And you, her  mistress see:
Haste your own good to meet;
And  lift your golden feet
Aboue the threshold, high,
With prosperous a•gury.
Now, youths, let go your pretty arms;
The place within chant's other charms.
much less description, be recovered to a part of that spirit it had in the gliding by.
Yet, that I may not utterly defraud the Reader of his hope, I am drawn to give it those brief touches, which may leave behind some shadow of what it was: And first of the Attires.
That, of the Lords, had part of it (for the fashion) taken from the an∣tique Greek statue; mixed with some modern additions: which made it both graceful, and strange. On their heads they wore Persick crowns, that were with scrolls of gold-plate turned outward, and wreathed about with a carnation and silver net-lawne; the one end of which hung carelessly on the left shoulder; the other was tricked up before, in several degrees of folds, between the plates, and set with rich jewels, and great pearl. Their bodies were of carnation cloth of silver, richly wrought, and cut to express the naked, in manner of the Greek Thorax; girt under the breasts with a broad belt of cloth of gold, embroidered, and fastened before with jewels: Their Labels were of white cloth of silver, laced, and wrought curiously between, suitable to the upper half of their sleeves; whose nether parts, with their bases, were of watchet cloth of silver, chev'rond all over with lace. Their Mantels were of several coloured silks, distinguishing their qualities, as they were coupled in pairs; the first, sky colour▪ the second, pearl colour; the third, flame colour; the fourth, tawny: and these cut in leaves, which were subtly tacked up, and embroidered with Oe's, and be∣tweene every rank of leaves, a broad silver lace. They were fastened on the right shoulder, and fell compass down the back in gracious folds, and were again tied with a round knot, to the fastening of their swords. Upon their legs they wore silver Grieves, answering in work to their Labells; and these were their accoutrements.
The Ladies attire was wholly new, for the invention, and full of glory; as having in it the most true impression of a celestial figure: the upper part of white cloth of silver, wrought with IVNOES birds and fruits; a loose vnder-garment, full gathered, of carnation, strip't with silver, and parted with a golden Zone: beneath that, another flowing garment, of watchet cloth of silver, laced with gold; through all which, though they were round, and swelling, there yet appeared some touch of their delicate lineaments, pre∣serving the sweetness of proportion, and expressing it self beyond express∣zion. The attire of their heads did answer, if not exceed; their hair being carelessly (but yet with more art, then if more affected) bound under the circle of a rare and rich Coronet, adorned with all variety, and choice of jewels; from the top of which, flowed a transparent veil, down to the ground; whose verge, returning up, was fastened to either side in most sprightly manner. Their shoes were Azure, and gold, set with Rubies and Diamonds; so were all their garments; and every part abounding in or∣nament.
No less to be admired, for the grace, and greatness, was the whole Machine of the Spectacle, from whence they came: the first part of which
was a MIKPOKOΣMOΣ, or Globe, filled with Countries, and those gilded; where the Sea was expressed, heightened with silver waives. This stood, or rather hung (for no Excel was seen to support it) and turning softly, dis∣covered the first Masque (as wee have before, but too runningly declared) which was of the men, sitting in fair composition, within a mine of several metals: To which, the lights were so placed, as no one was seen; but seemed, as if only REASON, with the splendour of her crown, illumined the whole Grot.
On the sides of this (which began the other part) were placed two great Statues, feigned of gold, one of ATLAS, the other of HERCVLES, in varied postures, bearing up the Clouds, which were of Relive, embossed, and tralucent, as Naturals: To these, a cortine of painted clouds joined, which reached to the vpmost roof of the Hall; and suddenly opening, reueal'd the three Regions of Ayre: In the highest of which, sate IVNO, in a glorious throne of gold, circled with Comets, and fiery Meteors, engine∣dred in that hot and dry Region; her feet reaching to the lowest: where, was made a Rainbow, and within it, Musicians seated, figuring airy spirits, their habits various, and resembling the several colours, caused in that part of the air by reflection. The midst was all of dark and condensed clouds, as being the proper place, where Rain, Hail, and other watery Me∣teors are made; out of which, two concave clouds, from the rest, thrust forth themselves (in nature of those Nimbi, wherein, by Homer, Virgil, &amp;c. the gods are feigned to descend) and these carried the eight Ladies, over the heads of the two  Terms; who (as the engine moved) seemed also to bow themselves (by virtue of their shadows) and discharge their shoulders of their glorious burden: when, having set them on the earth, both they and the clouds gathered themselves up again, with some rapture of the be∣holders.
But that, which (as aboue in place, so in the beauty) was most taking in the Spectacle, was the sphere of fire, in the top of all, encompassing the ayre, and imitated with such art and industry, as the spectators might discern the Motion (all the time the Shows lasted) without any Moouer; and that so swift, as no eye could distinguish any colour of the light, but might form to it self five hundred several hiewes, out of the tralucent body of the ayre, objected betwixt it, and them.
And this was crowned with a statue of IVPITER, the Thunderer.
ON the next Night, whose solemnity was of Barriers (all mention of the former being utterly removed and taken away) there appeared, at the lower end of the Hall, a Mist made of delicate perfumes; out of which (a battle being sounded under the stage) did seem to break forth two Ladies, the one representing Truth, the other Opinion; but both so alike attired, as they could by no note be distinguished. The colour of their garments were blue, their socks white; they were crowned with wreaths of Palm, &amp; in their hands •ch of thē sustained a Palm-bough. These, after the Mist was vanished,
And then, what rules husbands praescribe their wives!
In their eyes circles, they must bound their lives.
The moon, when farthest from the sun she shines,
Is most refulgent; nearest, most declines:
But your poor wives far off must never rome,
But wast their beauties, near their lords at home:
And when their lords range out, at home must hide
(Like to begged monopolies) all their pride.
When their lords list to feed a serious fit
They must be serious; when to show their wit
In jests, and laughter, they must laugh and jest;
When they wake, wake; and when they rest, must rest.
And to their wives men give such narrow scopes,
As if they meant to make them walk on ropes:
No tumblers bide more peril of their necks
In all their tricks; then wives in husbands checks.
Where virgins, in their sweet, and peaceful state
Have all things perfect; spin their own free fate;
Depend on no proud second; are their own
Center, and circle; Now, and always one.
To whose example, we doe still hear named
One god, one nature, and but one world framed,
One sun, one moon, one element of fire,
So, of the rest; one king, that doth inspire
Soul, to all bodies, in their royal sphere:
And where is marriage more declared, then there?
Is there a band more strict, then that doth tie
The soul, and body in such unity?
Subjects to sovereigns? doth one mind display
In th'ones obedience, and the others sway?
Believe it, marriage suffers no compare,
When both estates are valued, as they are.
The virgin were a strange, and stubborn thing,
Would longer stay a virgin, then to bring
Her self fit use, and profit in a make.
How she doth err! and the whole heaven mistake!
Look, how a flower, that close in closes grows,
Hid from rude cattle, bruised with no ploughs,
Which the ayre doth stroke, sun strengthē, showers shoot higher,
It many youths, and many maids desire;
The same, when cropped by cruel hand is withered,
No youths at all, no maidens have desired:
So a virgin, while untouched she doth remain,
Is dear to hers; but when with bodies stain
Her chaster flower is lost, she leaves to appear
Or sweet to young men, or to maidens dear.
That conquest then may crown me in this war,
Virgins, O virgins, fly from HYMEN far.
Virgins, O virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield,
For as a lone vine, in a naked field,
Never extols her branches, never bears
Ripe grapes, but with a headlong heaviness wears
Her tender body, and her highest sproote
Is quickly leuell'd with her fading root;
By whom no husbandmen, no youths will dwell;
But if, by fortune, she be married well
To th'elme her husband, many husbandmen,
And many youths inhabit by her, then:
So whilst a virgin doth, vntouch't, abide
All vnmanu•'d, she grows old, with her pride;
But when to equal wedlock, in fit time,
Her fortune, and endeavour lets her clime,
Dear to her love, and parents she is held.
Virgins, O virgins, to sweet HYMEN yield.
These are but words; hast thou a knight will try
(By stroke of arms) the simple verity?
To that high proof I would have dared thee.
Isle strait fetch champions for the bride and me.
The like will I doe for Virginity.
THe worthy custom of honouring worthy marriages, with these noble solemnities, hath, of late years, advanced it self frequently with vs; to the reputation no less of our court, then nobles: expressing besides (through the difficulties of expense, and travel, with the cheerfulness of vnder-taking) a most real affection in the personators, to those, for whose sake they would sustain these per∣sons. It behooves then vs, that are trusted with a part of their honour, in these celebrate∣once, to doc nothing in them, beneath the dignity of either. With this pre∣posed part of judgment, I adventure to give that abroad, which in my first conception I intended honourably fit: and (though it hath laboured since, under censure) I, that know Truth to be always of one stature, and so like a rule, as who bends it the least way, must needs doe an injury to the right, cannot but smile at their tyrannous ignorance, that will offer to slight me (in these things being an artificer) and give themselves a peremp∣toric licence to judge, who have never touched so much as to the bark, or utter shell of any knowledge. But, their daring dwell, with them. They have found a place, to power out their follies, and I a seat, to sleep out the passage.
The scene to this Masque, was a high, steep, red cliff, advancing it self into the clouds, figuring the place, from whence (as I have been, not fa∣bulously, informed) the honourable family of the RADCLIFFES first took their name (à cliuo rubro) and is to be written with that Orthography; as I have observed out of M. CAMBDEN, in his mention of the Earls of Sussex. This cliff was also a note of height, greatness, and antiquity; before which, on the two sides, were erected two pilasters, chardg'd with spoils and trophies, of love, and his mother, consecrate to marriage: amongst which were old and young persons figured, bound with roses, the wedding gar∣mints,
rocks, and spindles, hearts transfixed with arrows, others flaming, virgins girdles, gyrlonds, and worlds of such like; all wrought round and bold: and ouer-head two personages, triumph and victory, in flying po∣stirs, and twice so big as the life, in place of the arch, and holding a gyr∣land of myrtle for the key. All which, with the pillars, seemed to be of burnished gold, and embossed out of the mettle. Beyond the cliff was seen nothing but clouds, thick, and obscure; till on the sudden, with a solemn musique, a bright sky breaking forth; there were discovered, first two  doves, then two  swans with silver geeres, drawing forth a trium∣phoned chariot; in which VENVS sate, crowned with her star, and be∣neath her the three Graces, or Charites, AGLAIA, THALIA, EVPHRO∣SYN•, all attired according to their antique figures. These, from their chariot, alighted on the top of the cliff, and descending by certain ab∣rupt and winding passages, VENVS having left her star, only, flaming in her seat, came to the earth, the Graces throwing gyrlonds all the way, and began to speak.
IT is no common cause, ye will conceive,
My lovely Graces, makes your goddess leave
Her state in heaven, to night, to visit earth.
Love late is fled away, my eldest birth,
CUPID, whom I did joy to call my son;
And, whom long absent, VENVS is undone.
Spy, if you can, his foot-steps on this greene;
For here (as I am told) he late hath been.
With  divers of his brethren, lending light
From their best flames, to guild a glorious night;
Which I not grudge at, being done for her,
Whose honours, to mine own, I still prefer.
But he, not yet returning, I'am in fear,
Some gentle grace, or innocent beauty here,
Be taken with him: or he hath surprised
A second PSYCHE, and lives here disguised.
Find ye no tract of his strayed feet?
Not I.
Nor I.
Nor I.
Stay nymphs, we then will try
A nearer way. Look all these ladies eyes,
And see if there he not concealed lies;
Or in their bosoms, twixt their swelling breasts:
(The wag affects to make himself such nests)
Perchance, he'hath got some simple heart, to hide
His subtle shape in: I will have him cried.
And all his virtues told. That, when they know
What spright he is, she soon may let him go,
That guards him now; and think her self right blessed,
To be so timely rid of such a guest.
Begin soft GRACES, and proclaim reward
To her that brings him in. Speak, to be heard.
Beauties, have ye seen this toy,
Called  love, a little boy,
Almost naked, wanton, blind,
Cruel now; and then as kind?
If he be amongst ye, say;
He is VENVS run-away.
She, that will but now discover
Where the winged wag doth hover,
Shall, to night, receive a kiss,
How, or where her self would wish:
But, who brings him to his mother,
Shall have that kiss, and another.
H' hath of marks about him plenty:
You shall know him, among twenty.
All his body is a fire,
And his breath a flame entire,
That being shot, like lightning, in,
Wounds the heart, but not the skin.
At his sight, the  sun hath turned,
NEPTVNE in the waters, burned;
 Hell hath felt a greater heate:
JOVE himself forsook his seat:
From the center, to the sky,
Are his  trophies reared hie.
Wings he hath, which though ye clip,
He will leap from lip, to lip,
Over liver, lights, and heart,
But not stay in any part;
And, if chance his arrow misses,
He will shoot himself, in kisses.
He doth bear a golden Bow
And a Quiver, hanging low,
Full of arrows, that outbrave
DEAN'S shafts: where, if he have
Any head more sharpe then other,
With that first he strikes his mother.
Still the fairest are his fuel.
When his days are to be cruel,
Lovers hearts are all his food;
And his bathes their warmest blood:
Nought but wounds his hand doth season;
And he hates none like to Reason.
Trust him not: his words, though sweet,
Seldom with his heart doe meet.
All his practise is deceit;
Every gift it is a bait;
Not a kiss, but poison bears;
And most treason in his tears.
Idle minutes are his reign;
Then, the straggler makes his gain,
By presenting maids with toys,
And would have ye think 'hem joys:
It is the ambition of the elf,
To 'haue all childish, as himself.
If by these ye please to know him,
Beauties, be not nice, but show him.
Though ye had a will, to hide him,
Now, we hope, yee'le not abide him.
Since ye hear his falser play;
And that he is VENVS Run-away.
COme my little iocound sports,
Come away; the time now sorts
With your pastime: This same night
Is CVPID'S day. Advance your light.
With your Revel fill the room,
That our triumphs be not dumb.
WEll done Antiques: Now, my Bow,
And my Quiver bear to show;
That these Beauties, here, may know,
By what arms this feat was done,
That hath so much honour won,
Unto VENVS, and her Son.
WHat feat, what honour is it, that you boast,
My little straggler? I had given you lost,
With all your games, here.
Mother?
Yes sir, she.
What might your glorious cause of triumph be?
Ha'you shot  MINERVA, or the Thespian dames?
Heat aged  OPS again, with youthful flames?
Or have you made the colder Moon to visit
Once more, a sheepe-cote? Say, what conquest is it
Can make you hope such a renown to win?
Is there a second HERCVLES brought to spin?
Or, for some new disguise, leaves JOVE his thunder?
NOr that, nor those, and yet no less a wonder;
Which to tell, I may not stay:
 HYMEN'S presence bids away;
It is, already, at his night,
He can give you farther light.
You, my sports may here abide,
Till I call, to light the Bride.
VENVS, is this a time to quit your carre?
To stoop to earth? to leave, alone, your star,
Without your influence? and,  on such a night,
Which should be crowned with your most cheering sight?
As you were ignorant of what were done
By CUPIDS hand, your all-triumphing Son?
Look on this state; and if you yet not know,
What Crown there shines, whose Sceptre here doth grow;
Think on thy loved  AENEAS, and what name,
MARO, the golden trumpet of his fame,
Gave him, read thou in this. A Prince, that draws
By'example more, then others doe by laws:
That is so just to his great act, and thought,
To doe, not what Kings may, but what Kings ought.
Who, out of piety, unto peace, is vowed;
To spare his subjects, yet to quell the proud,
And dares esteem it the first fortitude,
To have his passions, foes at home, subdued.
That was reserved, until the Parcae spun
Their whitest wool; and then, his thread begun.
Which thread, when  Treason would have burst, a soul
(To day renowned, and added to my roll)
Opposed; and, by that act, to his name did bring
The honour, to  be Saver of his King.
This King, whose worth (if gods for virtue love)
Should VENVS with the same affections move,
As her AENEAS; and no less endear
Her love to his safety, then when she did cheer,
( After a tempest) long afflicted Troy,
Upon the Lybian shore; and brought them joy.
I Love, and know his virtues, and doe boast
Mine own renown, when I renown him most.
My CVPID'S absence I forgive, and praise,
That me to such a present grace could raise.
His champion shall, hereafter, be my care;
But speak his bride, and what her virtues are.
SHe is a noble virgin, styled the maid
Of the Radcliffe, and hath her dowry weighed;
No less in virtue, blood, and form, then gold.
Thence, where my Pillar's reared, you may behold,
(Filled with Loves Trophy•s) doth she take her name.
Those Pillars did vxorious  VVLCAN frame,
Against this day, and underneath that hill,
He, and his Cyclopes, are forging still
Some strange, and curious piece, to adorn the night,
And give these graced Nuptials greater light.
WHich I have done; the best of all my life:
And have my end, if it but please my wife,
And she commend it, to the laboured worth.
Cleave solid Rock, and bring the wonder forth.
IT'is a sphere, I'haue formed round, and even,
In due proportion to the sphere of heaven,
With all his lines, and circles; that compose
The perfect'st form, and aptly doe disclose
The heaven of marriage: which I title it.
Within whose Zodiac, I have made to sit,
In order of the signs, twelve sacred powers,
That are praesiding at all nuptial hours:
1. The first, in ARIES place, respects pride
Of youth; and beauty; graces in the bride.
2. In TAVRVS, he loves strength, and manliness;
The virtues, which the bridegroom should profess.
3. In GEMINI, that noble power is shown,
That twins their hearts; and doth, of two, make one.
4. In CANCER, he that bids the wife give way
With backward yielding, to her husbands sway.
5. In LEO, he that doth in still the heate
Into the man: which, from the following seat,
6. Is tempered so, as he that looks from thence
Sees, yet, they keep a VIRGIN innocence.
7. In LIBRA'S room, rules he that doth supply
All happy beds with sweet aequality.
8. The SCORPIONS place he fills, that make the jars,
And stings in wedlock; little strifes, and wars:
9. Which he, in the ARCHERS throne, doth soon remove
By making, with his shafts, new wounds of love.
10. And those the follower, with more heate, inspires,
As, in the GOAT, the sun renews his fires.
11. In wet AQVARIVS stead, reigns he, that showers
Fertility upon the genial bowers.
12. Last, in the FISHES place, sits he, doth say;
In married joys, all should be dumb, as they.
And this hath VVLCAN, for his VENVS, done,
To grace the chaster triumph of her son.
ANd for this gift, will I to heaven return,
And vow, for ever, that my lamp shall burn
With pure and chicest fire; or  never shine,
But when it mixes with thy sphere, and mine.
Loves common wealth consists of toys;
His council are those antique boys,
Games, laughter, sports, delights,
That triumph with him on these nights:
To whom we must give way,
For now their reign begins, and lasts till day.
They sweeten HYMENS war,
And, in that jar,
Make all, that married bee,
Perfection see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished star.
Why stays the Bridegroom to invade
Her, that would be a matron made?
Good night, whilst yet we may
Good-night, to you a virgin, say:
To morrow, rise the same
Your  mother is, and use a nobler name.
Speed well in HYMEN'S war,
That, what you are,
By your perfection, wee
And all may see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished star.
To night is VENVS vigil kept.
This night no Bridegroom ever slept;
And if the fair Bride doo,
The married say, it is his fault, too.
Wake then; and let your lights
Wake too: for they'll tell nothing of your nights:
But, that in HYMENS war,
You perfect are.
And such perfection, wee
Doe pray, should bee.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth thou wished star.
That, ere the rosy-fingerd morn
Behold nine moons, there may be borne
A babe, t'vphold the fame
Of RADCLIFFES blood, and RAMSEY'S name:
That may, in his great seed,
Wear the long honours of his fathers deed.
Such fruits of HYMENS war
Most perfect are;
And all perfection, wee
Wish, you should see.
Shine HESPERVS, shine forth, thou wished star.
IT increasing, now, to the third time of my being used in these services to her Majesties personal presentations, with the Ladies whom she pleases to honour; it was my first and special regard, to see that the no∣bilitie of the invention should bee ensue∣rabble to the dignity of their persons. For which reason I chose the argument, to bee, A celebration of honourable, and true fame, bred out of virtue: observing that rule of the  best artist, to suffer no object of delight to pass without his mixture of profit and example. And because her Ma∣jest (best knowing, that a principal part of life, in these spectacles, lay in their variety) had commanded me to think on some dance, or show, that might precede hers, and have the place of a foil or false Masque: I was careful to decline, not only from others, but mine own steps in that kind, since the  last year, I had an anti-masque of boys: and therefore now, deuis'd, that twelve women, in the habit of hags, or witches, sustaining the persons of ignorance, suspicion, credulity, &amp;c. the opposites to good Fame, (should fill that part; not as a Masque, but a spectacle of strangeness, pro∣ducing multiplicity of gesture, and not unaptly sorting with the current, and whole fall of the device.
His Majesty, then, being set, and the whole company in full expect∣tion, the part of the scene which first presented it self, was an ugly Hell: which flaming beneath, smoked unto the top of the roof. And in respect all evils are, morally, said to come from hell; as also from that observation of TORRENTIVS upon HORACE his CANIDIA,  quae tot instruct venenis, ex Orci faucibus profecta videri posit: These witches, with a kind
of hollow and infernal musique, came forth from thence. First one, then two, and three, and more, till their number increased to eleven; all diffe∣rently attired: some with rats on their head; some on their shoulders; others with ointment pots at their girdles; all with spindles, timbrels, rattles, or other veneficall instruments, making a confused noise, with strange gestures. The device of their attire was Master IONES his, with the invention, and architecture of the whole scene, and machine. Only, I prescribed them their properties of vipers, snakes, bones, herbs, roots, and other ensigns of their magic, out of the authority of ancient and late writers, wherein the faults are mine, if there be any found; and for that cause I confess them.
These eleven witches beginning to dance (which is an usual  ceremo∣no at their convents, or meetings, where sometimes also they are vizarded, and masked) on the sudden, one of them missed their chief, and inter∣rupted the rest, with this speech.
SIsters, stay, we want our  Dame;
Call upon her by her name,
And the charm we use to say,
That she quickly  anoint, and come away.
DAME, DAME, the watch is set:
Quickly come, we all are met.
 From the lakes, and from the fens,
From the rocks, and from the dens,
From the woods, and from the caves,
From the church-yards, from the graves,
From the dungeon, from the tree
That they die on, here are wee.
Comes she not yet?
Strike another heate.
THe weather is fair, the wind is good,
Up DAME, o'your  horse of wood:
Or else, tucke up your gray frock,
And saddle your  goat, or your greene  cock,
And make his bridle a bottom of third,
To roll up how many miles you have rid.
Quickly come away;
For we, all, stay.
Nor yet? Nay, then,
We'll try her again.
THe owl is abroad, the bat, and the toad,
And so is the cat-a-mountayne,
The ant, and the mole sit both in a hole,
And frog peepes out of the fountain;
The dogs, they doe bay, and the timbrels play,
The  spindle is now a turning;
The moon it is red, and the stars are fled,
But all the sky is a burning:
The  ditch is made, and our nails the spade,
With pictures full, of wax, and of wool;
Their livers I stick, with needles quick;
There lacks but the blood, to make up the flood.
Quickly DAME, then, bring your part in,
Spur, spur, upon little  MARTIN,
I Have been, all day, looking after
A Raven, feeding upon a quarter;
And, soon, as she turned her beak to the South,
I snatched this morsel out of her mouth.
I Have been gathering Wolves hairs,
The mad Dogs foam, and the Adders ears;
The spurging of a dead mans eyes,
And all since the evening star did rise.
I, Last night, lay all alone
Of the ground, to hear the Mandrake groan;
And plucked him up, though he grew full low;
And, as I had done, the Cock did crow.
ANd I ha'beene choosing out this scull,
From Charnel houses, that were full;
From private Grots, and public Pits,
And frighted a Sexton out of his wits.
Under a cradle I did creep,
By day; and, when the child was asleep,
At night, I sucked the breath; and rose,
And plucked the nodding Nurse by the nose.
I Had a dagger: what did I with that?
Killed an infant, to have his fat.
A Piper it got, at a Church-ale,
I bad him, again blow wind in the tail.
A Murderer, yonder, was hung in chains,
The Sun and the wind had shrunk his veins;
I bit off a sinew, I clipped his hair,
I brought off his rags, that danced in the ayre.
THe Scrich-owles eggs, and the feathers black,
The blood of the Frog, and the bone in his back,
I have been getting; and made of his skin
A purset, to keep Sir CRANION in.
ANd I ha'beene plucking (plants among)
Hemlock, Henbane, Adders-tongue,
Night-shade, Moone-wort, Libbards-bane;
And twice, by the dogs, was like to be tan.
I, From the jaws of a Gardeners bitch,
Did snatch these bones, and then leaped the ditch;
Yet went I back to the house again,
Killed the black Cat, and here's the brain.
I Went to the Toad breeds under the wall,
I charmed him out, and he came at my call;
I scratched out the eyes of the Owl before,
I tore the Bats wing; what would you have more?
YEs, I have brought (to help our vows)
Horned Poppy, Cypress boughs,
The Fig-tree wild, that grows on tombs,
And juice, that from the Larch-tree comes,
The Basilisks blood, and the Vipers skin:
And, now, our Orgies let's begin.
YOu  Fiends and Furies (if yet any bee
Worse then our selves) you, that have quaked to see
These  knots untied; and shrunk, when we have charmed.
You, that (to arm vs) have your selves disarmed,
And to our powers, resigned your whips and brands,
When we went forth, the scourge of men and lands.
You, that have seen me ride, when HECATE
Durst not take chariot; when the boisterous se•,
Without a breath of wind, hath knocked the sky;
And that hath thundered, JOVE not knowing why:
When we have set the elements at wars,
Made midnight see the sun, and day the stars;
When the winged lightning, in the course, hath staid;
And swiftest rivers have run back, afraid,
To see the corn remove, the groves to range,
Whole places alter, and the seasons change,
When the pale moon, at the first voice down fell
Poisoned, and durst not stay the second spell.
You, that have oft, been conscious of these sights;
And thou  three-formed star, that, on these nights
Art only powerful, to whose triple name
Thus we incline, once, twice, and thrice the same;
If now with rites profane, and foul enough,
We doe invoke thee; darken all this roof,
With present fogs▪ Exhale earths rott'nest vapors,
And strike a blindness through these blazing tapers.
Come, let a murmuring charm resound,
The whilst we  bury all, in the ground.
But first, see every  foot be bare;
And every knee. HAG. Yes, dame, they are.
Deep,  O deep, we lay thee to sleep;
We leave thee drink by, if thou chance to be dry;
Both milk, and blood, the dew, and the flood.
We breathe in thy bed, at the foot, and the head;
We cover thee warm, that thou take no harm:
And when thou dost wake,
Dame earth shall quake,
And the houses shake,
And her belly shall ache,
As her back were brake,
Such a birth to make,
As is the blue drake:
Whose form thou shall take.
Never a star yet shot?
Where be the ashes? HAG. Here in the pot.
DAM.  Cast them up; and the flint stone
Over the left shoulder bone:
Into the west. HAG. It will be best.
THe sticks are across, there can be no loss,
The sage is rotten, the sulphur is gotten
Up to the sky, that was in the ground.
Follow it then, with our rattles, round;
Under the bramble, over the brier,
A little more heat will set it on fire:
Put it in mind, to doe it kind,
Flow water, and blow wind.
Rouncy is over, Robble is under,
A flash of light, and a clap of thunder,
A storm of rain, another of hail.
We all must home, in the •gge-shell sail;
The mast is made of a great pin,
The tackle of cobweb, the sail as thin,
And if we go through and not fall in —
STay. All our charms doe nothing win
Upon the night; our labour dies!
Our Magicke-feature will not rise;
Nor yet the storm! We must repeat
More direful voices far, and beat
The ground with vipers, till it sweat.
Bark dogs, wolves howl,
Seas roar, woods roll,
Clouds crack, all be black,
But the light our charms doe make.
NOt yet? my rage begins to swell;
Darkness, devils, night, and hell,
Doe not thus delay my spell.
I call you once, and I call you twice;
I beat you again, if you stay my thrice:
Thorough these cronies, where I peep,
 I'll let in the light to see your sleep.
And all the secrets of your sway
Shall lie as open to the day,
As unto me. Still are you deaf?
Reach me a bough, that ne'er bare leaf,
To strike the air; and  Aconite,
To hurl upon this glaring light;
 A rusty knife, to wound mine arm;
And, as it drops, I'll speak a charm,
Shall cleave the ground, as low as lies
Old shrunk-vp CHAOS, and let rise,
Once more, his dark, and reeking head,
To strike the world, and nature dead,
Until my magic birth be bred.
Black go in, and blacker come out;
At thy going down, we give thee a shout.
Hoo!
At thy rising again, thou shalt have two,
And if thou dost what, we would have thee doe,
Thou shalt have three, thou shalt have four,
Thou shalt have ten, thou shalt have a score.
Hoo. Har. Har. Hoo!
A Cloud of pitch, a spur, and a switch,
To haste him away, and a whirlwind play,
Before, and after, which thunder for laughter,
And storms for joy, of the roaring boy;
His head of a drake, his tail of a snake.
ABout, about, and about,
Till the mist arise, and the lights •lie out,
The images neither be seen, nor felt;
The woollen burn, and the waxen melt;
Sprinkle your liquors upon the ground,
And into the ayre; around, around.
Around, around,
Around, around,
 Till a musique sound,
And the pace be found,
To which we may dance,
And our Charms advance.
AT which, with a strange, and sudden musique they fell into a  magi∣call dance, full of praeposterous change, and gesticulation, but most applying to their property: who at their meetings, doe call things contrary to the custom of men, dancing back to back, and hip to hip, their hands joined, and making their circles backward, to the left hand, with strange phantastique motions of their heads, and bodies. All which were excellent∣lie imitated by the maker of the dance, M. HIEROME HERNE, whose right it is here to be named.
IN the heat of their dance, on the sudden, was heard a sound of loud musique, as if many instruments had made one blast; with which not only the Hags themselves, but the hell, into which they ran, quite vanished, and the whole face of the Scene altered, scarce suffering the memory of such a thing: But in the place of it, appeared a glorious, and magnificent building, figuring the house of fame, in the top of which, were discovered the 12. masquers, sitting upon a throne triumphal, erected in form of a pyramid, and circled with all store of light. From whom a person, by this time descended, in the furniture of Perseus, and expressing he∣roique, and masculine virtue, began to speak.
SO should, at FEMS loud sound, and VERTVES sight,
All dark, and envious witchcraft fly the light.
 I did not borrow HARMS wings, nor ask
His crooked sword, nor put on PLVTO'S cask,
Nor on mine arm, advanced wise PALLAS shield,
(By which, my face auers'd, in open field
I slue the GORGON) for an empty name:
When VIRTUE cut off TERROR, he gat FAME.
And, if when FAME was gotten, TERROR died,
What black ERYNNIS, or more hellish pride,
Durst arm these HAGS, now she is grown, and great,
To think they could her glories once defeat?
I was her parent, and I am her strength.
Heroic Virtue sinks not under length
Of years, or ages; but is still the same,
While he preserves, as when he got good FAME.
My daughter, then, whose glorious house you see
Built of all sounding brass, whose columns bee
Men making Poets, and those well-made Men,
Whose strife it was, to have the happiest pen
Renown them to an after-life, and not
With pride, to scorn the Muse, and die forgot;
She, that inquires into all the world,
And hath, about her vaulted Palace, hoorl'd
All rumours and reports, or true, or vain,
What utmost lands, or deepest seas contain;
(But only hangs great actions, on her file)
She, to this lesser world, and greatest Isle,
To night sounds Honour, which she would have seen
In yond' bright BEVY each of them a Queen.
Eleven of them are of times, long gone.
PENTHESILEA, the brave Amazon,
Swift foot CAMILLA, Queen of Volscia,
Victorious THOMYRIS of Scythia,
Chaste ARTEMISIA, the Carian dame,
And fayre-hayr'd BERONICE, Aegypts fame,
HYPSICRATEA, glory of Asia,
CANDACE, pride of Aethiopia.
The Brittane honour, VOADICEA,
The virtuous PALMYRENE, ZENOBIA,
The wife, and warlike Goth, AMALASVNTA,
And bold VALASCA, of Bohemia.
Vel mare per medium, fluctu suspense tumenti,
Ferret iter, celereis nec tingeret aequore plants.
And afterword tells her attire, and arms, with the admiration, that the spectators had of her. All which i• the Poet created out of himself, with∣out nature, he did but show, how much so divine a soul could exceed her.
The third lived in the age of CYRVS, the great Persian Monarch; and made him leave to live. THOMYRIS, Queen of the Scythians, or Massagets. A Heroine of a most invincible, and vnbroken fortitude. Who, when CY∣RVS had invaded her, and, taking her only son (rather by treachery, then war, as she objected) had slain him; not touched with the grief of so great a loss, in the juster comfort she took of a greater revenge, pursued not on∣lie the occasion, and honour of conquering so potent an enemy, with whom fell two hundred thousand soldiers: but (what was right memorable in her victory) left not a messenger surviving, of his side to report the mas∣sacre. She is remembered both by  HERODOTVS and  IVSTINE, to the great renown, and glory of her kind: with this Elegy. Quote potentis∣simo Persarum Monarchaebello congress est, epsom{que} &amp; vita &amp; castris spoliauit, ad iustè vlciscendam filij eius indignissimam mortem.
The fourth was honoured to life in the time of XERXES, and present at his great expedition into Greece; ARTEMISIA, the Queen of Carry: whose virtue  HERODOTVS, not without some wonder, records. That, a woman, a Queen, without a husband, her son a ward, and she administering the government, occasioned by no necessity, but a mere excellence of spirit, should embark herself for such a war; and there, so to behave her, as XERXES beholding her sight, should say:  Viri quidē extiterunt mihi foeminae, foeminae atom viri. She is no less renowned for her chastity, &amp; love to her husband, MAVSOLVS,  whose bones (after he was dead) she preserved in ashes, and drunk in wine, making her self his tomb: and, yet, built to his memory a monument, deserving a place among the seven wonders of the world, which could not be done by less then a wonder of women.
The fifth was the fair haired daughter of PTOLOMAEVS PHILA∣DELPHVS, by the elder ARSINOE; who, married to her brother PTOLO∣MAEVS, surnamed EVERGETES, was after Queen of Egypt. I find her written both BERONICE, and BERENICE. This lady, upon an expedite∣on of her new wedded Lord into Assyria, vowed to VENVS, if he returned safe, and conqueror, the offering of her hair; which vow of hers (exacted by the success) she afterword performed. But, her father missing it, and therewith displeased, CONON, a Mathematician, who was then in house-hold with PTOLOMEY, and knew well to flatter him, persuaded the king that it was taken up to heaven, and made a constellation; she wing him those seven stars, ad caudam Lionise, which are since called Coma Beronices. Which story, then presently celebrated by CALLIMACHVS, in a most elegant poem, CATVLLVS more elegantly converted; wherein they call her the Magnanimous, even from a virgin: alluding (as  HYGINVS says) to a rescue she made of her father in his flight, and restoring the courage and honour of his army, even to a victory. Their words are,
 Cognoram d parua virgin magnanimam.
The sixth, that famous wife of MITHRIDATES, and Queen of Pone∣tus, HYPSICRATEA, no less an example of virtue then the rest; who so loved her husband, as she was assistant to him in all labours, and ha∣zards of the war, in a masculine habit. For which cause (as  VALE∣REVS MAXIMVS observes) she departed with a chief ornament of her beauty. Tonsis enim capillis, equo se &amp; arms assuefecit, quo facilius labo∣rebus &amp; periculis eius interesset. And, afterword, in his flight from POM∣PEY, accompanied his misfortune, with a mind, and body equally un∣wearied. She is solemnly registered, by that grave Author, as a notable President of marriage-loyaltie, and love: virtues, that might raise a mean person to equality with a Queen, but a Queen to the state, and honour of a deity.
The seventh, that renown of Aethiopia, CANDACE: from whose excellence, the succeeding queens of that nation were ambitious to bee called so. A woman, of a most haughty spirit against enemies, and a sin∣gular affection to her subjects. I find her celebrated by  DION, and  PLINIE, inuading Egypt in the time of AVGVSTVS; who, though she were enforced to a peace by his Lieutenant PETRONIVS, doth not the less worthily hold her place here; when, every where, this Elegy re∣mains of her fame: That she was Maxim enemy mulier, tantique in la merit, vt omnes d•inceps Aethiopum Reginae eius nominee fuerint appellate. She governed in Meroe.
The eight, our own honour, VOADICEA, or BOODICEA; By some BVNDVICA, and BVNDVCA: queen of the Iceni. A people, that inhabited that part of our Island which was called East-Anglia, and com∣prehended Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and Huntington shires. Since she was borne here at home, we will first honour her with a home-borne testi∣money; from the grave and diligent  SPENSER.
—BVNDVCA Britonesse▪
BVNDVCA, that victorious conquers,
That lifting up her brave Heroic thought
'Bo•e women's weakness, with the Romans fought;
Fought, and in field against them thrice prevailed, &amp;c.
To which, see her orations in story, made by  TAC•TVS, and  DION: wherein is expressed all magnitude of a spirit, breathing to the liberty and redemption of her Country. The latter of whom, doth honest her be∣side, with a particular desciption. BVNDVICA, Britanica foemina, orta stirpe Regia, quaenon solum cis cum magna dignitate praefuit, sed etiam hellum omne ad∣ministrauit; cuius animus virilis potius quam muliebris erat. And afterwards, Foemina, form honestissima, vultu seuero, &amp;c. All which doth weigh the more to her true praise, in coming from the mouths of Romans, and enemies. She lived in the time of NARROW.
The ninth, in time, but equal in fame, and (the cause of it) virtue, was the chaste ZENOBIA queen of the Palmerynes, who, after the death of
〈1 page missing〉
Her house is all of echo made,
Where never dyes the sound;
And, as her brows the clouds invade,
Her foot doe strike the ground.
Sing then good Fame, that's out of Virtue borne:
For, who doth Fame neglect, doth Virtue scorn.
Here they lighted from their Chariots, and danced forth their first dance; then a second, immediately following it: both right curious, and full of subtle and excellent changes, and seemed performed with no less spirits, then of those they personated. The first was to the Cornets, the second to the Violins. After which, they took out the men, and danced the measures; entertaining the time, almost to the space of an hour, with singular vary∣tie: when, to give them rest, from the Musique which attended the Cha∣riots, by that most excellent tenor voice, and exact singer (her Majesties ser∣vant M. IO. ALLIN) this Ditty was sung.
WHen all the Ages of the earth
Were crowned, but in this famous Birth;
And that, when they would boast their store
Of Worthy Queens, they knew no more:
How happier is that Age, can give
A Queen, in whom all they doe live!
After it, succeeded their third dance; then which, a more numerous com∣position could not be seen: Graphically disposed into Letters, &amp; honouring the name of the most sweet and ingenious Prince CHARLES Duke of York. Wherein, beside that principal grace of perspicuity, the motions were so even and apt, and their expression so just; as if Mathematicians had lost Pro∣portion, they might there have found it. The Author was M. THO. GILES. After this, they danced Galliards, and Corrantoes. And then their last dance, no less elegant (in the place) then the rest, with which they took their Chariots again, and triumphing about the stage, had their return to the House of Fame celebrated with this last Song; whose notes (as the former) were the work, and honour of my excellent friend, ALFONSO FERRABOSCO.
WHo, Virtue, can thy power forget,
That sees these live, &amp; triumph yet?
The Assyrian pomp, the Persian pride,
Gre•kes glory, and the Romans died:
And who yet imitate
Their noises, tarry the same fate.
Force greatness all the glorious ways
You can, it soon decays;
But so good Fame shall never:
Her triumphs, as their causes, are for ever.
To conclude which, I know no worthier way of Epilogue, then the cele∣bration of who were the Celebraters.
 
 
 
 
Nor a deuoish vit a cloud to fish 'hem out of te bottom of te vayter.
But tey mushed even come and daunch i'teyr mantels now; and snow tee how tey can foot te fading and te fadow, and te phip adunboyne I trow.
I pre dee now, let not tie sweet faysht ladies make a mock on 'hem, and scorn to daunsh vit'hem now, becash tey be poor.
Tey drink no bonny clabbe, in fayt, now
It each better ten vsquebagh to daunsh vit PHATRICK.
By my faters hand tey will daunsh very vell.
I by St. PATRICK will tey; for tey be nimble men.
And will leap ash light, be creesh save me, ash he tat veareste biggesht feather in tie court, king YAMISH.
For all tey have no good vindsh to blow tem heter, nor eel∣mentsh to presherue 'hem.
Nor all te four cornersh of te world, to creep out on.
But tine own Kingdoms.
Tey be honesht men.
And goot men: tine own shubshects.
Tou hashed very good shubshects in Ireland.
A great good many, o'great goot shubshects.
Tat love tie majesty heartily.
And vile run t'rough fire, and vater for tee, over t• bog, and te Bannoke, be te graish of got, and graish of king,
By got, tey vile fight for tee, king YAMISH, and for my mistresh tere.
And my little mayshter.
And te vfrow, tie daughter, that is in Tuchland.
Tey will spend la heart, in rer belly for tee, as vell as la legs, in la heelsh.
By creesh, tey will shpend all teyr cowesh for tee.
Pretee make mush on 'tem,
Pretee, sweet faysh doe.
Be not angry vit te honesh men, for te few rebelsh, &amp; knavish.
Nor believe no tails, king YAMISH.
For, by got, tey love tee in Ireland.
Pray tee, bid 'hem velcome, and got make 'hem rich for tee.
Tey will make tem shelves honesht.
Tou hashed not a hundret thousand such men by my trot.
No, nor forty, by my hand.
By iustish Delounes hant, not twenty.
By my Lo. deputish hant not ten, in all ti great Britain. Shall I call hem to tee?
Tey shit like poor men in the porch yonder.
Shtay te peep i'sh come! hark, hark.
Let vsh daunsh ten. Daunsh DENNISE.
By creesh sa' me I ha'forgot.
A little till our mayshtersh be ready.
How like tow tech YAMISH? And tey had fine cloyshs now, and liveries, like tine own men and bee.
But terugs make t'em shrug a little.
Tey have shit a great phoyle in te cold, ant bee
Isht not pity te cloysh be drowned now?
Pre tee she anoter daunsh and be not very.
He may be of your rudeness. Hold your tongues.
And let your courser manners seek some place,
Fit for their wildness. This is none, be gone.
Advance, immortal Bard, come up and view
The glad, ding face of that great king, in whom
So many prophecies of thine are knit.
This is that IAMES of which long since thou sung'st,
Should end our countries most unnatural broils;
And if her ear, then deafened with the drum,
Would stoup but to the musique of his peace,
She need not with the spheres change harmony.
This is the man thou promised should redeem:
If she would love his counsels as his laws,
Her head from servitude, her feet from fall,
Her fame from barbarism, her state from want,
And in her all the fruits of blessing plant.
Sing then some charm, made from his present looks,
That may assure thy former prophecies,
And firm the hopes of these obedient spirits,
Whose love no less, then duty hath called forth
Their willing powers: who if they had much more,
Would doe their All, and think they could not move
Enough to honour that, which he doth love.
BOw both your heads at once, and hearts:
Obedience doth not well in parts.
It is but standing in his eye,
You'll feel your selves changed by and by,
Few live, that know, how quick a spring
Works in the presence of a king:
Tic done by this; your slough let fall,
And come forth new-borne creatures all.
SO breaks the sun earths rugged chains,
Wherein rude winter bound her veins;
So grows both stream and source of price,
That lately fetterd were with ice.
So naked trees get crisped heads,
And cullord coats the roughest meads,
And all get vigour, youth, and spright,
That are but looked on by his light.
SOft, subtle fire, thou soul of art,
Now doe thy part
On weaker Nature, that through age is lamed.
Take but thy time, now she is old,
And the Sun her friend grown cold,
She will no more, in strife with thee be named.
Look, but how few confess her now,
In cheek or brow!
From every head, almost, how she is frighted.
The very age abhors her so,
That it learns to speak and go
As if by art alone it could be righted.
STay, see! our Mercury is coming forth; Art and all the Elements assist. Call forth our Philosophers. He will bee gon, he will evaporate. Dear Mercury! help. He flies. He is escaped. Precious golden Mercury, be fixed; be not so volatile. Will none of the Sons of Art appear?
NOw the place and goodness of it protect me. One tender-hearted creature, or other, save Mercury, and free him. Ne'er an old Gentle∣woman in the house, that has a wrinkle about her, to hide me in? I could run into a Seruing-womans pocket now; her glove, any little hole. Some merciful vardingale among so many, be bounteous, and undertake me: I will stand, close, up, any where, to escape this polt-footed Philosopher, old Smug here of Lemnos, and his smoky family. Has he given me time to breathe? Ô the variety of torment, that I have endured in the reign of the Cyclops, beyond the most exquisite wit of Tyrannes. The whole household of 'hem are become Alchemists (since their trade of armour-making failed them) only to keep themselves in fire, for this winter; for the mischief of Secret, that they know, aboue the consuming of coals and drawing of Vskabah. Howsoever they may pretend under the specious names of Ge∣ber, Arnold, Lully, Bombast of Hohenhein, to commit miracles in art and treason agoing nature. And, as if the title of Philosopher, that creature of glory, were to be fetched out of a furnace, abuse the curious and credulous Nation of metall-men through the world, and make Mercury their in∣strument. I am their Crude, and their Sublimate; their Praecipitate, and their vnctuous; their male and their female; Sometimes their Hermaphro∣dite; what they list to stile me. It is I, that am corroded, and exalted, and sublimed, and reduced, and fetched over, and filtred, and washed, and wiped; what between their salts and their sulphures; their oils, and their tar∣tars, their brines and their vinegers, you might take me out now a soused Mercury, now a salted Mercury, now a smoked and dri'd Mercury, now a pouldred and pickled Mercury: never Herring, Oyster, or Coucumer past so many vexations: my whole life with 'hem hath been an exercise of tor∣ture; one, two, three, four and five times an hour ha'they made me dance the Philosphicall circle, like an Ape through a hoop, or a dog in a wheel. I am their turne-spit indeed: They eat or smell no rost-meate but in my name. I am their bill of credit still, that passes for their victuals and house-roome. It is through me, they ha got this corner of the Court to cousin in, where they shark for a hungry diet below stairs, and cheat upon your vnder-Officers, promising mountains for their meat, and all upon Mercuries security. A poor Page of the Larder, they have made obe∣stinately believe, he shall be Physician for the Household, next Summer: they will give him a quantity of the quintessence, shall serve him to cure kibes,
or the mormall of the shin, take away the pustles in the nose, and Mer∣cury is engaged for it. A child of the Scullery steals all their coals for 'hem too, and he is bid sleep secure, hee shall find a corner of the Philosophers stone for it, under his bolster, one day, and have the Proverb inuerted. Against which, one day I am to deliver the Buttry in, so many firkins of Aurum potabile, as it delivers out Bombards of Budge to them, between this and that. For the Pantry, they are at a certainty with me, and keep a Tally, An Ingot, a loaf, or a wedge of some five pound weight, which is nothing of nothing, a trifle. And so the Black guard are pleased with a any lease of life (for some 999.) especially those of the boiling house, they are to have Medeas kettle hung up, that they may souse into it when they will, and come out renewed like so many stripped Snakes at their pleasure. But these are petty Engagements, and (as I said) below the stairs; Marry aboue here, Perpetuity of beauty, (doe you hear, Ladies) health, Riches, Honours, a matter of Immortality is nothing. They will calcine you a grave matron (as it might bee a mother of the maids) and spring up a young virgin, out of her ashes, as fresh as a Phoenix: Lay you an old Courtier of the coals like a sausedge, or a bloat-herring, and after they have broiled him enough, blow a soul into him with a pair of bell∣lowes, till hee start up into his galliard, that was made when Monsieur was here. They profess familiarly to melt down all the old sinners of the suburbs once in half a year, into fresh gamesters again. Get all the cracked maiden-heads, and cast'hem into new Ingots, half the wenches of the town are Alchemy. See, they begin to muster again, and draw their forces out against me! The Genius of the place defend me. You that are both the Sol and Iupiter of this sphere Mercury, invokes your majesty a∣against the sooty Tribe here; for in your favour only, I grow recovered and warm.
BEgin your charm, sound musique, circle him in, and take him: If he will not obey, bind him.
IT is in vain, Vulcan, to pitch your net in the sight of the foul thus: I am no sleepy Mars, to be caught i'your subtle toys. I know what your aims are, Sir, to tear the wings from my head, and heals, and lute me up in a glass, with my own seals, while you might wrest the Caducaeus out of my hand, to the adultery and spoil of Nature, and make your accesses by it, to her dishonour, more easy. Sir, would you believe, it should be come to that height of impudence, in mankind, that such a nest of fire∣worms, as these are (because their Patron Mulciber heretofore has made
stools stir, and statues dance, a dog of brass to bark, and (which some will say, was his worst act, a woman to speak) should therefore with their heats called Balnei, cineris, or horse-doung, profess to outwork the Sun in virtue, and contend to the great act of generation, nay, almost creation? it is so, though. For, in yonder vessels which you see, in their laboratory, they have enclosed Materials, to produce men, beyond the deeds of Deucalion, or Prometheus (of which, one, they say, had the Philoso∣phers stone, and threw it over his shoulder, the other the fire, and lost it.) And what men are they, they are so busy about, think you? not com∣mon or ordinary creatures, but of rarity and excellence, such as the times wanted, and the Age had a special deal of need of: such, as there was a necessity, they should be artificial; for Nature could never have thought or dreamt of their composition. I can remember some of their titles to you, and the ingredients doe not look for Paracelsus man among 'hem, that he promised you out of white bread, and dele-wine, for hee never came to light. But of these, let me see; the first that occurs; a master of the Duel, a carrier of the differences. To him went spirit of ale, a good quantity, with the amalgam of sugar and nutmegs, oil of oaths, sul∣phure of quarrel, strong waters, valour precipitate, vapor'd o'er the helm with tobacco, and the rosin of Mars with a dram of the business, for that's the word of tincture, the business. Let me alone with the bu∣sinesse, I will carry the business. I doe understand the business. I doe find an affront in the business. Then another is a fencer in the Mathe∣matiques, or the townes-cunning-man, a creature of art too; a supposed secretary to the stars; but, indeed, a kind of lying Intelligencer from those parts. His materials, if I be not deceived, were juice of almanacs, extra∣ction of Ephemerids, scales of the Globe, filings of figures, dust of the twelve houses, conserve of questions, salt of confederacy, a pound of adventure, a grain of skill, and a drop of truth. I saw vegitals too, as well as mine∣rals, put into one glass there, as adders tongue, title-bane, nitre of clients, tartar of false conveyance, Aurum palpabile, with a huge deal of talk, to which they added tincture of conscience, with the faces of honesty; but for what this was, I could not learn; only I have ouer-heard one of the Artists say, Out of the corruption of a Lawyer was the best generation of a Broker in suits: whether this were he or no, I know not.
THou art a scorner, Mercury, and out of the pride of thy protection here, make it thy study, to revile Art, but it will turn to thine own contumely soon. Call forth the creatures of the first class, and let them move to the harmony of our heat, till the slanderer have sealed up his own lips, to his own torment.
LEt 'hem come, let 'hem come, I would not wish a greater punishment to thy impudence.
ARt thou not ashamed, Vulcan, to offer in defence of thy fire and Art, a∣against the excellence of the Sun and Nature, creatures more imper∣fact, then the very flies and insects, that are her trespasses and scopes? Vanish with thy insolence, thou and thy Impostors, and all mention of you melt, before the Majesty of this light, whose Mercury henceforth I pro∣fesse to be, and never again the Philosophers. Vanish, I say, that all who have but their senses, may see and judge the difference between thy ridi∣culous monsters, and his absolute features.
HOw young and fresh am I to night,
To see it kept day, by so much light,
And twelve my sons stand in their Makers sight?
Help, wise Prometheus, something must be done,
To show they are the creatures of the Sun,
That each to other
Is a brother,
And Nature here no stepdame, but a mother.
Come forth, come forth, prove all the numbers then,
That make perfection up, and may absolve you men.
But show thy winding ways and arts,
Thy risings, and thy timely starts
Of stealing fire, from Ladies eyes and hearts.
Those softer circles are the young mans heaven,
And there more orbs and Planets are then seven,
To know whose motion
Were a Notion
As worthy of youths study, as devotion.
Come forth, come forth, prove all the time will gain,
For Nature bids the best, and never bad in vain.
HOw many, amongst these Ladies here,
Wish now they such a mother were!
Not one I fear,
And read it in their laughters.
Ther's more I guess would wish to be my daughters.
You think they would not be so old, for so much glory.
I think that thought so told
Is no false piece of story.
It is yet with them, but Beauties noon,
They would not Grandames be too soon.
Is that your Sexes humour?
It is then since Niobe was changed that they have left that tumor.
Move, move again, in forms as heretofore.
It is form allures.
Then move, the Ladies here are store.
Nature is motions mother, as she is yours.
The spring, whence order flows, that all directs,
And knits the causes with th'effects.
WHat'ha you done
So soon?
And can you from such Beauty part?
You'll doe a wonder more then I.
I woman with her ills did fly,
But you their good, and them deny.
Sure each hath left his heart
In pawn to come again, or else he durst not start.
THey are loath to go
I know,
Or sure they are no sons of mine.
There is no banquet, boys like this,
If you hope better, you will miss,
Stay here, and take each one a kiss.
Which if you can refine,
The taste knows no such cates, nor yet the palate wine.
No cause of tarrying shun,
They are not worth his light, go backward from the Sun.
Look, look! rejoice, and wonder!
That you offending mortals are,
(For all your crimes) so much the care
Of him, that bears the thunder!
JOVE can endure no longer,
Your great ones should your less invade,
Or, that your weak, though bad, be made
A prey unto the stronger.
And therefore, means to settle
ASTRAY in her seat again;
And let down in his golden chain
The age of better mettle.
Which deed he doth the rather,
That even envy may behold
Time not enjoyed his head of gold
Alone beneath his father.
But that his care conserveth
As time, so all times honours too,
Regarding still what heaven should doo,
And not what earth deserves.
But hark, what tumult from yond' cave is heard!
What noise, what strife, what earth-quake and alarms!
As troubled Nature, for her maker, feared;
And all the iron-age were up in arms!
Hide me, soft cloud, from their profaner eyes,
Till insolent rebellion take the field,
And as their spirits, with their counsels, rise,
I frustrate all, with showing but my shield.
COme forth, come forth, doe we not hear
What purpose, and, how worth our fear,
The King of gods hath on vs?
Hee is not of the iron breed
That would, though Fate did help the deed
Let shame in so upon vs.
Rise, rise then up, thou Grandam vice
Of all my issue, Avarice,
Bring with thee fraud and slander,
Corruption with the golden hands
Or any subtle•ill, that stands
To be a more commander.
Thy boys, Ambition, Pride, and Scorn,
Force, Rapine, and thy babe last borne,
Smooth Treachery call hither,
Arm Folly forth, and Ignorance,
And teach them all our Pyrrhick dance,
We may triumph together,
Upon this enemy so great,
Whom, if our forces can defeat,
And but this once bring under,
Wee are the masters of the skies,
Where all the wealth, height, power, lies,
The sceptre, and the thunder.
Which of you would not in a war
Attempt the price of any scarre,
To keep your own states even?
But, here, which of you is that hee,
Would not himself the weapon bee,
To ruin JOVE and heaven?
About it then, and let him feel,
The iron-age is turned to steel,
Since he begins to threat her:
And though the bodies here are less
Then were the Giants; he will confess
Our malice is far greater.
SO change, and perish, scarcely knowing, how,
That'gainst the gods doe take so vain a vow:
And think to equal with your mortal dates,
Their lives that are obnoxious to no fates,
It was time t'appeare, and let their follies see
Against whom they fought, and with what destinee
Die all, the can-remaine of you, but stone,
And that be seen a while, and then be none.
Now, now, descend you both beloved of JOVE,
And of the good on earth no less the love,
Descend you long long wished, and wanted pair,
And as your softer times divide the air,
So shake all clouds off, with your golden hair,
For spite is spent: the iron age is fled,
And, with her power on earth, her name is dead.
1.2. And are we then,
To live again,
With men?
1. Will JOVE such pledges to the earth restore
As justice? 2. or the purer ore?
2. But doe they know,
How much they owe,
Below?
1. And will of grace receive it, not as due?
If not, they harm themselves, not you.
Let narrow Natures (how they will) mistake,
The great should still be good for their own sake.
Welcome to earth and reign.
But how without a train
Shall we our state sustain?
Leave that to JOVE: therein you are
No little part of his MINERVA'S care.
Expect a while.
You farre-fam'd spirits of this happy Isle,
That, for your sacred songs have gained the stile
Of PHOEBVS sons: whose notes they air aspire
Of th'old Egyptian, or the Thracian lyre,
That Chaser, Gower, Lidgate, Spencer hight
Put on your better flames, and larger light,
To waite upon the age that shall your names new nourish,
Since virtue pressed shall grow, and buried arts shall flourish.
2. We come. 2. We come.
4. Our best of fire
Is that which PALLAS doth inspire.
Then see you yonder souls, set far within the shade,
And in Elision bowers the blessed seats doe keep,
That for their living good, now semigods are made,
And went away from earth, as if but tamed with sleep:
These we must join to wake; for these are of the strain
That justice dare defend, and will the age sustain.
Awake, awake, for whom these times were kept,
O wake, wake, wake, as you had never slept,
Make haste and put on arie, to be their guard,
Whom once but to defend, is still reward.
Thus PALLAS throws a lightning from her shield.
To which let all that doubtful darkness yield.
1. Now peace. 2. and love, 1. faith. 2. Joys, 1.2. all all increase.
2. And strife 2. and hate, 2. and fear, 2. and pain, 4. all cease.
No tumour of an iron vain.
The causes shall not come again.
But, as of old, all now be gold.
Move, move then to these sounds.
And, doe, not only, walk your solemn rounds,
But give those light and airy bounds,
That fit the Genij of these gladder grounds.
Already? Doe not all things smile?
But when they have enjoyed a while,
The ages quickening power:
That every thought a seed doth bring,
And every look a plant doth spring,
And every breath a flower:
Then earth vnplough'd shall yield her crop,
Pure honey from the oak shall drop,
The fountain shall run milk:
The thistle shall the lily bear,
And every bramble roses wear,
And every worm make silk.
The very shrub shall Balsam sweat,
And Nectar melt the rock with heat,
Till earth have drunk her fill:
That she no harmful weed may know,
Nor barren Fern, nor Mandrake low,
Nor Mineral to kill.
But here's not all: you must doe more,
Or else you doe but half restore
The ages liberty.
The male and female used to join,
And into all delight did coin
That pure simplicity.
Then feature did to form advance,
And youth called beauty forth to dance,
And every grace was by.
It was a time of no distrust,
So much of love had nought of lust,
None feared a jealous eye.
The language melted in the ear,
Yet all without a blush might hear,
They lived with open vow.
Each touch and kiss was so well placed,
They were as sweet as they were chaste,
And such must yours be now.
What change is here! I had not more
Desire to leave the earth before,
Then I have now, to stay;
My silver feet, like roots, are wreathed
Into the ground, my wings are sheathed,
And I cannot away.
Of all there seems a second birth,
It is become a heaven on earth,
And Jove is present here,
I feel the Godhood: nor will doubt
But he can fill the place throughout,
Whose power is every where.
This, this, and only such as this,
The bright Astraea's region is,
Where she would pray to live,
And in the midst of so much gold,
Vnbought with grace or fear vnsold▪
The law to mortals give.
It is now enough, behold you here,
What JOVE hath built to be your sphere,
You hither must retire.
And as his bounty gives you cause,
Be ready still without your pause
To show the world your fire.
Like lights about ASTRAEA'S throne,
You here must shine, and all be one,
In fervor and in flame.
That by your union she may grow,
And, you sustaining her, may know,
The age still by her name.
Who vows, against, or heat or cold,
To spin you garments of her gold,
That want may touch you never,
And making garlands every hour,
To write your names in some new flower,
That you may live for ever.
To Jove, to Jove, be all the honour given,
That thankful hearts can raise from earth to heaven.

THe DEVIL is an ASS. That is, to day,
The name of what you are met for, a new Play▪
Yet Grandee's, would you were not come to grace
Our matter, with allowing vs no place.
Though you presume SATAN a subtle thing,
And may have heard hoe's worn in a thumbe-ring;
Doe not on these presumptions, force vs act,
Encompass of a cheese-trencher. This tract
Will ne'er admit our vice, because of yours.
Anon, who, worse then you, the fault endures
That your selves make? when you will thrust and spurn,
And knock vs of the elbows, and hid, turn;
As if, when wee had spoke, wee must be gone,
Or, till wee speak, must all run in, to one,
Like the young adders, at the old ones mouth?
Would wee could stand due North; or had no South,
If that offend: or were Muscouy glass,
That you might look our Scenes through as they pass.
We know not how to affect you. If you'll come
To see new Plays, pray you afford vs room,
And show this, but the same face you ha•e done
Your dear delight, the Devil of Edmunton.
Or, if, for want of room it must mis-carry,
Twill be but Justice, that your censure tarry,
Till you give some. And when six times you have seen't,
If this Play doe not like, the Devil is in it.
Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, &amp;c.
To earth? and why to earth, thou foolish Spirit?
What wold'st thou do on earth?
For that, great Chief!
As time shall work, I do but ask my mon'th.
Which every petty pui'nee Devil has;
Within that term, the Cot of Hell will hear
Something, may gain a longer grant, perhaps.
For what? the laming a poor Cow, or two?
Entering a Sow, to make her cast her farrow?
Or crossing of a Market•women's Mare,
Twixt this and Totnam? these were wont to be
Your maine achievements, Pug, you have some plot, now,
Upon a ronning of Ale, to stale the yest,
Or keep the churn so, that the butter come not;
Spite of the housewives cord, or her hot spit?
Or some good Ribibe, about Kentish Town,
Or Hogsden, you would hang now, for a witch,
Because she will not let you play round Robin:
And you'll go sour the Cittiens Cream against Sunday?
That she may be accused for it, and condemned,
By a Middlesex Jury, to the satisfaction
Of their offended friends, the Londoners wives
Whose teeth were set on edge with it? Foolish fiend,
Stay i'your place, know your own strengths, and put not
Beyond the sphere of your activity.
You are too dull a Devil to be trusted
Forth in those parts, Pug, upon any affair
That may concern our name, on earth. It is not
Every ones work. The state of Hell must care
Whom it employs, in point of reputation,
Here about London. You would make, • think
An Agent, to be sent, for Lancashire,
Proper enough; or some parts of Northumberland,
So yo' had good instructions, Pug.
O Chief!
You doe not know, dear Chief, what there is in me.
Prove me but for a fortnight, for a week,
And lend me but a Vice, to carry with me,
To practice there-with any play-fellow,
And, you will see, there will come more upon it,
Then you'll imagine, precious Chief.
What Vice?
What kind would th'haue it of?
Why, any Fraud;
Or Covetousness; or Lady Vanity;
Or old Iniquity: I'll call him hither.
What is he, calls upon me, and would seem to lack a Vice▪
Ere his words be half spoken, I am with him in a trice;
Here, there, and every where, as the Cat is with the mice:
True vetus Iniquitas. Lack thou Cards, friend, or Dice?
I will teach thee cheat, Child, to cog, lye, and swagger,
And ever and anon, to be drawing forth thy dagger:
To swear by Gogs-nownes, like a lusty Inuentus,
In a cloak to thy heel, and a hat like a pent-house.
Thy breeches of three fingers, and thy doublet all belly,
With a Wench that shall feed thee, with cock-stones and gelly.
Is it not excellent, Chief? how nimble he is!
Child of hell, this is nothing! I will fetch thee a leap
From the top of Pauls-steeple, to the Standard in Cheepe:
And lead thee a dance, through the streets without fail,
Like a needle of Spain, with a thread at my tail.
We will survey the Suburbs, and make forth our sallies,
Down Petticoate-lane, and up the Smock-allies,
To Shoreditch, Whitechappell, and so to Saint Kathernes.
To drink with the Dutch there, and take forth their patterns:
From thence, wee will put in at Custom-house key there,
And see, how the Factors, and Prentices play there,
False with their Masters; and gueld many a full pack,
To spend it in pies, at the Dagger, and the Wool•sack.
Brave, brave, Iniquity! will not this doe, Chief?
Nay▪ boy, I will bring thee to the Bawds, and the Roisters,
At Belins gate, feasting with claret-wine, and oysters,
From thence shoot the Bridge, child, to the Cranes in the Vintry,
And see, there the gimblets, how they make their entry!
Or, if thou had rather, to the Strand down to •all,
Against the Lawyers come dabled from Westminster-hall
And mark how they cling, with their clients together,
Like Ivy to Oak; so Velvet to Leather:
Ha, boy, I would show thee.
Rare, rare!
Peace, dotard,
And thou more ignorant thing, that so admir'st.
Art thou the spirit thou seem? so poor? to choose
This, for a Vice, t'aduance the cause of Hell,
Now? as Vice stands this present year? Remember,
What number it is. Six hundred and sixteen.
Had it but been five hundred, though some sixty
Aboue; that's fifty years agony, and six,
(When every great man had his Vice stand by him,
In his long coat, shaking his wooden dagger)
I could consent, that, then this your grave choice
Might have done that, with his Lord Chief, the which
Most of his chamber can doe now. But Pug,
As the times are, who is it, will receive you?
What company will you go to? or whom mix with?
Where can thou carry him? except to Taverns?
To mount up on a joynt-stoole, with a Iewes-trumpe,
To put down Cokeley, and that must be to Citizens?
He ne'er will be admitted, there, where Vennor comes.
Hee may perchance, in tail of a Sheriffs dinner,
Skip with a rime of the Table, from New-nothing,
And take his Almaine-leape into a custard,
Shall make my Lad Maioresse, and her sisters,
Laugh all their hoods over their shoulders. But,
This is not that will doe, they are other things
That are received now upon earth, for Vices;
Stranger, and newer: and changed every hour.
They ride 'hem like their horses off their legs,
And here they come to Hell, whole legions of'hem,
Every week tired. Wee, still strive to breed,
And rear 'hem up new ones; but they doe not stand,
When they come there: they turn 'hem on our hands.
And it is feared they have a stud o'their own
Will put down ours. Both our breed, and trade
Will suddenly decay, if we prevent not.
Unless it be a Vice of quality,
Or fashion, now, they take none from vs. Car-men
Are got into the yellow starch, and Chimney-sweepers
To their tobacco, and strong-waters, Hum,
Mead, and Obarni. We must therefore aim
At extraordinary subtle ones, now,
When we doe send to keep vs up in credit.
Not old Iniquities. Get you even back, Sir,
To making of your rope of sand again.
You are not for the manners, nor the times:
They have their Vices, there, most like to Virtues;
You cannot know 'hem, apart, by any difference:
They wear the same clothes, eat the same meat▪
Sleep in the selfsame beds, ride i'those coaches.
Or very like, four horses in a coach,
As the best men and women. Tissue gowns,
Garters and roses, fourscore pound a pair,
Embroidered stockings, cut-worke smocks, and shirts,
More certain marks of lechery, now, and pride,
Then ere they were of true nobility!
But Pug, since you doe burn with such desire
To doe the Common-wealth of Hell some service▪
I am content, assuming of a body,
You go to earth, and visit men, a day.
But you must take a body ready made, Pug,
I can create you none: nor shall you form
Your self an aerie one, but become subject
To all impression of the flesh, you take,
So far as humane frailty. So, this morning,
There is a handsome Cutpurse hanged at Tiborne,
Whose spirit departed, you may enter his body:
For clothes employ your credit, with the Hangman,
Or let our tribe of Brokers furnish you.
And, look, how far your subtlety can work
Thorough those organs, with that body, spy
Amongst mankind, (you cannot there want vices,
And therefore the less need to carry 'hem wi'you)
But as you make your soon at nights relation,
And we shall find, it merits from the State,
You shall have both trust from vs, and employment.
Most gracious Chief!
Only, thus more I bind you,
To serve the first man that you meet; and him
I'll show you, now: Observe him. You' is hee,
You shall see, first, after your clothing. Follow him:
But once engaged, there you must stay and fix;
Not shift, until the midnights cock doe crow.
Any conditions to be gone.
Away, then.
I, they doe, now, name Bretnor, as before,
They talked of Gresham, and of Doctor Fore-man,
Franklin, and Fiske, and Savoury (he was in too)
But there's not one of these, that ever could
Yet show a man the Devil, in true sort.
They have their christalls, I doe know, and rings,
And virgin parchment, and their deadmen's •culls
Their ravens wings, their lights, and pentacles,
With characters; I have seen all these. But—
Would I might see the Devil. I would give
A hundred o'these pictures, to see him
Once out of picture. May I prove a cuckold,
(And that's the one maine mortal thing I fear)
If I begin not, now, to think, the Painters
Have only made him. Slight, he would be seen,
One time or other else. He would not let
An ancient gentleman, of a good house,
As most are now in England, the Fitz-dottrel's,
Run wilde, and call upon him thus in vain,
As I have done this twelve mone'th. If he be not,
At all, why, are there Conjurers? If they be not,
Why, are there laws against 'hem? The best artists
Of Cambridge, Oxford, Middlesex, and London,
Essex, and Kent, I have had in pay to raise him,
These fifty weeks, and yet h'appeares not. 'Sdeath,
I shall suspect, they, can make circles only
Shortly, and know but his hard names. They doe say,
H'will meet a man (of himself) that has a mind to him.
If hee would so, I have a mind and a half for him:
He should not be long absent. Pray thee, come
I long for thee. And I were with child by him,
And my wife, too; I could not more. Come, yet,
Good Beelezebub. Were hee a kind devil,
And had humanity in him, hee would come, but
To save ones longing. I should use him well,
I swear, and with respect (would he would try me)
Not, as the Conjurers doe, when they have raised him.
Get him in bonds, and send him post, on errands.
A thousand miles, it is preposterous, that:
And I believe, is the true cause he comes not.
And hee has reason. Who would be engaged,
That might live freely, as he may doe? I swear,
They are wrong all. The burned child dreads the fire.
They doe not know to entertain the Devil.
I would so welcome him, observe his diet,
Get him his chamber hung with arras, two of •hem,
In my own house; lend him my wives wrought pillows:
And as I am an honest man, I think,
If he had a mind to her, too; I should grant him,
To make our friend-ship perfect. So I would not
To every man. If hee but hear me, now?
And should come to me in a brave young shape,
And take me at my word? ha! Who is this?
SIR, your good pardon, that I thus presume
Upon your privacy. I am borne a Gentleman,
A younger brother; but, in some disgrace,
Now, with my friends: and want some little means,
To keep me upright, while things be reconciled.
Please you, to let my service be of use to you, Sir.
Service? before hell, my heart was at my mouth▪
Till I had viewed his shoes well: for, those roses
Were big enough to hide a cloven foot.
No, friend, my number's full. I have one servant,
Who is my all, indeed; and, from the broom
Unto the brush: for, just so far, I trust him.
He is my Ward-robe man, my Cater, Cooke,
Butler, and Steward; looks unto my horse:
And helps to watch my wife. H'has all the places,
That I can think on, from the garret downward,
Even to the manger, and the curry-combe.
Sir, I shall put your worship to no charge,
More then my meat, and that but very little,
I'll serve you for your love.
Ha? without wages?
I'll harken o'that ear, were I at leisure.
But now, I'm busy. Pray the, friend forbear me,
And thou had been a Devil, I should say
Somewhat more to thee. Thou dost hinder, now,
My meditations.
Sir, I am a Devil.
How!
A true Devil, Sr.
Nay, now, you lie:
Under your favour, friend, for, I'll not quarrel.
I looked o'your feet, before, you cannot cousin me,
Your shoo's not cloven, Sir, you are whole hoofed.
Sir, that's a popular error, deceives many:
But I am that, I tell you.
What's your name?
My name is Devil, Sr.
Sai'st thou true.
In∣deed, Sr.
'Slid! there's some omen i'this! what countryman?
Of Derby-shire, Sr. about the Peak.
That Hole
Belonged to your Ancestors?
Yes, Devils arse, Sr.
I'll entertain him for the name sake. Ha?
And turn away my tother man? and save
Four pound a year by that? there's luck, and thrift too!
The very Devil may come, hereafter, as well.
Friend, I receive you: but (withal) I acquaint you,
Aforehand, if yo' offend me, I must beat you.
It is a kind of exercise, I use.
And cannot be without.
Yes, if I doe not
Offend, you can, sure.
Faith, Devil, very hardly:
I'll call you by your surname, because I love it.
YOnder hee walks, Sir, I'll go lift him for you.
To him, good Engine, raise him up by degrees,
Gently, and hold him there too, you can doe it.
Show your self now, a Mathematical broker.
I'll warrant you for half a piece.
It is done, Sr.
Is it possible there should be such a man?
You shall be your own witness, I'll not labour
To tempt you past your faith.
And is his wife
So very handsome, say you?
I have not seen her,
Since I came home from travel: and they say,
She is not altered. Then, before I went,
I saw her once; but so, as she hath stuck
Still i'my view, no object hath removed her.
It is a fair guest, Friend, beauty: and once lodged
Deep in the eyes, she hardly leaves the Inn.
How do's he keep her?
Very brave. However,
Himself be sordide, hee is sensual that way.
In every dressing, hee do's study her.
And furnish forth himself so from the Brokers?
Yes, that's a hired suite, hee now has one,
To see the Devil is an Ass, to day, in▪
(This Engine gets three or four pound a week by him)
He dares not miss a new Play, or a Feast,
What rate soever clothes be at; and thinks
Himself still new, in other men's old.
But stay,
Do's he love meat so?
Faith he do's not hate it.
But that's not it. His belly and his palate
Would be compounded with for reason. Mary,
A wit he has, of that strange credit with him,
Against all mankind; as it doth make him doe
Just what it list: it rauishes him forth,
Whither it please, to any assembly'or place,
And would conclude him ruined, should hee scope
One public meeting, out of the belief
He has of his own great, and Catholic strengths,
In arguing, and discourse. It takes, I see:
•'has got the cloak upon him.
A fair garment,
By my faith, Engine!
It was never made, Sir,
For three score pound, I assure you: Twill yield thirty.
The plush, Sir, cost three pound, ten shillings a yard!
And then the lace, and velvet.
I shall, Engine,
Be looked at, pretitly, in it! Art thou sure
The Play is played to day?
ô here's the bill, Sr.
In, had forgot to gi't you.
Ha? the Devil!
I will not lose you, Sirah! But, Engine, think you,
The Gallant is so furious in his folly?
So mad upon the matter, that he will part
Wed's cloak vpo'these terms?
Trust not your Engine,
Break me to pieces else, as you would doe
A rotten Crane, or an old rusty Jack,
That has not one true wheel in him. Doe but talk with him.
I shall doe that, to satisfy you, Engine,
And my self too. With your leave, Gentlemen.
Which of you is it, is so mere Idolater
To my wives beauty, and so very prodigal
Unto my patience, that, for the short parley?
Of one swift hours quarter, with my wife,
He will depart with (let me see) this cloak here
The price of folly? Sir, are you the man?
I am that vent'rer, Sir.
Good time! your name
Is Witty-pol?
The same, Sr.
And it is told me,
Yo' have travelled lately?
That I have, Sr.
Truly,
Your travels may have altered your complexion;
But sure, your wit stood still.
It may well be, Sir.
All heads haven't like growth.
The good mans gravity,
That left you land, your father, never taught you
These pleasant matches?
No, nor can his mirth,
With whom I make 'hem, put me off.
You are
Resolved then?
Yes, Sr.
Beauty is the Saint,
You'll sacrifice your self, into the shirt too?
So I may still cloth, and keep warm your wisdom?
You lade me Sr!
I know what you will bear, Sr.
Well, to the point. It is only, Sir, you say,
To speak unto my wife?
Only, to speak to her.
And in my presence?
In your very presence.
And in my hearing?
In your hearing: so,
You interrupt vs not.
For the short space
You doe demand, the fourth part of an hour,
I think I shall, with some convenient study,
And this good help to boot, bring my self to it.
I ask no more.
Please you, walk to'ard my house,
Speak what you list; that time is yours: My right
I have departed with. But, not beyond,
A minute, or a second, look for. Length,
And drawing out, ma'aduance much, to these matches.
And I except all kissing. Kisses are
Silent petitions still with willing Lovers.
Lovers? How falls that o'your phantsie?
Sir.
I doe know somewhat, I forbid all lip-worke.
I am not eager at forbidden dainties.
Who covets unfit things, denies him self.
You say well, Sir, It was prettily said, that same,
He do's, indeed. I'll have no touches, therefore,
Nor takings by the arms, nor tender circles
Cast about the wast, but all be done at distance.
Love is brought up with those soft migniard handlings;
His pulse lies in his palm: and I defend
All melting joints, and fingers, (that's my bargain)
I doe defend 'hem; any thing like action.
But talk, Sir, what you will. Use all the Tropes
And Schemes, that Prince Quintilian can afford you:
And much good do your Rhetoriques heart. You are welcome, Sir.
Engine, God b'w'you.
Sir, I must condition
To have this Gentleman by, a witness.
Well,
I am content, so he be silent.
Yes, Sir.
Come Devil, I'll make you room, straight. But I'll show you
First, to your Mistress, who's no common one,
You must conceive, that brings this gain to see her.
I hope thou'st brought me good luck.
I shall do it. Sir.
Engine, you hope o'your half piece? It is there, Sir.
Be gone. Friend Manly, who's within here? fixed?
I am directly in a fit of wonder
What'll be the issue of this conference!
For that, ne'er vex your self, till the event.
How like yo'him?
I would fine see more of him.
What think you of this?
I am past degrees of thinking.
Old Africa, and the new America,
With all their fruit of Monsters cannot show
So just a prodigy.
Could you have believed,
Without your sight, a mind so sordide inward,
Should be so specious, and laid forth abroad,
To all the show, that ever shop, or ware was?
I believe any thing now, though I confess
His Vices are the most extremities
I ever knew in nature. But, why loves hee
The Devil so?
O Sr! for hidden treasure,
Hee hopes to find: and has proposed himself
So infinite a Mass, as to recover,
He cares not what he parts with, of the present,
To his men of Art, who are the race, may coin him.
Promise gold-mountaines, and the covetous
Are still most prodigal.
But have you faith,
That he will hold his bargain?
O dear, Sir!
He will not off on it. Fear him not. I know him▪
One baseness still accompanies another.
See! he is here already, and his wife too.
A wondrous handsome creature, as I live!
COme wife, this is the Gentleman. Nay, blush not.
Why, what do you mean Sir? ha'you your reason?
Wife,
I do not know, that I have lent it forth
To any one; at least, without a pawn, wife:
Or that I'haue eat or drunk the thing, of late,
That should corrupt it. Wherefore gentle wife,
Obey, it is thy virtue: hold no acts
Of disputation.
Are you not enough
The talk, of feasts, and meetingy, but you'll still
Make argument for fresh?
Why, careful wedlock,
If I have have a longing to have one tale more
Go of me, what is that to thee, dear heart?
Why should thou envy my delight? or cross it?
By being solicitous, when it not concerns thee?
Yes, I have share in this The scorn will fall
As bitterly on me, where both are laughed at.
Laughed at, sweet bird? is that the scruple? Come, come,
Thou art a Niaise. Which of your great houses,
(I will not mean at home, here, but abroad)
Your families in France, wife, send not forth
Something, within the seven year, may be laughed at?
I doe not say seven months, nor seven weeks,
Nor seven days, nor hours: but seven year wife.
I give 'hem time. Once, within seven year,
I think they may doe something may be laughed at.
In France, I keep me there, still. Wherefore, wife,
Let them that list, laugh still, rather then weep
For me; Here is a cloak cost fifty pound, wife,
Which I can sell for thirty, when I have seen
All London in it, and London has seen me.
To day, I go to the Black fryers Play-house,
Sit ithe view, salute all my acquaintance,
Rise up between the Acts, let fall my cloak,
Publish a handsome man, and a rich suite
(As that's a special end, why we go thither,
All that pretend, to stand for it of the Stage)
The Ladies ask who's that? (For, they doe come
To see vs, Love, as wee doe to see them)
Now, I shall lose all this, for the false fear
Of being laughed at? Yes, wuss. Let 'hem laugh, wife,
Let me have such another cloak to morrow.
And let 'hem laugh again, wife, and again,
And then grow fat with laughing, and then fatter,
All my young Gallants, let 'hem bring their friends too:
Shall I forbid 'hem? No, let heaven forbid 'hem:
Or wit, if it have any charge on 'hem. Come, thy eat, wife,
Is all, I'll borrow of thee. Set your watch, Sir,
Thou, only art to hear, not speak a word, Dove,
To ought he says. That I doe gi'you in precept,
No less then council, on your wiue-hood, wife,
Not though he flatter you, or make court, or Love,
(As you must look for these) or say, he rail;
What ere his arts be, wife, I will have thee
Delude 'hem with a trick, thy obstinate silence;
I know advantages; and I love to hit
These pragmatic young men, at their own weapons.
Is your watch ready? Here my sail bears, for you▪
Tack toward him, sweet Pinnace, whore's your watch?
I'll set it, Sir, with yours.
I must obey.
Her modesty seems to suffer with her beauty,
And so, as if his folly were away,
It were worth pity.
Now, th'a•e right, begin, Sir.
But first, let me repeat the contract, briefly.
I am, Sir, to enjoy this cloak, I stand in,
Freely, and as your gift; upon condition
You may as freely, speak here to my spouse,
Your quarter of an hour always keeping
The measured distance of your yard, or more,
From my said Spouse: and in my sight and hearing.
This is your covenant?
Yes, but you'll allow
For this time spent, now?
Set 'hem so much back.
I think, I shall not need it.
Well, begin, Sir,
There is your bound, Sir. Not beyond that rush.
If you interrupt me, Sir, I shall discloake you.
The time I have purchased, Lady, is but short;
And, therefore, if I employ it thriftily,
I hope I stand the nearer to my pardon.
I am not here, to tell you, you are fair,
Or lovely, or how well you dress you, Lady,
I'll save my self that eloquence of your glass,
Which can speak these things better to you then I.
And it is a knowledge, wherein fools may be
As wise as a Court Parliament. Nor come I,
With any prejudice, or doubt, that you
Should, to the notice of your own worth, need
Least revelation. Shoe's a simple woman,
Know's not her good: (who ever knows her ill)
And at all carat. That you are the wife,
To so much blasted flesh, as scarce hath soul,
In stead of salt, to keep it sweet; I think,
Will ask no witnesses, to prove. The cold
Sheets that you lie in, with the watching candle,
That sees, how dull to any thaw of beauty,
Pieces, and quarters, half, and whole nights, sometimes,
The Diuell-giuen Elfin Squire, your husband,
Doth leave you, quitting here his proper circle,
For a much-worse in the walks of Lincolnes Inn,
Under the Elms, t'expect the fiend in vain, there
Will confess for you.
I did look for this gear.
And what a daughter of darkness, he do's make you,
Locked up from all society, or object;
Your eye not let to look upon a face,
Under a Conjurers (or some mould for one,
Hollow, and lean like his) but, by great means,
As I now make; your own too sensible sufferings,
Without the extraordinary aids,
Of spells, or spirits, may assure you, Lady.
For my part, I protest against all such practice,
I work by no false arts, medicines, or charms
To be said forward and backward.
No, I except:
Sir I shall ease you.
Mum.
Nor have I ends, Lady,
Upon you, more then this: to tell you how Love
Beauties good Angel, he that waits upon her
At all occasions, and no less then Fortune,
Helps th'aduenturous, in me makes that proffer,
Which never fair one was so fond, to lose;
Who could but reach a hand forth to her freedom.
On the first sight, I loved you: since which time,
Though I have travelled, I have been in travel
More for this second blessing of your eyes
Which now In have purchased, then for all aims else.
Think of it, Lady, be your mind as active,
As is your beauty: view your object well.
Examine both my fashion, and my years
Things, that are like, are soon familiar:
And Nature joys, still in equality.
Let not the sign of the husband fright you, Lady.
But ere your spring be gone, enjoy it. Flowers,
Though fair, are oft but of one morning. Think,
All beauty doth not last until the autumn.
You grow old, while I tell you this. And such,
As cannot use the present, are not wise.
If Love and Fortune will take care of vs,
Why •should our will be wanting? This is all.
When doe you answer, Lady?
Now, the sport comes.
Let him still waite, waite, waite: while the watch goes,
And the time runs. Wife!
How! not any word?
Nay, then, I taste a trick in it. Worthy Lady,
I cannot be so false to mine own thoughts
Of your presumed goodness, to conceive
This, as your rudeness, which I see's imposed.
Yet, since your cautelous Jailer, here stands by you,
And yo'are denied the liberty of the house,
Let me take warrant, Lady, from your silence,
(Which ever is interpreted consent)
To make your answer for you: which shall be
To as good purpose, as I can imagine,
And what I think you'd speak.
No, no, no, no.
I shall resume, Sr.
Sir, what doe you mean?
One interruption more, Sir, and you go
Into your hose and doublet, nothing saves you.
And therefore harken. This is for your wife.
You mus• play fair, Sr.
Stand for me, good friend.
Troth, Sir, tic more then true, that you have uttered
Of my unequal, and so sordide match here,
With all the circumstances of my bondage.
I have a husband, and a two-legged one,
But such a moon-ling, as no wit of man
Or roses can redeem from being an Ass.
H'is grown too much, the story of men's mouths,
To scope his lading: should I maked my study,
And lay all ways, yea, call mankind to help,
To take his burden off, why, this one act
Of his, to let his wife out to be courted,
And, at a price, proclaims his asinine nature
So loud, as I am weary of my title to him.
But Sir, you seem a Gentleman of virtue,
No less then blood; and one that every way
Looks as he were of too good quality,
To entrap a credulous woman, or betray her:
Since you have paid thus dear, Sir, for a visit,
And made such venture, on your wit, and charge
Merely to see me, or at most to speak to me,
I were too stupid; or (what's worse) ingrate
Not to return your venture. Think, but how,
I may with safety doe it; I shall trust
My love and honour to you, and presume▪
You'll ever husband both, against this husband;
Who, if we chance to change his liberal ears,
To other ensigns, and with labour make
A new beast of him, as hee shall deserve,
Cannot complain, hee is unkindly dealth with.
This day hee is to go to a new play, Sir.
From whence no fear, no, nor authority,
Scarcely the Kings command, Sir, will restrain him,
Now you have fitted him with a Stage-garment,
For the mere names sake, were there nothing else:
And many more such journeys, hee will make.
Whieh, if they now, or, any time hereafter,
Offer vs opportunity, you hear, Sir,
Who'll be as glad, and forward to embrace,
Meet, and enjoy it cheerfully as you.
I humbly thank you, Lady.
Keep your ground Sir.
Will you be lightened?
Mum.
And but I am,
By the sad contract, thus to take my leave of you
At this so envious distance, I had taught
Our lips ere this, to seal the happy mixture
Made of our souls. But we must both, now, yield
To the necessity. Doe not think yet, Lady,
But I can kiss, and touch, and laugh, and whisper,
And doe those crowning court-ships too, for which
Day, and the public have allowed no name
But, now, my bargain binds me. It were rude injury,
T'importune more, or urge a noble nature,
To what of it's own bounty it is prone to:
Else, I should speak—But, Lady, I love so well,
As I will hope, you'll doe so to. I have done, Sir.
Well, then, I ha'won?
Sir, And I may win, too.
O yes! no doubt on it. I'll take careful order,
That she shall hang forth ensigns at the window,
To tell you when I am absent. Or I'll keep
Three or four foote-men, ready still of purpose,
To run and fetch you, at her longings, Sir.
I'll go bespeak me straight a guilt caroch,
For her and you to take the ayre in. Yes,
Into Hide-parke, and thence into Black-Fryers,
Visit the painters, where you may see pictures,
And note the properest limbs, and how to make 'hem.
Or what doe you say unto a middling Gossip?
To bring you aye together, at her lodging?
Under pretext of teaching of my wife
Some rare receipt of drawing almond milk? ha?
It shall be a part of my care. Good Sir, God b'w'you.
I have kept the contract, and the cloak is mine.
Why, much good do it you Sr; it may fall out,
That you have bought it dear, though I have not sold it.
A pretty riddle! Fare you well, good Sir.
W••e, your face this way, look on me: and think
Yo'haue had a wicked dream, wife, and forget it.
This is the strangest motion I ere saw.
Now, wife, sits this fair cloak the worse upon me,
For my great sufferings, or your little patience? ha?
They laugh, you think?
Why Sr. and you might see it.
What thought, they have of you, may be soon collected
By the young Genlemans speech.
Young Gentleman?
Death! you are in love with him, are you? could he not
Be named the Gentleman, without the young?
Up to your Cabin again.
My cage, yo' were best
To call it?
Yes, sing there. You'd fine be making
Blank Manger with him at your mothers! I know you.
Go get you up. How now! what say you, Devil?
Here is one Engine, Sir, desires to speak with you.
I thought he brought some news, of a broker! Well,
Let him come in, good Devil: fetch him else.
O, my fine Engine! what's th'affaire? more cheats?
No Sir, the Wit, the Brain, the great Proiector,
I told you of, is newly come to town.
Where, Engine?
I ha'brought him (H'is without)
Ere hee pulled off his boots, Sir, but so followed,
For businesses:
But what is a Proiector?
I would conceive.
Why, one Sir, that proiects
Ways to enrich men, or to make 'hem great,
By suites, by marriages, by undertakings:
According as hee sees they humour it.
Can hee not conjure at all?
I think he can, Sir.
(To tell you true) but, you doe know, of late,
The State hath tan such note of 'hem, and compelled 'hem,
To enter such great bonds, they dare not practice.
It is true, and I lie fallow for it, the while!
O, Sir! you'll grow the richer for the rest.
I hope I shall: but Engine, you doe talk
Somewhat too much, o'my courses. My Cloake-customer
Could tell me strange particulars.
By my means?
How should he haue'hem else?
You do not know, Sr,
What he has: and by what arts! A monei'd man, Sir,
And is as great with your Almanack-Men, as you are!
That Gallant?
You make the other wait too long, here:
And hee is extreme punctual.
Is he a gallant?
Sir, you shall see: He'is in his riding suit,
As hee comes now from Court. But here him speak:
Minister matter to him, and then tell me.
SIr, money's a whore, a bawd, a drudge;
Fit to run out on errands: Let her go.
Via pecunia! when she's run and gone,
And fled and dead; then will I fetch her, again,
With Aqua-vitae, out of an old Hogs-head!
While there are lees of wine, or dregs of beer,
I'll never want her! Coin her out of cobwebs,
Dust, but I'll have her! Raise wool upon egge-shells,
Sir, and make grass grow out of marro-bones.
To make her come. (Commend me to your Mistress,
Say, let the thousand pound but be had ready,
And it is done) I would but see the creature
(Of flesh, and blood) the man, the prince, indeed,
That could employ so many millions
As I would help him to.
How, talks he? millions?
(I'll give you an account of this to morrow.)
Yes, I will talk no less, and doe it too;
If they were Myriads: and without the Devil,
By direct means, it shall be good in law.
Sir.
Tell Mr. Wood cock, I'll not fail to meet him
Upon the Exchange at night. Pray him to have
The writings there, and we'll dispatch it. Sir,
You are a Gentleman of a good presence,
A handsome man (I have considered you)
As a fit stock to graft honours upon:
I have a project to make you a Duke, now.
That you must be one, within so many months,
As I set down, out of true reason of state,
You sha' not avoid it. But you must harken, then.
Harken? why Sr, do you doubt his ears? Alas!
You doe not know Master Fitz-dottrel.
He do's not know me indeed. I thank you, Engine,
Foe• rectifying him.
Good! Why, Engine, then
I'll tell it you. (I see you have credit, here,
And, that you can keep counsel, I'll not question.)
Hee shall but be an vndertaker with me,
In a most feasible business. It shall cost him
Nothing.
Good, Sr.
Except he please, butt's count'∣nonce;
(That I will have) t'appeare in it, to great men,
For which I'll make him one. Hee shall not draw
A string of's purse. I'll drive his patent for him.
We'll take in Citizens, Commoners, and Aldermen,
To bear the charge, and blow 'hem off again,
Like so many dead flies, when it is carried.
The thing is for recovery of drowned land,
Whereof the Crowne's to have his moiety,
If it be owner; Else, the Crown and Owners
To share that moiety: and the recouerers
T'enioy the tother moiety, for their charge.
Thorowout England?
Yes, which will arise
To eighteen millions, seven the first year:
I have computed all, and made my survey
Unto an acre. I'll begin at the Pan,
Not, at the skirts: as some have done, and lost,
All that they wrought, their timber-worke, their trench,
Their banks all borne away, or else filled up
By the next winter. Tut, they never went
The way: I'll have it all.
A gallant tract
Of land it is!
Twill yield a pound an acre.
Wee must let cheap, ever, at first. But Sir,
This looks too large for you, I see. Come hither,
We'll have a less. Here's a plain fellow, you see him,
Has his black bag of papers, there, in Buckram,
Wi'not be sold for th'Earledome of Pancridge: Draw,
Gi'me out one, by chance. Project. 4. Dog-skinnes?
Twelve thousand pound! the very worst, at first.
Pray you let's see it Sir.
It is a toy, a trifle!
Trifle! 12. thousand pound for dogs-skins?
Yes,
But, by my way of dressing, you must know, Sir,
And med'cining the leather, to a height
Of improu'd ware, like your Borachio
Of Spain, Sir. I can fetch nine thousand for it—
Of the Kings glover?
Yes, how heard you that?
Sir, I doe know you can.
Within this hour:
And reserve half my secret. Pluck another;
See if thou hast a happier hand: I thought so.
The very next worse to it! Bottle-ale.
Yet, this is two and twenty thousand! Pray thee
Pull out another, two or three.
Good, stay, friend,
By bottle-ale, two and twenty thousand pound?
Yes, Sir, it's cast to penny-hal'penny-farthing,
Of the back-side, there you may see it, read,
I will not bate a Harrington of the sum.
I'll win it i'my water, and my malt,
My furnaces, and hanging o'my coppers,
The tonning, and the subtlety of my yest;
And, then the earth of my bottles, which I dig,
Turn up, and steep, and work, and neale, my self,
To a degree of Porc'lane. You will wonder,
At my proportions, what I will put up
In seven years! for so long time, I ask
For my invention. I will save in cork,
In my mere stop'ling, above three thousand pound,
Within that term: by googing of 'hem out
Just to the size of my bottles, and not slicing.
There's infinite loss i'that. What hast thou there?
O'making wine of raisins: this is in hand, now,
Is not that strange, Sr, to make wine of raisins?
Yes, and as true a wine, as th'wines of France,
Or Spain, or Italy, Look of what grape
My raisin is, that wine I'll render perfect,
As of the muscatel grape, I'll render muscatel;
Of the Canary, his; the Claret, his;
So of all kinds: and bate you of the prices,
Of wine, throughout the kingdom, half in half.
But, how, Sr, if you raise the other commodity,
Raisin•s?
Why, then I'll make it out of black-berries:
And it shall doe the same. It is but more art,
And the charge less. Take out another.
No, good Sir.
Save you the trouble, I'll not look, nor hear
Of any, but your first, there; the Drown'd-land:
If it will doe, as you say.
Sir, there's not place,
To gi'you demonstration of these things.
They are a little to subtle. But, I could show you
Such a necessity in it, as you must be
But what you please: against the received heresy,
That England bears no Dukes. Keep you the land, Sr,
The greatness of th'estate shall throw't upon you.
If you like better turning it to money,
What may not you, Sr, purchase with that wealth?
Say, you should part with two o'your millions,
To be the thing you would, who would not do it?
As I protest, I will, out of my diuident,
Lay, for some pretty principality,
In Italy, from the Church▪ Now, you perhaps,
Fancy the smoke of England, rather? But—
Have you no private room, Sir, to draw to,
T'enlarge our selves more upon.
O yes, Devil!
These, Sir, are bus'nesses, ask to be carried
With caution, and in cloud.
I apprehend,
They doe so, Sr. Devil, which way is your Mistress?
Aboue, Sr. in her chamber.
O that's well.
Then, this way, good, Sir.
I shall follow you; Trains,
Gi'mee the bag, and go you presently,
Commend my service to my Lady Tail-bush.
Tell her I am come from Court this morning; say,
In have got our business moved, and well: Entreat her,
That she give you the four-score Angels, and see 'hem
Disposed of to my Council, Sir Poul Eytherside.
Sometime, to day, I'll waite upon her Ladyship,
With the relation.
Sir, of what dispatch,
He is! Do you mark?
Engine, when did you see
My cousin Euer-ill? keeps he still your quarter?
In the Bermudas?
Yes, Sir, he was writing
This morning, very hard.
Be not you known to him,
That I am come to Town: I have effected
A business for him, but I would have it take him,
Before he thinks for it.
Is it past?
Not yet.
It is well of the way.
O Sir! your worship takes
Infinite pains.
I love Friends, to be active:
A sluggish nature puts off man, and kind.
And such a blessing follows it·
I thank
My fate. Pray you let's be private, Sir?
In, here.
Where none may interrupt vs.
You hear, Devil,
Lock the streete-doores fast, and let no one in
(Except they be this Gentleman's followers)
To trouble me. Doe you mark? Yo'haue heard and seen
Something, to day; and, by it, you may gather
Your Mistress is a fruit, that's worth the stealing
And therefore worth the watching. Be you sure, now,
Yo' have all your eyes about you; and let in
No lace-woman; nor bawd, that brings French-masques,
And cut-works. See you? Nor old croons, with wafers,
To convey letters. Nor no youths, disguised
Like country-wiues, with cream, and marrow-puddings.
Much knavery may be vented in a pudding,
Much bawdy intelligence: They'are shrewd ciphers.
Nor turn the key to any neighbours need;
Be it but to kindle fire, or beg a little,
Put it out, rather: all out, to an ash,
That they may see no smoke. Or water, spill it:
Knock of the empty tubs, that by the sound,
They may be forbid entry. Say, wee are robbed,
If any come to borrow a spoon, or so.
I with not have good fortune, or gods blessing
Let in, while I am busy.
I'll take care, Sir:
They sha' not trouble you, if they would.
Well, doe so.
I have no singular service of this, now?
Nor no superlative Master? I shall wish
To be in hell again, at leisure? Bring,
A Vice from thence? That had bin such a subtlety,
As to bring broad-clothes hither: or transport
Fresh oranges into Spain. I find it, now;
My Chief was in the right. Can any fiend
Boast of a better Vice, then here by nature,
And art, they are owners of? Hell ne'er own me,
But I am taken! the fine tract of it
Pulls me along! To hear men such professors
Grown in our subtlest Sciences! My first Act, now,
Shall be, to make this Master of mine cuckold:
The primitiue work of darkness, I will practise!
I will deserve so well of my fair Mistress,
By my discoveries, first; my counsels after;
And keeping counsel, after that: as who,
So ever, is one, I'll be another, sure,
I'll have my share. Most delicate damned flesh!
She will be! O! that I could stay time, now,
Midnight will come too fast upon me, I fear,
To cut my pleasure—
Look at the back-doore,
One knocks, see who it is.
Dainty she-Diuell!
I cannot get this venture of the cloak,
Out of my fancy; nor the Gentleman's way,
He took, which though it were strange, yet it was handsome,
And had a grace withal, beyond the newness.
Sure he will think me that dull stupid cre•ture,
Hee said, and may conclude it; if I find not
Some thought to thank th'attemp. He did presume,
By all the carriage of it, on my brain,
For answer; and will swear it is very barren,
If it can yield him no return Who is it?
Mistress, it is, but first, let me assure
The excellence, of Mistresses, I am,
Although my Masters man, my Mistress slave,
The servant of her secrets, and sweet turns,
And know, what fitly will conduce to either.
What's this? I pray you come to your self and think
What your part is: to make an answer. Tell,
Who is it at the door?
The Gentleman, Mrs,
Who was at the cloake-charge to speak with you,
This morning, who expects only to take
Some small command'ments from you, what you please,
Worthy your form, hee says, and gentlest manners.
O! you'll anon prove his hired man, I fear,
What has he given you, for this message? Sir,
Bid him put off his hopes of straw, and leave
To spread his nets, in view, thus. Though they take
Master Fitz-dottrel, I am no such foul,
Nor fair one, tell him, will be had with stalking.
And wish him to for-beare his acting to me,
At the Gentleman's chamber-window in Lincolnes-Inne there,
That opens to my gallery: else, I swear
T'acquaint my husband with his folly, and leave him
To the just rage of his offended jealousy.
Or if your Masters sense be not so quick
To right me, tell him, I shall find a friend
That will repair me. Say, I will be quiet.
In mine own house? Pray you, in those words give it him.
This is some fool turned!
If he be the Master,
Now, of that state and wit, which I allow him;
Sure, hee will understand me: I durst not
Be more direct. For this officious fellow,
My husbands new groom, is a spy upon me,
I find already. Yet, if he but tell him
This in my words, hee cannot but conceive
Himself both apprehended, and requited.
I would not have him think hee met a statue:
Or spoke to one, not there, though I were silent.
How now? have you told him?
Yes.
And what says he?
Says he? That which my self would say to you, if I durst.
That you are proud, sweet Mistress? and with-all,
A little ignorant, to entertain
The good that's proffered; and (by your beauties leave)
Not all so wise, as some true politic wife
Would be: who having matched with such a Nupson
(I speak it with my Masters peace) whose face
Hath left t'accuse him, now, for it doth confess him,
What you can make him; will yet (out of scruple,
And a spiced conscience) defraud the poor Gentleman,
At least delay him in the thing he longs for,
And makes it hs whole study, how to compass,
Only a title. Could but he write Cuckold,
He had his ends. For, look you—
This can be
None but my husbands wit.
My precious Mrs.
It creaks his Engine: The groom never durst
Be, else, so saucy—
If it were not clearly,
His worshipful ambition; and the top of it;
The very forked top too: why should hee
Keep you, thus mur'd up in a back-roome, Mistress,
Allow you ne'er a casement to the street,
Fear of engendering by the eyes, with gallants,
Forbid you paper, pen and ink, like Rats-bane.
Search your half pint of muscatel, lest a letter
Be sunk in the pot: and hold your new-laid egg
Against the fire, lest any charm be writ there?
Will you make benefit of truth, dear Mistress,
If I doe tell it you: I do it not often?
I am set over you, employed, indeed,
To watch your steps, your looks, your very breathings,
And to report them to him. Now, if you
Will be a true, right, delicate sweet Mistress,
Why, wee will make a Cokes of this Wise Master,
We will, my Mistress, an absolute fine Cokes,
And mock, to ayre, all the deep diligences
Of such a solemn, and effectual Ass,
An Ass to so good purpose, as we'll use him.
I will contrive it so, that you shall go
To Plays, to Masques, to Meetings, and to Feasts.
For, why is all this Rigging, and fine Tackle, Mistress,
If you neat handsome vessels, of good sail,
Put not forth ever, and anon, with your nets
Abroad into the world. It is your fishing.
I here, you shall choose your friends, your servants, Lady,
Your squires of honour; I'll convey your letters,
Fetch answers, doe you all the offices,
That can belong to your blood, and beauty. And,
For the variety, at my times, although
I am not in due symmetry, the man
Of that proportion; or in rule
Of physic, of the just complexion;
Or of that truth of Picardill, in clothes,
To boast a sovereignty o'er Ladies: yet
I know, to do my turns, sweet Mistress. Come, kiss—
How now!
Dear delicate Mist. I am your slave,
Your little worm, that loves you: your fine Monkey;
Your Dog, your Jack, your Pug, that longs to be
Styled, o'your pleasures.
Hear you all this? Sir, Pray you,
Come from your standing, doe, a little, spare
Your self, Sir, from your watch, t'applaud your Squire,
That so well follows your instructions!
HOw now, sweet heart? what's the matter?
Good!
You are a stranger to the plot! you set not
Your saucy Devil, here, to tempt your wife,
With all the insolent uncivil language,
Or action, he could vent?
Did you so, Devil?
Not you? you were not planted i'your hole to hear him,
Vpo'the stayres? or here, behind the hangings?
I doe not know your qualities? he durst doe it,
And you not give directions?
You shall see, wise,
Whether he durst, or no: and what it was,
I did direct.
Sweet Mistress, are you mad?
You most mere Rogue! you open manifest Villain!
You Fiend apparent you! you declared Hel-hound!
Good Sr.
Good Knave, good Rascal, and good Trai∣tor.
Now, I doe find you parcel-Diuell, indeed.
Vpo' the point of trust? I'your first charge?
The very day of your probation?
To tempt your Mistress? You doe see, good wedlock,
How I directed him.
Why▪ where Sr, were you?
Nay, there is one blow more, for exercise:
I told you, I should doe it.
Would you had done, Sir.
O wife, the rarest man! yet there's another
To put you in mind of the last▪ such a brave man, wife!
Within, he has his proiects, and do's vent 'hem,
The gallantest! where you tentiginous? ha?
Would you be acting of the Incubus?
Did her silks rustling move you?
Gentle Sir.
Out of my sight. If thy name were not Devil,
Thou should not stay a minute with me. In,
Go, yet stay: yet go too. I am resolved,
What I will doe: and you shall know it afore-hand.
Soon as the Gentleman is gone, doe you hear?
I'll help your lisping. Wife, such a man, wife!
He has such plots! He will make me a Duke!
No less, by heaven! six Mares, to your coach, wife!
That's your proportion! And your coach-man bald!
Because he shall be bare, enough. Doe not you laugh,
We are looking for a place, and all, in the map
What to be of. Have faith, be not an Infidel.
You know, I am not easy to be gulled.
I swear, when I have my millions, else, I'll make
Another Duchess; if you have not faith.
You'll ha'too much, I fear, in these false spirits,
Spirits? O, no such thing! wife! wit, mere wit!
This man defies the Devil, and all his works!
He dos't by Engine, and devises, hee!
He has his winged ploughs, that go with sails,
Will plough you forty acres, at once! and mills,
Will spout you water, ten miles off! All Crowland
Is ours, wife; and the fens, from vs, in Norfolk,
To the utmost bound of Lincoln-shire! we have viewed it,
And measured it within all; by the scale!
The richest tract of land, Love, in the kingdom!
There will be made seventeen, or eighteen millions;
Or more, is it may be handled! wherefore, think,
Sweet heart, if th'hast a fancy to one place,
More then another, to be Duchess of;
Now, name it: I will have it, what ere it cost,
(If it will be had for money) either here,
Or'n France, or Italy.
You have strange fantasies!
WHere are you, Sir?
I see thou hast no talent
This way, wi•e. Up to thy gallery; doe, Chuck,
Leave vs to talk of it, who understand it.
I think we have found a place to fit you, now, Sir.
Gloc'ster.
O, no, I'll none!
Why, Sr?
Tic fatal.
That you say right in. Spenser, I think, the younger,
Had his last honour thence. But, he was but Earl.
I know not that, Sir. But Thomas of Woodstock•,
I'm sure, was Duke, and he was made away,
At Calice; as Duke Humphrey was at Bury:
And Richard the third, you know what end he came too.
By m'faith you are cunning in the Chronicle, Sir.
No, I confess I have it from the Play-bookes,
And think they'are more authentic.
That's sure, Sir.
What say you (to this then)
No, a noble house.
Pretends to that. I will doe no man wrong.
Then take one proposition more, and hear it
As past exception.
What's that?
To be
Duke of those lands, you shall recover: take
Your title, thence, Sir, Duke of the Drown'd-lands,
Or Drown'd-land.
Ha? that last has a good sound!
I like it well. The Duke of Drown'd-land?
Yes;
It goes like Groen-land, Sir, if you mark it.
I,
And drawing thus your honour from the work,
You make the reputation of that, greater;
And stay't the longer i'your name.
It is true.
Drown'd-lands will live in Drown'd-land!
Yes, when you
Have no foot left; as that must be, Sir, one day.
And, though it tarry in your heirs, some forty,
Fifty descents, the longer liver, at last, yet,
Must thrust 'hem out on it: if no quirk in law,
Or odd Vice o'their own not do'it first.
Wee see those changes, daily: the fair lands,
That were the Clients, are the Lawyers, now:
And those rich Manors, there, of good man Taylors,
Had once more wood upon 'hem, then the yard,
By which th'were measured out for the last purchase.
Nature hath these vicissitudes. She makes
No man a state of perpetuity, Sir.
Yo'are in the right. Let's in then, and conclude.
I my sight, again? I'll talk with you, anon.
SVre hee will geld me, if I stay: or worse,
Pluck out my tongue, one of the two. This Fool,
There is no trusting of him: and to quit him,
Were a contempt against my Chief, past pardon.
It was a shrewd disheartning this, at first!
Who would have thought a woman so well harnessed,
Or rather well-caparison'd, indeed,
That wears such petticoats, and lace to her smocks,
Broad seaming laces (as I see 'hem hang there)
And garters which are lost, if she can show 'hem,
Could have done this? Hell! why is she so brave?
It cannot be to please Duke Dottrel, sure,
Nor the dull pictures, in her gallery,
Nor her own dear reflection, in her glass;
Yet that may be: I have known many of 'hem,
Begin their pleasure, but none end it, there:
(That I consider, as I go a long with it)
They may, for want of better company,
Or that they think the better, spend an hour;
Two, three, or four, discoursing with their shadow:
But sure they have a farther speculation.
No woman dressed with so much care, and study,
Doth dress her self in vain. I'll vex this problem,
A little more, before I leave it, sure.
THis was a fortune, happy aboue thought,
That this should prove thy chamber; which I feared
Would be my greatest trouble! this must be
The very window, and that the room.
It is.
I now remember, I have often seen there
A woman, but I never marked her much.
Where was your soul, friend?
Faith, but now, and then,
Awake unto those objects.
You pretend so.
Let me not live, if I am not in love
More with her wit, for this direction, now,
Then with her form, though I have praised that prettily,
Since I saw her, and you, to day. Read those.
They'll go unto the ayre you love so well.
Try 'hem unto the note, may be the musique
Will call her sooner; light, shoe's here! Sing quickly.
Either he understood him not: or else,
The fellow was not faithful in delivery,
Of what I bad. And, I am justly paid,
That might have made my profit of his service,
But, by mistaking, have drawn on his envy,
And done the worse defeat upon my self.
How! Musique? then he may be there: and is sure.
O! Is it so? Is there the enter-view?
Have I drawn to you, at last, my cunning Lady?
The Devil is an Ass! fooled of•! and beaten!
Nay, made an instrument! and could not sent it!
Well, since yo' have shown the malice of a woman,
No less then her true wit, and learning, Mistress,
I'll try, if little Pug have the malignity
To recompense it, and so save his danger.
It is not the pain, but the discredit of it,
The Devil should not keep a body entire.
Away, fall back, she comes.
I'll leave you, Sir,
The Master of my chamber. I have business
Mrs!
You make me paint, Sr.
The'are fair colours,
Lady, and natural! I did receive
Some commands from you, lately, gentle Lady,
But so perplexed, and wrapped in the delivery,
As I may fear t'haue mis-interpreted:
But must make suit still, to be near your grace.
Who is there with you, Sr?
None, but my self.
It falls out, Lady, to be a dear friends lodging.
Wherein there's some conspiracy of fortune
With your poor servants blessed affections.
Who was it sung?
He, Lady, but hoe's gone,
Upon my entreaty of him, seeing you
Approach the window. Neither need you doubt him,
If he were here. He is too much a gentleman.
Sir, if you judge me by this simple action,
And by the outward habit, and complexion
Of easiness, it hath, to your design;
You may with Justice, say, I am a woman:
And a strange woman But when you shall please,
To bring but that concurrence of my fortune,
To memory, which to day your self did urge:
It may beget some favour like excuse,
Though none like reason.
No, my tune-full Mistress?
Then, surely, Love hath none; nor Beauty any;
Nor Nature-violenced, in both these:
With all whose gentle tongues you speak, at once.
I thought I had enough removed, already,
That scruple from your breast, and left yo' all reason;
When, through my mornings perspective I showed you
A man so aboue excuse, as he is the cause,
Why any thing is to be done upon him:
And nothing called an injury, mis-plac'd.
I'rather, now had hope, to show you how Love
By his accesses, grows more natural:
And, what was done, this morning, with such force
Was but deuis'd to serve the present, then.
That since Love hath the honour to approach
These sister-swelling breasts; and touch this soft,
And rosie hand; hee hath the skill to draw
Their Nectar forth, with kissing; and could make
More wanton salts, from this brave promontory,
Down to this valley, then the nimble Roe;
Could play the hopping Sparrow, about these nets;
And sporting Squirrel in these crisped groves;
Bury himself in every Silke-wormes kill,
Is here unravelled; run into the snare,
Which every hair is, cast into a curl,
To catch a Cupped flying: Bath himself
In milk, and roses, here, and dry him, there;
Warm his cold hands, to play with this smooth, •and,
And well torn'd chin, as with the Billiard ball;
Roll on these lips, the banks of love, and there
At once both plant, and gather kisses. Lady,
Shall I, with what I have made to day here, call
All sense to wonder, and all faith to sign
The mysteries revealed in your form?
And will Love pardon me the blasphemy
I uttered, when I said, a glass could speak
This beauty, or that fools had power to judge it?
Doe but look, on her eyes! They doe light—
All that Loue's world comprizeth!
Doe but look on her hair! it is bright,
As Loue's star, when it rises!
Doe but mark, her fore head's smoother,
Then words that sooth her!
And from her arched brows, such a grace
Sheds it self through the face;
As alone, there triumphs to the life,
All the gain, all the good, of the elements strife!
Have you seen but a bright Lily grow,
Before rude hands have touched it?
Have you marked but the fall of the Snow,
Before the soil hath smuch'd it?
Have you felt the wool of the Beaver?
Or Swans down, ever?
Or, have smelt of the bud of the Brier?
Or the Nerd in the fire?
Or, have tasted the bag of the Bee?
O, so white! O, so soft! O, so sweet is she!
IS she so, Sir? and, I will keep her so.
If I know how, or can: that wit of man
Will do it, I'll go no farther. At this windo'
She shall no more be buz'd at. Take your leave on it.
If you be sweet meates, wedlock, or sweet flesh,
Ell's one: I doe not love this hum about you.
A flye-blowne wife is not so proper, In:
For you, Sr, look to hear from me.
So, I doe, Sir.
No, but in other terms. There's no man offers
This to my wife, but pays for it.
That have I, Sir.
Nay, then, I tell you, you are.
What am I, Sir?
Why, that I'll think on, when I have cut your throat.
Go, you are an Ass.
I am resolved on it, Sir.
I think you are.
To call you to a reckoning.
Away, you brokers block, you property.
S'light, if you strike me, I'll strike your Mistress,
O! I could shoot mine eyes at him, for that, now;
Or leave my teeth in'him, were they cuckolds bane,
Enough to kill him. What prodigious,
Blind, and most wicked change of fortune's this?
I have no ayre of patience: all my veins
Swell, and my sinews start at iniquity of it.
I shall break, break.
This for the malice of it,
And my revenge may pass! But, now, my conscience
Tells me, I have profited the cause of Hell
But little, in the breaking-off their loves.
Which, if some other act of mine repair not,
I shall hear ill of in my account.
O, Bird!
Could you do this? against me? and at this time, now?
When I was so employed, wholly for you,
Drowned i'my care (more, then the land, I swear,
I'haue hope to win) to make you peerless? studying,
For footmen for you, fine paced huishers, pages,
To serve you of the knee; with what Knights wife,
To bear your train, and sit with your four women
In council, and receive intelligences,
From foreign parts, to dress you at all pieces!
You've (a'most) turned my good affection, to you;
Soured my sweet thoughts; all my pure purposes:
I could now find (i'my very heart) to make
Another, Lady Duchess; and depose you.
Well, go your ways in. Devil, you have redeemed all.
I doe forgive you. And I'll doe you good.
WHy ha you these excursions? where have you been, Sir?
Where I ha'beene vexed a little, with a toy!
O Sir! no toys must trouble your grave head,
Now it is growing to be great. You must
Be aboue all those things.
Nay, nay, so I will.
Now you are to'ard the Lord, you must put off
The man, Sir.
He says true.
You must do nothing
As you ha'done it heretofore; not know,
Or salute any man.
That was your bed-fellow,
The other month.
The other month? the week.
Thou dost not know the privileges, Engine,
Follow that Title; nor how swift: To day,
When he has put on his Lords face once, then—
Sir, for these things I shall doe well enough,
There is no fear of me. But then, my wife is
Such an untoward thing! she'll never learn
How to comport with it! I am out of all
Conceit, on her behalf.
Best have her taught, Sir.
Where? Are there any Schools for Ladies? Is there
An Academy for women? I doe know,
For men, there was: I learned in it, my self,
To make my legs, and doe my postures.
Sir.
Doe you remember the conceit you had—
Of the Spanish gown, at home?
Ha! I doe thank thee,
With all my heart, dear Engine. Sir, there is
A certain Lady, here about the Town,
An English widow, who hath lately travelled,
But shoe's called the Spaniard; cause she came
Latest from thence: and keeps the Spanish habit.
Such a rare woman! all our women here,
That are of spirit, and fashion flock, unto her,
As to their President; their Law; their Canon;
More then they ever did, to Oracle-Foreman.
Such rare receipts she has, Sir, for the face;
Such oils; such tinctures; such pomatumn's;
Such perfumes; med'cines; quintessences, &amp;c.
And such a Mistress of behaviour;
She knows, from the Dukes daughter, to the Doxey,
What is their due just: and no more!
O Sir!
You please me i'this, more then mine own greatness.
Where is she? Let vs have her.
By your patience,
We must use means; cast how to be acquainted—
Good, Sr, about it.
We must think how, first.
O!
I doe not love to tarry for a thing,
When I have a mind to it. You doe not know me.
If you doe offer it.
Your wife must send
Some pretty token to her, with a complement,
And pray to be received in her good graces,
All the great Ladies do it,
She shall, she shall,
What were it best to be?
Some little toy,
I would not have it any great matter, Sir:
A Diamant ring, of forty or fifty pound,
Would doe it handsomely: and be a gift
Fit for your wife to send, and her to take.
I'll go, and tell my wife on it, straight.
Why this
Is well! The clothes we'haue now: But, whore's this Lady?
If we could get a witty boy, now, Engine;
That were an excellent crack. I could instruct him,
To the true height. For any thing takes this dottrel.
Why, Sir your best will be one of the players!
No, there's no trusting them. They'll talk on it,
And tell their Poets.
What if they doe? the jest
will brooke the Stage. But, there be some of'hem
Are very honest Lads. There's Dicke Robinson
A very pretty fellow, and comes often
To a Gentleman's chamber, a friends of mine. We had
The merriest supper of it there, one night,
The Gentleman's Land-lady invited him
To'a Gossips feast, Now, he Sir brought Dick Robinson,
Dressed like a Lawyers wife, amongst 'hem all;
(I lent him clothes) but, to see him behave it;
And lay the law; and carve; and drink unto 'hem;
And then talk bawdy: and send frolics! o!
It would have burst your buttons, or not left you
A seam.
They say hoe's an ingenious youth!
O Sir! and dresses himself, the best! beyond
Forty o'your very Ladies! did you ne'er see him?
No, I do seldom see those toys. But think you,
That we may have him?
Sir, the young Gentleman
I tell you of, can command him. Shall I attempt it?
Yes, doe it.
S'light, I cannot get my wife
To part with a ring, on any terms: and yet,
The sollen Monkey has two.
It were'gainst reason,
That you should urge it; Sir, send to a Gold-smith,
•e not her lose by it.
How do's she lose by it?
Is it not for her?
Make it your own bounty,
It will have the better success; what is a matter
Of fifty pound to you, Sr.
In have but a hundred
Pieces, to show here; that I would not break—
You shall have credit, Sir. I'll send a ticket
Unto my Gold-smith. Heer, my man comes too,
To carry it fitly. How now, Trains? What birds?
Your Cousin Euer-ill met me, and has beat me,
Because I would not tell him where you were:
I think he has dogd me to the house too.
Well—
You shall go out at the back-doore, then, Trains.
You must get Guilt-head hither▪ by some means:
It is impossible!
Tell him, we have venison,
I'll g' him a piece, and send his wife a Pheasant.
A Forest moves not, till that forty pound,
Yo' had of him, last, be paid. He keeps more stir,
For that same petty sum, then for your bond
Of six; and Statute of eight hundred!
Tell him
We'll hedge in that. Cry up Fitz-dottrell to him,
Double his price: Make him a man of mettle.
That will not need, his bond is currant enough.
ALl this is to make you a Gentleman:
I'll have you learn, Son. Wherefore have I placed you
With Sr. Poul Either-side, but to have so much Law
To keep your own? Besides, he is a Justice,
Here in the Town; and dwelling, Son, with him,
You shall learn that in a year, shall be worth twenty
Of having stayed you at Oxford, or at Cambridge,
Or sending you to the Innes of Court, or France.
I am called for now in haste, by Master Meere-craft
To trust Master Fitz-dottrel, a good man:
In have inquired him, eighteen hundred a year,
(His name is currant) for a diamant ring
Of forty, shall not be worth thirty (thats gained)
And this is to make you a Gentleman!
O, but good father you trust too much!
Boy, boy,
We live, by finding fools out, to be trusted.
Our shop-bookes are our pastures, our corn-grounds,
We lay 'hem op'n, for them to come into:
And when wee have 'hem there, wee drive 'hem up
In •one of our two Pounds, the Counters, straight,
And this is to make you a Gentleman!
Wee Citizens never trust, but wee doe cousin:
For, if our debtors pay, wee cousin them;
And if they doe not, then we cousin our selves.
But that's a hazard every one must run,
That hopes to make his Son a Gentleman!
I doe not wish to be one, truly, Father.
In a descent, or two, wee come to be
Just 'itheir state, fit to be coozend, like 'hem.
And I had rather have tarried i'your trade:
For, since the Gentry scorn the City so much,
Me thinks we should in time, holding together,
And matching in our own tribes, as they say,
Have got an Act of Common Council, for it,
That we might cousin them out of rerum nature.
I, if we had an Act first to forbid
The marrying of our wealthy heirs unto 'hem:
And daughters, with such lavish portions.
That confounds all.
And makes a Mongrel breed, Father.
And when they have your money, then they laugh at you:
Or kick you down the stayres. I cannot abide 'hem.
I would fine have 'hem coozen'd, but not trusted.
O, is he come! I knew he would not fail me.
Welcome, good Guilt-head, I must have you doe
A noble Gentleman, a curtsy, here:
In a mere toy (some pretty Ring, or Jewel)
Of fifty, or threescore pound (Make it a hundred,
And hedge in the last forty, that I owe you,
And your own price for the Ring) He's a good man, Sr,
And you may hap' see him a great one! Hee,
Is likely to bestow hundreds, and thousands,
Wi'you; if you can humour him. A great prince
He will be shortly. What doe you say?
In truth, Sir
I cannot. 'T has been a long vacation with vs,
Of what, I pray thee? of wit? or honesty?
Those are your Citizens long vacations.
Good Father do not trust 'hem.
Nay, Thom. Guilt-head.
Hee will not buy a curtsy and beg it:
He will rather pay, then pray. If you doe for him,
You must doe cheerfully. His credit, Sir,
Is not yet prostitute! Who's this? thy son?
A pretty youth, what's his name?
Plutarchus, Sir.
Plutarchus! How came that about?
That year Sr,
That I begot him, I bought Plutarch's lives,
And fell s' in love with the book, as I called my son
By 'his name; In hope he should be like him:
And write the lives of our great men!
In the City?
And you do breed him, there?
His mind, Sir, lies
Much to that way.
Why, then, he is in the right way.
But, now, I had rather get him a good wife,
And plant him in the country; there to use
The blessing I shall leave him▪
Out upon it!
And lose the laudable means, thou hast at home, here,
T'aduance, and make him a young Alderman?
Buy him a Captains place, for shame; and let him
Into the world, early, and with his plume,
And Scarfs, march through Cheapside, or along Cornehill,
And by the vertue' of those, draw down a wife
There from a windo', worth ten thousand pound!
Get him the posture book, and's leaden men,
To set upon a table, against his Mistress
Chance to come by, that hee may draw her in,
And show her Finsbury battles.
I have placed him
With Justice Eytherside, to get so much law—
As thou hast conscience. Come, come, thou dost wrong
Pretty Plutarchus, who had not his name,
For nothing: but was borne to train the youth
Of London, in the military truth—
That way his Genius lies. My Cousin Euerill!
O, are you here, Sir? 'pray you let vs whisper.
Father, dear Father, trust him if you love me.
Why, I doe mean it, boy; but, what I doe,
Must not come easily from me: Wee must deal
With Courtiers, boy, as Courtiers deal with vs.
If I have a Business there, with any of them,
Why, I must wait, I'am sure on it, Son: and though
My Lord dispatch me, yet his worshipful man—
Will keep me for his sport, a month, or two,
To show me with my fellow Citizens.
I must make his train long, and full, one quarter;
And help the spectacle of his greatness. There,
Nothing is done at once, but injuries, boy:
And they come head-long! all their good turns move not,
Or very slowly
Yet sweet father, trust him.
Well, I will think.
Come, you must do it, Sir.
I'am undone else, and your Lady Tayle-bush
Has sent for me to dinner, and my clothes
A•e all at pawn. I had sent out this morning,
Before I heard you were come to town, some twenty
Of my epistles, and no one return—
Why, I have told you o'this. This comes of wearing
Scarlet, gold lace, and cut-works! your fine gartring!
With your blown roses, Cousin! and your eating
Pheasant, and Godwit, here in London! haunting
The Globes, and Mermaids! wedging in with Lords,
Still at the table! and affecting lechery,
In velvet! where could you have contented your self
With cheese, salt-butter, and a pickled hearing,
In the Low-countries; there worn cloth, and fustian!
Been satisfied with a leap of your Host's daughter,
In garrison, a wench of a stoter! or,
Your Sutlers wife, in the leaguer, of two blanks!
You never, then, had run upon this flat,
To write your letters missive, and send out
Your privy seals, that thus have frighted off
All your acquintance; that they shun you at distance,
VVorse, then you do the Bailies!
Pox upon you.
I come not to you for counsel, I lack money.
You doe not think, what you owe me already?
I?
They owe you, that mean to pay you. I'll besworn,
I never meant it. Come, you will project,
I shall undo your practice, for this month else:
You know me.
I, yo' are a right sweet nature!
Well, that's all one!
You'll leave this Empire, one day?
You will not ever have this tribute paid,
Your sceptre of the sword?
Tie up your wit,
Doe, and provoke me not—
Will you, Sir, help,
To what I shall provoke another for you?
I cannot tell; try me: I think I am not
So utterly, of an ore vn-to-be-melted,
But I can doe my self good, on occasions.
Strike in then, for your part. Mr. Fitz-dottrel
If I transgress in point of manners, afford me
Your best construction; I must beg my freedom
From your affairs, this day.
How, Sr.
It is
In succour of this Gentleman's occasions,
My kins-man—
You'll not do me that affront, Sr.
I am sorry you should so interpret it,
But, Sir, it stands upon his being invested
In a new office, hee has stood for, long:
Master of the Dependences! A place
Of my proiection too, Sir, and hath met
Much opposition; but the State, now, see's
That great necessity of it, as after all
Their writing, and their speaking, against Duels,
They have erected it. His book is drawn—
For, since, there will be differences, daily,
Twixt Gentlemen; and that the roaring manner
Is grown offensive; that those few, we call
The civil men of the sword, abhor the vapours;
They shall refer now, hither, for their process;
And such as trespass against the rule of Court,
Are to be fined—
In troth, a pretty place!
A kind of arbitrary Court twill be, Sir.
I shall have matter for it, I believe,
Ere it be long: I had a distaste.
But now, Sir,
My learned council, they must have a feeling,
They'll part, Sir, with no books, without the hand gout
Be oyld, and I must furnish. If it be money,
To me straight. I am Mine, Mint and Exchequer,
To supply all. What is it? a hundred pound?
No, th'Harpey, now, stands on a hundred pieces.
Why, he must have 'hem, if he will. To morrow, Sir,
Will equally serve your occasion's,—
And therefore, let me obtain, that you will yield
To timing a poor Gentleman's distresses,
In terms of hazard.—
By no means!
I must
Get him this money, and will.—
Sir, I protest,
I'd rather stand engaged for it my self:
Then you should leave me.
O good Sr. do you think
So coursely of our manners, that we would,
For any need of ours, be pressed to take it:
Though you be pleased to offer it.
Why, by heaven,
I mean it!
I can never believe less.
But wee, Sir, must preserve our dignity,
As you doe publish yours. By your fair leave, Sir.
As I am a Gentleman, if you doe offer
To leave me now, or if you doe refuse me,
I will not think you love me.
Sir, I honour you.
And with just reason, for these noble notes,
Of the nobility, you pretend too! But, Sir—
I would know, why? a motive (he a stranger)
You should doe this?
You'll mar all with your fineness
Why, that's all one, if'twere, Sir, but my fancy.
But I have a Business, that perhaps I'd have
Brought to his office.
O, Sir! I have done, then;
If hee can be made profitable, to you.
Yes, and it shall be one of my ambitions
To have it the first Business? May I not?
So you doe mean to maked, a perfect Business.
Nay, I'll doe that, assure you: show me once.
Sr, it concerns, the first be a perfect Business,
For his own honour!
I, and th'reputation
Too, of my place.
Why, why doe I take this course, else?
I am not altogether, an Ass, good Gentlemen,
Wherefore should I consult you? doe you think?
To make a song on it? How's your manner? tell vs.
Doe, satisfy him: give him the whole course.
First, by request, or otherwise, you offer
Your Business to the Court: wherein you crave:
The judgment of the Master and the Assistants.
Well, that's done, now, what doe you upon it?
We straight Sr, have recourse to the spring-head;
Visit the ground; and, so disclose the nature:
If it will carry, or no. If wee doe find,
By our proportions it is like to prove
A sul•en, and black Business That it be
Incorrigible; and out of, treaty; then,
We file it, a Dependence!
So it is filed.
What follows? I doe love the order of these things.
We then advise the party, if he be
A man of means, and hauings, that forth-with,
He settle his estate: if not, at least
That he pretend it. For, by that, the world
Takes notice, that it now is a Dependence.
And this we call, Sir, Publication.
Very sufficient! After Publication, now?
Then we grant out our Process, which is divers;
Either by Chartell, Sir, or ore-tenus,
Wherein the Challenger, and Challenge
Or (with your Spaniard) your Prouocador,
And Prouocado, have their several courses—
I have enough on it! for an hundred pieces?
Yes, for two hundred, vnder-write me, doe.
Your man will take my bond?
That he will, sure,
But, these same Citizens, they are such sharks!
There's an old debt of forty, I ga• my word
For one is run away, to the Bermudas,
And he will hook in that, or he with not doe.
Why, let him. That and the ring, and a hundred pieces,
Will all but make two hundred?
No, no more, Sir.
What ready Arithmetic you have? doe you hear?
A pretty mornings work for you, this? Do it,
You shall have twenty pound on it.
Twenty pieces?
Good Father, do it)
You will hook still? well,
Show vs your ring. You could not have done this, now
With gentleness, at first, wee might have thanked you?
But groan, and have you courtesies come from you
Like a hard stool, and stink? A man may draw
Your teeth out easier, then your money? Come,
Were little Guilt-head here, no better a nature,
I should ne'er love him, that could pull his lips off, now!
Was not thy mother a Gentlewoman?
Yes, Sir.
And went to the Court at Christmas, and St. Georges-tide?
And lent the Lords-men, chains?
Of gold, and pearl, Sr.
I knew, thou must take, after some body!
Thou coldest not be else. This was no shop-looke!
'll have thee Captain Guilt-head, and march up,
And take in Pimlico,, and kill the bush,
At every tavern! Thou shalt have a wife,
If smocks will mount, boy. How now? you ha'there now
Some Bristo-stone, or Cornish counterfeit
You'd put upon vs.
No, Sir, I assure you:
Look on his luster! hee will speak himself!
I'll gi'you leave to put him in the Mill,
H'is no great, large stone, but a true Paragon,
H'has all his corners, view him well.
H'is yellow.
Vpo'my faith, Sr, of the right black-water,
And very deep! H'is set without a foil, too.
Here's one of the yellow-water, I'll sell cheap.
And what do you value this, at? thirty pound?
No, Sir, he cost me forty, ere he was set.
Turnings, you mean? I know your Equinocks:
You'are grown the better Fathers of'hem o'late.
Well, where't must go, twill be judged, and, therefore,
Look you't be right. You shall have fifty pound for it.
Not a deneer more! And, because you would
Have things dispatched, Sir, I'll go presently,
Inquire out this Lady. If you think good, Sir.
Having an hundred pieces ready, you may
Part with those, now, to serve my kinsmans turns,
That he may wait upon you, anon, the freer;
And take 'hem when you have sealed, a gain, of Guilt-head.
I care not if I do!
And dispatch all,
Together.
There, they are just: a hundred pieces!
In ha'told 'hem over, twice a day, these two months.
Well, go, and seal then, Sr, make your return
As speedy as you can.
Come give me.
Soft, Sir,
Mary, and fair too, then. I'll no delaying, Sir.
But, you will hear?
Yes, when I have my diuident.
Theres forty pieces for you.
What is this for?
Your half. You know, that Guilt-head must have twenty.
And what's your ring there? shall I have none o'that?
O, thats to be given to a Lady!
Is it so?
By that good light, it is.
Come, gi'me
Ten pieces more, then.
Why?
For Guilt-head? Sir,
Do'you think, I'll 'low him any such share:
You must.
Must I? Doe you your musts, Sir, I'll doe mine,
You wi'not part with the whole, Sir? Will you? Go too.
Give me ten pieces!
By what law, doe you this?
Even Lyon-law, Sir, I must roar else.
Good!
Yo' have heard, how th'Asse made his divisions, wisely?
And, I am he: I thank you.
Much good do you, Sr.
I shall be rid o'this tyranny, one day?
Not,
While you doe eat; and lie, about the town, here;
And cousin i'your bullions; and I stand
Your name of credit, and compound your business;
Adiourne your beatings every term; and make
New parties for your proiects. I have, now,
A pretty tasque, of it, to hold you in
W•' your Lady Tayle-bush: but the toy will be,
How we shall both come off?
Leave you your doubting.
And doe your portion, what's assigned you: I
Never failed yet.
With reference to your aids?
You'll still be unthankful. Where shall I meet you, anon?
You have some feat to doe alone, now, I see;
You wish me gone, well, I will find you out,
And bring you after to the audit.
S'light!
There's Engines share too, I had forgot! This reign
Is too-too-vnsuportable! I must
Quit my self of this vassalage! Engine! welcome.
HOw goes the cry?
Excellent well!
Will it do?
VVhere's Robinson?
Here is the Gentleman, Sir.
Will undertake t'himselfe. I have acquainted him,
Why did you so?
Why, Robinson would ha'told him,
You know. And hoe's a pleasant wit! will hurt
Nothing you purpose. Then, he'is of opinion,
That Robinson might want audacity,
She being such a gallant. Now, hee has been,
In Spain, and knows the fashions there; and can
Discourse; and being but mirth (hee says) leave much,
To his care:
But he is too tall!
For that,
He has the bravest device! (you'll love him for it)
To say, he wears Cioppinos: and they doe so
In Spain. And Robinson's as tall, as hee.
Is he so?
Every jot.
Nay, I had rather
To trust a Gentleman with it, of the two.
Pray you go to him, then, Sir, and salute him.
Sir, my friend Engine has acquainted you
With a strange business, here.
A merry one, Sir.
The Duke of Drown'd-land, and his Duchess?
Yes, Sir.
Now, that the Conjurers have laid him by,
I have made bold, to borrow him a while;
With purpose, yet, to put him out I hope
To his best use?
Yes, Sir.
For that small part,
That I am trusted with, put off your care:
I would not lose to doe it, for the mirth,
Will follow of it; and well, I have a fancy.
Sir, that will make it well.
You will report it so.
Where must I have my dressing?
At my house, Sir.
You shall have caution, Sir, for what he yields,
To six pence.
You shall pardon me. I will share, Sir,
In your sports, only: nothing i'your purchase.
But you must furnish me with complements,
To the manner of Spain; my coach, my guarda duenn'as;
Engine's your Pro'uedor. But, Sir, I must
(Now I'haue entered trust wi'you, thus far)
Secure still in your quality, acquaint you
With somewhat, beyond this. The place, designed
To be the Scene, for this our merry matter,
Because it must have countenance of women,
To draw discourse, and offer it, is here by,
At the Lady Taile-bushes.
I know her, Sir,
And her Gentleman huisher.
Mr Ambler?
Yes, Sir.
Sir, It shall be no shame to me, to confess
To you, that wee poor Gentlemen, that want acres,
Must for our needs, turn fools up, and plough Ladies
Sometimes, to try what glebe they a•e: and this
Is no vnfruitefull piece. She, and I now,
Are on a project, for the fact, and venting
Of a new kind of fucus (paint, for Ladies)
To serve the kingdom: wherein she her self
Hath travelled, specially, by way of service
Unto her sex, and hopes to get the Monopoly,
As the reward, of her invention.
What is her end, in this?
Merely ambition,
Sir, to grow great, and court it with the secret:
Though she pretend some other. For, she's dealing,
Already, upon caution for the shares,
And Mr. Ambler, is hee named Examiner
For the ingredients; and the Register
Of what is vented; and shall keep the Office.
Now, if she break with you, of this (as I
Must make the leading thread to your acquaintance,
That, how experience gotten i'your being
Abroad, will help our business) think of some
Pretty additions, but to keep her floating:
It may be, she will offer you a part,
Any strange names of—
Sr, I have my'instructions.
Is it not high time to be making ready?
Yes, Sir,
The foole's in sight, Dottrel.
Away, then.
Returned so soon?
Yes, here's the ring: I ha'seal'd.
But there's not so much gold in all the row, he says—
Till'• come fro the Mint. It is tan up for the gamesters.
There's a shop-shift! plague on'hem.
He do's swear it.
He'll swear, and forswear too, it is his trade,
You should not have left him.
S'lid, I can go back,
And beat him, yet.
No, now let him alone.
I was so earnest, after the maine Business,
To have this ring, gone.
True, and it is time.
I have learned, Sir, senator you went, her Lady•ship •ats
With the Lady Tail bush, here, hard by.
In the lane here?
Yes, if you' had a servant, now of presence,
Well clothed, and of an aë•y voluble tongue,
Neither too big, or little for his mouth,
That could deliver your wives complement;
To send along withal.
I have one Sir,
A very handsome, gentleman-like-fellow,
That I doe mean to make my Duchess Usher—
I entertained him, but this morning, too:
I'll call him to you. The worst of him, is his name!
She'll take no note of that, but of his message.
Devil! How like you him, Sir. Pace, go a little.
Let's see you move.
He'll serve, Sr, give it him:
And let him go along with me, I'll help
To present him, and it.
Look, you doe sirah,
Discharge this well, as you expect your place.
Do'you hear, go on, come off with all your honours.
I would fine see him, do it.
Trust him, with it;
Remember kissing of your hand, and answering
With the French-time, in flexure of your body.
I could now▪ so instruct him— and for his words—
I'll put them in his mouth.
O, but I have 'hem
Of the very Academies.
Sir, you'll have use for 'hem,
Anon, your self, I warrant you: after dinner,
When you are called.
S'light, that'll be just play-time.
It cannot be, I must not lose the play!
Sir, but you must, if she appoint to sit.
And, shoe's president.
S'lid, it is the Devil!
And, it were his Damme too, you must now apply
Your self, Sir, to this, wholly; or lose all.
If I could but see a piece—
Sr. Never think on it.
Come but to one act, and I did not care—
But to be seen to rise, and go away,
To vex the Players, and to punish their Poet—
K•epe him in awe!
But say, that he be one,
Wi'not be awed! but laugh at you. How then?
Then he shall pay for 'his dinner himself.
Perhaps,
He would doe that twice, rather then thank you.
Come, get the Devil out of your head, my Lord,
(I'll call you so in private still) and take
Your Lord ship i'your mind. You were, sweet Lord,
In ta•ke to bring a Business to the Office.
Yes.
Why should no• you, Sr, carry it o'your self,
Before the Office be up? and show the world,
You had no need of any mans direction;
In point, Sir, of sufficiency. I speak
Against a kinsman, but as one that tenders
Your graces good.
I thank you; to proceed—
To Publications: ha▪ your Deed drawn presently.
And leave a blank to put in your Feoff•es
One, two, or more, as you see cause—
I thank you
Heartily, I doe thank you. Not a word more,
I pray you, as you love me. Let me alone.
That I could not think o'this, as well, as hee?
O, I could beat my infinite blockhead—!
Come, we must this way.
How far is it.
Hard by here
Over the way. Now, to achieve this ring,
From this same fellow, that is to assure it;
Before hee give it. Though my Spanish Lady,
Be a young Gentleman of means, and scorn
To share, as hee doth say, I doe not know
How such a toy may tempt his Lady-ship:
And therefore, I think best, it be assured.
Sir, be the Ladies brave, wee go unto?
O, yes.
And shall I see 'hem, and speak to 'hem?
What else? ha'you your false-beard about you? Trains.
Yes,
And is this one of your double Cloaks?
The best of 'hem.
Be ready then. Sweet Pi•fall!
COme, I must bus—
Away.
I'll set thee up again.
Never fear that: can thou get ne'er a bird?
No Thrushes hungry? Stay, till cold weather come,
I'll help thee to an Onsell, or, a Field-fare.
Who's within, with Madame?
I'll tell you straight.
Please you stay here, a while Sir, I'll go in.
I doe so long to have a little venery,
While I am in this body! I would taste
Of every sin, a little, if it might be
After the māner of man! Sweet-heart!
What would you, Sr?
Nothing but fall in, to you, be your Black-bird,
My pretty pit (as the Gentleman said) your Throstle:
Lye tame, and taken with you; here'is gold!
To buy you so much new stuffs, from the shop,
As I may take the old up —
You must send, Sir.
The Gentleman the ring.
There it is. Nay look,
Will you be foolish, Pit,
This is strange rudeness.
Dear Pit.
I'll call, I swear.
Where are you, Sr?
Is your ring ready? Go with me.
I sent it you.
Me? When? by whom?
A fellow here, even now,
Came for it i'your name.
I sent none, sure.
My meaning ever was, you should deliver it,
Your self: So was your Masters charge, you know.
What fellow was it, doe you know him?
Here,
But now, he had it.
Saw you any? Trains?
Not I.
The Gentleman saw him.
Enquire.
I was so earnest upon her, I marked not!
My devilish Chief has put me here in flesh,
To shame me! This dull body I am in,
I perceive nothing with! I offer at nothing,
That will succeed!
Sir, she saw none, she says.
Satan himself, has tan a shape t'abuse me.
It could not be else!
This is aboue strange!
That you should be so retchlesse. What'll you do, Sir?
How will you answer this, when you are questioned?
Run from my flesh, if I could▪ put off mankind!
This's such a scorn! and will be a new exercise,
For my Arch-Duke! Woe to the several cudgels,
Must suffer, on this back! Can you no succours? Sir?
Alas! the use of it is so present,
I ask,
Sir, credit for another, but till to morrow?
There is not so much time, Sir. But how ever,
The Lady is a noble Lady, and will
(To save a Gentleman from check) be entreated
To say, she he's received it.
Do you think so?
Will she be won?
No doubt, to such an office,
It will be a Lady's bravery, and her pride.
And not be known on it after, unto him?
That were a treachery! Upon my word,
Be confident. Return unto your master,
My Lady President sits this afternoon,
Ha'stan• the ring, commends her services
•nto your Lady-Dutchesse. You may say
She's a civil Lady, and do's give her
All her respects, already: Bad you, tell her
She lives, but to receive her wished commandments,
And have the honour here to kiss her hands:
For which she'll stay this hour yet. Hasten you
Your Prince, away.
And Sir, you will take care
Th'excuse be perfect?
You confess your fears.
Too much.
The shame is more, I'll quit you of either.
A Pox vpo' referring to Commissioners,
I'had rather hear that it were past the seals:
Your Courtiers move so Snaile-like i'your Business.
Would I had not begun wi'you.
We must move,
Madame, in order, by degrees: not jump.
Why, there was Sr. Iohn Monie-man could jump
A Business quickly.
True, hee had great friends,
But, because some, sweet Madame, can leap ditches,
Wee must not all shun to go over bridges.
The harder parts, I make account are done:
Now, it is referred. You are infinitely bound
Unto the Ladies, they have so cried it up!
Doe they like it then?
They have sent the Spanish-Lady,
To gratulate with you—
I must send 'hem thanks
And some remembrances.
That you must, and visit 'hem.
Whore's Ambler?
Lost, to day, we cannot hear of him.
Not Madam?
No in good faith. They say he lay not
At home, to night. And here has fallen a Business
Between your Cousin, and Master Manly, has
Vnquieted vs all.
So I hear, Madame.
Pray you how was it?
Troth, it but appears
Ill o'your Kinsmans part. You may have heard,
That Manly is a suitor to me, I doubt not:
I guessed it, Madame.
And it seems, he trusted
Your Cousin to let fall some fair reports
Of him unto me.
Which he did!
So far
From it, as hee came in, and took him railing
Against him.
How! And what said Manly to him?
Enough, I doe assure you: and with that scorn
Of him, and the injury, as I doe wonder
How Euerill bore it! But that guilt vndoe's
Many men's valors
Here comes Manly.
Madame,
I'll take my leave—
You sha'not go, i'faith.
I'll have you stay, and see this Spanish miracle,
Of our English Lady.
Let me pray your Ladyship,
Lay your commands on me, some other time.
Now, I protest: and I will have all pieced,
And friends again.
It will be but ill soldered▪
You are too much affected with it.
I cannot
Madame, but think on it for th'iniustice.
Sir,
His kinsman here is sorry.
Not I, Madam,
I am no kin to him, wee but call Cousins,
And if wee were, Sir, I have no relation
Unto his crimes.
You are not urged with 'hem.
I can accuse, Sir, none but mine own judgment,
For though it were his crime, so to betray me:
I'am sure, it was more mine own, at all to trust him.
But he, therein, did use but his old manners,
And savour strongly what hee was before.
Come, he will change!
Faith, I must never think it.
Nor were it reason in me to expect
That for my sake, hee should put off a nature
Hee sucked in with his milk. It may be Madam,
Deceiving trust, is all he has to trust to:
If •o, I shall be loath, that any hope
Of mine, should bate him of his means.
Yo'are sharp, Sir.
This act may make him honest!
If he were
To be made honest, by an act of Parliament,
I should not alter, i'my faith of him.
Eyther-side!
Welcome, dear Either-side! how hast thou done, good wench?
Thou hast been a stranger! I have not seen thee, this week.
EVer your servant, Madame.
Where hast'hou been?
I did so long to see thee.
Visiting, and so tired!
I protest, Madame, it is a monstrous trouble!
And so it is. I swear I must to morrow,
Begin my visits (would they were over) at Court.
It tortures me, to think on'hem.
I doe hear
You have cause, Madam, your suit goes on.
Who told thee?
One, that can tell: Mr. Eyther-side.
O, thy husband!
Yes faith, there's life in it, now: It is referred.
If wee once see it under the seals, wench, then,
Have with 'hem for the great Carroch, six horses,
And the two Coach-men, with my Ambler, bare,
And my three women: wee will live, i'faith,
The examples of the town, and govern it.
I'll lead the fashion still.
You doe that, now,
Sweet Madame.
O, but then, I'll every day
Bring up some new device. Thou and I, Either-side,
Will first be in it, I will give it thee;
And they shall follow vs. Thou shalt, I swear,
Wear every month a new gown, out of it.
Thank you good Madame.
Pray thee call me Taile-bush
As I thee, Either-side; I not love this, Madame.
Then I protest to you, Taile-bush, I am glad
Your Business so succeeds.
Thank thee, good Eyther-side.
But Master Either-side tells me, that he likes
Your other Business better.
Which?
Of the Tooth-picks.
I never heard on it.
Ask Mr. Mere craft.
Madame? H'is one, in a word, I'll trust his malice,
With any mans credit, I would have abused!
Sir, if you think you doe please me, in this,
You are deceived!
No, but because my Lady,
Named him my kinsman; I would satisfy you,
What I think of him: and pray you, upon it
To judge me!
So I doe: that ill men's friendship,
Is as unfaithful, as themselves.
Doe you hear?
Ha'you a Business about Tooth-picks?
Yes, Madame.
Did I ne'er tell't you? I meant to have offered it
Your Lady-ship▪ on the perfecting the patent.
How is it!
For serving the whole state with Tooth-picks;
(Somewhat an intricate Business to discourse) but—
I show, how much the Subject is abused,
First, in that one commodity? then what diseases,
And putrefactions in the gummes are bred,
By those are made' of' adultrate, and false wood?
My plot, for reformation of these, follows.
To have all Tooth-picks, brought unto an office,
There sealed; and such as counterfeit 'hem▪ mulcted.
And last, for venting 'hem to have a book
Printed, to teach their use, which every child
Shall have throughout the kingdom, that can read,
And learn to pick his teeth by. Which beginning
Early to practice, with some other rules,
Of never sleeping with the mouth open, ch•wing
Some grains of masticke, will preserve the breath
Pure, and so free from tayn!— ha'what is it? sai'st thou?
Good faith, it sounds a very pretty Business!
So Mr Either-side says, Madame.
The Lady is come.
Is she? Good, waite upon her in. My Ambler
Was never so ill absent. Either-side,
How doe I look to day? Am I not dressed,
Spruntly?
Yes, verily, Madame.
Pox of Madame,
Will you not leave that?
Yes, good Taile-bush.
So?
Sounds not that better? What vile Fucus is this,
Thou hast got on?
It is Pearl.
Pearl? Oyster-shells:
As I breath, Either-side, I know it. Here comes
(They say) a wonder, sirrah, has been in Spain!
Will teach vs all! shoe's sent to me, from Court.
To gratulate with me! Pray thee, let's observe her,
What faults she has, that wee may laugh at 'hem,
When she is gone,
That we will heartily, Tail-bush.
O, me! the very Infant of the Giants!
Here is a noble Lady, Madame, come,
From your great friends, at Court, to see your Ladyship:
And have the honour of your acquaintance.
Sir.
She do's vs honour.
Pray you, say to her Ladyship,
It is the manner of Spain, to embrace only,
Never to kiss. She will excuse the custom!
Your use of it is law. Please you, sweet, Madame,
To take a seat.
Yes, Madame. In have had
The favour, through a world of fair report
•o know your virtues, Madame; and in that
Name, have desired the happiness of presenting
My service to your Ladyship!
Your love, Madame,
I must not own it else.
Both are due, Madame,
To your great undertakings.
Great? In troth, Madame,
They are my friends, that think 'hem any thing:
•f I can doe my sex (by 'hem) any service,
I'haue my ends, Madame.
And they are noble ones,
That make a multitude beholden, Madame▪
The common-wealth of Ladies, must acknowledge from you.
Except some envious, Madame.
Yo'are right in that, Madame,
Of which race, I encountered some but lately.
••ho ('t seems) have studied reasons to discredit
Your business.
How▪ sweet Madame.
Nay, the parties
Wi'not be worth your pause— Most ruinous things, Madame,
That have put off all hope of being recovered
To a degree of handsomeness.
But their reasons, Madame?
I would fine hear.
Some Madame, I remember.
They say, that painting quite destroys the face—
O, that's an old one, Madame.
There are new ones, too.
Corrupts the breath; hath left so little sweetness
In kissing, as it is now used, but for fashion:
And shortly will be taken for a punishment.
Decays the fore-teeth, that should guard the tongue;
And suffers that run riot euer-lasting!
And (which is worse) some Ladies when they meet
Cannot be merry, and laugh, but they doe spit
In one another faces!
I should know
This voice, and face too:
Then they say, it is dangerous
To all the fallen, yet well disposed Mad-dames,
That are industrious, and desire to earn
Their living with their sweat! For any distemper
Of heat, and motion, may displace the colours;
And if the paint once run about their faces,
Twenty to one, they will appear so ill-favoured,
Their servants run away, too, and leave the pleasure
Imperfect, and the reckoning als' vnpay'd.
Pox, these are Poets reasons.
Some old Lady
That keeps a Poet, has deuis'd these scandales.
Faith we must have the Poets banished, Madame,
As Master Either-side says.
Master Fits dottrel?
And his wife: where? Madame, the Duke of Drown'd-land,
That will be shortly.
Is this my Lord?
The same.
YOur servant, Madame!
How now? Friend? offended,
That I have found your haunt here?
No, but wondering
At your strange fashioned venture, hither.
It is
To show you what they are, you so pursue.
I thinke't will prove a med'cine against marriage;
To know their manners.
Stay, and profit then.
The Lady, Madame, whose Prince has brought her, here,
To be instructed.
Please you sit with vs, Lady.
That's Lady-President.
A goodly woman!
I cannot see the ring, though.
Sir, she has it.
But, Madame, these are very feeble reasons!
So I urged Madame, that the new complexion,
Now to come forth, in name o'your Ladiship's fucus,
Had no ingredient—
But I durst eat, I assure you.
So do they, in Spain.
Sweet Madam be so liberal,
To give vs some o'your Spanish Fucuses!
They are infinite, Madame.
So I hear, they have
Water of Gourds, of Radish, the white Beans,
Flowers of Glass, of Thistles, Rose-marine.
Raw Honey, Mustard-seed, and Bread dough-bak'd,
The crumbs o'bread, Goats-milke, and whites of Eggs,
Campheere, and Lilly-roots, the fat of Swans,
Marrow of Veale, white Pigeons, and pine-kernells,
The seeds of Nettles, perse'line, and hares gall.
Lemons, thin-skind—
How, her Ladyship has studied
Al excellent things!
But ordinary, Madame.
No, the true rarities, are th'Aluagada,
And Argenta•a of Queen Isabella!
I, what are their ingredients, gentle Madame?
Your Alum Scagliola, or Pol-dipedra;
And Zuccarino; Turpentine of Abezzo.
VVash'd in nine waters: Soda di leuante,
Or your Fern ashes; Beniamin di gotta;
Grasso di serpe; Porcelletto merino;
Oils of Lentisco; Zucche Mugia; make
The admirable Varnish for the face,
Gives the right luster; but two drops rubbed on
VVi•h a piece of scarlet, makes a Lady of sixty
Look at sixteen. But, aboue all, the water
Of the white Hen, of the Lady Estifanias!
O, I, that same, good Madame, I have heard of:
How is it done?
Madame, you take your Hen,
Plume it, and skin it, cleanse it of the inwards:
Then chop it, bones and all: add to four ounces
Of Carrnuacins, Pipitas, Soap of Cyprus,
Make the decoction, strain it. Then distill it,
And keep it in your galley-pot well, glittered:
Three drops preserves from wrinkles, warts, spots, moles,
Blemish, or Sun-burnings, and keeps the skin
In decimo sexto, ever bright, and smooth,
As any looking-glasse; and indeed, is called
The Virgins milk for the face, Oglio real;
A Ceruse, neither cold or heat, will hurt;
And mixed with oil of myrrh, and the red Gilli-flower
Called Cataputia; and flowers of Rouistico;
Makes the best mute, or dye of the whole world.
Dear Madame, will you let vs be familiar?
Your Ladyships servant.
How do you like her.
Admirable!
But, yet, I cannot see the ring.
Sir.
I must
Deliver it, or mar all. This foole's so jealous.
Madame— Sir, wear this ring, and pray you take knowledge,
It was sent you by his wife. And give her thanks,
Doe not you dwindle, Sir, bear up.
I thank you, Sir,
But for the manner of Spain! Sweet, Madame, let vs
Be bold, now we are in: Are all the Ladies,
There, in the fashion?
None but Grandee's, Madame,
Of the clasped train, which may be worn at length, too,
Or thus, upon my arm.
And doe they wear
Cioppino's all?
If they be dressed in punto, Madame.
Guilt as those are? madame?
Of Goldsmiths work, madame▪
And set with diamants: and their Spanish pumps
Of perfumed leather.
I should think it hard
To go in 'hem▪ madame.
At the first, it is, madame.
Do you never fall in 'hem?
Never.
I swear, I should
Six times an hour.
But you have men at hand, still,
To help you, if you fall?
Only one, madame,
The Guardo-duennas, such a little old man,
As this.
Alas! hee can doe nothing! this!
I'll tell you, madame, I saw in the Court of Spain once,
A Lady fall in the Kings sight, along.
And there she lay, flat spread, as an Umbrella,
Her hoop here cracked; no man durst reach a hand
To help her, till the Guarda-duenn'as came,
Who is the person onel'allow'd to touch
A Lady there: and he but by this finger.
Have they no servants, madame, there? nor friends?
An Escudero, or so madame, that waits
Upon 'hem in another Coach, at distance,
And when they walk, or dance, holds by a hand-kercher,
Never presumes to touch 'hem.
This's sciruy!
And a forced gravity! I doe not like it.
I like our own much better.
It is more French,
And Courtly ours.
And tastes more liberty.
We may have our dozen of visitors, at once,
Make love t'vs.
And before our husbands?
Hus∣band?
As I am honest, Tayle-bush I doe think
If no body should love me, but my poor husband,
I should even hang my self.
Fortune forbid, wench:
So fair a neck should have so foul a neck-lace,
It is true, as I am handsome!
I received, Lady,
A token from you, which I would not bee
Rude to refuse, being your first remembrance.
O, I am satisfied now!
Do you see it, Sir.)
But since you come, to know me, nearer, Lady,
I'll beg the honour, you will wear it for me,
It must be so.
Sure I have heard this tongue.
What do you mean, Sr?
Would you ha'me merce∣nary?
We'll recompense it anon, in somewhat else,
I doe not love to be gulled, though in a toy.
Wife, doe you hear? yo' are come into the School, wife,
Where you may learn, I doe perceive it, any thing!
How to be fine, or fair, or great, or proud,
Or what you will, indeed, wife; here it is taught.
And I am glad on it, that you may not say,
Another day, when honours come upon you,
You wanted means. I have done my parts: been,
To day, at fifty pound charge, first, for a ring,
To get you entered. Then left my new Play,
To wait upon you, here, to see it confirmed.
That I may say, both to mine own eyes, and ears,
Senses, you are my witness, sha' hath enjoyed
All helps that could be had, for love, or money—
To make a fool of her.
Wife, that's your malice,
The wickedness of you nature to interpret
Your husbands kindness thus. But I'll not leave;
Still to doe good, for your deprau'd affections:
Intend it. Bend this stubborn will; be great.
Good Madame, whom do they use in messages?
They cōmonly use their slaves, Madame.
And do's your Ladyship.
Think that so good, Madame?
no, indeed, Madame; I,
Therein prefer the fashion of England far,
Of your young delicate Page, or discreet Usher,
And I go with your Ladyship, in opinion,
Directly for your Gentleman-vsher,
There's not a finer Officer▪ goes on ground.
If hee be made and broken to his place, once.
Nay, so I presuppose him.
And they are fitter
Managers too, Sir, but I would have 'hem called
Our Escudero's.
Good.
Say, I should send
To your Ladyship, who (I presume) has gathered
All the dear secrets, to know how to make
Pastillos of the Duchess of Braganza,
Coquettes, Almoiauana's, Mantecada's,
Alcoreas, Mustaccioli; or say it were
The Peladore of Isabella, or balls
Against the itch, or aqua nanfa, or oil
Of lessamine for gloves, of the Marquess Muja;
Or for the head, and hair: why, these are offices
Fit for a gentleman, not a slave. They only
Might ask for your piueti, Spanish-cole,
To burn, and sweeten a room: but the Arcane
Of Ladies Cabinets—
Should be else where trusted.
Yo'are much about the truth. Sweet honoured Ladies,
Let me fall in wi'you. I'ha' my female wit,
As well as my male. And I doe know what suits
A Lady of spirit, or a woman of fashion!
And you would have your wife such.
Yes, Madame, aërie,
Light; not to plain dishonesty, I mean:
But, somewhat o'this side.
I take you, Sir.
H'has reason Ladies. I'll not give this rush
For any Lady, that cannot be honest
Within a thread.
Yes, Madame, and yet venture
As far for the other, in her Fame—
As can be;
Coach it to Pimlico; dance the Saraband;
Hear, and talk bawdy; laugh as loud, as a larum;
Squeak, spring, do any thing.
In young company, Madame.
Or before gallants. If they be brave, or Lords,
A woman is engaged.
I say so, Ladies,
It is civility to deny vs nothing.
You talk of a University! why, Hell is
A Grammar-schoole to this!
But then,
She must not lose a look on stuffs, or cloth, Madame.
Nor no course fellow.
She must be guided, Madame
By the clothes he wears, and company he is in;
Whom to salute, how far—
I have told her this.
And how that bow•rye too, vpo' the point,
Is (in it self) as civil a discourse—
As any other affair of flesh, what ever.
But she will ne'er be capable, she is not
So much as coming, Madame; I know not how
She lo•es all her opportunities
With hoping to be forced. I'haue entertained
A gentleman, a younger brother, here,
Whom I would fine breed up, her Escudero,
Against some expectation's that I have,
And she'll not countenance him.
What's his name?
Devil, of Darbi-shire.
Bless vs from him!
Devil?
Call him De uile, sweet Madame.
What you please, Ladies.
De-uile's a prettier name!
And sounds, me thinks,
As it came in with the Conqueror—
Over smocks!
What things they are? That nature should be at leisure
Ever to make 'hem! my wooing is at an end.
What can he do?
Let's hear him.
Can he manage?
Please you to try him, Ladies. Stand forth, Devil.
Was all this but the preface to my torment?
Come, let their Ladyships see your honours.
O,
Hee makes a wicked leg.
As ever I saw!
Fit for a Devil.
Good Madame, call him De-uile.
De-uile, what property is there most required
In your conceit, now, in the Escudero?
Why doe you not speak?
A settled discreet pace, Madame.
I think, a barren head, Sir, Mountaine-like,
To be exposed to the cruelty of weathers—
I, for his Valley is beneath the waste, Madame,
And to be fruitful there, it is sufficient.
Dullness upon you! Could not you hit this?
Good Sir—
He then had had no barren head.
You daw him too much, in troth, Sir.
I must walk
With the French stick, like an old vierger for you,
O, Chief, call me to Hell again, and free me.
Do you murmur now?
Not I, Sr.
What do you take
M•. Devil, the height of your employment,
In the true perfect Escudero?
When?
What doe you answer?
To be able, Madame,
First to enquire, then report the working,
Of any Ladies physic, in sweet phrase,
Yes, that's an act of elegance, and importance.
But what aboue?
O, that I had a goad for him.
To find out a good Corne-cutter.
Out on him!
Most barbarous!
Why did you doe this, now?
Of purpose to discredit me? you damned Devil.
Sure, if I be not yet, I shall be. All
My days in Hell, were holy-daies to this!
It is labour lost, Madame?
H'is a dull fellow
Of no capacity!
Of no discourse!
O, if my Ambler had been here!
I, Madame;
You talk of a man, where is there such another?
Mr. Devil, put case, one of my Ladies, here,
Had a fine brach: and would employ you forth
To treat about a convenient match for her.
What would you observe?
The color, and the size, Madame.
And nothing else?
The Moon, you calfe, the Moon!
I, and the Sign.
Yes, and receipts for proneness.
Then when the Puppies came, what would you doe?
Get their nativities cast!
This's well. What more?
Consult the Almanack-man which would be least?
Which cleaneliest?
And which silentest? This's well, madame!
And while she were with puppy?
Walk her out,
And ayre her every morning!
Very good!
And be industrious to kill her fleas?
Yes!
He will make a pretty proficient.
Who,
Coming from Hell, could look for such Catechising?
The Devil is an Ass. I doe acknowledge it.
The top of woman! All her sex in abstract!
I love her, to each syllable, falls from her.
Good madame give me leave to go aside with him!
And try him a little!
Do, and I'll with-draw, Madame,
With this fair Lady: read to her, the while.
Come, Sr.
Dear Chief, relieve me, or I perish.
Lady, we'll follow. You are not jealous Sir?
O, madame! you shall see. Stay wife, behold,
I give her up here, absolutely, to you,
She is your own. Do with her what you will!
Melt, cast, and form her as you shall think good!
Set any stamp on! I'll receive her from you
As a new thing, by your own standard!
Well, Sir!
But what have you done i'your Dependence, since?
O, it goes on, I met your Cousin, the Master—
You did not acquaint him, Sr?
Faith, but I did, Sr.
And upon better thought, not without reason!
He being chief Officer, might ha'tane it ill, else,
As a Contempt against his Place, and that
In time Sir, ha'drawne on another Dependence.
No, I did find him in good terms, and ready
To doe me any service.
So he said, to you?
But Sr, you do not know him.
Why, I presumed
Because this business of my wives, required me,
I could not have done better: And hee told
Me, that he would go presently to your Council,
A Knight, here, in the Lane—
Yes, Justice Either-side.
And get the Feoffment drawn, with a letter of Attorney,
For livery and seisen!
That I knowe's the course.
But Sir, you mean not to make him Feoffee?
Nay, that I'll pause on!
How now little Pit-fall.
Your Cousin Master Euer-ill, would come in—
But he would know if Master Manly were here.
No, tell him, if he were, I ha'made his peace!
Hoe's one, Sir, has no State, and a man knows not,
How such a trust may tempt him.
I conceive you.
Sr. this same deed is done here.
Pretty Plutarchus?
Art thou come with it? and has Sir Paul viewed it?
His hand is to the draught.
Will you step in, Sr.
And read it?
Yes.
I pray you a word wi'you.
Sir Paul Eitherside willed me give you caution,
Whom you did make Feoffee: for it is the trust
O'your whole State: and though my Cousin here
Be a worthy Gentleman, yet his valour has
At the tall board bin questioned; and we hold
Any man so impeached, of doubtful honesty!
I will not justify this; but give it you
To make your profit of it: if you utter it,
I can forswear it!
I believe you, and thank you, Sir.
BE not afraid, sweet Lady: yo' are trusted
To love, not violence here; I am no ravisher,
But one, whom you, by your fair trust again,
May of a servant make a most true friend.
And such a one I need, but not this way:
Sir, I confess me to you, the mere manner
Of your attempting me, this morning took me,
And I did hold m'inuention, and my manners,
Were both engaged, to give it a requital;
But not unto your ends: my hope was then,
(Though interrupted, ere it could be uttered)
That whom I found the Master of such language,
That brain and spirit, for such an enterprise,
Could not, but if those succours were demanded
To a right use, employ them virtuously!
And make that profit of his noble parts,
Which they would yield. Sr, you have now the ground,
To exercise them in: I am a woman;
That cannot speak more wretchedness of my self,
Then you can read; matched to a mass of folly;
That every day makes haste to his own ruin;
The wealthy portion, that I brought him, spent▪
And (through my friends neglect) no jointure made me.
My fortunes standing in this precipice,
Tic Counsel that I want, and honest aides:
And in this name, I need you, for a friend!
Never in any other; for his ill,
Must not make me, Sr, worse.
O friend! forsake not
The brave occasion, virtue offers you,
To keep you innocent: I have feared for both;
And watched you, to prevent the ill I feared.
But, since the weaker side hath so assured me,
Let not the stronger fall by his own vice,
Or be the less a friend, cause virtue needs him.
Virtue shall never ask my succours twice;
Most friend, most man; your Counsels are commands:
Lady, I can love goodness in you, more
Then I did Beauty; and doe here entitle
Your virtue, to the power, upon a life
You shall engage in any fruitful service,
Even to forfeit.
Madame: Do you hear, Sir,
We have another leg-strain'd, for this Dottrel.
Have he's a quarrel to carry, and he's cause
A deed of Feoffment, of his whole estate
To be drawn yonder; h'ha'st within: And you,
Only, he means to make Feoffee. H'is fallen
So desperately enamoured on you, and talks
Most like a mad-man: you did never hear
A Phre•t••• so in love with his own favour!
Now, you doe know, it is of no validity
In your name, as you stand; Therefore advise him
To put in me. (h'is come here:) You shall share Sir.
Madame, I have a suit to you; and afore-hand,
I doe bespeak you; you must not deny me,
I will be granted.
Sir, I must know it, though.
No Lady; you must not know it: yet, you must too.
For the trust of it, and the fame indeed,
Which else were lost me. I would use your name,
But in a Feoffment: make my whole estate
Over unto you: a trifle, a thing of nothing,
Some eighteen hundred.
Alas! I understand not
Those things Sir. I am a woman, and most loath,
To embark my self—
You will not slight me, Madame?
Nor you'll not quarrel me?
No, sweet Madame, I have
Already a dependence; for which cause
I doe this: let me put you in, dear Madame,
I may be fairly killed.
You have your friends, Sir,
About you here, for choice.
She tells you right, Sir.
Death, if she doe, what do I care for that?
Say, I would have her tell me wrong.
Why, Sir,
If for the trust, you'll let me have the honour
To name you one.
Nay, you do me the honour, Madame:
Who is it?
This Gentleman:
O, no, sweet Madame,
••'is friend to him, with whom I have the dependence.
Who might he bee?
One Wittipol: do you know him?
Alas Sir, he, a toy: This Gentleman
A friend to him? no more then I am Sir!
But will your Ladyship undertake that, Madame?
Yes, and what else, for him, you will engage me.
What is his name?
His name is Justice Manly.
Whence do's he write himself?
of Middle-sex, Esquire.
Say nothing, Madame. Clerk, come hither
Write Justice Manly, Squire of Middle-sex.
What have you done, Sir?
Named a gentleman,
That I'll be answerable for, to you, Sir.
Had I named you, it might have been suspected:
This way, it is safe.
Come Gentlemen, your hands,
For witness.
What is this?
You have made Election
Of a most worthy Gentleman!
Would one of worth
Had spoke it: whence it comes, it is
Rather a shame to me, then a praise.
Sir, I will give you any Satisfaction.
Be silent then: "falsehood commends not truth.
You do deliver this, Sir, as your deed.
To th'vse of Mr. Manly?
Yes: and Sir—
When did you see young Wittipol? I am ready,
For process now; Sir, this is Publication.
He shall hear from me, he would needs be courting
My wife, Sir.
Yes: So witnesses his Cloak there.
Nay good Sir, —Madame, you did undertake—
What?
That he was not Wittipols friend.
I hear
Sr. no confession of it.
O she know's not;
Now I remember, Madame! This young Wittipol,
Would have debauched my wife, and made me Cuckold,
Through a casement; he did fly her home
To mine own window: but I think I sou't him,
And raui•h'd her away, out of his pounces.
I have sworn to ha'him by the ears: I fear
The toy, with not do me right.
No? that were pity!
What right doe you ask, Sir? Here he is will do it you?
Ha? Wittipol?
I Sir, no more Lady now,
Not Spaniard!
No indeed, it is Wittipol.
Am I the thing I feared?
A Cuckold? No Sir,
But you were late in possibility,
I'll tell you so much.
But your wife's too virtuous!
VVee'll see her Sir, at home, and leave you here,
To be made Duke of Shore-ditch with a project.
Thieves, ravishers.
Cry but another note, Sir,
I'll mar the tune, of your pipe!
Gi'me my deed, then.
Neither: that shall be kept for your wives good,
Who will know, better how to use it.
Have
To feast you with my land?
Sir, be you quiet,
Or I shall gag you, ere I go, consult
Your Master of dependences; how to make this
A second business, you have time Sir.
Oh!
What will the ghost of my wise Grandfather,
My learned Father, with my worshipful Mother,
Think of me now, that left me in this world
In state to be their Heir? that am become
A Cuckold, and an Ass, and my wives Ward;
Likely to loose my land; have my throat cut:
All, by her practice!
Sir, we are all abused!
And be so still! Who hinders you, I pray you,
Let me alone, I would enjoy my self,
And be the Duke of Drowned Land, you have made me.
Sir, we must play an after-game of this
But I am not in case to be a Gam-ster:
I tell you once again—
You must be ruled
And take some counsel.
Sir, I do hate counsel,
As I do hate my wife, my wicked wife!
But we may think how to recover all:
If you will act.
I will not think; nor act;
Nor yet recover; do not talk to me?
I'll run out of my wits, rather then hear;
I will be what I am, Fabian Fitz-Dottrel,
Though all the world say nay to it.
Let's follow him.
But he's my Lady mist me?
Beyond telling!
Here he's been that infinity of strangers!
And then she would have had you, to have sampled you
With one within, that they are now a teaching;
And do's pretend to your rank.
Good fellow Pit-fall,
Tel Mr. Mere-craft, I entreat a word with him.
This most unlucky accident will go near
To be the loss of my place; I am in doubt!
With me? what say you Mr Ambler?
Sir,
I would beseech your worship stand between
Me, and my Ladies displeasure, for my absence.
O, is that all? I warrant you.
I would tell you Sir
But how it happened.
Brief, good Master Ambler,
Put your self to your rack: for I have tasque
Of more importance.
Sir you'll laugh at me!
But (so is Truth) a very friend of mine,
Finding by conference with me, that I lived
Too chaste for my complexion (and indeed
Too honest for my place, Sir) did advise me
If I did love my self (as that I do,
I must confess)
Spare your Parenthesis.
To give my body a little evacuation—
Well, and you went to a whore?
No, Sr. I durst not
(For fear it might arrive at some body's ear,
It should not) trust my self to a common house;
But got the Gentlewoman to go with me,
And carry her bedding to a Conduit-head,
Hard by the place toward Tyborne, which they call
My L. Majors Banqueting-house. Now Sir, This morning
Was Execution; and I ner'e dream't on it,
Till I heard the noise of the people, and the horses;
And neither I▪ nor the poor Gentlewoman
Durst stir, till all was done and past: so that
In the Interim, we fell a sleep again.
Nay, if you fall, from your gallop, I am gone Sr.
But, when I waked, to put on my clothes, a suit,
I made new for the action, it was gone,
And all my money, with my purse, my seals,
My hard-wax, and my table-bookes, my studies,
And a fine new devise, I had to carry
My pen, and ink, my civet, and my tooth-picks,
All under one. But, that which grieved me, was
The Gentlewoman's shoes (with a pair of roses,
And garters, I had given her for the business)
So as that made vs stay, till it was dark.
For I was fine to lend her mine, and walk
In a rug, by her, barefoot, to Saint Giles'es.
A kind of Irish penance! Is this all, Sir?
To satisfy my Lady.
I will promise you, Sr.
I have told the true Disaster.
I cannot stay wi'you
Sir, to condole; but gratulate your return.
An honest gentleman, but he's never at leisure
To be himself: He he's such tides of business.
O, Call me home again, dear Chief, and put me
To yoking foxes, milking of Hee-goates,
Pounding of water in a mortar, lauing
The sea dry with a nut-shell, gathering all
The leaves are fallen this Autumn, drawing farts
Out of dead bodies, making ropes of sand,
Catching the winds together in a net,
Mustering of ants, and numbering atoms; all
That hell, and you thought exquisite torments, rather
Then stay me here, a thought more: I would sooner
Keep fleas within a circle, and be accountant
A thousand year, which of'hem and how far
Out leaped the other, then endure a minute
Such as I have within. There is no hell
To a Lady of fashion. All your tortures there
Are pastimes to it. 'T would be a refreshing
For me, to be in the sire again, from hence.
This is my suite, and those the shoes and roses!
The have such impertinent vexations,
A general Council of devils could not hit—
Ha! This is hee, I took a sleep with his Wench,
And borrowed his clothes. What might I doe to balke him?
Do you hear, Sr?
Answ. him but not to th'purpose
What is your name, I pray you Sir.
Is it so late Sir?
I ask not of the time, but of your name, Sir,
I thank you, Sir. Yes it dos hold Sir, certain.
Hold, Sir? What holds? I must both hold, and talk to you
About these clothes.
A very pretty lace!
But the Taylor consent me.
No, I am consent
By you! robbed.
Why, when you please Sir, I am
For three penny Gleek, your man
Pox o'your gleek,
And three pence. Give me an answer.
Sir,
My master is the best at it.
Your master!
Who is your Master.
Let it be friday night.
What should be then?
Your best songs Thom. of Be∣t'lem
I think, you are he. Do's he mock me trow, from pur∣pose?
Or do •ot I speak to him, what I mean?
Good Sir your name.
Only a couple a' Cocks Sir,
If we can get a Widgin, it is in season.
He hopes to make on of these Scipticks of me
(I think I name 'hem right) and do's not fly me.
I wonder at that! it is a strange confidence!
I'll prove another way, to draw his answer.
It is the easiest thing Sir, to be done.
As plain, as fizzling: roll but with your eyes,
And foam at th'mouth. A little castle-soape
Will do it, to rub your lips: And then a nutshell,
With toe, and touch-wood in it to spit fire,
Did you ner'e read, Sir, little Darrels tricks,
With the boy of Burton, and the 7. in Lancashire,
Summers at Nottingham? All these do teach it.
And we'll give out, Sir, that your wife he's bewitched you:
And practised with those two, as Sorcerers.
And ga' you potions, by which means you were
Not Compose mantis, when you made your feoffment.
There's no recovery of your state, but this:
This, Sir, will sting.
And move in a Court of equity.
For, it is more then manifest, that this was
A plot of your wives, to get your land.
I think it.
Sir it appears.
Nay, and my cousin has known
These gallants in these shapes.
To have don strange things, Sir▪
One as the Lady, the other as the Squire.
How, a mans honesty may be fooled! I thought him
A very Lady.
So did I: renounce me else.
But this way, Sir, you'll be revenged at height.
Upon 'hem all.
Yes faith, and since your Wife
Has run the way of woman thus, even give her —
Lost by this hand, to me; dead to all joys
Of her dear Dottrell, I shall never pity her:
That could, pity her self.
Princely resolved Sir,
And like your self still, in Potentià.
GVilt-head what news.?
O Sir, my hundred pieces:
Let me have them yet.
Yes Sir, officers
Arrest him.
Me?
I arrest you.
Keep the peace,
I charge you gentlemen.
Arrest me? Why?
For better security, Sir. My son Plutarchus
Assures me, you're not worth a great.
Pardon me, Father,
I said his worship had no foot of Land left:
And that I'll justify, for I writ the deed.
Have you these tricks in the city?
Yes, and more.
Arrest this gallant too, here, at my suite.
I, and at mine. He owes me for his lodging
Two year and a quarter.
Why M. Guilt-head, Land-Lord,
Thou art not mad, though you are Constable
Puffed up with th'pride of the place? Do you hear, Sirs.
Have I deserved this from you two? for all
My pains at Court, to get you each a patent
For what?
Vpo' my project of the forks,
Forks? what be they?
The laudable use of forks,
Brought into custom here, as they are in Italy,
To th'sparing of Napkins. That, that should have made
Your bellows go at the forge, as his at the fornace.
I have procured it, have the Signet for it,
Dealt with the Linnen-drapers, on my private,
By cause, I feared, they were the likeliest ever
To stir against, to cross it: for twill be
A mighty saver of Linen through the kingdom
(As that is one of my grounds, and to spare washing)
Now, on you two, had I laid all the profits.
Guilt-h•ad to have the making of all those
O• go•d and silver, for the better personages;
And you, of those of Steel for the common sort.
And both by Patent, I had brought you your seals in.
But now you have prevented me, and I thank you.
Sir, I will bail you, at mine own ap-perill.
Nay choose.
Do you so too, good Father.
I like the fashion of the project, well,
The forks! It may be a lucky one! and is not
Intricate, as one would say, but fit for
Plain heads, as ours, to deal in. Do you hear
Officers, we discharge you.
Why this shows
A little good nature in you, I confess,
But do not tempt your friends thus. Little Guilt-head,
Advise your sire, great Guilt-head from these courses:
And, here, to trouble a great man in reversion,
For a matter of fifty on a false Alarm,
Away, it shows not well. Let him get the pieces
And bring 'hem. Yo'll hear more else.
Father.
O Master Sledge, are you here? I have been to seek you.
You are the Constable, they say. Here's one
That I do charge with Felony, for the suite
He wears, Sir.
Who? M. Fitz-Dottrels man?
Ware what you do, M. Ambler.
Sir, these clothes
I'll swear, are mine: and the shoes the gentlewoman's
I told you of: and have him before a Justice,
I will.
My master, Sir, will pass his word for me.
O, can you speak to purpose now?
Not I,
If you be such a one Sir, I will leave you
To your God fathers in Law. Let twelve men work.
Do you hear Sir, pray, in private.
well, what say you?
Brief, for I have no time to loose▪
Truth is, Sir,
I am the very Devil, and had leave
To take this body, I am in, to serve you:
Which was a Cutpurses, and hanged this Morning▪
And it is likewise true, I stole this suite
To cl•th me with. Bu• Sir let me not go
To prison for it. I have hitherto
Lost time, done nothing; shown, indeed, no part▪
Of my Devils nature. Now, I will so help
Your malice, against these parties: so advance
The business, that you have in hand of witchcraft,
An• your possession, as my self were in you.
Teach you •uch tricks, to make your belly swell,
And your eyes turn, to foam, to stare, to gnash
Your teeth together, and to beat your self,
Laugh loud, and fine six voices—
Out you Rogue!
You most infernal counterfeit wretch! Avaunt!
Do you think to gull me with your▪ Aesops Fables?
Here take him to you, I have no part in him.
Sir.
Away, I do disclaim, I will not hear you.
What said he to you, Sir?
Like a lying rascal
Told me he was the Devil.
How! a good jest!
And that he would teach me, such fine devils tricks
For our new resolution.
Of pox on him,
It was excellent wisely done, Sir, not to trust him▪
Why, if he were the Devil, we sha' not need him,
If you'll be ruled. Go throw your self on a bed, Sir,
And fine you ill. We'll not be seen with you,
Till after, that you have a fit: and all
Confirmed within. Keep you with the two Ladies
And persuade them. I'll to Justice Either-side,
And possess him with all. Trains shall seek out Engine,
And they two fill the town with it, every cable
Is to be veered. We must employ out all
Our emissaries now; Sir, I will send you
Bladders and Bellows. Sir, be confident,
It is no hard thing t'out doe the Devil in:
A Boy of thirteen year old made him an Ass
But •'toher day.
Well, I'll begin to practice,
And scope the imputation of being Cuckold,
By mine own act.
yo'are right.
Come, you have put
Your self to a simple coil here, and your friends,
By dealing with new Agents, in new plots.
No more of that, sweet cousin.
What had you
To doe with this same Wittipol, for a Lady?
Question not tha•: it is done.
You had some strain
Above E la?
I had indeed.
And, now, you crack for it.
Do not upbraid me.
Come, you must be told on it;
You are so covetous, still, to embrace
More then you can, that you loose all.
It is right.
What would you more, then Guilty? Now, your succours.
HEre you are lodged, Sir, you must send your garnish,
If you'll be private.
There it is, Sir, leave me.
To New-gate, brought? How is the name of Devil
Discredited in me! What a lost fiend
Shall I be, on return? My Chief will roar
•n triumph, now, that I have been on earth,
A day, and done no noted thing, but brought
That body back here, was hanged out this morning.
Well! would it once were midnight, that I knew
My utmost. I think Time be drunk, and sleeps;
He is so still, and moves not! I doe glory
Now i'my torment. Neither can I expect it,
I have it with my fact.
Child of hell, be thou merry:
Put a look on, as round, boy, and red as a cherry.
Cast care at thy posternes; and firk i'thy fetters,
They are ornaments, Baby, have graced thy betters:
Look upon me, and hearken. Our Chief doth salute thee,
And least the coldyron should chance to confute thee,
H' hath sent thee, grant-paroll by me to stay longer
A month here on earth, against cold Child, or honger
How? longer here a month?
Yes, boy, till the Session,
That so thou may have a triumphal egression.
In a cart, to be hanged.
No, Child, in a Carre,
The chariot of Triumph, which most of them are.
And in the mean time, to be greasy, and bouzy,
And nasty, and filthy, and ragged and lousy,
With dam'n me, renounce me, and all the fine phrases;
That bring, unto Tiborne, the plentiful gazes.
He is a Devil! and may be our Chief!
The great Superior Devil! for his malice:
Arch-diuel! I acknowledge him. He knew
What I would suffer, when he tie'd me up thus
In a rogues body: and he has (I thank him)
His tyrannous pleasure on me, to confine me
To the unlucky carcass of a Cutpurse,
Wherein I could do nothing.
Impudent fiend,
Stop thy lewd mouth. Doest thou not shame and tremble
To lay thine own dull damned defects upon
An innocent case, there? Why thou heavy slave!
The spirit, that did possess that fresh before
Put more true life, in a finger, and a thumb,
Then thou in the whole Mass. Yet thou rebell'st
And murmur? What one profer hast thou made,
Wicked enough, this day, that might be called
Worthy thine own, much less the name that sent thee?
First, thou did help thy self into a beating
Promptly, and with t endangered'st too thy tongue:
A Devil, and could not keep a body entire
One day! That, for our credit. And to vindicate it,
Hinderd'st (for ought thou know) a deed of darkness:
Which was an act of that egregious folly,
As no one, to'ard the Devil, could have thought on.
This for your acting! but for suffering! why
Thou hast been cheated on, with a false beard,
And a turned cloak. Faith, would your predecessor
The Cutpurse, think you, have been so? Out upon thee,
The hurt th'hast don, to let men know their strength,
And that the'are able to out-doe a devil
Put in a body, will for ever be
A scarre upon our Name! whom hast thou dealt with,
Woman or man, this day, but have out-gone thee
Some way, and most have proved the better fiends?
Yet, you would be employed? Yes, hell shall make you
Provincial of the heaters! or Bawd-ledger,
For this side of the town! No doubt you'll render
A rare account of things. Bane of your itch,
And scratching for employment. I'll have brimstone
To al lay it sure, and fire to singe your nails off,
But, that I would not such a damned dishonour
Stick on our state, as that the devil were hanged;
And could not save a body, that he took
From Tyborne, but it must come thither again:
You should even ride. But, up away with him—
Mount, dearling of darkness, my shoulders are broad:
He that caries the fiend, is sure of his load.
The Devil was wont to carry away the evil;
But, now, the Evil out-carries the Devil.
O me!
1. What's this? 2. A ••ce of Justice Hall
Is broken down. 3. Faugh! what 〈…〉 of brimstone
Is here? 4. The prisoner's dead, came in b•t now▪
Ha? where? 4. Look here.
S'lid, I should know his coun∣tenance!
It is Gill-Cut-purse, was hanged out, this morning!
It is he! 2. The Devil, sure, has a hand in this!
3. What shall wee doe?
Carry the news of it
Unto the Sheriffs. 1. And to the Justices.
4. This strange! 3. And savours of the Devil, strongly!
2. In have the sulphur of Hell-coale i'my nose.
1. Faugh.
Carry him in. 1. Away. 2. How rank it is!
THis was the notablest Conspiracy,
That ere I heard of.
Sir, They had given him potions,
That did enamour him on the counterfeit Lady—
Just to the time o'deliuery of the deed—
And then the witchcraft 'gan't' appear, for straight
He fell into his fit.
Of rage at first, Sir,
Which since has so increased.
Good Sr. Poule, see him,
And punish the impostors.
Therefore I come, Madame.
Let Mr Etherside alone, Madame.
Do you hear?
Call in the Constable, I will have him by:
H'is the Kings Officer! and some Citizens,
Of credit! I'll discharge my conscience clearly.
Yes, Sir, and send for his wife.
And the two Sor∣carers,
By any means!
I thought one a true Lady,
I should be sworn. So did you, Eyther-si••?
Yes, by that light, would I might •ever stir else, Tailbush.
And the other a civil Gentleman.
But▪ Madame,
You know what I told your Ladyship.
I now see it:
I was providing of a banquet for 'hem.
After I had done instructing of the fellow
De•uile, the Gentleman's man
Who's found a thief, Madam.
And to have robed your Usher, Master Ambler,
This morning.
How?
In•l tell you more, anon.
Go me some garlic, garlic, garlic, garlic.
Hark the poor Gentleman, how he is tormented!
My wife is a whore, I'll kiss her no more: and why?
Ma'st not thou be a Cuckold, as well as I?
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, &amp;c.
That is the Devil speaks, and laughs in him.
Do you think so, Sr.
I discharge my conscience.
And is not the Devil good company? Yes, wis.
How he changes, Sir, his voice!
And a Cuckold is
Where ere hee put his head, with a a Wa•ion,
If his horns be forth, the Devils companion!
Look, look, look, else.
How he foams!
And swells!
O, me! what's that there, rises in his belly!
A strange thing! hold it down:
We cannot, Madam.
It is too apparent this!
Wittipol, Wittipol.
How now, what play have we here.
What fine, new matters?
The Cockscomb, and the Coverlet.
O strange impudēce!
That these should come to face their sin!
And out-face
Justice, they are the parties, Sir.
Say nothing.
Did you mark, Sir, upon their coming in,
How he called Wittipol.
And never saw 'hem.
I warrant you did I, let 'hem play a while.
Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
Lass poor Gentleman!
How he is tortured!
Fie, Master Fitz-dottrel!
What doe you mean to counterfeit thus?
O, ô,
She comes with a needle, and thrusts it in,
She pulls out that, and she puts in a pin,
And now, and now, I doe not know how, nor where,
But she pricks me here, and she pricks me there: oh, oh:
Woman forbear.
What, Sr?
A practice soul
For one so fair:
Hath this, then, credit with you?
Do you believe in it?
Gentlemen, I'll discharge
My conscience: It is a clear conspiracy!
A dark, and devilish practice! I detest it!
The Justice sure will prove to be the merrier!
This is most strange, Sir.
Come not to confront
Authority with insolence: I tell you,
I doe detest it. Here comes the Kings Constable,
And with him a right worshipful Commoner;
My good friend, Master Guilt-head! I am glad
I can before such witnesses, profess
My conscience, and my detestation of it.
Horrible! most vnaturall! Abominable!
You doe not tumble enough.
Wallow, gnash:
O, how he is vexed!
It is too manifest.
Give him more soap to foam with, now lie still.
And act a little.
What do's he now, Sr.
Show
The taking of Tobacco, with which the Devil
Is so delighted.
Hum!
And calls for Hum.
You takers of strong Waters, and Tobacco,
Mark this.
Yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow, &amp;c.
That's Starch! the Devils Idol of that colour.
He ratifies it, clapping of his hands.
The proofs are pregnant.
How the Devil can act!
He is the Master of Players! Master Guilt-head,
And Poets, too! you heard him talk in rime!
I had forgot to observe it to you, ere while!
See, he spits fire.
O no, he plays at Figgum,
The Devil is the Author of wicked Figgum—
Why speak you not unto him?
If I had
All innocence of man to be endangered,
And he could save, or ruin it: I'd not breath
A syllable in request, to such a fellow,
I'd rather fall.
ô they whisper, they whisper, whisper. &amp;c.
Wee shall have more, of Devils a score,
To come to dinner, in me the sinner.
Alas, poor Gentleman!
Put 'hem asunder.
Keep 'hem one from the other.
Are you frantic, Sir,
Or what grave dotage moves you, to take part
With so much villainy? wee are not afraid
Either of law, or trial; let vs be
Examined what our ends were, what the means,
To work by; and possibility of those means.
Doe not conclude against vs, ere you hear vs.
I will not hear you, yet I will conclude
Out of the circumstances.
Will you so, Sir?
Yes, they are palpable:
Not as your folly:
I will discharge my conscience, and doe all
To the Meridian of Justice:
You doe well, Sir:
Provide me to eat, three or four dishes o'good meat,
I'll feast them, and their trains, a Justice head and brains
Shall be the first.
The Devil loves not Justice,
There you may see.
A spare-rib of my wife,
And a whores purt'nance! a Guilt-head whole.
Be not you troubled, Sir, the Devil speaks it.
Yes, wis, Knight, shite, Poule, Ioule, owl, foul, troule, boule.
Crambe, another of the Diuell's games!
Speak, Sir, some Greek, if you can. Is not the Justice
A solemn gamester?
Peace.
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉,
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉,
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉.
Hee curses
In Greek I think.
Your Spanish, that I taught you.
Quebrémos el ojo de burlas,
How? your rest—
Let's break his neck in jest, the Devil says,
Di grátia, Signòr miose haú•te denári fataméne part.
What, would the Devil borrow money?
Oy,
Oy Monsieur, ùn pàuure Diable! Diablet in!
It is the devil, by his several languages.
Whore's St. Poule Ether-side?
Here, what's the mat∣la?
O! such an accident fallen out at Newgate, Sir:
A great piece of the prison is •ent down!
The Devil has been there, Sir, in the body—
Of the young Cut-purse, was hanged out this morning,
But, in new clothes, Sir, every one of vs know him.
These things were found in his pocket.
Those are mine, Sr.
I think he was committed on your charge, Sir.
For a new felony
Yes.
Hoe's gone, Sir, now,
And left vs the dead body. But withal, Sir,
Such an infernal stink, and steam behind,
You cannot see St. Pulchars Steeple, yet.
They smell it as far as Ware, as the wind lies,
By this time, sure.
Is this upon your credit, friend?
Sir, you may see, and satisfy your self.
Nay, then, it is time to leave off counterfeiting.
Sir I am not bewitched, nor have a Devil:
No more then you. I doe defy him, I,
And did abuse you. These two Gentlemen
Put me upon it. (I have faith against him)
They taught me all my tricks. I will tell truth,
And shame the Fiend. See, here, Sir, are my bellows,
And my false belly, and my Mouse, and all
That should have come forth?
Sir, are not you ashamed
Now of your solemn, serious vanity?
I will make honourable amends to truth.
And so will I. But these are Coozeners, still;
And have my land, as plotters, with my wife:
Who, though she be not a witch, is worse, a whore.
Sir, you belie her. She is chaste, and virtuous,
And we are honest. I doe know no glory
A man should hope, by venting his own follies,
But you'll still be an Ass, in spite of providence.
Please you go in, Sir, and hear truths, then judge 'hem:
And make amends for your late rashness; when,
You shall but hear the pains and care was taken,
To save this fool from ruin (his Grace of Drowned land)
My land is drowned indeed—
Peace.
And how much
His modest, and too worthy wife hath suffered
By mis-construction, from him, you will blush,
First, for your own belief, more for his actions!
His land is his: and never, by my friend,
Or by my self, meant to another use,
But for her succours, who hath equal right.
If any other had worse counsels in it,
(I know I speak to those can apprehend me)
Let 'hem repent 'hem, and be not detected.
It is not manly to take joy, or pride
In humane errors (wee doe all ill things,
They doe 'hem worst that love 'hem, and dwell there,
Till the plague comes) The few that have the seeds
Of goodness left, will sooner make their way
To a true life, by shame, then punishment.
THus, the Proiecter, here, is ouer-throwne.
But I have now a Project of mine own,
If it may pass: that no man would inuit
The Poet from vs, to sup forth to night,
If the play please. If it displeasant be,
We doe presume, that no man will: nor wee.

TRuth says, of old, the art of making Plays
Was to content the people; and their praise
Was to the Poet money, wine, and baize.
But in this age, a sect of Writers are,
That, only, for particular likings care,
And will taste nothing that is popular.
With such we mingle neither brains, nor breasts;
Our wishes, like to those (make public feasts)
Are not to please the Cooks tastes, but the guests.
Yet, if those cunning palates hither come,
They shall find guests entreaty, and good room;
And though all relish not, sure, there will be some,
That, when they leave their seats, shall make 'hem say,
Who wrote that piece, could so have wrote a Play:
But that, he knew, this was the better way.
For, to present all Custard, or all Tart,
And have no other meats, to bear a part,
Or to want bread, and salt, were but course art.
The Poet prays you then, with better thought
To sit; and, when his Cates are all in brought,
Though there be none far fet, there will deare-bought
Be fit for Ladies: some for Lords, Knights, Squires,
Some for your waiting wench, and Citie-wires,
Some for your men, and daughters of White-Fryars.
Nor is it, only, while you keep your seat
Here, that his feast will last; but you shall eat
A week at Ord'narie•, on his broken meat:
If his Muse be true,
Who commends her to you.
THe ends of all, who for the Scene doe write,
Are,  or should be, to profit, and delight.
And still 't hath been the praise of all best times,
So persons were not touched, to tax the crimes.
Then, in this Play, which we present tonight,
And make the object of your ear, and sight,
On forfeit of your selves, think nothing true,
Lest so you make the maker to judge you.
For he knows, Poet never credit gained
By writing truths, but things (like truths) well feigned.
If any, yet, will (with particular slight
Of application) wrest what he doth write;
And that he meant or him, or her, will say:
They make a Libel, which he made a Play.
 HAVE you got the Song yet perfect I ga'you, Boy?
Yes, Sir.
Let me hear it.
You shall, Sir, but i'saith let no body else.
Why, I pay?
It will get you the dangerous name of a Poet in
Town, Sir, besides me a perfect deal of ill will at the Manse∣on you wot of, whose Lady is the Argument of it: where now I am the welcom'st thing under a man that comes there.
I think, and aboue a man too, if the truth were racked out of you.
No faith, I'll confess before, Sir. The Gentlewomen play with me, and throw me of the bed; and carry me into my Lady; and she kisses me with her oiled face; and puts a Per∣ruke of my head; and asks me an• I will wear her Gown; and I say, no: and then she hits me a blow of the ear, and calls me Innocent, and lets me go.
No marvel, if the door bee kept shut against your Master, when the entrance is so easy to you—well Sir, you shall go there no more, lest I bee fine to seek your voice in my Ladies Rushes, a fortnight hence, Sing, Sir. 
Why, here's the man that can melt away his time, and never feels it! what, between his Mistress abroad, and his Angle at home, high Fare, soft Lodging, fine Clothes, and his Fiddle; he thinks the hours ha'no wings, or the day no Post-horse. Well, Sir Gallant, were you struck with the Plague this minute, or condemned to any capital punish∣meant to morrow, you would begin then to think, and va∣lue every Article of your time, esteem it at the true rate, and give all for it.
Why, what should a man doe?
Why, nothing: or that, which when it is done, is as i∣dl. Harken after the next Horse-race, or Hunting-match; lay Wagers, praise Puppy, or Pepper-corne, White-foot, Franklin; swear upon White-maynes party; sp•nd aloud, that my Lords may hear you; visit my Ladies at night, and bee able to give 'hem the Character of every Bowler, or Better of the Greene. These be the things, wherein your fashionable men exercise themselves, and I for company.
Nay, if I have thy authority, I'll not leave yet. Come, the other are considerations, when wee come to have gray heads, and weak hams, moist eyes, and shrunk mem∣bers.
we think she sleeps: nor, when the doors are shut, should men be inquiring, all is sacred within, then. Is it for vs to see their Perrukes put on, their false Teeth, their Complexion, their Eye-browes, their Nails? you see guilders will not work, but enclosed. They must not discover, how little serve, with the help of art, to adorn a great deal. How long did the Canvas hang before Ald-gate? were the people suffered to see the Cities Love, and Charity, while they were rude stone, before they were painted, and burnished? No. No more should Servants approach their Mistresses, but when they are complete, and finished.
Well said, my True-wit.
And a wise Lady will keep a guard always upon the place, that she may doe things securely. I once followed a rude fellow into a Chamber, where the poor Madame, for haste, and troubled, snatched at her Peruke, to cover her baldness: and put it on, the wrong way.
O prodigy!
And the unconscionable Knave held her in Com∣plement an hour, with that reversed face, when I still looked when she should talk from the t'other side.
Why, thou should have relieved her.
No faith, I let her alone, as we'll let this argument, if you please, and pass to another, When saw you Dauphi∣no, Eugene?
Not these three days. Shall we go to him this more∣ning? he is very melancholic, I hear.
Sick of the Uncle? is hee? I met that stiff piece of Formality, his Uncle, yesterday, with a huge Turban of Night-Caps on his head, buckled over his ears.
O, that's his custom when he walks abroad. Hee can endure no noise, man.
So I have heard. But is the disease so ridiculous in him, as it is made? they say, hee has been upon divers Trea∣ties with the Fish-wiues, and Orenge-women; and Articles
propounded between them: marry, the Chimney-sweepers will not be drawn in.
No, nor the Broome-men: They stand out stiffly. Hee cannot endure a Costard-monger, hee swoons if hee hear one.
Me thinks, a Smith should be ominous.
Or any Hammer-man. A Brasier is not suffered to dwell in the Parish, nor an Armourer. He would have hanged a Pewterers' prentice once up on a Shroue-tuesdayes Riot, for being of that Trade, when the rest were quit.
A Trumpet should fright him terribly, or the Hau•∣boys?
Out of his senses. The Weights of the City have a Pension of him, not to come near that Ward. This Youth practised on him, one night, like the Bell-man; and never left till hee had brought him down to the door, with a Long-Sword: and there left him flourishing with the Ayre.
Why, Sir! hee hath chosen a street to lye in, so nar∣row at both ends, that it will receive no Coaches, nor Carts, nor any of these common noises: and therefore, wee that love him, devise to bring him in such as wee may, now and then, for his exercise, to breath him. Hee would grow resty else in his ease. His Virtue would rust without action. I en∣treated a Beare-ward, one day, to come down with the Dogs of some four Parishes that way, and I thank him, he did; and cried his Games under Master Morose's window: till hee was sent crying away, with his head made a most bleding Spectacle to the multitude. And, another time, a Fencer, marching to his Prize, had his Drum most tragic∣cally run thorough, for taking that street in his way, at my request.
A good Wag. How do's he for the Bells?
O, in the Queens time, he was wont to go out of Town every Saturday at ten a clock, or on Holy-day-eues. But now, by reason of the sickness, the perpetuity of ring∣ing has made him devise a room, with double walls, and
treble feelings; the windores close shut, and calle'd: and there he lives by Candle-light. Hee turned away a man last week, for having a pair of new Shoes, that creak'd. And this fell∣low waits on him now, in Tennis-court Sockes, or Slippers sol'd with Wool: and they talk each to other, in a Trunk. See who comes here.
HOw now! what alle you Sirs? dumb?
Struck into stone almost, I am here, with Tales of thine Uncle! There was never such a Prodigy heard of.
I would you would once loose this subject, my masters, for my sake. They are such as you are, that have brought me into that predicament, I am, with him.
How is that?
Marry, that he will dis-inherit me, no more. Hee thinks, I, and my company are Authors of all the ridicu∣lous Acts, and Moniments are told of him.
Slid, I would bee the Author of more, to vex him, that purpose deserves it: it gives thee law of plaguing him. I'll tell thee what I would doe. I would make a false Alma∣neck; get it printed: and then have him drawn out on a Co∣ronation day to the Tower-Wharfe, and kill him with the noise of the Ordinance. Dis-inherit thee! hee cannot, man. Art not thou next of blood, and his Sisters Son?
I but hee will thrust me out of it, hee vows, and marry.
How! that's a more portent. Can he endure no noise, and will venture on a Wife?
Yes: why, thou art a stranger, it seems, to his best trick, yet. He has employed a fellow this half year, all over England, to harken him out a dumb woman; be she of any form, or any quality, so she be able to bear children: her silence is Dowry enough, he says.
But, I trust to God, he has found none.
No, but he has heard of one that's lodged in the next street to him, who is exceedingly soft-spoken; thrifty of her speech; that spends but six words a day. And her he's about now, and shall have her.
Is it possible! who is his agent in the business?
Marry, a Barber, one Cut-berd: an honest fellow, one that tells Dauphin all here.
Why, you oppress me with wonder! A woman, and a Barber, and love no noise!
Yes faith. The fellow trims him silently, and has not the knack with his Shears, or his fingers: and that continence in a Barber hee thinks so emient a virtue, as it has made him chief of his counsel.
Is the Barber to be seen? or the Wench?
Y••, that they are.
I p•ay thee, Dauphin, let's go thither.
I have some business now: I cannot in faith.
You shall have no business shall make you neglect this, Sir, we'll make her talk, believe it; or if she will not, wee can give out, at least so much as shall interrupt the Trea∣tie: we will break it. Thou art bound in conscience, when he suspects thee without cause to torment him.
Not I, by any means. I ll give no suffrage to 't. Hee shall never ha that plea against me, that I opposed the least phant'sie of his. Let it lye upon my Stars to be guilty, I'll be innocent.
Yes, and be poor, and beg; doe, innocent: when some Groom of his has got him an Heir, or this Barber, if he himself cannot. Innocent! I pray thee, Ned, where lies she? let him be innocent, still.
Why, right over against the Barbers; in the house, where Sir Iohn Daw lies.
You doe not mean to confound me!
Why?
Do's he, that would marry her, know so much?
Excellent! He was a fine youth last night, but now he is much finer! what is his christen-name? I have forgot.
Si Amorous La-foole.
The Gentleman is here below, that owns that name.
Hart, hoe's come, to inuit me to Dinner, I hold my life.
Like enough: pray thee, let's have him up.
Boy, marshall him.
With a Truncheon, Sir?
A way, I beseech you. I'll make him tell vs his Pede∣gre, now; and what meat hee has to Dinner; and, who are his Guests; and, the whole course of his fortunes: with a breath.
S'Aue, dear Sir Dauphin, honoured Master Clerimont.
Sir Amorous! you have very much honested my Lodging, with your presence.
Good faith it is a fine Lodging! almost, as delicate a Lodging, as mine.
Not so, Sir.
Excuse me, Sir, if it were in the Strand, I assure you. I am come, Master Clermont, to entreat you wait upon two or three Ladies, to dinner, to day.
How, Sir! wait upon 'hem? did you ever see me car∣rye Dishes?
No, Sir, dispense with me; I meant, to bear 'hem company.
O, that I will, Sir. The doubtfulness of your phrase, believe it, Sir, would breed you a quarrel, once an hour, with the terrible Boys, if you should but keep 'hem fellowship a day.
It should be extremely against my will, Sir, if I con∣tested with any man.
I believe it, Sir; where hold you your Feast?
At Tom Otters, Sir.
Tom Otter? what's he?
Captain Otter, Sir; he is a kind of Gamester: but he has had command, both by Sea, and by Land.
O, then he is animal amphibium?
I, Sir: his Wife was the rich China-woman, that the Courtiers visited so often, that gave the rare entertain∣meant. She commands all at home.
Then, she is Captain Otter?
You say very well, Sir: she is my Kins-woman, a La-Foole by the Mother side, and will inuit, any great Ladies, for my sake.
Not of the La-Fooles of Essex?
No, Sir, the La-Fooles of London.
Now, h'is in.
They all come out of our House, the La-fooles of the North, the La-fooles of the West, the La-Fooles of the East, and South—wee are as ancient a Fami∣lie, as any is in Europe—but I my self am descended lineally of the French La-Fooles—and, wee doe bear for our Coat Yellow, or Or, checkered Azure, and Gulls, and some three or four Colours more, which is a very noted Coat, and has, sometimes been solemnly worn by divers Nobi∣litie of our House—but let that go, Antiquity is not rasp∣cted now—I had a brace of fat Does sent me Gentlemen, and half a dozen of Pheasants, a dozen or two of God wits, and some other Foul, which I would have eaten, while they are good, and in good company—there will bee a grant La∣die, or two, my Lady Haughty, my Lady Centaur, Mistress Dol Mauis—and they come a'purpose, to see the silent Gentlewoman, Mistress Epicoene, that honest Sir Iohn Daw has promised to bring thither—and then, Mistress Trusty, my Ladies Woman, will be there too, and this Honourable
Knight, Sir Dauphin, with your self, Master Clerimont—and we'll be very merry, and have Fiddlers, and dance—I have been a mad Wag, in my time, and have spent some Crowns since I was a Page in Court, to my Lord Lofty, and after, my Ladies Gentleman-vsher, who got me knighted in Ireland, since it pleased my elder Brother to dye—I had as fair a gold Jerkin on that day, as any was worn in the I∣land-Voyage, or at Caliz, none dispraised, and I came over in it hither, showed my self to my friends, in Court, and af∣la went down to my Tenants, in the Country, and sir∣uai'd my Lands, let new Leases, took their Money, spent it in the eye of the Land here, upon Ladies—and now I can take up at my pleasure.
Can you take up Ladies, Sir?
O, let him breathe, he has not recovered.
Would I were your half, in that commodity—
No, Sir, excuse me: I meant Money, which can take up any thing. I have another Guest, or two, to inuit, and say as much to, Gentlemen. I'll take my leave abruptly, in hope you will not fail—Your Servant.
Wee will not fail you, Sir precious La-Foole; but she shall, that your Ladies come to see: if I have credit, a∣fore Sir Daw.
Did you ever hear such a Wind-fucker, as this?
Or, such a Rooke, as the other! that will betray his Mistress, to be seen. Come, it is time, we prevented it.
Go.
CAnnot I, yet, find out a more compendious method, then by this Trunk, to save my Servants the labour of speech, and mine ears, the discord of sounds? Let me see: all Discourses, but mine own, afflict me, they seem harsh,
impertinent, and irksome. Is it not possible, that thou should answer me, by Signs, and, I apprehend thee, fell∣low? speak not, though I question you. You have taken the Ring, off from the street door, as I bad you? answer me not, by speech, but by silence; unless,
 it be otherwise (—) very good. And, you have fastened on a thick quilt, or flock∣bed, on the out-side of the door; that if they knock with their Daggers, or with Brick-bats, they can make no noise? but with your leg, your answer, unless it bee otherwise (—) very good. This is not, only, fit modesty in a Ser∣uant, but good state, and discretion in a Master. And you have been with Cutberd, the Barber, to have him come to me? (—) good. And, hee will come presently? answer me not but with your leg, unless it bee otherwise: if it bee otherwise, shake your head, or shrug (—) so. Your Italian, and Spaniard, are wise in these! and it is a frugal, and comely gravity. How long will it bee, ere Cut∣berd come? stay, if an hour, hold up your whole hand; if half an hour, two fingers; if a quarter, one; (—) good: half a quarter? it is well. And have you given him a Key, to come in without knocking? (—) good. And, is the Lock oyld, and the Hinges, to day? (—) good. And the Quilting of the stayres no where worn out, and bare (—) very good. I see, by much doctrine, and impulsion, it may be effected: stand by. The Turk, in this divine discipline, is admirable, excee∣ding all the Potentates of the Earth; still waited on by Mutes; and all his Commands so executed; yea, even in the War (as I have heard) and in his Marches, most of his Charges, and directions, given by Signs, and with silence: and exquisite art! and I am heartily ashamed, and angry often∣times, that the Princes of Christendom, should suffer a Bar∣barian, to transcend 'hem in so high a point of felicity. I will practise it, hereafter. How now? oh! oh! what Villain? what Prodigy of Mankind is that? look. Oh! cut his throat, cut his throat: what Murderer, Hell-hound, Devil can this be?
It is a Post from the Court—
Out Rogue, and must thou blow thy Horn, too?
Alas, it is a Post from the Court, Sir, that says, hee must speak with you, pain of death—
Pain of thy life, be silent.
BY your leave, Sir (I am a stranger here) is your name, Master Morose? is your name, Master Morose? F•shes! Pythagoreans all! this is strange! What say you, Sir, nothing? Has Harpocrates been here, with his Club, among you? well Sir, I will believe you to be the man, at this time: I will ven∣la upon you, Sir. Your friends at Court commend 'hem to you, Sir—
And are extremely solicitous for you, Sir.
Whose Knave are you!
Mine own Knave, and your Compare, Sir.
Fetch me my Sword—
You shall taste the one half of my Dagger, if you do (Groom) and you, the other, if you stir, Sir: be patient, I charge you, in the Kings Name, and hear me without insur∣reaction. They say, you are to marry? to marry! doe you mark, Sir?
How then, rude companion!
Marry, your friends doe wonder, Sir, the Thames be∣ing so near, wherein you may drown so handsomely; or London-bridge, at a low fall, with a fine leap, to hurry you down the stream; or, such a delicate Steeple, in the Town, as Bow, to vault from; or, a braver height, as Pals, or, if you affected to doe it nearer home, and a shorter way, an excellent Garret Window, into the street; or, a Beam, in the said
Garret, with this Halter; which they have sent, and desire,  that you would sooner commit your grave head to this knot, then to the Wed-locke noose; or, take a little Sublimate, and go out of the World, like a Rat; or a Fly (as one said) with a Straw in your Arse: any way, rather, then to follow this Goblin Matrimony. Alas, Sir, doe you ever think to find a chaste Wife, in these times? now? when there are so many Masques, Plays, Puritan Preachings, Mad-folkes, and other strange fights to be seen daily, private and pub∣lique? if you had lived in King Etheldred's time, Sir, or Ed∣ward the Confessors, you might, perhaps have found in some cold Countrey-Hamlet, then, a dull frostrie Wench, would have been contented with one man: now, they will as soon be pleased with one leg, or one eye. I'll tell you, Sir, the monstrous hazards you shall run with a Wife.
Good Sir! have I ever cozened any friends of yours of their Land? bought their Possessions? taken forfeit of their Mortgage? begged a Reversion from 'hem? bastarded their Issue? what have I done, that may deserve this?
Nothing, Sir, that I know, but your itch of Mar∣riage.
Why? if I had made an Assassinate upon your Fa∣there; vitiated your Mother; ravished your Sisters —
I would kill you, Sir, I would kill you, if you had.
Why? you doe more in this, Sir: It were a ven∣geance centuple, for all facinorous Acts, that could be named, to doe that you doe—
Alas, Sir, I am but a Messenger: I but tell you, what you must hear. It seems, your friends are careful after your souls health, Sir, and would have you know the dan∣ger (but you may doe your pleasure, for all them, I persuade not, Sir) If, after you are married, your Wife doe run away with a Vaulter, or the Frenchman that walks upon Ropes, or him that dances the Ijg, or a Fencer for his skill at his Weapon, why it is not their fault; they have discharged their consciences: when you know what may happen. Nay,
suffer valiantly, Sir, for I must tell you, all the perils that you are obnoxious too. If she be fair, and young, vegetous, no Sweet-meates ever drew more Flies; all the Yellow Dou∣blets, and great Roses in the Town will bee there. If foul, and crooked, she'll bee with them, and buy those Doublets and Roses, Sir. If rich, and that you marry her Dowry, not her; she'll reign in your House, as imperious as a Widow. If Noble, all her Kindred will be your Tyrannes. If fruitful, as proud as May, and humorous as April; she must have her Doctors, her Mid-wiues, her Nurses, her longings every hour: though it be for the dearest morsel of man. If lear∣ned, there was never such a Parrot; all your Patrimony will be too little for the Guests, that must be invited, to hear her speak Latin and Greek: and you must lye with her in those Languages too, if you will please her. If precise, you must feast all the silenced Brethren, once in three days; salute the Sisters; entertain the whole Family, or Wood of 'hem; and hear long-winded Exercises, Singings, and Catechisings, which you are not given to, and yet must give for: to please the zealous Matron your Wife, who, for the holy cause, will cousin you, over and aboue. You begin to sweat, Sir? but this is not half, i'faith: you may doe your pleasure notwithstan∣ding,  as I said before, I come not to persuade you. Upon my faith, Master Serving-man, if you doe stir, I will beat you.
O, what is my sin! what is my sin?
Then, if you love your Wife, or rather, dote on her, Sir: O, how she'll torture you! and take pleasure in your tor∣mints! you shall lye with her but when she lists; she will not hurt her beauty, her complexion: or it must bee for that Jewel, or that Pearl, when she do's; every half hours pleasure must be bought anew: and with the same pain, and charge, you wooed her at first. Then, you must keep what Servants she please; what company she will; that friend must not visit you without her licence; and him she loves most she will seem to hate eagerliest, to decline your
jealousy; or, feign to bee jealous of you first; and for that cause go live with her she-friend, or Cousin at the College, that can instruct her in all the Mysteries, of writing Letters, corrupting Servants, taming Spies; where she must have that rich Gown for such a great day; a new one for the next; a richer for the third; be served in sell∣for; have the Chamber filled with a succession of Grooms, Foot-men, Ushers, and other Messengers; besides Embroy∣derers, Jewellers, Tyre-women, Sempsters, Fether-men, Per∣fumers; while she feels not how the Land drops away; nor the Acres melt; nor foresees the change, when the Mercer has your Woods for her Veluets; never weighs what her Pride costs, Sir: so she may kiss a Page, or a smooth chin, that has the despair of a Beard; be a States-woman, know all the News, what was done at Salisbury, what at the Bath, what at Court, what in Progress; or, so she may cen∣sure Poets, and Authors, and stiles, and compare'hem, Da∣neil with Spenser, Iohnson with the tother youth, and so forth; or, be thought cunning in Controversies, or the very knots of Divinity; and have, often in her mouth, the state of the question: and then skip to the Mathematiques, and de∣monstration and answer, in Religion to one; in state, to ano∣there, in baud'ry to a third.
O, ô!
All this is very true, Sir. And then her going in dis∣guise to that Conjurer, and this cunning woman: where the first question is, how soon you shall die? next, if her pre∣sent Servant love her? next that, if she shall have a new Ser∣uant? and how many? which of her Family would make the best Baud, Male, or Female? what precedence she shall have by her next match? and sets down the answers, and be∣leaves 'hem aboue the Scriptures. Nay, perhaps she'll study the Art.
Gentle Sir, have you done? have you had your plea∣sure of me? I'll think of these things.
Yes Sir: and then comes reeking home of vapor and sweat, with going afoot, and lies in, a month, of a new face, all Oil, and Bird-lime; and rises in Asses Milk, &amp; is cleansed with a new fucus: God b'w'you, Sir. One thing more (which I had almost forgot.) This too, with whom you are to marry, may have made a conveyance of her Virginity a∣fore-hand, as your wise Widows doe of their states, before they marry, in trust to some friend, Sir: who can tell? or if she have not done it yet, she may doe, upon the Wedding day, or the night before, and antidate you Cuckold. The like has bin heard of, in nature. It is no deuis'd impossible thing, Sir. God b'w'you: I'll be bold to leave this Rope with you, Sir, for a remembrance. Farewell Mute.
 Come, have me to my Chamber: but first shut the door. O, shut the door, shut the door: Is he come again?
It is I, Sir, your Barber.
O Cutberd, Cutberd, Cutberd! here has been a cut∣throat with me: help me in to my bed, and give me Physic with thy counsel.
NAy, and she will, let her refuse, at her own charges: it is nothing to me, Gentlemen. But she will not be invited to the like Feasts, or Guests, every day.
 O, by no means, she may not refuse— to stay at home, if you love your reputation: Slight, you are invited thither of purpose to bee seen, and laughed at by the Lady of the College, and her shadows. This Trumpeter hath pro∣climbed you.
You shall not go; let him bee laughed at in your stead, for not bringing you: and put him to his extemporal faculty of fooling, and talking loud to satisfy the company.
He will suspect vs, talk aloud. 'Pray, Mistress Epicoene,
let's see your Verses; wee have Sir Iohn Dew's leave: doe not conceal your Servants merit, and your own glories.
They'll prove my Servants glories, if you have his leave so soon.
His vain glories, Lady!
Show 'hem, show 'hem, Mistress, I dare own 'hem.
Judge you, what glories?
Nay, I'll read 'hem my self, too: an Author must recite his own Work. It is a Madrigal of Modesty.
Modest, and fair, for fair and good are near
Neighbours, how ere.—
Very good.
I, Is it not?
No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.
Excellent!
That again, I pray 'Sir Iohn.
It has some thing in it like rare wit, and sense.
Peace.
No noble virtue ever was alone,
But two in one.
Then, when I praise sweet Modesty, I praise
Bright Beauties rays:
And having praised both Beauty' and Modestee,
I have praised thee.
Admirable!
How it chimes, and cries think in the close, divinely!
I, it is Seneca.
No, I think it is Plutarch.
The dor on Plutarch, and Seneca, I hate it: they are mine own imaginations, by that light. I wonder those fell∣lowes have such credit with Gentlemen!
They are very grave Authors.
Grave Asses! mere Essaists! a few loose Senten∣ces, and that's all. A man would talk so, his whole age, I
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
doe utter as good things every hour, if they were collected, and observed, as either of 'hem.
Indeed! Sir Iohn?
Hee must needs, living among the Wits, and Bra∣ueries too.
I, and being President of 'hem, as he is.
There's Aristotle, a mere common place-fellow; Plato, a Discourser; Thucidides, and Lives, tedious and dry; Tacitus, an entire knot: sometimes worth the untying, ve∣rye seldom.
What doe you think of the Poets, Sir Iohn?
Not worthy to be named for Authors. Homer, an old tedious prolix Ass, talks of Curriers, and Chines of Beef. Ʋirgil, of dunging of Land, and Bees. Horace, of I know not what.
I think so.
And so Pindarus, Lycophron, Anacreon, Catullus, Seneca the Tragoedian, Lucan, Propertius, Tibullus, Martial, Juvenal, Ausonius, Statius, Politician, Valerius Flaccus, and the rest—
What a sacke-full of their names he has got!
And how he powers 'hem out! Politician, with Va∣lerius Flaccus!
Was not the Character right, of him?
As could be made, i'faith.
And Persius, a crabbed Cockescombe, not to bee endured.
Why? whom doe you account for Authors, Sir Iohn Daw?
Syntagma Iuris Ciuilis, Corpus Iuris Ciuilis, Corpus Iuris Canonise, the King of Spaines Bible.
Is the King of Spaines Bible an Author?
Yes, and Syntagma.
What was that Syntagma, Sir?
A Civil Lawyer, a Spaniard.
Sure, Corpus was a Dutch-man.
I, both the Corpusses, I knew 'hem: they were very corpulent Authors.
And, then there's Vatablus, Pomponatius, Symancha, the other are not to bee received, within the thought of a Scholar.
Fore God, you have a simple learned Servant, La∣die, in Titles.
I wonder that hee is not called to the Helm, and made a Councellor!
He is one extraordinary.
Nay, but in Ordinary! to say truth, the State wants such.
Why, that will follow.
I muse, a Mistress can bee so silent to the dotes of such a Servant.
It is her Virtue, Sir. I have written somewhat of her silence too.
In Verse, Sir Iohn?
What else?
Why? how can you justify your own being of a Poet, that so slight all the old Poets?
Why? every man, that writes in Verse, is not a Poet; you have of the Wits, that write Verses, and yet are no Poets: they are Poets that live by it, the poor fellows that live by it.
Why? would not you live by your Verses, Sir Iohn?
No, it were pity he should. A Knight live by his Verses? he did not make 'hem to that end, I hope.
And yet the noble Sidney lives by his, and the No∣ble Family not ashamed.
I, he professed himself; but Sir Iohn Daw has more caution: he will not hinder his own rising in the state so much! doe you think he will? Your Verses, good Sir Iohn, and no Poems.
Silence in woman, is like speech in man,
Deny it who can.
Not I, believe it: your reason, Sir.
Nor i'st a Tale,
That Female Vice should be a Virtue Male,
Or Masculine Ʋice, a Female Virtue be:
You shall it see
Proved with increase,
I know to speak, and she to hold her peace.
Doe you conceive me Gentlemen?
No faith, how mean you with increase, Sir Iohn?
Why, with increase is, when I court her for the common cause of Mankind; and she says nothing, but con∣sentire videtur: and in time is grauida.
Then, this is a Ballad of Procreation?
A Madrigal of Procreation, you mistake.
'Pray give me my Verses again, Servant.
If you you'll ask 'hem aloud, you shall.
See, here's Tru-wit again!
WHere hast thou been, in the name of madness! thus accoutred with thy Horn?
Where the sound of it might have pierced your sen∣ses, with gladness, had you been in eare-reach of it. Dau∣phine, fall down and worship me: I have forbid the Banes, Lad. I have been with thy virtuous Uncle, and have broke the match.
You haven't, I hope.
Yes faith; and thou should hope otherwsse, I should repent me: this Horn got me entrance, kiss it. I had no other way to get in, but by feigning to be a Post; but when I got in once, I proved none, but rather the contrary, turned him into a Post, or a Stone, or what is stiffer, with
thundering into him the incommodities of a Wife, and the miseries of Marriage. If ever Gorgon were seen in the shape of a woman, he hath seen her in my description. I have put him off of that sent, for ever. Why doe you not applaud, and adore me, Sirs? why stand you mute? Are you stupid? you are not worthy of the benefit.
Did not I tell you? mischief! —
I would you had placed this benefit somewhere else.
Why so?
Slight you have done the most inconsiderate, rash, weak thing, that ever man did to his friend.
Friend! if the most malicious enemy I have, had studied to inflict an injury upon me, it could not bee a gre∣la.
Wherein? for gods sake! Gent, come to your selves again.
But I presaged thus much before, to you.
Would my lips had been soldred, when I spake on it. Slight, what moved you to be thus impertinent?
My Masters, doe not put on this strange face to pay my courtesic: off with this Visor. Have good turns done you and thank 'hem this way?
Fore Heaven, you have undone me. That, which I have plotted for, and been maturing now these four Months, you have blasted in a minute: now I am lost, I may speak. This Gentlewoman was lodged here by me of pur∣pose, and, to be put upon my Uncle, hath professed this obsti∣nate silence for my sake, being my entire friend; and one, that for the requital of such a fortune, as to marry him, would have made me very ample conditions: where now, all my hopes are utterly miscarried by this unlucky accident.
Thus it is, when a man will be ignorantly officious; doe services, and not know his why: I wonder what curt∣os itch possessed you! you never did absurder part in your life, nor a greater trespass to friendship, to humanity.
Faith, you may forgive it, best: it was your cause principally.
I know it, would it had not.
How now, Cutberd? what news?
The best, the happiest that ever was, Sir. There has been a mad Gentleman with your Uncle, this morning, (I think this be the Gentleman) that has almost talked him out of his wits, with threatening him from Marriage—
On, I pray thee.
And your Uncle, Sir, he thinks it was done by your procurement; therefore he will see the party, you wot of, presently: and if hee like her, hee says, and that she be so inclining to dombe, as I have told him, he swears, hee will marry her, to day, instantly, and not defer it a minute longer.
Excellent! beyond our expectation!
Beyond your expectation? by this light, I knew, it would be thus.
Nay, sweet Tru-wit, forgive me.
No, I was ignorantly officious, impertinent: this was the absurd, weak part.
Wilt thou ascribe that to merit, now, was mere fortune?
Fortune? mere Providence. Fortune had not a finger in it. I saw it must necessarily in nature fall out so: my genius is never false to me in these things. Show me, how it could be otherwise.
Nay, Gentlemen, contend not, tic well now.
Alas, I let him go on with inconsiderate, and rash, and what he pleased.
Away thou strange instifier of thy self, to bee wiser then thou were, by the event.
Event! By this light, thou shalt never persuade me, but I fore-saw it, as well as the Stars themselves.
Nay, Gentlemen, it is well now doe you two en∣tertaine Sir Iohn Daw, with discourse, while I send her away with instructions.
I'll be acquainted with her, first, by your favour.
Master Tru-wit, Lady, a friend of ours.
I am sorry, I have not known you sooner, Lady, to celebrate this rare virtue of your silence.
Faith, and you had come sooner, you should have seen, and heard her well celebrated in Sir Iohn Dew's Ma∣drigalls.
Jack Daw, God save you, when saw you La-Foole?
Not since last night, Master Tru-wit.
That's Miracle! I thought you two had been in∣separable.
He's gone to inuit his Guests.
Gods so! tls true! what a false memory have I to∣wards that man! I am one: I met him even now, upon that he calls his delicate fine black Horse, rid into a foam, with posting from place to place, and person to person, to give hem the cue—
Left they should forget?
Yes: there was never poor Captain took more pains at a Muster to show men, then hee, at this meal, to show friends.
It is his Quarter-feast, Sir.
What! doe you say so, Sir Iohn?
Nay, Jack Daw will not be out, at the best friends he has, to the Talent of his wit: whore's his Mistress, to hear and applaud him? is she gone!
Is Mistress Epicoene gone?
Gone before, with Sir Dauphin, I warrant to the place.
Gone before! that were a manifest injury; a disgrace and a half: to refuse him at such a Festival time, as this, be∣ing a Bravery, and a Wit too.
Tut, he will swallow it like Cream: hoe's better read in Jure Civil, then to esteem any thing a disgrace is offered him from a Mistress.
Nay, let her even go; she shall sit alone, and bee
dumb in her Chamber, a Week together, for Iohn Daw, I warrant her: do's she refuse me?
No, Sir, doe not take it so to heart: she do's not re∣fuse you, but a little neglect you. Good faith, Tru-wit, you were too blame to put it into his head, that she do's refuse him.
She do's refuse him, Sir, palpably: how ever you mince it. And I were as he, I would swear to speak ne'er a word to her, to day, for it.
By this light, no more I will not.
Nor to any body else, Sir.
Nay, I will not say so, Gentlemen.
It had been an excellent happy condition for the company, if you could have drawn him to it.
I'll be very melancholic, i'faith.
As a Dog, if I were as you, Sir Iohn.
Or a Snail, or a Hog-louse: I would roll my self up for this day, in truth, they should not unwind me.
By this Pick-tooth, so I will.
It is well done: hee begins already to bee angry with his teeth.
Will you go, Gentlemen?
Nay, you must walk alone, if you bee right melan∣cholique, Sir Iohn.
Yes Sir, we'll dog you, we'll follow you a far off.
Was there ever such a two yards of Knight-hood, measured out by Time, to be sold to laughter?
A mere talking Mole! no Mushrome was ever so fresh. A fellow so utterly nothing, as he knows not what he would be.
Let's follow him: but first, let's go to Dauphin, hoe's hovering about the House, to hear what news.
Content.
WElcome Cutberd; draw near with your fair charge: and, in her ear, softly entreat her to vnmasque (—) So. Is the door shut? (—) enough. Now, Cutberd, with the same discipline I use to my Family, I will quest∣on you. As I conceive, Cutberd, this Gentlewoman is she, you have provided, and brought, in hope she will fit me in the place and person of a Wise? Answer me not, but with your leg, unless it bee otherwise: (—) very well done, Cutberd. I conceive, besides, Cutberd, you have been pre∣acquainted with her birth, education, and qualities, or else you would not prefer her to my acceptance, in the weigh∣tie consequence of Marriage. (—) this I conceive, Cutberd. Answer me not but with your leg, unless it be otherwise. (—) Very well done Cutberd. Give aside now a little,  and leave me to examine her condition, and aptitude to my affe∣ction. She is exceeding fair, and of a special good fa∣uour; a sweet composition, or harmony of limbs: her temper of beauty has the true height of my blood. The Knave hath exceedingly well fitted me without: I will now try her within. Come near, fair Gentlewoman: let not my behaviour seem rude, though unto you, being rare, it may happily appear strange. (—) Nay, Lady,  you may speak, though Cutberd, and my man, might not: for, of all sounds, only, the sweet voice of a fair Lady has the just length of mine ear. I beseech you, say Lady, out of the first fire of meeting eyes, (they say) love is stricken; doe you feel any such motion, suddenly shot into you, from any part you see in me? ha, Lady? (—) Alas, Lady, these answers by silent curtsies, from you, are too courtlesse, and simple.  I have ever had my breeding in Court: and she t•at shall be
my Wife, must be accomplished with Courtly, and audaci∣os ornaments. Can you speak, Lady?
Judge you, forsooth. 
What say you, Lady? speak out, I beseech you.
Judge you, forsooth.
Of my judgment, a divine softness! but can you naturally, Lady, as I enjoin these by doctrine and industry, refer your self to the search of my judgment, and (not taking pleasure in your tongue, which is a women's chiefest pleasure) think it plausible, to answer me by silent ge∣stirs, so long as my speeches jump right, with what you conceive? (—) Excellent! Divine! if it were possible, she should hold out thus! Peace, Cutherd, thou art made for e∣for, as thou hast made me, if this felicity have lasting: but I will try her further. Dear Lady, I am Courtly, I tell you, and I must have mine ears banqueted with pleasant, and witty Conferences, pretty Girds, Scoffs, and Dalliance in her, that I mean to choose for my Bed-pheere. The Ladies in Court, think it a most desperate impair to their quick∣ness of wit, and good carriage, if they cannot give occasion for a man to court 'hem; and, when an amorous Discourse is set on foot, minister as good matter to continue it, as him∣self: and doe you alone so much differ from all them, that, what they (with so much circumstance) affect, and toil for, to seem learned, to seem judicious, to seem sharpe, and conceited, you can bury in your self, with silence? and ra∣there trust your graces to the fair conscience of Virtue, then to the Worlds, or your own Proclamation?
I should be sorry else.
What say you, Lady? good Lady, speak out.
I should be sorry, else
That sorrow doth fill me with gladness! O Moro∣se! thou art happy aboue Mankind! pray that thou may contain thy self. I will only put her to it once more, and it shall be with the utmost touch, and test of their Sex. But
hear me, fair Lady, I doe also love to see her, whom I shall choose for my Heicfar, to be the first and principal in all Fa∣shions; praecede all the Dames at Court, by a sortnight; have her Counsel of Taylors, Linneners, Lace-women, Embroy∣derers, and sit with 'hem sometimes twice a day, upon French Intelligences; and then come forth, varied like Nature, or oftner then she, and better, by the help of Art, her aemu∣lous Servant. This doe I affect. And how will you bee able, Lady, with this frugality of speech, to give the manifold (but necessary) instructions, for that Bodies, these Sleeves, those Sirkts, this Cut, that Stitch, this Embroidery, that Lace, this Wire, those Knots, that Ruff, those Roses, this Girdle, that Fan, the tother Scarf, these Gloves? ha! what say you, Lady.
I'll leave it to you, Sir.
How, Lady? pray you, rise a note.
I leave it to Wisdom, and you, Sir.
Admirable Creature! I will trouble you no more: I will not sin against so sweet a simplicity. Let me now be bold to print, on those divine lips, the seal of being mine. Cutberd, I give thee the Lease of thy House free: thank me not, but with thy leg (—) I know what thou would say, she's poor, and her friends deceased; she has brought a wealthy dowry in her silence, Cutberd: and in respect of her poverty, Cutberd, I shall have her more loving, and obedi∣ent, Cutberd. Go thy ways, and get me a Minister present∣lie, with a soft, low voice to marry vs, and pray him he will not be impertinent, but brief as he can; away: softly, Cut∣berd. Sirrah, conduct your Mistress into the dining Room, your now-Mistris. O my felicity! how I shall bee revenged on mine insolent Kinsman, and his plots to fright me from marrying! This night I will get an Heir, and thrust him out of my blood like a Stranger; hee would bee knighted, forsooth, and thought by that means to reign over me, his Title must doe it: no Kinsman, I will now make you
bring me the tenth Lords, and the sixteenth Ladies Letter, Kinsman; and it shall doe you no good, Kinsman. Your Knight-hood it self shall come on it's knees, and it shall bee rejected; it shall bee sued for it's fees to execution, and not be redeemed; it shall cheat at the twelue-peny Ordinary, it Knight-hood, for it's Diet all the Terme-time, and tell Tales for it in the Vacation, to the Hostess: or it Knight-hood shall doe worse; take Sanctuary in Cole-harbor, and fast. It shall fright all it friends, with borrowing Letters, and when one of the foure-score hath brought it Knight-hood ten shillings, it Knight-hood shall go to the Cranes, or the Bear at the Bridge-foot, and be drunk in fear: it shall not have money to discharge one Tavern reckoning, to inuit the old Creditors, to forbear it Knight-hood; or the new, that should bee, to trust it Knight-hood. It shall bee the tenth name in the Bond, to take up the commodity of Pipkins and stone Iugs; and the part thereof shall not furnish it Knight-hood forth, for the attempting of a Bakers Widow, a brown Bakers Widow. It shall give it Knight-hoods name, for a stallion, to all gamesome Citizens Wives, and bee refused; when the Master of a Dancing School, or (How doe you call him) the worst Reveller in the Town is taken: it shall want Clothes, and by reason of that, wit, to fool to Law∣years. It shall not have hope to repair it self by Constanti∣nople, Ireland, or Virginia; but the best, and last fortune to it Knight-hood shall bee, to make Dol Teare-sheet, or Kate-Common, a Lady: and so, it Knight-hood may eat.
ARe you sure he is not gone by?
No, I staid in the shop ever since.
But, he may take the other end of the Lane.
No, I told him I would be here at this end: I ap∣pointed him hither.
What a Barbarian it is to stay then!
Yonder he comes.
And his charge left behind him, which is a very good sign, Dauphin.
How now Cutberd, succeeds it, or no?
Past imagination, Sir, omnia secunda; you could not have prayed, to have had it so well: Saltat senex, as it is in the Proverb, hee do's triumph in his felicity; admires the party! hee has given me the Lease of my House too! and, I am now going for a silent Minister to marry 'hem, and a∣way.
Slight, get one of the silenced Ministers, a zealous Brother would torment him purely.
Cum priuilegio, Sir.
O, by no means, let's doe nothing to hinder it now when it is done and finished, I am for you: for any de∣uise of vexation.
And that shall be within this half hour, upon my dexterity, Gentlemen. Contrive what you can, in the mean time, bones auibus.
How the Slave doth Latin it!
It would be made a Jest to Posterity, Sirs, this days mirth, if ye will.
Be shrew his heart that will not, I pronounce.
And, for my part. What is it?
To translate all La-Fooles company, and his Feast hither, to day, to celebrate this Bride-ale.
I marry, but how will it be done?
I'll undertake the directing of all the Ladie-Guests thither, and then the meat must follow.
For Gods sake, let's effect it: it will be an excellent Comoedy of affliction, so many several noises.
But are they not at the other place already, think you?
I'll warrant you for the Colledge-honours: one of their faces has not the priming colour laid on yet, nor the o∣there her Smock sleeked.
O, but they'll rise earlier then ordinary, to a Feast.
Best go see, and assure our selves.
Who knows the House?
I'll lead you, were you never there yet?
Not I.
Nor I.
Where have you lived then? not know Tom Otter!
No: for Gods sake, what is he?
An excellent Animal, equal with your Daw, or La-Foole, if not transcendent; and do's Latin it as much as your Barber: he is his Wives Subject, hee calls her Princess, and at such times as these, follows her up and down the House like a Page, with his Hat off, partly for heate, partly for reverence. At this instant, he is marshaling of his Bull, Bear, and Horse.
What be those, in the name of Sphinx?
Why Sir? hee has been a great man at the bear-garden in his time: and from that subtle sport, has tan the witty denomination of his chief carousing Cups. One he calls his Bull, another his Bear, another his Horse. And then he has his lesser Glasses, that he calls his Dear, and his Ape; and several degrees of 'hem too: and never is well, nor thinks any entertainment perfect, till these be brought out, and set of the Cupbord.
For Gods love! wee should miss this, if wee should not go.
Nay, hee has a thousand things as good, that will speak him all day. He will rail on his Wife, with certain common places, behind her back; and to her face—
No more of him. Let's go see him, I petition you,
NAy, good Princess, hear me pauca verb.
By that light, I'll a' you chained up, with your Bul-dogges, and Beare-dogges, if you be not civil the sooner. I'll send you to kennel, i'faith. You were best bait me with your Bull, Bear, and Horse? Never a time, that the Courtiers, or Collegiates come to the House, but you make it a Shrouetuesday! I would have you get your Whit∣sonti•e-Veluet-Cap, and your staff i'your hand, to entertain 'hem: yes in troth, doe.
Not so Princess, neither, but under correction, sweet Princess, gi'me leave—these things I am known to the Courtiers by. It is reported to them for my humour, and they receive it so, and doe expect it. Tom Otters Bull, Bear, and Horse is known all over England, in rerum nature.
Fore me, I will na-ture 'hem over to Paris-Gar∣den, and na-ture you thither too, if you pronounce them a∣gain. Is a Bear a fit Beast, or a Bull, to mix in society with great Ladies? think i'your discretion, in any good polity.
The Horse then, good Princess.
Well, I am contented for the Horse: they love to be well horsed, I know. I love it my self.
And it is a delicate fine Horse. Poetarum Pegasus. Under correction, Princess, Iupiter did turn himself into a—Taurus, or Bull, under correction, good Princess.
By my integritiy, I'll send you over to the Banke-side, I'll commit you to the Master of the Garden, if I hear but a syllable more. Must my house, or my roof, bee polluted with the scent of Bears, and Bulls, when it is per∣fumed
for great Ladies? Is this according to the instrument, when I married you? That I would be Princess, and reign in mine own House: and you would bee my subject, and o∣bay me? What did you bring me, should make you thus per∣emptory? Doe I allow you your halfe-crowne a day, to spend, where you will, among your Gamesters, to vex and torment me, at such times as these? Who gives you your maintenance, I pray you? who allows you your Horse∣meat, and Mans-meat? your three Suits of Apparel a year? your four pair of Stockings, one Silk, three Worsted? your clean Linen, your Bands, and Cuffs when I can get you to wear 'hem? It is mar'l you ha'hem on now. Who graces you with Courtiers, or great Person∣nages, to speak to you out of their Coaches, and come home to your House? Were you ever so much as looked up∣on by a Lord, or a Lady, before I married you: but on the Easter, or Whitson-holy-dayes? and then out at the Ban∣quetting-house window, when Ned Whiting, or George Stone, were at the stake?
(For Gods sake, let's go staue her off him.)
Answer me to that. And did not I take you up from thence, in an old Greasy Buffe-Doublet, with Points; and Greene Valet Sleeves, out at the elbows? you forget this.
(She'll worry him, if we help not in time.)
O, here are some of the Gallants! Go to, be∣have your self distinctly, and with good morality; Or, I protest, I'll take away your exhibition.
BY your leave, fair Mistress Otter, I'll bee bold to enter these Gentlemen in your acquaintance.
It shall not be obnoxious, or difficill, Sir.
How do's my noble Captain? Is the Bull, Bear, and Horse, in rerum nature still?
Sir. Sic visum superis.
I would you would but intimate 'hem, doe. Go your ways in, and get Tosts, and Butter, made for the Wood-cocks. That's a fit Province for you.
Alas, what a tyranny, is this poor fellow mar∣riot too.
O, but the sport will be anon, when wee get him loose.
Dares be ever speak?
No Anabaptist ever railed with the like licence: but mark her Language in the meane-time, I beseech you.
Gentlemen, you are very aptly come. My Co∣sin, Sir Amorous, will be here briefly.
In good time, Lady. Was not Sir Iohn Daw here, to ask for him, and the company?
I cannot assure you, Mr. Tru-wit. Here was a very melancholy Knight in a Ruff, that demanded my sub∣jest for some body, a Gentleman, I think.
I, that was he, Lady.
But he departed straight, I can resolve you.
What an excellent choice phrase, this Lady ex∣presses in?
O, Sir! she is the only authentical Courtier, that is not naturally bred one, in the City.
You have taken that report upon trust, Gen∣tlemen.
No, I assure you, the Court governs it so, Lady, in your behalf.
I am the Servant of the Court, and Courtiers, Sir.
They are rather your Idolaters.
Not so, Sir.
How now, Cutberd? Any cross?
and indeed, so ashamed of her injury to you, that she de∣sires you to forgive her, and but grace her Wedding with your presence to day—She is to be married to a very good fortune, she says, his Uncle, old Morose: and she willed me in private to tell you, that she shall be able to doe you more favours, and with more security now, then before.
Did she say so, i'faith?
Why, what doe you think of me, Sir Iohn! ask Sir Dauphin.
Nay, I believe you. Good Sir Dauphin, did she desire me to forgive her?
I assure you, Sir Iohn, she did.
Nay then, I doe with all my heart, and I'll bee io∣uiall.
Yes, for look you Sir, this was the injury to you. La-Foole intended this Feast to honour her Bridal day, and made you the property to inuit the College Ladies, and promise to bring her: and then at the time, she should have appeared (as his friend) to have given you the dor. Where∣as now, Sir Dauphin has brought her to a feeling of it, with this kind of satisfaction, that you shall bring all the Ladies to the place where she is, and be very jovial; and there she will have a Dinner, which shall be in your name: and so dis∣appoint La-Foole, to make you good again, and (as it were) a saver in the man.
As I am a Knight, I honour her, and forgive her heartily.
About it then presently, Tru-wit is gone before to confront the Coaches, and to acquaint you with so much, if he meet you. Join with him, and it is well. See, here comes your Antagonist, but take you no notice, but be ve∣rye jovial.
Are the Ladies come, Sir Iohn Daw, and your Mi∣stress? Sir Dauphin! you are exceeding welcome, and ho∣nest Master Clerimont. Whore's my Cousin? did you see no Collegiats, Gentlemen?
Collegiats! Doe you not hear, Sir Amorous, how you are abused?
How Sir!
Will you speak so kindly to Sir Iohn Daw, that has done you such an affront?
Wherein Gentlemen? let me be a Sut or to you to know, I beseech you!
Why Sir, his Mistress is married to day, to Sir Dau∣phines Uncle, your Cousins Neighbour, and hee has diver∣ted all the Ladies, and all your company thither, to frustrate your provision, and stick a disgrace upon you. He was here, now, to have enticed vs away from you too: but wee told him his own, I think.
Has Sir Iohn Daw wronged me so in-humanely?
Hee has done it, Sir Amorous, most maliciously, and treacherously: but if you'll be ruled by vs, you shall quit him i'faith.
Good Gentlemen! I'll make one, believe it. How I pray?
Marry Sir, get me your Pheasants, your Godwits, and your best meat, and dish it in Silver Dishes of your Co∣sens presently, and say nothing, but clap me a clean Towel about you, like a Sewer; and bare-headed, march before it with a good confidence (it is but over the way, hard by) and we'll second you, where you shall set of the Board, and bid 'hem welcome to it, which shall show it is yours, and disgrace his preparation utterly: and, for your Cousin, whereas she should be troubled here at home with care of making and giving welcome, she shall transfer all that labour thither, and be a principal guest her self, sit ranked with the Col∣ledge-Honors, and bee honoured, and have her Health drunk as often, as bare, and as loud as the best of 'hem.
I'll go tell her presently. It shall bee done, that's resolved.
I thought hee would not hear it out, but it would take him.
Well, there bee Guests, and meat now; how shall we doe for Musique?
The smell of the Venison, going through the Street, will inuit one noise of Fiddlers, or other.
I would it would call the Trumpeters thither.
Faith, there is hope, they have intelligence of all Feasts. There's good correspondence betwixt them, and the London-Cookes. It is twenty to one but we have 'hem.
Twill be a most solemn day for my Uncle, and an excellent fit of mirth for vs.
I, if we can hold up the aemulation betwixt Fool and Daw, and never bring them to expostulate.
Tut, flatter 'hem both (as Tru-wit says) and you may take their understandings in a Purse-net. They'll be∣leeue themselves to be just such men as we make 'hem, nei∣there more nor less. They have nothing, not the use of their senses, but by tradition.
See! Sir Amorous has his Towel on already.  Have you persuaded your Cousin?
Yes, it is very feasible: she'll doe any thing, she says, rather then the La-Fooles shall be disgraced.
She is a Noble Kinswoman. It will be such a pest'-ling device, Sir Amorous! It will pound all your enemies practises to poulder, and blow him up with his own mine, his own train.
Nay, we'll give fire, I warrant you.
But you must carry it privately, without any noise, and take no notice by any means—
Gentlemen, my Princess says, you shall have all her Silver Dishes, festinate: and she's gone to alter her Tyre a little, and go with you—
And your self too, Captain Otter.
By any means, Sir.
Yes Sir, I doe mean it: but I would entreat my Cousin Sir Amorous, and you Gentlemen, to be Suitors to my Princess, that I may carry my Bull, and my Bear, as well as my Horse.
That you shall doe, Captain Otter.
My Cousin will never consent, Gentlemen.
She must consent, Sir Amorous, to reason.
Why, she says they are no decorum among Ladies.
But they are decor, and that's better, Sir.
I, she must hear argument. Did not Pasiphae, who was a Queen, love a Bull? and was not Calisto, the Mother of Arses, turned into a Bear, and made a Star, Mistress Ʋr∣sula, in the Heavens?
O God! that I could have said as much! I will have these Stories painted in the Bear-garden, Ex Ouidij Meta∣morphosi.
Where is your Princess, Captain? pray be our Leader.
That I shall, Sir.
Make haste, good Sir Amorous.
SIr, there's an Angel for your self, and a brace of Angels for your cold. Muse not at this manage of my bounty, It is fit, we should thank Fortune, double to Nature, for a∣ny benefit she confers upon vs; besides, it is your imper∣fection, but my solace. 
I thank your Worship, so is it mine, now.
What says he, Cutberd?
Hee says, Praesto, Sir, whenever your Worship needs him, he can be ready with the like. Hee got this cold with sitting up late, &amp; singing Catches with Cloth-workers.
No more. I thank him.
God keep your Worship, and give you much joy with your fair Spouse.  (Vmh, vmb.)
O, ô, stay Cutberd! let him give me five shillings of my money back. As it is bounty to reward benefits, so is it e∣quity to mulct injuries. I will have it. What says he?
He cannot change it, Sir
It must be changed.
Cough again.
What says he?
He will cough out the rest, Sir.
(Vmh,  vmh, vmh.)
Away, away with him, stop his mouth, away, I for∣give it.—
Fie, Master Morose, that you will use this violence to a man of the Church.
How!
It do's not become your gravity, or breeding, (as you pretend in Court) to have offered this out-rage on a wa∣ter-man, or any more boisterous creature, much less on a man of his civil Coat.
You can speak then!
Yes, Sir.
Speak out I mean.
I Sir. Why, did you think you had married a Sty∣tu? or a Motion, only? one of the French Puppets, with the eyes turned with a Wire? or some innocent out of the Hospital that would stand with her hands thus, and a playse mouth, and look upon you.
O immodesty! a manifest woman! what Cutberd?
Nay, never quarrel with Cutberd, Sir, it is too late now. I confess, it doth bate somewhat of the modesty I had, when I writ simply Maid: but I hope, I shall make it a stock still competent, to the estate, and dignity of your Wife.
She can talk!
Yes indeed, Sir.
What, Sirrah. None of my Knaves there? where is this Impostor, Cutberd?
Speak to him, fellow, speak to him, I'll have none of this coasted, unnatural dumbness in my house, in a Fa∣mily where I govern.
She is my Regent already! I have married a Pen∣thesilea, a Semiramis, sold my liberty to a Distaff!
VVHere's Master Morose?
Is he come again! Lord have mercy up∣on me.
I wish you all joy, Mistress Epicoene, with your grave and honourable match.
I return you the thanks, Master Tru-wit, so friend∣lie a wish deserves.
She has acquaintance, too!
God save you Sir, and give you all contentment in your fair choice, here. Before I was the Bird of night to you, the Owl but now I am the Messenger of Peace, a Dove, and bring you the glad wishes of many friends, to the celebration of this good hour.
What hour, Sir?
Your Marriage hour Sir. I commend your resolve∣tion, that (notwithstanding all the dangers I laid before you, in the voice of a Night-Crow) would yet go on, and bee your self. It shows you are a man constant to your, own ends, and upright to your purposes, that would not bee put off with left-handed cries.
How should you arrive at the knowledge of so much!
Why, did you ever hope, Sir committing the se∣crazy of it to a Barber, that less then the whole Town should know it? you might as well have told it to the Con∣duet, or the Bake-house, or the Infant'ry that follow the Court, and with more security. Could your Gravity for∣get so old and noted a remnant, as, lips &amp; tonsoribus notum, Well Sir, forgive it your self now, the fault, and bee com∣municable
with your friends. Here will bee three or four fashionable Ladies, from the College to visit you present∣lie, and their train of Minions, and Followers.
Bar my doors! bar my doors! where are all my eaters? my mouths now? baire up my doors, you Varlets.
He is a Varlet, that stirs to such an office. Let 'hem stand open. I would see him that dares move his eyes to∣ward it. Shall I have a Barricade made against my friends, to be barred of any pleasure they can bring in to me with ho∣norable visitation.
O Amazonian impudence!
Nay faith, in this, Sir, she speaks but reason: and me thinks is more continent then you. Would you go to bed so presently, Sir, before noon? a man of your head, and hair, should owe more to that reverend Ceremony, and not mount the Marriage-bed, like a Towne-Bull, or a Moun∣tayne-Goate; but stay the due season; and ascend it then with Religion, and fear. Those delights are to bee stēep'd in the humour, and silence of the night; and give the day to other open pleasures, and jollities of Feast, of Mufique, of Revels, of Discourse: we'll have all, Sir, that may make your Hymen high, and happy.
O, my torment, my torment!
Nay, if you endure the first half hour, Sir, so tedi∣ously, and with this irksomeness; what comfort, or hope, can this fair Geutlewoman make to her self hereafter, in the consideration of so many years as are to come—
Of my affliction. Good Sir, depart, and let her doe it alone.
I have done, Sir.
That cursed Barber!
(Yes faith, a cursed Wretch indeed, Sir.)
I have married his Citterne, that's common to all men. Some plague aboue the plague—
(All Egypt ten Plagues)
Revenge me on him.
It is very well, Sir. If you laid on a curse or two, more, I'll assure you he will bear 'hem. As, that hee may get the Pox with seeking to cure it, Sir? Or, that while he is curling another mans hair, his own may drop off? Or, for burning some Male-baudes Locke, he may have his brain beat out with the Curling-Iron?
No, let the Wretch live wretched. May hee get the Itch, and his Shop so lousy, as no man dare come at him, nor he come at no man.
(I, and if he would swallow all his Balls for Pills, let not them purge him)
Let his Warming-Pan be ever cold.
(A perpetual Frost underneath it, Sir)
Let him never hope to see fire again.
(But in Hell, Sir)
His Chairs bee always empty, his Scissors rust, and his Combs mould in their Cases.
Very dreadful that! (And may he loose the inuen∣tion, Sir, of carving Lanterns in Paper)
Let there bee no Baud carted that year, to em∣ploy a Basin of his: but let him be glad to eat his Sponge, for Bread.
And drink lotium to it, and much good doe him.
Or, for want of Bread—
Eat Eare-Waxe, Sir. I'll help you. Or draw'his own Teeth, and add them to the Lute-string.
No, beat the old ones to poulder, and make Bread of them.
(Yes, make meal of the Milstones.)
May all the Botches, and Burns, that he has cured on others, break out upon him.
And he now forget the cure of 'hem in himself, Sir: or, if hee doe remember it, let him have scraped all his Lin∣nen into Lint for it, and have not a rag left him, to set up with.
That falls out often, Madame, that hee that thinks himself the Master-wit, is the Master-foole. I assure your Ladyship, ye cannot laugh at her.
No, we'll have her to the College: and she have wit, she shall be one of vs.! shall she not Centaur? we'll make her a Collegiate.
Yes faith, Madame, and Mauis, and she will set up a side.
Believe it Madame, and Mistress Mauis, she will sustain her part.
I'll tell you that, when I have talked with her, and tried her.
Ʋse her very civilly, Mauis.
So I will, Madame.
Blessed minute, that they would whisper thus ever.
In the the mean time, Madame, would but your Ladyship help to vex him a little: you know his disease, talk to him about the Wedding Ceremonies, or call for your Gloves, or—
Let me alone. Centaur, help me. Master Bridegroom, where are you?
O, it was too miraculously good to last!
We see no Ensigns of a Wedding, here; no Cha∣racter of a Brideale: where be our Skarfes, and our Gloves? I pray you, give 'hem vs. Let's know your Brides Colours, and yours, at least.
Alas, Madame, he has provided none.
Had I known your Ladyships Painter, I would.
He has given it you, Centaur, in faith. But doe you hear Master Morose, a Jest will not absolve you in this man∣ner. You that have sucked the Milk of the Court, and from thence have been brought up to the very strong meates, and Wine, of it; been a Courtier from the Biggen, to the Night-Cap: (as wee may say) and you, to offend in such a high point of Ceremony, as this and let your Nuptials
want all marks of solemnity! How much Plate have you lost to day (if you had but regarded your profit) what gifts, what friends, through your mere Rusticity?
Madame—
Pardon me, Sir, I must insinuate your errors to you. No Gloves? no Garters? no Skarfes? no Epithalamium? no Masque?
Yes, Madame, I'll make an Epithalamium, I pro∣missed my Mistress, I have begun it already: will your Lady∣ship hear it?
I, good Jack Daw.
Will it please your Ladyship command a Cham∣ber, and bee private with hour friend? you shall have your choice of Rooms, to retire to after: my whole House is yours. I know, it hath been your Ladishis errand, into the City, at other times, how ever now you have been unhap∣pily diverted upon me▪ but I shall bee loath to break any honourable custom of your Ladyships. And therefore, good Madame—
Come, you are a rude Bridegroom, to entertain Ladies of honour in this fashion.
He is a rude Groom, indeed.
By that light, you deserve to grafted, and have your Horns reach from one side of the Island, to the other. Doe not mistake me, Sir, I but speak this, to give the Ladies some heart again, not for any malice to you.
Is this your Brave•, Ladies?
As God help me, if you utter such another word, I'll take Mistress Bride in and begin to you, in a very sad cup, doe you see? Go too, know your friends, and such, as love you.
BY your leave, Ladies. Doe you want any Musique? I have brought you variety of noises. Play, Sirs, all of you.
 O, a plot, a plot, a plot, a plot upon me! This day, I shall bee their Anvil to work on, they will grate me a∣sunder. It is worse then the noise of a Saw.
No, they are Hair, Rosin, and Guts. I can give you the Receipt.
Peace, Boys.
Play, I say.
Peace, Rascals. You see who's your friend now, Sir? Take courage, put on a Martyrs resolution. Mock down all their attemptings, with patience. It is but a day, and I would suffer heroically. Should an Ass exceed me in fortitude? No. You betray your infirmity with your hang∣ing dull ears, and make them insult: bear up bravely, and constantly. Look you here, Sir, what honour is done you unexpected,  by your Nephew; a Wedding Dinner come, and a Knight Sewer before it, for the more reputation: and fine Mistress Otter, your Neighbour, in the Rump, or Tail of it.
Is that Gorgon, that Medusa come? Hide me, hide me.
I warrant you, Sir, she will not transform you. Look upon her with a good courage. Pray you entertain her, and conduct your Guests in, No? Mistress Bride, will you entreat in the Ladies? your Bridegroom is so shame-fac'd, here—
Will it please your Ladyship, Madame?
With the benefit of your company, Mistress.
Servant, pray you perform your duties.
And glad to be commanded, Mistress.
How like you her wit, Mauis.
Very prettily, absolutely well.
It is my place.
You shall pardon me, Mistress Otter.
Why, I am a Collegiate.
But not in ordinary.
But I am.
We'll dispute that within.
Would this had lasted a little longer.
And that they had sent for the Heralds. Captain Otter, what news?
I have brought my Bull, Bear, and Horse, in pri∣uate, and yonder are the Trumpeters without, and the Drum, Gentlemen.
O, ô, ô. 
And we will have a rouse in each of 'hem, anon, for bold Britons, in faith.
Follow, follow, follow.
WAs there ever poor Bridegroom so tormented? or man indeed?
I have not read of the like, in the Chronicles of the Land.
Sure, he cannot but go to a place of rest, after all this Purgatory.
He may presume it, I think.
The spitting, the coughing, the laughter, the no∣sing, the farting, dancing, noise of the Musique, and her masculine, and loud commanding, and urging the whole
Family, makes him think he has married a Fury.
And she carries it up bravely.
I, she takes any occasion to speak: that's the height on it.
And how so barley Dauphin labours to satisfy him, that it was none of his plot!
And has almost brought him to the faith, in the article. Here he comes. Where is he now? what's become of him, Dauphin?
O, hold me up a little, I shall go away in the jest else. Hee has got on his whole Nest of Night-caps, and locked himself up, in the top of the House, as high as ever he can climb from the noise. I peeped in at a cranny, and saw him sitting over a crosse-beame of the roof, like him of the Sadiers Horse in Fleetstreet, vp-right: and hee will sleep there.
But where are your Collegiates?
Withdrawn with the Bride in private.
O, they are instructing her in the Colledge-Gram∣mar. If she have grace with them, she knows all their se∣crets instantly.
Me thinks, the Lady Haughty looks well to day, for all my dispraise of her in the morning. I think, I shall come about to thee again, Tru-wit.
Believe it, I told you right. Women ought to re∣pair the losses, time and years have made in their features, with dressings. And an intelligent Woman, if she know by her self the least defect, will bee most curious, to hide it: and it becomes her. If she bee short, let her sit much, lest when she stands, she be thought to sit. If she have an ill foot, let her wear her Gown the longer, and her Shoo the thinner. If a fat Hand, and scald Nails, let her carve the less, and act in Gloves. If a sour breath, let her never discourse fa∣sting: and always talk at her distance. If she have black and rugged Teeth, let her offer the less at laughter, especial∣lie if she laugh wide, and open.
O, you shall have some women, when they laugh, you would think they brayed, it is so rude, and—
I, and others, that will stalk i'their gait like an E∣strich, and take huge strides. I cannot endure such a sight. I love measure in the feet, and number in the voice: they are Gentleness, thaa oft-times draw no less then the face.
How came thou to study these Creatures so ex∣actually? I would thou would make me a Proficient.
Yes, but you must leave to live in your Chamber then a month together upon Amadis de Gaul, or Don Quixote, as you are wont; and come abroad where the mat∣la is frequent, to Court, to Tiltings, public Shows, and Feasts, to Plays, and Church sometimes: thither they come to show their new Tyres too, to see, and to be seen. In these places a m•n shall find whom to love, whom to play with, whom to touch once, whom to hold cuer. The variety are∣rests his judgment. A Wench to please a man comes not down dropping from the seeling, as hee lies on his back droning a Tobacco Pipe. He must go where she is.
Yes, and be never the near.
Out Heretic. That diffidence makes thee worthy, it should be so.
He says true to you, Dauphin.
Why?
A man should not doubt to over come any Woman. Think hee can vanquish 'hem, and he shall, for though they deny, their desire is to bee tempted. Penelope her self can∣not hold out long. Ostend, you saw, was taken at last. You must persevere, and hold to your purpose. They would sol∣licit vs, but that they are afraid. Howsoever, they wish in their hearts wee should solicit them. Praise •hem, flatter. 'hem, you shall never want Eloquence, or trust: even the chastest delight to feel themselves that way rubbed. With Praises you must mix Kisses too. If they take them, they'll take more. Though they strive, they would bee over∣come.
O, but a man must beware of force.
It is to them an acceptable violence, and has oft∣times the place of the greatest curtsy. She that might have been forced, and you let her go free without touching though she then seem to thank you, will ever hate you af∣la: and glad in the face, is assuredly sad at the heart.
But all women are not to be taken always.
It is true. No more then all Birds, or all Fishes. If you appear learned to an ignorant Wench, or jocund to a sad, or witty to a foolish, why she presently begins to mistrust herself. You must approach them in their own height, their own line: for the contrary makes many that fear to com∣mit themselves to noble and worthy fellows, run into the embraces of a Rascal. If she love Wit, give Verses, though you borrow 'hem of a friend, or buy 'hem, to have good. If Valour, talk of your Sword, and be frequent in the menti∣on of Quarrels, though you be staunch in fighting. If activity be seen o'your Barberry often, or leaping over stools, for the credit of your back. If she love good clothes or dressing have your learned Counsel about you every morning, your French Taylor, Barber, Linnener, &amp;c. Let your Poulder, your Glass, and your Comb, be your dearest acquaintance. Take more care for the ornament of your head, then the safety: and wish the Common-wealth rather troubled, then a hair about you. That will take her. Then if she bee covetous and craving, doe you promise any thing, and perform spa∣ringly: so shall you keep her in appetite still. Seem as you would give, but be like a barren field that yields little, or unlucky Dice, to foolish, and hoping Gamesters. Let your gifts be flight, and dainty, ra her then precious. Let cun∣ning be aboue cost. Give Cherries at time of year, or Apri∣cots; and say they were sent you out of the Country, though you bought 'hem in Cheap-siae. Admire her Tyres; like her in all fashions; compare her in every habit to some Deity; invent excellent Dreams to flatter her, and Riddles; or, if she bee a great one, perform always the second
parts to her: like what she likes, praise whom she praises, and fail not to make the Household and Servants yours, yea the whole Family, and salute 'hem by their names: (it is but light cost if you can purchase' hem so) and make her Physi∣cian your Pensioner, and her chief woman. Nor will it bee out of your gain to make love to her too, so she follow, not usher, her Ladies pleasure. All blabbing is taken away, when she comes to be a part of the crime.
On what Courtly lap hast thou late slept, to come forth so sudden and absolute a Courtling?
Good faith, I should rather question you, that are so harkening after these Mysteries. I begin to suspect your diligence, Dauphin. Speak, art thou in love in earnest?
Yes by my troth am I: it were ill dissembling be∣fore thee.
With which of 'hem, I pray thee?
With all the Collegiates.
Out on thee. We'll keep you at home, believe it, in the Stable, and you be such a Stallion.
No, I like him well. Men should love wisely, and all women: someone for the face, and let her please the eye; another for the skin, and let her please the touch; a third for the voice, and let her please the ear; and where the Objects mix, let the senses so too. Thou would think it strange, if I should make 'hem all in love with thee a fore Night!
I would say thou had the best Philtre in the World, and could doe more then Madame Medea, or Do∣ctor Foreman.
If I doe not, let me play the Mounte-banke for my meat while I live, and the Bawd for my drink.
So be it, I say.
O Lord, Gentlemen, how my Knights and I have mist you here!
Why, Captain, what Service? what Service?
To see me bring up my Bull, Bear, and Horse to fight.
Yes faith, the Captain says we shall be his Dogs to bait 'hem.
A good employment.
Come on, let's see a course then.
I am afraid my Cousin will bee offended if she come.
Be afraid of nothing. Gentlemen, I have placed the Drum and the Trumpets, and one to give 'hem the sign when you are ready. Here's my Bull for my self, and my Bear for Sir Iohn Daw, and my Horse for Sir Amorous. Now set your foot to mine, and yours to his, and—
Pray God my Cousin come not.
Saint George, and Saint Andrew, fear no Cousins. Come, sound, sound. Et rauco strepuerunt cornuacantu.
Well said, Captain, in faith: well fought at the Bull.
Well held at the Bear.
Low, low, Captain.
Of the Horse has kicked off his Dog already.
I cannot drink it, as I am a Knight.
Gods so, off with his Spurs, some-body.
It goes again my conscience. My Cousin will be angry with it.
I have done mine.
You fought high and fair, Sir Iohn.
At the head.
Like an excellent Beare-Dogge.
You take no notice of the business I hope.
Not a word, Sir, you see we are jovial.
Sir Amorous, you must not aequiuocate. It must bee pulled down, for all my Cousin.
Sfoot, if you take not your drink, they'll think you are discontented with some thing: you'll betray all, if you take the least notice.
Not I, I'll both drink, and talk then.
You must pull the Horse on his knees, Sir Amorous: fear no Cousins. Iacta est alea.
O, now hoe's in his vain, and bold. The least hint given him of his Wife now will make him rail desperately.
Speak to him of her.
Doe you, and I'll fetch her to the hearing of it.
Captain hee-Otter, your shee-Otter is coming, your Wife.
Wife! Buzz. Titinilitium. There's no such thing in nature. I confess, Gentlemen, I have a Cooke, a Laundress, a House-Drudge, that serves my necessary turns, and goes under that title: But hoe's an Ass that will bee so vxorious, to tie his affections to one Circle. Come, the name dulls appetite. Here, replenish again: another bout. Wives are nasty, sluttish Animals.
O, Captain.
As ever the Earth bare, tribus verbis. Whore's Ma∣ster Tru-wit?
Hoe's slipped aside, Sir.
But you must drink, and be jovial,
Yes, give it me.
And me, too.
Let's be jovial.
As jovial as you will.
Agreed. Now you shall have the Bear, Cousin, and Sir Iohn Daw the Horse, and I'll have the Bull still. Sound
Tritons of the Thames. Nuns est bib•dum, nuns pede libero—
 Villains, Murderers, Sons of the Earth, and Traitors, what doe you there?
O, now the Trumpets have waked him, wee shall have his company.
A Wife is a sciruy Clogdogdo; an unlucky thing, a very fore-said Beare-whelpe, without any good fashion or breeding: mala bestia.
Why did you marry one then, Captain?
 A pox—I married with six thousand pound, I. I was in love with that. I have not kissed my Fury these forty weeks.
The more to blame you, Captain.
Nay, Mistress Otter, hear him a little first.
She has a breath worse then my Grand-mothers, profecto.
O treacherous Liar. Kiss me sweet Master Tru-wit, and prove him a slandring Knave.
I'll rather believe you, Lady.
And she has a Peruke, that's like a pound of Hemp, made up in Shoo-thrids.
O Viper, Mandrake!
A most vile face! and yet she spends me forty pound a year in Mercury, and Hogs-bones. All her Teeth were made in the Blacke-Friers: both her eye-browes in the Strand, and her Hair in Siuer-street. Every part of the Town owns a piece of her.
I cannot hold.
She takes her self asunder still when she goes to bed, into some twenty Boxes; and about next day noon is put together again, like a great Germane Clock: and so comes forth and rings a tedious larum to the whole House, and then is quiet again for an hour, but for her quarters. Have you done me right, Gentlemen?
No, Sir, I'll doe you right with my quarters, with my quarters.
 O, hold, good Princess.
Sound, sound.
A battle, a battle.
You notorious stinkardly Beareward, do's my breath smell?
Under correction, dear Princess: look to my Bear, and my Horse, Gentlemen.
Doe I want Teeth, and Eye-browes, thou Bul-Dogge?
Sound, sound still.
No, I protest, under correction—
I, now you are under correction, you protest: but you did not protest before correction, Sir. Thou Iudas, to offer to betray thy Princess! I'll make thee an exam∣ple—
 I will have no such examples in my House, Lady Otter.
Ah—
Mistress Mary Ambree, your examples are dange∣rous. Rogues, Hell-hounds, Stentors, out of my doors, you sons of noise and tumult, begot on an ill May-day, or when the Gally-foist is afloat to Westminster! A Trumpet∣la could not be conceived but then!
What ails you, Sir?
They have rent my Roof, Walls, and all my Windores asunder, with their brazen throats.
Best follow him, Dauphin.
So I will.
Whore's Daw, and La-Foole?
They are both run away, Sir. Good Gentlemen, help to pacify my Princess, and speak to the great Ladies for me. Now must I go lye with the Bears this fortnight, and keep out of the way, till my peace bee made, for this scandal she has taken. Did you not see my Bull-head, Gentlemen?
Is it not on, Captain?
No: but hee may make a new one, by that, is on.
O, here it is. And you come over, Gentlemen, and ask for Tom Otter, we'll go down to Ratcliffe, and have a course in faith: for all these disasters. There's bone spent left.
Away, Captain, get off while you are well.
I am glad we are rid of him.
You had never been, unless wee had put his Wife upon him. His humour is as tedious at last, as it was ridi∣culous at first.
WE wondered why you shrieked so, Mistress Otter.
O God, Madame, hee came down with a huge long naked Weapon in both his hands, and looked so dreadfully! Sure, hoe's beside himself.
Why, what made you there, Mistress Otter?
Alas, Mistress Mauis, I was chastising my sub∣jest, and thought nothing of him.
Faith, Mistress, you must doe so too. Learn to chastise. Mistress Otter corrects her Husband so, hee dares not speak, but under correction.
And with his Hat off to her: it would doe you good to see.
In sadness it is good, and mature counsel: pra∣ctize it, Morose. I'll call you Morose still now, as I call Cen∣taure, and Mauis: we four will be all one.
And you'll come to the College, and live with vs?
Make him give Milk, and Honey.
Look how you manago him at first, you shall have him ever after.
Let him allow you your Coach, and four Horses,
your Woman, your Chamber-maid, your Page your Gentle∣man-Vsher, your French Cooke, and four Grooms.
And go with vs, to Bed'lem, to the China Houses, and to the Exchange.
It will open the gate to your fame.
Here's Centaur has immortalised her self, with ta∣ming of her wilde Male.
I, she has done the Miracle of the Kingdom.
But Ladies, doe you count it lawful to have such plurality of Servants, and doe 'hem all graces?
Why not? why should women deny their Favours to men? Are they the poorer, or the worse?
Is the Thames the less for the Dyers Water, Mi∣stress?
Or a Torch, for lighting many Torches?
Well said, La-Foole; what a new one hee has got!
They are empty losses, women fear, in this kind.
Besides, Ladies should bee mindful of the approach of age, and let no time want his due use. The best of our days pass first.
We are Rivers, that cannot bee called back, Ma∣dame: she that now excludes her Lovers, may live to lye a forsaken Beldam, in a frozen Bed.
It is true, Mauis: and who will wait on vs to coach then? or write, or tell vs the news then? Make Anagrams of our names, and inuit vs to the Cock-pit, and kiss our hands all the Play-time, and draw their weapons for our ho∣nurse?
Not one.
Nay, my Mistress is not altogether vn-intelligent of these things; here bee in presence have tasted of her fa∣uours.
What a neighing Hobby-horse is this!
But not with intent to boast 'hem again, Servant. And have you those excellent Receipts, Madame, to keep your selves from bearing of Children?
now to comfort a poor Gentlewoman? Ay me! what for∣tune had I to marry a distracted man?
I'll tell you, Mistress—
How rarely she holds it up!
What mean you, Gentlemen?
What will you tell me, Servant?
The Disease in Greek, is called Mayia, in Latin, In∣sania, Furor, vel Ecstasis melancholica, that is, Egressio, when a man ex melancholico, euadit fanaticus.
Shall I have a Lecture read upon me alive?
But he may be but Phreneticus, yet, Mistress? and Phrenetis is only delirium, or so—
I, that is for the Disease, Servant: but what is this to the cure? we are sure enough of the Disease.
Let me go.
Why, we'll entreat her to hold her peace, Sir.
O, no. Labour not to stop her. She is like a Con∣duit-pipe, that will gush out with more force, when she o∣pens again.
I'll tell you, Morose, you must talk Divinity to her altogether, or moral Philosophy.
I, and there's an excellent Book of moral Philo∣sophie, Madame, of Raynard the Fox, and all the Beasts, called Dones Philosophy.
There is, indeed, Sir Amorous La-Foole.
O misery!
I have read it, my Lady Centaur, all over to my Cousin, hers.
I, and it is a very good Book as any is, of the Modernes.
Tut, he must have Seneca read to him, and Plutarch, and the Ancients; the Modernes are not for this Disease.
Why, you discommended them too, to day, Sir Iohn
I, in some Cases: but in these they are best, and A∣ristotles Ethics.
Say you so, Sir Iohn? I think you are decelu'd: you took it upon trust.
Whore's Trusty, my woman? I'll end this difference. I pray thee, Otter, call her. Her Father and Mother were both mad, when they put her to me.
I think so. Nay, Gentlemen, I am tame. This is but an exercise, I know a Marriage Ceremony, which I must endure.
And one of 'hem (I know not which) was cured with the Sick-mans Salve; and the other with Greens Groats-worth of wit.
A very cheap Cure, Madame.
I, it's very feasible.
My Lady called for you, Mistress Trusty: you must decide a Controversy.
O Trusty, which was it you said, your Father, or your Mother, that was cured with the Sick-mans Salve?
My Mother, Madame, with the Salve.
Then it was the Sick-womans Salve.
And my Father with the Groats-worth of wit. But there was other means used: we had a Preacher that would preach folk asleep still; and so they were prescribed to go to Church, by an old Woman that was their Physician, thrice a Week—
To sleep?
Yes forsooth: and every night they read them∣selves asleep on those Books.
Good faith, it stands with great reason. I would I knew where to procure those Books.
Oh.
I can help you with one of 'hem, Mistress Morose, the Groats-worth of wit.
But I shall disfurnish you, Sir Amorous: can you spare it?
O, yes, for a Week, or so; I'll read it my self to him.
No, I must doe that, Sir: that must be my office.
Sure, hee would doe well enough, if hee could sleep.
No, I should doe well enough, if you could sleep. Have I no friend that will make her drunk? or give her a little ladanum? or opium?
Why, Sir, she talks ten times worse in her sleep.
How!
Doe you not know that, Sir? never ceases all night.
And snores like a Porcpisce.
O, redeem me, Fate, redeem me, Fate. For how how many causes may a man be divorced, Nephew?
I know not truly, Sir.
Some Divine must resolve you in that, Sir, or Ca∣non Lawyer.
I will not rest, I will not think of any other hope or comfort till I know.
Alas, poor man.
You'll make him mad indeed, Ladies, if you pur∣sue this.
No, we'll let him breathe, now a quarter of an hour, or so.
By my faith, a large Truce.
Is that his keeper, that is gone with him?
It is his Nephew, Madame.
Sir Dauphin, Eugene.
He looks like a very pitiful Knight—
As can bee. This Marriage, has put him out of all.
He has not a penny in his Purse, Madame—
He is ready to cry all this day.
A very Shark, hee set me in the nick t'other night at Primero.
How these Swabbers talk!
I, Otters Wine has swelled their humours aboue a Spring-tide.
Good Morose, let's go in again. I like your cou∣ches exceeding well: we'll go lie, and talk there.
I wait on you, Madame.
Slight, I will have 'hem as silent as Signs, and their Posts too, ever I have done. Doe you hear, Ladie-Bride? I pray thee now, as thou art a noble Wench, continue this Discourse of Dauphin within: but praise him exceedingly. Magnify him with all the height of affection thou can. (I have some purpose in it) and but beat off these two Rooks, Jack Daw, and his fellow, with any discontentment hither, and I'll honour thee for ever.
I was about it, here. It angered me to the soul, to hear 'hem begin to talk so malapert.
Pray thee perform it, and thou win'st me an Ido∣later to thee, everlasting.
Will you go in, and hear me doe it?
No, I'll stay here. Drive 'hem out of your com∣panie, it is all I ask: which cannot bee any way better done, then by extolling Dauphin, whom they have so slighted.
I warrant you: you shall expect one of 'hem pre∣sently.
What a cast of Kestrels are these, to hawk after Ladies, thus?
I, and strike at such an Eagle as Dauphin.
Hee will bee mad, when wee will tell him. Here he comes.
O Sir, you are welcome.
Whore's thine Uncle?
Run out outdoors in's Night-caps, to talk with a Casuist, about his Divorce. It works admirably.
Thou would have said so, and thou had been here! The Ladies have laughed at thee, most Comically, since thou went, Dauphin.
And asked, if thou were thine Uncles keeper?
And the brace of Babouns answered, yes; and said, thou were a pitiful poor fellow, and did live upon posts: and had nothing but three Suits of Apparel, and some few Benevolences that Lords ga'thee to fool to hem, and swagger.
Let me not live, I'll beat 'hem. I'll bind 'hem both to grand Madams Bed. posts, and have 'hem baited with Monkeys.
Thou shalt not need, they shall bee beaten to thy hand, Dauphin. I have an Execution to serve upon 'hem, I warrant thee shall serve: trust my plot.
I, you have many plots! So you had one, to make all the Wenches in love with me.
Why, If I doe not yet before night, as near as it is; and that they doe not every one inuit thee, and bee ready to scratch for thee: take the mortgage of my wit.
Before God, I'll bee his witness; thou shalt have it, Dauphin: thou shalt bee his Fool for ever, if thou doest not.
Agreed. Perhaps twill bee the better estate. Doe you observe this Gallery? or rather Lobby, indeed? Here are a couple of Studies, at each end one: here will I act such a Tragi-comoedy between the Cuelphes, and the Ghi∣bellines,
Daw and La-Foole—which of 'hem comes out first, will I seize on: (you two shall be the Chorus behind the Are∣ras, and whip out between the Acts, and speak.) If I doe not make 'hem keep the peace, for this remnant of the day, if not of the year, I have failed once—I hear Daw com∣ming: Hide, and doe not laugh, for Gods sake.
Which is the way into the Garden, trow?
O, Jack Daw! I am glad I have met with you. In good faith, I must have this matter go no further between you. I must have it taken up.
What matter, Sir? Between whom?
Come, you disguise it—Sir Amorous and you. If you love me, Jack, you shall make use of your Philosophy now, for this once, and deliver me your Sword. This is not the Wed∣ding the Centaurs were at, though there be a shee-one here. The Bride has entreated me I will see no blood shed at her Bridal, you saw her whisper me ere-while.
As I hope to finish Tacitus, I intend no Murder.
Doe you not wait for Sir Amorous?
Not I, by my Knight-hood.
And your Scholarship too?
And my Scholarship too.
Go to, then I return you your Sword, and ask you mercy; but put it not up, for you will bee assaulted. I understood that you had apprehended it, and walked here to brave him: and that you had held your life contemptible, in regard of your honour.
No, no, no such thing I assure you. He and I parted now, as good fileds as could be.
Trust not you to that Visor. I saw him since Dinner with another face: I have known many men in my time vexed with losses, with doeths, and with abuses, but so of∣fended a Wight as Sir Amorous, did I never see, or read of. For taking away his Guests, Sir, to day, that's the cause: and he declares it behind your back; with such threatenings and centempts—Hee said to Dauphin, you were the er∣randst Ass—
I, he may say his pleasure.
And swears you are so protested a Coward, that hee knows you will never doe him any manly or single right, and therefore he will take his course.
I'll give him any satisfaction, Sir—but fighting.
I, Sir, but who knows what satisfaction he will take? blood hee thirsts for, and blood hee will have: and where-abouts on you he will have it, who knows but him∣self?
I pray you, Master Tru-wit, be you a Mediator.
 Well, Sir, conceal your self then in this study, till I return. Nay, you must bee content to bee locked in: for, for mine own reputation I would not have you seen to re∣ceiue a public disgrace, while I have the matter in man∣aging. Gods so, here hee comes: keep your breath close, that he doe not hear you sigh. In good faith, Sir Amorous, he is not this way, I pray you be merciful, doe not murder him; hee is a Christian as good as you: you are armed as if you sought a revenge on all his Race. Good Dauphin, get him away from this place. I never knew a mans choler so high, but hee would speak to his friends, he would hear reason. Jack Daw, Jack Daw! asleep?
Is he gone, Master Tru-wit?
I, did you hear him?
O God, yes.
What a quick ear fear has?
But is he so armed, as you say?
Armed? did you ever see a fellow, set out to take possession?
I, Sir.
That may give you some light, to conceive of him: but it is nothing to the principal. Some false Brother in the house has furnished him strangely. Or, if it were out of the house, it was Tom Otter.
Indeed, hoe's a Captain, and his Wife is his Kins∣woman.
Hee has got some-bodies old two-hand-sword to mow you off at the knees. And that Sword hath spawned such a Dagger!—but then he is so hung with Pikes, Hal∣berds, Peitro•ells, Calliuers, and Muskets, that hee looks like a Justice of Peace's Hall: a man of two thousand a year, is not sassed at so many weapons, as he has on. There was no∣for Fencer challenged at so many several Foils. You would think he meant to murder all Saint Pulehres Parish. If he could but victual himself for half a year, in his bree∣ches, he is sufficiently armed to ouer-runne a Country.
Good Lord, what means he, Sir! I pray you Ma∣ster Tru-wit, be you a Mediator?
Well, I'll try if he will be appeased with a Leg or an Arm, if not you must die once.
I would be loath to loose my right Arm, for wri∣ting Madrigals.
Why, if hee will bee satisfied with a thumb, or a little finger, ell's one to me. You must think, I'll do my best.
Good Sir, doe.
 What hast thou done?
He will let me doe nothing, man, hee do's all before me, he offers his left arm.
His left wing, for a Jack Daw.
Take it, by all means.
How! Maim a man for ever, for a jest? what a con∣science hast thou?
It is no loss to him: hee has no employment for his Arms, but to eat spoone-meat. Beside, as goods maim his body as his reputation.
Hee is a Scholar, and a Wit, and yet hee do's not think so. But he looses no reputation with vs, for we all re∣solved him an Ass before. To your places again.
I pray thee, let me be in at the other a little.
Look, you'll spoil all: these be ever your tricks.
No, but I could hit of somethings that thou wilt miss, and thou wilt say are good ones.
I warrant you. I pray forbear, I'll leave it off, else.
Come away, Clerimont.
Sir Amorous!
Master Tru-wit.
Whither were you going?
Down into the Court, to make water.
By no means, Sir, you shall rather tempt your bree∣ches.
Why, Sir?
Enter here, if you love your life.
Why! why!
Question till your throat be cut, doe: dally till the enraged soul find you.
Who's that?
Daw it is: will you in?
I, I, I'll in: what's the matter?
Nay, if hee had been cool enough to tell vs that, there had been some hope to atone you, but hee seems so implacably enraged.
Slight, let him rage. I'll hide my self.
Doe, good Sir. But what have you done to him within, that should provoke him thus? you have broke some Jest upon him, before the Ladies—
Not I, never in my life, broke Jest upon any man. The Bride was praising Sir Dauphin, and he went away in snuff, and I followed him, unless he took offence at me, in his drink ere while, that I would not pledge al the horse full.
By my faith, and that may be, you remember well: but he walks the round up and down, through every room of the house, with a Towel in his hand, crying, whore's La-Foole? who saw La-Foole? and when Dauphin, and I, de∣manded the cause, wee can force no answer f•om him, but (ô revenge, how sweet art thou! I will strangle him in this Towel) which leads vs to conjecture, that the maine cause of his fury is for bringing your meat to day, with a Towel about you, to his discredit.
Like enough. Why, and he be angry for that. I'll stay here, till his anger be blown over.
A good becoming resolution, Sir. If you can put it on of the sudden.
Yes, I can put it on. Or, I'll away into the Coun∣trey presently.
How will you get out of the house, Sir? Hee knows you are in the house, and he will watch you this seven-night but he will have you. He will out-wait a Seriant for you.
Why, then I'll stay here.
You must think, how to victual your self in time, then.
Why, sweet Master Tru-wit, will you entreat my Cousin Otter, to send me a cold Venison Pasty, a Bottle or two of Wine, and a Chamber Pot.
A stool were better, Sir, of Sir A-iax his invention.
I, that will be better indeed: and a Palate to lye on.
O, I would not advise you to sleep by any means.
Would you not, Sir? why, then I will not.
Yet, there's another fear—
Is there, Sir? What is it?
No, hee cannot break open this door with his foot, sure.
I'll set my back against it, Sir. I have a good back.
But, then if he should batter.
Batter! if he dare, I'll have an Action of Battery, against him.
Cast you the worst. Hee has sent for poulder alrea∣die, and what he will doe with it, no man knows: perhaps blow up the corner of the house where bee suspects you are. Here he comes, in quickly. I protest, Sir Iohn Daw, he is not this way: what will you doe? before God, you shall ha••g no peter de here. I'll dye rather Will you not take my word? I never knew one but would be satisfied. Sir Amorous, there's no standing out. Hee has made a petard of an old brass Pot, to force your door. Think upon some satisfaction or terms, to offer him.
Sir, I'll give him any satisfaction. I dare give any terms.
You'll leave it to me, then?
I, Sir. I'll stand to any conditions.
 How now, what think you, Sirs? were it not a dif∣ficult thing to determine, which of these two feared most.
Yes, but this fears the bravest: the other a whine∣ling daftard, Jack Daw: but La-Foole, a brave heroic coward! and is afraid in a great look, and a stout accent. I like him rarely.
Had it not been pity, these two should ha'beene concealed?
Shall I make a motion?
Briefly. For I must strike while it is hot.
Shall I go fetch the Ladies to the Catastrophe?
Vmh? I, by my troth.
By no mortal means. Let them continue in the state of ignorance, and err still: think 'hem wits, and fine fellows, as they have done. It were sin to reform them.
Well, J will have 'hem fetched, now I think on it, for a private purpose of mine: doe, Clerimont, fetch 'hem, and discourse to 'hem all that's past, and bring 'hem into the Gallery here.
This is thy extreme vanity, now: thou think thou were undone, if every Jest thou make were not published.
Thou shalt see, how unjust thou art, presently. Cle∣rimont, say it was Dauphine's plot. Trust me not, if the whole drift bee not for thy good. There's a Carpet in the next room, put it on, with this Scarf over thy face, and a Cushion of thy head, and be ready when I call Amorous. A∣way—.Iohn Daw.
What good news, Sir?
Faith, I have followed, and argued with him hard for you. I told him, you were a Knight, and a Scholar; and that you knew fortitude did consist magic patiendo quam fa∣ciendo, magic ferendo quam feriendo.
It doth so indeed, Sir.
And that you would suffer, I told him: so, at first he demanded, by my troth, in my conceit, too much.
What was it, Sir.
Your upper lip, and six of your fore-teeth.
It was unreasonable.
Nay, I told him plainly, you could not spare 'hem all. So after long argument (pro &amp; con, as you know) I brought him down to your two Butter-teeth, and them he would have.
O, did you so? why, he shall have 'hem.
But he shall not, Sir, by your leave. The conclusi∣on is this, Sir, because you shall be very good friends hereof∣la, and this never to be remembered, or upbraided; besides, that he may not boast, he has done any such thing to you in his own person: hee is to come here in disguise, give you five kicks in private, Sir, take your Sword from you, and lock you up in that Study, during pleasure. Which will be but a little while, we'll get it released presently.
Five kicks? he shall have six, Sir, to be friends.
Believe me, you shall not ouer-shoot your self, to send him that word by me.
Deliver it, Sir. He shall have it with all my heart, to be friends.
Friends? Nay, and he should not be so, and hearti∣lie too, upon these terms, he shall have me to enemy while I live. Come, Sir, bear it bravely.
O God, Sir, it is nothing.
True. What's six kicks to a man, that reads Seneca?
I have had a hundred, Sir.
Sir Amorous. No speaking one to another,  or re∣hearsing old matters.
One, two, three, four, five. I protest, Sir Amo∣rous, you shall have six.
Nay, I told you should not talk. Come give him six, and he will needs. Your Sword. Now return to your safe custody: you shall presently meet before the Ladies, and be
the dearest friends one to another—Give me the Scarf, now, thou shalt beat the other bare-fac'd. Stand by, Sir A∣morose.
What's here? A Sword.
I cannot help it, without I should take the quarrel upon my self: here he has sent you his Sword—
I ll receive none on it.
And hee wills you to fasten it against a wall, and break your head in some few several places against the Hilts.
I will not: tell him roundly. I cannot endure to shed my own blood.
Will you not?
No. I ll beat it against a fair flat wall, if that will satisfy him: If not, he shall beat it himself, for Amorous.
Why, this is strange starting off, when a man under∣takes for you! I offered him another condition: will you stand to that?
Yes, I am content, at the blunt.
Then you must submit your self to bee hood-win∣k'd in this Scarce, and bee led to him, where hee will take your Sword from you, and make you bear a blow, over the Mouth, Gulls, and tweakes by the Nose, Sans number∣bre.
I am content. But why must I be blinded?
That's for your good, Sir: because, if hee should grow insolent upon this, and publ•sh it hereafter to your disgrace (which I hope hee will not doe) you might swear safely and protest, hee never beat you to your know∣ledge.
O, I conceive.
I doe not doubt, but you'll bee perfect good friends upon it, and not dare to utter an ill thought one of a∣another, in future.
Not I, as God help me, of him.
Nor he of you, Sir. If he should—Come, Sir. All hid, Sir Iohn.
Oh, Sir Iohn, Sir Iohn. Oh, ô-ô ô ô ô Oh—
Good Sir Iohn, leave tweaking, you'll blow his Nose off. It is Sir Iohn's pleasure, you should retire into the Study. Why, now you are friends. All bitterness be∣tweene you, I hope, is buried; you shall come forth by and by, Demon and Pythias upon it: and embrace with all the rankness of Friendship that can bee. I trust, we shall have 'hem tamer i'their Language hereafter. Dauphin, I worcester∣ship thee. Gods will, the Ladies have surprised vs!
Centaur, how our judgements were imposed on by these adulterate Knights!
Nay, Madame, Mauis was more deceived then wee, it was her commendation uttered 'hem in the Col∣ledge.
I commended but their wits, Madame, and their braueries. I never looked toward their valours.
Sir Dauphin is valiant, and a wit too, it seems.
And a bravery too.
Was this his project?
So Master Clerimont intimates, Madame.
Good Morose, when you come to the College, will you bring him with you? Hee seems a very perfect Gentleman.
He is so Madame, believe it.
But when will you come, Morose?
Three or four days hence, Madame, when I have got me a Coach, and Horses.
No, to morrow, good Morose, Centaur shall send you her Coach.
Yes faith, doe, and bring Sir Dauphin with you.
She has promised that Mauis.
Hee is a very worthy Gentleman, in his exteriors, Madame.
I, he shows he is judicial in his clothes.
And yet not so superlatiuely neat as some, Madame, that have their faces set in a Brake!
I, and have every hair in form!
That wear purer Linen then our selves, and pro∣fesse more neatness, then the French Hermaphrodite!
I Ladies, they, what they tell one of vs, have told a thousand, and are the only Thieves of our fame: that think to take vs with that Perfume, or with that Lace, and laugh at vs unconscionably when they have done.
But, Sir Dauphins carelessness becomes him.
I could love a man, for such a Nose!
Or such a Leg!
He has an exceeding good eye, Madame!
And a very good Lock!
Good Morose, bring him to my Chamber first.
Please your Honours, to meet at my House, Madame?
See, how they eye thee, man! they are taken I war∣rant thee.
You have unbraced our brace of Knights, here, Master Tru-wit.
Not I, Madame, it was Sir Dauphins inginer: who, if he have disfurnished your Ladyship of any guard, or ser∣vice by it, is able to make the place good again, in himself.
There's no suspicion of that, Sir.
God so, Mauis, Haughty is kissing.
Let vs go too, and take part.
But I am glad of the fortune (beside the discovery of two such empty Caskets) to gain the knowledge of so rich a Mine of Virtue, as Sir Dauphin.
Wee would bee all glad to stile him of our friend∣ship, and see him at the College.
Hee cannot mix with a sweeter society, I'll pro∣phesie, and I hope he himself will think so.
I should be rude to imagine otherwise, Lady.
Did not I tell thee, Dauphin? Why, all their act∣once are governed by crude opinion, without reason or cause; they know not why they doe any thing: but as they are in∣formed, believe, judge, praise, condemn, love, hate, and in aemulation one of another, doe all these things alike. One∣lie, they have a natural inclination sways 'hem generally to the worst, when they are left to themselves. But, pursue it, now thou haft 'hem.
Shall we go in again, Morose?
Yes, Madame.
We'll entreat Sir Dauphins company.
Stay, good Madame, the inter-view of the two friends, Pylades and Orestes: I'll fetch 'hem out to you straight.
Will you, Master Tru-wit?
I, but noble Ladies, do not confess in your coun∣tenance, or outward bearing to 'hem any discovery of their follies, that wee may see, how they will bear up again, with what assurance, and erection.
We will not, Sir Dauphin.
Mau. Upon our honours, Sir Dauphin.
Sir Amorous, Sir Amorous. The Ladies are here.
Are they?
Yes, but slip out by and by, as their backs are turned, and meet Sir Iohn here, as by chance, when I call you. Jack Daw.
What say you, Sir?
Whip out behind me suddenly: and no anger in your looks to your Adversary. Now, now.
Noble Sir Iohn Daw! where have you been?
To seek you, Sir Amorous.
Me! I honour you.
I prevent you▪ Sir.
They have forgot their Rapiers!
O, they meet in peace, man.
Whore's your Sword, Sir Iohn?
And yours, Sir Amorous?
Mine! my Boy had it forth, to mend the handle, cene now.
And my gold handle was broke too, and my Boy had it forth.
Indeed, Sir? How their excuses meet!
What a consent there is, in the handles?
Nay, there is so in the points too, I warrant you.
O me! Madame, hee comes again, the mad man, away.
 WHat make these naked weapons here, Gentlemen?
O, Sir! here hath like to been muter since you went! A couple of Knights fallen out about the Brides favours: we were fine to take away their weapons, your house had been begged by this time else—
For what?
For Man slaughter, Sir, as being accessory.
And, for her favours?
I, Sir, heretofore, not present. Clerimont, carry 'hem their Swords, now. They have done all the hurt they will doe.
Have you spoke with a Lawyer, Sir?
O, no! there is such a noise in the Court, that they have frighted me home, with more violence then I went! such speaking, and counter-speaking, with their several voices of Citations, Appellations, Allegations, Certificates,
Attachments, Intergatories, References, Conuictions, and Afflictions indeed, among the Doctors and Proctors! that the noise here is silence too't! a kind of mid-night!
Why, Sir, if you would bee resolved indeed, I can bring you hither a very sufficient Lawyer, and a Learned Divine, that shall inquire into every least scruple for you.
Can you Master Tru-wit?
Yes, and are very sober grave persons, that will dispatch it in a Chamber, with a whisper, or two.
Good Sir, shall I hope this benefit from you, and trust my self into your hands?
Alas, Sir! your Nephew, and I, have been asha∣med, and oft-times mad since you went, to think how you are abused. Go in, good Sir, and locke your self up till we call you, we'll tell you more anon, Sir.
Doe your pleasure with me, Gentlemen; I be∣leeue in you: and that deserves no delusion—
You shall find none, Sir: but heaped, heaped plenty of vexation.
What wilt thou doe now, Wit?
Recover me hither Otter, and the Barber if you can, by any means, presently.
Why? to what purpose?
O, I'll make the deepest Divine, and gravest Law∣yer, out of them two, for him—
Thou can not man, these are waking Dreams.
Doe not fear me. Clap but a Civil Gown with a Welt, of the one; and a Canonical Cloak with Sleeves, of the other: and give 'hem a few terms in their mouths, if there come not forth as able a Doctor, and complete a Par∣son, for this turn, as may bee wished, trust not my Elect∣on. And, I hope without wronging the dignity of either Profession, since they are but persons put on, and for mirths sake, to torment him. The Barber smatters Latin, I remember.
Yes, and Otter too.
Well then, if I make 'hem not wrangle out this Case, to his no comfort, let me bee thought a lack Daw, or La-Foole, or any thing worse, Go you to your Ladies, but first send for them.
I will.
WHere had you our Swords, Master Clerimont?
Why, Dauphin took 'hem from the mad∣man.
And hee took 'hem from our Boys, I warrant you?
Very like, Sir.
Thank you good Master Clerimont. Sir Iohn Daw, and I are both beholden to you.
Would I knew how to make you so, Gentlemen:
Sir Amorous, and I are your Servants, Sir.
Gentlemen, have any of you a Pen-and-Inke. I would fine write out a Riddle in Italian, for Sir Dauphin, to translate.
Not I, in troth Lady, I am no Scrivener.
I can furnish you, I think, Lady.
He has it in the Haft of a Knife, I believe!
No, he has his Box of Instruments.
Like a Surgeon!
For the Mathematiques: his Squire, his Compass∣ses, his Brass Pens, and Black-lead, to draw Maps of eve∣rye place, and person, where he comes.
How, Maps of persons!
Yes, Sir, of Nomentack, when he was here, and of the Prince of Moldauia, and of Mistress, Mistress Epicane.
Away! he has not found our her Latitude, I hope.
You are a pleasant Gentleman, Sir.
Faith, now we are in private, let's wanton it a little, and talk waggishly. Sir Iohn, I am telling Sir Amorous here, that you two govern the Ladies, where ever you come. you carry the Feminine Gender before you.
They shall rather carry vs before them, if they will, Sir.
Nay, I believe that they doe, withal—But, that you are the prime-men in their affections, and direct all their actions—
Not I: Sir Amorous is.
I protest, Sir Iohn is.
As I hope to rise in the state, Sir Amorous, you have the person.
Sir Iohn, you have the person, and the Discourse too.
Not I, Sir. I have no discourse—and then you have activity beside.
I protest, Sir Iohn, you come as high from Tripoly, as I doe every whit: and lift as many joined stools, and leap over 'hem, if you would use it—
Well, agree on it together Knights; for between you, you divide the Kingdom, or Common-wealth of Ladies affections: I see it, and can perceive a little how they obe∣serve you, and fear you, indeed. You could tell strange Stories, my Masters, if you would, I know.
Faith, we have seen somewhat, Sir.
That we have—Valet Petticoats, and wrought Smocks, or so.
I, and—
Nay, out with it, Sir Iohn: doe not envy your friend the pleasure of hearing, when you have had the delight of tasting.
Why—a—doe you speak, Sir Amorous.
No, doe you, Sir Iohn Daw.
I'faith, you shall.
I'faith, you shall.
Why, we have been—
In the great Bed at Ware together in our time. On, Sir Iohn.
Nay, doe you, Sir Amorous.
And these Ladies with you, Knights?
No, excuse vs, Sir.
We must not wound reputation.
No matter—they were these, or others. Our bath cost vs fifteen pound, when we came home.
Doe you hear, Sir Iohn, you shall tell me but one thing truly, as you love me.
If I can, I will, Sir.
You lay in the same house with the Bride, here?
Yes, and conversed with her hourly, Sir.
And what humour is she of? is she coming, and open, free?
O, exceeding open, Sir. I was her Servant, and Sir Amorous was to be.
Come, you have both had favours from her? I know, and have heard so much.
O, no, Sir.
You shall excuse vs, Sir: we must not wound re∣putation.
Tut, she is married, now; and you cannot hurt her with any report, and therefore speak plainly: how many times, in faith? which of you lead first? Ha?
Sir Iohn had her Mayden-head, indeed.
O, it pleases him to say so, Sir, but Sir Amorous knows what's what, as well.
Dost thou in faith, Amorous?
In a manner, Sir.
Why, I commend you Lads. Little knows Don Bride groom of this. Nor shall he, for me.
Hang him, mad Ox.
Speak softly: here comes his Nephew, with the La∣die Haughty. He will get the Ladies from you, Sirs, if you look not to him in time.
Why, if he doe, we'll fetch 'hem home again, I warrant you.
IAssure you, Sir Dauphin, it is the price and estimation of your virtue only, that hath embarked me to this ad∣venture, and I could not but make out to tell you; nor can I repent me of the act, since it is always an argument of some virtue in our selves, that wee love and affect it so in o∣theirs.
Your Ladyship sets too high a price, on my weak∣ness.
Sir, I can distinguish Gems from Peebles—
(Are you so skilful in Stones?)
And, howsoever I may suffer in such a judgment as yours, by admitting equality of rank, or society, with Centaur or Mauis—
You doe not, Madame, I perceive they are your mere Foils.
Then are you a friend to truth, Sir. It makes me love you the more. It is not the outward, but the inward man that I affect. They are not apprehensive of an eminent perfection, but love flat, and dully.
Where are you, my Lady Haughty.
I come presently, Centawe. My Chamber, Sir, my Page shall show you; and Trusty, my woman, shall be ever a wake for you: you need not fear to communicate any thing with her, for she is a Fidelia. I pray you wear this Jewel for my sake, Sir Dauphin. Whore's Mauis, Cen∣taure?
Within, Madame, a writing. I'll follow you pre∣sently. I'll but speak a word with Sir Dauphin.
With me, Madame?
Good Sir Dauphin, doe not trust Haughty, nor make any credit to her, what ever you doe besides. Sir Dau∣phine, I give you this caution, she is a perfect Courtier; and loves no body, but for her uses: and for her uses, she loves all. Besides, her Physicians give her out to be none of the clearest, whether she pay 'hem or no, Heaven knows: and she's abode fifty too, and pargets! See her in a fore-noone. Here comes Mauis, a worse face then she! you would not like this, by Candle-light. If you'll come to my Chamber one of these Mornings early, or late in an Evening, I'll tell you more. Whore's Haughty, Mauis?
Within, Centaur.
What have you, there?
An Italian Riddle for Sir Dauphin, (you shall not see it in faith, Centaur.) Good Sir Dauphin, solve it for me. I'll call for it anon.
How now, Dauphin? how dost thou quit thy self of these Females?
Slight, they haunt meelike Fairies, and give me Jewels here, I cannot be rid of 'hem,
O, you must not tell, though.
Mass, I forgot that: I was never so assaulted. One loves for virtue, and bribes me with this. Another loves me with caution, and so would possess me. A third brings me a Riddle here, and all are jealous: and rail each at other.
 A Riddle? pray le' me see it? Sir Dauphin, I chose this way of intimation for privacy. The Ladies here, I know, have both hope, and purpose, to make a Collegiate and Servant of you. If I might bee so honoured, as to appear at any end of so noble a Work, I would enter into a fame of taking Physic to morrow, and continue you it four or five days, or longer, for your visitation. Mauis. By my faith, a subtle one! Call you this a Riddle? What's their plain dealing, trow?
We lack Tru-wit, to tell vs that.
Wee lack him for somewhat else too: his Knights reformados are wound up as high, and insolent, as ever they were.
You jest.
No Drunkards, either with Wine or Vanity, ever confessed such Stories of themselves. I would not give a Flies leg, in ballauce against all the women's reputations here, if they could be but thought to speak truth: and, for the Bride, they have made their affidauit against her direct∣lie—
What, they have lain with her?
Yes, and tell times, and circumstances, with the cause why, and the place where. I had almost brought 'hem to affirm that they had done it, to day.
Not both of 'hem.
Yes faith: with a sooth or two more I had effected it. They would have set it down under their hands.
Why, they will bee our sport, I see, still! whether we will, or no.
O, Are you here? Come Dauphin, Go call your Un∣cle presently. I have fitted my Divine, and my Canoe∣nest, dyed their Beards and all: the Knaves doe not know themselves they are so exalted, and altered. Preferment changes any man. Thou shalt keep one door, and I ano∣there, and then Clerimont in the midst, that hee may have no means of escape from their cavilling, when they grow hot once again. And then the women (as I have given the Bride her instructions) to break in upon him, in the l'enuoy. O, twill bee full and twanging! Away, fetch him. Come, Master Doctor, and Master Parson, look to your parts now, and discharge 'hem bravely: you are well set forth, perform
it as well. If you chance to be out, doe not confess it with standing still, or humming, or gaping one at another: but go on, and talk aloud, and eagerly, use vehement action, and only remember your terms, and you are safe. Let the mat∣la go where it will: you have many will doe so. But at first, be very solemn, and grave like your garments, though you lose your selves after, and skip out like a brace of Jug∣glers on a Table. Here he comes! set your faces, and look superciliously, while I present you.
Are these the two learned men?
Yes, Sir, please you salute 'hem?
Salute 'hem? I had rather doe any thing, then wear out time so unfruitfully, Sir. I wonder, how these common forms, as God save you, and you are well-come, are come to be a habit in our lives! or, I am glad to see you! when I cannot see, what the profit can be of these words, so long as it is no whit better with him, whose affairs are sad, and grievous, that he hears this salutation.
It is true, Sir, we'll go to the matter then. Gen∣tlemen, Master Doctor, and Master Parson, I have acquain∣ted you sufficiently with the business, for which you are come hither. And you are not now to inform your selves in the state of the question, I know. This is the Gentleman, who expects your resolution, and therefore, when you please, begin.
Please you, Master Doctor.
Please you, good Master Parson.
I would hear the Canon law speak first.
It must give place to positive Diunitie, Sir.
Nay, good Gentlemen, doe not throw me into cir∣cumstances. Let your comforts are•iue quickly at me, those that are. Be swift in affoording me my peace, if so I shall hope any. I love not your Dispurations, or your Court-tu∣mults. And that it be not strange to you, I will tell you. My Father, in my education, was wont to advise me, that I should always collect, and contain my mind, not suffering
it to flow loosely; that I should look to what things were necessary to the carriage of my life, and what not: embra∣cing the one and eschewing the other. In short, that I should endear my self to rest, and avoid turmoil: which now is grown to bee another nature to me. So that I come not to your public pleadings, or your places of noise; not that I neglect those things, that make for the dignity of the Com∣mon-wealth: but for the mere avoiding of clamours, and impertinences of Orators, that know not how to bee silent. And for the cause of noise, am I now a suitor to you You doe not know in what a misery I have been exercised this day, what a torrent of evil! My very House turns round with the tumult! I dwell in a Wind-mill! The perpetual about motion is here, and not at Eltham.
Well, good Master Doctor, will you break the ice? Master parson will wade after.
Sir, though unworthy, and the weaker, I will presume.
It is no presumption, Domino Doctor.
Yet again!
Your question is, for how many causes a man may have diuortium legitimum, a lawful Divorce. First, you must understand the nature of the word Divorce, a diuertendo—
No excursions upon words, good Doctor, to the question briefly.
I answer then, the Canon-law affords Divorce but in few cases, and the principal is in the common case, the adulterous case. But there are duodecim impedimenta, twelve impediments (as wee call 'hem) all which doe not dirimere contractum, but irritum redder matrimonium, as wee say in the Canon-law, not take away the bond, but cause a nullity therein.
I understood you, before: good Sir, avoid your impertinence of Translation.
He cannot open this too much, Sir, by your favour.
Yet more!
O, you must give the learned men leave, Sir. To your impediments, Master Doctor.
The first is impedimentum erroris.
Of which there are several species.
I, as error personae.
If you contract your self to one person, thinking her another.
Then, error fortune.
If she be a Beggar, and you thought her rich.
Then, error qualitatis.
If she prove stubborn, or head-strong, that you thought obedient.
How? is that, Sir, a lawful impediment? One at once, I pray you Gentlemen.
I, ante copulam, but not post copulam, Sir.
Master Parson says right. Nec post nuptiarum been∣dictionem. It doth indeed but irrita redder sponsalia, annul the Contract: after Marriage it is of no obstinacy.
Alas, Sir, what a hope are wee fallen from, by this time!
The next is condition: if you thought her free borne, and she prove a bond-woman, there is impediment of e∣state and condition.
I, but Master Doctor, those seruitudes are subla••e, now, among vs Christians.
By your favour, Master Parson—
You shall give me leave, Master Doctor.
Nay, Gentlemen, quarrel not in that question; it concerns not my case: pass to the third.
Well then, the third is votum. If either party have made a vow of Chastity. But that practice, as Master Par∣son said of the other, is taken away among vs, thanks bee to discipline. The fourth is cognatio: if the persons bee of kin, within the degrees.
I: doe you know, what the degrees are, Sir?
No, nor I care not, Sir: they offer me no comfort in the question, I am sure,
But, there is a branch of this impediment may, which is cognatio spiritualis. If you were her Godfather, Sir, then the Marriage is incestuous.
That comment is absurd, and superstitious, Master Doctor. I cannot endure it. Are wee not all Brothers and Sisters, and as much a kin in that, as God-fathers, and God-daughters?
O me! to end the Controversy, I never was a God∣father, I never was a God-father id my life, Sir. Pass to the next.
The sift is crimen adulterij: the known Case. The sixth, cultus disparitas, difference of Religion: have you ever examined her what Religion she is of?
No, I would rather she were of none, then bee put to the trouble of it!
You may have it done for you, Sir.
By no means, good Sir, on to the rest: shall you ever come to an end, think you?
Yes, he has done half, Sir. (On, to the rest) be pa∣tient, and expect, Sir.
The seventh is, vis: if it were upon compulsion, or force.
O no, it was too voluntary, mine: too voluntary.
The eighth is, ordo: if ever she have taken holy Orders.
That's superstitious, too.
No matter, Master Parson: would she would go into a Nunnery yet.
The ninth is, ligamen: if you were bound, Sir, to a∣ny other before.
I thrust my self too soon into these Fetters.
The tenth is, public honestas: which is inchoate quae∣dam affinitas.
I, or affinitas orta ex sponsalibus: and is but leave imp∣dimentum.
I feel no ayre of comfort blowing to me, in all this.
The eleventh is, affinitas ex fornication.
Which is no less vera affinitas, then the other Ma∣ster Doctor.
True, quae oritur ex legitimo matrimonio.
You say right, venerable Doctor. And, nascitur ex co, quote per coniugium duae personae efficiuntur una caro—
Hey-day, now they begin.
I conceive you, Master Parson. Ita per fornicatio∣name aeque est virus pater, queen sic generate—
Et vere filius queen sic generatur—
What's all this to me?
Now it grows warm.
The twelfth, and last is, si forte coire nequibis.
I, that is impedimentum grauissimum. It doth utterly annul, and annihilate, that. If you have manifestam frigi∣ditatem, you are well, Sir.
Why, there is comfort come at length, Sir. Con∣fesse your self but a man unable, and she will sue to be di∣uorc'd first.
I, or if there be morbus perpetuus, &amp; insanabilis, as Paralysis, Elephantiasis, or so—
O, but frigiditas is the fairer way, Gentlemen.
You say troth, Sir, and as it is in the Canon Master Doctor.
I conceive you, Sir.
Before he speaks.
That a Boy, or child, under years, is not fit for mar∣riage, because he cannot redder debitum. So your omnipoten∣tes—
Your impotentes, you whoreson Lobster.
Your impotentes, I should say, are minim apt ad contrahenda matrimonium.
Matrimonium? We shall have most vn-matrimo∣niall Latin, with you: Matrimony, and be hanged.
You put 'hem out, man.
But then there will arise a doubt, Master Parson, in our Case, post Matrimonium: that frigiditate praeditus (doe you conceive me, Sir?)
Very well, Sir.
Who cannot vti vxore pro vxore, may habere cam pro sorore.
Absurd, absurd, absurd, and merely Apostaticall.
You shall pardon me, Master Parson, I can prove it.
You can prove a Will, Master Doctor, you can prove nothing else. Do's not the Verse of your own Ca∣xan say, Haec socianda vetant connubia, facta retractant—
I grant you, but how doe they retractare, Master Parson?
(O, this was it, I feared.)
In aeternum, Sir.
That's false in Divinity, by your favour.
It is false in humanity, to say so. Is hee not prorsus inutilis ad Thorum? Can he praestare fidem datam? I would fine know.
Yes: how if he doe conualere?
He cannot connulere, it is impossible.
Nay, good Sir, attend the learned men, they'll think you neglect 'hem else.
Or, if he doe similar himself frigidum, odio vxoris, or so?
I say, he is adulter manifestus, then.
(They dispute it very learnedly, in faith.)
And prostitutor vxoris, and this is positive.
Good Sir, let me escape.
You will not doe me that wrong, Sir?
And therefore, if he be manifest frigidus, Sir—
I, if he be manifest frigidus, I grant you—
Why, that was my conclusion.
And mine too.
Nay, hear the conclusion, Sir.
Then frigiditatis causa—
Yes, causa frigiditatis—
O, mine ears!
She may have libellum diuortij, against you.
I, diuorty libellum she will sure have.
Good Eccho's, forbear.
If you confess it.
Which I would doe, Sir—
I will doe any thing—
And clear my self in Foro Conscientiae—
Because you wanc indeed—
Yet more?
Exercende potestate.
I Will not endure it any longer. Ladies, I beseech you help me. This is such a wrong, as never was offered to poor Bride before. Upon her Marriage day, to have her Hus∣band conspire against her, and a couple of Mercenary Com∣pinions, to be brought in for forms sake, to persuade a Se∣paration! If you had blood, or virtue in you, Gentlemen, you would not suffer such Eare-wigs about a Husband, or Scorpions, to creep between Man and Wife—
O, the variety, and changes of my torment!
Let 'hem bee cudgell'd out of doors, by our Grooms.
I'll lend you my Foot-man.
We'll have our men blanket 'hem in the Hall.
As there was one, at our House, Madame, for peeping in at the door.
Content, in faith.
Stay, Ladies, and Gentlemen, you'll hear, before uproceed?
I'd have the Bridegroom blanketed, too.
Begin with him first.
Yes, by my troth.
O, Mankind Generation!
Ladies, for my sake forbear.
Yes, for Sir Dauphins sake.
He shall command vs.
Hee is as fine a Gentleman of his inches, Madame, as any is about the Town, and wears as good colours when he lift.
Bee brief, Sir, and confess your infirmity, she'll be afire to be quit of you, if she but hear that named once, you shall not entreat her to stay. She'll fly you, like one that had the marks upon him.
Ladies, I must crave all your pardons—
Silence, Ladies.
For a wrong I have done to your whole sex, in marrying this fair, and virtuous Gentlewoman—
Hear him, good Ladies.
Being guilty of an infirmity, which before I con∣ferr'd with these learned men, I thought I might have con∣ceald—
But now being better informed in his conscience by them, hee is to declare it, and give satisfaction, by asking your public forgiveness.
I am no man, Ladies.
How!
Utterly vn-abled in nature, by reason of frigidity, to perform the duties, or any the least office of a Husband.
Now, out upon him, prodigious creature!
Bridegroom un carnate.
And would you offer it to a young Gentlewoman?
A Lady of her longings?
Tut, a device, a device, this, it smells rankly, Ladies. A mere comment of his own.
Why, if you suspect that, Ladies, you may have him searched.
As the custom is, by a Jury of Physicians.
Yes faith, twill be brave.
O me, must I undergo that!
No, let women search him, Madame: wee can doe it our selves.
Our on me, worse!
No Ladies, you shall not need, I'll take him with all his faults.
Worst of all!
Why, then it is no Divorce, Doctor, if she consent not?
No, if the man be frigidus, it is de part vxoris, that we grant Libellum diuorty, in the Law.
I, it is the same in Theology.
Worse, worse then worst!
Nay, Sir, be not utterly disheartened, wee have yet a small relike of hope left, as near as our comfort is blown out. Clerimont, produce your brace of Knights. What was that, Master Parson, you told me in error qualitatis even now? Dauphin, whisper the Bride, that she carry it as if she were guilty, and ashamed.
Mary Sir, in error qualitatis (which Master Doctor did forbear to urge) if she be found corrupt, that is, vitiated or broken up, that was pro virgin desponsa, espoused for a Maid—
What then, Sir?
It doth dirimere contractum, and irritum redder too.
If this bee true, wee are happy again, Sir, once more. Here are an honourable brace of Knights, that shall affirm so much.
Pardon vs, good Master Clerimont.
You shall excuse vs, Master Clerimont.
Nay, you must make it good now, Knights, there is no remedy, I'll eat no words for you, nor no men: you know you spoke it to me?
Is this Gentleman-like-like, Sir?
Jack Daw, hoe's worse then Sir Amorous: fiercer a great deal. Sir Amorous, beware, there bee ten Daws in this Clerimont.
I'll confess it, Sir.
Will you, Sir Amorous? will you wound reputation?
I am resolved.
So should you be too, Jack Daw: what should keep you off? she is but a woman, and in disgrace. He will bee glad on it.
Will he? I thought he would ha 'beene angry.
You will dispatch, Knights, it must bee done, in faith.
Why, and it must it shall, Sir, they say. They'll ne'er go back. Doe not tempt his patience.
It is true indeed, Sir.
Yes, I assure you, Sir.
What is true Gentlemen? what doe you assure me?
That we have known your Bride, Sir—
In good fashion. She was our Mistress, or so—
Nay, you must bee plain, Knights, as you were to me.
I, the question is, if you have carnaliter, or no.
Carnaliter? what else, Sir?
It is enough: a plain nullity.
I am vn-done, I am vn-done!
O, let me worship and adore you, Gentlemen!
I am undone!
Yes, to my hand, I thank these Knights: Master Parson, let me thank you otherwise.
And, have they confessed?
Now out upon 'hem, Informers!
You see, what creatures you may bestow your fa∣uours on, Madams.
I would except against 'hem as beaten Knights, Wench, and not good Witnesses in Law.
Poor Gentlewoman, how she takes it!
Be comforted, Morose, I love you the better for it.
So doe I, I protest.
But Gentlemen, you have not known her, since ma∣trimonium?
Not to day, Master Doctor.
No, Sir, not to day.
Why, then I say, for any act before, the matrimo∣nium is good and perfect: unless, the worshipful Bride∣groom did precisely, before witness demand, if she were virgo ante nuptias.
No, that he did not, I assure you, Master Doctor.
If he cannot prove that, it is ratum coniugium, not∣withstanding the premises. And they doe no way impedire. And this is my Sentence, this I pronounce.
I am of Master Doctors resolution too, Sir: if you made not that demand, ante nuptias.
O my heart! wilt thou break? wilt thou break? this is worst of all worst worsts! that Hell could have deuis'd! Marry a Whore! and so much noise!
Come, I see now plain confederacy in this Do∣ctor, and this Parson, to abuse a Gentleman. You study his affliction. I pray bee gone companions. And Gentlemen, I begin to suspect you for having parts with 'hem. Sir, will it please you hear me?
O, doe not talk to me, take not from me the plea∣sure of dying in silence, Nephew.
Sir, I must speak to you. I have been long your poor despised Kins-man, and many a hard thought has strengthened you against me: but now it shall appear if ei∣there I love you or your peace, and prefer them to all the World beside. I will not be long or grievous to you, Sir. If I free you of this unhappy match absolutely, and instantly af∣la all this trouble, and almost in your despair, now—
(It cannot be.)
Sir, that you bee never troubled with a murmur
of it more, what shall I hope for, or deserve of you?
O, what thou wilt, Nephew! thou shalt deserve me, and have me.
Shall I have your favour perfect to me, and love hereafter?
That, and any thing beside. Make thine own con∣ditions. My whole estate is thine. Manage it, I will become thy Ward.
Nay, Sir, I will not be so unreasonable.
Will Sir Dauphin be mine enemy too?
You know, I have been a long Suitor to you, Un∣cle, that out of your estate, which is fifteen hundred a year, you would allow me but five hundred during life, and assure the rest upon me after: to which I have often, by my self and friends tendered you a writing to sign, which you would never consent, or incline too. If you please to effect it now—
Thou shalt have it, Nephew. I will doe it, and more.
If I quit you not presently? and for-euer of this cumber, you shall have power instantly, before all these, to revoke your act, and I will become, whose Slave you will give me to, for-euer.
Where is the Writing? I will seal to it, that, or to a Blank, and write thine own conditions.
O me, most unfortunate wretched Gentlewoman!
Will Sir Dauphin doe this?
Good Sir, have some compassion on me.
O, my Nephew knows you belike: away Crocodile.
He do's it not sure, without good ground.
Here, Sir.
Come Nephew: give me the Pen. I will subscribe to any thing, and seal to what thou wilt, for my deliue∣rance. Thou art my restorer. Here, I deliver it thee as my Deed. If there bee a word in it lacking, or writ with false Orthography, I protest before—I will not take the aduan∣tage.
Then here is your release,  Sir: you have married a Boy: a Gentleman's son, that I have brought up this half year, at my great charges, and for this composition, which I have now made with you. What say you, Master Doctor? this is iustum impedimentum, I hope, error personae?
Yes Sir, in primo gradu.
In primo graou.
 I thank you, good Doctor Cutberd, and Parson Otter. You are beholden to 'hem, Sir, that have taken this pains for you: and my friend, Master Tru-wit, who enabled 'hem for the business. Now you may go in and rest, be as private as you will, Sir. I'll not trouble you, till you trow∣ble me with your Funeral, which I care not how soon it come. Cutberd, I'll make your Lease good. Thank me not, but with your leg, Cutberd. And Tom Otter, your Prin∣cesse shall be reconciled to you. How now, Gentlemen! doe you look at me?
A Boy.
Yes, Mistress Epicoene.
Well, Dauphin, you have lurched your friends of the better half of the Garland, by concealing this part of the plot: but much good doe it thee, thou deserve it, Lad. And Clerimont, for thy unexpected bringing in these two to confession, wear my part of it freely. Nay, Sir Daw, and Sir La-Foole, you see the Gentlewoman that has done you the favours! we are all thankful to you, and so should the wo∣man-kind here, specially for lying on her, though not with her! You meant so, I am sure? But, that wee have stuck it upon you to day, in your own imagined persons, and so lately; this Amazon, the Champion of the sex, should beat you now thriftily, for the common slanders, which La∣dies receive from such Cuckowes, as you are. You are they, that when no merit or fortune can make you hope to enjoy their bodies, will yet lye with their reputations, and make their fame suffer. Away you common Moths of these, and all Ladies honours, Go, travail to make legs and faces,
and come home with some new matter to be laughed at: you deserve to live in an Ayre as corrupted, as that wherewith you feed rumour. Madams, you are mute, upon this new Metamorphosis! but here stands she, that has vindicated your fems. Take heed of such insectae hereafter. And let it not trow∣ble you that you have discovered any Mysteries to this young Gentleman. He is (a'most) of years, and will make a good Visitant within this twelue-month. In the mean time, we'll all undertake for his secrecy, that can speak so well of his silence. Spectators, if you like this Comoedie, rise cheer∣fully, and now Morose is gone in, clap your hands. It may bee, that noise will cure him, at least please him.

LEt us make use of this stolen privacy,
And not loose time in protestation, mistress,
For it were in me a kind of breach of faith,
To say again I love you.
Sweet speak softly
For though the venture of your love to me,
Meets with a willing, and a full return:
Should it arrive unto my Fathers knowledge;
These were our last discourse.
How shall he know it?
His watching cares are such, for my advancement,
That every where his eye is fixed upon me:
This night that does afford us some small freedom,
At the request and much entreaty of,
The mistress of the house, was hardly given me:
For I am never suffered to stir out,
But he hath spies upon me, yet I know not
You have so won upon me, that could I think
You would love faithfully (though to entertain
Another thought of you, would be my death)
I should adventure on his utmost anger.
Why, do you think I can be false?
No faith,
You have an honest face, but if you should—
Let all the stored vengeance of heavens justice—
No more, I do believe you, the dance ended,
Which this free women's ghosts have vowed to have
Ere they depart, I will make home, and store me
With all the Jewels, Chains, and gold are trusted
Unto my custody, and at the next corner,
To my Fathers house, before one at the farthest,
Be ready to receive me.
I desire
No bond beyond your promise, let's go in,
To talk thus much before the door, may breed,
Suspicion. 
Here are company too.
Away,
Those powers that prosper true and honest loves
Will bless our undertakeings.
It is my wish Sir. 
Nay, Sir, excuse me, I have drawn you to,
Too much expense already in my travel:
And you have been to forward in your love;
To make my wants your own, allow me manners
Which you must grant I want, should I increase,
The bond in which your courtesies have tide me:
Be still consuming you, give me leave
To take mine own ways now; and I shall often
With willingness come to visit you, and then thank you.
By this hand I could be angry, what do you think me?
Must we that have so long time, been as one
Seen Cities, Countries, Kingdoms, and their wonders
Been bedfellows, and in our various journey
Mixtall our observations, part (as if
We were 2. Carriers at 2. several ways,
And as the forehorse guides, cry God be with you)
Without or complement, or ceremony?
In travelers that know transalpine garbs,
Though our designs are near so serious, friend,
It were a capital crime; it must not be,
Nay what is more, you shall not, you ere long
Shall see my house, and find what I call mine
Is wholly at your service.
It is this tires me,
Sir I were easily wooed if nothing else
But my will lay in the choice, but it is not so
My friends and kindred that have part of me,
And such on whom my chiefest hopes depend,
Justly expect the tender of my love
After my travel, then mine own honesty
Tells me it is poor, having indifferent means
To keep me in my quality and rank,
At my return to tire another bounty,
And let mine own grow lusty, pardon me.
I will not, cannot, to conclude I dare not:
Can any thing conferred upon my friend
Be burdensome to me? for this excuse
Had I no reason else you should not leave me,
By a travellers faith you should not, I have said,
And then you know my humour, ther's no contending.
Is there no way to scope this Inundation?
I shall be drowned with folly if I go:
And after 9. days men may take me up,
With my gall broken.
Are you yet resolved?
Wood you would spare me.
By this light I cannot
By all, that may be sworn by.
Patience help me,
And heaven grant his folly be not catching:
If it be, the towns undone, I now would give
A reasonable sum of gold to any sheriff,
That would but lay an execution on me,
And free me from his company; while he was abroad,
His want of wit and language kept him dumb:
But Balaam's Ass will speak now without spurring.
Speak, have I won you?—
You are not to be resisted.
Be ready I entreat you the dance done,
Besides a liberal reward I have,
A bottle of sherry in my power shall beget
New crotchets in your heads.
Tush fear not us, we'll do our parts.
Go in,
I know this fellow.
Belong you to the house?
I serve the Mistress.
Pretty, and short, pray you sir then inform her,
Two Gentlemen are covetous to be honoured,
With her fair presence.
She shall know so much,
This is a merry night with us, and forbid not
Welcome to any that looks like a man:
I'll guide you the way.
Nay follow, I have a trick in it. 
Come wher's this masque? fairest for our cheer,
Our thanks and service, may you long survive,
To joy in many of these nights.
I thank you.
We must have musique too, or ells you give us,
But half a welcome.
Pray you Sir excuse me.
By no means Lady.
Weal crown your liberal feast,
With some delightful strain fitting your love:
And this good company.
Since you enforce it,
I will not plead the excuse of want of skill
Or be, or nice, or curious, every year,
I celebrate my marriage night; and will
'Till I see my absent husband.
It is fit freedom.
Richardo thou art dull—
I shall be lighter,
When I have had a heate.
Now Sir, the news?
Mistress there are 2. Gentlemen.
Where?
Complementing who should first enter.
What are they?
Heaven knows, but for their strangeness, have you never seen a Cat wash her face?
Yes.
Just such a stir they keep if you make but hast,
You may see 'em yet before they enter.
Let 'em be what they will, we'll give them fair
Entertain, and gentle welcome.
It shall be so.
Then let it be your pleasure.
Let's stand a side and you shall see us have
Fine sport anon.
A fair society, do you know these Gentle women?
Yes.
What are they?
The second is a neighbours daughter, her name is Ʋiola.
There is my kinsmans wife, Portia her name, and a
Friend too.
Let her—what's she that leads the dance?
A Gentlewoman.
I see that.
Indeed?
What?
A Gentlewoman.
Udsfoote, good Sir what's she that leads the dance?
My Mistress.
What else?
My Mistress, Sir.
Your Mistress? a pox on you, What a fry of fools are here? I see it is treason to understād in this house; if nature were not better to them, then they can be to themselves, they would scant hit their mouths; my Mistress? Is there any one with so much wit in 's head, that can tell me at the first sight, what Gentlewoman that is that leads the dance?
It is my wife.
Hum.
How dost thou like her?
Well, a pretty Gentlewoman.
Prithee be quiet.
I would I could
Let never any hereafter that's a man,
That has affections in him and free passions,
Receive the least tie from such a fool as this is,
That holds so sweet a wife, it is lamentable to consider truly
What right he robs himself of, and what wrong
He doth the youth of such a Gentlewoman?
That knows her beauty is no longer hers,
Then men will please to make it so, and use it
Neither of which lies freely in a husband,
O what have I don, what have I don, Coxcomb?
If I had never seen, or never tasted
The goodness of this kix, I had been a made man,
But now to make a Cuckold is a sin
Against all forgiveness, worse then a murder;
I have a Woolfe by the ears, and am bitten both ways.
How now friend, what are you thinking of?
Nothing concerning you, I must be gone.
Pardon me, Isle have no going sir.
Then good sir give me leave to go to bed,
I am very weary and ill tempered.
You shall presently, the dance is done.
Mistress, these are the gentlemen.
My husband will come home, dear sir.
She's fair still, O that I were a knave or durst be one,
For thy sake coxcōbe; he that invented honesty, undid me.
I had you had not known me, you're merry tic well thought,
And how first with these worthy Gent?
We are glad to see you here again
Oh Gent, what ha'you lost? but get you into travels,
There you may learn, I cannot say what hidden virtues.
Hidden from you I am sure,
My blood boils like a furnace,
Shees a fair one.
Pray entertain this Gent. with all the courtesy,
Fitting my most especial friend.
What this poor house may yield,
To make you welcome dear sir command
Without more complement.
I thank you:
Shoe's wise and speaks well too, oh what a blessing
Is gone by me near to be recovered?
Well, it was an old shame the Devil laid up for me, and now has hit me home; if there be any ways to bee disho∣nest and save my self yet, — No it must not bee, why should I bee a fool to —Yet those eyes would tempt another Adam, how they call to me, and tell me — Sfoote they shall not tell me any thing, sir will you walk in.
How first Signior?
Crazie a little.
What aisle you sir?
Whats in my power pray make use of, sir.
Tic that must doe me good, she do's not mock me sure,
An't please you nothing, my disease is only weariness.
Come Gent. weal not keep you from your beds too long.
I ha some business, and tic late, and you far from your lodging.
Well. 
Come my dear Mercury, isle bring you to your chamber, and then I am for you, Maria, thou art a new wife to me now, and thou shalt find it, ere I sleep.
And I, an old ass to my self, mine own rod whips me, — good sir no more of this, tic tedious, you
are the best guide in your own house — go sir —
This fool, and his fair wife have made me frantic
From two such physics for the soul, deliver me.
Well, you must have this wench then.
I hope so, I am much of the bow hand else.
Wood I were hanged, tic a good loving little fool that dares venture her self upon a coast she never knew yet, but these women, when they are once thirteen, god speed the plough.
Faith they'll venture further, so their lading then a Merchant, and through as many storms, but theyle bee franghted, they are made like Carracks only strength and storage.
Come, come, you talk, you talk.
We doe so, but tell me Richardo, woot thou marry her?
Marry her? why what should I do with her?
Pox, I thought we should have had all shares in her like lawful prize.
No by my faith sir, you shall pardon me, I launched her at my own charge without partners, and so isle keep her.
VVhats the hour?
Twelve.
What shall we doe the while? tic yet scarce eleven.
Theres no standing here, is not this the place?
Yes.
And to go back unto her fathers house, may breed suspicion lets slip into a Tavern, for an hour, tic very cold.
Content, there is one hard by, a quart of burnt sack will recover us, I am as cold as Chri••mas, this stealing flesh in the frosty weather, may be sure 'ith eating, but sure the woodmen have no great catch on it; shalls go?
Thou art the strangest lover of a tavern, what shall we doe there now? loose the hour and our selves too?
Loose a pudding; what dost thou talk of the hour; will one quart muzzle us? have wee not ears to hear, and tongues to ask the drawers, but wee must stand here like bawds to watch the minutes?
Prithee content thy self, we shall scout here, as though we went a haying, and have some mangy prone∣tice, that cannot sleep for scratching, over ear us, come will you go sirs? when your love fury is a little frozen, you'll come to us.
Will you drink but one quart then?
No more I faith.
Content.
Why then, have with you, but letts be very watchful
As watchful as the belman, come Isle lead, because I hate good manners, they are too tedious. 
The night is terrible and I enclosed
With that my virtue and my self hate most,
Darkness; yet must I fear that which I wish,
Some company, and every step I take
Sounds louder in my fearful ears to night
Then ever did, the shrill and sacred bell
That rang me to my prayers; the house will rise
When I unlock the door, were it by day
I am bold enough, but then a thousand eyes
Warn me from going, might not God have made
A time for envious prying folk to sleep
Whilst lovers met, and yet the sun have shone?
Yet I was bold enough, to steal this key
Out of my fathers Chamber, and dare yet
Venture upon mine enemy, this night,
Armed only with my love, to meet my friend.
Alas how valiant, and how afraid at once
Love makes a Virgin? I will throw this key
Back through a window, I had wealth enough
In Jewels with me, if I hold his love
I steal i'm for; farewell my place of birth,
I never make account to look on thee again;
And if there be as I have heard men say,
These household gods, I doe beseech them look
To this my charge, bless it from thieves and fire,
And keep till happily my love I win
Me from thy door, and hold my Father in. 
No more for God sake, how is the night boy?
Faith sir tic very late.
Faith sir you lye, is this your jack in the clock-house? will you strike sir? gi's some more sack, you varlet.
Nay, if you love me, good Vberto go,
I am monstrous hot with wine.
Quench it again with love, Gent. I will-drinke one health more, and then if my legs say me not shamefully nay, I will go with you, give me a singular quart.
Of what wine sir?
Of Sack, you that speak confusion at the bar, of sack I say, and every one his quart, what a devil letts be merry.
You shall sir. 
We will sir, and a dried tongue.
And an Olive, boy, and a whole bunch of fiddlers, my head swims plaguely, vds precious I shall be claud.
Pray go, I can drink no more, think on your promise, tic midnight Gentlemen.
O that it were dum midnight now, not a word more, every man on's knees, and betake himself to his saint, heir's to your wench, seignior, all this, &amp; then away.
I cannot drink it.
Tic a toy, a toy, away wo't.
Now dare I speak any thing, to any body living, come whirs the fault? off with it.
I have broke my wind, call you this sack?— I wonder who made it? he was a sure workman, for tic plaguy strong work, is it gone round?
Tic at the last out of my way, good boy, is the moon up yet?
Yes sir.
Where is she boy?
There sir.
We shall have rain and thunder, boy.
When sir?
I cannot tell, but sure we shall, boy.
The Gent. is wine wise.
Drawer?
Here sir.
Can you procure?
What sir?
A whore or two or three as need shall serve, boy?
I, a good whore were worth money, boy.
I protest sir we are all together unprovided.
The mor's the pity, boy, can you not vize us where my child?
Neither, in troth sir.
Why where were you brought up boy? no juggling of a whore? no aim my boy?
It cannot sink in my head now, that thou should marry, why should thou marry, tell me?
I marry? Isle be hanged first: some more wine boy.
Is she not a whore translated? &amp; she be, lets repair to her.
I cannot tell, she may be an offender; but signior Silvio I shall scratch your head, indeed I shall.
Judge me I do most jest with thee, what an she were inverted with her heals upward, like a traitors Coat? what care I.
I, hang her, shall we fall out for her?
I am a little angry, but these wenches, did you not talk of wenches?
Boy lend me your candle.
Why Sir?
To set fire to your rotten feeling, you'll keep no
Whores, Rogue, no good members;
VVhores Sir?
I, whores, Sir, do you think we come to lye with your hogsheads?
I must beat the watch, I have longed for it any time this three weeks.
VVee'le beat the town too, and thou wilt, we are proof boy; shall wee kill any body?
No but we'll hurt 'em dangerously.
Silu. Now must I kill one, I cannot avoid it, boy easily before there with your candle; wher's your Mistress?
A bed, Sir.
With whom?
With my Master.
You lye Boy, shoe's better brought up then to lye with her husband, has he not cast his head yet? next year he will be a velvet-headed Cuckold.
You are a merry Gentleman, there Sir, take hold
This is the place I have out told the Clock,
For hast, he is not here. Richardo? no;
Now every power that loves and is beloved:
Keep me from shame to night, for all you know
Each thought of mine is innocent, and pure,
As flesh and blood can hold: I cannot back;
I threw the key within, and ere I raise
My Father up, to see his daughters shame,
I'll set me down, and tell the Northern wind,
That it is gentler then the curling West;
If it will blow me dead, but he will come;
I faith it is cold; if hee deceive me thus,
A woman will not easily trust a man. Hark what's that?
You are over long at thy pot, tom, tom, thou art over long at the pot tom.
Bless me! whose that?
Whoo!
There Boys.
Darkness be thou my cover, I must fly,
To thee I hast for help —
They have a light,
Wind if thou love a virgin blow it out,
And I will never shut a window more,
To keep thee from me.
Boy?
Sir.
Why Boy?
What say you Sir?
Why boy? art thou drunk boy?
What would you Sir?
Why very good, where are wee?
I, that's the point.
Why Sir, you will be at your lodging presently.
I'll go to no lodging Boy.
Whether will you go then Sir?
I'll go no farther.
For Gods sake Sir, do not stay here all night.
No more I will not boy, lay me down, and roll me to a whore.
And me.
There spoke an —
Then set your foot to my foot, &amp; up tails all.
That is Richardo, what a noise they make?
It is ill don on 'em: here Sirs, Richardo?
What's that Boy?
It is a wench Sir, pray Gent. come away.
O my dear love! how doest thou?
My sweet hart? even as thou see.
Wher's thy wench?
VVher's this bed worm?
Speak softly for the love of heaven.
Mistress get you gone, and doe not entice the gent. now you see thei're drunk, or Isle call the watch, and lay you fast enough.
Alas what are you? or what doe you mean?
Sweet love wher's the place?
Marry sweet love, ee'n here, lye down Isle fees you.
Good god! what mean you?
Isle have the wench.
If you can get her.
No Isle lye with the wench to night, and she shall be yours to morrow.
Let go the wench.
Let you go the wench.
O Gent. as you had mothers!
They had no mothers, they are the sons of bitches
Let that be maintained.
Marry then.
Oh bless me heaven!
How many is there once?
About five.
Why then lets fight three to three. 
Content.
The watch? the watch? the watch? where are you? 
Where are these cowards?
Ther's the whore.
I never saw a drunken man before,
But these I think are so.
Oh!
I mist you narrowly there.
My state is such, I know not how to think,
A prayer fit for me, only I could move,
That never maiden more might be in love. 
Where are they, boy?
Make no such hast sir, they are no runners.
I am hurt, but that's all one, I shall light upon some of ye,
Pedro thou art a tall Gent. let me kiss thee.
My friend.
Your friend? you lie.
Stand further off, the watch, you are full of fleas.
Gent either be quiet, or we must make you quiet.
Nay good Mr. Constable, be not so Rigorous.
Mr. Constable lend me thy hand of justice.
That I will sir.
Fie Mr. Constable what golls you have? is justice so blind she cannot see to wash your hands? I cry you mercy Sir; Your gloves are one.
Now you are up Sir, will you go to bed?
I'll truckle here Boy, give me another pillow.
Will you stand up and let me lay it on then?
Yes.
There hold him two of ye, now they are up be going Mr. Constable
And this way, and that way, tom.
And here away and there away tom.
This is the right way the others the wrong.
The others the wrong.
Thou art over long at the pot tom, tom.
Lead valiantly sweet Constable, whoop! ha Boys!
This wine hunts in their heads.
Give me the bill, for I'll bee the Sergeant.
Look to him Sirs.
Keep your Ranks you Rascals, keep your Ranks.
I Cannot sleep for thinking of this Asses wife, I'll be gon presently, ther's no staying here, with this Devil about me? hoe, this is the house of sleep, hoe? again ther's foot the darkness, and this love to∣gether, will make me lunatic; ho?
Who calls there?
Pray take the pains to rise and light a candle.
Presently,
Was ever man but I in such a stocks? well this shall be a warning to me, and a fair one too, how I betray my self to such a dunce, by way of benefit.
Did you call?
Yes, pray doe me the kindness sir, to let me out and not to enquire why, for I must needs be gone.
Not to night, I hope sir.
Good sir to night, I would not have troubled you else, pray let it be so.
Alas sir, my Master will be offended.
That I have business? no I warrant ye.
Good sir take your rest.
Pray my good friend let me appoint my own rest.
Yes sir.
Then show me the way out, I'll consider you.
Good Lord, sir.
If I had not an excellent tempered patience, now should I break this fellows head, and make him un∣derstand it were necessary; the only plague of this house is the unhandsome love of servants, that near doe their duty in the right place, but when they muster before din∣ner, and sweep the table with a wooden dagger, and then they are troublesome too, to all men's shoulders, the Wood∣cocks fleshed again, now I shall have a new stir.
Why how now friend? what do you up so late? are you well? do you want any thing? pray speak.
Only the cause I rise for.
What knaves are these? what do you want? why sirrah?
Nothing in the world, but the keys to let me out of doors; I must be gon, bee not against it, for you cannot stay me.
Begone at this time? that were a merry jest.
If there be any mirth in it, make you use on it, but I must go.
Why for loves sake?
Twill benefit your understanding nothing to know the cause, pray go to bed, I'll trouble your man only.
Nay Sir you have raised more, that has reason to curse you, and you knew all, my wives up, and coming down too.
Alas it will be a trouble, pray go up to her and let me disturb no more, it is unmannerly.
Shoe's here already; sweet hart: how say you by this Gentleman? he would away at midnight.
That I am sure hee will not.
Indeed I must.
Good Sir let not your homely entertainment press you to leave your bed at midnight; if you want, what my house or your town may afford you, make it your own fault if you call not for it pray go to bed again; let me compel you, I am sure you have no power to de∣ny a woman; the ayre is piercing, &amp; to a body beaten with long travel, twill prove an ill Physician.
If she speak longer I shall be a knave, as rank as ever sweat for it; Sir if you will send your wife up present∣lie, I will either stay with you, do ye mark, me or deliver you, so just a cause, that you your self, shall thrust me out of doors, both suddenly and willingly.
I would fine hear that faith, pray thee go up sweet hart, I have half persuaded him, besides, he hath some private business with me.
Good night Sir, and what content you would have, I wish with you. 
Could any man that had a back ask more? o me! o me!
Now deal directly with me: why should you go?
If you be wise do not enquire the cause, twill trow∣ble you:
Why? prithee why?
Faith I would not have you know it, let me go, twill be far better for you.
Who's that, that knocks there? i'st not at the street door?
Yes sir.
Who's there, cannot you speak?
A poor distressed maid, for gods sake let me in.
Let her in and me out together, it is but one labour, tic pity she should stand in the street, it seems she knows you.
There she shall stand for me, you are ignorant; this is a common custom of the Rogues that lie about the loose parts of the City.
As how?
To knock at doors in dead time of night, and use some fained voice to raise compassion, and when the doors are open, in they rush, and cut the throats of all and take the booty, we cannot be too careful.
As ever you had pity let me in, I am undone else.
Who are you?
My name is Viola, a Gentlewoman, that ill chance hath distressed, you know my father,
Alas of god we'll let her in, it is one of the Gen∣tlewomen were here in the evening, I know her by her name, (poor soul) shoe's cold I warrant her, let her have my warm Bed, and Isle take her fortune; come, pray come.
It is not Viola that's certain, she went home to her fathers, I am sure,
Will not you be so good to let me in?
Isle be so good to have you whipped away if you stay a little longer: Shoe's gone I warrant her, now let me know your cause for I will hear it, and not repent the knowing.
Since you are so importunate, I'll tell you, I love your wife extremely.
Very well.
And so well that I dare not stay.
Why?
For wronging you, I know I am flesh and blood, and you have done me friendships infinite and often, that must require me honest and a true man, and I will be so or I'll break my heart.
Why, you may stay for all this, me thinks.
No, though I wood be good, I am no saint, nor is it safe to try me, I deal plainly.
Come I dare try you, do the best you can.
You shall not when I am right again, I'll come and see you, till when, I'll use all Countries and all means, but I will loose this folly, it is a Devil.
Is there no way to stay you?
No, unless you will have me such a villain to you as all men shall spit at me.
Do's she know you love her?
No I hope not, that were recompense fit for a Rogue to render her.
If ever any had a faithful friend I am that man, and I may glory in it, this is he, that ipse, he that passes all Christendom for goodness, hee shall not over go me in his friendship it were recreant and base, and I'll be hanged first, I am resolved, go thy ways, a wife shall never part us, I have considered and I find her nothing to such a friend as thou art; I'll speak a bold word, take your time and woe her, you have overcome me clearly, and do what's fitting with her, you conceive me, I am glad at hart you love her: by this light, ne'er stare upon me for I will not fly from it, if you had spoken sooner, sure you had bin served; Sir, you are not every man, now to your task, I give you free leave, and the sin is mine if there be any in it.
Hee will be hanged before he makes this good, hee cannot be so innocent a Coxcomb, he can tell ten sure, if I had never known you as I have done, I might be one, as others perhaps sooner, but now it is impossible ther's too much good between us.
Well thou art even the best man—I can say no more, I am, so over joyed, you must stay this night, and in the morning go as early as you please, I have a toy for you.
I thought this pill would make you sick.
But where you mean to be I must have notice,
And it must be hard by too, do you mark me?
Why? what's the matter?
There is a thing in hand.
Why? what thing?
A sound one, if it take right, and you be not peevish We two will be—you would little think it; as fa∣mous for our friendship—
How?
If God please, as ever Demon was and Pytheas or Pie∣lades, and Orestes, or any two that ever were: do you con∣ceive me yet?
No by my troth Sir; he will not help me up sure.
You shall anon, and for our names, I think they shall live after us, and be remembered while there is a story; or I loose my aim.
What a vengeance ails hee? how do you?
Yes faith, wee two will be such friends as the world shall ring off.
And why is all this?
You shall enjoy my wife.
Away, away.
The wonder must begin, so I have cast it, twill be scurvy else, you shall not stir a foot i'nt, pray be quiet 'till I have made it perfect.
What shall a man do with this wretched fellow? there is no mercy to be used towards him, he is not capa∣ble of any pity, he will in spite of course be a Cuckold, And who can help it? must it begin so needs Sir?— think again.
Yes marry must it, and I my self will woe this wo∣man for you, do you perceive it now? ha?
Yes now I have a little sight in the matter; o that thy head should be so monstrous, that al thy Servants hats may hang upon it! but do you mean to do this?
Yes certain, I will woe her, and for you, strive not against it, it is the overthrow of the best plot that ever was then.
Nay I'll assure you Sir, I'll do no harm, you have too much about you of your own.
Have you thought of a place yet?
A place?
I a place where you will bide, prithee no more of this modesty, it is foolish, and we were not determinde to be absolute friends indeed, it were tolerable.
I have thought, and you shall hear from me.
Why? this will gain me everlasting glory; I have the better of him, that's my comfort, good night. 
Good night, well go thy ways, thou art the tie∣die withal this day I think above ground, and yet thy end for all this must bee motley. 
It is bitter cold; a plague upon these Rogues, how wary they are grown? not a door open now, but double bard, not a window, but up with a case of wood like a spice box, and their locks unpickable, the very smiths that were half venturers, drink penitent single Ale, this is the Iron age, the Ballad sings of; well I shall meet with some of our loose Linen yet, good fell∣lowes must not starve; heir's he shall show you God a mighties dog bolts, if this hold.
Faith thou art but too merciful, that's thy fault thou art as sweet a thief, that sin excepted ever suffered, that's a proud word and I'll maintain it.
Come prithee let's shogg off, &amp; brouze an how∣er or two, ther's ale will make a Cat speak, at the har∣row, we shall get nothing now, without we batter, it is grown too near morning, the Rogues sleep sober, and are watchful.
Wee want a Boy extremely for this function kept under for a year, with milk and knott-grasse; in my time I have seen a boy do vvonders Robin the red Think∣er had a boy Rest his soul he suffered this time 4. years for two spoons, &amp; a Pevvter Candlestick, that sweet man had a Boy as I am Curstend Whore, would have run through a Cat hole, he vvold have bolted such a piece of linen in an evening—
Well, we will have a Boy, prithee lets go, I am vengeance cold I tell thee.
I'll be hanged before I stir without some pur∣chase by these ten bones, I'll turn she ape and until a house, but I'll have it, it may be I have an humour to bee hanged, I cannot tell
Peace, you flayed vvhore, thou hast a mouth like a Bloodhound, here comes a night shade.
A Gentlewoman vvhore, by this darkness I'll case her to the skin.
Peace I say.
What fear have I endured this dismal night?
And what disgrace if I were seen and known?
In which this darkness, only is my friend,
That only has undone me; a thousand curses
Light on my easy, foolish childish, love,
That durst so lightly lay a confidence
Upon a man, so many being false;
my weariness, and weeping makes me sleepy, I must lye down.
VVhats this? a prayer, or a homily, or a Ballad of good council? she has a gown, I am sure.
Knock out her brains and then she'll near byte
Yes I will knock her, but not yet, you? woman?
For gods sake what are you?
One of the grooms of your wardrobe, come un∣case, uncase; bier lady a good Kersey.
Pray doe not hurt me sir.
Lets have no pity, for if you doe, here is that shall cut your whistle.
Alas what would you have? I am as miserable as you can make me any way.
That shall be tried.
Here, take my gown if that will doe you pleasure.
Yes marry will it, look in the pockets Doll, there may be birds.
They are flown a pox go with them, I'll have this Hat, and this Ruff too, I like it, now will I flourish like a Lady, brave I faith boy.
You're so gentle people to my seeming,
That by my truth I could live with you.
Could you so? a pretty young round wench, well blotted, I am for her, thieves.
But by this I am not, cool your Godpiece, Rogue, or Isle clap a spell upon it, shall take your edge off with a very vengeance.
Peace horse-flesh, peace, Isle cast off my Amazon, she has walked too long, and is indeed notorious, sheele fight and scold, and drink like one of the worthies.
Vds precious you young contagious whore must you be ticing? and is your flesh so wrank sir, that two may live upon it? I am glad to hear your cortall grown so lusty; he was dry foundered tother day, wee hee my pampered lade of Asia.
Good woman doe not hurt me, I am sorry that I have given any cause of anger.
Either bind her quickly and come away, or by this steel Isle tell though I truss for company; now could I eat her broyld, or any way, without vinegar, I must have her nose.
By any thing you love best, good sir, good woman.
Why her nose Dorithy?
If I have it not and presently and warm, I loose that I go withal.
Wood the Devil had that thou goosed withal, and thee together, for sure he got thy whelps if thou hast any, shees thy dear dad, whore! put up your cutpurse; an I take my swish up, twill be a black time with you else shes your bung whore.
Will you bind her? we shall stand here prating and be hang both.
Come I must bind you, not a word, no crying.
Doe what you will, indeed I will not cry.
Hurt her not, if thou dost by Ale and Bear Isle clout thy old bald brain pan, with a piece of brass, you bitch incarnate.
O God to what am I reserved, that knew not
Through all my childish hours and actions
More sin then poor imagination,
And too much loving of a faithless man?
For which I am paid, and so, that not the day
That now is rising to protect the harmless,
And give the innocent a sanctuary
From thieves and spoilers, can deliver me
From shame, at least suspicion—
Sirrah lead down the horses easily, I'll walk a foot till I be down the hill, tic very early, I shall reach home betimes. How now, whose there?
Night that was ever friend to lovers, yet
Has raised some weary soul, that hates his bed
To come and see me blush, and then laugh at me.
H'ad a rude heart that did this.
Gentle sir,
If you have that which honest men call pity,
And be as far from evil as you show;
Help a poor maid, that this night by bad fortune
Has been thus used by Robbers.
A pox upon his heart that would not help thee, this thief was half a Lawyer, by his bands, how long have you bin tied here?
Alas this hour, and with cold and fear am al∣most perished.
Where were the watch the while? good sober Gent. they were like careful members of the City, drawing in diligent ale and singing catches, while Mr. Constable con∣trivet the tosts: these fellows would bee more severely punished then wandering Gipsies, that every stat•te whips, for if they had every one two eyes a piece more, three pots would put them out.
I cannot tell I found no Christian to give me suc∣cour.
When they take a thief, I'll take Ostend again; the whorsons drink opium in their Ale, &amp; then they sleep like topps; as for their bills, they only serve to reach down Bacon to make Rashers on; now let me know whom I have done this curtsy too, that I may thank my early rising for it?
Sir, All I am, you see.
You have a name I'm sure, and a kindred, a father, friend or something that must own you; shoe's a hand∣some young wench; what Rogues were these to Rob her?
Sir you see all I dare reveal,
And as you are a Gent press me no further;
For there begins a grief whose bitterness
Will break a stronger heart then I have in me,
And twill but make you heavy with the hearing,
For your own goodness sake desire it not.
If you would not have me enquire that, how do you live then?
How I have lived, is still one question,
Which must not be resolved—
How I desire to live, is in your liking,
So worthy an opinion I have of you,
Is in my liking? how I pray thee? tell me, in faith I'll do you any good lys in my power; she has an eye would raise a bedrid man; come leave your fear and tell me, thats a good wench.
Sir I would serve—
Who would thou serve? doe not weep and tell me.
Faith sir even some good woman, and such a wife if you be married, I doe imagine yours.
Alas! thou art young and tender, let me see thy hand, this was near made to wash or wind up water, beat clothes, or rub a floor, by this light, for one use that shall be nameless, tic the best wanton hand that ere I look on.
Dare you accept me sir, my heart is honest,
Among your virtuous charitable deeds,
This will not be the least.
Thou can in a Chamber.
In a Chamber sir.
I mean waite there upon a Gentlewoman,
How quick she is, I like that mainly too;
Isle have her, though I keep her with maine strength
like a besieged town, for I know I shall have the enemy before me within a week.
Sir I can sow too, and make pretty laces,
Dress a head handsome, teach young gentlewomen,
For in all these I have a little knowledge.
Tic well, no doubt I shall increase that know∣ledge; I like her better still, how she provokes me; pretty youngmaid you shall serve a good Gentlewoman, though I say it that will not be unwilling you should please me, nor I forgetful if you doe.
I am the happier.
My man shall make some shift to carry you behind him, can you ride well?
But I'll hold fast for catching of a fall.
That's the next way to pull another on you, I'll work her as I go I know shoe's wax, now, now, at this time could I begett a worthy on this wench.
Sir for this Gentleness, may heaven requite you tenfold.
It is a good wench how ever others use thee, be sure I'll bee a loving master to thee, come. 
I hope I am wild enough for being known I have writ a letter here, and in it have abused my self most bitterly, yet all my fear is not enough, for that must do it, that must lay it on, I'll win her out in the flint, 'tvvill be more famous, now for my language.
Now Sir who would you speak with?
Where be thy Masters man? I would speak with her.
I have a letter.
Cannot I deliver it?
No by my trot and feet can thou not man.
Well Sir I'll call her to you, pray shake your ears without a little. 
Cran a Cry do it quickly; this rebel tongue sticks in my teeth vvorse then a tough hen, sure it was ne'er known at Babel, for they souled no apples, and this was made for certain at the first planting of Orchards it is so crabbed.
Whats he wood speak with me?
A kill kenny ring, there he stands Madam.
What would you have with me, friend?
He has a letter for other women, wilt thou read it.
From whence?
De Cross creest from my Master.
Who is your Master?
I pray do you look.
Doe you know this fellow?
No Madam not I; more then an Irish footman stand further friend, I doe not like your roperunners, what stallion Rogues are these, to wear such dovvsetts, the very Cotton may commit adultery.
I cannot find whose hand this should be, Isle read, to the beauteous wife of Don Antonio, sure this is some blind scribe —well now what follovves?
Pray God it take, I have given her, that will stir her conscience, how it works with her; hope if it be thy will let the flesh have it.
This is the most abhorred, intolerable knavery, that ever slave entertained, sure there is more then thine own head in this villainy, it goes like practiced mischief, disabled in his body? o good God, as I live he lies fear∣fully, and basely, ha? I should know that Jewel, it is my husband, come hither shat, are you an Irish man?
Sweet woman a Cry I am an Irish man.
Now I know it perfectly; is this your trick Sir? I'll trick you for it; how long have you served this Gentle∣man?
Please thee a little day, o my Mac dermond put me to my mastree, it is don I know.
By my faith he speaks as well as if he had been lousy for the language a year or two; well Sir, you had bin better have kept your own shape as I will use you, what have I don that should deserve this trial, I never made him cuckold to my knowledge, Sirrah com hither.
Now will she send some Jewel, or some letter
I know her mind as well; I shall be famous.
Take this Irish bawd here.
How?
And kick him till his breeches and breech bee of one colour a bright blew both.
I may be well swinged thus, for I dare not reveal my self, I hope she does not mean it, o hone o hone, o St. Patrick, o a Cry, o sweet woman.
No turn him and kick him o tother side, that's well
O good waiting man, I beseech thee good waiting man, a pox fire your legs.
You Rogue you enemy to all, but little breeches how dare thou come to me with such a letter?
Prithee pity the poor Irishman, all this makes for me, if I win her yet, I am still more glorious.
Now could I weep at what I have don, but I'll harden my hart again, go shut him up, 'till my husband comes home, yet thus much ere ye go, sirrah thatched head, would not thou be whipped &amp; think it justice? well Aqua∣vitae Barrel, I will bounce you.
I pray do, I beseech you be not angry.
O you hobby headed Rascal, I'll have you flayed, and trossers made of thy skin to tumble in, go a way with him, let him see no sun, 'till my husband come home, sir I shall meet with you for your knavery, I fear it not.
Wilt thou not let me go? I do not like this.
Away with him.
Come I'll lead you in by your Jack a lent hair, go quietly or I'll make your crupper crack.
And do you hear me sirrah? and when you have done, make my Coach ready.
Yes forsooth. 
Locke him up safe enough I'll to this Gentleman,
I know the reason of all this business, for I do suspect it,
If he have this plot, I'll ring him such a peal, shall make his ears deaf for a month at least. 
Am I not mad? can this weak tempered head,
That will be mad with drink, endure the wrong
That I have done a virgin and my love?
Be mad, for so thou ought, or I will beat
The walls and trees, down with thee, and will let
Either thy memory out or madness in,
But sure I never loved fair Ʋiola:
I never loved my Father nor my Mother,
Or any thing but drink; had I had love;
Nay, had I known so much charity,
As would have saved an Infant from the fire,
I had bin naked, raving in the street:
With half a face, gashing my self with knives,
Two hours ere this time.
Good morrow Sir.
Good morrow Gentlemen, shall we go drink again?
I have my wits.
So have I but they are unsettled ones, would I had some porrige.
The tavern boy was here this morning with me
And told me that there was a Gentlewoman,
Which he took for a whore that hung on me:
For whom we quarrelled, and I know not what.
I faith nor I.
I have a glimmering of some such thing.
Was it you Silvio,
That made me drink so much? it was you or Pedro.
I know not who.
We were all apt enough.
But I will lay the fault on none but me,
That I would be so entreated, come Silvio,
Shall we go drink again, come Gentlemen,
Why do you stay, let's never leave off now,
Whilst we have Wine and throats, I'll practise it,
Till I have made it my best quality;
For what is best for me to do but that?
For Gods sake come and drink; when I am named
Men shall make answer, which Richado mean you?
The excellent drinker? I will have it so,
Will you go drink?
We drunk too much too lately.
Why there is then the less behind to drink,
Let's end it all, dispatch that, we'll send abroad,
And purchase all the Wine the world can yield,
And then drink it off, then take the fruits of the earth,
Distill the Juice from them, and drink that off;
We'll catch the rain before it fall to ground,
And drink off that that never more may grow;
We'll set our mouths to Springs, and drink them off,
And all this while we'll never think of those
That love us best, more then we did last night.
We will not give unto the poor a drop
Of all this drink, but when we see them weep,
We'll run to them, and drink their tears off too,
We'll never leave whilst there is heate or moisture,
In this large globe, but suck it cold and dry,
Till we have made it Elemental earth,
Merely by drinking.
Is it flattery to tell you, you are mad?
If it be false,
There's no such way to bind me to a man;
He that will have me, lay my goods and lands,
My life down for him, need no more, but say
Richardo thou art mad, and then all these
Are at his service, then he pleases me,
And makes me think that I had virtue in me,
That I had love, and tenderness of heart,
That though I have committed such a fault,
As never creature did, yet running mad,
As honest men should doe for such a crime,
I have expressed some worth, though it be late:
But I alas have none of these in me,
But keep my wits still like a frozen man,
That had no fire within him.
Nay good Richardo leave this wild talk, and send a letter to her, I'll deliver it.
It is to no purpose; perhaps she's lost last night,
Or she got home again, she's now so strictly
Looked to, the wind can scarce come to her, or admit
She were her self; if she would hear from me,
From me unworthy, that have used her thus,
She were so foolish, that she were no more
To be beloved. 
Sir, we have foūd this night-gown she took with her.
Where?
Where? where? speak quickly.
Searching in the Suburbs, we found a Tinker and his whore, that had in it a sap-house, whom we apprehen∣ded, and they confessed they stole it from her.
And murdered her?
What ail you Man?
Why all this doth not make me mad.
It does, you would not offer this else, good Pedro look to his sword.
They do deny the killing of her, but swore they left her tied to a tree, in the fields, next those Suburbs that are without our Ladies gate, near day, &amp; by the rode, so that some passenger must needs untie her quickly.
The will of heaven be done? Sir I will only entreat you this, that as you were the greatest occasion of her loss, that you will be pleased to urge your friends, and be your self earnest in the search of her; if she be found, she is yours, if she please, I my self only, see these people bet∣la examined, and after follow some way in search, God keep you Gentlemen. 
Alas good man!
What think you now of me, I think this lump
Is nothing but a piece of phlegm congealed
Without a soul, for where theres so much spirit
As would but warm a flea, those faults of mine
Would make it glow and flame in this dull heart,
And run like molten gold through every sin,
Till it could burst these walls and fly away.
Shall I entreat you all to take your horses,
And search this innocent?
With all our hearts.
Do not divide your selves till you come there,
Where they say she was tied, I'll follow too,
But never to return till she be found.
Give me my sword good Pedro, I will do
No harm believe me with it, I am now
Far better tempered, If I were not so,
I have enough besides, God keep you all,
And send us good success. 
WHo is it? can you tell?
By my troth Sir I know not, but it is a Gentlewoman
A Gentleman I'll lay my life you puppy, he has sent his wife to me: if he have, fling up the bed.
Here she is Sir.
I am glad I found you Sir, there take your letter and keep it till you have another friend to wrong, it is too malicious false to make me sin, you have provoked me to be that I love not, a talker, and you shall hear me.
Why should you dare to imagine me
So light a huswife, that from four hours knowledge
You might presume to offer to my credit
This rude and ruffian trial, I am sure
I never courted you, nor gave you tokens,
That might concern assurance, you are a fool.
I cannot blame you now, I see this letter
Though you be angry, yet with me you must not,
Unless you'll make me guilty of a wrong,
My worst affections hate—
Did not you send it?
No upon my faith, which is more, I under∣stand
it not; the hand is as far from my knowledge, as the malice.
This is strange.
It is so, and had been stranger, and indeed more hateful,
Had •, that have received such courtesies, &amp; owe so many
Thanks, done this base office.
Your name is at it.
Yes, but not my nature, and I shall hate my name worse then the manner, for this base broking; you are wise and virtuous, remove this fault from me; for on the love I bear to truth and goodness, this letter dare not name me for the author.
Now I perceive my husbands knavery, if my man can but find where he has been, I will go with this Gen∣tleman whatsoever comes on it: and as I mean to carry it both he and all the world shall think it fit, and thank me for it.
I must confess I loved you, at first, however this made me leave your house unmannerly, that might pro∣folk me to do something ill, both to your honour &amp; my faith, and not to write this letter, which I hold so truly wicked, that I will not think on it.
I do believe you, and since I see you are free, my words were not meant to you, but this is not the half of my affliction.
It is pity you should know more vexation; may I enquire?
Faith Sir I fear I have lost my husband.
Your husband? it cannot be: I pity her, how shoe's vexed?
How now? what news? nay speak, for we must know.
Faith I have found at length by chance where he has been
Where?
In a blind out-house in the Suburbs, pray God all be well with him.
Why?
There are his clothes, but what's become of him, I cannot yet enquire.
I am glad of this; sure they have murdered him, what shall I do?
Be not so grieved before you know the truth, you have time enough to weep, this is the sodainst mischief; did you not bring an Officer to search there, where you say you found his clothes.
Yes, and wee searched it, and charged the fellow with him: but he like a rogue, stubborn rogue, made an∣swer, he knew not where he was; he had been there, but where he was now, he could not tell: I tell you true I fear him.
Are all my hopes and longings to enjoy him,
After this 3 years travel, come to this?
It is the rankest house in all the City, the most cursed roguy bawdi-house? hell fire it.
This is the worst I heard yet; will you go home? I'll bear you company, and give you the best help I may: this being here will wrong you.
As you are a Gentleman, and as you loved your dead friend, let me not go home, that will but heap one sorrow on another.
Why purpose any thing and I'll perform't; I am at my wits end too.
So am I, O my dear Master!
Peace you great fool.
Then good Sir cary me to some retired place, far from the sight of this unhappy City, whether you will in∣deed, so it be far enough.
If I might council you, I think it were better to go home, and try what may be done yet, hee may bee at home before you, who can tell?
O no, I know he's dead, I know hoe's murdered; tell me not of going home, you murder me too.
Well, since it pleases you to have it so, I will no more persuade you to go home, I'll be your guide in the Country, as your grief doth command me, I have a Mo∣there dwelling from this place some 20. miles, the house though homely, yet able to show something like a well∣come: thither I'll see you safe with all your sorrows.
With all the speed that may be thought upon; I have a Coach here ready, good Sir quickly; I'll fit you my fine husband.
It shall be so; if this fellow be dead, I see no band of any other man, to tie me from my will, and I will foal∣low her with such careful service, that she shall either be my Love or Wife; will you walk in?
I thank you Sir, but one word with my man, and I am ready; keep the Irish fellow safe, as you love your life, for he I fear has a deep hand in this, then search a∣gen, &amp; get out warrants for that naughty man, that keeps the bad house, that he may answer it, if you find the body, give it due burial; farewell. You shall hear from me, keep all safe. 
O my sweet Mr!
Man-a-cree, the Devil take thee, wilt thou kill me here, I prithee now let me go seek my Mr. I shall be very cheel else.
Do you hear man-a-cree, i'll cry your coxcomb, and you keep not still, down you rogue.
Good sweet fact serving-man, let me out I beseech de, and by my trot I will give dye Worship 2. shillings in good argot, to buy die Worship pippins.
This rogue thinks all the worth of man consists in Peepins; by this light I'll beat rebellion out of you for ever.
Wilt thou not hear me man? is fet, i'll give thee all I have about me.
I thank you Sir, so I may have picking work,
Here is five shillings man,
Here is a cudgel, a very good one.
How now, what's the matter, wher's the Irishman.
There, a with take him, he makes more noise a∣lone there, then ten Lawyers can do with double &amp; a scur∣vi Case.
Let him out, I must talk with him.
Wilt thou give me some drink, ô hone? I am very dry man.
You shall have that shall quench your thirst, my friend.
Fate dost thou mean man.
Even a good tough halter.
A halter? ô hone!
Sirha you are a mischievous rogue, that'• the truth.
No fet I am not.
Shall I knock out his brains? I have killed dogs have been worth three of him for all uses.
Sirah, the truth on it is, you must with me to a Justice. O Roger, Roger.
Why, what's the matter William?
Heavy news Roger, heavy news, God comfort us.
What is it man?
What's the matter now? I am even weary of this way, wouldl were out on it.
My Mr. sure is murdered, Roger, and this cursed rogue fear has had a hand in it.
No fet not.
Stand away, i'll kicked out of him: come sirha, mount, i'll make you dance, you Rascal, kill my Master? If thy breech were cannon proof, having this good cause on my side, I would encounter it; hold fair, Shamrock.
Why how now sirs? you will not murder me indeed.
Bless us Roger!
Nay, I am no spirit.
How do you Sir, this is my very Master.
Why well enough yet, but you have a heavy foot of your own; whore's my wife?
Alas poor sorrowful Gentlewoman, she thinks you are dead, and has given o'er house-keeping.
Whether is she gone then?
Into the Country with the Gentleman your friend Sir, to see if she can wear her sorrows out there; she weeps and takes on too too —
This falls out pat; I shall be everlasting for a name: doe you hear? upon your lives and faiths to me, not one word I am living, but let the same report pass along, that I am murdered still; I am made for ever.
Why Sir?
I have a Cause Sir that's enough for you; well, if I be not famous, I am wronged much; for any thing I know I will not trouble him this week at least, no, let them take their way one of another.
Sir, will you be still an Irish-man.?
Yes a while.
But your Worship will be beaten no more?
No I thank you William.
In truth Sir, if it must be so, I'll doe it better then a stranger.
Go, you are Knaves both, but I forgive you, I am almost mad with the apprehension of what I shall be, not a word I charge you. 
Come pretty soul, we now are near our home,
And whilst our horses are walked down the hill,
Let thou and I walk here over this Close:
The foot-way is more pleasant, it is a time
My pretty one, not to be wept away,
For every living thing is full of love;
Art not thou so too? ho?
Nay, there are living things empty of love,
Or I had not been here, but for my self!
Alas, I have too much.
It cannot be, that so much beauty, so much youth and grace should have too much of love.
Pray what is love? for I am full of that I doe not know.
Why, love fair maid is an extreme desire,
That's not to be examined but fulfil'd,
To ask the reason why thou art in love,
Or what might be the noblest end in love,
Would overthrow that kindly rising warmth,
That many times slides gently o'er the heart,
It would make thee grave, &amp; staid thy thoughts would be,
Like a thrice married Widow, full of ends,
And void of all compassion, and to fright thee
From such enquiry, whereas thou art now
Living in ignorance, mild, fresh, and sweet,
And but sixteen, the knowing what love is,
Would make thee six and forty.
Would it would make me nothing, I have heard
Scholars affirm the world is upheld by love,
But I believe women maintain all this,
For ther's no love in men.
Yes, in some men.
I know them not.
Why, there is love in me.
Ther's charity I am sure towards me.
And love; which I will now express, my pretty maid,
I dare not bring thee home, my Wife is foul,
And therefore envious, she is very old,
And therefore Jealous; thou art fair and young,
A subject fit, for her unlucky vices.
To work upon, she never will endure thee.
She may endure
If she be ought, but Devil, all the friendship
That I will hold with you; can she endure
I should be thankful to you? may I pray
For you and her, will she be brought to think
That all the honest industry I have
Deserves browne bread? if this may be endured,
She'll pick a quarrel with a sleeping child,
Ever she fall out with me.
But trust me she doe's hate all handsomeness.
How fell you in love with such a creature?
I never loved her.
And yet married her?
She was a rich one.
And you swore I warrant you, she was a fair one then too.
Or believe me I think I had not had her.
Are you men all such? wood you wood wall us in a place
Where all we women, that are innocent,
Might live together.
Do not weep at this,
Although I dare not for some weighty reason
Displease my Wife, yet I forget not thee.
What will you do with me?
Thou shalt be placed
At my mans house, and have such food and raiment
As can be bought with money: these white hands
Shall never learn to work, but they shall play
As thou say they were wont, teaching the strings
To move in order, or what else thou wilt.
I thank you Sir, but pray you cloth me poorly,
And let my labour get me means to live.
But fair one, you I know do so much hate
A foul ingratitude, you will not look
I should do this for nothing.
I will work as much out as I can, and take as little
That you shall have as duly paid to you
As ever servant did.
But give me now a trial on it, I may believe
We are alone, show me how thou wilt kiss
And hug me hard, when I have stolen away
From my too clamorous Wife that watches me,
To spend a blessed hour or two with thee.
Is this the love you mean? you would have that
Is not in me to give, you would have lust.
Not to dissemble, or to mince the word,
It is lust I wish indeed.
And by my troth I have it not for heavens sake use me kindly.
Though I be good, and show perhaps a monster,
As this world goes.
I doe
But speak to thee, thy answers are thy own,
I compel none, but if thou refuse this motion,
Thou art not then for me, alas good soul?
What profit can thy work bring me.
But I fear: I pray go, for lust they say will grow
Outrageous being denied, I give you thanks
For all your courtesies, and there's a Jewel
That's worth the taking, that I did preserve
Safe from the robbers, pray you leave me here
Just as you found me, a poor innocent,
And Heaven will bless you for it.
Pretty maid I am no Robber nor no Ravisher,
I pray thee keep thy Jewel, I have done
No wrong to thee, though thou be virtuous
And in extremity, I doe not know,
That I am bound to keep thee.
No sir, for gods sake if you know an honest man in all these countries, give me some directions to find him out.
More honest then my self good sooth I doe not know; I would have lain with thee with thy consent, and who would not in all these parts, is past my memory, I am sorry for thee, farewell gentle maid, god keep thee safe. 
I thank you sir, and you;
Woman they say, was only made of man,
Me thinks tic strange they should be so unlike,
It may be all the best was cut away
To make the woman and the nought was left
Behind with him, I'll sit me down and weep,
All things have cast me from 'em but the earth;
The evening comes and every little flower
Droops now, as well as I.
Good Madg lets rest a little, by my troth I am wea∣rye, this new pail is a plaguy heavy one, would Tom were hanged for choosing it, it is the antowardst fool in a Country.
With all my heart, and I thank you too, Nan.
What true contented happiness dwells here,
More then in Cities? wood to God my father
Had lived like one of these and bred me up
To milk and doe as they doe: me thinks
Tic a life that I wood choose, if I were now
To tell my time again, above a princes; maids for charity
Give a poor wench one draught of Milk
That weariness and hunger have nigh famished.
If I had but one Cows Milk in all the world, you should have some on it; there drink more, the cheese shall pay for it, alas poor heart! shees dry.
Doe you dwell here abouts?
No, would I did.
Madge if she do not look like my cousin Sue of the more lane as one thing can look like another—
Nay Sue has a hazel eye, I know Sue well, and by your leave not so trim a body neither, this is a feat bodied thing I tell you.
She laces close by the mass I warrant you, and so does Sue too.
I thank you for your gentleness fair maids.
Drink again pray thee.
I am satisfied, and heaven reward thee for it, yet thus far I will compel you to accept these trifles, toys only that express my thanks, for greater worth, I'm sure they have not in them; indeed you shall, I found i'm as I came.
Madge, look you here Madge.
Nay I have as fine a one as you, mine's all gold and painted, and precious stone in it; I warrant it cost a crown wench.
But mine is the most sumptuous one that ere I saw.
One favour you must doe me more, for you are well acquainted here.
Indeed we'll doe you any kindness sister.
Only to send me to some honest place, where I may find a service.
Vds me, our Dorithy went away but last week and I know my Mistress wants a Maid, and why may she not be placed there? this is a likely wench I tell you true∣lie, and a good wench I warrant her.
And tic a hard case if wee that have served four years a piece cannot bring in one servant, we will prefer her; hark you sister, pray what's your name?
Melvia.
A feat name in faith, and can you milk a Cow? and make a merry-bush? that's nothing.
I shall learn quickly.
And dress a house with flowers? and serve a pig? this you must doe, for we deal in the dary, and make a bed or two?
I hope I shall.
But be sure to keep the men out, they will mar all that you make else, I know that by myself; for I have been so toused among i'm in my days, come you shall even home with us and be our fellow, our house is so honest, and we serve a very good woman, and a Gentlewoman, and we live as merrily, and dance a good days after even-song, our wake shall be on Sunday; doe you know what a wake is? we have mighty cheer then, and such a coil, it would bless ye; you must not be so bashful, you'll spoil all.
Let's home for Gods sake, my Mistress thinks by this time we are lost, come we'll have a care of you, I war∣rant you; but you must tell my Mistress where you were borne, and every thing that belongs to you, &amp; the stran∣gest things you can devise, for she loves those extremely, it is no matter whether they be true or no, shoe's not so scrupulous; you must be our sister, and love us best, and tell us every thing, and when cold weather comes we'll lie together, will you do this?
Yes.
Then home again a gods name, can you go apace.
I warrant you. 
HOw now, any good news yet?
Faith not any yet.
This comes a tippling; would it were treason an• pleased God to drink more then three draughts at a meal.
When did you see Richardo?
I crossed him twice to day.
You have heard of a young wench that was seen last night?
Yes.
Has Richard hard of this?
Yes and I think hoe's ridden after, farewell I'll have another round.
If you hear any thing, pray spare no horse-fleshe
I'll do the like.
Do. 
Sir, I did think it was you by all descriptions.
Tic so,
I took her up indeed, the manner how
You have heard already, and what she had about her,
As Jewels, gold and other trifling things:
And what my end was, which because she slighted,
I left her there in the fields.
Left in the fields? could any but a Rogue
That had despised humanity and goodness,
God, law and credit? and had set himself
To loose his noblest part, and be a beast,
Have left so innocent, unmatched a virtue,
To the rude mercy of a wilderness?
Sir If you come to rail, pray quit my house,
I do not use to have such language given;
Within my doors to me; for your wench,
You may go seek her with more patience,
Shoe's tame enough I warrant you.
Pray forgive me.
I do confess my much forgetfulness;
And weigh my words no farther I beseech you,
Then a mere madness; for such a grief has seized me
So strong and deadly, as a punishment,
And a just one too,
That it is a greater wonder I am living,
Then any thing I utter; yet let me tel you thus much,
It was a fault for leaving her
So in the fields.
Sir I will think so now, and credit me,
You have so wrought me with your grief, that I
Do both forgive and pity you:
And if you'll please to take a bed this night here;
Too morrow I'll bring you where I left her.
I thank you, no, shall I be so unworthy,
To think upon a bed, or ease or comfort,
And have my heart stray from me God knows where,
Cold and forsaken, destitute of friends,
And all good comforts else, unless some tree
Whose speechless charity must better ours,
With which the bitter east winds made their sport
And sung through hourly, hath invited her
To keep off half a day? shall she be thus,
And I draw in soft slumbers? God forbid.
No, night and bitter coldness I provoke thee,
And all the dews that hang upon thy locks,
Showers, hails, snows, frosts, &amp; two edged winds that prime
The maiden blossoms, I provoke you all,
And dare expose this body to your sharpness,
'Till I be made a land mark.
Will you then stay and eat with me?
You're angry with me, I know you're angry,
You would not bid me eat else; my poor Mistress,
For ought I know thou art famished, for what else
Can the fields yield thee, and the stubborn season,
That yet holds in the fruit? good Gentle Sir,
Think not ill manners in me for denying
Your offered meat, for sure I cannot eat
While I do think she wants; well I'm a rascal;
A villain, slave, that only was begotten,
To murder women and of them the best.
This is a strange affliction.
If you'll accept no greater courtesy, yet drink Sir.
Now I am sure you hate me, and you knew
What kind of man I am, as indeed it is fit,
That every man should know me to avoid me.
If you have peace within you Sir, or goodness
Name that abhorred word drink no more unto me,
You had safer strike me.
I pray you do not, if you love me do not.
Sir, I mean no ill by it.
It may be so,
Nor let me see
None sir, if you love heaven;
You know not what offence it is unto me,
Nor good now, do not ask me why:
And I warn you once again, let no man else speak of't,
I fear your servants will be prating to me.
Why Sir what ail you?
I hate drink, ther's the end on it,
And that man that drinks with meat is damned
without an age of prayers and repentance,
And ther's a hazard too; good Sir no more,
If you will do me a free courtesy;
That I shall know for one, go take your horse,
And bring me to the place where you left her:
Since you are so importunate I will;
But I will wish Sir you had stayed to night
Upon my credit, you shall see no drink.
Be gon the heating of it makes me giddy,
Sir will you be entreated to forbear it,
I shall be mad else.
I pray no more of that, I am quiet,
I'll but walk in and away straight.
Now I thank you,
But what you do, do in a twinkling, Sir.
As soon as may bee. 
Is this the wench? you have brought me some catch I warrant;
How injuringly she looks upon the matter?
Yes forsooth this is the maiden.
Come hither, wood you serve?
If it shalt please you to accpt my service I hope I shall do something that shall like you, though it be but truth, and often praying for you.
You are very curious of your hand me thinks,
You preserve it so with gloves, let me see it;
I marry, here's a hand of march-pane wenches:
This pretty palm never knew sorrow yet;
How soft it is I warrant you, and supple:
Of my word this is fitter for a pocket to filch withal
Then to work, I fear me little one,
You are no better then you should be; go too.
My Conscience yet is but one witness to me,
And that heaven knows is or mine innocence,
Tic true, I must confess, with shame enough,
The time that I have lead yet never taught me
What t'was to break a sleep, or to be weary.
You can say well: if you be mine, Wench, you must doe well too, for words are but slow workers, yet so much hope I have of you, that I'll take you so you'll bee diligent, and do your duty: how now?
There is a messenger come from your son
That brings you word he is returned from travel,
And will be here this night.
Now joy upon thee for it, thou art ever
A bringer of good tidings, there, drink that:
In troth thou hast much contented me, my son?
Lord how thou hast pleased me, shall I see my Son
Yet ever I dye? take care my house be handsome,
And the new stools set out, and boughs and rushes,
And flowers for the window, and the Turkey Carpet,
And the great parcel salt, Nan, with the Cruets,
And prithee Alexander go to the Cooke,
And bid him spare for nothing, my son's come home,
Who's come with him?
I hear of none yet, but a Gentlewoman?
A Gentlewoman? what Gentlewoman.
I know not but such a one there is, he says.
Pray God he have not cast away himself
Upon some snout-faire piece, I do not like it.
No sure, my Master has more discretion.
Well, be it how it will, he shall be welcome.
Sirs, to your tasks, and show this little novice
How to bestir her self, I'll sort out things. 
We will forsooth, I can tell you my mistress is a s•irring woman.
Lord how she'll talk some times? tic the mad∣dest cricket—
Me thinks she talks well, and shows a great deal of good housewifery, pray let me deck the chambers, shall I?
Yes you shall, but doe not scorn to be avis'd si∣ster, for there belongs more to that then you are aware on; why would you venture so fondly upon the strew∣ings? ther's mighty matters in them I'll assure you, and in the spreading of a bough pot, you may miss if you were ten years elder, if you take not a special care before you.
I will learn willingly, if that be all.
Sirrah where is it they say my young master hath been?
Faith I know not, beyond the sea, where they are borne without noses.
less bless us! without noses? how doe they doe for handkerchers?
So Richard says, and sirrah, their feet stands in their foreheads.
Thats fine by my troth, these men have pestilence running heads then; doe they speak as we doe?
No, they never speak.
Are they cursend?
No they call them Infidels, I know not what they are.
Sirrah we shall have fine courting now my young master is come home, were you never courted sister?
Alas I know it not.
What is that courting sirrah?
I can tell, for I was once courted in the matted chamber, you know the party Madge, faith hee courted finely.
Pray thee what first?
Faith nothing but he was some what figent with me, faith tic fine sport, this courting.
Where be the Maids there?
We shall be hanged anon, away good wenches, and a care you dight things handsomely, I will look over you. 
If your sorrow will give you so far leave, pray think your self most welcome to this place, for so upon my life you are, and for your own fair sake, take truce a while with these immoderate mornings.
I thank you sir, I shall doe what I may;
Pray lead me to a chamber.
Presently,
Before your blessing mother, I entreat ye
To know this Gentlewoman, and bid her welcome,
The virtuous wife of him that was my self
In all my travels.
Indeed she is most welcome, so are you son
Now all my blessing on thee; thou hast made me
Younger by 20 years, then I was yesterday,
Will you walk in? what ails this Gentlewoman?
Alas I fear she is not well, good Gentlewoman.
You fear right.
She has fasted over long,
You shall have supper presently of the board.
She will not eat I can assure you mother,
For Gods sake let your maid conduct her up
Into some fair becoming Chamber
Fit for a woman of her being and
As soon as may be,
I know shoe's very ill, and wood have rest.
There is one ready for her, the blew chamber.
Tic well, I'll lead you to your Chamber door
And there I'll leave you to your quiet, Mistress.
I thank you Sir, good rest to every one,
You'll see me once again to night I hope. 
When you shall please, I'll waite upon you Lady.
Where are these maids attend upon the Gentle∣woman, and see she want no good thing in the house? goodnight with all my heart forsooth, good Lord how you are grown? is he not Alexander?
Yes truly he's shot up finely god be thanked.
An ill weed Mother will do so.
You say true Sir, an ill weed grows a pace.
Alexander the sharpe, you take me very quickly.
Nay I can tell, Alexander will do it, do you read madcapp still?
Some times forsooth.
But faith son what countries have you travelled?
Why many, Mother, as they lay before me, France, Spain, Italy and Germany, and other Provinces that I am, sure you are not bettered by, when you hear of them.
And can you these tongues perfectly?
Of some a little, Mother.
Pray spout some french son.
You understand it not, and to your ears twill go like an unshod cart upon the stones, only a rough un∣handsome sound.
Faith I would fine hear some french.
Good Sir speak some french to my Mistress.
At your entreaty Alexander, I will, who shall speak to?
If your worship will do me the favour Sir, to me.
Monsieur, Poltroon, Coukew, Cullione, Besay, Man cur.
Awe Monsieur.
Ha, ha, ha, this fine indeed, gods blessing 'on thy hart Son, by my troth thou art grown a proper Gentle∣man, cullen and pullen, good god what aucey words they use beyond the seas, ha, ha, ha?
Did not you swear right?
Yes good Alexander, if you had done so to
But good Mother I am very hungry and have rid far to day and am fasting.
You shall have your supper presently my sweet Son.
As soon as you please, which once ended,
I'll go and visit you sick gentlewoman.
Come then. 
I have ridden like a fury to make up this work and I will do it bravely ere I leave it, this is the house I am sure.
Whood you speak with Sir?
Marry Sir I would speak with a Gentlewoman, came this night late here from the City, I have some letters of Importance to her, I am a Post Sir and would bee dispatched in hast.
Sir, cannot I deliver 'em? for the truth is shoe's ill and in her chamber.
Pray pardon me I must needs speak with her, my business is so weighty.
I'll tell her so, and bring you present word.
Pray do so, and I'll attend her, pray god the grief of my imaginde death spoil not what I intend, I hope it will not.
Though she be very ill, and desires no trouble,
Yet If your business be so urgent, you may come up and speak with her.
I thank you Sir, I follow you. 
What should this fellow be in the name of heaven that comes with such Post business? sure my husband hath revealed himself, and in this hast sent after me, are you the Post my friend?
Yes for sooth Mistress.
What good news hast thou brought me gentle Post?
For I have woe and grief too much already.
I would you had less, Mistress, I could wish it, be∣shrove my hart she moves me cruelly.
Have I found you once more Juggler? well Jewel, thou hast only vetrtue in thee, of all I read of yet; what ears has this ass to betray him with? well, what's your business then?
I have brought a letter from your servant, Mistress, in hast.
Pray give it me, I hope the best still.
This is the upshot and I know I have hit it,
Well if the spirits of the dead do walk, I shall
Hear more of this one hundred years hence.
By any means you must have special care, for now the City is possessed for certain, my Master is made away, which for ought I know is a truth indeed; good Mistress leave your grief and see your danger, and let that wise and noble Gentleman with whom you are, bee your right hand in all things.
Now do I know I have the better on it by the lan∣gushing of her eye at this near instant, it is still simming in her blood, in coining somewhat to turn Mercury I know it.
He is my husband, and it is reasonable he should command in all things, since he will be an ass again the hair at his one peril be it, in the morn you shall have a packet, 'till I must entreat you stay, you shall not loose by it.
I do not doubt it, Mistress; I'll leave you to your rest and waite your pleasure.
Do, and speak out the Gentleman of the house, bid him come to me presently.
Who, Mr. Mercury?
Do you know him, post?
Only by sight forsooth, now I remember your servant wild me to let you know he is the only man, you and your fortunes, are now to rest upon.
Prithee no more, I know all this already.
I'll take my leave now, I am made for ever. 
Good night I am provided for you my fine youth
I'll make thee have more care.
Good Mistress pardon me.
Thou't near be good I warrant thee, can your fine fingers hold no faster?
Indeed it was against my will.
Alexander, let's see the glass, as, I am true kirsome woman, it is one of the crystal glasses my cozen sent me and the baggage hath broke it where it cannot bee mended, Alexander, can Humfrey mend this think you?
No truly this will near be mended.
T•uly I meant but to wash it for the Gentlewo∣man, that is sick above, and shaking out the water, knocked it against the pail side.
Did you so? be sure I'll stop it, twill make a good gap in your quarters wages, can tell you.
I pray forgive me, and let me have no wages this first quarter.
Go whimling, and fetch two or three grating loaves out of the kitchen, to make gingerbread of, it is such an untoward thing. 
Shoe's somewhat simple indeed, she knew not what a kimnell was, she wants good nurture mightily.
My Son tells me, Alexander, that this young widow means to sojourn here, she offers largly for her board, I may offer her good cheer, prey thee make a step in the morning down to the parsonage for some Pigi∣once? what are you mad there; what noise is that? are you at bowls within? why do you whine?
I have done another fault, I beseech you sweet Mistress ofrgive me.
What's the matter.
As I was reaching for the bread that lay upon the shelf, I have thrown down the minced meat, that should have made the pies to morrow.
Get thee out of my house thou filthy destroying Harlot, thou, I'll not keep thee an hour longer.
Good Mistress beat me rather for my fault as much as it deserves, I do not know whether to go.
No I warrant thee, out of my doors.
Indeed I'll mend, I pray speak you for me.
If thou had hurled down any thing but the pie meat, I would have spoke for thee, but I cannot find in my hart now.
Art thou here yet? I think I must have an off∣cer to thrust thee out of my doors, must I?
Why you may stop this in my wages too,
For Gods sake do, I'll find my self this year;
And let me stay.
Thou't spoil ten times as much, I'll cudgel thee out of my doors.
I am assured you are more merciful,
Then thus to beat me and discharge me too.
Dost thou dispute with me, Alexander carry the prating hilding forth.
Good Mistress hear me I have here a Jewel,
My Mother left me and it is something worth:
Receive it and when all my faults together
Come to the worth of that, then turn me forth,
'Till then I pray you keep me.
What giggombob have wee here? pray god you have not pilfered this some where; you are such a puling thing, wipe your eyes, and rise go your ways, Alexander, bid the Cook mince some more meat, come and get you to bed quickly that you may up betime in the morning a milking or you and I shall fall out worse yet.
She has hurt my arm; I am a afraid, she is a very angry woman, but bless him heaven that did me the most wrong, I am a afraid Antonious wife should see me, she will know me
Melvia.
I am coming, shoe's not angry again I hope. 
Now what am I the better for enjoying
This woman that I loved? so all I find,
That I before immaginde to be happy:
Now I have done, it turns to nothing else
But a poor pitied and a base repentance,
Udsfoote I am monstrous angry with my self:
Why should a man that has discourse and reason,
And knows how near he looses all in these things,
Covet to have his wishes satisfied;
Which when they are, are nothing but the shame
I do begin to loath this woman straingly,
And I think justly too, that durst adventure,
Flinging away her modesty to take
A stranger to her bed, her husbands body
Being scarce cold in the earth for her content,
It was no more to take my senses with,
Then if I had an idle dream had in sleep
Yet I have made her promises: which grieves me,
And I must keep 'em too, I think she hunts me:
The Devil cannot keep these women off,
When they are fletched once.
To bed for gods sake Sir, why do you stay heer?
Some are up in the house, I hard the wife,
Good dear sweet hart to bed.
Why I am going? why do you follow me?
You would not have it known I hope, pray get you
Back to your chamber, the doors hard by for me,
Let me alone I warrant you, this it is
To thresh well, have got a customer,
Will you go to bed?
Will you?
Yes I am going.
Then remember your promise you made to marry me.
I will, but it was your fault, that it came
To this pinch now, that it must need remembrance:
For out of honesty I offered you
To marry you first, why did you slack that offer?
Alas I told you the inconvenience of it,
And what wrong it would appear to the world
If I had married you in such post hast
After his death: beside, the foolish people
Would have been bold to have thought wee had lain
together in his time, and like enough imagined
We two had murdered him.
I love her tongue yet,
If I were a Saint
A gilded Saint, and such a thing as this
Should prate thus wittily and feelingly
Unto my holiness, I cannot tell,
But I fear shrewdly I should doe something
That would quite scratch me out of the Calendar,
And if I stay longer talking with her,
Though I am mad at what I have done already,
Yet I shall forget my self again;
I feel the Devil
Ready to hold my stirrup; pray to bed, god-night.
This kiss, god-night sweet Love,
And peace go with thee: thou hast proved thy self
The honestest man that ever was enticed
To that sweet sin as people please to call it,
Of lying with another Wife, and I,
I think the honestest woman without blushing,
Th•t ever lay with another man, I sent my husband
Into a Cellar, post, fearing, and justly,
He should have known him, which I did not purpose
Till I had had my end.
Well, now this plot is perfect, let him brag on it.
Byr'lady Sir you have rid hard that you have.
They that have business must do so I take it.
You say true, when set you out my friend?
About ten a clock and I have rid all night.
By the mass you are tough indeed, I have seen the day, I would have rid too with the proudest of them and fling dirt in their faces, and I have don't with this foolish boy sir many a time; but what can last always? it is done, it is done now Sir, age, care, and office, brings us to our footecloathes, the more the pity.
I believe that Sir, but will it please you to read the business?
My friend I can read an I can tell you when.
Would I could too Sir, for my hast requires it.
Whence comes it do you say?
Sir from the City.
O from the City it is a reverent place.
And his justice bee as short as his memory,
A Dudgeon Dagger will serve him to mow down sin withal,
What clod pole Commissioner is this?
And by my faith governed by worthy member,
Discreet and upright.
Sir they are beholding to you, you have given some of them a commendations, they were not worthy of this twenty years.
Go to go to, you have a merry meaning, I have found you sir in faith, you are a wag, away, fie, now I'll read Your letter.
Pray do sir; what a misery it is,
To have an urgent business, wait the Justice,
Of such an old Tuff taffeta that knows not,
Nor can be brought to understand more sense,
Then how to restore suppressed Ale-houses,
And have his man compound small trespasses,
For ten groats.
Sir it seems here your business is of deeper circum∣stance then I conceived it for; what do you mean Sir?
It is for mine own ease I'll assure your Worship.
It shall not be in faith friend, here I have it,
That one Antonio a Gentleman, I take it so,
Yes it is so, a Gentleman is lately thought to
Have been made away, and by my faith upon a
Perles ground too, if you consider; well, there's
Knavery in it, I see that without spectacles.
Sure this fellow deals in revelation he's so hidden,
Go thy ways, thou wilt sick a bench spit as formally,
And show thy agot, and hatched chain
As well as the best of them.
And now I have considered, I believe it.
What Sir?
That he was murdered.
Did you know him?
No.
Nor how it is supposed.
No, nor I care not two-pence, those are toys and yet I verily believe hee was murdered, as sure as I believe thou art a man, I never failed in these things yet, wear a man that's beaten to these matters, experience is a certain concealed thing that fails not; pray let me ask you one
thing, why doe you come to me?
Because the letter is addressed to you, being the no∣rest Justice.
The nearest? is that all?
I think it be Sir, I would be Ioth you should bee the wisest.
Well Sir, as it is, I will endeavour in it; yet if it had come to me by name, I know not, but I think it had been as soon dispatcht as by another, and with as round a wisdom, I, and as happily, but that's all one: I have borne this place this thirty years, and upwards, and with sufficient credit: and they may when they please, know me better; to the nearest? well.
Sir, it is not my fault, for had I known you sooner—
I thank you Sir, I know it.
I'll besworn you should have plaid for any busi∣ness now.
And further, they have specified unto me, his Wife is sorely suspected in this matter, as a maine cause,
I think she be Sir, for no other cause can be yet found.
And one Mercury a traveller, with whom they say directly she is run away, and as they think this way.
I knew all this before.
Well Sir, this Mercury I know, and his bree∣ding, a neighbours child hard by, you have been happy Sir in coming hither.
Then you know where to have him Sir?
I do Sir, he dwells near me.
I doubt your Worship dwells near a Knave then.
I think so; pray put on: but it is a wonder
To see how graceless people are now given,
And how base virtue is accounted with them
That should be all in all as says a wise man.
I tell you Sir, and it is true, that there have been such murders, and of late days, as it would make your very heart bleed in you, and some of them as I shall bee enabled I will tell you, it fell out of late days.
It may be so, but will it please you to proceed in this?
An honest Weaver, and as good a work-man as ere shot shuttle, and as close: but every man must dye; this honest Weaver being a little mellow in his Ale, that was the evidence verbatim, Sir, God bless the mark, sprung his neck just •n this place: well Iarvis, thou had wrongs, &amp; if I ••ve some of the best shall sweat fort, then a wench—
But Sir you have forgot my business.
A sober pretty maid about 17. they say, certainly howsoever it is shuffled, she burst her self, and fondly, if it be so, with Furmety at a Churching, but I think the Devil had another agent in it: either of which if I can catch shall stretch for it.
This is a mad Justice that will hang the Devil; but I would you would be short in this, before that other notice can be given?
Sir I will doe discreetly what is fitting; what, Antonio?
Your Worship?
Put on your best coat, and let your fellow Mark go to the Constable &amp; bid him aide me with all the speed hee can, and all the power, and provide pen and ink to take their Confessions, and my long sword, I can∣not tell what danger wee may meet with; you'll go with us?
Yes, what else? I came to that end to accuse both parties.
May I crave what you are?
Faith Sir one that to be known would not profit you, more then a mere Kinsman of the dead Antonio's.
It is well, I am sorry for my neighbour, truly, that hee had no more grace, twill kill his Mother; shoe's a good old woman, will you walk in? I'll but put my Cloak on, and my Chain off, and a clean band, and have my shoes blackt over, and shift my Jerkin, and we'll to our business, and you shall see how I can bolt these matters.
As soon is it please you Sir. 
This is the place; here did I leave the Maid
Alone las• night drying her tender eyes,
Uncertain what to do, and yet desirous
To have me gone.
How rude are all we men,
That take the name of Civil to our selves?
If she had set her foot upon an earth
Where people live that we call barbarous;
Though they had had no house to bring her too,
They would have spoiled the glory that the spring
Has decked the trees in, and with willing hands
Have torn their branches down, and every man
Would have become a builder for her sake.
What time left you her there?
I left her, when the Sun had so much to set,
As he is now got from his place of rise.
So near the night she could not wander far;
Fair Viola?
It is in vain to call, she sought a house
Without all question.
Peace, fair Viola?
Fair Viola? who should have left her here
On such a ground? if you had meant to loose her,
You might have found there were no Inches here
To take her name and carry it about,
When her true Lover came to mourn for her,
Till all the neighbouring valleys and the hills,
Resounded Viola,—
And such a place,
You should have chose—
You pity us because
The dew a little wets our feet,
Unworthy far to seek her in the wet;
And what becomes of her? where wandered she,
With 2 showers raining on her, from her eyes
Continually, abundantly, from which
There's neither tree nor house to shelter her;
Will you go with me to travel?
Whither?
Over all the world.
No by my faith, I'll make a shorter journey
When I do travel.
But theres no hope
To gain my end in any shorter way.
Why, what's your end?
It is to search the earth,
Till we have found two in the shapes of men,
As wicked as our selves.
It were not so hard to find out those.
Why, if we find them out,
It were the better; for what brave villainy,
Might wee 4. do? wee wood not keep together:
For every one has treachery enough
For 20. Countries, one should trouble Asia,
Another should sow strife in Africa;
But you should play the knave, at home in Europe,
And for America let me alone.
Sir I am hones•e•,
Then you know how to bee, and can no more
Bee wronged but I shall find my self a right.
If you had any spark of honesty,
You would not think that honester then I,
Were a praise high enough to serve your turn:
If men were commonly so bad as I,
Thieves would be put in Calendars for Saints;
And bones of murderers would work miracles.
I am a kind of knave, of knave so much —
There is betwixt me and the vilest else,
But the next place of all to mine is yours.
That last is she, it is she.
Let us away, we shall infect her, let her have the wind,
And wee will kneel down here.
Wenches away for here are men.
Fair maid I pray you stay.
Alas, again?
Why do you lay hold on her? I pray heartily let her go.
With all my heart, I do not mean to hurt her.
But stand away then for the purest bodies
Will soonest take infection, stand away,
But for infecting her my self, by heaven,
I would come there and beat thee further off.
I know that voice and face.
You are finely mad, godbwy Sir, now you are here together, In leave you so, god send you good luck, both when you are soberer, you'll give me thanks. 
Wilt thou go milk? come.
Why dost not come?
She nods, shoe's a sleep.
What, were up so early?
I think your man's mad to kneel there, nay come away ves body, Nan, help she looks black 'ith face, Shoe's in a sound.
And you bee a man com hither, &amp; help a woman.
Come thither? you are a fool.
And you a knave and a beast that you are.
Come hither? it was being my now so near,
That made her sown, and you are wicked people,
Or you wood do so too, my venom eyes
Strike innocence dead at such a distance,
Here I'll kneel for this is out of distance.
You are a prating Ass ther's no goodness in thee,
I warrant, how dost thou?
Why? well.
Art thou able to go?
No, pray go you and milk, if I be able to come
I'll follow you, if not I'll sit here,
'Till you come back.
I am loath to leave thee here with you wild fool.
I know him well, I warrant thee, he will not hurt me.
Come then Nan.
How do you? be not fearful, for I hold my hands
Before my mouth and speak, and so
My breath can never blast you.
It was enough to use me ill, though you had no∣ver sought me too mock me to, why kneel you so far Off, were not that gesture better used in prayer, had dealt so with you, I should not sleep, till God and you had both forgiven me.
I do not mock, nor lives there such a villainy
That can do any thing contemptible,
To you, but I do kneel because it is,
An action very fit, and reverent,
In presence of so pure a creature,
And so far off, as fearful to offend,
One too much wronged already.
You confess you did the fault, yet scorn to come,
So far as hither to ask pardon for it;
Which I could willingly afford to come,
To you to grant, good Sir if you have
A better love, may you be blessed together,
She shall not wish you better then I will,
I but offend you; there are all the Jewels
I stole, and all the love I ever had,
I leave behind with you, I'll carry now
To give another, may the next maid you try
Love you no worse, nor be no worse then I.
Do not leave me yet for all my fault,
Search out the next things too impossible,
And put me on them when they are effected,
I may with better modesty receive
Forgiveness from you.
I will set no penance,
To gain the great forgiveness you desire:
But to come hither and take me and it,
Or else I'll come and beg so you will grant,
That you will be content to be forgiven.
Nay I will come since you will have it so,
And since you please to pardon me I hope
Free from infection, here I am by you;
A careless man, a breaker of my faith,
A loathsome drunkard and in that wild fury:
A hunter after whores I do beseech you,
To pardon all these faults, and take me up
An honest sober and a faithful man.
For gods sake urge your faults no more, but mend,
All the forgiveness I can make you is,
To love you which I will do and desire,
Nothing but love again, which if I have not,
Yet I will love you still.
O women that some one of you will take,
An everlasting pen into your hands:
And grave in paper which the writ shall make,
More lasting then the marble monuments,
Your matchless virtues to posterityes:
Which the defective race of envious man,
Strive to conceal.
Me thinks I would not now for any thing,
But you had mist me, I have made a story,
Will serve to wast many a winters fire
When we are old, I'll tell my daughters then,
The miseries their Mother had in love:
And say my girls bee wiser, yet I would not
Have had more wit my self, take up those Jewels,
For I think I hear my fellows coming.
How dost thou now?
Why? very well I thank you, it is late shall I hast home?
I prithee vvee shall be shent soundly.
Why doe's that railing man go with us?
I preythee speak well of him, on my word,
Hoe's an honest man.
There was never any so one's complexion, a Gentleman?
I'd be ashamed to have such a foul mouth. 
How now Alexander, what Gentleman is this?
Indeed forsooth I know not, I found him at the market full of woe, crying a lost daughter, and telling all her tokens to the people; and wot you what? by all sub∣scription in the world, it should be our new maid Melvia, one would little think it, therefore I was bold to tel him of her Mistress.
Melvia? it cannot be, fool, alas you know she is a poor wench, and I took her in upon mere charity.
So seemed my daughter when she went away, as she had made her self.
What stature was your child of, Sir?
Not high, and of a browne complexion, Her hair aborne, a round face, which some friends that flattered me, would say it would bee a good one.
This is still Melvia, Mistress, that's the truth on it.
It may be so I'll promise you.
Well, go thy ways, the flower of our town, For a hand and a foot, I shall never see thy fell∣low.
But had she not such toys, as bracelets, rings, and Jewels?
She was something bold indeed, to take such things that night she left me.
Then belike she run away?
Though she be one I love, I dare not lye, she did indeed.
What think you of this Jewel?
Yes, this was one of them, and this was mine, you have made me a new man, I thank you for it.
Nay, and she be given to filching, there is your Jewel, I am clear on it: but by your leave Sir, you shall answer me for what is lost since she came hither, can tell you there lye things scattering in every place about the house.
As I am virtuous, I have the lyingst old Gentle∣woman to my Mistress, and the most malicious, the De∣will a good word will she give a servant, that's her old rule; and God be thanked they'll give her as few, there is perfect love on both sides, it yearns my heart to hear the wench misconstrued, a careful soul she is i'll be∣sworn for her, and when shoe's gone, let them say what they will, they may cast their Caps at such a∣another.
What you have lost by her, with all my heart
I'll see you double paid, for you have saved
With your kind pity two that must not live
Unless it be to thank you; take this Jewel,
This strikes off none of her offences, Mistress,
Would I might see her.
Alexander, run, and bid her make hast home, shoe's at the milking Close; but tell her not by any means whoe's here, I know she'll be too fearful.
Well, we'll have a posit yet at parting, that's my comfort, and one round, or else i'll loose my will.
You shall find Silvio, Ʋberto, and Pedro enqui∣ring for the Wench at the next Town, tell them she is found, and where I am, and with the favour of this Gen∣tlewoman, desire them to come hither,
I pray doe, they shall be all welcome. 
By your leave forsooth you shall see me find the parties by a slight.
who's that? Mr. Justice? how do you Sir.
Why very well, and busy, wher's your son.
Hoe's within Sir.
Hum, and how does the young woman my Cozen that came down with him.
Shoe's above, as a woman in her case may be.
You have confessed it? then sirha call in the Officers; shoe's no Cousin of mine; a mere trick to dis∣cover all.
To discover? what?
You shall know that anon: I think you have o∣ver reached you; ô welcome, enter the house, and by virtue of my warrant which you have there, seize up∣on the bodily persons of those whose names are there written, to wit, one Mercury, and the wife of one An∣tonio.
For what.
Away I say,
This Gentleman shall certify you for what. 
Hee can accuse my Son of nothing, hee came from travel but within these two days?
There hangs a tale.
I should be sorry this should fall out at any time: but especially now Sir; will you favour me so much, as to let me know of what you accuse him?
Upon suspicion of murder.
Murder? I defy thee.
I pray GOD hee may prove himself inno∣cent.
Fie, say not so, you show your self to be no good Commonwealths man: for the more are hanged, the better it is for the Common-wealth.
By this rule you were best hang your self.
I forgive your honest mirth ever: O, welcome, well∣come Mark.
Your pen, ink, and paper to take their exam∣nations.
Why do you pull me so? I'll go alone.
Let them stand, let them stand quietly, whilst they are examined?
What will you examine us of?
Of Antonio's murder.
Why, he was my friend.
He was my husband.
The more shame for you both; Mark, your pen and ink.
Pray God all be well, I never knew any of these Travellers come to good; I beseech you, Sir, be favourable to my Son.
Gentlewoman hold you content, I would it were come to that?
For gods sake mother why kneel you to such a pig bribe fellow? he has surfeited of geese, and they have put him into a fit of Justice, let him do his worst.
Is your paper ready?
I am ready Sir.
Accuse them Sir, I command thee to lay down ac∣cusations against these persons in behalf of the State, and •erst look upon the parties to be accused, and deliver your name.
My name is Curio, my murdered Kinsman
If he were living now, I should not know him,
Tic so long since we saw one another.
My cozen Curio?
But thus much from the mouths of his servants, &amp; others, whose examinations I have in writing about me, I can accuse them of; this Mercury, the last night, but this last, lay in Antonio's house, and in the night he rose, rai∣sing Antonio, where privately they were in talk an hour, to what end I know not: but of likely-hood, finding An∣•onio's house not a fit place to murder him in, hee suffe∣red him to go to bed again, but in the morning early, he trained him I think forth, after which time hee never saw his home; his clothes were found near the place where Mercury was, and the people at first denied they saw him: but at last he made a frivolous tale, that there he shifted himself into a foote-mans habit: but in short, the next hour this woman went to Mercury, and in her Coach they posted hither; true accusations, I have no more, and I will make none.
No more? wee need no more, Sirha, be drawing heir Mittimus before wee hear their answer. What say you Sir? are you guilty of this murder?
No Sir.
Whether you are or no, confess, it will bee the better for you.
If I were guilty, your Rhetoric could not fetch it forth: but though I am innocent, I confess, that if I were a stander by, these circumstances urged, which are true, would make me doubtless believe the accused parties to be guilty.
Write down, that hee being a stander by, for so you see he is, doth doubtlessely believe the accused parties, which is himself, to be guilty.
I say no such thing.
Write it down I say, we'll try that.
I care not what you write, pray God you did not kill him for my love, though I am free from this, we both deserve.
Govern your tongue I pray you, all is well, my husband lives, I know it, and I see him.
They whisper, sever them quickly I say Officers why do you let them prompt one another, Gentlewoman, what say you to this, are not you guilty?
No as I hope for mercy.
But are not those circumstances true, that this Gentleman hath so shortly and methodically delivered?
They are; and what you do with me I care not,
Since he is dead, in whom was all my care:
You knew him not.
No an't bin better for you too, and you had never knew'd him.
Why then you did not know the worlds chief joy
His face so manly, as it had been made,
To fright the world, yet he so sweetly tempered;
That he would make himself a natural fool,
To do a noble kindness for a friend,
He was a man whose name I'll not out live,
Longer then heaven whose will must be obeyed;
Will have me do.
And I will quit thy kindness.
Before me she has made the tears s•and in mine eyes, but I must be austere Gentlewoman, you must con∣fesse this murder.
I cannot Sir, I did it not, but I de sire to see those examinations which this Gentleman acknowledges to have about him, for but late last night I received letters from the City, yet I heard of no confession, then.
You shall see them time enough I warrant you, but letters you say you had, where are those letters?
Sir they are gon.
Gone? whether are they gone?
How have you disposed of 'em?
Why Sir they are for women's matters, and so I use 'em.
Who writ em?
A man of mine.
Who brought 'em?
A Post.
A Post? there was some great hast sure, a ha where is that Post?
Sir there he stands.
Doe's hee so? bring hither that Post, I am afraid that Po•t will prove a knave; come hither Post, what? what can you say con•earning the murder of Antonio?
VVhats that to you?
O Post, you have no answer ready have you? I'll have one from you.
You shall have no more from me then you have, you examine an honest Gentleman and Gentlewoman here, it is pity such fools as you should bee in the com∣mission.
Say you so Post, take away that Post, whip him and bring him again quickly, I'll hamper you Post.
It is Antonio, I know him now as well, what an ir∣regular fool is this?
Whip me? hold off.
O good Sir whip him, by his murmuring he should know some thing of my husbands death; that may quit me, for gods sake fetched out.
Whip him I say.
who 'ist dares whip me now?
O my loved husband.
My most worthy friend? where have you been so long?
I cannot speak for joy.
Why, what's the matter now, and shall not law then have her course?
It shall have no other course then it has I think
It shall have other course before I go, or I'll beat my brains, and I say it was not honestly done of him to discover himself before the parties accused were execu∣ted that law might have had her course, for then the kingdom flourishes.
But such a wife as thou, had never any man, and such a friend as he, believe me wife, shall never be a good wife, love my friend, friend love my wife, hark friend.
Mark. if wee can have nothing to doe, you shall swear the peace of some body.
Yes Sir.
By my troth I am sorry my wife is so obstinate, sooth if I could yet doe thee any good, I wood, faith I wood.
I thank you Sir, I have lost that passion.
Cousin Curio, you and I must be better acquain∣ted.
It is my wish Sir.
I should not have known you neither, it is so long
since we saw, we were but children then: but you have showed your self an honest man to me.
I would be ever so.
Look you, whoe's there.
Say nothing to me, for thy peace is made.
Sir, I can nothing say,
But that you are her Father, you can both
Not only pardon, when you have a wrong,
But love where you have most injury.
I think I shall hear of no hanging this year, there A Tinker and a Whore yet, the Crier said that robed her, and are in prison, I hope they shall be hanged.
No truly sir, they have broke prison.
It is no matter, then the Jailer shall be hanged.
You are deceived in that to sir, it was known to bee against his will, and he hath got his pardon, I think for nothing, but if it doth cost him any thing, 'Ile pay it.
Mark up with your papers, away.
O you shall stay dinner, I have a couple of brawling neighbours, that I'll assure you will not agree, and you shall have the hearing of their matter.
With all my heart.
Go, Gentlemen, go in.
O Ʋiola, that no succeeding age,
Might loose the memory of what thou were,
But such an overswayed sex is yours,
That all the virtuous actions you can do,
Are but as men will call them, and I swear,
It is my belief that women want but ways;
To praise their deeds, but men want deeds to praise.
THis Comedy long forgot, by some thought dead,
By us preserved, once more doth raise her head.
And to your noble censures does present,
Her outward form, and inward ornament.
Nor let this smell of arrogance, since it is known,
The makers that confessed it for their own
Were this way skilful, and without the crime
Of flatteries I may say did please the time;
The work it self too, when it first came forth,
In the opinion of men of worth,
Was well received, and favoured, though some rude
And harsh among the ignorant multitude,
(That relish gross food better then a dish,
That's cooked with care, and served into the wish,
Of curious palates) wanting wit and strength,
Truly to judge, condemned it for the length,
That fault's reformed, and now it is to be tried,
Before such Judges twill not be denied
A free and noble hearing, nor fear I,
But twill deserve to have free liberty,
And give you cause (and with content) to say,
Their care was good that did revive this Play.
It is ended; but my hopes, and fears begin,
Nor can it bee imputed as a sin
In me to wish it favour, if this night,
To the Judicious it hath given delight,
I have my ends, and may such for their grace,
Vouchsafed to this, find theirs in every place.

THe DEVIL is an ASS. That is, to day,
The name of what you are met for, a new Play,
Yet Grandee's, would you were not come to grace
Our matter, with allowing us no place.
Though you presume SATAN a subtle thing,
And may have heard he's worn in a thumb-ring;
Doe not on these presumptions, force us act,
In compass of a cheese-trencher. This tract
Will ne'er admit our vice, because of yours.
Anon, who, worse then you, the fault endures
That your selves make? when you will thrust and spurn,
And knock us of the •lbowes and bid, turn;
As if, when we had spoke, we must be gone,
Or, till we speak, must all run in, to one;
Like the young adders, at the old ones mouth?
Would we could stand due North; or had no South,
If that offend: or were Muscovy glass,
That you might look our Scenes through as they pass.
We know not how to affect you. If you'll come
To see new Plays, pray you afford us room,
And show this, but the same face you have done
Your dear delight the Devil of Edmunton.
Or, if, for want of room, it must mis-carry,
Twill be but Justice, that your censure tarry,
Till you give some. And when six times you ha'seen't,
If this Play doe not like, the Devil is in it.
Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, &amp;c.
To earth? and why to earth, thou foolish Spirit?
What wold'st thou do on earth?
For that, great Chief•
As time shall work, I do but ask my mon'th.
Which every petty pui'nee Devil has;
Within that term, the Court of Hell will hear
Something may gain a longer grant, perhaps.
For what? the laming a poor Cow, or two?
Entering a Sow, to make her cast her farrow?
Or crossing of a Market-womans Mare,
Twixt this and Tot•am? these were wont to bee
Your maine achievements, Pug, you have some plot, now,
Upon a tonning of Ale, to stale the yest,
Or keep the churn so, that the butter come not;
Spite of the housewives cord, or her hot spit?
Or some good Ribibe, about Kentish Town,
Or Hogsden, you would hang now, for a witch,
Because she will not let you play round Robin:
And you'll go sour the Citizens Cream against Sunday?
That she may be accused fort, and condemned
By a Middlesex Jury; to the satisfaction
Of their offended friends, the Londoners wives
Whose teeth were set on edge with it? Foolish fiend,
Stay i'your place, know your own strengths, and put not
Beyond the sphere of your activity.
You are too dull a Devil to be trusted
Forth into those parts, Pug, upon any affair
That may concern our name, on earth. It is not
Every ones work. The state of Hell must care
Whom it employs, in point of reputation,
Here about London. You would make, I think
An Agent, to be sent, for Lancashire,
Proper enough; or some parts of Northumberland,
So yo'had good instructions, Pug.
O Chief!
You doe not know, dear Chief, what there is in me.
Prove me but for a fortnight, for a week,
And lend me but a Vice, to carry with me,
To practice there-with any play-fellow,
And, you will see, there will come more upon it,
Then you'll imagine, precious Chief.
What Vice?
What kind would th'have it of?
Why, any Fraud;
〈◊〉 Covetousness; or Lady Vanity;
〈◊〉 Iniquity: I'll call him hither.
What is he, calls upon me, and would seem to lack a Vice?
〈◊〉 words be half spoken, I am with him in a trice;
〈◊〉 there, and every where, as the Cat is with the mice:
True vetus iniquitas. Lack thou Cards, friend, or Dice?
I will teach thee cheat, Child, to cog, lye, and swagger,
And ever and anon, to be drawing forth thy dagger:
To swear by Gogs-nownes, like a lusty Iuventus,
In a cloak to thy heel, and a hat like a pent-house.
〈◊〉 breeches of three fingers, and thy doublet all belly,
With a Wench that shall feed thee, with cock-stones and gelly.
Is it not excellent, Chief? how nimble he is!
Child of hell, this is nothing! I will fetch thee a leap
From the top of Pauls-steeple, to the Standard in Cheap:
And lead thee a dance, through the streets without fail,
Like a needle of Spain, with a thread at my tail.
We will survey the Suburbs, and make forth our sallies,
Down Petticoate-lane, and up the Smock-allies,
To Shoreditch, Whitechappell, and so to Saint Kathernes.
To drink with the Dutch there, and take forth their patterns:
From thence, we will put in at Custom-house key there,
And see, how the Factors, and Prentices play there,
False with their Masters; and gueld many a full pack,
To spend it in pies, at the Dagger, and the Wool sack.
Brave, brave, Iniquity! will not this doe, Chief?
Nay, boy, I will bring thee to the Bawds, and the Roisters,
At Belins-gate, feasting with claret-wine, and oysters,
From thence shoot the Bridge, child, to the Cranes in the Vintry,
And see, there the gimblets, how they make their entry!
Or, if thou had rather, to the Strand down to fall,
Against the Lawyers come dabled from Westminster-hall
And mark how they cling, with their clients together,
Like Ivy to Oak; so Velvet to Leather:
Ha, boy, I would show thee.
Rare, rare!
Peace, dotard,
And thou more ignorant thing, that so admir'st.
Art thou the spirit thou seem? so poor? to choose
This, for a Vice, t'advance the cause of Hell,
Now? as Vice stands this present year? Remember,
What number it is. Six hundred and sixteen.
Had it but been five hundred, though some sixty
Above; that's fifty years agony, and six.
(When every great man had his Vice stand by him,
In his long coat, shaking his wooden dagger)
I could consent, that, then this your grave choice
Might have done that, with his Lord Chief, the which
Most of his chamber can doe now. But Pug,
As the times are, who is it, will receive you?
What company will you go to? or whom mix with?
Where can thou carry him? except to Taverns?
To mount up on a joynt-stoole, with a Iewes-trumpe,
To put down Cokeley, and that must be to Citizens?
He ne'er will be admitted, there, where Vennor comes.
He may perchance, in tail of a Sheriffs dinner,
Skip with a rime of the Table, from New-nothing,
And take his Almaine-leape into a custard,
Shall make my Lad Majoresse, and her sisters,
Laugh all their hoods over their shoulders. But,
This is not that will doe, they are other things
That are received now upon earth, for Vices;
Stranger, and newer: and changed every hour.
They ride 'hem like their horses off their legs,
And here they come to Hell, whole legions of'hem,
Every week tired. Wee, still strive to breed,
And rear 'hem up new ones; but they doe not stand,
When they come there: they turne'hem on our hands.
And it is feared they have a stud o'their own
Will put down ours. Both our breed, and trade
Will suddenly decay, if we prevent not.
Unless it be a Vice of quality,
Or fashion, now, they take none from us. Car-men
Are got into the yellow starch, and Chimney-sweepers
To their tobacco, and strong-waters, H•m,
Mead, and Obarni. Wee must therefore aim
At extraordinary subtle ones, now,
When we do send to keep us up in credit.
Not old Iniquities. Get you even back, Sir,
To making of your rope of sand again.
You are not for the manners, nor the times:
They have their Vices, there, most like to Virtues;
You cannot know 'hem, apart, by any difference:
They wear the same clothes, eat the same meat,
Sleep in the selfsame beds, ride i'those coaches.
Or very like, four horses in a coach,
As the best men and women. Tissue gowns,
Garters and roses, fourscore pound a pair;
Embroidered stockings, cut-worke smocks, and shirts,
More certain marks of lechery, now, and pride,
Then ere they were of true nobility!
But Pug, since you doe burn with such desire
To doe the Common-wealth of Hell some service;
I am content, assuming of a body,
You go to earth, and visit men, a day.
But you must take a body ready made, Pug,
I can create you none, nor shall you form
Your self an aerie one, but become subject
To all impression of the flesh, you take,
So far as humane frailty. So, this morning,
There is a handsome Cutpurse hanged at Tiborne,
Whose spirit departed, you may enter his body:
〈◊〉 clothes employ your credit, with the Hangman,
〈◊〉 let our tribe of Brokers furnish you.
〈◊〉 look, how far your subtlety can work
Though those organs, with that body, spy
Amongst mankind, (you cannot there want vices,
And therefore the less need to carry 'hem wi'you)
But as you make your soon at nights relation,
And we shall find, it merits from the State,
You shall have both trust from us, and employment.
Most gracious Chief!
Only, thus more I bind you,
To serve the first man that you meet; and him
I'll show you, now: Observe him. Yon' is he,
You shall see, first after your clothing. Follow him:
But once engaged, there you must stay and fix;
Not shift, until the midnights cock doe crow.
Any conditions to be gone.
Away, then.
I, they doe, now, name Bretnor, as before;
They talked of Gresham, and of Doctor Fore-man,
Franklin, and Fiske, and Savoury (he was in too)
But ther's not one of these, that ever could
Yet show a man the Devil, in true sort.
They have their christalls, I doe know, and rings,
And virgin parchment, and their deadmen's sculls
Their ravens wings, their lights, and pentacles,
With characters; I have seen all these. But—
Would I might see the Devil. I would give
A hundred o'these picture,, to see him
Once out of picture. May I prove a cuckold,
(And that's the one maine mortal thing I fear)
If I begin not, now, to think, the Painters
Have only made him. Slight, he would be seen.
One time or other else. He would not let
An ancient gentleman, of a good house,
As most are now in England, the Fitz-dottrel's,
Run wild, and call upon him thus in vain,
As I ha'done this twelve mone'th. If he be not,
At all, why, are there Conjurers? If they be not,
Why, are there laws against 'hem? The best artists
Of Cambridge, Oxford, Middlesex, and London,
Essex, and Kent, I have had in pay to raise him;
These fifty weeks, and yet h'appeares not. 'Sdeath,
I shall suspect, they, can make circle only,
Shortly, and know but his hard names. They doe say,
H'will meet a man (of himself) that has a mind to him.
If he would so, I have a mind and a half for him:
He should not be long absent. Pray thee, come
I long for thee. And I were with child by him,
And my wife, too; I could not more. Come, yet,
Good Beelezebub. Were he a kind devil,
And had humanity in him, he would come, but
To save ones longing. I should use him well,
I swear, and with respect (would he would try me)
Not, as the Conjurers doe, when they have raised him.
Get him in bonds, and send him post, on errands.
A thousand miles, it is preposterous, that:
And I believe, is the true cause he comes not.
And he has reason. Who would be engaged,
That might live freely, as he may doe? I swear,
They are wrong all. The burned child dreads the fire.
They doe not know to entertain the Devil.
I would so welcome him, observe his diet,
Get him his chamber hung with arras, two of'hem,
In my own house; lend him my wives wrought pillows:
And as I am an honest man, I think,
If he had a mind to her, too; I should grant him,
To make our friend-ship perfect. So I would not
To every man. If he but hear me, now?
And should come to me in a brave young shape,
And take me at my word? ha! Who is this?
SIr, your good pardon, that I thus presume
Upon your privacy. I am borne a Gentleman,
A younger brother; but in some disgrace,
Now, with my friends: and want some little means,
To keep me upright, while things be reconciled.
Please you, to let my service be of use to you, Sir.
Service? before hell, my heart was at my mouth,
Till I had viewed his shoes well: for, those roses
Were big enough to hide a cloven foot.
No, friend, my number's full. I have one servant,
Who is my all, indeed; and, from the broom
Unto the brush: for, just so far, I trust him.
He is my Ward-robe man, my Cater, Cooke,
Butler, and Steward; looks unto my horse:
And helps to watch my wife. H'has all the places,
That I can think on, from the garret downward,
Even to the manger, and the curry-combe.
Sir, I shall put your worship to no charge,
More then my meat, and that but very little,
I'll serve you for your love.
Ha? without wages?
I'll harken o'that ear, were I at leisure.
But now, I'm busy. Prithee, friend forbear me,
And'thou had been a Devil, I should say
Somewhat more to thee. Thou dost hinder, now,
My meditations.
Sir, I am a Devil.
How!
A true Devil, Sir.
Nay, now, you lie:
Under your favour, friend, for, I'll not quarrel.
I looked o'your feet, before, you cannot cousin me,
Your shoo's not cloven, Sir, you are whole hoofed.
Sir that's a popular error deceives many:
But I am that, I tell you.
What's your name?
My name is Devil, Sir.
Sai'st thou true.
Indeed, Sir.
'Slid! there's some omen i'this! what countryman?
Of Derby-shire, Sir, about the Peak.
That Hole
Belonged to your Ancestors?
Yes, Devils arse, Sir.
I'll entertain him for the name sake. Ha?
And turn away my tother man? and save
Four pound a year by that? there's luck and thrift too!
The very Devil may come hereafter, as well.
Friend, I receive you: but (withal) I acquaint you,
Aforehand, if yo'offend me, I must beat you.
It is a kind of exercise, I use.
And cannot be without.
Yes, if I doe not
Offend, you can, sure.
Faith, Devil, very hardly:
I'll call you by your surname, because I love it.
YOnder he walks, Sir, I'll go lift him for you.
To him, good Engine, raise him up by degrees,
Gently, and hold him there too, you can doe it.
Show your self now, a Mathematical broker.
I'll warrant you for half a piece.
It is done, Sir.
Is it possible there should be such a man?
You shall be your own witness, I'll not labour
To tempt you past your faith.
And is his wife
So very handsome, say you?
I have not seen her,
Since I came home from travel: and they say,
She is not altered. Then before I went,
I saw her once; but so, as she hath stuck
Still i'my view, no object hath removed her.
It is a fair guest, Friend, beauty: and once lodged
Deep in the eyes, she hardly leaves the Inn.
How do's he keep her?
Very brave. However,
Himself be sordide, he is sensual that way.
In every dressing, he do's study her.
And furnish forth himself so from the Brokers?
Yes, that's a hired suite, he now has on,
To see the Devil is an Ass, to day, in
(This Engine gets three or four pound a week by him)
He dares not miss a new Play, or a Feast,
What rate soever clothes be at; and thinks
Himself still new in other men's old.
But stay,
Do's he love meat so?
Faith he do's not hate it.
But that's not it. His belly and his palate
Would be compounded with for reason. Mary,
A wit he has, of that strange credit with him,
Against all mankind; as it doth make him doe
Just what it list: it ravishes him forth,
Whither it please, to any assembly or place,
And would conclude him ruined, should he scope
One public meeting, out of the belief
He has of his own great, and Catholic strengths,
In arguing, and discourse. It takes, I see:
H'has got the cloak upon him.
A fair garment,
By my faith, Engine!
It was never made, Sir,
For threescore pound, I assure you: Twill yield thirty.
The plush, Sir, cost three pound, ten shillings a yard!
And then the lace, and velvet.
I shall, Engine,
Be looked at, prettily, in it! Art thou sure
The Play is played to day?
ô here's the bill, Sir.
I, had forgot to gi't you.
Ha? the Devil!
I will not loose you, Sirah! But, Engine, think you,
The Gallant is so furious in his folly?
So mad upon the matter, that he'll part
Wed's cloak upo'those terms?
Trust not your Engine,
Break me to pieces else, as you would doe
A rotten Crane, or an old rusty Jack,
That has not one true wheel in him. Doe but talk with him.
I shall doe that, to satisfy you, Engine,
And my self too. With your leave, Gentlemen.
Which of you is it, is so mere Idolater
To my wives beauty, and so very prodigal
Unto my patience, that, for the short parley?
Of one swift hours quarter, with my wife,
He will depart with (let me see) this cloak here
The price of folly? Sir, are you the man?
I am that vent'rer, Sir.
Good time! your name
Is Witty-pol?
The same, Sir.
And'tis told me,
Yo'have travelled lately?
That I have, Sir.
Truly,
Your travels have altered your complexion;
But sure your wit stood still.
It may well be, Sir.
All heads haven't like growth.
The good mans gravity,
That left you land, your father, never taught you
These pleasant matches?
No, nor can his mirth,
With whom I make'hem, put me off.
You are
Resolved then?
Yes, Sir.
Beauty is the Saint,
You'll sacrifice your self, into the shirt too?
So I may still cloth, and keep warm your wisdom?
You lade me Sir!
I know what you will bear, Sir,
Well, to the point. It is only, Sir, you say,
To speak unto my wife?
Only, to speak to her.
And in my presence?
In your very presence.
And in my hearing?
In your hearing: so,
You interrupt us not.
For th• short space
You doe demand, the fourth part of an hour,
I think I shall, with some convenien• study,
And this good help to boot, bring my self to it.
I ask no more.
Please you, walk to'ard my house,
Speak what you list; that times yours: My right
I have departed with. But, not beyond,
A minute, or a second, look for. Length,
And drawing out, ma'advance much, to these matches.
And I except all kissing. Kisses are
Silent petitions still with willing Lovers.
Lovers? How falls that o'your phantsie?
Sir.
I doe know somewhat, I forbid all lip-worke.
I am not eager at forbidden dainties.
Who covets unfit thinks, denies him self.
You say well, Sir, It was prettily said, that same,
He do's, indeed. I'll have no touches, therefore,
Nor takings by the arms, nor tender circles
Cast'bout the wast, but all be done at distance.
Love is brought up with those soft migniard handlings;
His pulse lies in his palm: and I defend
All melting joints, and fingers, (that's my bargain)
I doe defend 'hem any thing like action.
But talk, Sir, what you will. Use all the Tropes
And Schemes, that Prince Quintilian can afford you:
And much good do your Rhetoriques heart. You are welcome, Sir.
Engine, God b'w'you.
Sir, I must condition
To have this Gentleman by, a witness.
Well,
I am content so he be silent.
Yes, Sir.
Come Devil, I'll make you room, straight. But I'll show you
First, to your Mistress, who's no common one,
You must conceive, that brings gain to see her.
I hope thou'st brought me good luck.
I shall do it. Sir.
Engine, you hope o'your half piece? It is there, Sir.
Be gone. Friend Manly, who's within here? fixed?
I am directly in a fit of wonder
What'll be the issue of this conference!
For that, ne'er ve• your self, till the event.
How like yo'him?
I would fine see more of him.
What think you of this?
I am past degrees of thinking.
Old Africa, and the •ew America,
With all their fruit of Monsters cannot show
So just a prodigy.
Could you have believed,
Without your sight, a mind so sordide inward,
Should be so specious, and laid forth abroad,
To all the show, that ever shop, or ware was?
I believe any thing now, though I confess
His Vices are the most extremities
I ever knew in nature. But, why loves he
The Devil so?
O Sir! for hidden treasure,
He hopes to find: and has proposed himself
So infinite a Mass as to recover,
He cares not what he parts with, of the present,
To his men of Art, who are the race, may coin him.
Promise gold-mountaines, and the covetous
Are still most prodigal.
But have you faith,
That he will hold his bargain?
O dear, Sir!
He will not off on it. Fear him not. I know him.
One baseness still accompanies another.
See! he is here already, and his wife too.
A wondrous handsome creature, as I live!
COme wife, this is the Gentleman. Nay, blush not.
Why what doe you mean Sir? have you your reason?
Wife,
I do not know, that I have lent it forth
To any one at least without a pawn, wife:
Or that I'have eat or drunk the thing, of late,
That should corrupt it. Wherefore gentle wife,
Obey, it is thy virtue: hold no acts
Of disputation.
Are you not enough
The talk, of feasts, and meetings, but you'll still
Make argument for fresh?
Why, careful wedlock,
If I have a longing to have one tale more
Go of me, what is that to thee, dear heart?
Why should thou envy my delight? or cross it?
By being solicitous, when it not concerns thee?
Yes I have share in this. The scorn will fall
As bitterly on me, where both are laughed at.
Laughed at, sweet bird? is that the scruple? Come, come,
Thou art a Niaise. Which of your great houses,
(I will not mean at home, here, but abroad)
Your families in France, wife, send not forth
Something, within the seven year, may be laughed at?
I doe not say seven months, nor seven weeks,
Nor seven days, nor hours: but seven year wife.
I give 'hem time. Once within seven year,
I think they may doe something may be laughed at.
In France, I keep me there, still. Wherefore, wife,
Let them that list, laugh still, rather then weep
For me; Here is a cloak cost fifty pound, wife,
Which I can fell for thirty, when I have seen
All London in it, and London has seen me.
To day, I go to the Black-friers Play-house,
Sit in the view, salute all my acquaintance,
Rise up between the Acts, let fall my cloak,
Publish a handsome man, and a rich suite
(As thats a special end, why we go thither,
All that pretend, to stand for it of the Stage)
The Ladies ask who's that? (For, they do come
To see us, Love, as we doe to see them)
Now, I shall lose all this, for the false fear
Of being laughed at? Yes, wuss. Let'hem laugh, wife,
Let me have such another cloak to morrow.
And let 'hem laugh again, wife, and again,
And then grow fat with laughing and then fatter,
All my young Gallants, let 'hem bring their friends too:
Shall I forbid 'hem? No let heaven forbid 'hem:
Or wit, if it have any charge on 'hem. Come, thy ear, wife,
Is all I'll borrow of thee. Set your watch, Sir,
Thou, only art to hear, not speak a word, Dove,
To ought he says. That I do gi'you in precept,
No less then council, on your wive-hood, wife,
Not though he flatter you, or make court, or Love,
(As you must loke for these) or say, he rail;
What ere his arts bee, wife, I will have thee
Delude 'hem with a trick, thy obstinate silence;
I know advantages; and I love to hit
These pragmatic young men, at their own weapons.
Is your watch ready? Here my sail bears, for you:
Tack toward him, sweet Pinnace, wher's your watch?
I'll set it, Sir, with yours.
I must obey.
Her modesty seems to suffer with her beauty,
And so, as if his folly were away,
It were worth pity.
Now, you are right, begin, Sir.
But first, let me repeat the contract, briefly.
I am, Sir, to enjoy this cloak, I stand in,
Freely, and as your gift; upon condition
You may as freely, speak here to my spouse,
Your quarter of an hour always keeping
The measured distance of your yard, or more,
From my said Spouse: and in my sight and hearing.
This is your covenant?
Yes, but you'll allow
For this time spent, now?
Set 'hem so much back.
I think, I shall not need it.
Well, begin, Sir,
There is your bound, Sir. Not beyond that rush.
If you interrupt me, Sir, I shall discloake you.
The time I have purchased, Lady, is but short;
And, therefore, if I employ it thriftily,
I hope I stand the nearer to my pardon.
I am not here, to tell you, you are fair,
Or lovely, or how well you dress you, Lady,
I'll save my self that eloquence of your glass,
Which can speak these things better to you then I,
And it is a knowledge, wherein fools may be
As wise as a Court Parliament. Nor come I,
With any prejudice, or doubt, that you
Should, to the notice of your own worth, need
Least revelation. Shoe's a simple woman,
Know's not her good: (who ever knows her ill)
And at all carat. That you are the wife,
To so much blasted flesh, as scarce hath soul,
In stead of salt, to keep it sweet; I think,
Will ask no witnesses, to prove. The cold
Sheets that you lie in, with the watching candle,
That sees, how dull to any thaw of beauty,
Pieces, and quarters, half, and whole nights, sometimes,
The Divell-given Elfin Squire, your husband,
Doth leave you, quitting here his proper circle,
For a much-worse in the walks of Lincolnes Inn,
Under the Elms, t'expect the fiend in vane, there
Will confess for you.
I did look for this gear.
And what a daughter of darkness, he do's make you,
Locked up from all society, or object;
Your eye not let to look upon a face,
Under a Conjurers (or some mould for one,
Hollow, and lean like his) but, by great means,
As I now make; your own too sensible sufferings,
Without the extraordinary aids,
Of spells, or spirits, may assure you, Lady.
For my part, I protest against all such practice,
I work by no false arts, medicines, or charms
To be said forward and backward.
No, I except:
Sir, I shall ease you.
Mum.
Nor have I ends, Lady,
Upon you, more then this: to tell you how Love
Beauties good Angel, he that waits upon her
At all occasions, and no less then Fortune,
Helps th'adventurous, in me makes that proffer,
Which never fair one was so fond, to lose;
Who could but reach a hand out to her freedom.
On the first sight I loved you: since which time,
Though I have travelled, I have been in travel
More for this second blessing of your eyes
Which now I'have purchased, then for all aims else.
Think of it, Lady, be your mind as active,
As is your beauty: view your object well.
Examine both my fashion, and my years
Things, that are like, are soon familiar:
And Nature joys, still in equality.
Let not the sign of the husband fright you, Lady.
But ere your spring be gone, enjoy it. Flowers,
Though fair, are oft but of one morning. Think,
All beauty doth not last until the Autumn.
You grow old, while I tell you this. And such,
As cannot use the present, are not wise,
If Love and Fortune will take care of us,
Why should our will be wanting? This is all.
When doe you answer, Lady?
Now, the sport comes.
Let him still waite, waite, waite: while the watch goes,
And the time runs. Wife!
How! not any word?
Nay, then, I taste a trick in it. Worthy Lady,
I cannot be so false to mine own thoughts
Of your presumed goodness, to conceive
This as your rudeness, which I see's imposed.
Yet, since your cautelous Jailer, here stands by you,
And yo'are denied the liberty of the house;
Let me take warrant, Lady, from your silence,
(Which ever is interpreted consent)
To make your answer for you: which shall be
To as good purpose, as I can imagine,
And what I think you'd speak.
No, no, no, no.
I shall resume, Sir.
Sir, what doe you mean?
One interruption more, Sir, and you go
Into your hose and doublet, nothing saves you.
And therefore harken. This is for your wife.
You must play fair, Sir.
Stand for me, good friend.
Troth, Sir, tic more then true, that you have uttered
Of my unequal, and so sordide match here,
With all the circumstances of my bondage.
I have a husband, and a two-legged one,
But such a moon-ling, as no wit of man
Or roses can redeem from being an Ass.
H'is grown too much, the story of men's mouths
To scope his lading: should I maked my study,
And lay all ways, yea, call mankind to help,
To take his burden off, why, this one act
Of his, to let his wife out to be courted,
And, at a price, proclaims his asinine nature
So loud, as I am weary of my title to him.
But Sir, you seem a Gentleman of virtue,
No less then blood; and one that every way
Looks as hee were of too good quality,
To entrap a credulous woman, or betray her
Since you have paid thus dear, Sir, for a visit,
And made such venture, on your wit, and charge
Merely to see me, or at most to speak to me,
I were too stupid; or (what's worse) ingrate
Not to return your venture. Think, but how,
I may with safety doe it; I shall trust
My love and honour to you, and presume,
You'll ever husband both, against this husband;
Who, if we chance to change his liberal ears,
To other ensigns, and with labour make
A new beast of him, as he shall deserve,
Cannot complain, he is unkindly dealth with.
This day he is to go to a new play, Sir,
From whence no fear, no, nor authority,
Scarcely the Kings command, Sir, will restrain him,
Now you have fitted him with a Stage-garment,
For the mere names sake, were there nothing else,
And many more such journeys, he will make.
Which, if they now, or, any time hereafter,
Offer us opportunity, you hear, Sir,
Who'll be as glad, and forward to embrace,
Meet, and enjoy it cheerfully as you.
I humbly thank you, Lady.
Keep your ground Sir.
Will you be lightened?
Mum.
And but I am,
By the sad contract, thus to take my leave of you
At this so envious distance, I had taught
Our lips ere this, to seal the happy mixture
Made of our souls. But we must both, now, yield
To the necessity. Doe not think yet, Lady,
But I can kiss, and touch, and laugh, and whisper,
And doe those crowning court-ships too, for which
Day, and the public have allowed no name
But, now, my bargain binds me. It were rude injury,
T'importune more, or urge a noble nature,
To what of it's own bounty it is prone to:
Else, I should speak—But, Lady, I love so well,
As I will hope, you'll do so to. I have done, Sir.
Well, then, I ha'won?
Sir, And I may win, too.
O yes! no doubt on it. I'll take careful order,
That she shall hang forth ensigns at the window,
To tell you when I am absent. Or I'll keep
Three or four foote-men, ready still of purpose,
To run and fetch you at her longings, Sir.
I'll go bespeak me straight a guilt caroch,
For her and you to take the air in: yes,
Into Hide-parke, and thence into Black-Friers,
Visit the painters, where you may see pictures,
And note the properest limbs, and how to make 'hem.
Or what doe you say unto a middling Gossip?
To bring you aye together, at her lodging?
Under pretext of teaching o'my wife
Some rare receipt of drawing almond milk? ha?
It shall bee a part of my care. Good Sir, God b'w'you.
I have kept the contract, and the cloak is mine own.
Why, much good do it you Sir; it may fall out,
That you ha'bought it dear, though I have not sold it.
A pretty riddle! Fare you well, good Sir.
Wife, your face this way, look on me: and think
Yo'have had a wicked dream, wife, and forget it.
This is the strangest motion I ere saw.
Now, wife, sits this fair cloak the worse upon me,
For my great sufferings, or your little patience? ha?
They laugh, you think?
Why Sir, and you might see it.
What thought, they have of you, may be soon collected
By the young Gentlmans speech.
Young Gentleman?
Death! you are in love with him, are you? could he not
Be named the Gentleman, without the young?
Up to your Cabin again.
My cage, yo'were best
To call it?
Yes, sing there. You'd fine be making
Blank Manger with it at your mothers! I know you.
Go get you up. How now! what say you, Devil?
Here is one Engine, Sir, desires to speak with you.
I thought he brought some news, of a broker! well,
Let him come in, good Devil: fetch him else
O, my fine Engine! what's th'affaire? more cheats?
No Sir, the Wit, the Brain, the great Projector,
I told you of, is newly come to town.
Where, Engine?
I ha'brought him▪ (H'is without)
Ere he pulled off his boots, Sir, but so followed,
For business:
But what is a Projector?
I would conceive.
Why, one Sir, that projects
Ways to enrich men, or to make 'hem great,
But suites, by marriages, by undertaking:
According as he sees they humour it.
Can he not conjure at all?
I think he can, Sir.
(To tell you true) but, you doe know, of late,
The State hath tan such note of'hem, and compelled 'hem,
To enter such great bonds, they dare not practice.
It is true, and I lie fallow for it, the while!
O, Sir! you'll grow the richer for the rest.
I hope I shall: but Engine, you do talk
Somewhat too much, o'my courses. My Cloake-customer
Could tell me strange particulars.
By my means?
How should he have 'hem else?
You doe not know, Sir,
What he has: and by what arts! A monied man, Sir,
And is as great with your Almanack-Men, as you are!
That Gallant?
You make the other waite too long, here:
And he is extreme punctual.
Is he a gallant?
Sir you shall see: He'is in his riding suit,
As he comes now from Court. But here him speak:
Minister matter to him, and then tell me.
SIr, money's a whore, a bawd, a drudge;
Fit to run out on errands: Let her go.
Via pecunia! when she's run and gone,
And fled and dead; then will I fetch her, again,
With Aqua-vitae, out of an old Hogs-head!
While there are lees of wine, or dregs of beer,
I'll never want her! Coin her out of cobwebs,
Dust, but I'll have her! Raise wool upon egge-shells,
Sir, and make grass grow out o'marro-bones.
To make her come. (Commend me to your Mistress,
Say, let the thousand pound but be had ready,
And it is done) I would but see the creature
(Of flesh, and blood) the man, the Prince, indeed,
That could employ so many millions
As I would help him to.
How, talks he? millions?
(I'll give you an account of this to morrow.)
Yes, I will take no less, and doe it too;
If they were Myriads: and without the Devil,
By direct means, it shall be good in law.
Sir.
Tell Mr. Wood-cock, I'll not fail to meet him
Upon th'Exchange at night. Pray him to have
The writings there, and we'll dispatch it: Sir,
You are a Gentleman of a good presence,
A handsome man (I have considered you)
As a fit stock to graft honours upon:
I have a Project to make you a Duke, now.
That you must be one, within so many months,
And I set down, out of true reason of state,
You sha' not avoid it. But you must harken, then.
Harken? why Sir, doe you doubt his ears? Alas!
You doe not know Master Fitz-dottrel.
He do's not know me indeed. I thank you, Engine,
For rectifying him.
Good! Why, Engine, then
I'll tell you. (I see you have credit, here,
And, that you can keep counsel, I'll not question.)
He shall but be an undertaker with me,
In a most feasible business. It shall cost him
Nothing.
Good, Sir.
Except he please, butt's countenance;
(That I will have) t'appeare in it, to great men,
For which I'll make him one. He shall not draw
A string of's purse. I'll drive his patent for him.
We'll take in Cit'zens, Commoners, and Aldermen,
To bear the charge, and blow 'hem off again,
Like so many dead flies, when it is carried.
The thing is for recovery of drowned Land,
Whereof the Crown's to have a moiety,
If it be owner; Else, the Crown and Owners
To share that moiety: and the recoverers
T'enjoy the tother moiety, for their charge.
Throughout England?
Yes, which will arise
To eighteen millions, seven the first year:
I have computed all, and made my survey
Unto an acre, I'll begin at the Pan,
Not, at the skirts: as some have done, and lost,
All that they wrought, their timber-worke, their trench,
Their banks all borne away, or else filled up
By the next winter. Tut, they never went
The way. I'll have it all.
A Gallant tract
Of land it is!
Twill yield a pound an acre.
We must let cheap, ever, at first. But Sir,
This looks too large for you, I see. Come hither,
We'll have a less. Here's a plain fellow, you see him,
Has his black bag of papers, there, in Buckram,
Wi'not be sold for th'Earldome of Pancridge: Draw,
Gi'me out one, by chance▪ Project; four dogs skins?
Twelve thousand pound! the very worst, at first.
Pray you let's see it Sir.
It is a toy, a trifle!
Trifle! 12. thousand pound for dogs-skins?
Yes,
But, by way of dressing, you must know, Sir,
And med'cining the leather, to a height
Of improved ware, like your Borachio
Of Spain, Sir. I can fetch nine thousand for it—
Of the Kings glover?
Yes, how heard you that?
Sir, I doe know you can.
Within this hour
And reserve half my secret. Pluck another;
See if thou hast a happier hand: I thought so.
The very next worse to it! Bottle-ale.
Yet, this is two and twenty thousand! Pray thee
Pull out another, two or three.
Good, stay, friend,
By bottle-ale, two and twenty thousand pound?
Yes, Sir, it's cast to penny-hal'penny-farthing,
Of the back-side, there you may see it, read,
I will not bate a Harrington of the sum.
I'll win it i'my water, and my malt,
My furnaces, and hanging o'my coppers,
The tonning, and subtlety o'my yest;
And, then the earth of my bottles, which I dig,
Turn up, and steep, and work, and neale, my self,
To a degree of Proc'lane. You will wonder,
At my proportions, what I will put up
In seven years! for so long time, I ask
For my invention. I will save in cork,
In my mere stop'ling, 'bove three thousand pound,
Within that term: by googing of 'hem out
Just to the size of my bottles, and not fleeing.
There's infinite loss i'that. What hast thou there?
O'making wine of raisins: this is in hand, now,
Is not that strange, Sir, to make wine of raisins?
Yes, and as true wine, as th'wines of France,
Or Spain, or Italy, Look of what grape
My raisin is, that wine I'll render perfect,
As of the muscatel grape, I'll render muscatel;
Of Canary, his; the Claret, his;
So of all kinds: and bate you of the prices,
Of wine, throughout the kingdom, half in half.
But, how, Sir, if you raise the other commodity,
Raisins?
Why, then I'll make it out of black-berries:
And it shall doe the same. It is but more art,
And the charge less. Take out another.
No, good Sir.
Save you the trouble, I'll not look, nor hear
Of any, but your first, there; the Drown'd-land:
If it will doe, as you say.
Sir, there's not place,
To gi'you demonstration of these things.
They are a little to subtle. But, I could show you
Such a necessity in it, as you must be
But what you please: against the received heresy,
That England bears no Dukes. Keep you the land, Sir,
The greatness of th'estate shall throw't upon you.
If you like better turning it to money,
What may not you, Sir, purchase with that wealth?
Say, you should part with two o'your millions,
To be the thing you would, who would not do it?
As I protest, I will, out of my divident,
Lay, for some pretty principality,
In Italy, from the Church: Now, you perhaps,
Fancy the smoke of England, rather? But—
Ha'you no private room, Sir, to draw to,
T'enlarge our selves more upon.
O yes, Devil!
These, Sir, are bus'nesses, ask to be carried
With caution▪ and in cloud.
I apprehend,
They doe so, Sir, Devil, which way is your Mistress?
Above, Sir, in her chamber.
O that's well.
Then this way good, Sir.
I shall follow you; Trains,
Gi'me the bag, and go you presently,
Commend my service to my Lady Tail-bush.
Tell her I am come from Court this morning; say,
I'have got our business moved, and well: Entreat her,
That she give you the foure-score Angels, and see 'hem
Disposed of to my Council, Sir Poul Eitherside.
Sometime, to day, I'll waite upon her Ladyship,
With the relation.
Sir, of what dispatch,
He is! Do you mark?
Engine, when did you see
My cousin Ever-ill? keeps he still your quarter?
In the Bermudas?
Yes, Sir, he was writing
This morning, very hard.
Be not you known to him,
That I am come to Town: I have effected
A business for him, but I would have it take him,
Before he thinks for it.
It is past?
Not yet.
It is well of the way.
O Sir! your worship takes
Infinite pains.
I love Friends, to be active:
A sluggish nature puts off man, and kind.
And such a blessing follows it.
I thank
My fate. Pray you let's be private, Sir?
In, here.
Where none may interrupt us.
You hear, Devil,
Lock the street-doores fast, and let no one in
(Except they be this Gentleman's followers)
To trouble me. Doe you mark? Yo'have hard and seen
Something, to day; and, by it, you may gather
Your Mistress is a fruit, that's worth the stealing
And therefore worth the watching. Be you sure, now,
Yo'have all your eyes about you; and let in
No lace-woman; nor bawd, that brings French-masques,
And cut-works. See you? Nor old croons, with wafers,
To convey letters. Nor no youths, disguised
Like country-wives, with cream, and marrow-puddings.
Much knavery may be vented in a pudding,
Much bawdy intelligence: They'are shrewd ciphers.
Nor turn the key to any neighbours need;
Be it but to kindle fire, or beg a little,
Put it out, rather: all out, to an ash,
That they may see no smoke. Or water, spill it:
Knock of the empty tubs, that by the sound,
They may be forbid entry. Say, we are robbed,
If any come to borrow a spoon, or so.
I wi'not have good fortune, or gods blessing
Let in, while I am busy.
I'll take care, Sir,
They sha'not trouble you, if they would.
Well doe so.
I Have no singular service of this, now?
Nor no superlative Master? I shall wi•h
To be in hell again, at leisure? Bring,
A Vice from thence? That had bin such a subtlety,
As to bring broad-clothes hither: or transport
Fresh Oranges into Spain. I find it, now;
My Chief was in the right. Can any fiend
Boast of a better Vice, then here by nature,
And art, they are owners of? Hell ne'er own me,
But I am taken! the fine tract of it
Pulls me along! To hear men such professors
Grown in our subtlest Sciences! My first Act, now,
Shall be, to make this Master of mine cuckold:
The primitive work of darkness, I will practise!
I will deserve so well of my fair Mistress,
By my discoveries, first; my counsels after;
And keeping counsel, after that: as who,
So ever, is one, I'll be another, sure,
I'll ha'my share. Most delicate damned flesh!
She will be! O! that I could stay time, now,
Midnight will come too fast upon me, I fear,
To cut my pleasure—
Look at the back-doore,
One knocks, see who it is.
Dainty she Devil!
I cannot get this venture of the cloak,
Out of my fancy; nor the Gentleman's way,
He took, which though it were strange, yet it was handsome,
And had a grace withal, beyond the newness.
Sure he will think me that dull stupid creature,
He said, and may conclude it; if I find not
Some thought to thank th'attempt. He did presume,
By all the carriage of it, on my brain,
For answer; and will swear it is very barren,
If it can yield him no return. Who is it?
Mistress, it is, but first, let me assure
The excellence, of Mistresses, I am,
Although my Masters man, My Mistress slave,
The servant of her secrets, and sweet turns,
And know, what fitly will conduce to either.
What's this? I pray you come to your self and think
What your part is: to make an answer. Tell,
Who is it at the door?
The Gentleman, Mistress,
Who was at the cloake-charge to speak with you,
This morning, who expects only to take
Some small command'ments from you, what you please,
Worthy your form, he says, and gentlest manners.
O! you'll anon prove his hired man, I fear,
What has he given you, for this message? Sir,
Bid him put off his hopes of straw, and leave
To spread his nets, in view, thus. Though they take
Master Fitz-dottrel, I am no such foul,
Nor fair one, tell him, will be had with stalking.
And wish him to for-beare his acting to me,
At the Gentleman's chamber-window in Lincolnes-Inne there,
That opens to my gallery: else, I swear
T'acquaint my husband with his folly, and leave him
To the just rage of his offended jealousy.
Or if your Masters sense be not so quick
To right me, tell him, I shall find a friend
That will repair me. Say, I will be quiet
In mine own house? Pray you, in those words give it him.
This is some fool turned!
If he be the Master,
Now, of that state and wit, which I allow him;
Sure, he will understand me: I durst not
Be more direct. For this officious fellow,
My husbands new groom, is a spy upon me,
I find already. Yet, if he but tell him
This in my words, he cannot but conceive
Himself both apprehended, and requited.
I would not have him think he met a statue:
Or spoke to one, not there, though I were silent.
How now? ha'you told him?
Yes.
And what says he?
Says he? That which my self would say to you, if I durst.
That you are proud, sweet Mistress! and with-all,
A little ignorant, to entertain
The good that's proffered; and (by your beauties leave)
Not all so wise, as some true politic wife
Would be: who having matched with such a Nupson
(I speak it with my Masters peace) whose face
Hath left t'accuse him, now, for it doth confess him,
What you can make him; will yet (out of scruple,
And a spiced conscience) defraud the poor Gentleman,
At least delay him in the thing he longs for,
And makes it his whole study, how to compass,
Only a title. Could but he write Cuckold,
He had his ends. For, look you—
This can be
None but my husbands wit.
My precious Mistress.
It creaks his Engine: The groom never durst
Be, else, so saucy—
If it were not clearly,
His worshipful ambition; and the top of it;
The very forked top too: why should he
Keep you, thus mur'd up in a back-roome, Mistress,
Allow you ne'er a casement to the street,
Fear of engendering by the eyes, with gallants,
Forbid you paper, pen and ink, like Rats-bane.
Search your half pint of muscatel, lest a letter
Be sunk in the pot: and hold your new-laid egg
Against the fire▪ least any charm be writ there?
Will you make benefit of truth, dear Mistress,
If I doe tell it you: I do it not often?
I am set over you, employed, indeed,
To watch your steps, your looks, your very breathings,
And to report them to him. Now, if you
Will be a true, right, delicate sweet Mistress,
Why, we will make a Cokes of this Wise Master,
We will, my Mistress, an absolute fine Cokes,
And mock, to air, all the deep diligences
Of such a solemn, and effectual Ass,
An Ass to so good purpose, as we'll use him.
I will contrive it so, that you shall go
To Plays, to Masques, to Meetings, and to Feasts.
For, why is all this Rigging, and fine Tackle, Mistress,
If you neat handsome vessels, of good sail,
Put not forth ever, and anon, with your nets
Abroad into the world. It is your fishing.
There you shall choose your friends, your servants, Lady,
Your squires of honour; I'll convey your letters,
Fetch answers, doe you all the offices,
That can belong to your blood, and beauty. And,
For the variety, at my times, although
I am not in due symmetry, the man
Of that proportion; or in rule
Of physic, of the just complexion;
Or of that truth of Piccardell, in clothes,
To boast a sovereignty o'er Ladies: yet
I know, to doe my turns, sweet Mistress. Come, kiss—
How now!
Dear delicate Mistress, I am your slave,
Your little worm, that loves you: your fine Monkey;
Your Dog, your Jack, your Pug, that longs to be
Styled, o'your pleasures.
Hear you all this? Sir, Pray you,
Come from your standing, doe, a little, spare
Your self, Sir, from your watch, t'applaud your Squire,
That so well follows your instructions!
HOw now, sweetheart? what's the matter?
Good!
You are a stranger to the plot! you set not
Your saucy Devil, here, to tempt your wife,
With all the insolent uncivil language,
Or action, he could vent?
Did you so, Devil?
Not you? you were not planted i'your hole to hear him,
Upo'the stayres? or here, behind the hangings?
I doe not know your qualities? he durst doe it,
And you not give directions?
You shall see, wife,
Whether he durst, or no: and what it was
I did direct.
Sweet Mistress, are you mad?
You most mere Rogue! you open manifest Villain!
You Fiend apparent you! you declared Hel-hound!
Good Sir.
Good Knave, good Rascal, and good Traitor.
Now, I doe find you parcel-Divell, indeed.
Upo' the point of trust? I'your first charge?
The very day o'your probation?
To tempt your Mistress? You doe see, good wedlock,
How I directed him,
Why, where Sir, were you?
Nay, there is one blow more, for exercise:
I told you, I should doe it.
Would you had done, Sir.
O wife, the rarest man! yet there's another
To put you in mind of the last. Such a brave man, wife!
Within, he has his projects, and do's vent 'hem,
The gallantest! where you tentiginous? ha?
Would you be acting of the Incubus?
Did her silks rustling move you?
Gentle Sir.
Out of my sight. If thy name were not Devil,
Thou should not stay a minute with me. In,
Go, yet stay: yet go too. I am resolved,
What I will doe: and you shall know it afore-hand.
Soon as the Gentleman is gone, doe you hear?
I'll help your lisping. Wife, such a man, wife!
He has such plots! He will make me a Duke!
No less, by heaven! six Mares, to your coach, wife!
That's your proportion! And your coach-man bald!
Because he shall be bare, enough, Doe not you laugh,
We are looking for a place, and all, in the map
What to be of. Have faith, be not an Infidel.
You know I am not easy to be gulled.
I swear, when I have my millions, else, I'll make
Another Duchess; if you have not faith.
You'll have too much, I fear, in these false spirits,
Spirits? O, no such thing! wife! wit, mere wit!
This man defies the Devil, and all his works!
He dos't by Engine, and devises, he!
He has his winged ploughs, that go with sails,
Will plough you forty acres, at once! and •ills,
Will spout you water, ten miles off! All Crowland
Is ours, wife; and the fens, from us, in Norfolk,
To the utmost bound of Lincoln-shire! we have viewed it.
And measured it within all; by the scale!
The richest tract of land, Love, in the kingdom▪
There will be made seventeen, or eighteen millions;
Or more, is it may be handled! wherefore, think,
Sweet heart, if th'hast a fancy to one place,
More then another, to be Duchess of;
Now, name it: I will have it, what ere it cost,
(If it will be had for money) either here,
Or'n France, or Italy.
You ha'strange fantasies!
WHere are you, Sir?
I see thou hast no talent
This way, wife. Up to thy gallery; doe, Chuck,
Leave us to talk of it, who understand it.
I think we have found a place to fit you, now, Sir.
Gloc'ster.
O, no, I'll none!
Why, Sir?
Tic fatal.
That you say right in. Spenser, I think, the younger,
Had his last honour thence. But, he was but Earl.
I know not that, Sir. But Thomas of Woodstocke,
I'm sure, was Duke, and he was made away,
At Calice; as Duke Humphrey was at Bury:
And Richard the third, you know what end he came too.
By m'faith you are cunning in the Chronicle, Sir.
No, I confess I have it from the Play-bookes,
And think they'are more authentic.
That's sure, Sir.
What say you (to this then)
No a noble house.
Pretends to that. I will doe no man wrong.
Then take one proposition more, and here it
As past exception.
What's that?
To be
Duke of those lands, you shall recover: take
Your title, thence, Sir, Duke of the Drown'd-lands,
Or Drown'd-land.
Ha? that last has a good sound!
I like it well. The Duke of Dround-'land?
Yes;
It goes like Gr•en-land, Sir, if you mark it.
I,
And drawing thus your honour from the work,
You make the reputation of that, greater;
And stay't the longer i'your name.
It is true.
Droun'd-lands will live in Droun'd-land!
Yes, when you
Have no foot left; as that must bee, Sir, one day.
And, though it tarry in your heirs, some forty,
Fifty descents, the longer liver, at last, yet,
Must thrust 'hem out on it: if no quirk in law,
Or odd Vice o'ther own not do it first.
We see those changes, daily: the fair lands,
That were the Clients, are the Lawyers, now:
And those rich Manors, there, of good man Tailors,
Had once more wood upon 'hem then the yard,
By which th'were measured out for the last purchase.
Nature hath these vicissitudes. She makes
No man a state of perpetuity, Sir.
Yo'are in the right. Let's in then, and conclude.
I my sight, again? I'll talk with you, anon.
SUre he will geld me, if I stay: or worse,
Pluck out my tongue, one of the two. This Fool,
There is no trusting of him: and to quit him,
Were a contempt against my Chief, past pardon.
It was a shrewd disheartning this at first!
Who would ha'thought a woman so well harnessed,
Or rather well-caparison'd, indeed,
That wears such petticoats, and lace to her smoks,
Broad seaming laces (as I see 'hem hang there)
And garters which are lost, if she can show 'hem,
Could ha'done this? Hell! why is she so brave?
It cannot be to please Duke Dottrel, sure,
Nor the dull pictures, in her gallery,
Nor her own dear reflection, in her glass;
Yet that may be: I have known many of'hem,
Begin their pleasure, but none end it, there:
(That I consider, as I go a long with it)
They may, for want of better company,
Or that they think the better, spend an hour;
Two, three, or four, discoursing with their shadow:
But sure they have a farther speculation.
No woman dressed with so much care, and study,
Doth dress her self in vain. I'll vex this problem,
A little more, before I leave it, sure.
THis was a fortune,, happy aboue thought,
That this should prove thy chamber; which I feared
Would be my greatest trouble! this must be
The very window, and that the room.
It is.
I now remember, I have often seen there
A woman but I never marked her much.
Where was your soul, friend?
Faith, but now, and then,
Awake unto those objects.
You pretend so.
Let me not live, if I am not in love
More with her wit, for this direction, now,
Then with her form, though I have praised that prettily,
Since I saw her, and you, to day. Read those.
They'll go unto the air you love so well.
Try 'hem unto the note, may be the musique
Will call her sooner; light, shoe's here! Sing quickly.
Either he understood him not: or else,
The fellow was not faithful in delivery,
Of what I bad. And, I am justly paid,
That might have made my profit of his service,
But, by mistaking, have drawn on his envy,
And done the worse defeat upon my self.
How! Musique? then he may be there: and is sure.
O! Is it so? Is there the enter-view?
Have I drawn to you, at last, my cunning Lady?
The Devil is an Ass! fooled off! and beaten!
Nay, made an instrument! and could not sent it!
Well, since yo'have shown the malice of a woman,
No less then her true wit, and learning, Mistress,
I'll try, if little Pug have the malignity
To recompense it, and so save his danger.
It is not the pain, but the discredit of it,
The Devil should not keep a body entire.
Away, fall back, she comes.
I'll leave you, Sir,
The Master of my chamber. I have business.
Mis.!
You make me paint, Sir.
The'are fair colours,
Lady, and natural! I did receive
Some commands from you lately, gentle Lady,
But so perplexed, and wrapped in the delivery,
As I may fear to have mis-interpreted:
But must make suit still, to be near your grace.
Who is there with you, Sir?
None, but my self.
It falls out, Lady, to be a dear friends lodging.
Wherein there's some conspiracy of fortune
With your poor servants blessed affections.
Who was it sung?
He, Lady, but he's gone,
Upon my entreaty of him, seeing you
Approach the window. Neither need you doubt him,
If he were here. He is too much a gentleman.
Sir if you judge me by this simple action
And by the outward habit, and complexion
Of easiness, it hath, to your design;
You may with Justice, say, I am a woman:
And a strange woman. But when you shall please,
To bring but that concurrence of my fortune,
To memory, which to day your self did urge:
It may beget some favour like excuse,
Though none like reason.
No, my tune-full Mistress?
Then, surely, Love hath none; nor Beauty any;
Nor Nature violenced, in both these:
With all whose gentle tongues you speak, at once.
I thought I had enough removed, already,
That scruple from your breast, and left yo'all reason;
When, through my mornings perspective I showed you
A man so above excuse, as he is the cause,
Why any thing is to be done upon him:
And nothing called an injury, mis-plac'd.
I'rather now had hope, to show you how Love
By his accesses, grows more natural:
And, what was done, this morning, with such force
Was but devised to serve the present, then.
That since love hath the honour to approach
These sister-swelling breasts; and touch this soft,
And rosie hand; he hath the skill to draw
Their Nectar forth, with kissing; and could make
More wanton salts, from this brave promontory,
Down to this valley, then the nimble Roe;
Could play the hopping Sparrow, about these nets;
And sporting Squirrel in these crisped groves;
Bury himself in every Silke-wormes kill,
Is here unravelled; run into the snare,
Which every hair is, is cast into a curl,
To catch a Cupped flying: Bath himself
In milk, and roses, here, and dry him, there;
Warm his cold hands, to play with this smooth, round,
And well torn'd chin, as with the Billiard ball;
Roll on these lips, the banks of love, and there
At once both plant, and gather kisses. Lady,
Shall I, with what I have made to day here, call
All sense to wonder, and all faith to sign
The mysteries revealed in your form?
And will Love pardon me the blasphemy
I uttered, when I said, a glass could speak
This beauty, or that fools had power to judge it?
Doe but look, on her eyes! They doe light—
All that Love's world comprizeth!
Doe but look on her hair! it is bright,
As Love's star, when it rises!
Doe but mark, her fore-head smoother,
Then words that sooth her!
And from her arched brows, such grace
Sheds it self through the face;
As alone, there triumphs to the life,
All the gain, all the good, of the elements strife!
Have you seen but a bright Lily grow,
Before rude hands have touched it?
Have you marked but the fall of Snow,
Before the soil hath smutch'd it?
Have you felt the wool of the Beaver?
Or Swans down, ever?
Or, have smelt of the bud of the Brier?
Or the Nerd in the fire?
Or, have tasted the bag of the Bee?
O, so white! O, so soft! O, so sweet is she.
IS she so, Sir? and, I will keep her so.
If I know how, or can: that wit of man
Will do it, I'll go no farther. At this window'
She shall no more be buz'd at. Take your leave on it.
If you be sweet meates, wedlock, or sweet flesh,
Alls one: I doe not love this hum about you.
A fly-blowne wife is not so proper, In:
For you, Sir, look to hear from me..
So, I doe, Sir.
No, but in other terms. There's no man offers
This to my wife, but pays for it,
That have I, Sir.
Nay, then, I tell you, you are.
What am I, Sir?
Why, that I'll think on, when I ha'cut your throat.
Go, you are an Ass.
I am resolved on it, Sir.
I think you are.
To call you to a reckoning.
Away, you brokers block, you property.
S'light, if you strike me, I'll strike your Mistress,
O! I could shoot my eyes at him, for that, now;
Or leave my teeth in him, were they cuckolds bane,
Enough to kill him. What prodigious,
Blind, and most wicked change of fortune's this?
I ha'no air of patience: all my veins
Swell, and my sinews start at iniquity of it.
I shall break, break.
This for the malice of it,
And my revenge may pass! But, now, my conscience
Tells me, I have profited the cause of Hell
But little, in the breaking-off their loves.
Which, if some other act of mine repair not,
I shall hear ill of my account.
O, Bird!
Could you doe this? against me? and at this time, now?
When I was so employed, wholly for you,
Drowned i'my care (more, then the land, I swear,
I'have hope to win) to make you peerless? studying,
For footmen for you, fine paced huishers, pages,
To serve you of the knee; with what Knights wife,
To bear your train, and sit with your four women
In council, and receive intelligences,
From foreign parts, to dress you at all pieces!
You've (a'most) turned my good affection, to you;
Soured my sweet thoughts; all my pure purposes:
I could now find (i'my very heart) to make
Another, Lady Duchess; and depose you.
Well, go your ways in. Devil, you have redeemed all.
I doe forgive you. And I'll doe you good.
WHy ha'you these excursions? where ha'you been, Sir?
Where I ha'beene vexed a little, with a toy!
O Sir! no toys must trouble your grave head,
Now it is growing to be great. You must
Be above all those things.
Nay, nay, so I will.
Now you are to'ard the Lord, you must put off
The man, Sir.
He says true.
You must doe nothing
As you ha'done it heretofore; not know,
Or salute any man.
That was your bed-fellow,
The other month.
The other month? the week.
Thou dost not know the privileges, Engine,
Follow that Title; nor how swift: To day,
When he has put on his Lords face once, then—
Sir, for these things I shall doe well enough,
There is no fear of me. But then, my wife is
Such an untoward thing! she'll never learn
How to comport with it! I am out of all
Conceit, on her behalf.
Best have her taught, Sir.
Where? Are there any Schools for Ladies? Is there
An Academy for women? I doe know,
For men there was: I learned in it, my self,
To make my legs, and doe my postures.
Sir.
Doe you remember the conceit you had—
Of the Spanish gown, at home?
Ha! I doe thank thee,
With all my heart, dear Engine. Sir, there is
A certain Lady, here about the Town,
An English widow, who hath lately travelled,
But shoe's called the Spaniard; cause she came
Latest from thence: keeps the Spanish habit.
Such a rare woman! all our women here,
That are of spirit, and fashion flock, unto her,
As to their President; their Law; their Canon;
More then they ever did, to Oracle-Foreman.
Such rare receipts she has, Sir, for the face;
Such oils; such tinctures; such pomatumn's;
Such perfumes; med'cines; quintessences, &amp;c.
And such a mistress of behaviour;
She knows, from the Dukes daughter, to the Doxey,
What is their due just: and no more!
O, Sir!
You please me i'this, more then mine own greatness.
Where is she? Let us have her.
by your patience,
We must use means; cast how to be acquainted —
Good Sir, about it.
We must think how, first,
O!
I do not love to tarry for a thing,
When I have a mind to it. You doe not know me.
If you doe offer it.
Your wife must send
Some pretty token to her, with a complement,
And pray to be received in her graces,
All the great Ladies do it,
She shall, she shall,
What were it best to be?
Some little toy,
I would not have it any great matter, Sir:
A Diamant ring, of forty or fifty pound,
Would doe it handsomely: and be a gift
Fit for your wife to send, and her to take.
I'll go, and tell my wife on it, straight.
Why this
Is well! the clothes we'have now: But whore's this Lady?
If we could get a witty boy, now, Engine;
That were an excellent crack. I could instruct him,
To the true height. For any thing takes this dottrel.
Why, Sir your best will be one of the players!
No, there's no trusting them. They'll talk on it,
And tell their Poets.
What if they doe? the jest
Will brooke the Stage. But there be some of'hem
Are very honest Lads. There's Dicke Robinson
A very pretty fellow, and comes often
To a Gentleman's chamber, a friends of mine. We had
The merriest supper of it there, one night,
The Gentleman's Land-lady invited him
To'a Gossips feast, Now, he Sir brought Dick Robinson,
Dressed like a Lawyers wife, amongst'hem all;
(I lent him clothes) but, to see him behave it;
And lay the law; and carve; and drink unto'hem;
And then talk bawdy: and send frolics! o!
It would have burst your bottons, or not left you
A seam.
They say hoe's an ingenious youth!
O Sir! and dresses himself, the best! beyond
Forty o'your very Ladies! did you ne'er see him?
No, I doe seldom see those toys. But think you,
That we may have him?
Sir, the young Gentleman
I tell you of, can command him. Shall I attempt it?
Yes doe it.
S'light, I cannot get my wife
To part with a ring, on any terms: and yet,
The sollen Monkey has two.
It were'gainst reason,
That you should urge it; Sir, send to a Gold-smith,
Let not her lose by it.
How do's she lose by it?
Is it not for her?
Make it your own bounty,
It will hawed better success; what is a matter
Of fifty pound to you, Sir.
I have but a hundred
Pieces, to show here; that I would not break—
You shall ha'credit, Sir. I'll send a ticket
Unto my Gold-smith. Here, my man comes too,
To carry it fitly. How, now, Trains? What birds?
Your Cousin Ever-ill met me, and has beat me,
Because I would not tell him where you were:
I think he has dogd me to the house too.
Well—
You shall go out at the back-doore, then, Trains.
You must get Guilt-head hither, by some means:
It is impossible!
Tell him we have venison,
I'll g'him a piece, and send his wife a Pheasant.
A Forest moves not till that forty pound,
Yo'had of him, last, be paid. He keeps more stir,
For that same petty some, then for your bond
Of six; and Statute of eight hundred!
Tell him
We'll hedge in that. Cry up Fitz-dottrell to him,
Double his price: Make him a man of mettle.
That will not need, his bond is currant enough.
ALl this is to make you a Gentleman:
I'll have you learn, Son. Wherefore have I placed you
With Sir. Bold Either-side, but to have so much Law
To keep your own? Besides, he is a Justice,
Here in the Town; and dwelling, Son, with him,
You shall learn that in a year, shall be worth twenty
Of having stayed you at Oxford, or at Cambridge,
Or sending you to the Innes of Court, or France.
I am called for now in haste, by Master Meere-craft
To trust Master Fitz-dottrell, a good man:
I'have inquired him, eighteen hundred a year,
(His name is currant) for a diamant ring
Of forty, shall not be worth thirty (thats gained)
And this is to make you a Gentleman!
O, but good father, you trust too much!
Boy, boy,
We live, by finding fools out, to be trusted.
Our shop-bookes are our pastures, our corn-grounds,
We lay'hem op'n, for them to come into:
And when we have 'hem there, we drive 'hem up
In t'one of our two Pounds, the Counters, straight,
And this is to make you a Gentleman!
We Citizens never trust, but we doe cousin:
For, if our debtors pay, we cousin them;
And if they do not, then we cousin our selves.
But that's a hazard every one must run,
That hopes to make his Son a Gentleman!
I doe not wish to be one, truly, Father.
In a descent, or two, we come to be
Just 'itheir state, fit to be coozend, like 'hem.
And I had rather ha'tarried i'your trade:
For, since the Gentry scorn the City so much,
Me thinks we should in time, holding together,
And matching in our own tribes, as they say,
Have got an Act of Common Council, for it,
That we might cousin them out of rerum nature.
I, if we had an Act first to forbid
The marrying of our wealthy heirs unto 'hem:
And daughters, with such lavish portions,
That confounds all.
And makes a Mongrel breed, Father.
And when they have your money then they laugh at you:
Or kick you down the stairs. I cannot abide 'hem.
I would fine have 'hem coozen'd, but not trusted.
O, Is he come! I knew he would not fail me.
Welcome, good Guilt-head, I must ha'you doe
A noble Gentleman, a curtsy, here:
In a mere toy (some pretty Ring, or Jewel)
Of fifty, or threescore pound (Make it a hundred,
And hedge in the last forty, that I owe you,
And your own price for the Ring) He's a good man, Sir,
And you may hap' see him a great one! He,
Is likely to bestow hundreds, and thousands,
Wi'you; if you can humour him. A great Prince
He will be shortly. What doe you say?
In truth, Sir
I cannot. 'T has been a long vacation with us.
Of what, I pray thee? of wit? or honesty?
Those are your Citizens long vacations.
Good Father do not trust 'hem.
Nay, Thom. Guilt-head.
He will not buy a curtsy and beg it:
He'll rather pay, then pray. If you doe for him,
You must doe cheerfully. His credit, Sir,
Is not yet prostitute! Who's this? thy son?
A pretty youth, what's his name?
Plutarchus, Sir.
Plutarchus! How came that about?
That year Sir,
That I begot him, I bought Plutarch's lives,
And fell s' in love with the book, as I called my son
By'his name; In hope he should be like him:
And write the lives of our great men!
In the City?
And you doe breed him, there?
His mind, Sir, lies
Much to that way.
Why, then, he is in the right way.
But, now, I had rather get him him a good wife,
And plant him in the country; there to use
The blessing I shall leave him.
Out upont't!
And lose the laudable means, thou hast at home, here,
T'advance, and make him a young Alderman?
Buy him a Captains place, for shame; and let him
Into the world, early, and with his plume,
And Scarfs, march through Cheapside, or along Cornehill,
And by the vertue' of those, draw down a wife
There from a windo', worth ten thousand pound!
Get him the posture book, and's leaden men,
To set upon a table, against his Mistress
Chance to come by, that he may draw her in,
And show her Finsbury battles.
I have placed him
With Justice Etherside, to get so much law—
As thou hast conscience! Come, come, thou dost wrong
Pretty Plutarchus, who had not his name,
For nothing: but was borne to train the youth
Of London, in the military truth—
That way his Genius lies. My Cousin Ev•rill!
O, Are you here, Sir? 'pray you let us whisper.
Father, dear Father, trust him if you love me.
Why, I doe mean it, boy; but, what I doe,
Must not come easily from me: Wee must deal
With Courtiers, boy, as Courtiers deal with us.
If I have a Business there, with any of them,
Why, I must waite, I'am sure on it, Son▪ and though
My Lord dispatch me, yet his worshipful man—
Will keep me for his sport, a month, or two,
To show me with my fellow Citizens.
I must make his train long, and full, one quarter;
And help the spectacle of his greatness. There,
Nothing is done at once, but injuries, boy:
And they come head-long! all their good turns move not,
Or very slowly.
Yet sweet father, trust him.
Well, I will think..
Come, you must do it, Sir.
I'am undone else, and your Lady Tail-bush
Has sent for me to dinner, and my clothes
Are all at pawn. I had sent out this morning,
Before I heard you were come to town, some twenty
Of my Epistles, and no one return—
Why, I have told you o'this. This comes of wearing
Scarlet, gold lace, and cut-works! your fine gartring!
With your blown roses, Cousin! and your eating
Pheasant, and Godwit. here in London! haunting
The Globes, and Mermaids! and wedging in with Lords,
Still at the table! and affecting lechery,
In velvet! where could you ha'contented your self
With cheese, salt-butter, and a pickled hearing,
In the Low-countries; there worn cloth, and fustian!
Been satisfied with a leap o'your Host's daughter,
In garrison, a wench of a stoter! or,
Your Sulters wife, in the leaguer, of two blanks!
You never, then, had run upon this flat,
To write your letters missive, and send out
Your privy seals, that thus have frighted off
All your acquaintance; that they shun you at distance,
Worse, then you do the Bailies!
Pox upon you.
I come not to you for counsel, I lack money.
You doe not think, what you owe me already?
I?
They owe you that mean to pay you. I'll besworn,
I never meant it. Come, you will project, 〈◊〉
I shall undo your practice, for this month 〈◊〉
You know me.
I yo'are a right sweet nature!
Well, that's all one!
You'll leave this Empire, one day?
You will not ever have this tribute paid,
Your sceptre of the sword?
Tie up your wit,
Doe, and provoke me not—
Will you, Sir, help,
To what I shall provoke another for you?
I cannot tell; try me: I think I am not
So utterly, of an ore un-to-be-melted,
But I can doe my self good, on occasions.
Strike in then, for your part. Mr. Fitz-dottrel
If I transgress in point of manners, afford me
Your best construction; I must beg my freedom
From your affairs, this day.
How, Sir.
It is
In succour of this Gentleman's occasions,
My kins-man—
You'll not doe me that affront, Sir.
I am sorry you should so interpret it,
But, Sir, it stands upon his being invested,
In a new, office, he has stood for, long:
Master of the Dependences! A place
Of my projection too, Sir, and hath met
Much opposition; but the State, now see's
That great necessity of it, as after all
Their writing, and their speaking, against Devils,
They have erected it. His book is drawn—
For, since, there will be differences, daily,
Twixt Gentlemen; and that the roaring manner
Is grown offensive; that those few, we call
The civil men of the sword, abhor the vapours;
They shall refer now, hither, for their process;
And such as trespass against the rule of Court,
Are to be fined—
In troth, a pretty place!
A kind of arbitrary Court twill be, Sir.
I shall have matter for it, I believe,
Ere it be long: I had a distaste.
But now, Sir,
My learned council, they must have a feeling,
They'll part, Sir, with no books, without the hand gout
Be oyld, and I must furnish. If 't be money,
To me straight. I am Mine, Mint and Exchequer,
To supply all. What is it? a hundred po•d?
No th'Harpey, now stands on a hundred pieces.
Why, he must have 'hem, if he will. To morrow, Sir,
Will equally serve your occasion's,—
And therefore, let me obtain, that you will yield
To timing a poor Gentleman's distresses,
In terms of hazard.—
By no means!
I must
Get him him this money, and will.—
Sir, I protest,
I'd rather stand engaged for it my self:
Then you should leave me.
O good Sir, doe you think
So coursely of our manners, that we would,
For any need of ours, be pressed to take it:
Though you be pleased to offer it.
Why by heaven,
I mean it!
I can never believe less.
But we, Sir, must preserve our dignity,
As you doe publish yours. By your fair leave, Sir.
As I am a Gentleman, if you doe offer
To leave me now, or if you doe refuse me,
I will not think you love me.
Sir, I honour you.
And with just reason, for these noble notes,
Of the nobility, you pretend too! But, Sir —
I would know, why? a motive (he a stranger)
You should doe this?
You'll mar all with your fineness)
Why, that's all one, if it were, Sir, but my fancy.
But I have a Business, that perhaps I'd have
Brought to his office.
O, Sir! I have done, then;
If he can be made profitable, to you.
Yes, and it shall be one of my ambitions
To 〈◊〉 it the first Business? May I not?
So you doe mean to maked, a perfect Business.
Nay I'll doe that assure you: show me once.
Sir• 〈◊〉 concerns, the first be a perfect Business,
〈◊〉 his ow• •onour!
I, and th'reputation
To 〈◊〉 my place.
Why, why, doe I take this course, else?
〈◊〉 not altogether, an Ass, good Gentlemen,
Wherefore should I consult you? doe you think?
To make a song on it? How's your manner? tell us.
Doe, satisfy him: give him the whole course.
First, by request, or otherwise you offer
Your Business to the Court: wherein you crave:
The judgement of the Master and the Assistants.
Well, that's done, now, what doe you upon it▪
We straight Sir, have recourse to the spring-head;
Visit the ground; and so disclose the nature:
If it will carry, or no. If we doe find,
By your proportions it is like to prove
A sullen, and black Business That it be
Incorrigible; and out of, treaty; then,
We file it, a Dependence!
So it is filed.
What follows? I doe love the order of these things.
We then advise the party, if he be
A man of means and havings▪ that forth-with,
He settle his estate: if not, at least
That he pretend it. For, by that, the world
Takes notice, that enough is a Dependence.
And this we call, Sir, Publication.
Very sufficient! After Publication, now?
Then we grant out our Process, which is divers▪
Either by Chartell, Sir, or ore-tenus,
Wherein the Challenger, and Challenge
Or (with your Spaniard) your Provocador,
And Provocado, have their several courses—
I have enough on it! for an hundred pieces?
Yes, for two hundred, under-write me doe.
Your man will take my bond?
That he will, sure,
But, these same Citizens, they are such sharks!
There's an old debt of forty, I ga'my word
For one is run away, into the Bermudas,
And he will hook in that, or he wi'not doe.
Why let him. That and the ring, and a hundred pieces,
Will all but make two hundred?
No, no more, Sir.
What ready Arithmetic you have? do you hear?
A pretty mornings work for you, this? Do it,
You shall have twenty pound on it.
Twenty pieces?
Good Father, do it)
You will hook still? well▪
Show us your ring. You could not ha'done this, now
With gentleness, at first, we might ha'thank'd you▪
But groan, and ha'your courtesies come from you
Like a hard stool, and stink? A man may draw
Your teeth out easier, then your money? Come,
Were little Guilt-head here, no better a nature,
I should ne'er love him, that could pull his lips off, now▪
Was not thy mother a Gentlewoman?
Yes, Sir.
And went to the Court at Christmas, and St. Georges-tide?
And lent the Lords-men, chains?
Of gold, and pearl, Sir.
I knew, thou must take, after some body!
Thou coldest not be else. This was no shop-looke
I'll ha'thee Captain Guilt-head, and march up,
And take in Pimlico, and kill the bush,
At every tavern! Thou shalt have a wife,
If smocks will mount, boy. How now? you ha'there now
Some Bristo-stone, or Cornish counterfeit
You'd put upon us.
No, Sir, I assure you:
Look on his luster! he will speak himself!
I'll gi'you leave to put him in the Mill,
H'is no great, large stone, but a true Paragon,
H'has all his corners, view him well.
H'is yellow.
Vpo'my faith, Sir, of the right black-water,
And very deep! H'is set without a foil, too.
Here's one of the yellow water, I'll sell cheap.
And what doe you value this at? thirty pound?
No, Sir, he cost me forty, ere he was set.
Turnings, you mean? I know your Equivocks▪
You'are grown the better Fathers of'hem o'late,
Well, where't must go, twill be judged, and therefore,
Look you't be right. You shall have fity pound for it.
Not a dencer more! And because you would
Have things dispatched, Sir, I'll go presently,
Inquire out this Lady, If you think good Sir.
Having an hundred pieces ready, you may
Part with those, now, to serve my kinsmans turns,
That he may wait upon you, anon, the freer;
And take 'hem when you have sealed, again, of Guilt-head.
I care not if I doe!
And dispatch all,
Together,
They are just: a hundred pieces!
In have told 'hem over, twice a day, these two months.
Well, go and seal then, Sir, make your return
As speedy as you can.
Come give me.
Soft Sir.
Marry, and fair too, then. I'll no delaying, Sir.
But you will hear?
Yes, when I have my divident.
There's forty pieces for you.
What is this for?
Your half. You know that Guilt-head must ha'twenty.
And what's your ring there? shall I have none o'that?
O, that's to be given to a Lady!
Is it so?
By that good light, it is.
Come, gi'me
Ten pieces more then.
Why?
For Guilt, head? Sir,
Doe you think, I'll •low him any such share.
You must.
Must I? Doe you your musts, Sir, I'll doe mine,
You wi'not part with the whole, Sir? Will you? Go too.
Give me ten pieces!
By what law doe you this?
Even Lyon-law, Sir, I must roar else.
Good!
Yo'have heard, how the Ass made his divisions wisely?
And I am he, I thank you.
Much good doe you, Sir.
I shall be rid o'this tyranny, one day?
Not,
While you doe eat, and lie about the town here;
And cousin i'your bullions and I stand
Your name of credit, and compound your business;
Adjourn beatings every term; and make
New parties for your projects. I have now
A pretty tasque of it, to hold you in
Wi'your Lady Taile-bush: but the toy will be,
How we shall both come off?
Leave your doubting,
And doe your portion, what's assigned you: I
Never failed yet.
With reference to your aides?
You'll still be unthankful. Where shall I meet you anon?
You have some feat to be done alone, now, I see;
You wish me gone, well, I will find you out,
And bring you after to the audit.
S'light!
There's Engines share too▪ I had forgot! This reign
Is too-too unsupportable! I must
Quit my self of this vassalage! Engine! welcome.
HOw goes the cry?
Excellent well!
Will it do?
Whore's Robinson?
Here is the Gentleman, Sir.
Will undertake t'himselfe. I have acquainted him.
Why did you so?
Why, Robinson would ha'told him,
You know. And he's a pleasant wit! will hurt
Nothing you purpose. Then, he'is of opinion,
That Robinson might have audacity,
She being such a gallant. Now, he has been,
In Spain, and knows the fashions there, and can
Discourse; and being but mirth (he says) leave much,
To his care:
But he is too tall!
For that,
He has the bravest device! (you'll love him for it)
To say, he wears Cioppin•s: and they doe so
In Spain. And Robinson's as tall, as he.
Is he so?
Every jot.
Nay, I had rather
To trust a Gentleman with it, of the two.
Pray you go to him, then, Sir, and salute him.
Sir, my friend Engine has acquainted you
With a strange business, here.
A merry one, Sir.
The Duke of Droun'd land, and his Duchess?
Yes, Sir.
Now, that the Conjurers ha'laid him by,
I ha'made bold to borrow him a while;
With purpose, yet, to put him out I hope
To his best use?
Yes, Sir.
For that small part,
That I am trusted with, put off your care:
I would not lose to doe it, for the mirth,
Will follow of it; and well I have a fancy.
Sir, that will make it well.
You will report it so.
Where must I have my dressing?
At my house, Sir.
You shall have caution, Sir, for what he yields,
To six pence.
You shall pardon me. I will share, Sir,
In your sports, only: nothing i'your purchase.
But you must furnish me with complements,
To th'manner of Spain; my coach, my guarda duenn'as;
Engine's your Pro'vedor. But, Sir, I must
(Now I'have entered trust wi'you, thus far)
Secure still i'your quality, acquaint you
With somewhat, beyond this. The place designed
To be the Scene, for this our merry matter,
Because it must have countenance of women,
To draw discourse, and offer it, is hereby,
At the Lady Taile-bushes.
I know her, Sir▪
And her Gentleman huisher.
Mr. Ambler?
Yes, Sir.
Sir, it shall be no shame to me, to confess
To you that we poor Gentlemen, that want acres,
Must for our needs, turn fools up, and plough Ladies
Sometimes, to try what glebe they are: and this
Is no unfruitful piece. She and I now,
Are on a project for the fact, and venting
Of a new kind of fucus (paint for Ladies)
To serve the kingdom: wherein she her self
Hath travelled, specially by way of service
Unto her sex, and hopes to get the Monopoly,
As the reward of her invention.
What is her end, in this▪
Merely ambition,
Sir, to grow great, and court it with the secret:
Though she pretend some other. For she's dealing,
Already, upon caution for the shares,
And Mr. Ambler, is he named Examiner
For the ingredients; and the Register
Of what is vented; and shall keep the Office.
Now, if she break with you, of this (as I
Must make the leading thread to your acquaintance,
That how experience gotten i'your being
Abroad, will help our business) think of some
Pretty additions, but to keep her floating:
It may be, she will offer you a part,
Any strange names of—
Sir, I have my instructions.
Is it not high time to be making ready?
Yes, Sir,
The foole's in sight, D•ttrel.
Away then.
Returned so soon?
Yes, here's the ring: I have sealed.
But there's not so much gold in all the row, he says—
Till't come fro the Mint. It is tan up for the gamsters.
There's a shop-shift! plague on'hem.
He do's swear it.
He'll swear, and forswear too, it is his trade,
You should not have left him.
S'lid, I can go back,
And beat him, yet.
No, now let him alone.
I was so earnest, after the maine Business,
To have this ring, gone.
True, and it is time.
I have learned, Sir, sin'you went, her Ladyship eats
With the Lady Tail-bush, here, hard by.
In the lane here?
Yes, if yo'had a servant, now of presence,
Well clothed, and of an aëry voluble tongue,
Neither too big, or little for his mouth,
That could deliver your wives complement;
To send along withal.
I have one Sir,
A very handsome, gentleman-like-fellow,
That I doe mean to make my Duchess Usher—
I entertained him, but this morning, too:
I'll call him to you. The worst of him, is his name!
She'll take no note of that, but of his message.
Devil! How like you him, Sir. Pace, go a little.
Let's see you move.
He'll serve, Sir, give it him:
And let him go along with me, I'll help
To present him, and it.
Look, you doe sirah,
Discharge this well, as you expect your place.
Do'you hear, go on, come off with all your honours.
I would fine see him, do it.
Trust him, with it;
Remember kissing of your hand, and answering
With the French-time, in flexure of your body.
I could not so instruct him— and for his words—
I'll put them in his mouth.
O, but I have 'hem
Of the very Academies!
Sir, you'll have use for'hem,
Anon, your self, I warrant you: after dinner,
When you are called.
S'light, that'll be just play-time.
It cannot be, I must not lose the play!
Sir, but you must, if she appoint to sit.
And, she's president.
S'lid, it is the Devil!
And it were his Damme too, you must now apply
Your self, Sir, to this, wholly; or lose all.
If I could but see a piece—
Sir. Never think on it.
Come but to one act, and I did not care—
But to be seen to rise, and go away,
To vex the Players, and to punish their Poet—
Keep him in awe!
But say, that he be ont,
Wi'not be awed • but laugh at you. How then?
Then he shall pay for'his dinner himself.
Perhaps,
He would do that twice, rather then thank you.
Come, get the Di•ell out of your head, my Lord,
(I'll call you so in private still) and take
Your Lord-ship i'your mind. You were, sweet Lord,
In talk to bring a Business to the Office.
Yes.
Why should not you, Sir, carry it o'your self,
Before the Office be up? and show the world,
You had no need of any mans direction;
In point, Sir, of sufficiency. I speak
Against a kinsman, but as one that •enders
Your graces good.
I thank you; to proceed—
To Publications: ha'your Deed drawn presently.
And leave a blank to put in your Fe•ffees
One, two, or more, as you see cause —
I thank you
Heartily, I doe thank you. Not a word more,
I pray you, as you love me. Let me alone.
That I could not think o'this, as well as he?
O, I could beat my infinite blockhead —!
Come, we must this way.
How far is it.
Hard by here
Over the way. Now, to achieve this ring,
From this same fellow, that is to assure it;
Before he give it. Though my Spanish Lady,
Be a young Gentleman of means, and scorn
To share as he doth say, I doe not know
How such a toy may tempt his Ladyship:
And therefore, I think best, it be assured.
Sir, be the Ladies brave, we go unto?
O, yes.
And shall I see 'hem, and speak to 'hem?
What else? ha'you your false beard about you? Trains.
Yes.
And is this one of your double Cloaks?
The best of 'hem.
Be ready then. Sweet Pitfall!
COme, I must bus —
Away.
I'll set thee up again;
Never fear that: can thou get ne'er a bird?
No Thrushes hungry? Stay till cold weather come,
I'll help thee to an Ousell, or a Field-fare.
Who's within with Madame?
I'll tell you straight.
Please you stay here a while Sir, I'll go in.
I doe so long to have a little venery,
While I am in this body! I would taste
Of every sin, a little, if it might be
After the manner of man! Sweet heart!
What would you, Sir?
Nothing but fall in, to you, be your Blacke-bird,
My pretty pit (as the Gentleman said) your Throstle:
Lye tame, and taken with you; here'is gold!
To buy you so much new stuffs from the shop,
As I may take the old up —
You must send, Sir,
The Gentleman the ring.
There it is. Nay look,
Will you be foolish, Pit.
This is strange rudeness.
Dear Pit.
I'll call, I swear.
Where are you, Sir?
Is your ring ready? Go with me.
I sent it you.
Me? When? by whom?
A fellow here, even now,
Came for it i'your name.
I sent none, sure.
My meaning ever was, you should deliver it,
Your self: So was your Masters charge, you know.
What fellow was it, doe you know him?
Here,
But now, he had it.
Saw you any? Trains?
Not I.
The gentleman saw him.
Enquire.
I was so earnest upon her, I marked not!
My devilish Chief has put me here in flesh,
To shame me! This dull body I am in,
I perceive nothing with! I offer at nothing,
That will succeed!
Sir, she saw none, she says.
Satan himself, has tan a shape t'abuse me.
It could not be else!
This is above strange?
That you should be so retchlesse. What'll you do Sir?
How will you answer this, when you are questioned?
Run from my flesh, if I could: put off mankind!
This's such a scorn! and will be a new exercise,
For my Arch-Duke! Woe to the several cudgels,
Must suffer, on this back! Can you no suckers? Sir?
Alas! use of it is so present.
I ask,
Sir, credit for another, but till to morrow?
There is not so much time, Sir. But how ever,
The Lady is a noble Lady, and will
(To save a Gentleman from check) be entreated
To say, she he's received it.
Do you think so?
Will she be won?
No doubt, to such an office,
It will be a Lady's bravery, and her pride.
And not be known on it after, unto him?
That were a treachery! Upon my word.
Be confident. Return unto your master,
My Lady President sits this afternoon,
He's tan the ring, commends her services
Unto your Lady-Dutchesse. You may say
She's a civil Lady, and do's give her
All her respects, already: Bad you tell her
She lives, but to receive her wished commandments,
And have the honour here to kiss her hands:
For which she'll stay this hour yet. Hasten you
Your Prince, away.
And Sir, you will take care
Th'excuse be perfect?
You confess your fears.
Too much.
The shame is more, I'll quit you of either.
APox upo' referring to Commissioners,
I'had rather hear that it were past the seals:
Your Courtiers move so Snaile-like i'your Business.
Would I had not begun wi'you.
Wee must move,
Madame, in order, by degrees • not jump.
Why, there was Sr. Iohn M•mis-man could jump
A Business quickly.
True he had great friends,
But because some, sweet Madame, can leap ditches,
We must not all shun to go over bridges,
The harder parts, I make account are done:
Now it is referred. You are infinitely bound
Unto the Ladies, they have so cried it up!
Doe they like it then?
They have sent the Spanish Lady
To gratulate with you—
I must send 'hem thanks
And some remembrances.
That you must, and visit 'hem.
Whore's Ambler?
Lost to day, we cannot hear of him.
Not madame?
No in good faith. They say he lay not
At home to night, And here has fallen a Business
Between your Cousin and Master Manly, has
Vnquieted us all.
So I hear, madame.
Pray you how was it?
Troth, it but appears
Ill o'your Kinsmans part. You may have heard,
That Manly is a su•or to me, I doubt not:
I guessed it, madame.
And it seems he trusted
Your Cousin to let fall some fair reports
Of him unto me.
Which he did!
So far
From it, as he came in and took him railing
Against him.
How! And what said Manly to him?
Enough, I doe assure you: and with that scorn
Of him, and the injury, as I doe wonder
How Everill bore it! But that guilt undoe's
Many men's valors.
Here comes Manly. Man. madame,
I'll take my leave—
You sha'not go, •faith.
I'll have you stay and see this Spanish miracle,
Of our English Lady.
Let me pray your Ladyship,
Lay your commands on me some other time.
Now, I protest: and I will have all pieced,
And friends again.
It will be but ill •older'd!
You are too much affected with it.
I cannot
Madame, but think on it for th'injustice.
Sir,
His Kinsman here is sorry. Not I Madame,
I am no kin to him, we but call Cousins,
And if we were, I have no relation
Unto his crimes.
You are not urged with 'hem.
I can accuse Sir, none but mine own judgement,
For though it were his crime so to betray me:
I am sure it was more mine own, at all to trust him.
But he therein did use but his old manners,
And •ivor strongly what he was before.
Come, he will change!
Faith, I must never think i•.
Nor were it reason in me to expect
That for my sake, he should put off a nature
He sucked in with his milk. It may be Madame,
Deceiving trust is all he has to trust to:
If so, I shall be loath that any hope
Of mine should bate him of his means.
Yo'are sharpe Sir.
This act may make him honest!
If he were
To be made honest, by an act of Parliament,
I should not alter, i'my faith of him.
Either-side!
Welcome, dear Either-side! how hast thou done, good wench?
Thou hast been a stranger• I haven't seen thee, this week.
EVer your servant, madame.
Where hast'hou been?
I did so long to see thee.
Visiting, and so tired!
I protest, madame, it is a monstrous trouble!
And so it is. I swear I must to morrow,
Begin my visits (would they were over) at Court.
It tortures me, to think on'hem.
I doe hear
You ha'cause, madame, your suit goes on.
Who told thee?
One, that can tell: Mr. Either-side.
O, t•y husband!
Yes faith, their's life in it, now: It is referred.
If we once see it under the seals, wench, then,
Have with 'hem for the great Carroch, six horses,
And the two Coach-men, with my Amble•r, bare,
And my three women: we will live, i'faith,
The examples of the town, and govern it.
I'll lead the fashion still.
You doe that, now,
Sweet madame.
O, but then, I'll every day
Bring up some new device. Thou and I, Either-side,
Will first be in it, I will give it thee;
And they shall follow us. Thou shalt, I swear,
Wear every month a new gown, out of it.
Thank you good madame.
Pray thee call me Taile-bush
As I thee, Either-side; I not love this, madame.
Then I protest to you Tail bush, I am glad
Your Business so succeeds.
Thank thee, good Either-side.
But Mr. Either-side tells me, that he likes
Your other Business better.
Which?
O, the Toothpicks.
I never heard on it.
Ask Mr. Mere-craft.
Madame? H'is one, in a word, I'll trust his malice,
With any mans credit, I would have abused!
Sir, if you think you doe please me, in this,
You are deceived!
No, but because my Lady,
Named him my kinsman, I would satisfy you,
What I think of him: and pray you, upon it
To judge me!
So I doe: that ill men's friendship,
Is as unfaithful, as themselves.
Doe you hear?
Ha'you a Business about Tooth-picks?
Yes, madame.
Did I ne'er tellt you? I meant to have offered it
Your Lady-ship, on the perfecting the patent.
How is it!
For serving the whole state with Tooth picks;
(Somewhat in intricate Business to discourse) but—
I show, how much the Subject is abused,
First in that one commodity? then what diseases,
And putrefactions in the gummes are bred,
By those are made' of' adultrate, and false wood?
My plot, for reformation of these, follows.
To have all Tooth-picks, brought unto an office,
There sealed; and such as counterfeit 'hem, mulcted.
And last, for venting 'hem to have a book
Printed, to teach their use, which every child
Shall have throughout the kingdom, that can read,
And learn to pick his teeth by. Which beginning
Early to practice, with some other rules,
Of never sleeping with the mouth open, chawing
Some grains of mystic, will preserve the breath
Pure, and so free from taint— ha'what is it? sai'st thou?
Good faith, it sounds a very pretty Business!
So Mr. Either-side says, madame.
The Lady is come.
Is she? Good, waite upon her in. My Ambler
Was never so ill absent. Either-side,
How doe I look to day? Am I not dressed,
Spruntly?
Yes, verily, madame.
Pox o'madame,
Will you not leave that?
Yes good Tail-bush.
So?
Sounds not that better? What vile Fucus is this,
Thou hast got on?
It is Pearl.
Pearl? oister-shells:
As I breath, Either-side, I know it. Here comes
(They say) a wonder, sirrah, has been in Spain!
Will teach us all! shoe's sent to me, from Court.
To gratulate with me! Pray thee, let's observe her,
What faults she has, that wee may laugh at 'hem,
When she is gone.
That we will heartily, Tail bush.
O, me! the very Infant of the Giants!
Here is a noble Lady, madame, come,
From your great friends, at Court, to see your Ladyship:
And have the honour of your acquaintance.
Sir.
She do's us honour.
Pray you, say to her Ladyship,
It is the manner of Spain, to embrace only,
Never to kiss. She will excuse the custom!
Your use of it is law. Please you, sweet madame,
To take a seat.
Yes, madame, I'have had
The favour, through a world of fair report
To know your virtues, madame,; and in that
Name have deserved the happiness of presenting
My service to your Ladyship!
Your love, madame,
I must not own it else.
Both are due madame,
To your great undertakings.
Great? In troth, madame,
They are my friends, that think 'hem any thing:
If I can doe my sex (by 'hem) any service,
I'have my ends, madame.
And they are noble ones,
That make a multitude beholden, madame:
The common-wealth of Ladies, must acknowledge from you.
Except some envious, madame.
Yo'are right in that, madame,
Of which race, I encountered some but lately.
Who ('t seems) have studied reasons to discredit
Your business.
How sweet madams?
Nay, the parties
W•'not be worth your p•use— Most ruinous things, madame,
That have put off all hope of being recovered▪
To a degree of handsomeness.
But their reasons, madame?
I would fine hear.
Some madame, I remember.
They say, that painting quite destroys the face—
O, that's an old one, madame.
There are new ones, too.
Corrupts the breath; hath left so little sweetness
In kissing, as it is now used, but for fashion:
And shortly will be taken for a punishment.
Decays the fore-teeth, that should guard the tongue;
And suffers that run riot everlasting!
And (which is worse) some Ladies when they meet
Cannot be merry, and laugh, but they doo spit
In one another faces!
I should know
This voice, and face too:
Then they say, it is dangerous
To all the fallen, yet well disposed Mad-dames,
That are industrious, and desire to earn
Their living with their sweat! For any distemper
Of heate, and motion, may displace the colours;
And if the paint once run about their faces,
Twenty to one, they will appear so ill-favour'd,
Their servants run away, too, and leave the pleasure
Imperfect, and the reckoning als'unpay'd.
Pox, these are Poets reasons.
Some old Lady
That keeps a Poet, has devised these scandals.
Faith we must have the Poets banished, madame,
As Master Either-side says.
Master Fitz-dottrell?
And his wife: where? madame, the Duke of Droun'd-land,
That will be shortly.
Is this my Lord?
The same.
YOur servant, madame!
How now? Friend? offended,
That I have found your haunt here?
No but wondering
At your strange fashioned venture, hither.
It is
To show you what they are, you so pursue.
I think twill prove a med'cine against marriage;
To know their manners.
Stay, and profit then.
The Lady, madame, whose Prince has brought her here,
To be instructed.
Please you sit with us Lady.
That's Lady-President.
A goodly woman!
I cannot see the ring, though.
Sir, she has it.
But madame, these are very feeble reasons!
So I urged madame, that the new complexion,
Now to come forth, in name o'your Ladyships fucus,
Had no ingredient—
But I durst eat, I assure you.
So doe they in Spain.
Sweet madame be so liberal,
To give us some o'your Spanish Fucuses!
They are infinite madame.
So I hear they have
Water of Gourds, of Radish, the white Beans,
Flowers of Glass, of Thistles, Rose-marine.
Raw Honey, Mustard-seed, and bread dough-bak'd,
The crumbs o'bread, Goats milk, and whites of Eggs,
Campheere and Lilly-rootes, the fat of Swans,
Marrow of Veale, white Pigeons, and pine-kernells,
The seed of Nettles, perse'line, and hares gall.
Lemons, thine skinned—
How, her Ladyship has studied
All excellent things!
But ordinary madame,
No, the true rarities are th'Alvagada,
And Argentata of Queen Isabella!
I, what are their ingredients, gentle madame?
Your Alum Scagliola, or Pol•dipedra;
And Zuccarino; Turpentine of Abezzo,
Washed in nine waters: Soda di gotta;
Grosia di serpe; Porcelleto marine•;
Oils of Lentisco; Zucchi Mugia; make
The admirable Varnish for the face,
Gives the right luster; but two drops rubbed on
With a piece of scarlet, makes a Lady of sixty
Look at sixteen. But above all, the water
Of the white Hen, of the Lady Estifanias!
O I, that same good madame, I have heard of:
How is it done?
madame, you take your Hen,
Plume it, and skin it, cleanse it of the inwards:
Then chop it, bones and all: add to four ounces
Of Carrnuacins, Pipitas, Soap of Cyprus,
Make the decoction, strain it. Then distill it,
And keep it in your galley-pot well glittered:
Three drops preserves from wrinkles, warts, spots, moles,
•lemish, or Sun-burnings, and keeps the skin
In decimo sexto, ever bright, and smooth,
As any looking-glasse; and indeed is called
The Virgins milk for the face, Ogle•oriole;
A Ceruse, neither cold or heat will hurt;
And mixed with oil of myrrh, and the red Gilli-flower
Called Cataputia; and flowers of Rovistico;
Makes the best mute▪ or die of the whole world.
Dear madame, will you let us be familiar?
Your Ladyships servant.
How doe you like her.
Admirable!
But, yet, I cannot see the ring.
Sir.
I must
Deliver it, or mar all. This fool•'s so jealous.
Madame— Sir, wear this ring, and pray you take knowledge,
It was sent you by his wife. And give her thanks,
Doe not you dwindle, Sir, bear up.
I thank you, Sir.
But for the manner of Spain! Sweet, madame, let us
Be bold, now we are in: Are all Ladies,
There, in the fashion?
None but Grandee's, madame.
Of the clasped train, which may be worn at length, too,
Or thus, upon my arm.
And doe they wear
Cioppino's all?
If they be dressed in punto, madame.
Guilt as those are? madame?
Of Goldsmiths work, madame;
And set with diamants: and their Spanish pumps
Of perfumed leather.
I should think it hard
To go in 'hem, madame.
At the first, it is, madame.
Do you never fall in 'hem?
Never.
I swear, I should
Six times an hour.
But you have men at hand, still,
To help you, if you fall?
Only one, madame,
The Guardo duennas, such a little old man,
As this.
Alas! he can doe nothing! this!
I'll tell you, madame, I saw in the Court of Spain once,
A Lady fall in the Kings sight, along.
And there she lay, flat spread, as an Umbrella,
Her hoop here cracked; no man durst reach a hand
To help her, till the Guarda duenn as came,
Who is the person one l'allowed to touch
A Lady there: and he but by this finger.
Ha'they no servants, madame, there▪ nor friends?
An Escudero, or so madame, that waits
Upon 'hem in another Coach, at distance,
And when they walk, or dance, holds by a hand-kercher,
Never presumes to touch 'hem.
This's scurvy!
And a forced gravity! I doe not like it.
I like our own much better.
It is more French,
And Courtly ours.
And tastes more liberty.
We may have our dozen of visitors, at once,
Make love t'us.
And before our husbands?
Husband?
As I am honest, Tayle-bush I doe think
If no body should love me, but my poor husband,
I should even hang my self.
Fortune forbid, wench:
So fair a neck should have so foul a neck-lace,
It is true, as I am handsome!
I received, Lady,
A token from you, which I would not be
Rude to refuse, being your first remembrance.
O, I am satisfied now!
Do you see it, Sir.)
But since you come, to know me, nearer, Lady,
I'll beg the honour, you will wear it for me,
It must be so.
Surely I have heard this tongue.
What doe you mean Sir?
Would you ha'me mercenary?
We'll recompense it anon, in somewhat else.
I doe not love to be gulled, though in a toy.
Wife, doe you hear? yo'are come in the school, wife,
Where you may learn, I doe perceive it, any thing!
How to be fine, or fair, or great, or proud,
Or what you will, indeed, wife; here it is taught.
And I am glad on it, that you may not say,
Another day, when honours come upon you,
You wanted means. I ha'done my parts: been,
To day at fifty pound charge, first, for a ring,
To get you entered. Then let my new Play▪
To wait upon you, here, to see it confirmed.
That I may say, both to mine own eyes, and ears,
Senses, you are my witness, sha'hath enjoyed
All helps that could be had for love or money—
To make a fool of her.
Wife, that's your malice,
The wickedness o'your nature to interpret
Your husbands kindness thus. But I'll not leave;
Still to doe good for your depraved affections:
Intend it. Bend this stubborn will; be great.
Good Madame, whom do they use in messages?
They commonly use their slaves Madam.
And do's your Ladyship.
Think that so good, Madame?
No indeed Madame; I,
Therein prefer the fashion of England far,
Of your young delicate Page, or discreet Usher.
And I go with your Ladyship in opinion,
Directly for your Gentleman-usher,
There's not a finer Officer goes on ground.
If he be made and broken to his place once.
Nay so I presuppose him.
And they are fitter
Managers too Sir, but I would have 'hem called
Our Escudero's.
Good.
Say I should send
To your Ladyship, who (I presume) has gathered
All the dear secrets to know how to make
Pastillos of the Duchess of Braganza,
Coquettes, Almoiavana's, Mantecada's,
Alcoreas, Mustaccioli; or say it were
The Peladore of Isabella, or balls
Against the itch, or aqua nanfa, or oil
Of Iessamine for gloves, of the Marquess Muja;
Or for the head and hair: why, these are offices.
Fit for a gentleman, not a slave. They only
Might ask for your pivety, Spanish-cole,
To burn and sweeten a room: but the Arcane
Of Ladies Cabinets—
Should be else-where trusted.
Yo'are much about the truth. Sweet honoured Ladies,
Let me fall in wi'you. I have my female wit,
As well as my male. And I doe know what suits
A Lady of spirit, or a woman of fashion!
And you would have your wife such.
Yes, madame, aërie,
Light; not to plain dishonesty, I mean:
But, somewhat o'this side.
I take you, Sir.
H'has reason Ladies. I'll not give this rush
For any Lady, that cannot be honest
Within a thread.
Yes, madame, and yet venture
As far for the other, in her Fame—
As can be;
Coach it to Pimlico; dance the Saraband,
Hear, and talk bawdy; laugh as loud, as a larum;
Squeak, spring, do any thing.
In young company, madame.
Or before gallants. If they be brave, or Lords,
A woman is engaged.
I say so, Ladies,
It is civility to deny us nothing.
You talk of a University! why, Hell is
A Grammer-schoole to this!
But then,
She must not lose a look on stuffs, or cloth, madame.
Nor no course fellow.
She must be guided, madame
By the clothes he wears, and company he is in;
Whom to salute, how far—
I ha'told her this.
And how that baudery too, upo'the point,
Is (in it self) as civil a discourse—
As any other affair of flesh, what ever.
But she will ne'er be capable, she is not
So much as coming, madame; I know not how
She loses all her opportunities
With hoping to be forced. I'have entertained
A gentleman, a younger brother, here,
Whom I would fine breed up, her Escudero,
Against some expectation's that I have,
And she'll not countenance him.
What's his name?
Devil, o'Darby-shire.
Bless us from him!
Devil?
Call him De-vile, sweet madame.
What you please, Ladies.
De-vile's a prettier name!
And sounds, me thinks,
As it came in with the Conqueronr—
Over smocks!
What things they are? That nature should be at leisure
Ever to make 'hem! my wooing is at an end.
What can he do?
Lets hear him.
Can he manage?
Please you to try him, Ladies. Stand forth, Devil.
Was all this but the preface to my torment?
Come, let their Ladyship see your honours.
O,
He makes a wicked leg.
As ever I saw!
Fit for a Devil.
Good madame, call him De-vile.
De-vile, what property is there most required
I'your conceit, now, in the Escudero?
Why do you not speak?
A settled discreet pause, madame.
I think, a barren head, Sir, Mountaine-like,
To be exposed to the cruelty of weathers—
I, for his Valley is beneath the waste, madame,
And to be fruitful there, it is sufficient.
Dullness upon you! Could not you hit this?
Good Sir—
He then had had no barren head.
You daw him too much, in troth, Sir.
I must walk
With the French stick, like an old vierger, for you.
O, Chief, call me to Hell again, and free me.
Do you murmur now?
Not I, Sir.
What do you take
Mr. Devil, the height of your employment,
In the true perfect Escudero?
When?
What doe you answer?
To be able, madame,
First to enquire, then report the working,
Of any Ladies physic, in sweet phrase,
Yes, that's an act of elegance, and importance.
But what above?
O, that I had a goad for him.
To find out a good Corne-cutter.
Out on him!
Most barbarous!
Why did you doe this, now?
Of purpose to discredit me? you damned Devil.
Sure, if I be not yet, I shall be. All
My days in Hell, were holy-daies to this!
It is labour lost, madame?
H'is a dull fellow
Of no capacity!
Of no discourse!
O, if my Ambler had been here!
I, madame;
You talk of a man, where is there such another?
Mr. Devil, put case, one of my Ladies, here,
Had a fine brach: and would employ you forth
To treat about a convenient match for her.
What would you observe?
The color, and the size, madame.
And nothing else?
The Moon, you calfe, the Moon!
I, and the Sign.
Yes, and receipts for proneness.
Then when the Puppies came, what would you doe?
Get their nativities cast!
This's well. What more?
Consult the Almanack-man which would be least?
Which cleaneliest?
And which silentest? This's well, madame?
And while she were with puppy?
Walk her out,
And air her every morning!
Very good!
And be industrious to kill her fleas?
Yes!
He will make a pretty proficient.
Who,
Coming from Hell, could look for such Catechising?
The Devil is an Ass. I doe acknowledge it.
The top of woman! All her sex in abstract!
I love her, to each syllable, falls from her.
Good madame give me leave to go aside with him!
And try him a little!
Do, and I'll with-draw, madame,
With this fair Lady: read to her the while.
Come, Sir.
Dear Chief, relieve me, or I perish.
Lady, we'll follow. You are not jealous Sir?
O, madame! you shall see. Stay wife, behold,
I give her up here, absolvtely, to you,
She is your own. Doe with her what yo will!
Melt, cast, and form her as you shall think good!
Set any sttamp on! I'll receive her from you
As a new thing, by your own standard!
Well, Sir!
BUt what ha'you done i'your Dependence, since?
O, it goes on, I met your Cousin, the Master—
You did not acquaint him, Sir?
Faith, but I did, Sir.
And upon better thought, not without reason!
He being chief Officer, might ha'taine it ill, else,
As a Contempt against his Place, and that
In time Sir, ha'drawne on another Dependence.
No, I did find him in good terms, and ready
To doe me any service.
So he said to you?
But Sir, you doe not know him.
Why, I presumed
Because this business of my wives, required me,
I could not ha'done better: And he told
Me, that he would go presently to your Council,
A Knight, here, in the Lane—
Yes, Justice Either-side.
And get the Feoffment drawn, with a letter of Attorney.
For livery and seisen!
That I knowe's the course.
But, Sir, you mean not to make him Feoffee?
Nay, that I'll pause on!
How now little Pit-fall?
Your Cousin Mr. Ever-ill, would come in—
But he would know if Master Manly were here.
No, tell him, if he were, I ha'made his peace!
Hoe's one, Sir, has no state, and a man knows not,
How such a trust may tempt him.
I conceive you.
Sir, this same deed is done here.
Pretty Plutarchus?
Art thou come with it? and has Sir Paul viewed it?
His hand is to the draught.
Will you step in, Sir,
And read it?
Yes.
I pray you a word wi'you,
Sir Paul Either-side willed me give you caution
Whom you did make Feoffee: for it is the trust
O'your whole State: and though my Cousin here
Be a worthy Gentleman, yet his valour has
At the tall board bin questioned; and we hold
Any man so impeached of doubtful honesty!
I will not justify this; but give it you
To make your profit of it: if you utter it,
I can forswere it!
I believe you, and thank you, Sir.
BE not afraid, sweet Lady: yo'are trusted
To love, not violence here; I am no ravisher,
But one, whom you, by your fair trust again,
May of a servant make a most true friend.
And such a one I need, but not this way:
Sir, I confess me to you, the mere manner
Of your attempting me, this morning took me,
And I did hold m'invention, and my manners,
Were both engaged, to give it a requital;
But not unto your ends: my hope was then,
(Though interrupted, ere it could be uttered)
That whom I found the Master of such language,
That brain and spirit, for such an enterprise,
Could not but if those succours were demanded
To a right use, employ them virtuously!
And make that profit of his noble parts,
Which they would yield. Sir, you have now the ground,
To exercise them in: I am a woman,
That cannot speak more wretchedness of my self,
Then you can read; marched to a mass of folly;
That every day makes haste to his own ruin;
The wealthy portion, that I brought him, spent;
And (through my friends neglect) no jointure made me.
My fortunes standing in this precipice,
It is Counsel that I want, and honest aides:
And in this name, I need you, for a friend!
Never in any other; for his ill,
Must not make me, Sir, worse.
O friend! forsake not
The brave occasion, virtue offers you,
To keep you innocent: I have feared for both;
And watched you to prevent the ill I feared.
But since the weaker side hath so assured me,
Let not the stronger fall by his own vice,
Or be the less a friend, cause virtue needs him.
Virtue shall never ask my succours twice;
Most friend, most man; your Counsels are commands:
Lady, I can love goodness in you, more
Then I did Beauty; and doe here entitle
Your virtue to the power, upon a life
You shall engage in any faithful service,
Even to forfeit.
Madame: Do you hear, Sir,
We have another leg-strain'd, for this Dottrel.
He'ha's a quarrel to carry, and he's cause
A deed of Feoffment, of his whole estate
To be drawn yonder; •a'st within: And you,
Only, he means to make Feoffee. H'is fallen
So desperately enamoured on you, and talks
Most like a mad-man: you did never hear
A Frantic, so in love with his own favour!
Now, you doe know, it is of no validity
In your name, as you stand; Therefore advise him
To put in me. (h'is come here:) You shall share Sir.
Madame, I have a suit to you; and a fore-hand,
I doe bespeak you; you must not deny me,
I will be granted.
Sir, I must know it, though.
No Lady; you must not know it: yet, you must too.
For the trust of it, and the fame indeed,
Which else were lost me. I would use your name,
But in a Feoffment: make my whole estate
Over unto you: a trifle a thing of nothing,
Some eighteen hundred.
Alas! I understand not
Those things Sir. I am a woman, and most loath,
To embark my self—
You will not slight me, madame?
Nor you'll not quarrel me?
No, sweet madame, I have
Already a dependence; for which cause
I doe this: let me put you in, dear madame,
I may be fairly killed.
You have your friends, Sir,
About you here, for choice.
She tells you right, Sir.
Death, if she doe, what doe I care for that?
Say, I would have her tell me wrong.
Why, Sir,
If for the trust, you'll let me have the honour
To name you one.
Nay, you doe me honour, madame:
Who is it?
This Gentleman.
O, no, sweet madame,
H'is friend to him, with whom I hawed dependence.
O, might he be?
One Wittipol: do you know him?
Alas Sir, he, a toy: This Gentleman
A friend to him, no more then I am Sir!
But will your Ladyship undertake that, madame?
Yes, and what else, for him, you will engage me.
What is his name?
His name is Justice Manly.
Whence do's he write himself?
Of Middle-sex,
Esquire.
Say nothing, madame. Clerk, come hither,
Write Justice Manly, Squire of Middle-sex.
What ha'you done, Sir?
Named a gentleman,
That I'll be answerable for, to you, Sir.
Had I named you, it might ha'beene suspected:
This way, it is safe.
Come Gentlemen, your hands,
For witness.
What is this?
You ha'made Election
Of a most worthy Gentleman!
Would one of worth
Had spoke it: whence it comes, it is
Rather a shame to me, then a praise.
Sir, I will give you any Satisfaction.
Be silent then: "falsehood commends not truth.
You do deliver this, Sir, as your deed,
To th'use of Mr. Manly?
Yes: and Sir—
When did you see young Wittipol? I am ready,
For process now; Sir, this is Publication.
He shall hear from me, he would needs be courting
Ny Wife, S•r.
Yes: So witnesses his Cloak there.
Nay good Sir,— Madame, you did undertake—
What?
That he was not Wittipols friend.
I hear
Sir, no confession of it.
O she knows not;
Now I remember, madame! This young Wittipol,
Would have debauched my wife, and made me Cuckold,
Through a casement; he did fly her home
To mine own window: but I think I sou't him,
And ravished her away, out of his pounces.
I have sworn to have him by the ears: I fear
The toy, with not do me right.
No? that were pity!
What right doe you ask, Sir? Here he is will do it you?
Ha? Wittipol?
I Sir, no more Lady now,
Nor Spaniard!
No indeed, it is Wittipol.
Am I the thing I feard'd?
A Cuckold? No Sir,
But you were late in possibility,
I'll tell you so much.
But your wife's too virtuous!
We'll see her Sir, at home, and leave you here,
To be made Duke o'Shore-ditch with a project.
Thieves, ravishers.
Cry but another note, Sir,
I'll mar the tune, o'your pipe!
Gi'me my deed, then.
Neither: that shall be kept for your wives good,
Who will know, better how to use it.
Have
To feast with my land?
Sir, be you quiet,
Or I shall gag you, ere I go, consult
You Master of dependences; how to make this
A second business, you have time Sir.
Oh!
What will the ghost of my wise Grandfather,
My learned Father, with my worshipful Mother
Think of me now, that left me in this world
In state to be their Heir? that am become
A Cuckold, and an Ass, and my wives Ward;
Likely to lose my land; ha'my throat cut:
All, by her practice!
Sir, we are all abused!
And be so still! Who hinders you, I pray you,
Let me alone, I would enjoy my self,
And be the Duke o'Dround'd-Land, you have made me.
Sir, we must play an after-game of this
But I am not in case to be a Gam-ster:
I tell you once again—
You must be ruled
And take some counsel.
Sir, I doe hate counsel,
As I doe hate my wife, my wicked wife!
But we may think how to recover all:
If you will act.
I will not think; nor act;
Nor yet recover; do not talk to me?
I'll run out o'my wits, rather then hear;
I will be what I am, Fabian Fits dottrel,
Though all the world say nay to it.
Let's follow him.
BUt he's my Lady mist me?
Beyond tell•ng!
Here has been that infinity of strangers!
And then she would ha'had you, to ha'sampled you
With, one within, that they are now a teaching;
And do's pretend to your rank.
Good fellow Pit-fall
Tel Mr. Meer-craft, I entreat a word with him.
This most unlucky accident will go near
To be the loss o'my place; I am indoubt!
With me? what say you Mr. Ambler?
Sir,
I would beseech your worship stand between
Me, and my Ladies displeasure, for my absence.
O, is this all? I warrant you.
I would tell you Sir
But how it happnened.
Brief, good Mr. Ambler,
Put your self to your rack: for I have a tasque
Of more importance.
Sir you'll laugh at me!
But (so is Truth) a very friend of mine,
Finding by conference with me, that I lived
Too chaste for my complexion (and indeed
Too honest for my place, Sir) did advise me
If I did love my self (as that I do,
I must confess)
Spare your Parenthesis,
To give my body a little evacuation—
Well, and you went to a whore?
No, Sir. I durst not
(For fear it might arrive at some body's ear,
It should not) trust my self to a common house;
But got the Gentlewoman to go with me,
And carry her bedding to a Conduit-head,
Hard by the place toward Tiburne, which they call
My L. Majors Banqueting-house. Now, Sir, This morning
Was Execution; and I ne'e dream't on it,
Till I heard the noise of the people, and the horses;
And neither I, nor the poor Gentlewoman
Durst stir, till all was done and past: so that
In the Interim, we fell a sleep again.
Nay, if you fall, from your gallop, I am gone Sir.
But when I waked, to put on my clothes, a suit,
I made new for the action, it was gone,
And all my money, with my purse, and seals,
My hard-wax, and my table-books, my studies,
And a fine new devise, I had to carry
My pen, and ink, my civet, and my tooth-picks,
All under one. But, that which grieved me, was
The Gentlewoman's shoes (with a pair of roses,
And garters, I had given her for the business)
So as that made us stay, till it was dark.
For I was fine to lend her mine, and walk
In a rug, by her, bare foot, to Saint Giles'es.
A kind of Irish penance! Is this all, Sir?
To satisfy my Lady.
I will promise you, Sir.
I ha'told the true Disaster.
I cannot stay wi'you
Sir, to condole; but gratulate your return.
An honest gentleman, but he's never at leisure
To be himself: He he's such tides of business.
O, Call me home again, dear Chief, and put me
To yoking foxes, milking of Hee-goates,
Pounding of water in a mortar, laving
The sea dry with a nut-shell, gathering all
The leaves are fallen this Autumn, drawing farts
Out of dead bodies, making ropes of sand,
Catching the winds together in a net,
Mustering of ants, and numbering atoms; all
That hell, and you thought exquisite torments, rather
Then stay me here, a thought more: I would sooner
Keep fleas within a circle, and be accountant
A thousand year, which of'hem and how far
Out leaped the other, then endure a minute
Such as I have within. There is no hell
To a Lady of fashion. All your tortures there
Are pastimes to it. It would be a refreshing
For me, to be in the fire again, from hence.
This is my suite, and those the shoes and roses!
Th'have such impertinent vexations,
A general Council of devils could not hit—
Ha! This is he I took a sleep with his Wench,
And borrowed his clothes. What might I doe to balke him?
Do you hear, Sir?
Answer but not to th'purpose.
What is your name, I pray you Sir.
Is it so late Sir?
I ask not of the time, but of your name, Sir.
I thank you, Sir. Yes it dos hold Sir, certain.
Hold, Sir? What holds? I must both hold, and talk to you
About these clothes.
A very pretty lace!
But the Taylor consent me.
No, I am consent
By you! robbed.
Why, when you please Sir, I am
For three penny Gleek, your man.
Pox of your gleek,
And three pence. Give me an answer.
Sir,
My master is the best at it.
Your master!
Who is your Master.
Let it be friday night.
What should be then?
Your best songs Tom of Bet'lem
I think, you are he. Do's he mock me trow, from purpose?
Or doe not I speak to him, what I mean?
Good Sir your name.
Only a couple a'Cocks Sir,
If we can get a Widgin, it is in season.
He hopes to make one o'these Scipticks o'me
(I think I name'him right) and do's not fly me.
I wonder at that! it is a strange confidence!
I'll prove another way, to draw his answer.
IT is the easiest thing Sir, to be done.
As plain, as fizzling: roll but wi'your eyes,
And foam at th'mouth. A little castle-soape
Will do it, to rub your lips: And then a nutshell,
With toe, and touch-wood in it to spit fire,
Did you ner'e read, Sir, little Darrels tricks,
With the boy of Burton, and the 7 in Lancashire,
Summers at Nottingham? All these do teach it.
And we'll give out, Sir, that your wife he's bewitched you:
And practised with those two, as Sorcerers.
And ga'you potions, by which means you were
Not Compose mantis, when you made your feoffment.
There's no recovery o'your estate, but this:
This, Sir, will sting.
And move in a court of equity.
For it is more then manifest, that this was
A plot o'your wives, to get your land.
I think it.
Sir it appears.
Nay and my cousin has known
These gallants in these shapes.
To have done strange things, Sir.
One as the Lady, the other as the Squire.
How, a mans honesty may be fooled! I thought him
A very Lady.
So dd I: renounce me else.
But this way, Sir you'll be revenged at height.
Upon 'hem all.
Yes faith, and since your Wife
Has run the way of woman thus, even give her—
Lost by this hand, to me; dead to all joys
Of her dear Dottrell, I shall never pity her:
That could, pity her self.
Princly resolved Sir,
And like your self still, in Potentiâ.
GVilt-head what news?
O Sir, my hundred pieces:
Let me ha'them yet.
Yes Sir, officers
Arrest him.
Me?
I arrest you.
Keep the peace,
I charge you gentlemen.
Arrest me? Why?
For better security, Sir. My son Plutarchus
Assures me, you're not worth a great.
Pardon me, Father,
I said his worship had no foot of Land left:
And that I'll justify, for I writ the deed.
Ha'you these tricks in the city?
Yes, and more.
Arrest this gallant too, here, at my suit.
I, and at mine. He owes me for his lodging
Two year and a quarter.
Why M. •uilt-head, Land-Lord,
Thou art not mad, though you are Constable
Puffed up with the pride of the place? Doe you hear, Sirs.
Have I deserved this from you two? for all
My pains at Court, to get you each a patent.
For what?
Upo' my project of the forks.
Forks? what be they?
The laudable use of forks,
Brought into custom here, as they are in Italy,
To th'sparing o'Napkins. That, that should have made
Your bellows go at the forge, as his at the furnace.
I ha'procured it, hawed Signet for it,
Dealt with the Linnen-drapers, on my private,
By cause, I feared, they were the likeliest ever
To stir against, to cross it: for twill be
A mighty saver of Linen through the Kingdom
(As that is one o'my grounds, and so spare washing)
Now, on you two, had I laid all the profits.
Guilt-head to have the making of all those
Of gould and silver, for the better personages;
And you of those of Steel for the common sort.
And both by Patent, I had brought you your seals in.
But now you have prevented me, and I thank you.
Sir, I will bail you, at my own ap-perill.
Nay choose.
Do you so too, good Father.
I like the fashin of the project, well,
The forks! It may be a lucky one! and is not
Intricate, as one would say, but fit for
Plain heads, as ours, to deal in. Do you hear.
Officers, we discharge you.
Why this shows
A little good nature in you, I confess,
But doe not tempt your friends thus. Little Guilt-head,
Advise your fire, great Guilt-head from these courses:
And, here, to trouble a great man in reversion,
For a matter o'fifty on a false Alarm,
Away, it shows not well. Let him get the pieces
And bring 'hem. Yo'll hear more else.
Father.
O Master Sledge, are you here? I ha'been to seek you.
You are the Constable, they say. Here's one
That I do charge with Felony, for the suite
He wears, Sir.
Who? M. Fitz-dottrels man?
Ware what you do, M. Ambler.
Sir, these clothes
I'll swear, are mine: and the shoes the gentlewoman's
I told you of: and ha'him before a Justice,
I will.
My master, Sir, will pass his word for me.
O, can you speak to purpose now?
Not I,
If you be such a one Sir, I will leave you
To your God-fathers in Law. Let twelve men work.
Do you hear Sir, pray, in private.
Well, what say you?
Brief, for I have no time to loose.
Truth is, Sir,
I am the very Devil, and had leave
To take this body, I am in, to serve you:
Which was a Cutpurses, and hanged this Morning.
And it is likewise true, I stole this suite
To cloth me with. But Sir let me not go
To prison for it. I have hitherto
Lost time, done nothing; shown, indeed, no part.
O'my Devils nature. Now, I will so help
Your malice, against these parties: so advance
The business, that you have in hand of witchcraft,
And your possession, as my self were in you.
Teach you such tricks, to make your belly swell,
And your eyes turn, to foam, to stare, to gnash
Your teeth together, and to beat your self,
Laugh loud, and fine six voices—
Out you Rogue!
You most infernal counterfeit wretch! Avaunt!
Do you think to gull me with your AEsops Fables?
Here take him to you, I ha'no part in him.
Sir.
Away, I do disclaim, I will not hear you.
What said he to you, Sir?
Like a lying rascal
Told me he was the Devil.
How! a good jest!
And that he would teach me, such fine devils tricks
For our new resolution.
O'pox on him,
It was excellent wisely done, Sir, not to trust him.
Why, if he were the Devil, we sha'not need him,
If you'll be ruled. Go throw your self on a bed, Sir,
And fine you ill. We•'ll not be seen wi'you,
Till after, that you have a fit: and all
Confirmed within. Keep you with the two Ladies
And persuade them. I'll to Justice Either-side,
And possess him with all. Trains shall seek out Engine,
And they to fill the town with'•, every cable
It is to be veered. We must employ out all
Our emissaries now; Sir, I will send you
Bladders and Bellows. Sir, be confident,
It is no hard thing t'out doe the Devil in:
A Boy o'thirteen year old made him an Ass
But t'toher day.
Well, I'll begin to practice,
And scope the imputation of being Cuckold,
By mine own act.
Yo'are right.
Come, you ha'put
Your self to a simpe coil here, and your friends,
By dealing with new Agents, in new plots.
No more o'that, sweet cousin.
What had you
To doe with this same Wittipol, for a Lady?
Question not that: it is done.
You had some strain
'Bove Eel?
I had indeed.
And, now, you crack fort.
Do not upbraid me.
Come, you must be told on it;
You are so covetous, still, to embrace
More then you can, that you loose all.
It is right.
What would you more, then Guilty? Now, your succours.
HEre you are lodged, Sir, you must send your garnish,
If you'll be private.
There it is, Sir, leave me.
To New-Gate, brought? How is the name of Devil
Discredited in me! What a lost fiend
Shall I be, on return? My Chief will roar
In triumph, now, that I have been on earth,
A day, and done no noted thing, but brought
That body back here, was hanged out this morning.
Well! would it once were midnight, that I knew
My utmost. I think Time be drunk, and sleeps:
He is so still, and moves not! I do glory
Now i'my torment. Neither can I expect it,
I have it with my fact.
Child of hell, be thou merry▪
Put a look on, as round, boy, and red as a cherry.
Cast care at thy posternes; and firk in thy fetters,
They are ornaments, Baby, have graced thy betters▪
Look upon me, and hearken. Our Chief doth salute thee,
And least the could iron should chance to confu•e thee,
H'hath sent thee, grant-paroll by me to stay longer
A month here on earth, against cold Child, or honger
How? longer here a month?
Yes, boy, till the Session,
That so thou majesty have a triumphal egression.
In a cart, to be hanged.
No, Child, in a Ca•te,
The chariot of Triumph, which most of them are.
And in the mean time, to be greasy, and bouzy,
And nasty, and filthy, and ragged and lousy,
With dam'n me, renounce me, and all the fine phrases;
That bring, unto Tiborne, the plentiful gazes.
He is a Devil! and may be our Chief!
The great superior Devil! for his malice:
Arch-divel! I acknowledge him. He knew
What I would suffer, when he tie'd me up thus
In a rogues body: and he has (I thank him)
His tyrannous pleasure on me, to confine me
To the unlucky carcass of a Cutpurse
Wherein I could do nothing.
Impudent fiend,
Stop thy lewd mouth. Doest thou not shame and tremble
To lay thine own dull damned defects upon
An innocent case, there? Why thou heavy slave!
The spirit, that did possess that flesh before
Put more true life, in a finger, and a thumb.
Then thou in the whole Mass. Yet thou rebell'st
And murmurst? What one proffer hast thou made,
Wicked enough, this day, that might be called
Worthy thine own, much less the name that sent thee?
First, thou did help thy self into a beating
Promptly, and with it endangerdd'st too thy tongue:
A Devil, and could not keep a body entire
One day! That, for our credit. And to vindicate it,
H•nderd'st (for ought thou know) a deed of darkness:
Which was an act of that egregious folly,
As no one, to'ard the Devil, could ha'thought on.
This for your acting! but for suffering! why
Thou hast been cheated on, with a false beard,
And a turned cloak. Faith would your predecessor
The Cutpurse, think you, have been so? Out upon thee,
The hurt th'hast don, to let men know their strength,
And that they are able to out-doe a devil
Put in a body, will for ever be
A scarre upon our Name! whom hast thou dealt with,
Woman or man, this day, but have out-gone thee
Some way, and most have proved the better fiends?
Yet, you would be employed▪ Yes, hell shall make you
Provincial of the heaters! or Baud-ledger,
For this side of the town! No doubt you'll render
A rare account of things. Bane o'your itch,
And scratching for imployme•t. I'll ha'brimstone
To allay it sure, and fire to singe your nails off,
But, that I would not such a damned dishonour
Stick on our state, as that the devil were hanged;
And could not save a body, that he took
From Tiborne, but it must come thither again:
You should even ride. But up away with him—
Mount, dearling of darkness, my shoulders are broad:
He that caries the fiend, is sure of his load.
The Devil was wont to carry away the evil;
But, now, the Evil out-carries the Devil.
O me!
What's this?
A piece of Justice Hall
Is broken down.
Faugh! what a steam of brimstone
Is here?
The prisoner's dead, came in but now!
Ha? where?
Look here.
S'lid I should know his countenance!
It is Gil-Cut-purse, was hanged out, this morning!
It is he!
The Devil, sure, has a hand in this!
What shall we doe?
Carry the news of it
Unto the Sheriffs.
And to the Justices.
This strange!
And savours of the Devil, strongly!
In have the sulphur of Hell-coale i'my nose.
Faugh.
Carry him in.
Away.
How rank it is!
THis was the notablest Conspiracy,
That ere I heard of.
Sir, they had given him potions,
That did enamour him on the counterfeit Lady—
Just to the time o'delivery of the deed—
And then the witchcraft 'gan't'appeare, for straight
He fell into his fit.
Of rage at first, Sir,
Which since has so increased.
Good Sir Poule, see him,
And punish the impostors.
Therefore I come, madame.
Let M. Eitherside alone, madame.
Do you hear?
Call in the Constable, I will have him by:
H'is the Kings Officer! and some Citizens,
Of credit! I'll discharge my conscience clearly.
Yes, Sir, and send for his wife.
And the two Sorcerers,
By any means!
I thought one a true Lady,
I should be sworn. So did you, Either-side?
Yes, by that light, would I might ne'er stir else, Tailbush.
And the other a civil Gentleman.
But, madam,
You know what I told your Ladyship.
I now see it:
I was providing of a banquet for 'hem
After I had done instructing of the fellow
De-vile, the Gentleman's man.
Who's found a thief, madam.
And to have robed your Usher, Master Ambler
This morning.
How?
Isle tell you more, anon.
Gi'me some garlic, garlic, garlic, garlic.
Hark the poor Gentleman, how he is tormented!
My wife is a whore, I'll kiss her no more: and why?
Ma'st not thou be a Cuckold as well as I?
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, &amp;c.
That is the Devil speaks, and laughs in him.
Do you think so Sir.
I discharge my conscience.
And is not the Devil good company? Yes, wis.
How he changes, Sir, his voice!
And a Cuckold is
Where ere hee put his head, with a Wanion,
If his horns be forth, the Devils companion!
Look, look, look, else.
How he fomes!
And swells!
O, me! what's that there, rises in his belly!
A strange thing! hold it down:
We cannot, madame.
It is too apparent this!
Wittipol, Wittipol.
How now, what play ha'we here.
What fine new, matters?
The Cockscomb, and the Coverlet.
O strange impudence!
That these should come to face their sin!
And ou•face
Justice, they are the parties, Sir.
Say nothing.
Did you mark, Sir, upon their coming in,
How he called Wittipol.
And never saw 'hem.
I warrant you did I, let 'hem play a while.
Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
Lass poor Gentleman!
How he is tortured! Mis. Fit F•e, Master Fitz-dottrel!
What doe yo mean to counterfeit thus?
O, ô,
She comes with a needle, and thrusts it in,
She pulls out that, and she puts in a pin,
And now, and now, I doe not know how, nor where,
But she pricks me here, and she pricks me there: oh, oh,
Woman forbear.
What, Sir?
A practice foul
For one so fair:
Hath this, then, credit with you?
Do you bell•eve in it?
Gentlemen, I'll discharge
My conscience: It is a clear conspiracy▪
A dark and devilish practice! I detest it!
The Justice sure will prove to be the merrier!
This is most strange, Sir.
Come not to confront
Authority with insolence: I tell you,
I doe detest it. Here comes the Kings Constable,
And with him a right worshipful Commoner;
My good friend, Master Guilt-head! I am glad
I can before such witnesses, profess
My conscience, and my detestation of it.
Horrible! most unaturall! Abominable!
You doe not •humble enough.
Wallow, gnash:
O, how he is vexed!
It is too manifest.
Give him more soap to foam with, now lie still.
And act a little.
What do's he now, Sir.
Show
The taking of Tobacco, with which the Devil
Is so delighted.
Hum!
And calls for Hum.
You takers of Waters and Tobacco,
Mark this.
Yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow, &amp;c.
That's Starch! the Devils Idol of that colour.
He ratifies it, clapping of his hands.
The proofs are pregnant.
How the Devil can act!
He is the Master of Players? Master Guilt-head,
And Poets, too! you heard him talk in rime!
I had forgot to observe it to you, ere while!
See, he spits fire.
O no, he plays at Figgum,
The Devil is the Author of wicked Figgum—
Why speak you not unto him?
If I had
All innocence of man to be endangered
And he could save, or ruin it: I'd not breath
A syllable in request, to such a fellow,
I'd rather fall.
ô they whisper, they whisper, whisper, &amp;c.
We shall have more, of Devils a score,
To come to dinner, in me the sinner.
Alas, poor Gentleman!
Put'hem asunder.
Keep 'hem one from the other.
Are you frantic, Sir,
Or what grave dotage moves you, to take part
With so much villainy? we are not afraid
Either of law, or trial; let us be
Examined what our ends were, what the means,
To work by; and possibility of those means.
Doe not conclude against us, ere you hear us.
I will not hear you, yet I will conclude
Out of the circumstances.
Will you so, Sir?
Yes they are palpable:
Not as your folly:
I will discharge my conscience, and doe all
To the Merid•an of Justice.
You doe well, Sir:
Provide me to eat, three or four dishes o'good meat,
I'll feast them, and their trains, a Justice head and brains
Shall be the first.
The Devil loves not Justice,
There you may see.
A spare-rib o'my wife,
And a whores purt'nance! a Guilt-head whole.
Be not you troubled, Sir, the Devil speaks it.
Yes, wis, Knight, shite, Poule, Ioule, owl, foul, troule, boule.
Crambe, another of the Divell's games!
Speak, Sir, some Greek, if you can. Is not the Justice
A solemn gamester?
Peace.
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉,
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉,
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉.
Hee curses
In Greek, I think.
Your Spanish, that I taught you.
Qu brémosel ojo de burlas.
How? your rest—
Let's break his neck in jest, the Devil says,
Di gratia, Signòr mio se baúete denári fataméne part.
What, would the Devil borrow money?
Oy,
Oy, Monsiur, ùn pàuure Diable! Diablet in!
It is the Devil, by his several languages.
Whore's Sir Paule Either-side?
Here, what's the matter?
O! such an accident fallen out at Newgate, Sir:
A great piece of the prison is rent down!
The Devil has been there, Sir, in the body—
Of the young Cut-purse, was hanged out this morning,
But in new clothes, Sir, every one of us know him.
These things were found in his pocket.
Those are mine, Sir.
I think he was committed on your charge, Sir.
For a new felony
Yes.
Hoe's gone, Sir, now,
And left us the dead body. But with all, Sir,
Such an infernal stink, and steam behind,
You cannot see St. Pulchars Steeple, yet.
They smell it as far as Ware, as the wind lies,
By this time, sure.
Is this upon your credit, friend?
Sir, you may see, and satisfy your self.
Nay, then, it is time to leave off counterfeiting.
Sir I am not bewitched, nor have a Devil▪
No more then you. I doe defy him, I,
And did abuse you. These two Gentlemen
Put me upon it. (I have faith against him)
They taught me all my tricks. I will tell truth,
And shame the Fiend. See, here, Sir are my bellows,
And my fall belly, and my Mouse, and all
That should ha'come forth?
Sir, are not you ashamed
Now of your solemn, serious vanity?
I will make honourable amends to truth.
And so will I. But these are Coozners, still;
And ha'my land, as plotters, with my wife:
Who, though she be not a witch, is worse, a whore.
Sir, you belie her. She is chaste, and virtuous,
•nd we are honest. I doe know no glory
• man should hope, by venting his own follies,
•ut you'll still be an Ass, in spite of providence.
••as you go in, Sir, and here truths, then judge 'hem:
•nd make amends for your late rashness; when,
•o• shall but here the pains and care was taken,
•o save this fool from ruin (his Grace of Droun'd land)
My land is droun'd indeed—
Peace.
And how much
•s modest and too worthy wife hath suffered
• misconstruction, from him, you will blush,
••st for your own belief, more for his actions!
〈◊〉 land is his: and never, by my friend,
〈◊〉 by my self, meant to another use,
〈◊〉 for her succours, who hath equal right.
If any other had worse counsels in it,
(I know I speak to those can apprehend me)
L•t'hem repent 'hem, and be not detected.
It is not manly to take joy, or pride
In humane errors (we doe all ill things,
They doe 'hem worst that love 'hem, and dwell there,
Till the plague comes) The few that have the seeds
Of goodness left, will sooner make their way
To a true life, by shame, then punishment.
THus, the Projector, here, is over-throwne.
But I have now a Project of mine own,
If it may pass: that no man would invite
The Poet from us, to sup forth to night,
If the play please. If it displeasant be,
We doe presume, that no man will: nor we:

MArtino?
Signior Francisco? you're the luckiest Gentleman to
meet
Or see first in a morning: I never saw you yet
But I was sure of money within less than half an hour.
I bring you the same luck still.
What you doe not?
I hope Sir you are not come for an other Warrant?
Yes faith, for an other Warrant.
Why ther's my dream come out then. I never dreamed
of a buttock but I was sure to have money for a Warrant. It
is the luckiest part of all the body to me: let every man speak as
he finds. Now your Usurer is of opinion, that to dream of the
Devil is your wealthier dream; and I think if a man dream
of that part that brings many to the Devil, it is as good; and
has all one smatch indeed; for if one be the flesh, th'others the
broth: So it is in all his members and we mark it; if Gluttony
be the meat, Lechery is the Porridge, they are both boiled toge∣there,
and wee Clerks will have our modicum too, though it
conclude in the two penny chop: Why Sir,
Signior Francisco.
It was her voice sure,
Or my soul takes delight to think it was,
And makes a sound like hers.
Sir, I beseech you.
It is the prettiest contrived building, this:
What Poesie's that I prithee?
Which Sir, that
Under the great brass Squirt?
I that Sir, that
From fire, from water, and all things amiss,
Deliver the house of an honest Justice?
Ther's like to be a good house kept then, when fire and water's forbidden to come into the Kitchen. Not yet a sight of his? this hour's unfortunate. And what's that yonder prithee? O loves famine, Ther's no affliction like thee. I, I hear you Sir.
You're quicker eared than I then: you hear me
Before I heard my self.
A gift in friendship
Some call it an instinct.
It may be
The other's the sweeter phrase though; Look you Sir,
Mine own wit this, and it is as true as turtle;
A Goose-quill and a Clerk, a Constable and a Lantern,
Brings many a Baud from Coach to Cart, and many a Thief to
one turn.
That one turn helped you well.
'Tas helped me to money indeed for many a Warrant.
I am 40. dollars the better for that one-turn; and it would come
off quicker it were ne'er a whit the worse for me. But indeed when
Thieves are taken, and break away twice or thrice one after an
other, ther's my gains; then goes out more Warrants to fetch'em
again: one fine nimble villain, may be worth a man ten dollars
in and out a that fashion; I love such a one with my heart, I, and
will help him to scope to, and I can; hear you me that: Isle have
him in at all times at a months warning: nay, say I let him run
like a Summer Nag all the Vacation: See you these blancks, Isle
send him but one of these bridles, and bring him in at Michaelmas
with a vengeance: nothing kills my heart, but when one of 'em
dyes Sir; then ther's no hope of more money: I had rather lose
at all times two of my best kindred, than an excellent Thief: for
hoe's a Gentleman I'm more beholding to.
You betray your mystery too much Sir. Yet no comfort?
It is but her sight that I waste precious time for,
For more I cannot hope for, she's so strict,
Yet that I cannot have.
I'm ready now Signior.
Here are blank Warrants of all dispositions, give me but the name
and nature of your Malefactor, and Isle bestow him according to
his merits.
This only is the excuse that bears me out,
And keeps off impudence and suspicion
From my too frequent coming: what name now
Shall I think on, and not to wrong the house?
This Coxcomb will be prating.—One Astilio,
His offence wilful murder.
Wilful murder? oh I love a life to have such a fell∣low
come under my fingers; like a beggar that's long a taking
leave of a fat lowce, I'm loath to part with him, I must look upon
him over and over first; are you wilful? y'faith, isle be as wilful
as you then.
Martino?
Mistress?
Make haste, your Master's going.
I'm but about a wilful murder forsooth, Isle dispatch that
presently.
Good morrow Sir: oh that I durst saymore.
It is gone again, since; such are all lifes pleasures,
No sooner known, but lost; he that enjoys 'em
The length of life, has but a longer dream,
He wakes to this in the end, and sees all nothing.
He cannot see me now; isle mark him better
Before I be too rash: sweetly composed he is;
Now as he stands, he's worth a women's love,
That loves only for shape, as most on's doe:
But I must have him wise, as well as proper,
He comes not in my Books else, and indeed
I have thought upon a course to try his wit: Violetta.
Mistress.
Yonders the Gentleman again.
Oh sweet Mistress
Pray give me leave to see him.
Nay take heed,
Open not the window and you love me.
No, I've the view of whole body here, Mistress,
At this pore little slit, oh enough, enough,
In troth it is a fine out-side.
I see that.
Has curled his hair most judiciously well.
I ther's thy love, now, it begins in barbarism: she buys
a Goose with feathers, that loves a Gentleman for's hair; she
may be consent to her face Wench. Away: he takes his leave.
Reach me that letter hither, quick▪ quick Wench.
Nay look upon it, and spare not: every one cannot get
that kind of Warrant from me Signior. Doe you see this prick
in the bottom, it betokens power and speed, it is a privy mark, that
runs betwixt the Constables and my Mr. Those that cannot read,
when they see this, know it is for Lechery or Murder, and this
being away, the Warrant comes gelded, and insufficient.
I thank you Sir,
Look you; all these are Nihils,
They want the punction.
Yes, I see they doe Sir,
Ther's for thy pains, mine must go unrewarded.
The better love, the worse by fate regarded.
Well, go thy ways, for the sweetest Costomer that
ever Penman was blessed withal: now will he come for an other
to morrow again; if he hold on this course, he will leave never a
knave in the town within this twelve month: no matter, I shall be
rich enough by that time.
Martino?
Say you forsooth.
What paper's that the Gentleman let fall there?
Paper? Tic the Warrant I hope, if it be isle hide it, and
make him pay for it again. No Pox: it is not so happy.
What i'st Sirrah?
It is nothing but a letter forsooth.
Is that nothing?
Nothing, in respect of a Warrant Mistress.
A letter? why 'tas been many a mans undoing Sir.
So has a Warrant, and you go to that Mistress.
Read but the superscription; and away with it:
Alas it may concern the Gentleman nearly.
Why Mistress, this letter is at home already.
At home, how mean your Sir?
You shall hear Mistress. To the deservingst of all her
Sex, and most worthy of his best respect and love, Mrs. Philippe
Brandino.
How Sir, to me?
To you Mistress.
Run, as thou love my honour, and thy life,
Call him again, Isle not endure this injury:
But stay, stay now I think on it, it is my credit,
Isle have your Masters Counsel: ah base fellow
To leave his loose lines thus; it is even as much
As a poor honest Gentlewoman's undoing,
Had I not a grave wiseman to my Husband:
And thou a vigilant varlet to admit
Thou care not whom
Alas it is my office Mistress.
You know you have a Kirtle every year,
And it is within two months of the time now,
The velvets coming over: pray be milder; a man that has a
place must take money of any body: please you to throw me
down but half a dollar, and Isle make you a warrant for him
now, that's all I care for him.
Well, look you be clear now from this foul conspiracy
Against mine honour; or your Masters love to you
That makes you stout, shall not maintain you here;
It shall not: trust to 't.— 
This is strange to me now:
Dare she doe this, and but eight weeks to New-years tide?
A man that had his blood as hot as hers now, would fit her with
French Velvet: Isle go near it.
If this be a wrong to modest reputation
Be you the censurer Sir, that are the Master
Both of your fame and mine.
Signior Francisco?
Isle make him fly the land.
That will be hard Sir;
I think he be not so well feathered Master,
He has spent the best part of his patrimony.
Hark of his bold confederate.
There thour't bitter;
And I must chide thee now.
What should I think Sir?
He comes to your man for Warrants.
There it goes then;
Come hither knave: Comes he to you for Warrants?
Why, what of that Sir?
You know I give no Warrants to make Cuckolds,
That comes by fortune, and by nature Sir.
True, that comes by fortune, and by nature; Wife
Why dost thou wrong this man?
He needs no Warrant Master, that goes about such bu∣siness,
a Cuckold-maker carrys always his warrant about him.
La: has he answered well now? to the full?
What cause hast thou to abuse him?
Hear me out I pray:
Through his admittance, he has had opportunity
To come into the house, and court me bodly.
Sirrah, you're foul again me thinks.
Who I Sir?
You gave this man admittance intoth'house.
That's true Sir, you never gave me any order yet
To write my Warrants in the street.
Why sure thou take delight to wrong this fellow, Wife:
Ho, cause I love him.
Pray see the fruits: see what has left behind here:
Be angry where you should be: there's few Wives
Would doe as I doe
Nay Isle say that for thee
I ne'er found thee but honest.
She's a beast
That ever was found otherwise.
Read Martino,
Mine eyes are sore already, and such business
Would put'em out quite
Fair, dear and incomparable Mistress,—
Oh! every letter draws a tooth me thinks.
And it leads mine to watering.
Here's no villainy?
My love being so violent, and the opportunity
so precious in your husbands absence to night, who as I under∣stand
takes a journey this morning.
Oh plot of villainy.
Am I honest think you Sir?
Exactly honest, perfectly improov'd: on, on Martino.
I will make bold dear Mistress, though your
chastity has given me many a repulse, to wait the sweet blessings
of this long desired opportunity, at the back gate, between nine
and ten this night.
I feel this Ins-a-Court man in my Temples.
Where if your affection bee pleased to receive me,
you receive the faithfullest that ever vowed service to wo∣man—Francisco.
I will make Francisco smart for it.
Show him the letter, let him know, you know him;
That will torment him: all your other courses
Are nothing Sir to that: that breaks his heart.
The strings shall not hold long then: Come Martino.
Now if Francisco have any wit at all,
He comes at night; if not, he never shall.
Nay mark, mark it Francisco: It was the naturalest cur∣tesie
that ever was ordained; A young Gentleman being spent,
to have a rich Widow set him up again: to see how fortune has
provided for all mortalities ruins; your College for your old
standing Scholar, your Hospital for your lame creeping Soldier,
your Baud for your mangled Rorer, your open house for your
Beggar, and your Widow for your Gentleman: ha Francisco?
I Sir, you may be merry: you're in hope of a rich Widow.
And why should not thou be in hope of an other, if there
were any spirit in thee, thou art as likely a fellow as any is in the
company. Isle be hanged now if I doe not hit the true cause of thy
sadness; and confess truly y'faith; thou hast some land unsold yet,
I hold my life.
Mary I hope so Sir.
A Pox ont, have I found it? slight away with it with all
speed man. I was never merry at heart while I had a foot: why
man, Fortune never minds us, till we are left alone to our selves:
for what need she take care for them, that doe nothing but take
care for themselves? why, dost think if I had kept my lands still,
I should ever have looked after a rich Widow? alas, I should have
married some poor young Maid, got five and twenty children,
and undone my self.
I protest Sir, I should not have the face though, to come
to a rich Widow with nothing
Why, art thou so simple, as thou make thy self? dost
think y'faith I come to a rich Widow with nothing?
I mean with state not answerable to hers.
Why ther's the fortune, man, that I talked on;
She knows all this, and yet I am welcome to her.
I▪ that's strange Sir.
Nay more to pierce thy hard heart, and make thee sell thy
land if thou'st any grace: she has amongst others two substantial
Suitors,
One, in good time be it spoke, I owe much money to,
She knows this too, and yet I'm welcome to her,
Nor dares the unconscionable Rascal trouble me;
Sh'as told him thus, those that profess love to her
Shall have the liberty to come and go,
Or else get him gone first; she knows not yet
Where fortune may bestow her, she's her gift,
Therefore to all will show a kind respect.
Why this is like a woman: I have no luck in it.
And as at a Sheriffs table, O blessed custom,
A poor indebted Gentleman may dine,
Feed well, and without fear, and depart so,
So to her lips, fearless I come and go?
You may well boast, you're much the happier man Sir
So you would be, and you would sell your land Sir
I have heard the circumstance of your sweet fortunes:
Prithee give ear to my unlucky tale now.
That's an ill hearing; but come on for once Sir.
I never yet loved but one Woman.
Right, I begun so too; but I have loved a thousand since.
Pray hear me Sir; but this is a mans wife.
So has five hundred of my thousand been.
Nay see and you'll regard me.
No? you see I doe,
I bring you an example in for every thing.
This mans wife
So you said.
Seems very strict
Ha, humh.
Doe you laugh at that?
Seems very strict you said,
I hear you man, y'faith you are so jealous still.
But why should that make you laugh?
Because she seems so: you're such an other—
Nay Sir, I think she is.
You cannot tell then.
I dare not ask the question I protest
For fear of a repulse, which yet not having.
My mind's the quieter, and I live in hope still.
Ha, hum: this it is to be a landed man. Come, I perceive
I must show you a little of my fortune, and instruct you:
Not ask the question?
Me thought still she fround Sir?
Why that's the cause fool, that she looked so scurvily.
Come, come, make me your woman, you'll ne'er do it else,
Isle show you her condition presently.
I perceive you must begin like a young Vaulter, and get up at
horse-tail, before you get into the saddle; have you the boldness
to utter your mind to me now, being but in hose and doublet?
I think if I should put on a Farthingale, thou would never have
the heart to do it.
Perhaps I should not then for laughing at you Sir.
In the mean time I fear I shall laugh at thee without one.
Nay you must think friend, I dare speak to a woman.
You shall pardon me for that friend; I will not think it,
till I see it.
Why you shall then: I shall be glad to learn too,
Of one so deep as you are.
So you may Sir; Now it is my best course to look mild∣lie,
I shall put him out at first else.
A word, sweet Lady.
With me Sir? say your pleasure.
O Ricardo,
Thou art too good to be a woman long.
Doe not find fault with this, for fear I prove
Too scornful, be content when you're well used.
You say well Sir. Lady I have loved you long.
It is a good hearing Sir. If he be not out now isle be hanged.
You play a scornful woman? I perceive Ricardo,
You have not been used to 'em: why isle come in at my pleasure
with you: alas it is nothing for a man to talk, when a woman
gives way too't: one shall seldom meet with a Lady so kind, as
thou playdst her.
Not altogether perhaps: he that draws their pictures
must slatter 'em a little, they'll look he that plays 'em should do it
a great deal then.
Come, come isle play the woman, that I'm used too,
I see you ne'er wore shoe that pinched you yet,
All your things comes on easy.
Say you so Sir?
Isle try your Ladyship faith: Lady well met.
I doe not think so Sir.
A scornful Gom,
And at the first dash too: my Widow never gave me such an an∣swer,
isle to you again Sir.
Fairest of creatures, I doe love thee infinitely.
Ther's no body bids you Sir.
Pox on thee thou art the beastliest crossest Baggage that ever
man met withal; but isle see thee hanged sweet Lady ere I be
daunted with this: why you're too awkward Sirha.
Hang thee base fellow.
Now by this light, he thinks he dost indeed,
Nay then have at your plumb-tree faith, isle not be foiled,
Though you seem to be careless Madam, as you have enough where∣with
all to be, yet I doe, must, and will love you.
Sir, if you begin to be rude, isle call my woman.
What a pestilent Queens this? I shall have much ado
with her I see that; tell me as you're a woman Lady, what serve
kisses for? but to stop all your mouths.
Hold, hold Ricardo.
Disgrace me VVidow.
Ait mad, I'm Francisco?
Signior Ricardo, up, up.
Who is it Francisco?
Francisco quoth a? what are you mad Sit?
A bots on thee, thou dost not know what injury thou
hast done me, I was in the fairest dream, this is your way now, and
you can follow it.
It is a strange way me thinks.
Learn you to play a woman not so scornfully then,
For I am like the Actor that you spoke on,
I must have the part that overcomes the Lady,
I never like the Play else.—Now your friendship,
But to assist a subtle trick I have thought on,
And the rich VVidows mine within these three hours.
We should be proud of that Sir.
List to me then.
Isle place you too, I can do it handsomely
I know the house so well, to hear the conference
Twixt her and I, she's a most affable one,
Her words will give advantage, and isle urge 'em
To the kind proof, to catch her in a Contract,
Then shall you both step in as witnesses,
And take her in the snare.
But doe you love his?
And then twill prosper.
By this hand I doe,
Not for her wealth, but for her person too.
It shall be done then.
But stay, stay Francisco,
Where shall we meet with thee some two hours hence now?
Why hark you Sir.
Enough, command my life,
Get me the widow, isle get thee the wife.
Oh that's now with me past hope; yet I must love her,
I would I could not do it.
Yonder's the villain Master.
Francisco; I am happy.
Let's both draw Mr. for ther's no body with him; Stay,
stay Mr.
Doe not you draw till I be ready too,
Let's draw just both together, and keep even.
What and we killed him now, before he saw us?
No, then he will hardly see to read the letter.
That's true: good counsel marry.
Marry thus much Sir,
You may kill him lawfully, all the while he's a reading on it, as an
Anabaptist may lie with a Brothers wife, all the while he's a sleep.
He turns; he looks: Come on Sir, you, Francisco,
I loved your father well, but you're a villain:
He loved me well too; but you love my wife Sir,
After whom take you that? I will not say
Your Mother plaid false.
No Sir, you were not best.
But I will say, in spite of thee, my wife's honest.
And I, my Mistress.
You may, isle give you leave.
Leave, or leave not, there, she defies you Sir;
Keep your adulterous sheet to wind you in,
Or cover your forbidden parts at least,
For fear you want one; many a lecher may
That sins in Cambric now.
And in Lawn too Master.
Nay read, and tremble Sir.
Now shall I do it Mr? I see a piece of an open seam in
his Shirt, shall I run him in there, for my Sword has ne'er a point.
No, let him foam a while.
If your Sword be no better than mine, we shall not kill
him by daylight, we had need have a Lantern.
Talk not of Lanterns, he's a sturdy Lecher,
He would make the horns fly about my ears.
I apprehend thee: admirable woman,
Which to love best I know not; thy wit, or beauty.
Now Sir, have you well viewed your bastard there,
Got of your lustful brain? give you joy on it.
I thank you Sir, although you speak in jest,
I must confess, I sent your wife this letter,
And often courted her, tempted, and urged her.
Did you so Sir?
Then first before I kill thee, I for-warn thee my house▪
And I before I kill thee, for-warn thee my office; dye to
morrow next, thou never get Warrant of me more, for love,
or money.
Remember but again, from whence I came Sir,
And then I know you cannot think amiss of me.
How's this?
Pray hear him: it may grow to a peace:
For Mr. though we have carried the business nobly, we are not
altogether so valiant as we should be.
Peace, thou say true in that: what is it you'd say Sir?
Was not my Father, (quietness be with him)
And you sworn Brothers?
Why Right: that's it urges me.
And could you have a thought that I could wrong you,
As far as the deed goes?
You took the course Sir.
To make you happy, and you rightly weight it.
Troth isle put up at all adventures Mr.
It comes off very fair yet.
You in years
Married a young Maid: what do's the world judge think you?
Byr'lady Mr. knavishly enough I warrant you,
I should doe so my self.
Now to damp slander,
And all her envious and suspicious brood,
I made this friendly trial of her constancy,
Being Son to him you loved; that now confirmed
I might advance my Sword against the world
In her most fair defence, which joys my spirit.
Oh Mr. let me weep while you embrace him.
Francisco; is thy fathers soul in thee?
Lives he here still? what, will he show himself
In his male seed to me? give me thy hand,
Me thinks it feels now like thy fathers to me,
Prithee forgive me.
And me to, prithee.
Come to my house, thy father never missed it.
Fetch now as many Warrants as you please Sir,
And welcome too.
To see how soon mans goodness
May be abused.
But now I know thy intent
Welcome to all that I have.
Sir, I take it:
A gift so given, hang him that would forsake it.
Martino, I applaud my fortune, and thy Counsel.
You never have ill fortune when you follow it.
Here was things carried now, in the true nature of a quiet Duello;
A great strife ended, without the rough Soldier, or the—
And now you may take your journey.
Thou art my glee Martino.
SErvellio.
Mistress.
If that fellow come again,
Answer him without me: isle not speak with him.
He in the Nutmeg-colourd band forsooth.
I, that spic'd-Coxcomb Sir: Never may I marry again
If his right worshipful idolatrous face
Be not most fearfully painted, painted, so hope comfort me,
I might perceive it peel in many places,
And under's eye, lay a betraying foulness,
As Maids sweep dust of the house, all to one corner,
It showed me enough there, prodigious pride
That cannot but fall scornfully. I'm a woman,
Yet I praise heaven, I never had the ambition
To go about to mend a better Workman,
She ever shames her selfi'th' end, that do's it.
He that likes me not now, as heaven made me,
I will never hazard hell to doe him a pleasure;
Nor lye every night like a Woodcock in past
To please some gaudy Goose in the morning:
A wise man likes that best, that is it self,
Not that which only seems, though it look fairer;
Heaven send me one that loves me, and I'm happy,
Of whom isle make great trial ere I have him,
Though I speak all men fair, and promise sweetly,
I learn that of my Suitors, it is their own,
Therefore injustice it were to keep it from 'em.
And so as I said sweet Widow.
Doe you begin where you left Sir?
I always desire when I come to a Window, to begin in the
middle of a sentence, for I presume she has a bad memory of a
woman that cannot remember what goes before.
Stay, stay Sir, let me look upon you well,
Are not you painted too?
How, painted, Widow?
Not painted Widow, I doe not use it trust me Sir.
That makes me love thee.
I mean painted Gentleman,
Or if you please to give him a greater stile Sir;
Blame me not Sir, its a dangerous age I tell you,
Poor simple dealing women had need look about 'em.
But is there such a fellow in the world, Widow,
As you are pleased to talk on?
Nay, here lately Sir.
Here? a Pox, I think I smell him, it is Vermilion sure, ha:
oil of Ben, doe but show him me Widow, and let me never hope
for comfort, if I doe not immediately gueld him, and grind his
face upon one of the stones.
Suffices you've expressed me your love and valour, and man∣lie
hate against that unmanly pride: but Sir, isle save you that la∣bore,
he never comes within my door again.
Isle love your door the better while I know it Widow; a
pair of such Brothers were fitter for Posts without door indeed,
to make a show at a new-chosen Magistrates gate, than to be used
in a Women's Chamber: No, sweet Widow, having me, you've
the truth of a man, all that you see of me, is full mine own, and
what you see, or not see, shall be yours: I ever hated to be behol∣ding
to art, or to borrow any thing but money.
True, and that you never use to pay again.
What matter i'st? if you be pleased to do it
For me, I hold it as good.
Oh, soft you Sir I pray.
Why in faith you may and you will.
I know that Sir.
Troth, and I would have my will then if I were as you.
Ther's few women else but has.
But since I cannot hav't in all Signior, I care not to have
it in any thing.
Why you may hav't in all, and you will Widow.
Pish, I would have one that loves me for my self Sir,
Not for my wealth: and that I cannot have.
What say you to him that do's the thing you wish for?
Why here's my hand, isle marry none but him then.
Your hand, and faith.
My hand, and faith.
It is I then.
I shall be glad on it trust me: shrew my heart else.
A match.
Give you joy, sweet Widow.
Joy to you both.
How?
Nay, ther's no starting now, I have you fast Widow,
You're witness Gentlemen.
We'll be deposed on it.
Am I betrayed to this then? then I see
It is for my wealth; a women's wealth's her Traitor.
It is for love chiefly, I protest sweet Widow,
I count wealth but a fiddle to make us merry.
Hence.
Why you're mine.
I doe renonunce it utterly.
Have I not hand and faith?
Sir, take your course.
With all my heart; ten courses and you will Widow.
Sir, Sir, I'm not so gamesome as you think me,
Isle stand you out by law.
By Law? O cruel merciless woman,
To talk of law, and know I have no money.
I will consume my self to the last stamp,
Before thou got me.
Life, isle be as wilful then too: Isle rob all the Carriers
in Christendom, but isle have thee, and find my Lawyers money:
I scorn to get thee under form pauperise,
I have too proud a heart, and love thee better.
As for you Gentlemen, isle take course against you;
You came into my house without my leave;
Your practices are cunning, and deceitful;
I know you not, and I hope law will right me.
It is sufficient that your husband knows 'em,
It is not your business to know every man,
An honest wife contents her self with one.
You know what you shall trust to, pray depart Sir,
And take your rude confederates along with you,
Or I will send for those shall force your absence:
I'm glad I found your purpose out so soon.
How quickly may poor women be undone.
Lose thee? by this hand isle fee fifteen Counsellours
first, though I undo a hundred poor men for 'em, and isle make
'em yaul one an other deaf, but isle have thee.
Me?
Thee.
I, fret thy heart out.
Were I he now
Il'd see thee starve for man before I had thee.
Pray counsel him to that Sir, and isle pay you well.
Pay me? pay your next husband.
Doe not scorn't gallant: a worse woman than I,
Has paid a better man than you.
1 Why how now sweet Widow?
Oh kind Gentlemen,
I am so abused here.
Abused?
What will you doe Sirs? put up your weapons.
Nay, they are not so easily drawn, that I must tell you
you, mine has not been out this three ears; mary in your cause
Widow, it would not be long a drawing. Abused? by whom
Widow?
Nay, by a beggar.
A beggar? Isle have him whipped then, and sent to the
house of Correction.
Ricardo? Sir.
Ricardo? nay by the mass, he's a Gentleman beg∣ger,
he'll be hanged before he be whipped. Why you'll give me leave
to clap him up I hope?
It is too good for him; that's the thing he would have,
He would be clapped up whether I would or no methinks;
Placed two of his companions privately,
Unknown to me, on purpose to entrap me
In my kind answers, and at last stole from me,
That which I fear will put me to some trouble,
A kind of verbal courtesy, which his witnesses
And he forsooth call by the name of contract.
O politic villain,
But I am resolved Gentlemen,
If the whole power of my estate can cast him,
He never shall obtain me.
Hold you there Widow,
Well fare your heart for that y'faith.
Stay, stay, stay,
You broke no gold between you?
We broke nothing Sir.
Nor drunk to one an other?
Not a drop Sir.
You're sure of this you speak?
Most certain Sir.
Be of good comfort wench, isle undertake then
At mine own charge to overthrow him for thee.
O doe but that Sir, and you bind me to you,
Here shall I try your goodness. I'm but a woman,
And alas, ignorant in Law businesses,
Isle bear the charge most willingly.
Not a penny,
Thy love will reward me.
And where love must be,
It is all but one purse now I think on it.
All comes to one, sweet Widow.
Are you so forward?
I know his mates Attilio and Francisco,
Isle get out process and and attach 'em all,
We'll begin first with them.
I like that, strangely.
I have a daughter run away I thank her,
Isle be a scourge to all youth for her sake:
Some of 'em has got her up.
Your daughter? what Sir? Martia.
I a shake wed her,
I would have married her to a wealthy Gentleman,
No older than my self, she was like to be shrewdly hurt Widow.
It was too happy for her.
I'm of thy mind.
Farewell sweet Widow, isle about this strait,
Isle have 'em all three put into one Writ,
And so save charges.
How I love your providence.
Is my Nose board? Isle cross ye both for this,
Although it cost me as much o'th'other side,
I have enough, and I will have my humour.
I may get out of her, what may undo her too;
Hark you sweet Widow, you must now take heed,
You be of a sure ground, he will overthrow your else.
Marry fair hope forbid.
That will he: mary le' me see, le' me see: pray how
far past it between you and Ricardo?
Farther Sir
Than I would now it had, but I hope well yet.
Pray let me hear't: I've a shrewd guess of the Law.
Faith Sir, I rashly gave my hand and faith
To marry none but him.
Indeed?
I, trust me Sir.
I'm very glad on it, I'm an other witness,
And he shall have you now.
What said you Sir.
He shall not want money in an honest cause Wi∣dow,
I know I have enough, and I will have my humour.
Are all the world betrayers.
Pish, pish, Widow.
You've borne me in hand this three months, and now fobd me
I've known the time when I could please a woman,
Isle not be laughed at now; when I'm crossed, I'm a Tiger;
I have enough, and I will have my humour.
This only shows your malice to me Sir,
The world knows you have small reason to help him,
So much in your debt already.
Therefore I do it,
I have no way but that to help my self;
Though I lose you, I will not lose all Widow;
He marrying you, as I will follow't for him,
Isle make you pay his debts, or lye without him.
I looked for this from you.
I have not deceived you then:
Fret, vex, and chafe, I'm obstinate where I take.
Isle seek him out, and cheer him up, against her,
I have no charge at all, no child of mine own,
But two I got once of a scouring woman,
And they are both well provided for, they are in the Hospital:
I have ten thousand pound to bury me, and I will have my hue∣more.
A man must have a time to serve his pleasure,
As well as his dear Friend, I'm forced to steal from 'em,
To get this night of sport for mine own use▪
What says her amiable witty letter here?
Twixt nine and ten, now it is twixt six and seven,
As fit as can be; he that follows Lechery,
Leaves all at six and seven, and so doe I me thinks:
Sun sets at eight, its 'bove an hour high yet,
Some fifteen mile have I before I reach her,
But I've an excellent horse; and a good gallop,
Helps man as much as a provoking Banquet.
Here's one of 'em, begin with him first Officers.
By virtue of this writ we attach your body Sir.
My body? life, for what?
Hold him fast Officers.
The least of us can do it, now his Sword's off Sir,
We have a trick of hanging upon Gentlemen,
We never lose a man.
O treacherous fortune,
Why what's the cause?
The Widow's business Sir,
I hope you know me?
For a busy Coxcomb,
This fifteen year, I take it.
Oh you're mad Sir,
Simple though you make me, I stand for the Widow.
She's simply stood for then: what's this to me Sir,
Or she, or you, or any of these flesh-hooks?
You're like to find good bayl before you leave us,
Or lye till the Suit's tried.
O my loves misery.
I'm put in trust to follow't, and Isle do it with all
severity;
Build upon that Sir.
How I would curss my self.
Look, here's Francisco,
Will you believe me, now you see his qualities?
It is strange to me.
I tell you it is his fashion,
He never stole away in's life from me,
But still I found him in such scurvy Company;
A pox on thee Francisco wilt never leave thy old
Tricks, are these lousy Companions for thee?
Pish, pish, pish.
Here they be all three now: 'prehend 'em Officers.
What's this?
I gave you warning enough to make away,
I'm in for the Widows business, so are you now.
What, all three in a noose? this is like a Widows busi∣nos
indeed.
Sh'as caught you Gentlemen, as you caught her,
The Widow means now, to begin with you Sir.
I thank her heartily, sh'as taught me wit: for had I been
any but an ass, I should have begun with her indeed: by this light,
the Widows a notable House-wife, she bestirs her self, I have a
greater mind to her now thau ever I had: I cannot go to prison
for one I love better I protest, that's one good comfort,
And what are you I pray Sir, for a Coxcomb?
It seems you know me by your anger Sir.
I've a near guess at you Sir.
Guess what you please Sir,
I'm he ordained to trounce you, and indeed
I am the man must carry her.
I, to me.
But Isle swear she's a beast, and she carry thee.
Come, wher's your Bail Sir, quickly, or away.
Sir, I'm held wrongfully, my Bayls taken already.
Where i'st Sir, where?
Here they be both: pox on you, they were taken before
I'd need of 'em, and you be honest Officers let's Bail one another,
for by this hand, I doe not know who will else:—'odds' light is
he come too? I'm in for midnight then, I shall never find the way
out again: my debts, my debts:
I'm like to dye in the hole now.
We have him fast old Signior, and his Consorts,
Now you may lay action on action on him.
That may I Sir, y'faith.
And I'd not spare him Sir.
Know you me Officers?
Your bounteous worship Sir.
I know the rascal so well, I dare not look upon him.
Upon my worth deliver me that Gentleman.
Which Gentleman?
Not you Sir, you're too hasty;
No, nor you neither Sir: pray stay your time.
Ther's all but I now, and I dare not think he means me.
Deliver me Ricardo.
O sure he lies.
Or else I doe not hear well.
Signior Ricardo.
Well, what's the matter? you may go, who let's you?
It is his worships pleasure Sir to Bayl you.
Bayl me?
I will, I Sir, look in my face man,
Thou'st a good cause, thoul't pay me when thour't able?
I, every penny, as I am a Gentleman.
No matter if thou dost not, then, Isle make thee,
And that's as good at all times.
But I pray Sir,
You go against the Hair there.
Against the Widow you mean Sir,
Why it is my purpose truly, and against you too,
I saw your politic Combination,
I was thrust out between you: here stands one
Shall doe as much for you, and he stands rightest,
His cause is strong and fair, nor shall he want
Money, or means, or friends, but he shall have her,
I've enough, and I will have my humour.
Hang thee; I have a purss as good as thine.
I think they are much alike, they are rich knaves both.
'Heart, and I take your railing at my Patron Sir,
Isle cramp your joints.
Let him alone sweet honey,
I thank thee for thy love though.
This is wonderful.
Oh Ricardo,
It is seven, struck in my pocket: I lose time now.
What say Francisco?
I have mighty business,
That I ne'er thought on: get me Baild, I'm spoiled else.
Why you know, it is such a strange miraculous courtesy,
I dare not be too forward, to ask more of him,
For fear he repent this, and turn me in again.
Doe somewhat and you love me.
Isle make trial faith
May it please you Sir:—life if I should spoil all now?
What say Ricardo?
Only a thing by'th'way Sir,
Use your own pleasure.
That I like well from thee.
It were good, and those two Gentlemen were Bayld too,
They are both my witnesses.
They are well, they are well:
And they were Bayld, we know not where to find 'em,
Let 'em go to prison, they'll be forth-comming the better,
I have enough, and I will have my humour.
I knew there was no more good to be done upon him,
It is well I've this, heaven knows I never looked for it.
What plaguy luck had I to be ensnared thus?
O, patience.
Pox O your comfortable ignorance.
Martino, we ride slow.
But we ride sure Sir,
Your hasty riders often come short home Mr.
'Bless this fair company.
Here he's again too,
I am both shamed, and crossed.
See thou who's yonder, Martino?
We ride slow, isle besworn now Mr.
How now Francisco, art thou got before me?
Yes, thank my fortune, I am got before you.
What no? in hold?
I, of my troth poor Gentleman,
Your worship Sir, may doe a good deed to Bayl him.
Why doe not you do it then?
La you Sir now, my Mr. he has that honesty
He's loath to take a good deed from you Sir.
Isle tell you why I cannot, else I would Sir.
Luck I beseech thee,
If he should be wrought to Bail me now, to go to
His wife, it were happiness beyond expression.
A matter but of controversy.
That's all, trust me Sir.
Francisco shall ne'er lye for it; he's my friend,
And I will Bayl him.
He's your secret friend Mr.
Think upon that.
Give him his liberty Officers,
Upon my peril, he shall be forth coming.
How I am bound to you?
Know you whom you cross Sir?
It is at your Sisters suit, be well advised Sir,
How, at my Sisters suit? take him again then.
Why Sir, doe you refuse me?
Isle not hear thee.
This is unkindly done sir.
It is wisely done sir.
Well shot, foul malice.
Flattery stinks worse sir.
You'll never leave till I make you stink as bad sir.
Oh Martino, have I this for my late kindness?
Alas poor Gentleman, dost complain to me?
Thou shalt not fare the worse for it: Hark you Master,
Your sisters suit said you?
I sir, my wives sister.
And shall that dant you Master? think again,
Why were it your mothers suit; your mothers suit,
Mark what I say, the dearest suit of all suits,
You're bound in conscience sir to bayl this Gentleman.
Yea, am I so, how proov'st thou that Martino?
Have you forgot so soon, what he did lately?
Has he not tried your wife to your hand master?
To cut the throat of slander and suspicion;
And can you do too much for such a man?
Shall it be said, I serve an ingratfull master?
Never Martino; I will bayl him now,
And it were at my wives suit.
It is like to be so.
And I his friend, to follow your example Mr.
Precious Martino.
You've done wondrous well sir.
Your sister shall give you thanks.
This makes him mad sir.
We'll follow't now to the proof.
Follow your humour out,
The widow shall find friends.
And so shall he sir,
Money and means.
Hear you me that old huddle.
Mind him not, follow me and isle supply thee,
Thou shalt give all thy Lawyers double fees,
I've buried money enough to bury me,
And I will have my humour.
Fare thee well once again my dear Francisco,
I prithee use my house.
It is my purpose sir.
Nay you must do it then; though I am old, I'm free.
And when you want a warrant, come to me.
That will be shortly now, within this few hours.
This fell out strangely happy. Now to horse,
I shall be nighted; but an hour or two
Never breaks square in love; he comes in time
That comes at all; absence is all loves crime.
COme, come, let's watch th'event on yonder hill,
If he need help, we can relieve him suddenly.
I, and with safety too, the hill being watched Sir.
Have you the Blew cotes and the Beards?
They are here Sir.
Come, come away then, a fine Cock shoot evening.
Kuck before, and Kuck behind, &amp;c.
Troth you're the merriest, and delightfulst company Sir,
That ever Traveller was blessed withal,
I praise my fortune that I overtook you Sir.
Pish, I've a hundred of 'em.
And believe me Sir,
I'm infinitely taken with such things.
I see ther's music in you, you kept time me thought
Pretty and handsomely with your little hand there.
It only shows desire, but troth, no skill Sir.
Well, while our horses walk down yonder hill Sir,
Isle have an other for you.
It rids way pleasantly.
Le' me see now: one confounds an other sir,
You've heard this certainly: Come my dainty Doxes.
Oh, that's all the Country over sir,
Ther's scarce a Gentlewoman, but has that pricked.
Well, here comes one I'm sure you never heard then.
I keep my Horse, I keep my Whore,
I take no Rents, yet am not poor;
I traverse all the Land about,
And yet was born to never a foot:
With Partridge plump, with Woodcock fine
I doe at midnight often dine;
And if my Whore be not in case,
My Hostess daughter he has her place;
The Maids sit up, and watch their turns,
If I stay long the Tipster mourns;
The Cook-maid has no mind to sin,
Though tempted by the Chamber lin;
But when I knock, oh how they bustle,
The Ostler yawns, the Geldings justly.
If Maid but sleep, oh how they curse his!
And all this comes of, Deliver your purse sir.
How Sir?
Few words: quickly come, deliver your purse sir.
You're not that kind of Gentleman, I hope sir,
To sing me out of my money?
It is most sit
Art should be rewarded: you must pay your Music sir
Where ere you come.
But not at your own carving.
Nor am I cōmon in it: Come, come your purse sir.
Say it should prove the undoing of a Gentleman?
Why sir, doe you look for more conscience in us, than
In Usurers? young gentleman, you've small reason for that y'faith.
There it is, and all I have; and so truth comfort me,
All I know where to have.
Sir, that's not written
In my belief yet; search, it is a fine evening,
Your horse can take no harm: I must have more sir.
May my hopes perish, if you have not all sir,
And more I know than your compassionate charity
Would keep from me, if you but felt my wants.
Search, and that speedily: if I take you in hand,
You'll find me rough, me thinks men should be ruled,
When they are so kindly spoke too, fie upon it.
Good fortune, and my wit assist me then,
A thing I took in haste, and never thought on it:
Look sir, I've searched, here's all that I can find,
And you're so covetous, you will have all you say,
And I'm content you shall, being kindly spoke too.
A pox of that young devil of a handful long.
That 'as afraid many a tall thief from a rich purchase.
This, and my money sir, keeps company;
Where one goes, the other must; assure your soul
They vowed never to part.
Hold, I beseech you sir.
You rob a prisoners box, and you rob me, sir.
There it is again.
I knew 't would never prosper with you;
Fie, rob a younger Brother, oh take heed sir,
It is against nature that, perhaps your Father
Was one sir, or your Uncle, it should seem so
By the small means was left you, and less manners.
Go, keep you still before me, and do you hear me;
To pass away the time to the next Town,
I charge you sir, sing all your Songs for nothing—
Oh horrible punishment.—A Song:
Honest Gentleman.
How now, what art thou?
Stand you in need of help?
I made all haste I could, my Master charged me.
A Knight of worship; he saw you first assaulted.
From top of yonder hill.
Thanks honest friend.
I taste this trick already.—
Look, hoe's gone sir,
Shall he be stopped; what is he?
Let him go sir;
He can rejoice in nothing, that's the comfort.
You have your purse still then?
I, thanks fair fortune,
And this grym handful.
We were all so afraid o'you,
How my good Lady cried Ohelp the gentleman,
It is a good woman that: but you're too mild sir,
You should have marked him for a villain faith
Before h'ad gone, having so sound a means too.
Why there's the jest man; he had once my purse.
Oh▪ villain, would you let him scope unmasacred?
Nay, hear me sir, I made him yield it straight again,
And so hope bless me, with an uncharged Pistol.
'Troth I should laugh at that.
It was discharged Sir,
Before I meddled with it.
I'm glad to hear't.
Why how now, What's your will?
Ho, Latrocinio, Occulto, Silvio.—
What are you caught sir?
The Pistol cannot speak.
He was too young,
I ever thought he could not; yet I feared him.
You've found out ways too merciless to betray
Under the veil of friendship, and of charity.
Away sirs, bear him in to the next Cops, and strip him.
Brandino's Copps, the Justice?
Best of all sit, a man of law?
A Spider lies unsuspected in the corner of a buckeram bag, man.
What seek you sirs? take all and use no cruelty,
You shall have Songs enough.
How round the world goes, and every thing that's in it,
The Tides of gold and silver, ebb and flow in a minute:
From the Usurer to his Sons, there a current swiftly runs,
From the Sons to Queens in chief, from the gallant to the Thief,
From the Thief unto his Host, from the Host to Husband-men;
From the Country to the Court, and so it comes to us again.
How round the world goes, and every thing that's in it,
The Tides of gold and silver, ebb and flow in a minute.
What time of night is it?
Time of night doe you call it?
Its so late, it is almost early Mistress.
Fie on him, ther's no looking for him then;
Why sure this Gentleman apprehends me not.
It is happy then y'arrid of such a fool Mistress.
Nay sure Wench, if he find me not out in this
Which were a beaten path to any wiseman,
Isle never trust him with my reputation;
Therefore I made this trial of his wit,
If he cannot conceive what's good for himself,
He will worse understand what's good for me.
But suppose Mrs. as it may be likely,
He never saw your letter?
How thou plyest me,
With suppositions? why I tell thee wench,
Tic equally as impossible for my husband
To keep it from him, as to be young again,
Or as his first wife knew him, which he brags on
For bearing children by him.
Ther's no remedy then,
I must conclude Francisco is an Ass.
I would my letter, wench, were here again,
I'd know him wiser ere I sent him one;
And travail some five year first.
So h'ad need methinks,
To understand the words, methinks the words
Themselves should make him do it, had he but the perseverance
Of a Cock sparrow, that will come at philip,
And can nor write, nor read poor fool, this Coxcomb
He can doe both, and your names but Philippe,
And yet to see, if he can come when's called,
He never shall be called again for me sirha.
Well, as hard as the world goes, we'll have a Song we nch,
We'll not sit up for nothing.
That's poor comfort though.
Better then any's brought, for ought I see yet? So set to
your Lute.
1 If in this question I propound to thee
Be any, any choice,
Let me have thy voice.
2 You shall most free.
I Which had thou rather be
If thou might choose thy life,
A Fools, a fools Mistress,
Or an old mans wife?
2 The choice is hard, I know not which is best,
One ill you're bound too, and I think that's least.
1 But being not bound, my dearest sweet,
I could shake off the other.
2 Then as you lose your sport by one,
You lose your name by t'other.
1 You counsel well, but love refuses,
What good counsel often chooses.
I have got my self unbound yet: merciless villains,
I never felt such hardness since life dwelt in me;
It is for my sins: That light in yonder Window
That was my only comfort in the woods,
Which oft the trembling of a leaf would lose me,
Has brought me thus far, yet I cannot hope
For succour in this plight, the world's so pitiless,
And every one will fear or doubt me now:
To knock will be to bold, isle to the gate,
And listen if I can hear any stirring.
Was ever man so crossed? no it is but sweat sure,
Or the dew dropping from the leaves above me,
I thought'thad bled again: these winching businesses
Are strange unlucky things, and fatal fooleries,
No mar'l so many gallants die ere thirty,
It is able to vex out a mans heart in five year,
The crosses that belong to it: first arrested,
That set me back two mangy hours at least,
Yet that's a thing my heat could have forgiven,
Because arresting, in what kind soever,
Is a most Gentleman-like affliction:
But here, within a mile of the town forsooth,
And two mile off this place, when a mans oath
Might ha'been taken for his own security,
And his thoughts brisk, and set upon the business,
To light upon a roguy flight of Thieves,
Pox on'em, here's the length of one of their whistles,
But one of my dear Rascals, I pursued so,
The Gaol has him, and he shall bring ou'ts fellows:
Had ever young mans love such crooked fortune?
I'm glad I'm so near yet; the Surgeon bad me too
Have a great care; I shall never think of that now.
One of the Thieves come back again? Isle stand close;
He dares not wrong me now, so near the house,
And call in vain it is, till I see him offer't.
Life, what should that be? a prodigious thing
Stands just as I should enter, in that shape too,
Which always appears terrible.
What ere it be, it is made strong against me
By my ill purpose. For'tis mans own sin
That puts on armour upon all his evils,
And gives them strength to strike him: were it less
Then what it is, my guilt would make it serve;
A wicked mans own shadow has distracted him:
Were this a business now to save an honour,
As it is to spoil one, I would pass this then
Stuck all hells horrors i'thee: now I dare not.
Why may it not be the spirit of my Father
That loved this man so well, whom I make haste
Now to abuse? And I have been crossed about it
Most fearfully hitherto, if I well think on it;
Escaped death but lately too, nay most miraculously;
And what do's fond man venture all these ills for,
That may so sweetly rest in honest peace?
For that which being obtained, is as he was
To his own sense but removed nearer still
To death eternal: what delight has man
Now at this present, for his pleasant sin
Of yesterdays committing? alas, it is vanished,
And nothing but the sting remains within him.
The kind man baild me too; I will not do it now
And it were but only that: how blessed were man,
Might he but have his end appear still to him,
That he might read his actions in the event?
'T would make him write true, though he never meant.
Whose Check so ere thou art, Fathers, or Friends,
Or Enemies, I thank thee, peace require thee;
Light, and the lighter Mistress both farewell.
He keeps his promise best that breaks with hell.
He's gone to call the rest, and makes all speed,
Isle knock what ere befalls, to please my fears,
For no compassion can be less than theirs.
He's come, he's come; oh are you come at last sir?
Make little noise, away, he'll knock again else.
I should have bin at I stria by day-break too,
Near to Valerias house the wealthy Widows,
There waits one purposely to doe me good.
What will become of me?
Oh, you're a sweet Gallant, this your hour?
Give me your hand; come, come sir, follow me,
Isle bring you to light presently: softly, softly sir. Exeunt.
I should have given him up to all my thoughts
The dullest young man, if he had not found it;
So short of apprehension, and so worthless,
He were not fit for women's fellowship;
I've been at cost too for a Banquet for him;
Why't would have killed my heart, and most specially
To think that man should ha'no more conceit;
I should have thought the worse on's wit for ever,
And blamed mine own for too much forwardness.
Oh Mistress, Mistress.
How now, what's the news?
Oh, I was out of my wits for a minute and a half.
Ho?
They are scarce settled yet Mistress.
What's the matter?
Doe you ask that seriously?
Did you not hear me squeak?
How? sure you're out of thy wits indeed.
Oh, I'm well now,
To what I was Mistress.
Why whore's the gentleman?
The gentleman's forth-comming, and a lovely one,
But not Francisco.
What sai'st, not Francisco?
Pish, hoe's a coxcomb, think not on him Mistress.
What's all this?
I'ave often heard you say, ye'ad rather have
A wise man in his shirt than a Fool featherd,
And now fortune has sent you one, a sweet young gentleman,
Robed even to nothing but what first he brought with him,
The slaves had stripped him to the very shirt Mistress,
I think it was a shirt, I know not well,
For Gallants wear both now adays.
This is strange.
But for a face, a hand, and as much skin
As I durst look upon, hoe's a most sweet one;
Francisco is a child of Egypt to him:
I could not but in pity to the poor gentleman,
Fetch him down one of my old Masters Suits.
It was charitably done,
You'd say Mistress, if you had seen him as I did.
Sweet youth, Isle be sworn Mistress hoe's the loveliest
Proper'st young gentleman, and so you'll say your self,
If my Masters clothes do not spoil him, that's all the fear now,
I would it had been your luck to have seen him
Without'em, but for scarring on you.
Go, prithee fetch him in whom thou cōmend'st so,
Since fortune sends him surely we'll make much on him;
And better he deserves our love, and welcome,
Than the respectless fellow it was prepared for;
Yet if he please mine es never so happily,
I will have trial of his wit, and faith,
Before I make him partner with my honour,
It was just Francisco's case, and he deceived me;
Isle take more heed of the next sor't; perhaps now
To furnish his distress, he will appear
Full of fair promising Courtship; but Isle prove him then
For a next meeting, when he needs me not,
And see what he performs then when the storm
Of his so rude misfortunes is blown over,
And he himself again: A distressed mans flatteries
Are like vows made in drink, or bonds in prison,
There's poor assurance in 'em: when hoe's from me,
And in's own power, then I shall see his love.
'Masse here he comes.
Never was star-cross'd gentleman
More happy in a courteous virgins love,
Than I in yours.
I'm sorry they are no better for you,
I wished 'em hansomer, and more in fashion,
But truly Sir, our house affords it not:
There is a Suit of our Clerks, hangs in the garret,
But that's far worse than this, if I may judge
With modesty of men's matters.
I deserve not
This, dear, and kind gentlewoman, is yond' your Mistress?
Why trust me, here's my Husband young again,
It is no sin to welcome you, Sweet gentleman.
I am so much indebted, courteous Lady,
To the unmatched charity of your house,
My thanks are such poor things they would but shame me.
Beshrew thy heart for bringing o'him: I fear me
I have found wit enough already in him,
If I could truly but resolve my self
My husband was thus handsome at nineteen,
'Troth I should think the better of him at fourscore now.
Nay Mistress, what would he be, were he in fashion,
A hempen curse on those that put him out on it,
That now appears so handsome, and so comely in clothes
Able to make a man an unbeliever,
And good for nothing but for shift, or so
If a man chance to fall in the ditch with better?
This is the best, that ever I marked in 'em,
A man may make him ready in such clothes
Without a candle.
I for shame of himself Wench.
My Master do's it oft in winter mornings,
And never sees himself till he be ready.
No, nor then neither, as he should do Wench.
I am sorry gentle Sir, we cannot show you
A courtesy, in all points answerable
To your undoubted worth: your name I crave sir.
Ansaldo, Lady.
It is a noble name Sir.
The most unfortunate now.
So doe I think truly
As long as that Suites on.
The most unfitting,
And unprovidest sir of all our courtesies,
I doe presume is that you've past already,
Your pardon but for that, and wee'r encouraged.
My faithful service, Lady.
Please you Sir
To taste the next a poor slight Bancket, for sure I think you were▪
Unluckily prevented of your supper sir.
My fortune makes me more than amends Lady,
In your sweet kindness, which so nobly shown to me,
It makes me bold to speak my occasions to you:
I am this morning, that with clearness now
So cheerfully hastens me, to meet a Friend
Upon my states establishing, and the place
Ten mile from hence: oh, I am forced unwillingly
To crave your leave for it, which done I return
In service plentiful.
Is it so important?
If I should fail, as much as my undoing.
I think too well of you, to undo you sir,
Upon this small acquaintance.
My great happiness.
But when should I be sure of you here again sir?
As fast as speed can possibly return me.
You will not fail?
May never wish go well with me then.
There's to bear charges sir.
Courtesy dwells in you.
I brought my horse up with me from the woods,
That's all the good they left me, against their wills too,
May your kind breast never want comfort Lady,
But still supplied, as liberally as you give.
Farewell sir, and be faithful.
Time shall prove me.
In my opinion now, this young mans likeliest
To keep his word, he's modest, wise, and courteous;
He has the language of an honest soul in him:
A women's reputation may lye safe there,
I'm much deceived else, he has a faithful eye
If it be well observed.
Good speed be with thee sir;
He puts him to it y'faith.
Violetta.
Mistress.
Alas, what have we done wench?
What's the matter Mistress?
Run, run, call him again; he must stay tell him;
Though it be upon's undoing, wee'r undone else,
Your Masters clothes, their known the Country over.
Now by this light that's true, and well remembered,
But ther's no calling of him, he's out of sight now.
Oh what will people think?
What can they think Mistress?
The Gentleman has the worst on it: were I he now
I'd make this ten mile, forty mile about
Before Il'd ride through any market town with 'em.
Will he be careful think?
My life for yours Mistress.
I shall long mightily to see him again.
And so shall I, I shall nev'r laugh till then.
IT goes well hitherto, my sweet Protector.
I, and shall still to the end, to the end my honey,
Wherefore have I enough, but to hav't go well sir?
My whole State on it; thou overthrowst him Widow.
I hope well still sir.
Hope? be certain Wench:
I make no question now, but thou art mine,
As sure as if I had thee in thy night-geer.
By'r Lady, that I doubt Sir.
Oh it is clear wench
By one thing that I marked.
What's that good sweet sir?
A thing that never failed me.
Good sir, what?
I heard our Counsellour speak a word of comfort
Invita voluntate, ho, that's he wench,
The word of words, the precious chiefy's faith.
Invita voluntate, what's the meaning sir?
Nay there I leave you, but assure you thus much,
I never heard him speak that word in my life,
But the cause went on's side, that I market ever.
Doe, doe, and spare not: thou would talk with her.
Yes, with your leave, and liking.
Doe, my adoption,
My chosen child, and thou holdst so obedient
Sure thou wilt live, and cozen all my kindred.
A Child's part in your love, that's my ambition sir.
Go, and deserve it then: please me well now;
I love wrangling a life Boy; ther's my delight,
I have no other venery but vexation,
That's all my honey now: smartly now to her,
I've enough and I will have my humour.
This need not ha'been Widow.
You say right sir.
No, nor your treachery, your close conspiracy
Against me for my wealth, need not have been neither.
I had your fairly, I scorn treachery
To your woman that I never meant to marry,
Much more to you whom I reserved for wife.
How, wise?
I, Wife, Wife, Widow, be not ashamed on it,
It's the best calling ever woman came to,
And all your grace indeed, brag as you list.
Ha, ha.
I grant you sir, But not to be your wife.
Oh, oh.
Not mine? I think it is the best bargain
That ere thou made i'thy life, or ever shall again,
When my heads laid: but that's not yet this threescore year,
Let's talk of nearer matters.
You're as near sir
As ere you're like to be, if Law can right me.
Now before conscience, you're a wilful housewife.
How?
I, and I fear you spend my goods lavishly.
Your goods?
I shall miss much I doubt me,
When I come to look over the Inventory.
Isle give you my word you shall sir.
Look too't Widow,
A night may come will call you to account for it.
Oh if you had me now sir in this heat
I doe but think how youl'd be revenged on me.
I, may I perish else; if I would not get
Three Children at a birth, and I could of the.
Take off your yongster there.
Take off your Widow first,
He shall have the last word, I pay for it dearly;
To her again sweet Boy, that sides the weaker.
I have enough, and I will have my humour.
O Brother see I'm up to the ears in law here;
Look, Copy upon Copy.
It were grief enough if a man did but hear on it
But I'm in pain to see it.
What sore eyes still Brother?
Worse, and worse Sister; the old women's water
Do's me no good.
Why, it is helped many sir.
It helps not me I'm sure—Mart, Oh, oh.
What ayls Martino too?
Oh, oh, the tooth-ach, the tooth-ach.
Ah poor worm, this he endures for me now.
There beats not a more mutual pulse of passion,
In a kind husband when his wife breeds child,
Than in Martino; I have marked it ever,
He breeds all my pains in's teeth still: and to quit me,
It is his eye-tooth too.
I, I, I, I.
Where did I hear late of a skilful fellow,
Good for all kind of Maladies? true, true sir,
His flag hangs out in town here, in the Cross Inn,
With admirable cures of all conditions,
It shows him a great travelling, and learned Empiric.
We'll both to him Martino.
Hark you Brother,
Perhaps you may prevail, as one indifferent.
I, about that sweet Widow.
True; speak low sir.
Well, what's the business, say, say.
Mary this Brother.
Call the young man aside, from the old Woolf there,
And whisper in his ear a thousand dollars
If he will vanish, and let fall the Suit,
And never putt's to no more cost and trouble.
Say me those words good sir, Isle make 'em worth
A chain of gold to you, at your Sisters wedding.
I shall doe much for that.
Welcome sweet heart,
Thou come most happily, I'm bold to send for thee
To make a purpose good.
I take delight forsooth
In any such employment.
Good wench trust me
How Sir, let fall the Suit? life Isle go naked first.
A thousand Dollars sir, think upon them.
Why they are but a thousand Dollars, when they are thought on.
A good round sum.
A good round Widow's better,
There's meat and money too. I have been bought
Out of my lands, and yielded, but (sir) scorn
To be bought out of my affection.
Why here's even just my University spirit,
I prized a piece of red Deer, above gold then.
My Patron would be mad, and he should hear on it.
I pray what's good Sir, for a wicked tooth?
Hanged, drawn, and quartering; is it a hollow one?
I it is a hollow one.
Then take the powder
Of a burnt Warrant, mixed with oil of Felon.
Why sure you mock me.
'Troth I think I doe sir.
Come hither honey; What's the news in whispers?
He will not be bought out.
No? that's strange Brother.
Pray take a little pains about this project then,
And try what that effects.
I like this better;
Look you sweet Gentles, see what I produce here
For amities sake, and peace, to end all controversy;
This Gentlewoman my charge left by her friends,
Whom for his person, and his portion,
I could bestow most richly, but in pity
To her affection, which lies bent at you sir,
I am content to yield to her desire.
At me?
But for this jar, 't had ne'er been offered.
I bring you flesh, and money, a rich heir,
And a Maid too, and that's a thing worth thanks, sir:
Nay, one that has rid fifteen mile this morning
For your love only.
Honey, hearken after her;
Being rich, I can have all my money there:
Ease my purse well, and never wage law further.
I have enough, yet I will have my humour.
Doe you love me forsooth?
Oh infinitely.
I doe not ask thee, that I meant to have thee,
But only to know what came in thy head to love me.
My time was come sir, that's all I can say.
Alas poor soul, where did thou love me first prithee?
In happy hour be it spoke, out at a window sir.
A window? prithee clap it too, and call it in again:
What was I doing then should make thee love me?
Twiriling your band-string, which me thought became you
so generously well.
It was a good quality to choose a husband for: That
love was likely to be tied in Matrimony, that begun in a band∣string:
yet I have known as much come to pass ere now upon a
tassel. Fare you well Sister; I may be consent in a Maid, I cannot
in a Widow.
Art thou come home again; stickst thou there still?
I will defend thee still then.
Sir you malice
Will have enough on it.
I will have my humour.
Beggary will prove the sponge.
Sponge in thy gascoyns,
Thy gally-gascoyns there.
Ho brave Protector.
I thought it would come to open Wars again,
Let 'em agree as they will; two testy Fopps,
Isle have a care of mine eyes.
I, of my chops.
Away, out with the Banner, send's good luck to day.
I warrant you; your name's spread Sir, for an Empiric.
Theres an old Mason troubled with the Stone,
Has sent to you this morning for your counsel,
He would have ease fain.
Mary I cannot blame him sir.
But how he will come by it, there lies the question,
You must do somewhat sir, for hoe's swollen most piteously,
Has urine in him now was brewed last March.
Twill be rich gear for Dyers.
I would it were come to that sir.
Le' me see, isle send him a whole Musket-charge of Gun-powder.
Gun-powder? what sir, to break the stone?
I by my faith sir,
It is the likeliest thing I know to do it,
I'm sure it breaks stone-walls, and Castles down,
I see no reason, but't should break the stone.
Nay, use you pleasure sir.
'Troth, if that doe not
I have nothing else that will.
I know that too.
Why then you're a Coxcomb to make question on it.
Go call in all the rest, I have employment for them.
When the high-wayes grow thin with Travellers,
And few Portmantues stirring, as all trades
Have their dead time wee see; Thee very, poor takings,
And Lechery cold doings, and so forwards still;
Then doe I take my Inn, and those Curmoogions,
Whose Purses I can never get abroad,
I take 'em at more ease here in my chamber,
And make 'em come to me, it's more state-like too:
Hang him that has but one way to his trade,
Hoe's like a mouth that eats but on one side,
And half cozens his belly, specially if he dine among Shavers,
And both-handed feeders: Stratio, Silvio, and Fiducio,
I will have none left out, there's parts for you.
For us? pray let's have 'em.
Change your selves
With all speed possible into several shapes
Far from your own, as you a Farmer sir,
A Grazier you, and you may be a Miller.
Oh no, a Miller comes too near a Thief,
That may spoil all again.
Some Country Taylor then.
That's near enough by'r lady, yet Isle venture that;
The Miller's a white Devil, he wears his theft
Like Innocence in badges most apparently
Upon his nose, sometimes between his lips;
The Tailor modestly between his legs.
Why pray, do you present that modest thief then,
And hark you, for the purpose.
Twill improve you sir.
Twill get believers, believe that my Masters,
Repute and confidence, and make all things clearer;
When you see any come, repair you to me
As samples of my skill; there are few arts
But have their shadows Sirs to set 'em off;
Then where the Art it self is but a shadow
What need is there my Friends? make hast away sirs.
Where are you Sir?
Not far man; What's the news?
The old Justice sir, whom we robed once by Moon-light,
And bound his man and he in haycock-time
With a rope made of horse-meat, and in pity
Left their Mares by 'em, which I think ere midnight
Did eat their hay-bound Masters both at liberty,—
Life, what of him man?
Hoe's enquiring earnestly
For the great man of art; indeed for you sir:
Therefore withdraw sweet sir; make your self dainty now,
And that's three parts of any profession.
I have enough on it.
How now, what thing's this?
Now by this light, the second part of the Justice
Newly revived with never a hair on's face,
It should be the first rather by his smoothness,
But I have known the first part written last:
It is he, or let me perish, the young Gentleman
We robbed, and stripped, but I am far from knowledge now.
One word I pray Sir.
With me gentle Sir?
Was there not lately seen about these parts sir
A knot of fellows, whose conditions
Are privily suspected?
Why doe you ask Sir?
There was a poor young gentleman robed last night.
Robbed?
Script of all y'faith.
Oh beastly Rascals.
Alas what was he?
Look o'me, and know him sir.
Hard-hearted villains, strip? troth when I saw you
Methought those clothes were never made for you sir.
Want made me glad o'em.
'Send you better fortunes sir:
That we may have about with you once again.
I thank you for your wish of love, kind sir.
It is with my heart y'faith; now store of coin
And better clothes be with you.
Ther's some honest yet
And charitably minded: how, wha'ts here to doe?
Here within this place is cured
All the griefs that were ev'r endured.
Nay there thou lie, I endured one last night,
Thou can not cure this morning; a strange Promiser.
Palsy, Gout, Hydropick Humour,
Breath that sticks beyond persumer,
Fistula in ano, Ulcer, Megrum,
Or what disease so ere beleaguer 'em,
Stone, Rupture, Squinancie, Imposthuma,
Yet too dear it shall not cost 'em.
That's conscionably said y'faith.
In brief, you cannot I assure you
Be unsound so fast, as I can cure you.
By'r Lady, you shall pardon me, isle not try't sir.
Martino, is not yond my hinder parts?
Yes, and your fore parts too Sir.
I trow so,
I never saw my hind parts in my life else,
No, nor my fore ones neither: what are you sir?
Are you a Justice pray?
A Justice? no truly.
How came this Suit to you then?
How, this Suit?
Why must he needs be a Justice sir, that wears it?
You'll find it so: it was made for no body else.
I paid for it.
Oh strange fortune, I have undone
The charitable woman.
He will be gone.
Martino, hold him fast, Isle call for aid.
Hold me? oh curss of fate!
Oh Mr, Mr.
What ayls Martino?
In my conscience
Has beat out the wrong tooth, I feel it now,
Three degrees of.
Oh slave, spoiled a fine Penman.
He lackd good manners though: lay hands of me?
I scorn all the deserts, that belong to it.
Why how now? what's the broil?
The man of art
I take you sir to be.
I'm the professor
Of those slight cures you read of in the Banner.
Our business was to you most skilful sir,
But in the way to you, right worshipful
I met a thief.
A thief?
With my clothes on sir,
Let but the Hose be searched, isle pawn my life
Ther's yet the Tailors bill in one of the pockets,
And a white thimble that I found in moon light,
Thou saw me when I put it in Martino.
Oy, oy.
Oh, has spoiled the worthiest Clark that ere drew War∣rant
here.
Sir, you're a stranger, but I must deal plain with you,
That Suit of clothes must needs come oddly to you.
I dare not say which way, that's my affliction.
Is not your worships name Signior Brandino sir?
It has been so, these threescore year and upwards.
I heard there was a robbery done last night
Near to your house.
You heard a truth then sir,
And I the man was robbed.
Ah that's too gross
Send him away for fear of farther mischief,
I doe not like him, he's a cunning knave.
I want but aid.
Within there.
Ceize upon that impudent thief.
Then here me speak.
Away;
Isle neither hear thee speak, nor wear those clothes again,
To prison with the varlet.
How am I punished?
Isle make thee bring out all, before I leave thee.
You've took an excellent course with this
bold villain sir.
I am sworn for service to the Common-wealth
sir,
What are these, learned sir?
Oh they are my patients.
Good morrow, Gout, Rupture, and Palsy.
It is farewell Gout almost, I thank your worship.
What no, you cannot part so soon, I hope?
You came but lately to me.
But most happily,
I can go near to leap sir.
What you cannot?
Away I say, take heed, be not to venturous though,
I've had you but three days, remember that.
Those three are better than three hundred sir.
Yet again?
Ease takes pleasure to be known sir.
You with the rupture there hernia in scrotum.
Pray let me see your space this morning, walk sir,
Isle take your distance strait: it was F. O. yesterday:
Ah sirha, here's a simple alteration,
Secundo gradu, ye F. U. already,
Here's a most happy change; be of good comfort sir,
Your knees are come, within three inches now
Of one an other; by to morrow noon
Isle make'em kiss, and justly.
'Bless your worship.
You have a hundred prayers in a morning sir.
Faith we have a few to pass away the day with:
Taylor, you had a stitch.
Oh good your worship
I have had none since Easter: were I rid
But of this whoreson Palsy, I were happy;
I cannot thread my needle.
No, that's hard,
I never marked so much.
It comes by fits sir.
Alas poor man: what would your worship say now
To see me help this fellow at an instant?
And make him firm from shaking?
As a steeple,
From the disease on it.
It is to me miraculous.
You, with your whoremaster disease, come hither;
Here, take me this round glass, and hold it steadfast,
Yet more sir, yet I say; so.
Admirable.
Go, live, and thread thy needle.
Here Martino:
Alas poor Fool, his mouth is full of praises
And cannot utter 'em.
No, what's the malady?
The fury of a tooth.
A tooth? ha, ha,
I though't had been some Gangrene, Fistula,
Canker, or Ramex.
No, its enough as it is sir.
My man shall ease that straight, sit you down there sir,
Take the tooth sirha, daintily, insensibly:
But what's your worships malady, that's for me sir?
Marry pray look you sir: your worships Counsel
About mine eyes.
Sore eyes? that's nothing too sir.
By'r Lady I that fell it▪ think it somewhat.
Have you no Convulsions? pricking aches sir,
Ruptures, or Apostemates?
No by my faith sir,
Not doe I desire to have 'em.
Those are ••res,
There doe I win my fame sir: quickly sirrah,
Reach me the eye-cup hither: doe you make water well sir?
I'm all well there.
You feel no grief in the kidney.
Sound, sound, sound sir.
Oh here's a breath sir, I must talk withal
One of these mornings.
There I think y'faith,
I am to blame indeed, and my Wises words
Are come to pass sir.
Oh, oh, it is not that, it is not that.
It is the next beyond it; there, there, there.
The best have their mistakings: now Isle fit you sir.
What's that sweet Sir, that comforts with his coolness?
Oh soverign gear: wink hard, and keep it in sir.
Oh, oh, oh.
Nay, here he goes, one twitch more, and he comes sir.
Ah, ho.
Spit out▪ I told you he was gone sir.
How cheers Martino?
Oh, I can answer you now Master,
I feel great ease sir.
So doe I Martino.
I'm rid of a sore burden, for my part Master,
Of a scaled little one.
Please but your worship now
To take three drops of the rich water with you,
Isle undertake your man shall cure you sir
At twice i'your own Chamber.
Shall he so sir?
I will uphold him in it.
Then will I do it sir.
How lively your man's now?
Oh I'm so light me thinks
Over I was.
What i•'t contents your worship?
Even what your worship please, I am not mercenary.
My purse is gone Martino.
How, your purse sir?
It is gon y'faith: I'ave been among some Rascals.
And that's a thing
I ever gave you warning of Master, you care not
What company you run into.
Lend me some money: chide me anon I pre' thee.
A pox on 'em for vipers, they ha'suckt blood o'me.
Oh Master.
How now man?
My purse is gon too.
How? Isle never take warning more of thee while I live
then, thou art an Hypocrite, and art not fit to give good coun∣sell
to thy Master, that can not keep from ill company thy
self.
This is most strange sir: both your purses gon.
Sir, I'd my hand on mine, when I came in.
Are you but sure of that; oh would you were.
As I'm of ease.
Then, they are both gon one way, be that your comfort.
I but what way's that sir?
That close knave in your Clothes he has got 'em both,
It is well you've clapped him fast.
Why that's impossible.
Oh tell not me sir: I have known purses gon,
And the Thief stand, and look one full in the face,
As I may doe your Worship, and your man now.
Nay, that's most certain Master.
I will make
That Rascal in my clothes answer all this then,
And all the robberies that have been don
Since the Moon changed; get you home first Martino,
And know if any of my wives things are missing,
Or any more of mine: tell her hoe's taken,
And by that token he has took both our purses.
That's an ill token Master.
That's all one sir,
She must have that or nothing, for I'm sure
The Rascal has left nothing else for a Token.
Begone, make hast again; and meet me part of the way.
Isle hang the villain,
And 't were for nothing but the Sowce he gave me.
Sir, I depart ashamed of my requital,
And leave this seal ring with you as a pledge
Of further thankfulness.
No, I beseech you sir.
Indeed you shall sir.
Oh, your worships word sir.
You shall have my word too, for a rare gedtleman
As ere I met withal.
Clear sight be with you sir;
If Conduit-water, and my Hostess Milk
That comes with the ninth child now, may afford it.
Life, I feared none but thee, my villainous toothdrawer,
There was no fear of me; I've often told you
I was bound Prentice to a Barber once,
But ran away in the second year.
I marry,
That made thee give a pull at the wrong tooth.
And me afraid of thee: what have we there sirs?
Some threescore Dollars in the Masters purse,
And sixteen in the Clerks, a Silver seal,
Two or three Amber beads, and four blank Warrants.
Warrants? where be they? the best news came yet.
'Masse here's his hand, and here's his Seal I thank him,
This comes most luckily: one of our fellows
Was took last night, we'll set him first at liberty,
And other good Boys after him: and if he
In the old Justices Suit, whom he robed lately,
Will come off roundly, we'll set him free too.
That were a good deed faith, we may in pity.
There's nothing done merely for pity now adays,
Money or Ware must help too.
Give me fortune, give me health,
Give me freedom, Isle get wealth.
Who complains his fate's amiss,
When he has the wide world his?
He that has the Devil in fee,
Can have but all, and so have wee.
Give us fortune, give us Health,
Give us freedom, we'll get wealth.
In every Hamlet, Town and City,
He has lands, that was born witty.
HOw well this Gentleman keeps his promise too?
Sure there's no trust in man.
They are all Francisco's,
That's my opinion Mistress: Fools, or false ones.
He might have had the honesty yet y'faith
To send my Masters clothes home.
I those clothes.
Colliers come by the door every day Mistress,
Nay, this is Market-day too, Powlterers, Butchers,
They would have lain most daintily in a Panyer,
And kept Veal from the wind.
Those clothes much trouble me.
Faith, and he were a gentleman as he seemed to be,
They would trouble him too I think;
Me thinks he should have small desire to keep 'em.
Faith and less pride to wear'em, I should think wench,
Unless he kept'em as a testimony
For after-times to show what misetie
He past in his young days, and then weep over 'em.
Weep Mistress? nay sure me thinks he should not weep
for laughing.
Martino? oh w'are spolld wench, are they come then?
Mistress, be of good cheer, I have excellent news for you,
comfort your heart, what have you to breakfast Mistress, you shall
have all again, I warrant you.
What says he Wench?
I'm loath to understand him.
Give me a note of all your things sweet Mistress,
You shall not lose a hair, take it of my word
We have him safe enough.
Olas, sweet wench
This man talks fearfully.
And I know not what yet
That's the worst Mistress.
Can you tell me pray,
Whether the Rascal has broke op my desk or no,
Ther's a fine little barrel of pom-citrons
Would have served me this seven year, oh, and my fig-cheese.
The fig of everlasting obloquy
Go with him if he have eat it, Isle make haste
He cannot eat it all yet, he was taken Mistress
Grossly, and beastly, how doe you think y'faith?
I know not sir.
Troth in my Masters clothes,
Would any thief but a beast been taken so?
Wench, wench.
I have grief enough of mine own to tend Mistress.
Did he confess the robbery?
O no, no Mistress
He's a young cunning Rascal, he confessed nothing;
While we were examining on him, he took away
My Masters purss and mine, but confessed nothing still.
That's but some slanderous injury raised against him.
Came not your Mr. with you?
No sweet Mistress.
I must make hast and meet him pray dispatch me then.
I have looked over all with special heedfulness,
Ther's nothing missed, I can assure you sir
But that Suit of your Masters.
I'm right glad on it
That Suit would hang him yet I would not have him hanged in
that Suit though, it will disgrace my Masters fashion for ever, and
make it as hateful as yellow bands.
O what shall's doe wench?
It is no marvel Mistress
The poor young Gentleman could not keep his promise.
'Alas sweet man, he has confessed nothing ye wench.
That shows his constancy, and love to you Mistress:
But you must do it of force, there is no help for it,
The truth can neither shame nor hurt you much,
Let 'em make what they can on it, it were sin and pity y'faith
To cast away so sweet a Gentleman,
For such a pair of infidel hose and doublet,
I would not hang a Jew for a whole wardrobe on 'em.
Thou say true wench.
Oh, oh, they are come again Mistress.
Signior Ansaldo?
The same mightily crossed Lady,
But past hope freed again by a Doctors means,
A man of art, I know not justly what indeed,
But pity, and the fortunate gold you gave me,
Wrought my release between 'em.
Met you not
My husbands man?
I took such strange ways Lady
I hardly met a creature.
Oh most welcome
But how shall we bestow him now we have him Mris?
'Alas, that's true.
Martino may come back again.
Step you into that little Chamber speedily sir,
And dress him up in one of my Gowns and head-tyres
His youth will well endure it.
That will be admirable.
Nay do it, do it quickly then, and cut that Suit
Into a hundred pieces, that it may never be known again.
A hundredth? nay ten thousand at the least Mris.
For if there be a piece of that Suit left, as big as my nail,
The deed will come out, it is worse than a murder,
I fear twill never be hid.
Away, do your endeavour, and dispatch wench,
I've thought upon a way of certain safety,
And I may keep him while I have him too,
Without suspicion now: I've heard of the like:
A Gentleman, that for a Ladies love
Was thought six months her woman, tended on her
In her own garments, and she being a Widow,
Lay night by night with her in way of comfort,
Mary in conclusion match they did together,
Would I'd a copy of the same conclusion:
He's come himself now, if thou be a happy wench
Be fortunate in thy speed, Isle delay time
With all the means I can: oh welcome sir.
Isle speak to you anon wife, and kiss you shortly,
I'm very busy yet: Cocksey-down, Mem-berrie,
Her Manner house at Well-dun.
What's that good sir?
The widows your sweet Sisters deed of gift;
Sh'as made all her estate over to me wench:
She'll be too hard for 'em all: and now come buss me
Good luck after thieves hansell.
Oh it is happy Sir
You have him fast.
I have laid him safe enough wench.
I was so lost in joy at the report on it
I quite forgot one thing to tell Martino.
What's that sweet blood?
He, and his villains sir
Robbed a sweet Gentlewoman last night.
A Gentlewoman?
Nay, most uncivilly and basely stripped her sir.
Oh barbarous slaves.
I was even fain for woman-hoods sake
(Alas) and charities, to receive her in,
And cloth her poor wants in a Suit of mine.
It was most religiously done: I long for her;
Who have I brought to see thee think thou woman?
Nay Sir, I know not.
Guess, I prithee heartily:
An enemy of thine.
That I hope you have not sir.
But all was done in jest: he cries thee mercy,
Francisco sirha.
Oh; I think not on him.
That Letter was but writ to try thy constancy,
He confessed all to me.
Joy on him sir,
So far am I from malice, look you sir;
Welcome sweet Signior; but Isle never trust you sir.
Faith I'm beholding to thee wife, for this.
Methinks, I enter now this house with joy,
Sweet peace, and quietness of conscience,
I wear no guilty blush upon my cheek
For a sin stamped last midnight: I can talk now
With that kind man, and not abuse him inwardly,
With any scornful thought made of his shame:
What a sweet being is an honest mind?
It speaks peace to itself, and all mankind.
Martino.
Master.
Ther's an other robbery done sirha,
By the same party.
What? your worship mocks,
Under correction.
I forgot to tell thee
He robbed a lovely Gentlewoman.
O Pagan,
This fellow will be stoned to death with Pipkins,
Your women in the Suburbs will so maule him
With broken crew•es, and pitchers without ears,
He will nev'r dye alive, that's my opinion.
Look you your judgments Gentlemen, yours
especially
Signior Francisco, whose mere object now
Is woman at these years, that's the eye Saint I know
Amongst young Gallants, Husband, you have a glimpse too;
You offer half an eye, as old as you are,
By'r Lady better wench: an eye, and a half I troa,
I should be sorry else.
What think you now sirs
Is it not a goodly manly Gentlewoman?
Bashaw my heart else wife.
Pray soft a little Signior you're but my guest remember,
I'm Mr. of the house, Isle have the first buss.
But Husband, it is the courtesy of all places
To give a stranger ever the first bit.
In Woodcock or so, but ther's no heed to be taken in
Mutton;
We commonly fall so roundly to that we forget our selves:
I'm sorry for thy fortune, but thou'it welcome Lady
My Master kisses, as I've heard a hackney man
Cheer up his Mare, chap, chap.
I have him fast Lady, and he shall lye by it close,
You cannot doe me a greater pleasure Sir,
I'm happily glad on it.
Me thinks there's somewhat whispers in my soul,
This is the hour, I must begin my acquaintance
With honest love, and banish all loose thoughts;
My fate speaks to me from the modest eye
Of yon sweet Gentlewoman.
Wench, Wench.
Pish, hold in your breath Mistress,
If you be seen to laugh, you spoil all presently,
I keep it in with all the might I have—puh.
Pray what young gentleman's that sir?
An honest boy y'faith,
And came of a good kind: dost like him Lady,
I would thou had him, and thou be not promised,
Hoe's worth ten thousand Dollars.
By this light Mistress, my Master will go near to make a match anon, me thinks I dream of admirable sport Mistress.
Peace, thou art a drab.
Come hither now Francisco,
I've know the time, I've had a better stomach;
Now I can dine with looking upon meat.
That face deserved a better fortune Lady
Than last nights rudeness showed.
We cannot be
Our choosers sir in our own destiny.
I return better pleased, than when I went.
And could that beastly Imp rob you forsooth?
Most true forsooth,
I will not altogether sir, disgrace you,
Because you look half like a Gentleman.
And that's the Mothers half.
There's my hand for you.
I swear you could not give me any thing
I love better, a hand gets me my living;
Oh sweet lymon-peel.
May I request a modest word or two Lady
In private with you?
With me sir?
To make it sure from all suspect of injury,
Or unbeseeming private, which heaven knows
Is not my aim now, Isle entreat this gentleman
For an ear witness unto all our conference.
Why so, I am content Sir,
So am I Lady..
Oh Master, here's a rare Bedfellow for my Mistress to night,
For you know we must both out of Town again.
That's true Martino.
I do but think how they'll lye telling of tales together
The pretiest.
The pretiliest indeed.
Their tongues will never lyn wagging Master.
Never Martino, never.
Take heed you be not heard.
I fear you most Mistress.
Me fool? ha, ha.
Why look you Mistress: faith you're faulty, ha, ha,
Well said y'faith, where lies the fault now gossip.
Oh for a husband; I shall burst with laughing else,
This house is able to spoil any Maid.
Isle be revenged now soundly of Francisco
For failing me when time was.
Are you there Mistress? I thought you would not forget that
How ever, a good turn disappointed is ever the last thing
That a woman forgives, she'll scarce do it when shoe's speechless,
Nay, though she hold up her whole hand for all other injuries,
She'll forgive that but with one finger.
Isle vex his heart as much as he mocked mine.
But that may mar your hopes too, if our gentlewoman
be known to be a man.
Not as Isle work it;
I would not lose this sweet revenge me thinks
For a whole fortnight of the old mans absence,
Which is the sweetest benefit next to this:
Why how now sir, what course take you for laughing?
We are undone for one.
Faith with great pain,
Stifle it, and keep it in: I have no receipe for it.
But 'pray, in sadness say; What is the Gentleman,
I never knew his like for tedious urgings,
He will receive no answer.
Would he would not Sir.
Says I'm ordained for him: merely for him,
And that his wiving fate speaks in me to him;
Will force on me a jointure speedily
Of some seven thousand Dollars.
Would thou had'st'em sir: I know he can and he will.
For wonders pity; What is this Genleman?
Faith shall I tell you sir,
One that would make an excellent honest husband
For her that's a just Maid at one and twenty;
For on my conscience he has his Maidenhead yet.
Fie, out upon him beast.
Sir, if you love me.
Give way but to one thing I shall request of you.
Your courtesies you know may lay commands on me.
Then at his next solicitings, let a consent
Seem to come from you; Twill make noble sport sir,
We'll get joincture and all; but you must bear
Your self most affable to all his purposes.
I can doe that.
I, and take head of laughing.
I've bide the worst of that already Lady.
Peace, set your countenance then; for here he comes.
There is no middle continent in this passion,
I feel it since, it must be love, or death
It was ordained for one.
Seignior Francisco,
I'm sorry it was your fortune, in my house sir,
To have so violent a stroke come to you:
The gentlewoman's a stranger pray be counselled sir,
Till you hear further of her Friends and portion.
It is only but her love that I desire,
She comes most rich in that.
But be advised though,
I think shoe's rich heir, but see the proof sir,
Before you make her such a generous Jointure.
It is mine, and I will do it.
She shall be yours too,
If I may rule her then.
You speak all sweetness.
She likes your person well, I tell you so much,
But take no note I said so.
Not a word.
Come Lady, come, the gentleman desertfull,
And O my conscience honest.
Blame me not, I am a Maid, and fearful.
Never truth came perfecter from man.
Give her a lip-taste,
That she her self may praise it.
Yea, a match y'faith: my house is luckily for 'em
Now Martino.
Master, the Widow has the day.
The day?
She's overthrown my youngster.
Precious tidings,
Clap down four Woodcocks more.
They are all at hand Sir.
What both her adversaries too.
They are come sir.
God bid the Cook serve in two geese in a dish.
I like your conceit Master beyond utterance.
Welcome sweet Sister; which is the man must have you.
Id welcome no body else.
Come to me then sir.
Are yo' have faith, my chain of gold? I'm glad on it.
I wonder you can have the face to follow me,
That have so prosecuted things against me,
But I have resolved my self it is done to spite me.
O dearth of truth.
Nay, do not spoil thy hair,
Hold, hold I say, Isle get thee a VVidow somewhere.
If hand and faith be nothing for a Contract,
What shall man hope?
It was wont to be enough, Honey.
When there was honest meaning amongst Widows,
But since your bribes came in, it is not allowed
A contract without gifts to bind it fast,
Every thing now must have a feeling first:
Doe I come near you Widow?
No indeed sir,
Nor ever shall I hope: and for your comfort sir,
That sought all means t'entrap me for my wealth,
Had Law unfortunately put you upon me,
You had lost your labour, all your aim, and hopes sir:
Here stands the honest Gentleman my Brother
To whom I've made a deed of gift of all.
I that sheh' as y'faith, I thank her Gentlemen
Look you here sirs.
I must not look for pleasures
That give more grief if they prove false, or fail us
Then ever they gave joy.
Ha'you se've me so widow
I'm glad thou hast her not, laugh at him honey;
ha, ha.
I must take one that loves me for my self:
Here's as old Gentleman looks not after wealth
But virtue, manners, and conditions.
Yes by my faith: I must have Lordships too Widow.
How sir?
Your manners, virtue, and conditions Widow.
Are pretty things within doors, I like well on 'em,
But I must have somewhat with out-lying or being
In the tenure or occupation of me such a one: ha?
Those are fine things indeed.
Why sir, you swore to me it was for love.
True; but theirs two words to a bargain ever
All the world over, and if love be one
I'm sure mony's the other; it is no bargain else:
Pardon me, I must dine, as well as sup Widow.
Cry mercy, I mistook you all this while sir.
It was this ancient Gentleman indeed,
Whom I crave pardon on.
What of me Widow?
'Alas I have wronged you sir; it was you that swore
You loved me for my self?
By my troth but I did not.
Come, Father not your lies upon me Widow:
I love you for your self? spit at me Gentlemen
If ever I'd such a thought, fetch me in Widow:
You'll find your reach too short.
Why you have enough you say.
I, but I will have my humour too; you never think
of that, they are Coach horses, they go together still.
Whom should a Widow trust: I'll swear it was one of you
That made me believe so: mass, think it was you sir
Now I remember me.
I swore too much
To be believed so little.
Was it you then?
Beshrew my heart for wronging of you.
Welcome blessing,
Are you nine faithfully now?
As love can make one.
Why this fills the Common-wealth so full of beggars,
Marrying for love, which none of mine shall doe.
But now I think on it: we must part again sir.
Again?
You're in debt, and I, in doubt of all,
Left my self nothing too; we must not hold,
Want on both sides makes all affection cold:
I shall not keep you from that Gentleman,
You'll be his more then mine and when he list
He'll make you lye from me in some sour prison,
Then let him take you now for altogether sir,
For he that's mine shall be all mine or nothing.
I never felt the evil of my debts
Till this afflicting minute.
Isle be mad once in my days: I have enough to cure
me, and I will have my humour, they are now but desperate debts
again, I nev'r look for 'em,
And ever since I knew what malice was
I always held it sweeter to sow mischief.
Than to receive money; it is the finer pleasure.
Isle give him in his bonds as it were in pity
To make the match, and bring 'em both to beggary,
Then will they nev'r agree; that's a sure point,
He'll give her a black eye within these three days,
Beat half her teeth out by Alhall outed,
And break the little household-stuff they have
With throwing at one another: O sweet sport.
Come Widow, come, isle try your honesty
Here to my honey you've made many proffers,
I fear they are all but tricks: here are his debts Gentlemen:
How I came by 'em I know best my self.
Take him before us faithfully for your husband
And he shall tear 'em all before your face Widow.
Else may all faith refuse me:
Tear 'em honey
It is firm in Law, a consideration given:
What with thy teeth? thoul't shortly tear her so
That's all my hope, thoud'st never had 'em else
I've enough, and I will have my humour.
I'm now at liberty Widow.
Isle be so too
And then I come to thee: give me this from you Brother,
Hold Sister: Sister.
Look you, the deed of gift sir, I'm as free
He that has me, has all, and thou art he.
1. 2. How's that?
You're bobbed, it was but a deed in trust
And all to prove thee, whom I have found most just.
I'm bobbed among the rest too: I'd have sworn
It had been a thing for me, and my heirs for ever;
If I'd but got it up to the black box above
I had been past redemption
How am I cheated?
I hope you'll have the conscience now to pay me sir.
Oh wicked man, sower of strife and envy, open not thy lips.
How, how's this?
Thou hast no charge at all, no child of thine own
But two thou got once of a scouring woman,
And they are both well provided for, thei'r in the hospital,
Thou hast ten thousand pound to bury thee,
Hang thy self when thou wilt, a slave go with thee
I'm gone, my goodness comes all out together.
I have enough, but I have not my humour.
O Master, Gentlemen: and you sweet Widow
I think you are no forwarder yet, I know not,
If ever you be sure to laugh again,
Now is the time.
Why what's the matter wench?
Ha, ha, ha.
Speak, speak.
Ha, a marriage, a marriage, I cannot tel't for laughing:
ha, ha.
A marriage doe you make that a laughing matter?
Ha: I, and you'll make it so when you know all,
Here they come, here they come, one man married to an
other.
How? man to man?
I man to man y'faith
Ther'l be good sport at night to bring 'em both to bed;
Doe you see 'em now, ha, ha, ha.
My daughter Martia.
Oh my Father: your love, and pardon sir.
It is she indeed Gentlemen.
I have been disobedient I confess
Unto your mind, and Heaven has punished me
With much affliction since I fled your sight;
But finding reconcilement from above
In peace of heart; the next I hopes your love.
I cannot but forgive thee now I see thee,
Thou fledst a happy fortune of an old man,
But Francisco's of a noble family.
Though he be somewhat spent.
I loved her not sir
As she was yours, for I protest I know it not,
But for her self sir, and her own deserving,
Which had you been as foul, as you've been spiteful
I should have loved in her.
Well, hold your prating sir,
You're not like to loose by it.
Oh Violetta, who shall laugh at us now?
The child unborn Mistress.
Be good.
Be honest.
Heaven will not let you sin, and you'd be careful.
What means it sends to help you, think and mend,
You're as much bound as we, to praise that friend.
I am so, and I will so.
Marry you speedily,
Children tame you, you'll die like a wild beast else.
I by my troth should I, I've much ado to forbear
Laughing now, more's my hard fortune.
O Master, Mistress, and you gentles all;
To horse, to horse presently, if you mean to doe your Country any
service.
Art not ashamed Martino, to talk of horsing so openly
Before young married couples thus.
It do's concern the Common-wealth and me,
And you Master, and all: the Thieves are taken.
What sai'st Martino,
Law, here's Common-wealths-men,
The man of art Master, that cupt your eyes
Is proved an arrant rascal: and his man
That drew my tooth, an excellent purse-drawer,
I felt no pain in that, it went insensibly:
Such notable villainies confessed.
Stop there sir:
We'll have time for them: Come gentle-folks,
Take a slight meal with us: but the best cheer
Is perfect joy, and that we wish all here.—
A Sport, only for Christmas, is the Play
This hour presents to you; to make you merry,
Is all the ambition 'thas; and fullest aim
Bent at your smiles, to win it self a name:
And if you edge be not quite taken off,
Wearied with sports, I hope twill make you laugh.
STay, stay, Sir, I'm as hungry of my Widow
As you can be upon your Maid believe it,
But we must come to our desires in order,
There's duties to be paid, ever we go further;
Hee that without your likings, leaves this place,
Is like one falls to meat, and forgets grace.
And that's not handsome trust me, no,
Our rights being paid, and your loves understood,
My Widow, and my meat, then do's me good;
I have no money Wench, I told thee true,
For my report, pray let her hear't from you,

A Cuckold? why now it is a common name,
As the shee-Gossip• are that give it vs.
Why doth it not derive, and spread it self.
To all the generations we produce?
Why should not every child of mine be called
Cuckold, as well as Ʋaster, Woman, woman
Thou sad undoer of the fairest building,
That ever earth bragged to be pavement to.
Man, Man; the pride of heavens creation,
Abstract of Nature, that in his small volume
Contains the whole worlds Text, and heavens impression:
His Makers Image, Angels mate, Earths great wonder,
Made to guide all, by woman is brought under.
That harmony, fair Nature made to stand,
Is forced out of tune by women's hand.
A woman hath deformed me. See, I look
Like any beast has horns: an Ass may boast
Himself a horne-lesse Gentleman before me.
Yet let not clouds of passion choke my reason.
Why? what's a Cuckold? let's see: define him:
It is a man, whose wife plays the whore. Zilid, what's that to him? It is all one, as if a proper Gentleman should ride on a hal∣ting Jade; or a good Musician play on a broken fiddle. Oh but t'will be said: Woman could not be so light a ship, if her hus∣band could well ballast her. It is his insufficiency. A pox it is.
Had she Hercules to her husband, she would enter the lists with some crinkle-hamm'd tilting Courtier. Well then,
I see no reason, that a women's evil,
Should thus transform man to a horned devil,
No: it was Actions lusts, and not his wife,
That so bestagg'd him. Hence sprouts al my shame.
Fuller of truth then age, thy• rule hath been:
" Nothing deforms a man, but his own sin.
Sir, my mother prays—
No more of her. Her prayers.
Are putrid sacrifices: like foul airs,
Too thick to mount up to yon glorious feeling.
" When black hands are reared up, heaven has no feeling.
She is your wife, my mother, Sir.
What then Sir?
Nothing, but that you wrong her, ô my conscience.
Oh tic a brave Puritan-world, when boys talk of con∣science! Conscience must lye at the stake, when they play but at blow-point. Sirrah, as you love your Conscience, hate a wife. Zlid, if I thought thou would marry, I would vnblesse thee, as I have disinherited thee already: Get bastards, as I would have got thee. A woman may serve to lye withal: none good enough to marry.
Oh were you not my father, I would let
This passion out of your impostum'd heart—
Why should not I forget, that your blood moves
In any veins of mine; when you forgo
The reason of a father, husband, man?
And stick degeneration on your name?
If I sail ill, know your example steered
My voyage and my vessel. Fathers are more
Then private men: their lives are the set copies.
Their children write by; and should there give
Their imitation patterns how to live.
Hell's a sad place, they say:—Oh, Isle dare never
To follow my own father leading thither.
Sir, call your mother. This boy's a Puritan.
I that had ne'er loved my self to be thought good,
Am highly pleased to see it in my blood.
From whom derives this sprig such fruitful juice;
The father being bad, the mother worse.
Sure, he did suck this goodness from his Nurse.
Poor boy, my riot has undone thee: poor
You're made by me, I by a wife turned whore.
My state is mortgaged to the vsurous hand
Of Gripe: my goods are wasted: all my hopes life
Breathes thus: having sold all, Isle sell my wife.
Y' are welcome, Looseness.
Looseness Sir? Oh hell!
She is my mother; pray you, use her well.
Be gone.
I cannot Sir.
Good son, a way.
A father gives command.
I must obey.
Make much of you? I will, I will. Never man made more of his wife, when he sold her to her smock. Isle sell thy flesh too Gypsy.
Dear husband, I am yet clear; Oh do not you
Force me to sin, Isle be for over true.
True? true to the brothel, to the spittle, to the grave.
Thou art deaths agent: a whore is one of his Beadles.
Heaven pardon your black slanders.
Come, I'm poor.
Who made you?
Thou, my content, turned whore.
Isle work, or beg for you.
No, thou hast wrought
Too much already. Here, here's thy work.
Wilt thou doe one thing?
Any thing.
Then swear.
And keep thy oath. Isle travel to the wars,
And turn thee up, as some Captains wont; and try,
If thou can live by thy old trade, or die.
Will you forsake me then?
Yes, and am just.
Since thou forsook'st me, and thine innocence,
Be thy reward proportioned I must hence.
Whiles thou wast good, to thee I had free desire.
Now thou art proved a whore receive thy hire.
Take place, thou tyrant will. Thick woes here hover.
My state is lower then fate can recover.
My obedience waits your pleasure.
Ho, within there.
Aunt Marre-maid I have brought you the girl
I promised. Is the money ready?
By that little honesty I have to swear by; a handsome wench. I must pay fifty pound for her: but if she were as young, as fair, I would get five hundred pound by her within this month.
Aunt, pray use her well: she's my own sister.
Be petulāt you whore, sprightly frolic—as a Dutch Tanikin.—or—This woman is a Bawd, a very Bawd; you like her the better for that. Come, skip about, quick silver: Dance like a Courtesan, or Isle fiddle ye. You have more tricks in private, then a Fencer can teach a Lord, or the devil a Fencer. Life, doe you pull? I must have fifty pound for you: Doe y' hear? Let your heals caper, and your tongue grow wanton, or by these horns Isle gore you—Aunt, shoe's somewhat sick of that rare disease, called Modesty. But in private she's more insatiate then a Puritan.
How old are you, fair sister?
Not sixteen.
About some six and forty.
Oh you Witch—Aunt, she lies eight and twenty, at least 
Hark ye sister,—
Please this old Hag, make her believe y' are right,
And answerable to her Stygian spells:
Or I will bear thee to an Army, and there
Ha'thy sod flesh sold, lent; and prostituted,
And my self Cuckolded forty times a day.
Leave this forced so bernesse—Aunt, will you hear her speak?
I can skip lighter then the wanton Doe,
And jerk it through the Dale,
I cannot hold, neither my tongue, nor heals,
(Nor nails from scratching out a Lechers eyes)
Sure, I am composed most of the nimbler elements:
But little water in me, far less earth, some air,
To keep me humid, mutable, and tender,
And apt for conuolution: but their mixture
Is scarce discernible, the are so dispersed.
For my predominant quality is all fire,
Pure, radiant, subtle fire.
I have oft seen a couple of light heals
Carry a sober head: a women's tongue
Read lectures of civility; her face
A printed book, each dimple a sweet line,
That doth to good the Readers eye incline,
Never till now a body forced to doe,
What the poor mind loathes to consent unto.
She dances weeping, laughs and sighs in pain.
So I have seen (me thinks) Sun-shine in rain.
Enough, I long to employ her. Cousin, here is the money. She's mine. Whats your name?
Florence.
Florence. I like the name well.
Its a good lucky name to make a whore on. You'll stay with me, Florence.
Till you are weary of me. Isle but take leave of my brother, and follow you.
What with me?
Am I not worthy of one kiss?
There—now be gone.
Be gone? Death could not speak a word more fatal.
Yet one more—so now farewell—
Unjust—unkind—my woe-diuining heart.
By this we first embraced, by this we part.
I am a villain, but she makes me weep.
Why doe I think she's false? I never saw't.
Tut, all bells ring that tune. It is too true.
I told her that this fifty pound should carry me to the wars;
But I have a battle to fight ere I go.
Old Gripe that has the mortgage of my lands,
Lies sick of the Gout, and seldom stirs abroad.
Some of that race Isle kill, or leave my own life
In pawn I would have done 't. I have challenged
Beniamin Gripe the son, whom the world calls
The Honest Lawyer. He comes.
You're the son of a villain.
If I were, I could not help it.
Thy selfe's a villain.
Its a rank lie.
Lie? Thou exasperatst
One mad already, that would have hazard heaven
To make this earth drunk with thy blood.
Its dear, so bought. Twil not redeem your soul.
Say, with deep sluices, all these lively springs,
That run through the soft channels of my veins,
Should be exhaust by thee, or thine by me,
And burning malice should be quenched in blood:
He that speeds best, wins what he should abhor,
And glories to be cursed a conqueror.
Let Sophisters alone with these distinctions.
Our moderators are our swords: the question,
That calls vs forth, as warlike disputants
Beyond decision of the gowne-furr'd peace.
Draw then thy argument, and let's talk indeed.
We cannot reason soundly, till we bleed.
Let's think the terms, on which we venture blood.
Th'ffects are weighty, let the cause be good.
Thy father hath undone me, and mine issue.
The law affords no succour: what remains,
But only to let him bleed through thy veins?
How have I wronged thee?
Ask no more. The State
Of our strife is, thou art his Son, I hate.
No help? let fury arbitrate the rest.
This passion must but center in one breast.
Yet let's embrace, and pardon; and even love
In hate. O suffer not the dying blood
To prejudice the sad survivors good.
What unexpected clangor frights the peace
Of my delighted solitary walks?
What sons of mischief in their fury tread
These unfrequented paths?—stay—hold.
My sons, hear age but speak; wisdom is old.
Peace, Dotard.
On my knees, which doubling age
Hath scarce left able to support my corps:
By the remaining tears of forty years
Spent in this penitential order: the last drops,
The drying hand of age hath left to dew
This witherd garden: I implore—beseech.
Father, you speak to rocks, or the surd waives.
Then on this innocent bosom turn your swords,
And ease a weak soul of her tedious portage,
Some hour before her time. O do not fly me.
Let the few drops of my slow-pacing blood,
That stands in my cold channels, expiate yours.
Oh let a falling trunk redeem two plants.
No remedy? let me exclaim for help.
(The devil part you:) if I should now ha'paid for my charity—well: it was this Church-coate that saved me.
Oh thou hast slain me: hold thy conquering hand.
Heavens, you are too just pay-masters. Thy sword,
With a fate-sign'd direction, hath cut short
My hoped fortunes in a longer breath.
But I forgive thee. Fly—stay.
I have two Orphans in this hour deprived
Of a bad Parent. For their mother—nothing.
She has a trade to live on. O let my dying breath
Beg this one mercy at thy bloud-staind hands:
Relieve them with now thine, once their own lands.
Forgive my deed, and by that mercy, I
Depend on for my sins; my mercy shall
Raise up the children for the fathers fall. Farewell.
He's gone. Now up again. My wounds
Are slight, yet through their windows, hear I breath
Out all my malice. Noble youth, I love thee.
How little of thy father hast thou in thee!
Now for some strange disguise, till time I find,
To pleasure him that was to me thus kind.
Well, I see there's no living in London, The four winds have conspired to blow all the villainy of the world thither. When I returned from my short travel, I inquired, for the knot of my old companions. But like an old Lady, that has much used painting, how suddenly are they broken! I heard of three or four in Bed∣lam. Five or six in Bridewell. Half a score in the Counter. a whole dozen at Tyburne. But Oh, numbers, numbers, un∣der the hands of Barber-Surgions. Some turned Squires to a Bro∣thell. Others walk New-gate lane. Some cheating in Ordina∣ries. Others prigging in crowds. And the rest, either swam o∣for sea, or drowned upon a hill. Well, I do not like these prose∣dings; there bee so many rubs. I could now beg in Dutch, but its no speeding language. Now my villainy fails on the sea, Isle try what cheats the land has to work on. I learned some scurvy medicines of our Surgeon of the ship: &amp; had no sooner set up my bills in Bedford here; but a Gouty cure comes halting to me. Fifty pounds I must have to heal him. Five and twenty I have in pawn: for the rest, Isle leave it with the next Quacksaluer, that with more skill shall doe him as little good.
Cousin Nice, and my man Thirsty.
Shall I fetch you some drink, Sir?
No. Thy mind runs all of the pot.
So 't had need, for you keep me Thirsty, spite of my teeth.
Go you two to the vnder-Sheriffe; and bid him by ver∣tu of this mortgage, give you possession of Vasters lands. The beg∣gerly slave has broken with me, and Isle take the forfeit. Go quick, quick. I will not lose an hour.
Isle but go to the Church for a little holy-water—
Be drowned in holy-water.
No, but a little sprinkled Sir. We shall have the better suc∣cesse in our business.
I pree thee good Nice, dispatch, dispatch.
I, come, come master Nice. There's good liquor it h' house. You may sprinkle your throat with that. Its better then holy∣water.
One thing Sir. I do not like going to day. Sure tic not a lucky time. For the first Crow I heard this morning, cried twice. This Even, Sir, is no good number.
Pox of Crows and numbers. If thou had given her a piece of carrion, she would have cried again. Away.
I go, Sir—stay, what if there be a Raven about the ground?
Shall we then take possession? Oh tic an unlucky bird.
Why, let her croak the downfall of his house.
Whats that to me? prithee good Nice make haste.
Nay, too much haste will make one stumble: and thats no good sign.
Now, Valentine, Hast all things ready? how now—a∣gain?
A toy comes in my head.
Pox of that head: more toys yet?
How if a Cat sits on the Buttry hatch? Thou we'st pro∣ceed no further. My Grandam told me that a Cat sitting on the hatch, was an ill sign.
Mew. Beat her off, dash out her brains. Good Nice be not so curious.
Oh Sir, it's good doubting the worst.
Are all things ready, Valentine? this fool troubles me worse then the gowte.
Sir, the remedy is very painful. I could give a tedious course of physic, worse then any sickness. Keep you fasting sixteen days together, save the diet I give you. Bind you to the post of patience every day ten hours; and have one still pour scaulding water on you: purge your very heart out: send your eyes out of their holes, to see how your feet doe: make your guts bark worse, then an hundred dogs at a bear-baiting. But my medicine is sharpe and short, but passing sure. Sir, there be four kinds of gowte.
No more of kinds. There's no gowte kind to any man, I think, but to Physicians. Your remedy short-short.
Sir, nothing: specially of no cost. Do y' see this ten-pen∣ny nail?
Yes: What of that?
This nail I must drive through your great toe.
What? through the bone?
Yes, bone &amp; flesh too.
Oh-oh-giue me my money. This medicine's worse then any gowte. Oh good Valentine, your tent's too long—too long.
Then sit and rot: be racked still, Isle be gone.
Nay, good Valentine: would not a sixe-penny nail serve?
You'll be Physician, will you? If you'll sit down and be cured, so: if not, farewell.
Nay, good Valentine:—even do thy will.
Endure it manfully. It's but a brunt—so.  You shall sit but a quarter of an hour, till I have been at the Apo∣thecaries, and then Isle loose you. Now farewell, gouty fool, Thou took no purge, yet hast a most sharpe stool. Pray heavens, this kill him not. Well, let him sit.  And this shall go with me. I pray Sr take your case. This plot has took; try if some new may hit.
Come-come-Valentine. Oh-neuer was man so far in my bonds, as I am in this Physicians. H' has nailed me to him. That every whore in London, were but in my case now. Why Valentine—
Oh he's come. How now? are you returned? whore's my more∣gage? out Villains, whore's my mortgage? Oh my toe—oh my mortgage. I'm undone.
Me thinks you are too fast, Sir.
Plague of you and your mortgage. Oh my heart-it beats so, that it has broke my buttons. I would not bee so frighted a∣gain to be made your heir. puff.
What's the news Thirsty? what, what, good Thirsty?
Let me undo you Master.
No, not till I hear of my mortgage. What's the mat∣la? oh—
The matter? I would not have such another cross, for all the crosses in your purse.
What? oh—what? Is my mortgage safe? Hath the un∣der-Sheriffe done a miracle, and played the honest man? what good Thirsty?
Nothing Sir, but a Hare crossed the way; and hee, poor timorous soul, durst go no further for fear of sprights.
Oh rogues, pernicious villains, you conspire to cousin me: get out the nail, Thirsty. Hares, and Ravens, and Devils.
Who has abused you thus Sir? could you be so credulous, to think this a receipt good for the Gout? Sir, give me leave to help you.
Do, good Ben. but not in this, Ben. not in this. Oh my more∣gage man, my mortgage—run. I shall lose a days fruits of my more∣gage.
Come Sir, respect your health aboue your gain.
I would not for your wealth have half your pain.
Go in Sir, get some broth, look to your wound.
Your mortgage leave to me, Isle keep that sound.
Take my cousin Nice with you. Come Thirsty, help Thirsty.
Now for some cleanly trick to shift my hands
Of this same shallow superstitious fool.
Now cousin, I'am sure you are not without an Erra Pater in your pocket. They say this is like to be a very strange year.
Most strange, and full of preposterous, prodigious, turbu∣lent, dismal, fatal, amazing, terrifying—
Bless vs. What?
Wonders. The effects whereof will appear in risings, part∣lie biformed, and partly circular, on men's forheads, and women's mountains.
Is there no sad mortality to ensue?
Yes, my Almanac speaks of a most fearful pestilence, especially to happen amongst Taylors and Gold-end-men.
Ther's a statute-lace shall undo them in faith. A Tailors Bill shall be no more so deadly as the plagues.
Sirrah Nice, I had a dream to night.
Passion of my heart! a dream? what? I do not like these dreams.
Isle tell thee what. Me thought, my troubled fancy
Led me into a Garden proudly decked
With Natures glory, and the sweetest flowers,
That ere my breath sucked up: where the greene grass
Tempted my sleepy spirits to soft repose.
There came, me thought, a friend (dead now long since)
And shook me by the hand, and questioned me
Of many sad events, whose conference
So vexed me that I woke. Why stand amazed?
Thou wilt not leave me Cos.
Yes, and you were ten Cousins. Dream of a garden, and greene rushes, and a dead friends salutation? Cousin, make your will, be ruled and make your will: you cannot live.
Wilt thou be a fool of fate? who can
Prevent the destiny decreed for man? Isle on.
So will not I. Good Cos, I leave you to your destiny. The next news I hear, the Lawyer's a dead man. Dreams quoth a! and he will not believe a dream, he's an Infidel. One night I dream't that I found gold at a play. Next day I came thy∣there, slatter'd with these hopes. Zlid, before the Prologue had done, I had lost my purse.
Cos▪ if you ha'no faith in dreams, farewell.
I would not dream of heaven, lest I find hell.
This charm has cast him off, now to my mortgage.
Oh Vaster, thou art dead; thy haplesse issue,
Exposed to the bleak ayre of these cold times.
I have no means to expiate the wrongs,
My cruel Father, and my self more bloody,
Have done thee, but by charity to thine,
All the poor pieces that remain of thee.
So with the plasters of our broken good,
We hide the wounds, first having shed the blood.
Within there Ho.
Thou come upon thy death, infectious issue of the worlds plague; if thy blood stained foot enter these doors. Our parents are from home. Till their return, Isle keep possession. Or lose it with my life.
Incensed Youth.
Thou fight against power with a sword of straw:
As good cope with the devil, as with the Law.
Me thinks, Sir, there should dwell some pity in your look.
Oh, cast an eye of mercy on the woes,
Of two most wretched Orphans; doubly lost,
First in their Parents miseries: but, oh! most
In their untimely deaths; for we doubt sore,
We never shall behold their faces more.
My grief requites you both.
No matter, had it so pleased the high powers,
If that my Father had excused yours.
Good Sir, forget your strength; and do not triumph over the prostrate fortunes of two wretches,
Exposed to unresisted tyranny.
Behold a Maiden begging on her knee—
Rise: that's heavens due. These arms now thee entwine,
That wish for ever, to be called thine:
A strange new influence runs through my affections,
Into my panting heart; and there enthroned,
Commands my lower faculties to love
This poor distressed Virgin. I am flamed
With pity and affection; whether more!
Yet let my senses some cool reason gather:
What, love the daughter, and have slain the father?
(I must: heaven knows I must). See, my loved friends:
My coming to you is for other ends.
My Father sent me to invade your lands.
A while stand free redeemed with my hands.
There's money to relieve you: that done, you shall have more.
Despair not: heaven will not forsake the poor.
Right noble son of so professed a foe,
Heaven be as kind to you, as you to our woe.
I burst, if I contain my passion. Fairest Virgin,
If thou dare credit me, I love thee.
Hold. Here take your kindness back: Though we are poor,
My sister was not bred to be a whore.
Forbear to touch her.
Fond Youth, thy rage is vain.
You are young: thy error doth thy virtue stain.
I love her as a wife.
Oh doe not mock me.
How can I think, you to such fortunes borne.
Will look upon a Maid, so poor, forlorn?
Alas! that poverty should virtue smother.
Not in my breast. No, Isle still honest be:
Virtue in rags are gold's all one to me.
Censure me both, as you shall find me true,
Isle be your father, and your brother too.
So, let me down, till I have seen my new mortgage.
How now son Beniamin, have you taken possession?
Of that you cannot dispossess me, Sir.
No knave? what wilt thou take my lands before I'm dead?
You are a brave son indeed. But this is the world. If the father be poor, the son would be rid of him, to save charges. If rich, he must have his lands ere his bones be cold.
They may be cold, for they have been rotten these dozen years.
I am very hungry.
I am very thirsty.
But dare not eat, because I was dreamed to night of cho∣king.
Now brother w' are, undone.
The damned father will pervert the son.
Gout, dropsy, lameness, rotten legs can hasten
T'vndoe the poor. Usurers that sit
Bound to their chairs with charms, &amp; cannot move
But by their porters, can to ill bestir them.
He needs make haste, that is at hell before them.
Ha? for 3. Months?
Indeed Sir, by that power you put me in,
In charity to their miserable state,
Orphaned of Parents, and of means to live,
I gave them 3. months profit of the lands.
Out Villain, Charitie's a beggar, as thou wut be. 3. mo∣nods! three weeks, 3. days, 3. hours had been more charity, then ever I showed, or will show to such beggars. Come Nice, Thirsty, list me: Isle take possession my self.
I hope Sir, you'll not nullify my deed.
Deed me no deeds: Isle nullify thee from being mine heir. Come, help me I say.
Indeed Sir, I dare not lift you against the poor.
Whore's my man Thirsty?
He's gone in to drink Sir.
Oh he's a good knave: he has got possession ot'h house.
Of nothing master but the Buttry, I.
As lame as I am, Isle in my self.
Sit still you lethargy: y' had better drop—
Contain your self, young friend. He is my father,
Let not the warm nest of my love to you,
Hatch up encouragement to my fathers wrongs.
You are my sterne Sir, at your pleasure guide
This tempest-beaten vessel.
Good Sir confirm
This work of piety, which I presumed,
On faith of your good nature to afford.
Sirrah, your good nature will bring you to th'Almes∣house. Thou shalt not inherit a doyt of mine. And for you two Kitlins, Isle make you mew ith Jail, and there be any law in Eng∣land. So this chasing fit hath got me the use of my legs agame. Oh excellent Surgeon; would thou were here again, for the other 25. pounds.
Strange! that same Quack-saluer has done him good, a∣against his will. How fare you Sir?
The worse for thee Bastard. Th'hast too much charity in thee to be the son of old Gripe.
Dear brother, yield possession: wee 'l beg rather,
Then this our worthy friend should lose his father.
Sir, be not so incensed: resume your son
Into your former love, and I resign
All right, that his free promise hath made mine.
Come then, Nice, Thirsty. Oh brave Surgeon, I can go.
Oh brave mortgage I can enter.
M. Beniamin, a sober word in private. If this wench want harbour, I care not if I give her a nights lodging.
I have invited her with her brother to supper this night.
Will you—
Oh it's Fry-day, and I know you have flesh.
Thou would take her any night. Is she not flesh?
Sweet Cousin, I would not eat her. If you please to com∣mend me to her: let me see, for what—I leave that to you.
Go in, let me alone. This petulant fool.
Shall be my scaffold to erect my plots.
Come, friends, vnlode your sorrows on my heart.
Griefs weight is eased; when each one bears his part.
THus am I stolen out from the Covent. Abbot,
Lie there, thou happy warranted case
Of any Villain. Th'hast been my stawking-horse,
Now these ten months. So long it is since the Abbot
Went on a solemn pilgrimage and left
My brother, a good honest Fryer, his friend
Deputed for him. But my brother scarce
Warm in his new vice-honour, walking out
To visit me one morning, at my house
Fell dead of an impostume suddenly.
I buried him in private; but from his blood
Am purer then the Crystal. Studying now,
How to turn sorrow into policy,
I have assumed his shape. Who can deny,
But that a Dunce may rise to Dignity?
Blind Ignorance doth not always strut in Satin.
It often walks a Clergy pace in black,
And deals the holy Rites with as bold hands,
As if it grasped Ioues thunder: and did judge it
Enough to stare, look big, and with a brow
More rugged then is Radamanths, denounce
Torrors against ill deeds: the whiles their own
Are not less monstrous, but less broadly shown.
Thus in my self, how easie't is, I prove,
To sweat out judgements against the sins we love.
As if a garment of world-couzning grace
Were impudently good, set out by place.
Well, I get nothing by this borrowed form,
But countnance to my thefts. This hollow tree
Keeps all my holiness: Lie there Abbot, till
My work is done, then doe thou hide my ill.
Mass here is comes one already.
Now have I, like a Parasite, covered my back with brains. Out of my usurers Gouty toe, I have spun a fair suite. I would fine hear, whether the devil be dead or no. Yet I need not be so inquisitive, for I'm sure he has giuē me nothing in'swill. Now am I in quest of some vaulting house. I would fine spend these crowns, as I got them, in cony-catching. I hawed game in sent, &amp; will follow it with full cry.
Stand—Give the word.
Word? what word? am I beleaguerd?
Few words are best among friends. Empty your pockets, and you may vault the lighter. Quick.
You are an honest fellow, a very honest fellow. In good faith I had no great need of money; but since thou hast brought me some, Isle not refuse it.
Troth, I ha'but a little.
Faith nor I. we'll even draw cuts, who shall ha'both.
Agreed.—Shall we breathe?
Good fortune grant, you be able to pay me for this pains. In sadness, I deserve double fees.
Isle make you plead harder, ere you sit down to tell your money.
Look that your case be good, I shall pick a hole in it else.
Well, let the law pass.
Not altogether so: lest we be both hang.—Stand your ground. Zlid, I cannot abide these running Cocks.
I have seen a runner win the battle.—Shall wee draw stakes?
Ha? a match—Throw by weapons, and lets embrace.
I am a villain, but I fear your clutch worse then a Seriants
As I'm true thief, thou moist trust me. Ha sirrah!
Robin Hood, and the Pindar of Wakefield had not a stiffer bout. Shall we cling, like a couple of Eels, not to bee dissolved but by Thunder?
Most liberally. Let's set up shop together.
Done: &amp; to begin our trade, behold a customer. Stand close.
This russet-shape of a plaine-dealing yeoman
Spirits my hopes with boldness. Sharpe suspicion
Like to a winking Justicer shall see me,
And yet not see me. Thus with griefe-swolne eyes,
Isle match my wife, and childrens miseries.
This fifty pound Isle husband like a Badger;
Buy and sell Barley: and so easily wind
Into the present passages of Bedford.
How good a schoolmaster is Poverty!
I could not live on hundreds, that came in
By annual rents; now I begin to thrive
On the small fragments. Thus like Prodigals,
That once did scorn the meat, now glad of pottage.
The manor gone, Isle try to live of the cottage.
Bedford, ha'for you.
Stand. Give the word.
The word, y' are a thief.
You might ha'shot twice, and not hit it righter.
What do you shoot at?
Oh Sir, like your Iesuite, all at the purse.
Will you cast out the devil, and saue's a conjuring.
Are you so cunning at the black Art? Isle try your skill. What, both at once? that's no fair play.
Fair play is for Fencers. Yet thou seem a good fellow. Thou shalt have it. Stand aside, partner.
Say thou me so, boy? then there's money, win't and were it.
Now could I get in and rob 'hem both—Hercules! Hee lays about him like Orlando Furioso, or a coward turned desperate. Brave boy in faith. Wee might ha'robd two and twenty Taffata-clok'd rorers, before this freese-iacket. Oh, your surly Bore is like
a bloudy'd Mastiff: when your spruce Pantaloon bawles like a whelp in a Tavern: yet at the sight of cold iron runs, as if he had seen a Sergeant.
Hold, hold: Keep your cash.
The mony's good money Sir, if it be not too heavy for you
Nay, for the weight I could make shift, but for the scurvy conditions go with it.
Hau you any gall to it Sir?
Not not so much as pigeon. Put up thy cash my brave queen∣tessence of Hobbniols. Give me thy hand. How many thousand cudgels hast thou broken in thy days about a May-pole?
I warrant, as many as would make all Bedford chimneys smoke a whole winter.
Jest on. Have you any more to say to me.
Nothing my brave Clem of th Clough, but I would thou would deal with vs. Say, shall wee put all our stocks together, and set out a ship of our own?
Ha? first tell me truly what you are.
Agreed. Let's sit down to counsel. I am the Abbot of Newnham.
How? much?
Isle not bate you an Ace on it, till the old Abbot returns from Pilgrimage. My chamber shall be our Rendezvous. The devil himself in the shape of a blurting Constable will not look for vs there.
I am a soldier, and in this vacation time am forced to do like Lawyers; when suites do not make them, they make suites: because the wars will not maintain me, I maintain the wars. I set up my Bills in Bedford here, for a Physician, and dealt with Gripe for the Gout. I have a project to swell our purses till they burst. Will you second me?
As inseparably, as a condition does an obligation.
I have often heard the gripulous Dotard talk of Fairies: and how rich the house proves that they haunt. I have ripened the blister of his imagination to the full. Shall we lance it? I have keys that shall secure our conveyance. Is it a match?
The safest stratagem we could devise,
By craft, more then by strength, all thieves do rise.
Of many politic knaves you cannot spy one.
The Fox will have his prey before the Lion.
Two or three nights we will scatter some small pieces of sell∣for, till opportunity plump our project.
I take it rightly. Oh tic quick and sharpe.
So with a Gudgeon lost, we'll catch a Carpe. A booty.
As I was saying, Master Bromley, why should you take the advantage of your neighbour Sager here? Y' have got the reuer∣zion of his Lease. Ther's is but one life to come in it. Wee are all mortal. It may come ere you look for it. I love peace, I love peace.
I say, that life is forfeit: and Isle enter on all. The law is on my side. Isle not be bound to the peace.
Nay Sir, Isle bind no man: but if I could persuade you—to be fleeced both, so I might be kept warm in your wool—How say you neighbour Sager?
Alas Sir, I do but defend my own.
Nay could be wel-contented to sit down
With some (though unjust) loss. I judge it best.
Though with some prejudice to buy my rest.
Therein you wrong your self: the law is impartial, like a Bell, as sound on one side, as on the other, if the clapper be right. Master Bromley a word—What will you judge me worthy of, If I persuade him to relinquish his right? You know your case—.
Here's twenty angels: work it good Master Griffin, work it; and you shall be my everlasting Attorney. But if you fail, you must return.
Pish, never talk of that man—Mr. Sager, a word—I love peace, though I cannot live by it. I respect my conscience aboue my purse—when to has no money in it.—What will you give me to draw Bromley to a good handsome composition?
Not a penny, till y' have done it.
You know twill go against you, but I love peace.
(I never know it in any of your Tribe.
The event be what it will, Isle give no bribe.)
Sir, as I like your end—God and my cause,
Are coat of steel, against the sharpe fangs of laws.
Shall we walk on? our iourney's long.
Not so long as you take it. Stand, good Mr. Lawyer, shall I put case to you now?
Come, untruss, we have hast of business?
Quick sirrah, I shall serve an Execution of your throat else
Indeed Gentlemē, I am sorry that I'm not better stored for you. If you had took me coming from term, I could have served your turns better.
Bind them, hamper the rogues. Serve a Habeas corpus on that fieri faces.
How happy were this common wealth! how sound!
If every corrupt Lawyers fingers were thus bound.
Sager, I know thee poor: here take thy purse.
Though I rob these, no poor man shall me curse.
Tarry till I lay the Lawyer in the midst of his clients.
Are your talons bound Harpy? Thou least now like a Stallion new gilt, betwixt two Mares. This is a Distring is, sirrah.
Farewell pettie-fogger.
Oh neighbours, I'am undone, undone.
Then help to undo me. Isle have my action against the Rogues.
Stay till you catch them master Bromley.
Well, somewhat this my falling state relieves:
That honesty speeds well even amongst thieves
Help, help. Good master Griffin, your breath's stron∣gest, yawle, yawle. Your tongue could never stand your Clients in more stead.
I heard this way some mans distressed voice,
Crying for help: some robbery. Oh tic no wonder!
A thief and bawdy house are ne'er far asunder.
Oh good woman help, help to untie vs.
I know 'hem all. Two knaves, one honest man.
They know not me in this translation.
Come Sir, Isle loose you first, help you the rest.
Do well to all, but to the good do best.
Oh that I had the villains upon an execution now.
Would you turn hang-man, Sir?
I faith sweet wench, I would show 'hem the law.
Oh pity them: necessity has no law.
Perhaps want forced them; though it was not good.
What Horseleaches are they, that full, suck blood!
There is an Inn, enter, refresh your selves.
Their loss is money, yet I moan their state.
Who pities me most, most unfortunate!
Robbed of a husbands love, now of himself.
How far is this beyond all loss of pelf!
He sold me hither; may that sinful price
Of my deep sorrow never prejudice
His happiness, what climate ever holds him.
Be blessed, sweet husband; let my ruin buy
Thy wished content, though I forsaken die.
This witch has tired me with her customers,
Whom I have all sent home with bettered minds.
Against her vicious will, I force her strive
By virtue rather, then by lust to thrive.
I know, I am expected.
The Jacks be now vncag'd, and flutterd hence.
(The woman, that releasd them, I should know.
She frees them from this bondage to a worse.
There is no thief, like whore, to pick the purse.)
Shall we not shift ground?
By no means. A theefes safest residence is in the same plat he did the robbery. There, of all places, the Cuckoldly hue will no∣for cry after him.
When shall we share the booties, and be proud,
How liberally our division mounts?
The days work done, we will cast up the accounts.
Whore's the pettie-foggers Portmanteau?
Here.
Lay it there. So, you shall see me catch a fat Pickerel, with this Gudgeon presently. Stand close.
Uncle, uncle, I had a certain scurvy dream to night.
Dream? what of dreams? good cousin be not so nice.
I dreamt—
Be hanged.
Be you hanged, Uncle.
Behanged both, except I may have some drink.
Me thought I found a great deal of money.
I would we had it, cousin, without dreaming.
Whoop master—no part of my finding.
No matter for a part: ell's mine.
Nay, ell's mine for dreaming.
Nay, ell's mine for finding: and Isle keep't.
Soft, sirrah: it lies there for a wager.
What wager, Sir?
Marry, that who ever finds it, shall loose all the money in's purse.
Isle not meddle with it.
Isle have no part in it.
Judgment, Gentlemen: have they not lost the wager?
Vast. Lost, lost; as sure as Virginity; no sooner laid then lost.
Come then to pay, to pay. (Sure this is Gripe, my Bedford-Gowtie-Vsurer. Plague o▪ your stilts; what Carpenter set 'hem up∣right? not my wimble, I hope.
Oh I am spoiled, spoiled; this tic to dream of sinding mo∣ney—I knew, what twould come to.
Save your labour, good master Thief: for my breeches are in the fashion, a great deal of pocket, but no lining.
This is the rock that split me. Oh good fate!
That thou had now about thee half my state.
Is it sin to rob the Thief? by vsurious course,
He once robbed me, now I rob him by force.
No difference but this, twixt him and me.
I have not such protection, as had he.
Oh I am a poor man, a very poor man.
Thou art indeed; wealth without use doth free
No soul from the bleak storms of poverty.
Who cannot natures requests satisfy
Out of his wealth, his coffer's rich, not he.
Be they all bound to the good forbearance?
Thus far quits my revenge. The Usurer lies,
As fast in mine, as I am in his ties.
Now let me kill him. No, blood shall not die
My other sins in purple. Lye there. Lo!
That the wise law would serve all usurers so.
How few in thy bonds did thou ere untie?
Now bound thy self, so without mercy lie.
Come, let's retire to our refuge.
Uncle, uncle. I would this all were but a dream too.
Oh cos, I am damned, damned, my mony's gone.
Elstow mortgage is lost. Wallow to me, Nice.
Oh uncle, its dangerous tumbling, snakes in the grass.
Wallow to me, Thirsty.
Master, I'm so dry, I cannot stir my feet.
Help.—
More robberies yet? tic strange, how villains swarm!
Mischiefs hold close to keep each other warm.
Three rank corruptions make their near abode.
An Abbey, Bawd'house, and a Thievish rode.
Where be these men distressed?—how? my Usurer?
Shall I unbind him, that hath bound my husband
In merciless fetters? Yes, I'm bidden, still;
With good deeds to requite my enemies ill.
Come, devil, Isle vnlose thee.
Oh how I'm crossed!
My money, and my mortgage, all, all lost.
Mass, a pretty wench—If she lay thus bound before me, I would not loose her, but upon some conditions.
Will you go in Sir, and refresh your self?
Isle follow thee, sweet girl. Would I could cope This mortgage, though my other be past hope.
Doe they brew wine here?
See how this woman still me quits, and crosses.
I rob and bind, and she relieves their losses.
Why doth she thus? Its but a trick of hers:
By charity to draw in customers.
I am now patient, but more Cuckold still.
I help her to supply, against my own will.
Shall we retire to my chamber, and share?
Tarry. Here comes another Jackdaw: let's pluck him, and take his feathers with vs—stand.
Thou durst not say so, were we on just terms.
You should bee some Lawyer, you stand so on your terms
Faith, we must change professions with you, you must giue's our fees.
You'll earn them first?
Brave Sir, so do not Lawyers always.
But when you're paid your self, you'll giue's our due.
Hold, Gentlemen, this is my friend.
Thine, noble Valoys? thou shalt beg hisransome then.
Hee stands secure. Haste to your chamber. There Isle meet you presently, and then we'll share.
Are thy ends good in this given liberty?
Or dost it here alone to murder me?
Not with my sword, but with a tale shall wound thy a∣missed heart—come, let's sit down.
What tale? good friend, be plain and short.
Woe to a heart, by expectation centuples the smart.
I have commendations to you from one Vaster: For by's description you should be the man.
Lives Vaster then?
Alas Sir, you know he's dead.
And by your bloody hand was murdered.
By me?
Is not your name Sir Beniamin Gripe!
What then?
You killed him, Sir. Poor man he died
With penitence to heaven, to you remission.
Said, that you did it like a man, provoked
By his intemperate rage. Fate gave that I
Keeping his walk, came to close up his eye.
Heaven pardon me. What said the dying Vaster?
He charged me seek you out, and gave me gold,
To bury him in secret; lest his death
Should hazard yours, and charmed my silent breath.
His love gives fire to my greene pile of sorrows.
May his bones rest in peace: in grief I live;
Less he and heaven do my black fault forgive.
He hath forgiven you, only this he begs;
That to the scattered pieces of himself,
Left to survive his miseries vncomplete,
His Widow and his Orphans, you would yield
Some pity for your own, heavens, and his sake:
And teach that hand, (from which he hoped some good)
To succour theirs, that took away his blood.
He bad me tell you, now all means were gone,
To expiate that sin, save only one:
To hold those up, that on the worlds sea swim:
Since he had them undone, you undone him.
That you would be to them, as he should be:
This he bequeathed you as a Legacy.
Isle be a just Executor of his will.
Good friend, great thanks: my purse th'hast spared to ceaz
But what is worse, hast robbed me of my peace.
Ʋaster, you are dead: if thy transformed soul,
Could from the battlements of you high Tower,
Behold the vowed endeavours of my heart,
To satisfy thy will and my huge debt,
In thee, to thine, thou would my merit set
Amongst thy best friends: yet narrow are my bounds;
To give them plasters, that first gave them wounds.
Farewell Sir, think on Vaster.
Friend adieu. To Vaster and my vow I will be true.
How thick the sharpe pulse of my conscience bears!
How strangely my distracted Phantsie threats!
Oh vnappeased murder, that still keeps
The sensitive committer from fast sleeps:
And murmurs in the ears a fatal knell
Of restless thoughts on earth, of worse in hell,
How deep thou strik'st me with a silent blow!
Be patient heart, to thy fate humbly bow.
Fetch him again I cannot; oh his sown
Is too too mortal. Why then hurled I down
My sinking spirits? Let me sly to mirth,
And burden cares with wine, to make them sink.
The worlds rule is, Who feels the lode of conscience let him drink.
But oh importunate grief! too hard it is,
To counterfeit a false and forged bliss!
Yet once Isle force a trial; I have here an Inn,
I hear and wonder, is turned house of sin.
Isle see, if the loose sprawls, with their sharpe wit,
Can give my mind a medicine for this fit.
Whores I abhor, as Gardeners Joys: no matter;
Once for experiment, Isle hear them chatter.
Prevention! I think here's one of the iourney-women come, to proffer me her service. Black prostitution! that any such face should ever waite upon thee. Sister, what seek you?
What is hard to find:
An honest man, or else my eyes are blind.
Foot, if I say I'm one, I then fall short,
Of the occasion I intend for sport.
I'm such a fool in this Priapus-rode.
Me thinks, sweet-heart, your honest-man should bee one, that should please your appetite, stir your veins, tickle your blood, and make you laugh delight into your panting spleen.
An honest devil.
They are friends to hell, that tempt weak souls to evil.
Come, let me kiss thee—so: this was with ease;
Words are airy shades, they are deeds that please.
Sir, do not think to enter my chaste fort,
Encouraged by this parley. You presume—
Not to unlock thy treasures with such keys.
Gold only can surprise such holds as these.
And I have that will doo 't.
Then use it well.
How's wealth abused, when it conducts to hell!
Sir, I will set no price on your desires.
Isle be the franker Pay-master.
You must: Then pay me for my virtue: so Isle▪ take it.
What starves lust, is well bought; not what it feeds.
It is follies dregs, with coin to buy ill deeds.
Come, come; why should you be so quaint, and nice,
That know what belongs to 't? 'Dsso, a Virgin
At thirteen, or perhaps a little under,
Could not with whuling nay's be so perverse,
In her beworded Mayden-head.
I must.
Thou dost not rightly of my merits deem.
I would not know you such, as you now seem.
The golden footed law, that goes or runs,
Stays, and turns back, as we give motion to it,
Shall step the pace, which thou would have it. Nay,
Speak as thy tongue instructs it. I will change
Thy poverty to gold, rich robes, a Coach,
And prancing Coursers, that shall whirl thee through
The popular streets; and when thou set in pride,
The tamed law shall lackey by thy side.
These are some incitations to a heart
Tainted with malice, or that thinks a heaven
In glorious ostentation; or would stand
Affected with the bane of prurient lust.
I'm of another temper. Pray you leave me.
Thou shalt Nectar drink:
Make ebrious waste of the sweet Gnossian wines;
Pheasants shall be course diet: refined marow,
Small pounded nuts, and losseng'd Amylum,
Scraped pearl and date-stones sprinkled on each slice,
And strewed with sugar, like white frost on ice.
Grant me but love, Isle rain a shower of Gold
Into thy lap, out-shining Jove, when he
Wrapped in his glory courted Dane.
Thy language does affright me. Oh my stars!
O let not tears spoil such a beauty. Tell me; Why spill you water like a Crockodile, to captive me; that might have don't with mirth, nimbler then ayre?
Sir, I have no desire,
To take your lust, but pity. Some what prompts my credulous heart, there is some goodness in you.
My truth shall quite thy faith, Impart thy mind.
Isle trust you, Sir. I am a wretched woman,
The widow or the wife, I know not whether, of the distressed or dead Vaster.
How? I faint to tell thee; thou art then a widow:
The wars have ended his unfortunate days.
Nay, let not grief oppress thy spirits. Oh,
I have killed the wife and husband with one blow.
Lift up thy swooning eyes.
Oh let me dye. Rather short death, then lingering misery.
Revive thy heart: Vaster yet lives in me:
I am his son, that hath thy husbands lands.
And can I look for mercy at your hands?
Receive this earnest; all my state is thine.
You cannot with these spells charm me to sin.
I do not: when I taint thy chaster ears
With motions of black lust, pronounce me Villain.
Tell me, who brought you to this Brothell-Inne?
He, to whom heaven (I trust) hath cleared all sin.
My Vaster sold me hither. I was content.
Thus to relieve his state, when all was spent.
But could thou live infectlesse in this ayre?
I have, and will.
Will? This gives strange suspicion.
I made a promise, that without consent
Of her that bought me, I would not depart.
See where the Enchantress comes.
Now minion, you must be gadding. Cry you mercy, Land-lord: if you'll have any sport, walk in, walk in. You shall take out your rent here, Land-lord. She shall be your own Vaca∣tion and Term too, Land-lord.
So, you pernicious Damme of lusts foul littour,
You that buy beauty and do sell 't again;
And live by th'occupation. Hear you? Free
This woman from your brothel slavery.
Or I shall bring you to the cart and lash.
Oh I am cast away; she cost me fifty pounds, I ne'er got four grotes by her yet.
Thou shalt lose more by keeping her. Go cleanse the house from this disorder, or I here discharge thee.
Good Land-lord, bestow her where you will. I am content to be rid of her, so I may hold your fouour—
Fox pull your honesty. Is this the dancing maid?
One more such purchase will undo my trade.
Hostess, Ostice, wher's your kinswoman?
Yonder Sir, talking with my Land-lord, your Worcester∣ships son.
Son Benlamin? yea faith, are you so close with a wench? Come hither—she's a whore, Take heed on her.
If she want men, bring her home: she shall keep my house.
Faith, I grow old, and cannot now long live:
Oh such a Wench would be restorative
Persuade her Ben.
Isle do my best, Sir▪ See,
The pleased fates consent to succour thee.
My fathers house shall shelter thee unknown.
Please the old man with words, but hold your own.
If my plot takes, as I can hope no less,
This lust of his shall thy good fortunes bless.
COme, sister to my sorrows, and my self.
They say, society in woes doth lighten
Our pressures; but I find the contrary.
My woes are heavier by thy company
My grief for thy distress, doubles mine own.
I should be far less wretched, if alone.
Sweet brother. since we must both suffer, think it some comfort, that we share an equal fortune.
Grief has less power to work on our sad hearts;
Where mutual loves contend to bear their parts.
Little once thought thy mother, that thy fate
Should stoop to service to relieve thy state:
We are not tried, but in our misery.
He is a cunning Coach-man that can turn
Well in a narrow room. To manage plenty
In a right form, commends the state, not person.
Hoe's blessed, that to be rich can give consent
With honesty, or rest poor with content.
I wonder, Benjamin doth not visit vs.
His last relief is done, if that spring dry,
We faint for succour, and must fainting dye.
See, here comes Bromloy, once our fathers Steward: Sure, he will support vs. Sister, cry his kindness: thy speech is more pathetical.
Thieves, Lawyers, Rogues, Harlots, and Inne-keepers, are men's purgations. Griffin has cheated me: took twenty an∣gels from me; thieves took 'hem from him. He promised to draw Sager to compound; now the day's gone against me.
Oh I could wish my nails turned Vulturos talons,
That I might tear their flesh in mammocks, raise
My losses from their carcases turned Mummy.
Good Sir, a word—
Now Kitlin, what would you have?
Sir, remember we are the miserable children of lost Ʋa∣ster; whom once you served.
What's that to me?
I hope, Sir, you can spare somewat to vs distressed.
This is plain begging. Minion, fall to work,
And earn supply to wants with diligent labour.
For Vasters sake I will not urge the Statute.
The Statute, Iudas? w' are no Beggars, though
We tried thy curtsy. Cursed be thy fate,
Thou from our father got thy whole estate.
Yet grudgest vs some fragments. Hence, out Dog: If thou stay miscreant—
Boy, Isle smoke you for it.
Do thy worst, devil. An insatiate worm strike deep in∣to thy conscience, sile thy heart strings with rubbing flets: And turn thy derogated name,
On foggy blastings of eternal shame.
Ingratitude is gone; and in his room,
Extortion and a fiend is his or come.
I'm going to see my mortgage—
Good Sir, show mercy on two wretched Orphans.
Out beggars, mercy? what dost talk to me of mercy? I'm going to let my grounds. I have no leisure for mercy.
Go thou accursed Cain: in misery,
When thou beg mercy, be it as far from thee.
Sir, y' have undone our Parents; pity vs.
I cannot stay to hear you, I have business.
Heaven be as deaf to thee, when thy soul breath
Shall beg some respite at thy violent death.
This fellow sure will succour vs.
June, July, August, September—the first day—
Sir, raise our prostrate sortunes with some help: Some little help, you know vs.
Yes, yes, I remember I have seen you. Let's see—The fourteenth day—bad. I must do no deed of charity to day; I have president for it. 't is lost.
Now I remember, when I went to school,
I read of one Vespasian a good Emperor,
That told his Courtiers if a day out-slipt him,
Wherein he did nor good, that day was lost.
The next he would redeem't with double cost.
Ill coloured sin, how shameful dost thou look,
In them that plead thy warrant from their book!
Fourteenth day. A good turn forgotten. Oh here is lear∣ning from the stars.
Though I do little good ere I am rotten,
Like citizens, I would not have it forgotten.
Yet let me study on it: though a man may not give, he
May buy, I hope without danger. Fair sister,
What shall I give you for your maiden-head?
Thus much: a broken head.
Oh—Oh—Forgive me, good Calender—I perceive now, thy counsel's true. It's an evil day indeed: I should neither have bought nor sold on it.
Hence, skie-consulting Gypsy: men commit
Sins dark as night, and blame the stars for it.
Another passenger—Oh this is Sager.
His wife was once a servant to our mother.
Alas, when these built from our ruinous woe
Relieve vs not, what should this poor man doe.
I long to hear from London; how my suite
Ends, or depends: if lost, I'm lost with it.
Who would trust any bars this tottring world
Can plot to fortisie our wheeling states!
When the strong doors of Justice may be broke,
Or lifted from the hinges by the force
Of politic engines: or the safest locke
Be picked with a false key.
Sir, dwells there any mercy in your heart?
Yes: or of mercy, I must hope no part.
I know you, and your wants. My wife was once your Parents servant.
True, but that time is past,
And in her service now I would be placed.
That were too lavish yielding to your woe.
I am but poor, troubles have made me so,
Yet of that small life-blood, which my drenched state
He has left it by the Laws sharpe surgery,
Embrace a portion, as your needs require;
And I may give. Here comes your enemies Son.
I have been seeking all you three with nowes.
Good news; friend Sager, the day's yours.
It's welcome. I have the better means to succour these.
You have prevented my request: I purposed
To beg that kindness of you. Robin, I would
Entreat you to accept my service, but
I mean the name of it: for in deed Isle use thee
As my most equal and respected friend.
Nan, in thine arms I throw and locke my self;
My fortunes be all thine: the key's thy love;
Let this kiss be the seal. Ye sacred powers
Make indissoluble this knot of ours.
Now, master Sager, give her that respect,
You would my wife: all charges are my debt.
Robin, you know the house; conduct your sister thither; that done, conucy these letters to the widow Sorrow; (that's her borrowed name) she lies at my fathers.
With just hands.
I'm prouder of thy love, then of thy lands.
Oh pure quintessence of thy profession.
How many hast thou robbed, thus to make up
Thy perfect goodness! as if wiser nature
Had made an extract of ten thousand Lawyers,
And thrice refined it with immortal fires:
Then set it like a sanctified Lamp
On the Altar of thy soul; to give exemplar light,
In the dull darkness of this sinne-borne night.
Bromley's grown mad with rage: I'm jealous of him. You know the hopes of your posterity dwell on your present fortunes: all which burn with the short Taper of your singular life, Say he should quench it.
How Sir? murder me?
I cannot tell, it's but my iclaousie.
Tic not amiss, to keep preventions eye
Open and wary. Instruments of death
Stand ready pressed to a malicious arm.
And policy, like a cunning Iesuite,
Watches behind that Arras for a call.
The deed once done, help it who can, or shall.
What ground for this suspicion find your thoughts?
The fury of his madness, Envies some,
That surges from the poisoned avarice
Of his swollen heart: his broken resolutions,
Wherein his traitor-tongue can scarce forbear
The protestation. Give me leave to fear.
What will you counsel me?
That must be studied. Thus—Listen—We'll try what mischiefs he can warp: With wooden wasters learn to play at sharpe.
Oh my back, my back—
How do you, Sir?
Oh son, son, worse then ever. The Gout was but a stitch to this. Oh the Colic, the Colic and stone.
There be two of them master, ask the widow else.
Sure it will rend my bowels out.
It's just: The stone in the bladder now should make him smart That has so long been sick of stone in the heart.
Oh that I knew where my old Physician lived.
Keep on your habit. Our walke's turned Pols, I think.
Zlid, if our third party were here, wee would venture on 'hem all. They are but welsh freeze; they would shrink at the sense of iron.
Let's muffle up our villains with the shadow
Of some great conference: if a cheat be offered,
We'll not refuse: but now to compass it,
Must not be done by force of arms, but wit.
Son Beniamin, you must to Goldington,
To view young Brusters lands: they are offered me
This morn in mortgage. Hark you—
Thirsty, come hither.
Ha'you any drink there?
No; but come drink thy self drunk with Poetry.
Faith, Poetry now a days will scarce make a man drink. I had as lief be a pot as a Poet: then I should sometimes be full of good liquor.
Oh, your Poet is too full of that, it makes him thread bare. Sirrah, I ha'made a Sonnet here to my Mistress; she ne'er wrought such a one on her Sampler. Lay thine ear close to my musical tongue, I shall ravish her.
You shall be hanged for it then.
Open thine ears, like an Oyster a sunning
Even as the bird, which we Chameleon call, doth live on air for aye:
So my kind heart, ever like a stocke-Doue shall feed on thy love all day.
I, and all night too.
I, and all night too: but that night would make the verse too long. Now I talk of night, let me see what time of day it is. I have business, must not be rim'd away.
Pray y' Sir, how speaks your watch? One? mine lies in∣clining to two You have a pretty interpreter of the time there. Who made it, French or Dutch? You need not doubt me, Sir, I am the new Parson of Saint Peters in Bedford.
Sir, then as I may say, have joy in your new Benefice, for bell∣ly-peece you must ha'none. Pray lets peruse your watch, see you mine.
Fezz 'Sir, y' have a brave wash there. Chill warrant the Kings wash-maker made it. Beseech you mozter Nice, let me see master Parson wash. Master Pason will you zell your wash, chill give you good cash for it.
No, my honest friend, I will not sell it.
Will you run with me for it?
Run? no.
Cheuore ye run for it, you shall ne'er have it else.
Oh my watch—Nic. Oh my watch.
Stop the thief, stop the thief.
Stop the Priest, stop the Priest.
Let him go, he runs for a wager.
How now? is my cousin Nice playing at Base?
I know one of them well, by his sad tale
Of Vasters death: for that Isle not pursue him.
Son, I did rest me, hoping to go forward.
But so increase my pains, I am not able.
Survey you Brusters lands, and speed return.
Ell's for your good, for I am now out-worne.
I go Sir—Ell's for me; yet whileshe lives,
And his hydroppicke spirits can look through
His bodies loope-holes, and convey the pleasure
Of his contemplate gold, his lusts sole God,
Through those windows to the admiring heart:
Nothing comes from him; not the superfluities
Of basers things, not being first improu'd.
I am his only issue, and on me
I think he means to settle all his state.
It's the only way to give me cursed and poor,
To build my nest on such extorted store.
Those fathers, that distressed men's ruins use,
" As scaffolds to build up their racked wealth,
" Prove in the end, like citie-houses, that
" On small foundations carry spacious roofs:
" When the incensed heavens in tempests frown,
" Their own top-heauy weight tumbles them down.
" The first or second generation spells
" By riot, what by wrong the father fills.
In this Isle be a mirror to these times:
And by the hand of charity return
To every man, what by his covetous rape
Their states are ravished of: so work my rest.
The isle gotten gone, that which remains is blessed.
Oh Thirsty, honest Thirsty. Thy old master is but a dead man. I cannot peace man: my vrine's stopped.
You should drink, hard, master: all this comes with pinching your self of your liquor. This is the reason, that so few Dutchman are troubled with the stone. Your miserable Churl dribbles like the pissing Conduit: but his jovial son with a stream like Ware-water-spout. This is the cause, the Usurer falling sick, so seldom rises by the staff of Physic: for he has no water for the Physician to cast.
Now the Gout, Dropsy, Lethargy take possession of their legs. I ha'lost my wind, and my watch, and I fear, my wench too.
You have watched fair: sure that Parson was some Irishman.
Some hangman uncase him. I ha'bene at the Parsons, and he's no such manner of man.
What crew's this?
Bless your worship: I am your Worships sons Tenant. I ha'brought a rogue to your worship, to be examined.
What fault hath has he committed? Clarke, to your office: take his examination. Now neigbour Sleepy, are you Constable?
A good harmless Constable, a thief may take him napping.
An't please your worship, the rude Raggamussin comes into my house, calls for drink; and when the Tipster came with a reckoning, he broke the pot about's head; because he had not a clean Apron on.
No, because he misreckoned me.
Whose fault was it, to wipe out the score?
Not mine. Indeed I anointed the score with butter, and the Tipsters own dog licked it out.
Uncle, uncle, as sure as my watch is lost, this is master Valentine the Physician.
Oh Cos, that it were true. Pray Sir, let me move a question.
You may command my answer Sir, y' are a Justice.
Were not you the man, that heald me of the Gout?
Troth Sir, I have done so many cures, that I forget a number of my patients. The other day I cured a lunatic
Cobbler, pitifully run out at soul, when hee was given ore by the Physicians. I let him blood, took three Hen-egges, sucked 'hem out, into the shells I put his blood, set them under a brood-Goose. When she had hatched the rest, I gave these three putrefied eggs to a Dog: the Dog grew mad, the Cobbler sober. And now my memory runs back, I call to mind one of Bedford, sick of the Gout, whom I cured.
I am the man, my renowned Paracelsian: thou shalt have the other 25. pound. Constable, I discharge you. Ostice, I'll see you paid: set your recknoning on my score: trouble me no further: leave vs, leave vs. Now my deep diver into the secrets of nature, I have a cure for thee, more desperate then the former.
What is it Sir, that my Art cannot extend to?
The stone, the stone: I am pitifully grip'd with the stone, I ha'lost my pissing.
Sir, the disease is somewhat dangerous.
Yet if that your expulsiue faculty
Retain true force, I'll warrant to make you peace.
I must awhile withdraw to study Sir.—
Now am I puzzled: blood, what medicine
Should I devise to do it? It must be violent.
Give him some Aqua-fortis; that would speed him.
Let's see. Me thinks—a little Gun-powder
Should have some strange relation to this fit.
I have seen Gun-powder oft drive out stones
From Forts and Castle-walls, huger then he
Has any in his reins or bladder, sure.
Faith,' cause I am a soldier, i'll make trial
Of that same black and vaporous Mineral.
I'll shoot into his belly: if the gun hold,
I▪le give him charge enough: some Aquavitae
First brewd together would allay it well.
Isle swear to try it, if I doe not miss,
By a strange trick Isle make my Usurer peace.
Sir, Isle go in and prepare for jove.
Doe so. Here, Thirsty, there be the Keys of the Buttry:
attend upon him good Thirsty: let him lack nothing, as thou love me.
I love you Master, but here's a good key I love better. Sweet instrument of my joy, let me kiss thee. A∣las, that thou and I should be such strangers. Wee have but one barrel: now if that should bee in my masters disease, troubled with the strangullion, and could not run—well, if it bee not empty, Isle gived a scouring.
Now if this rare wonder of leaches can cure me of this griping, that I may have some forty or threescore years more to gather in, by that time I shall gather enough to keep me all the rest of my life. When a man grows up to to six or seven score, it is high time to think of mortality, and to take some ease. These three or four nights I have been haunted with Fairies: they dance about my bed-side, poppe in a piece of gold between the sheets, scatter here and there fragments of silver, in every corner. I keep my cham∣ber swept, clean linen, fire to warm them every night. I was at first a afraid, they had been spirits; now I see, they are good harmless Fairies. If I can please them, I shall grow rich, rich.
Son I have stayed for you.
You have done your health the more wrong, Sir.
How dost like my mortgage?
It's a fair living, Sir; but I would not have you med∣dl with it.
Why, my wise son?
Oh Sir, good deeds are scant,
When we advantage take of poor men's want.
Bruster's an honest man; lend him some money without such sharpe security.
Not a doyt. If he come to me, and convey the mortgage I have it ready; else I have no money.
Son come and sup with me.
I follow, Sir. Preposterous transuersion of our selves!
Th'erection of our faces should instruct
Our grovelling thoughts to ascend. How do men thwart
The teaching hand of Nature, and our birth!
Our heads cut air, and yet our hearts plow earth:
I look for Sager here. He's come.
Heir's my own case and counterfeit; by this danger∣less plummet, we may sound the depth of his more close and intricate stratagems.
So wiser masters lay some easy baits,
At once to tempt and try their servants truth.
The subject for quack-saluing Empirickes
To exercise their inexperience on,
Should not be men, but malkins.
Do you think, that he would doe me violence a∣sleep? would he not wake me to some conference?
No, hoe's a most rank Coward; and I know,
Dares not come near thee, though thou were asleep.
If he does ought, he'll do it by that long Engine.
Conceal your self awhile. How fares my name?
How does she brooke my slow-pac'd coming to her?
Faith, in your constancy lightens all grief.
She never hears you mentioned, but she startles:
As if your name like some celestial fire
Quickened her slow-pac'd spirits with new life.
I never knew virtue and beauty meet
In a more happy mixture. I remove.
I love her freely: shoe's to me as the air.
Her beauty is best and blessed, whose soul is fair.
The Wolf is come.
Good evening to you Sir.
My wish requite you.
You walk to have a shoot, Sir: I depart.
I would be loath to prejudice your sport.
Saw you not Mr Sager, Sir, of late? This is his walk: I would fine speak with him.
Why would you speak with him?
Sir, for no harm.
I do not think you mean it; but you know, hoe's valiant like a Lyon: if cross words should stir your bloods to quarrel—Sir, take heed. He will be too hard for you, and your long weapon. This meadow is his evening walk. Farewell to you Sir.
Good night M. Beniamin; you need not doubt me.
If I could meet him at the advantage now,
He is the Foul I'd shoot at. His life done,
The Farm is mine. Oh ye, whose hopes depend,
Like Imgring shadows, on another end,
What need you waite with patience natures leisure,
When such an engine can soon work your pleasure?
Tarry: yonder's a man—now by his habit
It should be Sager. What? and fast asleep?
Wished opportunity to my revenge.
Isle kill him ere he wakes. Stay, grant he should
In this unbeaten meadow lately act
Some horrid sin, please his adulterous lust:
I should then with his body strike his soul,
And sink them both together. Reason no further
Thou chiding conscience. See, the Fates have placed
Him sit for vengeance: enemy, sleep thy last.
Hoe's Planet-strucke, fallen down: now to my Farm.
He that would rise, must thank his wit or arm.
Oh but my murder! pish, who ever stood
In fortunes height, without some touch of blood?
This I divined.
Happy prevention!
Go, thou despairing wretch, and for thy will,
Ten thousan swords shall thy vexed conscience kill.
'T was a vain blow to vs, and no blood spilt,
Not less in thy intention is thy guilt.
This Clergy-habite which you have assumed,
Make good a while for your supposed death;
Allow his tyranny free scope: live close:
Till time shall ripen those events, we strive
To build on this vile ground. Hold, ther's my key:
Into my chamber; I sup at my fathers.
What, come again?
I cannot be at rest: I must needs see,
If this late murdered corps removed be.
Some gold I have put up in this Portmanteau:
If I should be pursued, this may relieve me.
Ay me! the bodi's gone: sure it's reueal'd:
Murder from heavens eye cannot be concealed.
What shall I doe? sit down: lye there, my gold.
Holla, Cousin Beniamin. So ho ho.
Oh ho ho.
Oh me, the Countrie's up, what shall I do?
This fool hath frayd him.
Oh guilt! how hast thou made
Cowherd of man to fly at his own shade!
Now Cousin Nice, what holla you for?
You had need of a bell to ring you in. Your father has stayed supper for you this hour.
Come then, let's walk on—what's here a Port∣mantua?
Oh, oh, do not touch it: it's venom.
Why my wise Cousin? why are you so timorous?
Oh it lies there for a wager: there be thieves about it. Take heed Cousin; I found a Portmanteau once, and lost all the money in my purse. Fly, fly—
Are you gone? Well, I see now, hee that will be wise by Calender, shall be a fool by destiny.
Sure, this is Bromleys budget, and has gold
Put up for his escape: it is so by th'weight.
It falls into my hands most luckily:
For I have need of cash in these occasions.
Yet Isle repay't again: my honesty
Shall be his friend, whose fear was friend to me.
Oh, in this glass my represented soul
Stands manifest to my impartial eye.
Ye heavens rain showers of mercy on my sins:
Lest where my pleasure ends my wo begins.
RVnne faster, ye dull legs of motion,
That time may follow with a swifter pace.
Let wanton Epicures wish you creeple-limbes,
Insatiate with the riot of their joys;
And chide the hasty forwardness of day,
That will not dance attendance on their play.
My spirits wrought upon with tedious woes,
Think that each hour lingering and lazy goes.
Impartial fates, how you delude our thoughts!
Guiding events to their determined ends,
Whether our strength with or against contends.
Whether the passenger wake, or sleep his fill,
The wave and wind-mov'd vessel goes on still.
Patience then heart! they do not valour know,
That weary faint, but who can suffer woe.
Who's this?
By your leave, Mistress Sorrow.
Right, th'hast hit my name.
Yet clear of sin, my sorrow has no shame.
I have letters from Mr. Ben. Gripe.
They're welcome. (poor boy how am I undone!
Tic hard, a mother must not own her son.
Sure I should know that face and language too.
A chill disquiet troubles my soft peace,
And runs like a cold fever through my blood.
I'm very sick of somewhat. Oh it is then
Error, the sickness in all minds of men.
But that I know her absence gives her dead.
In would swear it was my mother. alas vain thoughts,
How you would flatter me!
—Your provident friend, Beniamin Gripe.
Leave out that Gripe: it's an vnproper name;
Cannot denominate thee for such a creature.
A name can never constitute a nature.
If blessed mankind have a Phoenix left;
And vice of that good hath not time bereft;
In this degenerate worlds apostasy;
The plural number's lost: that one is hee,—Son
Zlid she calls me Son.
That word's oreslipt.
How easily love is in her language trip't.
Son—of compelling nature not forbears:
Passion must vent it self in speech or tears.
Dost thou not know me?
Yes: this testify.
I beg your blessing on my humbled knee.
Rise with heauen's benediction.
Lives my Father?
Guess by my grief and silence.
Vm'h my doubts
Wrap me in further maze. My father dead?
My mother living in his enemies house?
Let's study. Oft I have heard my father moan,
That this same women's lust had him undone.
This gives strong faith. Why should she else live here,
But to some such vile end? By heaven tic clear.
Oh that this sap, which my life feeds upon,
Did not confess a derivation
From that corrupted trunk! Well, I will force
Nature run back with a preposterous course.
Isle fashion a forgetful lunacy,
That ere I was her soon. But on my soul,
Not touch her with least hurt.—Woman come hither.
Woman! Dear Robin, not thy mother? bless me.
Why dost thou gripe me thus? Oh some black storm
Is rising on thy brow.
Storm? No, tic thunder. Can you read this?
Yes, I can spell't too well. It speaks my death, dear son—
Come, come, forget
These filial rights, and Natures attributes.
Prepare your self to—
What? Oh desperate child.
Oft have thy bended knees with a just duty
Kissed the cold earth, to beg my prayers to heaven,
For thy prosperity: oft desired forgiveness
Of thy wild infant-errors. Oft have these
Borne thee with soft indulgence: but now, see,
A woeful mother bends her humble knee
To her incensed son; not to conserve
This flesh from death, but thy black soul from hell:
The vnscaped dungeon, where all Parricides dwell.
Think: if thy spirits be not grown mad and wild,
Pity a mother kneeling to her child.
I'm deafer then an Usurer to your mons.
I must, like Narrow, see the place I bred in.
Be brief in answer: did you never wrong my fathers nuptial bed.
Never.
Take heed.
Clog not that breast with more sin, that must bleed.
Speak truth and save your soul.
Lye you not here to satiate his lust,
That robbed my father? speak, or y' are but dust.
No on my soul.
Now on thy soul thou lie.
Confess, be plain, or without pause thou die.
Help, heavens or men.
What prodigie's this?
Nothing Sir, alas nothing: it was but my fear.
It is my servant Sir; he meant no ill.
Son, son, howsoever he serves you, I'm sure he does not serve God. Without question, he would have ra∣uish'd her.
He would have refreshed her, Sir.
Speak widow, is 't not true?—away with him.
Cousin Nice, make his mittimus.
It's not amiss to let him feel some smart.
His life they cannot touch: what his offence
Deserves in heavens, strict justice, mercy pardon.
Parents learn this in tendering Childrens state:
Too much indulgence is not love but hate.
Sure his complexion doth not give it: let me see your hand, Sir.
Will you feel it, Sir? 
(Son offer violence to the mother?) strange!
Till I can sound this mystery of ill,
Isle to the prison and relieve him still.
You will be gone Mr. Valentine; but I hope you will visit me shortly again.
Before you look for me, Sir,—if all fall right,
I vow to visit you again this night.
Ha widow! I am clear of the stone now.
The less able to do a widow pleasure, Sir.
Tut, wench, I mean the disease, the disease.
(No Sir: you have a worse disease behind:)
The body hath no sickness like the mind.
Try me, sweet. I'm like a leek, though I have
a gray head, I have a greene—wut? wut be my medicine for the stone? when? when?
When you have married me I will be your wife.
Pish: first make trial how thou likest me: there is no wit, to marry before experience.
Your house Sir, is too public.
Hold, ther's the key of my closet. Be thine own pander for conveyance. I must receive a little money: profit is aboue pleasure: about ten—
Good luck direct my hands unto the mortgage.
That found, if or my wit or strength hold tack,
I have a medicine Sir, to cool your back.
Alas poor wench: now shoe's got into my Closet, she hugges her hopes, as a Politician his aerie plot, and cries a prize, a prize. She shall be double cony-catch'd. Well, it grows Fairy-time. Oh the fine dapper lads, how they frisk about my chamber: when at every step here drops a groat, there a teston. Many drops make a flood. Sure, I'm some wonderful honest man, that they love me thus. I must to bed. Tarry, how then shall I keep touch with the widow? Tha't, Isle sit down in my chair, and fine my self in a slum∣ber. Oh twill be a golden waking dream.
Oh-oh-th' are angry. Would I were rid of 'hem. Oh—sweet spirit—oh—doe not terrify me thus. What have I done to provoke you?
Confess thy sins. The hast some wench in a cor∣ner.
I have, I have—oh—but Isle not meddle with her.
Whiles thy house was cleanly swept,
And thy conscience chastely kept:
Neat linen, fire and water ready;
And thy purpose good and steady:
Whiles thou never sentst the poor
Unrewarded from thy door.
Whiles thou wakendst with the chimes,
Because thou went to bed betimes,
We brought thee wealth; but ▪it was in vain:
For now we'll fetch it back again.
Come deliver the keys of your trunks.
Oh theenes, you'll rob me, you'll undo me.
No, Gouty blister, well bind thee, undo thee, who will—.
Open thy jaws thou yawning sepulchre:
Here is a morsel for an Usurer.
A piece of Cheese of the Low-country Dairies.
This is the usual diet of the Fairies.
Now we will rip the lining of thy trunks.
Better the Fairies have it then thy punkes.
Luck more, then we can carry, hath assigned vs.
Each horse his lode: we'll leave the rest behind vs. Thou greedy Panther.
Savage Wolf.
Man-eater. Thou fitting Canker.
Cōmons horsleech.
Cheater
Whose belly has just cause to sue an action
Of trespass, against thy covetous lusts exaction:
For detinie of many hundred meals,
Which it from others, and thy self too; steals.
The Gout.
The Dropsy.
Colic, Lunacy,
Like Sprites and Fairies haunt thy company.
And as thou gap'st now, let some Bat or Owl
Spent backewards in thy mouth.
No more. If thou do not
Repent, restore, turn good, sit till thou rot.
What does Usury stick in thy teeth? spent out, Dog, spent out. Now thou gap'st for a mortgage. Dost?
Fare-ill. To those that ask how came this evil, Give answer thus: The Fairies robbed the Devil.
Oh—Oh—Oh.
Ho master Gripe? what, your chamber door op thus carely? how now, bound? gagged? what rogues have been here?
Speak to me uncle, speak: the gagge's out.
Save the gag. I will hang the whole shire, but Isle find 'hem. Iugglers, Fairies, incarnall sprites! My money, my heart, my guts, my soul—Let me curse my self into the ground, and save a Dirge. Run, cry, ride, charge the Consta∣bless with 'hem.
Where be they, Sir?
Gone to the Devil. Run to a Conjurer, cast me a fi∣gure.
Oh, Sir, all the Conjurers are of their own trade. A mischief on it, I thought there was some scurvy luck towards; the Crickets did so cry in the Oven yesterday. And this very hour, as we came in, there was an Owl whoo-whooping in the top of the chimney: and just at the threshold, master Brom∣ley here stumbled Signs, signs.
Pluck down the signs. Isle undo all the Innes in the town: they harbour the thieves.
You said they were Fairies.
Now in sincerity, I heard a great rattling of chains.
(This makes me wonder! such a robbery, and I not hear it?
Come bridle up this fury. What will you say, if I can produce you the plotter, abettor, or at least accessory to this villainy? What if the pick-locke can open the chest of all this stratagem?
Alas, poor widow, she was fast, I warrant you.
No, she was loose I warrant you: how could we have got in, if she had not opened the door? Your cousin Nice and I came from a hurly-burly in the Jail. Your sons man has broke from his keeper. And as we were coming, wee met this wo∣man very supitiously stealing out.
My heart misgave me thus: this devils tongue
Would work my misdeem'd innocence some wrong.
No more words. Cousin, neighbor, take her to the next Justice. I must not deal in my own business. Let her bee examined soundly, soundly: sent to the Jail, roundly, roundly.
Sir, I beseech you.
No more. Do not you know, I know you for a whore!
Away with her, I will not hear her speak.
My gold, my silver—Oh my heart will break.
Come, will you walk? Isle lead, widow, come you next. Master Nice, you'll follow.
As close, as beggary follows drunkenness.
Let me see your hand, widow—Oh the case is clear.
A yellow spot doth on your hand appear.
Gather up your heals, widow: Justice Surly dwells hard by.
How now? my mother guarded? with two rogues?
Sword, thou did fine to kill her—but—Sirrah—you—deliver me this woman, or Isle make thy yellow starched face serve me for a cut-worke band.
Oh Sir, y' are well met; you broke from the Jail last night. Apprehend him master Nice.
I'am somewhat dainty and shy on him, Sir. He looks vile sharpe on it.
Let him look as sharpe, as an Apparitors nails, we'll blunt him I warrant ye. Sirrah, I charge you stand.
Sirrah, you see I stand charged already. Will you have me run?
Oh help, help—
Hold, hold, I have not made my will.
No matter for thy prayers; dispatch it quickly then.
You'll give me leave, Sir, to make my will.
Yes.
Then my will is—to run away.
Thanks, son; but now do you not, like the Lion,
Save the distressed Lamb from the Wolfs paws,
For sacrifice to his own bloody laws?
Dear mother, pardon; be secure—
This way, this way: here—Oh have we found you?
How do these mischiefs flutter in thick heaps!
And cloud my understanding from the light,
I looked the Sun should shine, find it dark night
I cannot stand to examine circumstances.
Now master Bromley, whither are you bound?
Your father gave vs charge to have the widow
To master Justice Surly's; he suspects her
To have some hand in the robbery to night.
Sir it concerns you; he has lost 300. pound.
Vmh. My father robbed? the widow charged with it?
Her son vniayld himself? these are harsh turns.
Well, go you two before, prepare the Justice.
You have my word for their appearance. Go.
VViddow, and Robin, now here's none but friends:
You'll give me leave to wonder at these ends.
Of that anon.
Mean time I here present you with a gift,
Dearer to me, then is the Sun to earth.
So; narrow up your passions for a space:
H'you the morgage-deeds? give them my hands.
Yet the success on my innention stands.
Mother, and brother, (so I hope your titles)
My self, and friend here, whom you do not know,
Will bail you both. That done, I have an Inn,
Now void of Tenant; there dwell all together.
My friendship to the power shall pledge your faith.
Measure good deeds by what man would, not hath.
What Damned fortune's this, that I cannot smell out these thieves? I would sweat them to the Gallous, as well as they swore me out of my money. An oath like a strong charm, should conjure their necks into the circle of a rope.
Oh, here comes my fellow-Patient; wee both took Physic together; purged, purged: but I have a cordial for him. Save you, brother Gripe. Mr. Bromley, news, good news. It's repor∣ted, that Sager's dead.
Dead? Isle go take possession presently.
Do not with too strict rigour exercise your power on his distressed family.
My time is come, I will not lose an hour.
It's just, that every man should take his own.
Sir, you speak law, not charity. He that will
Be nothing more then just, is unjust still.
Wo to that quited soul, to whom from heaven
All justice, and no mercy shall be given.
Your mercy to the widow, to the Orphans.
As much as a Puritan has upon a good feast.
Well—let me tell you this—Sager is dead.
So flies report, borne on presumptions wings.
But how he died, that aerie bird not sings.
Kilt—but by whom—weight deeply—I must hence.
The muttring's strong—look to your conscience.
How's this? kilt?—muttering? and conscience? Look, his ghastly melancholy points him out for the murderer. As sure, as a hatte-brinkes pulled down declares a cuckold, this darkness discovers him.
I am a villain.
Tell him, that knows it not.
My narrow heart cannot be capable
Of this huge bulk of sorrow. It must out.
Now, to whose bosom better then my friends?
This hand kilt Sager.
How?
Nay, do your worst.
It was but chance medley, accidental slaughter.
Intending with my Piece to strike a foul,
Against my will the cock went down, and he
Stood in deaths way. It was his destiny.
But Griffin, hark you—let not your tongue stir.
Do not I know you for a forgerer?
And more—you wot—let not your tongue be loose.
Thus are two Foxes caught in one poor noose.
Our guilt shall bind our secrecy; who lives
An unsuspected villain, winks at others
Unlawful deeds, to teach their eye-lids how
To wink at his—Shall we go to our new Hostess?
Where? who?
For your where, at the Maiden-head, a good likely place. For your who: the wid dow that old Gripe suspects for the robbery; but young Gripe hath tenanted to his Inn. Mass, she prevents vs. Widow, we were coming.
Pray Gentlemen walk in; you shall have attendance.
Your company, sweet widow.
Isle not be long from you, Sir.
Oh, some retiring from this house of sin.
Fate! I was never bred to keep an Inn.
More customers? that which all Innes would see;
Great store of guests: this is a plague to me.
Yonder's mine Hostess. Now the water's up, that we cannot get over to the Abbey, it is our securest course to com∣mit the money to her custody. If any search should be made, and these tokens found about vs, we are all dead men: there's not so much mercy in Gripe, as in the Plague.
Agreed. Widow, we have some money to pay to a Londoner in Bedford here; and he's not yet come to receive it. Will you locke it up safe for vs?
But hear you? Deliver it not to any one of vs. Except all three demand it to gether, keep it still.
Help her to bear it in, and see it laid up.
Zlid, my wife takes degrees; she rises fairly.
I sold her hither whore some tricks to do.
Now she's turned whore, and Bawd, and Hostess too.
Stand close dear wits, and shadow me disguise.
She cast me down, and by her fall Isle rise.
Husbands that love your honour as your life;
Learn now to be revenged, on a false wife.
Your friends expect you Sir.
Sweet, I would go.
But here's a charming beauty, that says no.
Will you walk off a little—to the meadow?
I have a tiny business with you, widow?
What is your will, Sir? I'm in haste: be short.
The thing thou wotst on, half a minutes sport.
Forbear, libidinous Groom.
Groom? I'm a man.
And can do, Hostess, what another can.
Come, shall I speak in gold, and action?
Be damned, enchanter, with thy golden spells.
Thou think, gold can buy lust, when nothing else.
Yet I do love thy soul. Think, ethinke, how dear,
A moments joy is bought with endless fear.
How ill the flesh steals his unjust delight,
When the soul suffers an eternal night.
Flatter thy glowing hopes with heate no more.
Be not deceived; thy Hostess is no whore.
So: spoke my out-side brave; did my rich husk
Allow me impudent; and my vndown'd chin
Promise my blood vnsuck'd out by this sin,
You would run mad on me.
Sooth, thou much err.
I never saw that person (except one,
Who justly claimed my love, now dead and gone)
In whose embraces I would sooner locke the treasures of my heart.
Now, now, she's coming.
If you had moved my ears with a chaste suite, I should have listened.
Brave! she's mine already.
I cannot love theenow.
No?
No, I cannot
conceive a good thought of thee.
No?
I hate thee.
Heigh? handy, dandy, fast and loose, brave devil.
Isle conjure you for this. Come, will you love me?
Or no matter for your love, will you lie with me?
Doe, or lie alone in the meadow here. I shall leave your temp∣ting eyes for the Crows to pick out.
Defend me goodness.
Whistle not so loud, lest I cut your pipe, Come on.
Honour or life, how shall I save you both?
Sir, I shall spoil you. I ha'bene long a sinner.
A common sinner, Sir, and am not sound.
You cannot scope infection, if you touch me.
Humh! the pox, say you? well, you'll not reveal me.
You need not, Sir, distrust my silence. Wrongs
That scope heavens hand, need not fear mortal tongs.
This world's turned Bedlam, raving, desperate-badde.
It staggered drunk before, now it runs mad.
More customers?
But, Sir, respect your life, your conscience.
Thou say well, for my life. But for my conscience▪ Tic like a Surgeons, that takes money for letting out blood. Think of my mortgage.
Upon my life, he'll kill her. O presumption,
How dost thou dare heavens justice? I must study
To interpose prevention. Sir, I'm your son:
This breast you gave me, and Isle still conserve it,
A faithful closet to locke up your secrets.
How will you strike? Pistol her?
No: that speaks
Like an obstreperous Advocate, too loud,
In th'cares of justice. Murder, like your Iesuite,
Should whisper death in silence—sleeping silence.
I apprehend it, poison. Sir, Isle buy you
A speedy potion.
Not too dear, good son.
I would not have it too dear: my mony's gone.
Two peny-woorth of Rats-bane, w' have experience,
W'll do it; do it thoroughly.
Isle provide it, Sir.
Isle be your Apothecary; but by no means
Minister it my self. You must do that, Sir:
I cannot doe you better service. Rare!
Then bring my father to the Galhouse.
Be petulant, and let your wanton mirth,
Give you forgetful of all wrong.
Come widow, I forgive thee now: I hope thou't forgive me too. I'm come to drink down all malice.
Pray Sir, lead the way. Isle follow.
Look up, dear friend: what thus deiects you?
Wonders, miracles—I must needs poison thee.
Be not dismayed, my poison shall not hurt thee:
Isle tell thee all▪
Hostess, Pray help me to the money quickly. I must pay't instantly.
You shall Sir.
So, if my new-borne plots hold constant life▪
Isle cheat my thieves, but aboue all, my wife.
Thank you, good Widow. Youth, tel the
Gentlemen I'm gone to tender the money. Bid
'hem be merry and continue their healths. Isle take my round, when I come again. Farewell Ostice.
You're welcome Sir, 
Gone, say thou? and with the money? fire and gun∣powder! how are we blown up?
Pretty handsome!
Ostice—
Good leach, stand further off: your breath's too violent▪
Did we not charge you not to deliver the money, but to vs all three together?
Mass, tic true. How forgetfully are we cheated?
You are a coozening woman.
You doe lye!
Keep the peace. Ostice, you'll make it good to vs, three hundred pound, a pretty competent sum.
Furies and Fiends! wits, you do fairly strive.
I thought this faiery money would ne'er thrive.
I have heard all this roguery.
Cheer, Widow: let not sorrow make thee sick.
Perhaps, Isle catch the knaves at their own trick.
So ho-my master's turned Reveller. I never lost my name
since I came into his staruice, till now. Vck! a miracle, I am not Thirsty.
Now my wise kindred, why look you so pale?
O, Isle put off my wedding. I will not for all Bedford marry to morrow.
No? why?
O, my Uncle reaching for a Cup, overthrew the salt towards me—towards me. O tic ominous.
The falling of a salt keep thee from marriage! well, I have a strange medicine, of quick cure to this conceited sick∣ness. Robin, fetch me some wine. Cos, how dost feel thy self?
Hee shakes as if he had the gurning agew.
Perplexed Cousin, perplexed. I had rather a good Lordship had fallen toward me.
Tut man, salt seasons all things; fish or flesh.
And troth, thou need it: for thy witte's but fresh.
Here blood, I drink to thee.
Now could I dance like a Dutch Fro: my heals are as light as my head.
Oh I recant. Cousin, I will marry.
What meant you Sir, to spill the wine upon him?
It was a mischance Sir.
No: it was good hap.
Tic a good sign, to have wine spilt in ones lap:
This makes amends for the salt, Sir.
I thought this dock would fetch your nettle out.
I see. small wind turns a fools mill about. Let's go.
Yonder comes my Physician and his potion.
I have here two papers: one of sugar, and that's for my self: another of poison, and that's for my Ostice. Let me be right-right. I should make fair work, if I were mista∣ken now. Ha widow! the art a Churle-a very churl, that would not keep company with thy guests. I have brought thee a cup of wine here: health and blood to thee, sweet Widow.
A miracle: An Usurer drunk it's own cost.
There's a whole cup for thee: pledge me chuck. Nay tarry, tarry: thou must have sugar to 't; women love sweet things, I know. So, off with it bottom and all: the dee∣per the sweeter. Ha Ostice, my son shall give thee a lease of thine Inn.
I would hee could grant me a lease of my life: for I grow sick sir. Robin, look in.
(Excellent rattes-bane) it works already. Widow, dost remember since thou wast in my study? and y faith what foundst there?
Nothing, but what I left behind me, Sir. I'm ve∣rye sick.
(Isle ne'er trust poison else.) This cottons well yet. No sooner dead, but my son shall cease on all the goods. Search the coffers for my mortgage. If it be lost, yet now she I keep counsel.
This wine hath made me thirsty: I'm not well.
Hye thee to bed and sweat. A little posit with two-penny worth of horse-spice. O tic excellent to put one into a sweat. Farewell widow.
So I'm recovered now: thy absence cures me.
O earth! thou center of the world and sin;
Tsty Paradise is lost t'th'art only now
A larger stable, where all vices dwell.
Did not the Sun shine, I should think thee hell.
Lucky! here comes the cheater. Sir, the money is asked for by the Gentlemen, your friends: They threaten to arrest me, but I hope sir, you'll be my quittance.
Yes: on this condition.
Let me enjoy thy love on this soft ground:
Isle pay it back, were it three hundred pound.
Stir not: this charge you: are you not content?
Come, with a silent kiss seal your consent.
Sir, you know my disease. I'm dangerous.
The pox? O I have known London too long to bee
afraid of the pox. Come, will you unlock? I have the golden key. If not, Isle to Virginia, like some cheating Bankrupt, and leave my Creditor in the suddes. You know the Jail. Ha you never bin hired to yawle for the whole prison? and whule to the passengers?
Sorcerer, thy circle cannot hold me.
No, I would have yours hold me. Come, will you fadge?
Not, if thou killst me: not if thy murderous hand
Could put me to a death▪ (like Iesuites poison)
Ten years a dying.
No? you will repent.
So wilt thou never: take my carcase, slave:
Whiles there's a soul within; no lustful hand
Did or shall ever touch it.
Politic whore!
What do you ken me now?
My husband? ô,
Into your arms I fly.
Infection, no.
Y are dangerous by your own confession.
Alas! I forged that answer, to avoid
Sinful embracings. Brothels sick indeed
Of that contagion, sooth and smother't up,
To tempt distrustful comers on, at once
To their own profit, and the others ruin.
They speak false, to do false the safer. I
To save my conscience did my flesh belly.
You cannot tempt me Siren; I am resolute.
Thou art a cunning Bitch, and I am proud
Of such expected means to my revenge.
Hark, how Isle quittance thy abhorred lusts.
First, thou shalt be arrested for the money,
Whereof I cheated thee: so be restrained
From thy old straggling, mewed up like a haggard;
Till the Assise comes, then thou shalt be hanged.
I hear thou standst bound over for suspicion
Of robbing Gripe. I did the villainy.
Isle have it proved thine: so thou shalt hang for me.
Dear husband, do so.
Husband me no more:
That name was cancelled when you first played whore.
Now garden-pot, you water your sad fears,
But I am no loue-foole, won with women's tears.
O prosecute your will. Thus on my knees,
And with a heart more humbled, I entreat,
And I must have it granted ere I rise;
Be pleased to make this life a sacrifice,
To expiate your wrath. I freely yield it,
For your redemption. For your hate I dye;
That might not live in your loves company.
If I confess not guilty, to save you,
Imagine then all your suspicions true.
But when for your debts I have paid this life,
Believe but then, you had a faithful wife.
O, thou would melt a rock. My heart's too dead,
To sprout at this wet April. Fare you well.
Peace and content attend you: and let still
Mercy forgive, and rectify your ill.
What? not dead yet? but weeping? come, come dry
Up all thy tears: go hye thee in, and dye.
Much villainy is now together packed.
The Scene grows full. Your patience this last act.
TO man, how sweet is breath! yet sweetest of all,
That breath, which from his native ayre doth fall.
How many weary pases have I measured!
How many known and unknown dangers past,
Since I commenced my tedious Pilgrimage,
The last great work of my death-yeelding age!
Yet am I blessed, that my returning bones
Shall be raked up in Englands peaceful earth.
Oh happy Englishmen, if your sore eyes
Did not look squint on your felicities!
How other Countries envy, what you loath,
And surfeit on: and would make that their pride,
Which is by your contempt still vilified!
This sickness fullness breeds in most men's blood;
None less, then the possessors, know what's good.
Now to my deputy: here his glories end.
But stay: he comes to meet me. Isle attend.
Confound this damned fox: he has cheated me of the best prey, I ever shark'd for. Would I could light on him; I have a Constable here should make him stand.
What's this? sharking, foxing, and a pistol?
Th'embleme of thief, cheater, murderer?
Sure, this vile Elderne was not of my planting.
I know him: Tic his brother, to whose trust I did infeoffe my place.
I was directed this way to the Abbot.
My lord—the Judge detained by sickness from to morrow's Session, desires your lordships aid to the supply of his own place. The assistant Justices rest their determining sentence on your lips.
Isle give my old attendance.
Your lordships leave.
I leave your lordship too.
I must about this mischief to prevent:
Isle force you both your offices repent.
So, so, so. My customers drop in roundly. Welcome, Mr. Gripe, and the rest of my good friends, welcome! I am very glad to see you here. My house was not graced with an Vsu∣rer, and vnder-Sheriffe, many a day before; though I have been pestered with abundance of honester fellows. Speak, shal'• be merry? what will you have to dinner?
A rope. What dost thou tell me of dinner?
No Sir, that shall be kept for your supper.
Give me so me Sack and Aqua vitae. I will be drunk presently.
It's clear. I have twenty cases for it.
The concealing of murder is but man-slaughter. I must have my book.
Give 's some Sack, I say: mun tut, &amp;c.
My Uncle committed? Justice it self sent to the Jail?
Cousin, sweet Cousin, run, scudde, fly—to Sir Bare Notwithstanding: he lies but three miles off; he's in my debt: bid him release me, and Isle release him.
Stay Sir. He's in my debt too: I have solicited for Sir Bare these seven years, and have nothing but bare thanks.
Nay then, take me with you. Thus—
Ha you your lesson perfect?
Yes, yes: as a Mid-wife her errand to a Citizens wife. There's not an Owl in an Iuy-bush, nor a Parrot at a Drugsters door, has whoo whoop, or walk Knave, more perfect.
Robin, do it cunningly. My Dad shall be
Only to me beholding for his life.
By that advantage I recall his love.
Cousin, fly every step. Remember, like a Iury-man, you go upon life and death.
Happiness grant, that no Hare cross him in the way: his superstitious legs will retire, though wee hang for it. Come, shall we keep the rule of the place, and drink drunk now?
Now kindred, whither trot you so fast?
Oh Cousin, about a deed of charity; to save your father, and two or three knaves more from hanging. I am go∣ing to Sir Bare Notwithstanding; to save them out of prison: they have saved him often.
Sir Bare Notwithstanding, he's a great man, Cousin.
Hee had three Lordships fell to him at a clap; the worst worth 400. a year.
Yet hoe's bare notwithstanding.
Hee has sold his Caroch with four Flanders mares, because he would retire himself and live in the Country.
Yet he's Bare Notwithstanding. But to himself Cou∣sin, farewell.
To him, quoth he? I will to him, were the devil in my way.
Pork, pork.
The devil pork you. What dismal bird crokes dis∣aster to my journey!
Pork.
Nay, if the destinies have set the Raven against me, Isle rerurne sure—yet let me see. So my Uncle may bee hanged, Isle on, come what will.
Pork.
O this black bird tolles like a passing-bell,
My own sad mischief and my Uncles knell.
Yet why am I so timorous; when charity
Bids me go on, shall a Raven hinder me?
Isle keep aloose and pass—oh a spirit, a spirit.
The Widows Ghost. Bromley, Lawyer, Uncle, hang.
Take all your fortunes, I'll no further gang.
It's an unhallowed place, a dismal day.
Betide what will, Il'e back again some way.
Come down, Raven.
Come out, Spirit.
Blind, credulous fool! He that shall trust at need
Such nice and tottring cockscombs, shall thus speed.
Should his sick father send him for some drugs,
Hee would turn back at such imagined bugs.
Come, mother, friend, and wife; take these back places,
Where you may hear unseen: that when time serves,
I may produce you. Works and hours are spent
Then well, when we doe good, or ill prevent.
I cannot judge, what is this days success.
All-ruling powers the doubtful sequel bless.
My Lord, whose place I personate, being sick,
Hath thus designed me, both to hear and censure
The criminal causes, which offend the peace
Of our dread Sovereign, and his subjects weal.
Whiles we lance Ulcers, we the body heal.
The charge I give in short, you of the Jury,
Look to your Oath and conscience: let not favour
Shut up your eyes, nor malice open them
Too wide. You understand, our laws are good.
Tic pity that they should be writ in blood.
But since conniuence at unlawful deeds
Gives but encouragement, and wee cannot strike
With sword of Justice the deserving faults,
Except you give the persons to our hands:
All on your vigilant information stands.
Proceed to the Inditements.
We are all cast away. Sir Bare is not come.
Pull down that counterfeit, proud, arrogant, puff:
Could your intrusion not content it self
T'vsurpe my office, but you must abuse
The Kings deputed Judge?
Down with him, down with him.
Jailer, receive him to your custody,
Till our just censure give him punishment.
Fox, I shall hunt you out.
Do it with a pox.
The goose sometimes must sit and judge the Fox.
Proceed; the day hastens.
Marian Sorrow widow, yield thy body, and save thy bail.
Sir, she is dead: her felony is answered Before a higher Court.
That is the woman that Gripe is suspected to have poisoned. Godfrey Gripe stand to the Bar. You are indi∣ted for the murder of Marian Sorrow widow: guilty or not?
Not guilty, my Lord: let all the world testify of my honest carriage. I have lived all my days in good name and fame.
Stand not upon your credit and good deeds.
Your harvest would be small, if like your seeds.
If all that know thee stood about this place,
And had free liberty to speak their thoughts,
Round echoing curses would amaze thy soul,
And with hells damned crew thy name enrol.
But when the Widow, Orphan call for plagues
On thy black life, thou hy'st unto thy bags;
There dost applaud and hug thy wretched self:
As solace against all woes lay in thy pelf.
Thou hast no god but gold: that Deity
Thou should adore, and would still succour thee,
Is quite rejected. And that Idol, money,
Which bears away thy confidence and heart,
When thou art plagued, aggrauates thy smart.
Thou art the Devils Executioner.
His rankest plague on earth's an Usurer.
Spirits in hell whip souls: extorting slaves
Torment poor bodies so before their graves.
Thou art a gulf, poor men's estates to drink.
A quagmire; none pass ore thee, but they sink.
Unless Strepsiades-like, men could devise
To pluck the Moon by Sorcery from the skies;
Thy month and gain will come. Like some at sea,
(Yet dangerlesse of shipwreck more then they)
Thou slumbrest in a base lethargic swoon.
Let others toil, thy iournye's done as soon.
Will not this move him?
Nature in all inferior things hath set
A pitch or term, when they no more shall get
Increase and off-spring. Vnrepayred houses
Fall to decay: old Cattle cease to breed.
And sappelesse trees deny more fruit or seed.
The earth would hart-lesse and infertile be,
If it should never have a Jubilee.
Only the Usurers money genders still:
The longer, lustier: Age this doth not kill.
He lives to see his moneys moneys money,
Even to a hundred generations reach.
He, whiles his interest money in do's troule,
Cares not to lose the principal, his Soul.
He like a cleanly Alchemist can soak
And draw much silver, yet waste none in smoke.
Thou lendst, like water powered on sea-cole fire,
Or on a lode of Lime a shower of rain.
It seems to cool heate, but doth more inflame.
His conscience has deaf ears.
When all is done,
And thou hast swel'd thy heaps; to say no more,
Thy coffer's only rich, and thou art poor.
This common plague is on all Usurers shown:
Th'haue much, yet are not masters of their own.
One day thy stintlesse mind shall have enough;
When the divided pieces of thy self
Shall in their several doomed mansions dwell:
Enough of mould in grave, of fire in hell.
But I spend breath in vain; come, let's proceed.
No further. You have made my conscience bleed.
I here confess my self guilty of all,
Even of this murder too.
Let mercy fall on thy distressed soul. Now to the rest.
Nicholas Bromley, you are indicted for the murder of William Sager, &amp;c. Guilty or not?
Not guilty? Who testifies against me!
In case of Murder should we never judge
By circumstanciall likelihoods and presumptions,
No life could be secure.
Puff! shift for your selves; Sir Bare Notwithstanding dares not be seen.
O, I am lost.
My Lord, I'm guilty: so is Griffin too:
He did conceal the fact, that I did doe,
We shared the Lands together.
Powerful truth!
Murder will out, though by the Actors mouth.
O Beniamin, I have undone
My life, my state, my credit, and my Son.
But I'm resolved to dye, so Monarchs must:
Rich men as well as poor, must turn to dust.
Me thinks I could prevent all this.
Alas, thou love me; but tic not possible.
Sir, I have here a book already drawn,
Seal to it freely, and Isle save your life.
You shall confirm me your undoubted heir,
And then surrender Vasters mortgaged lands.
Tic done.
My Lord and all this bench be witness to it.
Then thus I quit you, widow, appear in Court.
In earnest, see, she lives, that died in sport.
Sir, thank your Drugstore, else I had died by you.
And you for me received a murderers due.
So, I am cozened finely, finely—
My Lord, I challenge this widow for cheating me of 300. pounds. This is one of her old tricks.
How's this?
My Lord, my self and two entrusted friends
Came hither to pay money on a bond,
Whiles the receiver did defer his coming;
We gave this coozening woman, being Hostess,
The whole sum to lay up: and straightly charged her,
Not to deliver it, but to vs all together.
She says one of vs three demanded it
Of her in haste, and ran away: and thus
We lost our money, and the bond lies forfeit.
Your Lordships leave. Tic true, she not denies,
But they so charged her, and she was so coozend.
Therefore she yields to payment. Let 'hem come
All three together, they shall have the money.
Upon my faith, a pretty quillet.
Witty and just. How say you? here produce
The other two, your satisfaction's ready.
The widdow's cleared: but master Valentine—
Nay, man, come nearer, you'd have present pay.
No, Sir, let it even go.
So must not you.
You gave 300. pound to her: tic true.
Which like a subtle Quacksaluer, you robbed
My father of; Sprites, Fairies—
I am cob'd.
It's true, my lord: this is one of the Fairies. Justice, Justice.
Well, if there be no remedy, I hope,
I shall not dance alone upon the rope.
My lord, here's the other Fairy.
O Sir, have I found you?
Pull off that borrowd habit from his back.
O that such foul deeds should be hid in black.
My Lord, this Widow's accessory too:
She plotted, she received. Justice, justice.
But late thy song was mercy, now all justice?
Here's all the goodness of an Usurer.
She saved his life, he would now hang her.
She has robbed me, undone me.
It is most true, my lord, she plotted all.
(Your villainy, Ostice, we shall now retort.
You cheated vs, and we will hang you for it.
How doe these mischiefs grow, like Hidra's heads, faster by cutting off!
Prodigious villains! will they thus cast away an innocent woman?
Yet I most vile of all, that thus stand by,
And for my fault behold my poor wife dye.
My lord, upon my soul this woman's clear:
And only malice thus accuses her.
Speak, woman, art thou guilty?
My lord, I beg a word with my Confessor,
Then I shall answer. Sir, a word in private.
Now Vaster, op thy vnbeleeuing eyes:
Lo, thy devoted wife for thy sin dyes.
Yield but this kindness to my latest breath,
Thou hate'st me living, love me yet in death.
Farewell—My lord, I will not say, I'm guilty;
Do as your evidence and wisdom leads you.
This knot is hard to undo.
My lord, Isle help you.
Lo, I am that third Fairy, that pronounce
This woman clear, and those two perjured knaves.
We three are guilty: let your sentence come.
I have deserved, will not despair my doom.
My lord, he says not true: hoe's innocent: I guilty.
Speak on your souls, which of these tongues speak truth.
Curf. My lord, the woman's clear.
Pernicious Villains, hopeless to be good:
That thus have strove to spill the guiltless blood.
Widow, y' are quited. Sir, waite you your doom.
With patience. Beniamin Gripe, I here accuse you for murdering Richard Vaster.
How?
My lord, I found that Vaster dying, buried him,
Saw him receiving death by this mans sword.
Theft's a great sin, but murder most abhorred.
Speak; is this possible?
We met in single combat in the field:
It seems his life unto my sword did yield.
Ay me, my father slain?
And by his friend?
Fate, whither will thy proiects tend!
My husbands hand my fathers life undoes:
For this fact he must dye: thus both I lose.
Forgive me all, by me you all have lost,
The wife a Husband, children a dear Parent:
Thus I return you all some recompense.
Nan thou shalt lose a husband.
Heavens defend.
Mother, you lose a son, brother a friend.
Can nature so degenerate, that a man should live, stand by, and see another suffer for murdering him?
Once again off disguise.
My lord, thus I prevent this feared disaster
My second case pulled off, I am plain Vaster.
My father?
My dear husband.
Most, most dear friend.
My love to you doth beyond bounds extend.
My Lord, first to this honourable Bench,
I'here present the Kings most gtacious pardon
For vs three here: heaven no less pardon vs.
Now to my wife: see wench, I am new borne;
Renc'd from the plague of a suspected horn.
Black Iaundeys of the mind, thou fained spirit,
That haunts men's quiet thoughts with troubling shades.
Pernicious Jealousy, that like needless Physic
Diuertest health to voluntary sickness,
I brush thee off like dust. See, I am now
New married to my love and to my life.
Never could man boast a more constant wife.
Dear Beniamin, now Son, what I have left
Of all my shipwrecked fortbnes, shall be thine.
Resume your former state, my father yields it.
Thanks to your honesty, not his; yet thus,
Some means of satisfaction I have found;
Isle pay him back his lost three hundred pound:
The fairy money, which was just the price
Of my redeemed lands.
Now master Bromley,
That universal mercy to our guilt,
May be afforded, and no blood be spilt:
Surrender up your lease for the three lives
To Sagers wife and children, and Isle quit you.
I do most freely yield it.
Sager lives,
And hearty thanks for your forced kindness gives.
Happy delusions! in such ways of ill,
I wish men may be thus mistaken still.
Ravens, and Sprites, and Fairies, and Hares and diuels-Thus have I lost my wench, lost my money, lost my watch, lost my wits. I doe here renounce the faith of all Almanacs, Physiogmoners, Palmists, Fortune-tellers. Erra Pater was an Ass, and so are Prognosticators, his children, from generation to generation.
I have drunk powerful physic, and the Dropsy
Of my (till now) ne'er quenched avarice,
Dries up like dew at the ascending Sun.
Vaster, take back your lands; and for the money,
Give it my son in portion with your daughter.
Henceforth Isle study to requite the wrongs,
Which I have done poor men by usury,
And vomit up th'extortions, that doe lie
As vndigested crudities on my conscience.
My future life shall bee in mercy spent.
I'm Gripe no more; that name I doe repent.
All Chronicles be filled with this; and let it
Beas a wonder to all ears imparted.
England had once an Usurer converted.
THe Session now dissolves: each Justice rises:
No hurt is done; this is the mild Assises.
We have escaped fair thus far: yet there remains
A stronger judgment to pass on our pains.
Too much to hope or doubt we must not dare.
We humbly then stand at your censures bar.
If the worst comes that may be, yet I look
For this grace, to be saved by my book.
But if with your applause our merit stands:
Faith then be friends with vs, and giue's your hands.

NOw a fair blessing bless my dearest earth,
and like a Bride adorn thy royal brow,
with fruits rich Garland; a new married Bride
Unto thy King and Husband, who too long
Hath left thee widowed: O, me thinks I see
how all my Gracious with unsatiate looks
and greedy eyes doe bid me welcome home:
Each ear that hears the clamour seems to grieve,
it cannot speak, and give a (welcome King:
Come Clytemnestra, let not anger make,
his wrinkled seat upon my loves fair brow;
I have too long been absent from thy bed,
Chide me for that anon, when arm in arm
I shall relate those projects in love terms,
which when they first were acted, made Mars fear
to see each man turned to a God of war.
O my dear Lord, absence of things wee love,
thus intermixed, makes them the sweeter prove:
That your departure pierced my tender soul,
witness those Crystal floods which in my eyes
did make a sea, when you should go to sea,
those streams, which then flowed from the veins of grief.
at your return doe overflow the banks.
But it is with joy.
Now these ears indeed
have changed their place: they which were wont to hear
no musique but the summoning of war
blown thorough discords brazen instrument,
are blessed now with accents that doe fill
my age-dry'd veins with youthful blood again.
These eyes which had no other object once,
but Hector twixt the arms of Greece and Troy,
hewing down men, and making every field
Flow with a sea of blood, now see's blood flow.
In my Orestes cheeks: heaven bless this plant
sprung from the sap of this juicelesse oak;
Now be thy branches greene, under whose shade
I may be shadowed from the heat of war.
Rise young Orestes, Oh how it glads my soul,
to see my Queen and Son, my Son and Queen.
But come my Lord, true love still hates delays,
let no ears first be blessed with your breath,
till on my breast resting your wearied head,
You tell your war, where that the field's your bed.
My Queen shall have her will, see how times change.
I that last night thought all the world a sea,
As if our common mother earth, had now
shot her self wholly into Neptunes arms,
and the strong hindges of the world had cracked,
letting the moon fall into the swelling waves,
such watery mountains oft did seem to rise,
and quite o'rwhelme us, all the winds at war,
banded the sea on to the others coasts,
Jove thinking Neptune began to strive for heaven,
sent a new sea from thence, and with his thunder,
bad silence to the waves; they uncontrolled,
kept on their noise, and let their fury swell,
turning heaven, earth, sea, clouds, and all to hell.
Each Trojan that was saved then 'gan cry,
happy were they that did with Priam die.
It glads me now to think, that that night was
no star, no, not Orion there appeared;
But this night's turned to day, and here doth shine,
for a good Omen, my embraced Queen.
With whom her Agamemnon still will stay,
till age and death shall bear him quite away.
And that shall be ere long. Tush, shall be'sslow,
my vengeful thoughts tell me thou now art dead.
Fie faint Apollo, weakling infant-God,
why would thou let lame Vulcan's hammers beat
down those brave Turrets which thou help'dst to build?
Venus, I see thou art a woman now,
which here are like to take a double foil;
for we, that meanwhile reveled in thy camp
in the sweet pleasures of incestuous sheets,
must leave our loved unsatiate desires:
But now begin, thou black Eumenides,
You hand-mayds of great Dis, let such a flame
of anger burn me, as doth Etnas forge,
on fury, on, our hate shall not die thus:
I'll draw my poisonous arrow to the length,
that it may hit the mark and fly with strength. 
Come now my dearest friend, my other self,
my empty soul is now filled to the top,
brimful with gladness, and it must run o'er
into my dear friends heart: those silver hairs,
which time hath crowned my Fathers brow withal,
do shine within mine eyes, and like the Sun,
extract all drossy vapors from my soul.
Like as the earth, whom frost hast long benumbed,
and brought an Icy dryness on her face,
her veins so open, at a sudden thaw,
that all plants, fruits, flowers, and tender grafts,
kept as close prisoners in their mothers womb,
start out their heads, and on a sudden doth
the sad earth countenance with a summer look.
So in this breast, here in this breast dear friend,
whiles Annus ten times circled in the world
ten clumsy winters, and ten lagging springs
hath (with my fathers absence) frozen been
all thoughts of joy, which now shall make a spring
in my refreshed soul.
"Things that we daily see th'affections cloy,
"hopes long desired bring the greatest joy.
Nay, but dear Cousin, give not the reins too much
to new received joys, lest that they run
with so much speed, that they out-breath themselves:
your Father is come home; but being come,
should now some woeful afterclap of fate
(which Omen Jove forbid should come to pass)
but take him hence again, and cross your joy;
each spark of gladness which you now conceive,
would turn a flame for grief: still one extreme,
altering his course, turns to the diverse theme.
Tush Pylades, talk not of what may be,
we may, indeed in the clearest afternoon
expect a storm.
Yes, and such storms oft come,
and wet shrewd too, before we get at home.
O, but I'll be above all fatal power:
I that have such a Father new come home,
I that have such a friend, such too rare gifts;
who gave me these gifts, thought, no scowling frown
of angry fortune ever should throw me down.
Call them not gifts Orestes, they are but lent,
mere landings friend, and landings we must pay,
when ever the owner shall appoint his day.
True, Pylades, but owners use to warn
their debtors when they must bring in their sums:
but heavens tell me with favouring aspects,
I still must keep their landings, and possess,
with frolic joy, all their lent happiness.
Trust not the heavens too much, although they smile,
good looks do mortal hearts too oft beguile:
the heavens are usurers; and as oft it is seen
a full pouched churl give a most fair good even
to his poor Creditor: who, trusting that,
hath slackt this payment: on the morrow next
he hath been rooted out by the tuskey boar,
which gave the fair good even the day before:
The heavens can do thus too???
Tush: mortals must
lean on the sacred heaven with greater trust;
but it grows far in night, come let us in
to morrow shall our joys afresh begin. 
O Night, now only spread thy sable wings
over this climate, gather all thy fogs
that they may meet, and make thy face more black:
let horrid murder take thee by the hand
and come along: I have a prodigy
equal to all the murders, all the blood
that hath been shed in all Troys ten years siege.
So, snore returned King; good Morpheus hang
thy leaden weight upon his drowsy eyes,
let him not wake till he shall see himself
drenched in a sea of his vermilion gore:
Thou dost no Trojan, now, no Hector fear,
but yet I'll show thee a new Hector here.
See, I'll turn man too now, and to the hate
which women bear, I'll add a manly strength:
my mind does tremble, what I mean to do.
Breath forth your vapor's, O ye Stygian powers!
and listen to a hateful women's prayers.
Pluto stand by me for to aide my hand,
I may strike home now, and perform an act
may make Medea blush she thought not of:
Could the old dry boned dotard ever dream,
now he had drawn forth all his strength abroad,
he could be welcome to lie bed-rid here,
and supple his numbed joints in my fresh arms?
Spoke like a queen, spoke like Aegystheus love!
Now great Thyestes Genius, which did prompt
me to this act; Come, be spectator now!
and see revenge for Athens bloody feast.
And thou wronged Clytemnestra call to mind,
how his unsatiate, lustful loathed desire,
doted on every female face he saw,
raped the Priests daughter, and so brought a plague
on all the Grecian host:
Yes, yes,
yes.
And raped young Briseis from Achilles bed.
Crowd all revengeful thoughts into this hour,
now let thy sword let out that lustful blood.
Wound him Egystheus, kill him not at once,
we'll be true Tyrants, let him feel he dies.
Help Clytemnestra, help me, my dear Queen.
Yes dotard, I will help thee, thus, yes thus:
Remember the Priests daughter: this for her,
and this for Briseis:
See, my Gracious, see,
your King which you so gladly entertained.
Sol, hide thy self in everlasting night,
or when thou resist, let thy blushing face
make these to blush.
Ay, so, curse on, curse on:
O Clytemnestra, O my once dear wife,
is this the entertainment that thou give
thy new come husband? gratulates thou thus
my ten years absence? See these frosty hairs
would even move Hecuba to pity me;
Look on these aged arms which in this bed,
thought to have been blessed with thy kind embrace.
Yes, mine or Cassandra's, old adulterer.
Kinsman Aegystheus; O my dearest wife
whom shall I call? me thinks you both are mine.
What Titius, what Megaera hath put on
Aegystheus and my Clytemnestra's shapes?
Call thou us friends?
O be not so, and I'll not call you so:
Let not your coward weapons wound this head,
that erst did scorn to shrink at Priams blow.
O hew me not down thus for my sons sake,
dear Clytemnestra, for Orestes sake.
Is this the Trojan tale! how I should tell,
that here great Hector slew Antiochus,
and here that Meontiades was slain,
and poor Prothesilaus dear to Lacdamie:
I thought to tell how these men lost their blood;
and see my blood is thus let forth at home.
Is your hot blood yet cold!
breath dotard, do.
you shall have gaps enough to let your soul
find a free passage to his deserved flames.
No pity yet? O then, no pity light
on you, nor yours; but let dire revenge
come learn how she may after handle you:
O, I am drowned in blood, and now must yield
to murderers weapons; treason wen's the field.
Alas this coming home hath had small joy;
Argos hath worser foes then ever Troy. 
Now I am Clytemnestra right, now I deserve
to add one more to the three Furies, now
do I count this more then my nuptial night;
It is mine, tic thine, Egystheus, and none else
shall share a minute of this right, but we.
Me thinks I now go equal with the stars,
and my proud head touches the highest pole;
Hark, hell applauds me, and me thinks I hear 
Thyestes tell me, I have done enough:
And now I kiss my hands, whilst yet they bear
this tincture on them, and embrace my Queen,
now made my love; lets in, this night the Fates
have amply fed us with revengeful cates.
What horrid dreams affright me? I see nought
that I should fear, and yet me thinks I fear.
Mine eyes scarce closed, my busy Fancy saw
a sight that dashed all comforts of the day:
me thought my Father lying in his Tent,
hateful Achylles, for his wronged love
comes in with Briseis, and they two let forth
streams of fresh blood from out his aged side,
with that his Echoed schrich did make me wake;
but I remembered then he was come home,
and yet I'll see him, still me thinks I quake.
Do I still dream? Are not mine eyes unclosed?
Is this a Torch? yea, it is, it burns, I see
I am awake, do not delude me Night!
Now stand on tip-toes Atlas, lift heaven higher,
I may have air enough to breath my woes in,
O let me yet recall thy posting Soul!
if Charon have not hurried thee too fast,
if yet thou hast not drunk on Lethes Pool,
come back, and tell me who it is this night,
hath done this deed far blacker than the night?
Ah! Art thou fled past call? Why, thou were old,
me thinks thou should not haste so fast away!
Was it for this thou swe'tst so oft in Arms!
Was it for this that the froth swelling foam,
when thy Ships top touched heaven, and deep placed hell;
that thou must yet escape curled Neptune's waves,
to be a Palinurus in thy shore,
there drown thy aged locks in Crimson gore?
O, if one spark yet of thy Princely Soul
remain within this trunk, now let it shine
and light mine ignorant eyes to read the names
of these night vultures, whose devouring bills
have made a Titius of thy royal corps:
who did not fear great Agamemnons sleep?
Arm, arm your selves all you all-potent Gods,
you which we term just Ministers of heaven!
shoot forked lightning from the marble poale,
let the all-seeing eye of heaven shoot flames
which may parch up the marrow from their bones,
should they lie couched in the breast of the Thunderer,
or be entrenched with guards of furies fierce,
heaven, earth nor hell, should keep them from my sword.
Dost thou sleep Jove! O, could thou snore so fast,
and let thy great vicegerent thus be torn?
Some of th'immortal powers have had fathers,
and know what it is to have them murdered thus.
But I turn woman now: O, I rave out
my passions; do, grief, pour out thy self,
that thou may make room in my empty heart,
to fill it with revenge.
How now? what ails our son, how now Orestes!
O some are come now to help me to grieve:
See, mother, see, your husband and my father,
the King of Greece, great Shepherd of his Land,
see, see him here:
O help me now good heaven to keep my sex,
let me dissemble.
Help (my Lords) the Queen.
Why hindered you my soul, that whilst he lived,
was linked to his, and would too now have fled
with winged desire to have been with him!
What doe I live for! Agamemon slain!
My Lord, my King, husband, wake my Lord,
what bloody Trojan followed thee from thence
to kill thee here? could he not one night
have let me rested in thy sweet embraces?
Must he for sureness make so many holes,
for thy sweet soul to fly to be a God?
O let my tears be balm to these thy wounds,
let my lips kiss, and warm thy gellid lips;
let my hair wipe these clots of blood away
from thy age-honor'd side: O dry your tears,
join knees and prayers with me, awake ye Gods,
and send our vows, since we can send no wounds:
Come son, we women still know how to curse.
Let him that did it be an Adulterer.
Faith she begins well, sure she knows the man.
Let him be conscious, he hath don a deed
deserves revenge, whether it fall or no:
Let him for ever bear in mind this night,
and who it was helped him in this bloody act.
Yes, he will remember how you curse him now.
If ever he have children, let them be
murdered before his face, that they may know
how nature binds a father and a son.
Now hands I thank you, now my soul grows glad,
had not he grieved thus, I had lost revenge.
But come my son, now let us talk of graves,
of Epitaphs, and tombs, and's soul being fled,
let's lap his Trunk up in a sheet of lead.
Methinks I see a Tragedy at hand,
to which this night hath as a Prologue bin;
I'll make a prayer now worthy Atreus grandchild,
let the foul Adder sting me as I walk,
the poisonous toad belch her black venom forth
in my despised face, let it be thought
I never had a father, but some monster
bred by a slimy exhalation,
If my revenge fly not with ample wing:
till then rest soul, hate told, may lose his sting.
O ye dead Trojans leap within your graves!
O mother that thou had lived this night!
Now thou'ldst be glad to have lost so many sons:
the Gracious are revenged upon themselves,
I thank thee soul, that thou keeptst here till now
to let me see Greece overcome it self;
I live, I live, I'm here, I live to see it:
I do not dream on it, no, I saw the blood
run from his side, whole Cataracts, all Greece.
Apollo, how am I bound now for this
that I do only see this happiness?
Hecuba, Priam, young Astianax.
Look Hecuba, Greece now doth act your woes,
laugh Hecuba, for now Electra weeps:
and Tyndarus he knows not what to do:
Come little Cousin, come my Astianax,
Orestes is in a worse case then thou.
Still I had others for to weep with me,
but none are left to laugh now, but my self:
What should he fear at home? A conqueror fear!
Tic done, it is done, leave fighting Hector, leave,
the Gracious mean to fight against themselves,
from Tyndarus the first brand took fire
which burnt down Troy: and now an other here
kindles from him, to set a fire Greece,
Gray juvenca venit, quae se, patremque virumque
Perdidit, Io laetor, Graja juvenca venit.
Helen, thy sister Helen, nay shoe's thine:
who could have thought that Hector being slain,
old Priam made a sacrifice to death,
Troy turned to cinders, poor Andromacha
dragged by her hair to death; Astianax
sent out of the world before he well came in,
Ha, ha, who could have thought after all this
Cassandra should have ever laughed again?
One hour of laughter following many years
of discontent, doth help to sweeten tears 
Fair morning to my Queen, nay more, my love,
how likes my sweet her change of bed-fellow?
Look as an hallow leafelesse failing oak,
to whom, for that h'hath bin her weight too long,
the earth denies to lend him moisture, so
his sap fails, and he stands on a green
amongst sprouting Elms, that they may seem more fresh
whilst hoe's but held a monument of years.
Such one seemed Agamemnon; a dry tree:
thou like a sprouting Elm, whom I embrace
like twining Ivy, with these now blessed arms,
blessed whilst this treasure in them they hold locked:
O who'd not do a murder for a woman!
Heaven had but two things for the Gods reserved,
fire, and women: when with Giant strength
Promotheus had tan one, Jove in his rage
threw him the to'ther, bad him keep 'em both.
O they are rare creatures, they have such Meanders,
Their tears will come and go with such brave art!
Come now my Queen, one sweet Ambrosian kiss;
O Nectar! prithee had thou taught thy tears
how they should flow before?
No, trust me love,
I knew my tears would soon be at command,
and faith the boy had almost made me weep
really once. Were not my curses rare?
Yes, all was woman-like: but yet that boy
he took it deeply; would he were with his father,
so gon, it skills not how; were he away,
we would act freely all our lustful play.
O but my love! hoe's mine: Nor can the raven
dig her sharp beak into her own birds breast:
He will forget his father: woe will break;
it is not the greatest grief that most doth speak.
O, but he will bear still a suspicious eye;
and who in bloody Scenes doth act a part,
thinks every eye doth penetrate his heart.
Nor can we ere be free, or I enjoy
true pleasures; we must be but thieves at most,
close in delights, and have a Pander still
to be a Factor twixt thy bed and mine:
this we could have before, what now we do,
the world should see done, and applaud us too.
Why my dear Love, I that would set my hand
to stain my marriage sheets with husbands blood,
would let these hands, instructed now in ill,
not leave one arm of that uprooted tree;
Could but Aegistheus give me any hope,
that from this top there should one spreading branch
grow up and flourish.
Now thou art thy self;
yes, yes my love, there shall one spring from us
shall be a lofty Pine, let this be cropped;
murder must murder guard, guilt add to guilt,
after one drop, whole streams of blood be spilt.
Dear friend, what mean you, to o'rwhelm your self
in such a sea of grief?
Father! dear Agamemnon!
Nay cease this tempest, thou hast lost a father,
why, it is but change, my father shall be thine,
I'll be thy brother, nay, I'll be thy self,
weep when thou weep, and where thou go I'll go,
and bring thee on thy pilgrimage of woe.
Brother, look up; have not I lost a father?
yes, yes, and would a river of fresh tears
turn Lethes stream, and bring him from the wharf,
with a North gale of windy blowing sighs,
I would expire my soul, become all tears.
Come, you have lost a father, I a brother,
the Queen a Husband, all the Land a King;
yet all this but a man; therefore must dye:
Our woes may all be in one balance poised.
His book of life the Fates had over-read,
and turned the leaf where his last period stood.
Now an immortal wreath circles his brow,
and makes him King in heaven, who was before
at most a God on earth: Hence difference springs,
Kings are earths Gods, and Gods are heavenly Kings.
Let us join words then now, and Swan-like sing
the doleful dirge to a departed King:
Thou friend did of this misery divine,
therefore the burden of the song is mine:
words Orators for woe, which plead the cause,
when griefe's the judge, and sighs are all the laws,
each one a sob for Diapason bears,
our tunes shall drown the music of the spheres:
O what Hirudo with unsatiate thirst,
could draw the blood from out those Princely veins,
from whence flowed comfort to so many souls!
Mother, when wept you last? here take a scarf
dry your eyes: now by???you need none,
what shine of comfort hath dried up your tears?
Our son's too saucy with his mother Queen:
Why, Sir, shall you tell us a time to weep?
Us? good: Who is it makes the plurality?
It was wont to be my father: does he live?
Sir, curb this lavish speech, or I'll forget
you are my son, and make you but a subject.
Good Cousin add not disobedience
unto your mothers griefs.
My mother, no,
she is not here, no, she hath hid her self
in some odd nook, or angle unperceived,
she might not see this impious stygian world.
Aegystus, can thou still suffer thy dull sword in the sheath?
Take the rank head from this o'r-growing weed.
Remember Clytemnestra, he's your son.
He is so, and I'll learn him to be so:
Had I a brazen bull, it should be heat
hotter then for the Tyrant: Disobedient!
More harsh then Adders hisses is thy voice,
Sir, you shall dye, but with a living death,
he still shall live, but live to know he dies;
who strait threats death, knows not to Tyrannize.
What temper's grown on the distracted Queen?
Hath grief, conceived for her late husbands death,
brought her so far, she hath forgot her self?
No Uncle, no, by ??? I do suspect.
O, my prophetic soul divines much ill!
Well, I will fly. But hear this stratagem,
it shall be rumor'd in the ear of the Court
I was found dead, I'll put a new shape on,
and live alone, to hear how things go here.
Nay, not alone Orestes, whilst I live,
should make thy bed upon the rigid Alps,
or frozen Caucasus, wrapped in sheets of snow,
I'd freeze unto thy side; we will tell tales
of Trojan warriors, and deposed Kings.
Tell of strange shipwreck, of old Priams fall,
how mad Andromacha did tear her hair,
when the wild horses tore brave Hectors limbs:
We'll think they all do come, and weep with us;
grief loves companions, and it helps woe,
when it hears every one groan forth his, Oh!
it eases much, and our plaints fall more sweet,
when a whole consort in one tune do meet.
The half-dead ship-man, which hath shipwreck borne,
seeing many drowned, it makes him less to mourn:
It made Deucalion care the less to die,
when he had all the world in company.
Thus we will sit, and our tears turns shall keep,
thou for thy father, I for thee will weep:
If actors on the Stage having no cause,
but for to win an hearers hands applause,
can let fall tears, we'll think we Actors be,
and only do but play griefs Tragedy.
O, but dear friend, should we but act a part,
the play being ended, passion left the heart,
and we should share of joy: but my whole age
must never move from off this woeful Stage:
But we must take our leave; Uncle, farewell,
remember what I spake; and Sister, you
must tarry here, my thoughts shall busied be,
to find the man that let my father blood.
Can I but find Aegystheus did consent,
to spill one drop, O, I would pierce his heart
with venomed daggers, and so butcher him,
that all Apollos skill in physic herbs,
nor Aesculapius the Epidaurian God,
should keep his soul out of Enio's hand;
Come my dear friend; to all the rest farewell;
If heaven relate it not, I'll know it from hell.
What, is Orestes fled? sure there's some plot,
if you dear Queen, but search Electra well,
you'll find she knows whither her brothers gone.
If in her heart there be but lodged a thought
unknown to me, this hand shall rip her breast,
and search her inparts, but I'll find it out.
Mysander, call Electra.
O, were that moat tan from our comforts beams,
no cloud ever then could overshade our joys,
his life must be cut off without delay,
mischief, by mischief finds the safest way:
But here's Electra.
Why! how now Minion! what a blubbering still!
Huswife, pray whore's your brother, wher's my son?
Mother, pray whore's my father, wher's your husband?
Hail to my my gracious Queen, here's one at door.
brings you a message, hee will not relate
to any, but your self, he says tic sad.
Why, the more dismal, the more welcome it is.
But as for you???
Good mother do your worst,
no plague can ever make me more accursed,
nothing is worse then death, that I'll not fly.
Yes, life is worse to those that fine would die.
But whore's the messenger?
What whirlwind rising from the womb of earth
doth raise huge Pelion unto Ossa's top,
that both being heaped, I stand upon them both
and with an hundred Stentor-drowning voice,
relate unto the world the saddest tale
that ever burdened the weak jaws of man?
Why, what portentous news? Amaze us not,
tell us what ever it be.
Were my mind settled, would the gellid fear,
that freezes up my sense, set free my speech,
I would unfold a tale which makes my heart
throb in my entrails, when I seem to see it.
Relate it quickly, hold's not in suspense.
Upon the mount of yonder rising cliff,
which th'earth hath made a bulwark for the sea,
whose peerless head is from the streams so high,
that whosoe'r looks down, his brain will swim
with a vertigo: The space remove d so far
the object from the eye, that a tall ship
seemed a swift flying bird: upon this top
saw I two men making complaints to heaven,
one's voice distinctly still cried, Father, King,
great Agamemnon, whose diviner soul
fled from thy corps, exiled by butchers hands:
his friend still sought to keep his dying life
with words of comfort, that it should not rush
too violently upon the hands of Fate.
He deaf as sea, to which he made his plaints,
still cried out, Agamemnon, I will come,
and find thy blessed soul where ever it walk;
in what fair Temple of Elysium
so ever it be, my soul shall find it out.
With that his friend knit him within his arms,
striving to hold him, but when it was no boot,
they hand in hand, thus plunged into the maine;
strait they arose, and strived (me thought) for life,
but swelling Neptune not regarding friends,
wrapped their embraced limbs in following waves:
Until at last their dear departing souls
hastened to Styx, and I no more could see.
O it was Orestes, it was my Pylades,
which arm in arm did follow him to death.
O my Orestes, O my dearest brother!
It is he, it is he, that thus hath drowned himself.
Why, then if Agamemnon and his son
have brought their lease of life to the full end:
I am Thyestes son, and the next heir,
to sit in Argos Throne of Majesty.
Thanks to our Alpheus sea, who as 't'ad strived
to gratify Aegystheus, raised his force,
and gathered all his waters to one place,
they might be deep enough to drown Orestes:
But come my Queen, let us command a feast.
To get a kingdom, who'ld not think it good,
to swim unto it through a sea of blood?
Our daughter sends for us? how fares she? well?
she mourns I'm sure for her husbands death.
My Lord, she took it sadly at the first:
But time hath lessened it.
I, grief soon ends
that flows in tears; they still are women's friends:
But how is it rumord now in Argos, though,
that Agamemnon died?
Why, he was old,
and death thought best to seize on him at home.
It was a long home, he got by coming home:
Well, well, Misander, I like not the course,
the peoples murmur makes my cheeks to blush.
My gracious Lord, who trusts their idle murmur,
must never let the blush go from his cheek;
They are like flags growing on muddy banks,
whose weak thin heads blown with one blast of wind,
they all will shake, and bend themselves one way:
Great minds must not esteem what small tongues say.
All things in state must ever have this end,
the vulgar should both suffer, and commend,
if not for love, for fear; great Majesty
should do those things which vulgars dare not fee.
O, Sir, but those that do commend for fear,
do in their hearts a secret hatred bear.
Ever learn this; the truest praise indeed,
must from the heart, and not from words proceed.
I fear some soul play: doth Aegystheus mean,
then totally for to invest himself
in Agamemnons seat? Whore's young Orestes?
Why my Lord, he for the great grief conceived
being young, not knowing well to rule himself
with sway of reason, ran upon his death
and threw himself with my lord Strophius son,
into the midst of Alpheus, so was drowned,
How took my daughter that?
Why, wisely too,
and like her self; not being in despair:
her royal womb will bring forth many more,
shall be as dear as ever Orestes was.
I fear heaven cannot look with equal eyes
upon so many deaths, but means to send
plague after plague; for in a wretched state,
one ill begets another dismal Fate:
But go and tell my daughter I will come,
and help to solemnise her nuptial night:
Her hasty wedding, and the old Kings neglect,
makes my conjectural soul some ill suspect.
If ever God lent any thing to earth,
whereby it seemed to sympathize with heaven,
it is this sacred friendship: Gordian knot
which Kings, nor Gods, nor Fortune can undo.
O what Horoscopus, what constellation,
held in our birth so great an influence,
which one affection in two minds unites?
How hath my woe been thine, my fatal ill
hath still been parted, and one share been thine!
Why, dearest friend, suppose my case were thine,
and I had lost a father, would not thou
in the like sort participate my grief?
Yes, witness heaven I would.
So, now thou hast lost a father.
True, Pylades, thou putst me well in mind,
I have lost a father, a dear, dear father,
a King, a brave old King, a noble soldier,
and yet he was murdered! O my forgetful soul!
Why should not I now draw my vengeful sword,
and strait-way sheath it in the murderers heart?
Minos should never have vacation,
whilst any of our progeny remained.
Well, I will go, and so massacre him,
I'll teach him how to murder an old man,
a King, my father, and so dastardly
to kill him in his bed.
Alas, Orestes!
Grief doth distract thee: who is it thou wilt kill?
Why, he, or she, or they that killed my father.
I, who are they?
Nay, I know not yet,
but I will know.
Stay thy vengeful thoughts,
and since thus long we have estranged our selves
from friends and parents, let's think why it is,
and why we had it noised in the Court,
we both were dead; the cause was thy revenge,
that if by any secret private means,
we might but learn who it was that drenched their swords
in thy dear fathers blood, we then would rouse
black Nemesis in flames from out her cave,
and she should be the umpire in this cause.
Mans soul is like a boisterous working sea,
swelling in billows for disdain of wrongs,
and tumbling up and down from day to day,
grows greater still in indignation,
turns male-content, in pleaselesse melancholy,
spending her humours in dull passion, still
locking her senses in unclosed gins,
till by revenge she's set at liberty.
O, now my thirsty soul expects full draughts
of Ate's boiling cup: O, how twoul'd ease
my heart to see a channel of his blood
streaming from hence to hell, that killed my father.
I, but dear friend, thou must not let rage loose,
and like a furious Lion, from whose den
the forester hath stole away his young,
he missing it, straight runs with open jaws
on all he meets, and never hurting him
that did the wrong: Wise men must mix revenge
with reason, which by providence will prompt,
and tell us whore's the mark, whereat we aim.
Till then, in Cinders we'll rake up our grief:
fire thus kept, still lives, but opened dies;
from smallest sparks great flames may one day rise.
True, friend, but, O, who ever will reveal
this hideous act! what power shall we invoke?
Yes, harken friend, I have bethought a means;
not distant far from this place where we live,
there stands a cave hard by a hollow oak,
in a low valley, where no Sun appears,
no music ever was there heard to sound;
but the harsh voice of croaking ominous ravens,
and sad Nyctimine the bird of night:
There's now a shed, under whose ancient roof
there sometimes stood an Altar for the Gods,
but now slow creeping time, with windy blasts
hath beaten down that stately Temples walls,
defaced his rich built windows, and untiled
his battlemented roof, and made it now
a habitation, not for God, nor men:
Yet an old woman, who doth seem to strive
with the vast building for antiquity,
in whose rough face time now hath made such holes,
as in those uncouth stones she there hath made
her self a cell, wherein to spend her age.
Her name's Canidia; great in Magic spells,
at whose dire voice, the gods themselves would quake
to hear her charm the second time pronounced.
One that can know the secrets of the heavens,
and in the ayre hath flying ministers,
to bring her news from earth, from sea, from hell:
which, when thick night hath compassed in the world,
then doth she go to dead men's graves and tombs,
and sucks the poisonous marrow from their bones,
then makes her charm, which she ne'er spent in vain:
Nor doth she come as suppliant to the gods,
but making Erebus, and heaven to quake,
she sends a spell drowning infernal thunder,
by which all secrets that were ever done,
in fair white parchment writ in lines of blood,
locked in the inmost room of hell it self
is brought unto her: and by her we may
have leave to look in Pluto's register,
and read the names of those most loathed furies,
which rent thy Fathers soul from out his trunk:
But she must see thy fathers dead bones first,
them we must bring her, for by them she works:
This if thou dare assay, I'll go along.
If I dare assay! yes, yes, dear friend,
were it to burst my fathers sepulchre,
and wake his Manes, show them Radamanth;
their iterated sight will burn my soul
with such a sparkling flame of dire revenge,
as Nessus shirt did burn great Hercules:
If that the scroll which did contain their names,
were in a lake of flaming brimstone drenched,
I'd take it out, or fech't from Pluto's arms:
But come; if earth hath such a creature as can tell,
twill save a journey (for this once) from hell.
All years of happy days, all hours of joy
so circle in thy state, as doth this crown
wreath and combine thy princely temples in,
All speak, Jove still protect Aegystheus.
Thanks to my fathers subjects:
Now Argos swell up to the brim with joy,
and streams of gladness flow on Tyndarus,
Now made our father; see old King, see here's
my Queen doth mean to make thee a grandfather,
see how thy royal blood shall propagate,
whose Kingly drops like heaven distilling dew,
shall add fresh life unto thy withered root.
Yes, but Aegystheus, there were arms before
grew on this tree; but the Fates envious axe
hath cut them off before th'ad time to sprout.
O Sir, the Fates needs must have leave to make
ways for themselves to manage what they do:
Had Agamemnon and Orestes lived,
they could not then have blessed me with these gifts:
Still when the heavens and Fates do work their will,
they intend good, though sometimes there come ill.
O but pray Jove the Fates now were not forced,
but deeds like words no man can ever recall,
be it good or ill; once done, we must bear all.
Come father sit we down, and make a feast,
to glad our hearts; Heaven still doth for the best.
O let my latter age not live to see
Aegystheus wear great Argos diadem.
Fear not good uncle, there will be a time,
to pull him down, although he yet doth climb.
Who ever trusted much on fortunes gifts,
on wife, on state, on health, on friends, on lands,
may look on Agamemnons coming home:
Fortune me thinks ne'er showed her power more;
how quickly could she turn her Fatal sword
upon his breast, that thought himself past harm?
she that had used death like an angry dog,
holding him up, when that he should have bit,
when all the game was past, and's fury laid,
the king being past all danger, safe at home,
then he slip's collar, never until then,
and fortune she stood hissing of him on,
till he had torn the good kings soul away.
Nay but good father let pass elegies,
you draw fresh tears now from your daughters eyes,
who shed enough before it's funeral:
let's talk who are to live, not who are dead;
and think what progeny shall spring from us
may bear your Image stamped upon the face,
this we must talk of now, not what griefs past
but of the joy to come. My Queen not well!
Now good Electra look unto your mother,
Lucina be propitious to the birth;
why, will not now a young Aegystheus be,
as grateful as an old Orestes was?
Thou times good lengthener, age, posterity,
spread thy self still upon Aegystheus line,
help me to treasure up antiquity,
and from Thyestes loins let spring an heir,
shall ever sit in great Thyestes chair. 
Near to this shady grove, where never light
appears, but when it is forced with some charm,
Canidia dwells, in such a dusky place,
that the night goblins fear to come too near it.
Here let us knock.
Nay, Pylades, see here,
O give me leave to discant on these bones:
This was my Fathers scull; but who can know
whether it were some subjects scull, or no?
Where be these Princely eyes, commanding face,
the brave majestic look, the Kingly grace?
Whore's the imperious frown, the God-like smile,
the graceful tongue, that spoke a soldiers stile?
Ha, ha, worms eat them! could no Princely look,
no line of eloquence writ in this book,
command, nor yet persuade the worms away?
Rebellious worms! could a King bear no sway?
Injurious worms! what could no flesh serve
but Kings for you? By???you all should starve,
had I but known't: What must my father make
a feast for you? O ye devouring creatures!
Now some Archilocus to help him make
vengeful Iambics, that would make these worms
to burst themselves: Passion must please
it self by words, grief told, it self doth ease.
You cowardly bones, would you be thus unclothed
by little crawling worms! by??? I never thought
my fathers bones could ever have been such cowards:
O you ungrateful worms! how have you used him?
See their ingratitude! O ambitious creatures,
how they still domineer o'er a Kings carcass!
How could they think when thou came to'the crown
that thou should bear, that these should eat thy father?
True, Pylades, should I not rend their maws,
devise new tortures? O most horrible treason,
that worms should come unto a great Kings face,
and eat his eyes! why, I would undertake
but at one stamp to kill a thousand of'em:
and I will kill these:
Go you King-eating creatures: I will mar
all your digestion.
Alas, where be his wits?
He stands declaming against senseless worms,
and turns more senseless then the worms themselves:
whore's now the oracle you should consult?
The great Magician? now the Centaurs thought
shall be example to all future years;
and now transcend Proserpina's invention.
Ha, hast thou found them out? ha, were they worms?
O prithee laugh not at me, call her, call her;
whilst I stand gathering up my fathers bones,
his dear dissected bones; O, I remember, here
ran the strong sinews, twixt his knitting joints,
here to this bone was joined his princely arm,
here stood the hand that bare his warlike shield,
and on this little joint was placed the head,
that Atlas-like bare up the weight of Greece:
here, here betwixt these hollow yawning jaws
stood once a tongue, which with one little word
could have commanded thousand souls to death:
Good hands endure this your weighty task,
and good eyes strive not to make moist his bones
with weeping tears:
What Scinis or Procustes ever could
have hacked a King into such things as these?
Alas here's every part now so deformed,
I know not which was his, yet all was his.
Protect us O ye Ministers of heaven,
stand near me my good Genius, my soul hath lost
his humane function, at this hellish sight.
Who is it disturbs our cave? what messenger
hath Pluto sent, that would know ought from us?
what are you? speak, Canidia cannot stay.
Prompt us some Ghost.
Great fear of earth, and governess of nature,
in whose deep closet of that sacred heart
are writ the characters of future Fate;
and what is done, and what must be thou know:
Whose words make burning Acheron grow cold,
and Jove leave thundering, when he hears thy name:
to thee we come: O turn thy secret book,
and look whose names thou there shalt see inscribed
for murderers, read o'er all the catalogue,
until thou find there engraven those
which killed the King of Greece, great Agamemnon.
Yes, he that did owe these bones which worms have eat;
it is not now one of the meaner sort
that craves this boon, but it is the heir of Greece,
heir only now but to my fathers grave;
I not command, but my astonished soul
entreats to know.
If in thy book it be not yet put down,
command the gods to unlock the gates of heaven,
and fetch forth death, command him to relate
who it was put Agamemnon in his hands,
this is our business, this, great prophetess,
made us approach to thy most hallowed cell.
Ho, ho, ho, I tell thee fond young prince,
a lesser power thou might have implored,
which might have urged th'unwilling fiends to this;
our dire enchantments carry such a force,
that when the stars, and influence of heaven,
have sucked the lively blood from out men's veins,
I at my pleasure bring it back again;
I knew each hour in the Trojan fight,
what Grecian, or what Phrygian should die,
and fierce Achilles had no sooner pierced
great Hectors side, but Fate did send me word:
Earth, Sea, deep Chaos, all the stony hills,
will op themselves to show me prodigies;
Night will unmask her brow, to let me see
what black conceptions reem within her womb.
O then relate, great Mistress of thy Art,
the things we crave:
What time of night is it?
Upon the stroke of twelve.
Strait when a cloudy even clappeth the Ayre,
and all light's drench't in misty Acheron,
when the black palpheries of the full cheeked moon,
have got behind this part of the Hemisphere,
and dark Aldebor, and is mounted high
into the sable Cassiopeias chair,
and night full mounted in her seat of jet,
sits wrapped within a cabinet of clouds,
when serpents leave to hiss, no dragons yell,
no birds do sing, no harsh tuned toads do croake,
the Armenian Tiger, and the ravenous woolf,
shall yield up all their tyranny to sleep,
and then none walk but hells disturbed spirits,
children of night, such as belong to me,
I'll show thee thy desire; give me these bones.
Here, take them Mother, use them gently,
they were a Kings bones once. O not so hard.
Why senseless boy, dost think that I respect
a Kings dead bones, more then another mans?
O they smell rankly; I, this sent doth please,
but I must now to work: why Sagana.
Look here thou King of Greece, fond Menelaus,
thou which did bring so many goodly shapes
into such things as these, and all for Helen:
Which when the worms bred of her dainty flesh,
shall have knaw'd off her tender ruby lips,
and left her gumlesse, look upon her then;
and thou would even disgorge thy self to see,
such putrid vermin to lie kissing her.
This head had once a royal diadem,
now knock it, beat it, and twill ne'er cry treason.
Why Sagana.
There was a player once upon a stage,
who striving to present a drecry passion,
brought out the urn of his late buried son,
it might the more affect him, and draw tears:
But I, as if I had no passion left,
not acting of a part, but really
in a true cause having my fathers bones,
his hollow scull, yet crawling full of worms,
I cannot weep, no not a tear will come.
Why Sagana, Veia, Erictho, know you not your time?
What would you, Beldam?
Hath not triform'd Hecate put on
her Styx-dyed mantle, is it not now fit time
to work our charms in?
We here are ready against thy sacred charm.
You two, sit by, and bear in mind this charge;
Who ever you see, who ever I present,
let your tongues be perculiss'd in your jaws;
stir not, nor speak not, till the charm be done.
Fear not, it shall be chained with silence.
Night, and Diana sacred Queen,
Which ever hath spectator been
Unto our baleful hideous rights,
Ne'er acted but in darkest nights,
Now in this fatal hears-bred hour,
Show to my rites the greatest power.
Erictho when my torch shall twinkle,
A vernal water thou shalt sprinkle
About the room, now let us kneel,
Our heavy burden hell shall feel:
Lets all coin words, now we may see
Who it was did work this prodigy.
Omnes. Pluto, great Pluto, we command,
Thou send unto us out of hand,
The shapes of them that killed the King,
Great Agamemnon.
O'tis above my bearing! were I linked here with chains,
I would like Cerberus draw Alcides back:
Stay, stay, by ??? revenge shall take you here;
nay, I will follow you, should they take their cave,
where Etna vomits fire, I would in:
my mother! Clytemnestra! Aegystheus! was it they?
Nay, I will o'rtake them.
O son, remember what I told you, son,
many a rocky hill and stony mount,
many a sea, and vast Charybdis gulf,
stands betwixt them and thee, though they seem near.
O piety! O most prodigious nature!
What creatures hast thou made to live on earth?
How hast thou clothed black darkness with a scarf
of unstained purity, and put a godly face
upon portentous devils? Oh, how my mother wept!
How Clytemnestra! how that Hyena wept!
No more my mother, I abjure the name,
she did not bring me forth, I know she did not:
But I'll o'rtake 'em; show me (Canidia) where,
which way they went, where have they hid themselves.
Should they mount up to the chariot of the Sun,
and in his Car fly to the Antipodes,
or in the farthest nook of yonder sphere,
get up and place themselves twixt Taurus horns,
the fire-breathing bull, or Lerna's Hydra,
were there no entrance but ten Lions jaws,
I'd run through all, and make my way my self:
I'd fix them to the Axel-tree of heaven,
where their infectious carcasses should hang
a bait for flying spirits in the Ayre.
Canidia, I thank thee for thy pains,
still may thy sacred Art reveal such deeds,
still keep the gates of Orcus yawning op,
make the dark powers ready at command.
But let us hast dear friend, this vast worlds room
allows us none, but thy dead fathers Tomb:
here's nought but airs of death, no bed but stones,
????????? pillow's a dead scull, companions bones,
?????????s's all our comfort, if we needs must die,
????????? have a Grave prepared wherein to lie.
Now pale Tisiphone, O for thy Snakes!
????????? that renowned spirit, that more than man,
???home all the Trojan host could not o'rwhelm,
murdered! But what brave warrior wore a crown,
by guilding a dire sword in his dear blood?
Hector, nor Priam, no, nor Mars himself,
only his Wife was his Bellona now.
O miserable valour, to scope foes,
and come for to be murdered of his friends!
O shameful conquest! O most coward Fate!
that a weak Woman was competitor
in Agamemnons death: had it been any, yet
it should have been a Goddess at the least;
and yet she's but a Queen, a mortal Woman.
Were she a Goddess, I would make her mortal.
Dull coward that I am, and worse than all,
after so many wrongs, yet unrevenged:
their Palace now should fire o'er their heads,
and the huge beams dash out their guilty brains:
The roof, should fall on me, so't fell on them.
Begin revenge, and now perform an act,
may give a theme to all posterity.
ever to talk of, fraught so full of horror:
Aegystheus and my Mother, may wish their's,
yet none was ever greater: yes, my deed.
Revenge is lost, unless we do exceed.
But a bad mother, friend, thou should not hurt,
the Law of Nature doth forbid such thoughts.
Nor Gods, nor Nature, shall keep me in awe:
why towards my mother, by heavens Parliament,
who is most guilty, is most innocent.
Shall I thus by some Magic Art, my son,
take both their pictures in pure virgin wax?
And wound the place where that the hurt should stand,
and so wound them?
Tush, this is too little.
Shall I breed them hate?
Too little too.
Shall I consume their children?
All this too little:
Hell and the Furies shall stand all amazed,
Alecto shall come there for to behold
new kinds of murders, which she knew not yet:
and Nature learn to violate her self.
I'll instantly to th'Court, and what I do,
my self will see done, yes, and act it too.
Thanks great Canidia, this black night being done,
Revenge now knows her game whereat to run.
NEver but when a royal off-spring comes
from a Kings loins, can he be truly King.
Then doth he sit firm, rooted in his state,
then is he truly man, and then the gods
he knows do love him, which when Kings do want,
the curse of Nature doth deny them fruit,
and brands their bed with loathed sterility.
Aegystheus, since the gods have blessed you so,
have care their blessings turn not to your wo.
Your joy, my daughters joy, and my joy too,
have care it be preserved, and brought up well:
And take heed, son, of Agamemnon's blood,
Pierce not with envy the Babes tender heart.
Tush Father, now, not without grief I speak,
all brooks which from the Princely Ocean ran,
are quite dried up, only Electra here,
our dear Electra, whose great weight of love
is in our balance equally so poised,
that she shall ever think her Father lives,
our heart shall be so parallel with hers.
Yes, great Aegystheus, were it but our mothers will,
what she thinks good of, I must not think ill:
Besides, your love ever since my fathers death,
as if it came from his departing soul,
and forth-with had revived again in you,
hath held a prospective for me, to see
his care redoubled, though the objects changed:
And, for I lost a brother, if you please,
that I may challenge in your royal blood,
here do I tie with all affections bands,
my self unto this Babe, which is as dear
unto my soul, as were Orest???s here.
Daughter, your heart now with obedience strung,
makes a sweet music sounding from your tongue.
Nurse, Bring the Babe. Give it Electra; so,
you daughter shall have oversight of it.
O, shall I part from it then?
No good Nurse, no,
Electra with her care, you with your pains.
Now by Lucina, had it gone away,
I should have sit, and sobbed away my heart;
It is the sweetest Babe that ever Nurse did kiss.
Look here good father, look my nobles here,
upon this Babe scarce crept yet out of earth,
for you shall grow an Autumn of ripe years,
when time hath brought it to maturity.
Look on thy grandchild, Tyndarus, see, it is thine,
this came from thee, old-man; see how it smiles
upon the Grandsire, as if wise Nature had
taught him his kindreds Names before he came forth.
I see it Aegyst. &amp; my aged blood grows warm,
as if my self were a new father made,
and all the blessings I can render it,
shall drop like golden showers on the head:
Me thinks it doth recall my sliding age,
and makes swift time retire back again:
It doth unfold those wrinkles in my face,
which grief and years had fixed as their signs
upon my brow, and now it shall be seen,
although my hairs are gray, my joys are green.
Long may our Father his opinion hold,
and you, our daughter, let not sinister thoughts
wrong your suspicious mind, though this being young,
it makes our Lord, and me to speak our joys;
yet our affection, and our natural love,
is not a whit to you diminished.
A Mother can be Mother unto many,
and as from one Root hid within the ground,
springs many flowers, that lends sap to all;
So from a Parents heart run veins of love,
which, though to many they without do flow,
yet from one heart, one Root, they all do grow.
I hope our gracious Mother cannot think
we do suspect her love; witness this charge,
which you have blessed my arms and soul withal:
and as your love committed it with care,
my care shall still defend it with my love.
We thank our daughter, come Lord Strophius, come,
grief still sits heavy on your sighing heart.
Be frolic, learn of us; in all the grace,
and pleasure our Court extends, you shall have place.
I thank my gracious Lord, time hath by this,
almost eat out the memory of our son,
and since the heavens let fall their dew on you,
and watered Argos with such springing hopes;
I will not seem a stock incapable
of such a general comfort, but revive
my buried thoughts, and for my Sovereign's sake,
old Strophius will a young mans person take.
We thank old Strophius, and if honour can
keep thee still young, our Princely hand is wide,
and freely shall extend all Graces on thee,
and you all our Subjects, which bear part
thus in our joy. And here I do proclaim,
and personally from my own Mouth pronounce,
sealing it with the Signet of my State,
A general immunity to all
Murders, Rapes, Treasons, Thefts, Conveyances,
which have been from the birth of our dear Child,
in all the Confines of our Empire done;
nor shall your licence date be quite expired,
till the slow year seven times runs out his course.
Our self thus speak it; until then ell's free,
Kings win their Subjects by immunity.
Electra, you are happy in your charge.
Yes, Uncle, and you happy in your favour.
Madam, Shall I stay here until you come?
Yes, Nurse, sit down and sing, look to the Babe,
I'll only with my Uncle change a word.
 Lullaby, lullaby Baby,
Great Argos joy,
The King of Greece thou art born to be,
In despite of Troy.
Rest ever wait upon thy head,
Sleep close thine eyes,
The blessed gaurd, tend on thy bed,
Of Deities.
O, how this brow will beseem a Crown!
How these locks will shine!
Like the rays of the Sun on the ground,
These locks of thine.
The Nurse of heaven still send thee milk,
Moist thou ???uk a Queen.
Thy drink Joves Nectar, and clothes of silk,
A God may thou seem.
Cupped sit on this Rosin cheek,
On these ruby lips
May thy mind like a Lamb be meek,
In the vales which trips,
Lullaby, Lullaby Baby, &amp;c.
You never heard from my brother, Uncle,
nor from your son! they have been long away!
In troth, Electra, I am in despair,
almost of ever seeing them again;
Sure if Orestes live, and ever hear,
unto what pass Aegystheus brings his state,
seated him in the throne, and's mothers bed,
and like to leave Argos hereditary
to his Posterity, it cannot ever be born,
Orestes spirit will endure no scorn.
Uncle, his long delays make me surmise,
or he will never come, or come with prize;
He, if now come, he must not show himself,
but live unknown, unnamed, or change his name.
His name, Electra, yes, and's nature too,
which I do fear me he will hardly do.
But if we hear not from them now ever long,
I'll listen by some means about the land,
to hear of them; mean time you to your charge,
officious duty must our lives enlarge.
Come Nurse. 
O, here's the Palace under whose kind roof
My tender years were gently softered:
But now the sight on it seems to strike my soul,
when I but think it holds within the walls,
the patrons of such lust, incarnate devils,
mere Pythonists, that facinate the world.
Nay, but Orestes, think now of your self,
complain not of your wrongs, but seek to right them.
We might have lived in the woods still to complain,
and to that purpose we may turn again.
Whet up your former thoughts, and spend not time,
to rave, but to revenge this odious act.
We know they were their shapes, and no Chimera's.
O, Pylades, know I thou art my friend?
I hope you think it.
I do, I dare swear it,
so I dare swear it was Aegystheus, and
the dumb Witch, the ??? O, what thing's enough
to be an attribute to term her by?
The Clytemnestra, O, we saw her do it.
It was a black deed indeed, and past all thought.
O, Hell it self has not the pattern to it:
Some stench, some fogs and vapours stop their breath,
exhald from out the dampish womb of Styx.
Did ever foul, disastrous, fiendlike hands,
cast up so huge a heap of hell-bred mischief?
Were I to dive to'th depth of Phelgeton.
or fetch young Gaenimed from the arms of Jove,
to rend Proserpina from Pluto's bed,
or take the vulture from off Titius heart,
and set it on my Mothers, I would do it;
I'll break op doors, and nail 'em to their bed;
hark, revenge calls me, I come, I come.
Nay, still outrageous friend, good now contain
your heady fury in wisdoms reyn:
hearken to my advice.
I will, dear friend,
thou hast plaid music to my doleful soul;
and when my heart was tympaniz'd with grief,
thou lav'dst out some into thy heart from mine,
and kepst it so from bursting; thou hast tide
with thy kind counsel, all these loosned strings,
they should not crack asunder with their weight.
Then listen now, the best plot I can think,
is this: We here will live a while unknown:
Orestes, thy Profession shall be Physic,
I as your friend t'company you at Court;
carry it neatly, learn a few strange words,
palliate your woe a while, and coop up grief,
you may in time so minister to the King;
Physics occasion fit revenge may bring.
Rarely invented, I'll speak Aphorisms,
sublimed Purgations, Quintessence distilled,
each Dose I give shall make a heart to bleed,
and prove a true Physician so indeed.
It was my good Genius guided me here now,
to hear Conspiracy; wherefore I'll attach them.
Save you Gentlemen.
Save you too, if you please.
Sir, it was small manners to interrupt our talk,
and give no warning of your being near.
Warning? you shall have warning, yes, I know
I heard you both, and understood your plot,
you'll turn Physician, Sir, and give rare Clysters,
shall work like Stibium, to purge our hearts:
You thought to act well true Physicians parts.
Therefore on thee our Medicine first shall work.
Help, murder.
Nay Parasite, I'll gag you,
you shall not fawn again, or wag your tail,
when the King nods.
O help me, I am slain.
Stop his breath quickly, if but he be dead,
we may escape the danger of the treason.
Nay he is silent; O, but we are beset.
Look out, me thought I heard one cry out murder,
some voice I am sure did disturb the Court,
it was Mysanders voice, me thought that cried,
and see, hoe's slain; one whom the Kings esteem
did rank among the best; there are the Murderers:
Fellows, how durst you thus abuse the Court?
Go, haste to the King, tell him the men be here.
Gentlemen, we as lovers to the Court,
came here as strangers, for to see the King,
this man being coming out, too soon for us;
and for himself used us uncivilly;
we have been Gentlemen, though our Fortunes now
have put on Beggars weeds upon our backs:
who answering in the same sort he proposed,
he struck us, and men cannot endure blows:
so thinking much to be struck again,
he grew so hot, he drew and made a Stab;
at which encounter both enclosing him
twixt us he took a wound worse than we thought
to give, for we did think to have given none;
But since it is thus, we must appeal to the King.
Yes; and here comes his Majesty in person.
A Guard there on us, here is murder done.
What, is Mysander killed, our trusty servant?
Where are the vilians?
O hold good heart, hark, hark, he calls us villains.
What is the matter? speak, how came he dead?
They shall die two deaths, that did cause him one.
O I am now undone; he must sit judge,
to condemn us, that should massacre him.
Nay, keep a temper, hold good friend a while.
My gracious sovereign, these two be the men,
which have confessed the deed:
Are you the men which thus abused our state?
Was it one or both? if both, you both shall die;
if one, that one: w're just in our Decree.
What, is my Queen come here, to hear the Cause?
We'll then ascend, and judge them instantly.
O crack my ey-strings, let these balls drop out,
or the quick sights like darts fly to their souls,
and pierce their entrails; he King, my mother Queen!
The Briseis and Achilles, that in my dream.
We come to be condemned amongst our friends.
I will speak to them, Electra's there,
And Storphius, your old Father, Pylades.
Show thy self valorous, overcome thy self:
If we be known, we surely are condemned.
Father, Lord Strophius, sit and hear the cause.
Why, my Lord, what is it makes the business thus?
My Queen shall straitway know; Bring them away.
Although it is not fallen out of our mind,
of a free act of pardon of all faults
committed in the date of such a time,
our hand of mercy must not be so soft,
to cover o'er with gentle lenity,
such ulcerous sores as these; there is no place
for mercy left; murder must not find grace:
Therefore our doom is past, one needs must die,
blood still for blood unto the gods will cry.
Then, if thy doom be spent, great King here stands;
the man that did it, showing his guilty hands.
O hold thy doom a while; it was not he,
His serious studies in the learned Arts,
hearing acute Philosophers dispute
twixt life and death, and of a future state
would fain haste to it; but the man was I:
believe not him, it was his desire to die.
No King, it is he which in his desperate thoughts,
would loose the bands betwixt his soul and him;
ones self against ones self is witness store,
my self confesses, what would thou have more?
Believe him not, upon my knees I vow,
these hands are only branded with the guilt,
and for ones blood, let not two lives be spilt.
And on my knees I the like Oath do take,
I gave the stab, my Dagger's bloody yet.
That was my Dagger, King, he took't from me.
He do's me wrong, by???, it was ever mine.
This doth amaze us, I ne'er yet saw two
turn Rhetoricians so to plead for death.
Would not the pardon of this odious fact,
like a foul stench, or an unwholesome air,
send an infectious vapour through the Land,
and choke up Justice; this fidelity
should for this one time set two murderers free.
Now good my love, methinks I pity them,
and prithee for my sake (I know them not)
abate thy edge of Justice for this once.
O what she spoke! to damn it had been better.
My love, thou know I never look too stern
upon a fault that could ask lenity.
But this is so transcendent, and so great,
it must not be slipped with impunity.
To do a heinous murder, and i'th'Court,
in the place of Justice, where the King might hear,
upon a chief attendant of the Kings!
Murder it self is past all expiation,
the greatest crime that Nature doth abhor:
not being, is abominable to her;
and when we be make others not to be,
it is worse than bestial: and we did not so,
when only we by natures aid did live
a Heterogeneous kind, as semibeasts,
when reason challenged scarce a part in us;
but now doth manhood and civility
stand at the Bar of Justice, and there plead,
how much they are wronged, and how much defaced
when man doth dye his hands in blood of man.
Judgement it self would scarce a Law enact
against the murderer, thinking it a fact
that man against man would never dare commit,
since the worst things of nature do not it.
O how his words now rail against a sin,
which beat upon his Conscious thoughts within!
His tongue speaks fair, his inparts, look on them,
and they like Jury-men himself condemn:
But O great King, if justice must have right,
let me stand only guilty in thy sight.
No, it is not, King, it was I that did the deed,
and for my action, let no other bleed.
In troth this makes my Doom it cannot fall:
Will none of you confess?
Yes, I confess.
No King, it is I confess.
How now Lord Strophius, what affects you so,
that makes your tears bewrayers of some passion?
My gracious Sovereign, this strange spectacle
renews the Memory of my once great loss,
and my dear Queens, we once were blessed with two,
which so had linked themselves in bands of love,
as these men now do seem to me they have.
One stream of love did in two hearts so glide,
one with the other lived, with the other died.
And would my Queen be my competitor,
for our Sons sake my suits should join with her,
since Justice craves but one, and both will go,
even save them both, and right wronged Justice so.
I, good my love, let Justice come and look,
if she can find in all her Statute Book,
two men for the same crime should rightly die;
she will not say so, Justice cannot lie.
And since they both will die, let ones love save
the others life, and so both life shall have.
In troth my Queen, and my old Lord have moved.
Well, since your loves are both so strongly tied,
and friendship like an old acquaintance sends
to her friend Justice that she should be mild,
and looks with eyes of Mercy on your fault,
considering our immunity proclaimed,
and such Petitioners as you both have got,
Death in our Sentence, now shall have no part;
whilst who should have done worst, confession strives,
too much confession thus saves two men's lives:
But now we must demand, what you made here?
What business or condition you profess?
Great King, our duty owes to thee our lives,
and were we men that strived to set a cloud
before these gifts, Art hath instructed us,
or we have purchased at a most dear rate,
of cost and labour; yet thy clemency
commands us to lay open all to thee:
yet for my self I rather count my state
blessed that I lighted on this honest man;
whose accurate and watchful indagation,
hath taught him for to heal the wounds of Nature,
by his exceeding skill in wholesome herbs;
one, that when I did think my shred of life
had been quite cut, did tie it up again,
and make it last: recalled my youthful days,
and made me Aeson-like, become thus young;
for which great practise I did owe my life,
and thence proceeded our late pious strife.
Nay then I'm glad our mercy did extend
on men whom such rare virtues do commend;
our love shall then grow greater, &amp; our Court
shall entertain you, and't may chance we will,
my Queen and I, make trial of your skill.
My gracious Sovereign, words must not have wings,
to pass and to out-flye the bounds of truth,
only to win the Elixir of opinion;
but for my friend, I here profess so much,
and for my life do stand so deeply bound,
that all my Art can ne'er make recompense.
Please but your Graces self??? and your dear Queen,
appoint the secrets of the safest room
to let me show my self to none but you;
though Nature dried up with too much time,
deny to spring in fruit from forth your loins,
or any other strange impediment;
our Art preserves from sickness ruining.
And twill be blessed to show it to a King.
Ha, prithee let me speak with thee apart.
Thou strik'st on tunes now, make me glad to hear,
we will commit our secrecy to thee.
Can water barren Wombs with such a dew,
shall make 'em flourish and wax green with fruit?
Although we cannot altogether blame,
that Nature hath been too unkind to us;
yet we would plant each corner of our Realm
with springing Branches of our Royal self,
to compass in our selves, and we stand in the midst.
Kings in their Children do great blessing find,
and great men love to Propagate their kind.
Great Sovereign, boasting words shall ne'er out-weigh
the things I will perform, I speak not fame,
but what I have said, I will do the same.
We like thy temper well, and we will trust;
therefore this night we will appoint it so,
thou shalt be guided to our secretest room,
and there shalt use thy skill; which if it take,
our love shall honour thee for Physics sake.
Good heavens I thank you, your effectual power
hath showed your justice in this blessed hour.
Now is occasion put; thus murder lays
the trap wherein it self, it self betrays.
Old Lord, a word with you.
and with you Lady.
Had not you once a Son loved the young prince?
Yes Sir, but Fates envied my happiness,
and holds both Prince and Son away too long.
And had not you a brother (Lady) once?
When heard you of him last? He went to travel.
In truth I had, but I can hear no news.
O see! my son! welcome my dearest boy.
Our Brother, our Orestes is come home.
It is they indeed; O how my blood revives!
Let me embrace them; O ye'r welcome home,
now is the Autumn of our sorrow done.
What silent place hath smothered you so long?
Of what great Powers have you counsel taken,
concerning the great Plot you had in hand?
Uncle, and Sister, we must not stand now
embracing much, and bidding welcome home;
you see before I come, how things do stand:
My business hastens; and my friend, and I,
have yet a greater Project to perform:
Only Electra, we must have your aid,
to help us with their Child, for now's the time,
when blessed occasion strives to help revenge.
Why Brother, is the Child in any fault?
that was unborn when that our Father died:
And it is a lusty boy: O hurt not that.
Tush, I must have it, it shall have no hurt,
worse than my Father:
Shall it not, indeed.
Believe me, no worse hurt; but let's be gone.
I'll be a tripod Paracelsian.
Boy, sweep the room, set each thing in his place,
the King and Queen take Physic here to night.
Sir, and you'll help me, I am ready here,
Fetch them two Chairs.
Yes, Sir.
What Carpet mean you shall be spread a'th board?
That of red velvet, set the silver cups,
there may be use of them to take the potion:
So, now ell's well, the room is well prepared.
Is this the room, friend, where the King must be?
Yes, this is the room Sir, it is the privat'st, this.
You must avoid it then, and tell his Grace,
that I stay here provided against he come.
His Grace shall know it.
I faith Orestes, prithee spare the child,
it hath no fault, but it is too like thy mother.
Like my mother, O most execrable!
had ranked the confused Chaos of all sins,
thou could not have found out a fault more black,
more stinking, more infectious to my heart.
Art like my mother, O transcendent crime!
Some say I'm eyd like her, but in the face
I do resemble most the King my father.
Poor babe.
The King thy father! yes, too like them both.
Electra says, I'm somewhat like Orestes,
her brother that is dead.
How, like Orestes! when did see him child?
Indeed I never saw him, but I love him.
Alas, dear friend, see the pretty knave.
Would thou were not my mothers, I could weep,
but see, O see now my relenting heart,
must now grow flinty, see my father, see,
now to show pity were impiety.
Why flags revenge? see thy now yielding soul,
made me burst op my strong jawed sepulchre,
and rip the seare-cloth from my wounded breast.
O can a child smile blank the memory
of all these horrid wounds, that make me groan,
in the dark caverns of the uncoucht earth?
from whence I come for to infect thy soul
with ayre of vengeance, may make Acheron,
yea, and our selves, at the performance quake.
Fruit of our loins, first vigour of our youth,
look on these wounds, as on the Gorgons head,
and turn thy heart to stone: hovering revenge
is fallen into thy hands, O grasp her close
by her snake knotted front, and make her do
things may incite a horror to her self.
Forget all mother, in that disloyal witch,
whose damned heate raging in strumpets blood,
so soon did condescend to murder me.
By all the rights of Father I conjure thee:
By Atreus, Atreus, he whose revengeful soul
is echoed through the world superlative;
do thou make Nemesis as great a feast,
and be enthroniz'd in her fiery chair,
in her triumphant chariot ever ride,
in which, Bears hurry her from the womb of hell,
and bear this Title as thy deserved hire,
the brave revenger of thy murdered sire.
Think on me, and revenge.
Stay, stay, and see it,
stay Sprite, thou strik'st no terror to my soul:
For unamaz'd I now would dare out-look
ranks of Medusa's, and the grim aspect
of the most frowning object hell affords.
Think on me and revenge! yes, those two words
shall serve as burden unto all my acts,
I will revenge, and then I'll think on thee:
I'll think on thee, and then again revenge,
and stab, and wound, and still I'll think on thee:
I have a dropsy now to suck up fumes,
and drink the reeking streams of vengeance some:
Great Agamemnons Ghost, I will bedew
thy hearse with blood in stead of brinish tears,
and build a pile up of their murdered trunks,
to burn thy marrow-lesse consumed bones.
Arrows of forked lightening never flew
more swiftly from the awful arms of Jove,
then Nemesis black Scorpions from me.
It was a strange sight.
I, did thou see it friend?
all of those wounds will I stick in his breast.
Alas, one will be enough for him?
I, but she shall have more. A while go by:
Were all the world their lives, the world should die.
Now Tragedy fetch out thy crimson robes,
and buckle sure thy purple buskins on,
stooped ten grains deeper in their scarlet die;
this night shall give me now a deep carouse,
of Clytemnestrae's and Aegystheus blood,
and Cerberus himself stand by to pledge me,
whilst to hells fire I shall sacrifice
three Hecatombs; it doth the furies good,
when ever we wet their Altars with such blood.
And now ye fiends of hell, each take a place,
as it were spectators at a first days play;
raise all the hellish winds to expel nature:
Great Goddess give me leave now to forget
all strains of duty; all obedient thoughts
die in me quite: a mothers memory,
pious affections take no hold on me.
Be all my senses circled in with Fiends,
and let Erynnis hold her flaming brand
to guide my murderous sword; for all lights else,
vanish from out this Center, be this room fraught
so full of mischief, may make the Fabric crack,
and let no time now come into my thoughts,
but that dire night wherein my father died.
I'll only be a Doctor now in word,
each potion that I give shall be my sword.
But I must change.
O Doctor, you are busy for our coming.
My gracious Lord, I had no cause to fail.
Nay, but is this fit time for physic, Doctor?
First, Madam, for the physic that I give,
now the diastal fabric of your pulse,
shows all your passions most hysterical.
Pleases your Grace sit down? on at each end of the table.
Yes, must we sit? sit there my Queen.
Yes, now is Saturn, governor of nature,
in free conjunction with the planet Venus:
And just at this time Jupiter begat
great Hercules: Sol, Luna, Mercury.
in that Diameter, now favour propagation,
and now will my Alexipharmacon
stir the Analeptick veins and arteries:
If you out-live this night, you'll live to see
a royal, strange, and Princely progeny.
Think thou so, Doctor?
Think it, nay, I know it.
Hem.
Surely he means to work rare Art upon us.
Pray God thy physic take.
Yes, it shall take.
Hem.
Treason, we are betrayed.
Nay, tic your privat'st room.
View me well mother, ha, do you know me yet?
Here, here's the drugs my Art hath thought upon:
be pitiless now Pylades, be my friend.
O help me father, else these men will kill me.
O my boy, my boy.
O ye'r fast bound.
Yes, he is thine, thy face, thy eyes, thy heart,
and would I knew where Nature had couched most,
of thy damned blood, I thus would let it out,
and thus't should spirit in thy most loathed face.
O now the heavens rain vengeance on our heads.
O mother, mother, save me, save me father.
Hold Pylades, be steadfast, for by???
he wounds me, that persuades me not to wound.
O turn thy bloody weapon on my breast,
it was this womb that brought forth this babe and thee,
If that be guilty, I have made it so.
Rip up this place which first did bring thee forth,
it is I entreat thee, it is thy mother, she
which gave thee hous-room here within this breast,
upon whose dugs thy infant lips did hang.
It was my father, he entreated you,
who many a time had clipped you in his arms,
who made you Queen of Greece, yes, it was he,
good Agamemnon, he did plead for life.
Bath not thy hands in a poor infants blood,
nor in thy mothers, I deserve to die:
and yet remember how my doom saved thee,
how easily mercy did obtain her suit.
Nay, but Egystheus, you can aggravate,
to doe a heinous murder, and in the Court;
In the place of Justice, where the King might hear,
upon a chief attendant of the Kings.
Murder it self is past all expiation,
a crime that nature most of all abhors,
and look how manhood and civility,
stand at the bar of Justice, and there plead,
how much they are wronged, and how much defaced,
when man doth dye his hands in blood of man.
Now hearken King, I'll use thy Rhetoric,
thou did a heinous murder in the Court,
not which the King did hear, but which he felt;
when no petition could (good man) prevail,
therefore this dies, this first shall have his due,
this mischief done, revenge shall prompt anew.
O, the gods blush, and heaven looks pale at this,
a fathers face besmeared with his child's blood!
My hast deceives my will; tush, all this yet,
may be called piety; you shall taste too, mother.
O, why dos't banish nature from his place?
Look on thy mothers tears, worse then those groans,
and pangs she had, when she first brought thee forth.
When of thy friends or parents thou hast wrong,
patience, not fury doth to thee belong.
Is this the blessing that thy knee should ask?
Repay'st thou thus my kisses and my tears,
which flowed from me to thee in tender years?
O why did you so banish woman-hood,
when you and this damned villain, base adulterer,
made in my fathers side so many wounds,
and brought a brave old King into this state?
See here's his bones, my pocket can contain.
great Agamemnon; and repayd you thus
his kind embraces? all his loving signs?
Aegystheus, you are thirsty, you shall drink,
yes, you shall clear your throat, by ??? you shall.
O mischief above mischief! what Heniochus
bred on a stony rock, could ever endure
to see a fathers thirst quenched with such blood?
Hast thou no measure, hath revenge no end?
Who first doth mischief, may keep mean in the deed,
but who revengeth, must all mean exceed.
Nay mother we'll not bar you of your draught.
O Nature, see here all thy law infringed,
a mothers prayers prevail not with her son.
Pray with Thyestes, it shall never move me:
But first Aegystheus, Do thou haste revenge.
O, I am wounded, O when dost thou end?
Nay, I have scarce begun. Now mother, you.
So now, I'll stand and look, and on hell call,
nay, my revenge must not be usual:
One more for thee Aegystheus; only let out
the blood you drank before.
O, my heart feels it.
Now mother you, and your love the same.
O kill me quickly, time prolongs my wo,
and since I must die, let me quickly go.
You know your sentence; Let him feel he dies.
who strait threats death, knows not to tyrannise.
This brings ten deaths.
Would twould an 100 bring,
one death's too little to revenge a King.
Hence, hence, adulterous soul to Tantalus,
and let hell know who it was sent thee thither:
Now, mother, you shall follow: but he first,
lest that like Lovers you go hand in hand.
Why son, whose death is it thou dost revenge?
thy fathers? but on whom? upon thy mother!
On her which brought thee forth, which took most care,
to bring thee up, from whom thou took thy self?
you're sure thou art mine, but dost not know,
who it was begat thee.
Will it Bastardise me?
Yes, mother, yes, I know I was his son:
Alas! why, what are you? a senseless peace
of rotten earth can do as much to corn,
as you to me, bear it, and bring it forth;
but Agamemnon, he that seed did sow,
and only unto him my self I ow:
and for him thou shalt die.
O, I confess,
my conscience tells me, I deserve no less:
and thus thy mother from thee doth depart,
leaving vexation to torment thy heart.
Now friend, I see my father live again,
and in his royal state at Argos Court:
This is the night in which he first came home,
O blessed powers of hell, divine Canidia,
Now am I satisfied, now hath revenge perfection;
and nothing grieves me, but that Tyndarus,
my mothers father, did not see her die.
Isle in and tell him, my thoughts must reveal
those acts I do: this night who would conceal?
Now soul triumph, whist that my deed shall shine,
In the face o th Court, and all the world know it mine.
My Lord, your daughters potion works most rarely;
the King's asleep, God bless his Majesty.
O, do not wake him, faith it is pity, la.
What do I see? ha, blood, the little child
dead! my daughter bleed? Aegystheus killed?
Your Lordships eyes do fail, it is but spilt wine.
Lay hands of the villain, it is the Physicians deed.
Nay friends, hands off it is no Physician now:
See, see, old Tyndarus, dost thou know me yet?
Fetch me my Crown and robes, nay, I'll ascend:
Is not Atrides eldest son your King?
What hast thou done, foul Viper, to eat out
thy mothers bowels? what, was this thy deed?
Thy silence says it was thine. What Tanais,
Tygris or Rhenus, or what flowing sea,
should wash thee in the salt Meotis stream?
Or Tithes at full tide o'rflow thy banks,
still would the spots of murder stick on them.
Why Grandsire, I go not about to wash,
by???it was all the fruit I thought to win,
to think all mischief here could be no sin.
See, see, thy mother, look upon her now,
on her, whose eyes thou hast for ever closed,
which eyes have often wakned at thy cry,
and hushed thee with a lullaby to sleep:
See, see, these hands, which oft with so much care,
wrapped gently up thy unset tender limbs.
See, see, this face, wont at thy signs to smile,
when nature gave not leave unto thy tongue
to utter thy child's meaning.
See, see these bones, these nasty rotten bones,
which had so often locked his hands in hers;
here stood the tongue, which oft had called her sweet,
dear Clytemnestra, and then stopped his speech,
and told his love in a more speaking sign.
Here stood those eyes, which fed upon her face,
and made her of thy daughter, a great Queen,
and she made him a dish for loathed worms.
Suppose she did, there was but one yet dead,
and with ones death again should be repaid.
No, Tyndarus, had I desired but one,
I should have thought I had desired none.
Why, methinks, I should too have killed thee,
the number is too little yet of three.
Into what land, what country wilt thou fly?
all earths, all lands, all countries will fly thee:
the heavens will look with a more cheerful brow
on Cerberus.
Why, let heaven look as twill, tic my crown,
that I have done an act shall make heave frown.
O, what earth loves so much a guilty soul,
that it can bear thee?
Why, Sir, this is mine,
and this shall bear me. Am I not right heir?
Thou heir to kingdoms! thou a subject rather,
to help to make a Players Tragedy.
Why, that will make me swell with greater pride,
to think my name shall drop in lines of blood,
from some great Poets quill, who well shall paint
how bravely I revenged my fathers death;
that is the thing I wished, and it is my glory,
I shall be matter for so brave a story.
But whore's my Crown?
No murderer, we'll rather join with him,
this old man here, to take away thy life,
then such a homicide shall frame us laws,
who hath himself raced out the laws of Nature.
Yes, and we'll set here Argos crown on him,
who shall enact some pnnishment for thee;
which although none can equalise this deed,
yet what our griefs can think, all shall be done,
and we'll forget you're Agamemnons son.
Why, think you on your worst, I scorn to crave:
I had three lives, you but my one shall have.
Then since vile wretch, thou hast committed that,
which while there is a world, throughout the world
will be pronounced for the most horrid deed,
that ever came into the thought of man;
a thing which all will talk of, none allow:
I here disclaim that name of Grand-father,
and I must quite forget that in thy veins,
my blood doth flow, but think it then let out,
when thou letst out my daughters. And since you,
kind Lords, commit the state unto my years,
years too unfit, heavens know, to bear a state:
My mind, methinks, contends for to decree
somewhat, which to my self I dare not tell.
Just conceived wrath, and my affection strives,
hate forbids pity, pity forbids hate,
and exile is but barren punishtnent:
Yet let me banish thee from out these eyes,
O never let thy sight offend me more,
all thy confederates, and all thy friends.
You, Pylades, which did so smoothly cloak,
the dam'nd profession he did undertake:
You, Strophius.
My Lord, I know not ought.
Yet since one foot is now in Charons boat,
if it please you, set tother too aflote.
Not so, but I will banish you the Court,
and you Electra; come, I must forget
affection too towards you, you gave the child,
which you had charge of, to the murderers sword.
Why Grandsire, I herein no wrong do find,
since all these go, I would not stay behind.
Nay, but no one shall company the other,
hence thou Cocytus, stream of this offence,
Strophius and Pylades, Electra, hence.
Why farewell Grandsire, since thou bid, I fly,
and scorn companions for my misery.
Unto this punishmeht this one more I add,
that none shall dare to give Orestes food,
and this decree shall stand; I speak with grief,
and here pronounce Orestes no relief.
Hence with these corps; poor child, what had thou don?
thy Nurses prayers, that there might spring a rose,
where ever thou trod'st could not keep back thy foes.
Some plague he hath; but such a matricide
should never die, although he ever died.
Thus never less alone, then when alone,
where to our selves we sweetly tell our woes.
Thou Uncle, chief companion to our griefs,
and soul partaker of our miseries,
why do we live, when now it is come to pass,
it is scarce known that Agamemnon was?
He dies far easier, who at first doth drown,
then he which long doth swim, and then sinks down.
Nay Niece, me thinks I now do see the haven
where my aged soul must leave this tossed bark,
made weak with years and woes: yet I commend
unto my son the heart of a true friend,
that's all the will I leave, and let him know
friendship should ever be, but most in woe.
And so I leave thee Niece, I first must die,
to hast a period to this Tragedy.
O envious Fates could you not use me thus?
have I not grief enough to burst my heart?
Was my life's thread twisted and knit so strong
that the keen edge of all these miseries
can never cut it off? must I bear more?
It is all my safety now not to be safe.
Are there so many ways to rid ones life,
and can I hit on none? They say that death
is every where, and yet I find him not:
Tush, but I seek him not: why my own hand
might grasp him to me, if I did but strive.
Now hand help ease my heart, and make a way
to let out grief, that hath so long dwelt here;
Now knife thou'st done good service, there lie by,
heaven well decreed it, nothing life can give,
but every thing can make us not to live.
Now Priams Ghost, haste, haste I say, to look,
with cheerful eyes on the sinister book,
and there to Hecuba my mother show
the tragic story of thy conquered foe.
And let Andromecha my sister see,
what Agamemnons race is come to be.
Now Troy may gratify that most sad doom,
conquered by those that thus themselves or'ecome.
let Greece so flourish still, let Argos be
puffed with the pride of their great victory.
Let it bear Soldiers, so withal it bear
Orestes too; now mother, never fear
Argos makes me to laugh, which made thee weep;
the Trojans in the grave now sweetly sleep;
their sorrow hath the end, now these begin
to overflow themselves with mutual sin:
And after all, Orestes, we may see,
hath lost his reason, mans sole property.
By???you shall not, nay, I am decreed:
do, tear, tear me; yes, I have deserved it.
O brave, O brave, he's mad as well as I;
I'm glad my madness hath got company.
Mother, why mother, will you kill my father?
Then I'll kill you; tush, I have don't already.
Much patience will grow fury in time:
follow you me, you, beast, you damned Aegystheus.
I'll hew thee piece by piece, look off my mother.
I am she, or one loves thee well.
Out you witch, you witch.
Murderer, murderer.
Dost. whisper with the devils to torment me?
O how they lash me with their snaky whips!
Why Megaera, Megaera, wilt not hold thy hand?
Are you there too, Erynnis? hey, all hell!
my Grandsier Atreus he stands fighting there,
but he will ha'th better on it; keep Cerberus, keep,
keep the gates fast, or all hell breaks loose.
Mother, I see you; O you are a whore.
Did I kill you, witch, dost thou laugh, dost: thou?
Why this is fine, my very looks do whip him.
Could I but get the stone from Sysiphus,
I'd dash thy brains out; O, are you there I faith,
a bed so close with your adulterer?
I'll stab your lustful souls with your own knives.
O clap, clap, O rare beyond expectation:
hold good heart, do not burst with laughter.
Will you not wake, sleep, sleep then your last.
Look how they fly in the ayre.
I see them, see them.
Why Jove, dost mean to let them into heaven?
O you are come down, and gone to hell;
Pluto, see Pluto, hoe's afraid of them,
O spare my sides, my sides, my sides, the blood!
O now you touch my ribs.
Hey, how he skips! O excellent, whips himself!
O sweet Catastrophe, do's non see it but I?
Clap, clap, again, would all Priams sons
and daughters were here now to help me laugh.
Lash on, lash on. Canidia, art thou there?
why grandsire, would it were to do again:
nay Oecus I fear no whipping posts,
lavgh'st thou, thou witch? I'll follow thee to hell.
Thus seeking others, I have lost my self,
my friend and father banished, and whilst I
wander to seek them for to ease their woe,
I here more grief proclaimed against my friend,
that none must succour, none must give him food,
and yet I'll seek him; and should all the laws,
that tyranny should think upon, restrain,
I'd draw my blood forth for to let him drink.
But O what's here? O I have found too soon,
one which I sought, my fathers wearied soul
in sighs hath now expired out it self.
Now, O ye sisters, your great task is don,
you ne'er untwine what you have once begun.
Thus obvious to our Fates, t'our selves unkind,
we haste to seek, that which too soon we find.
Alas, why do our souls too greedy burn,
to hasten thither whence we ne'er return?
We run to it of our selves, 'sif death were slow;
should he come tardy, we too soon should go.
For the first day that gives us our first breath,
doth make us a day nearer unto death.
All this huge world, which now on earth so strive,
to morrow this time may not be alive.
Great Troy is down, since Agamemnon fell,
since my dear father, which but now was well.
O art thou come dear friend, for thee I sought,
here's some food yet, in spite of all the laws.
Wilt bid me to dinner Pluto? ha, with what?
Give me no snakes, I, I go, I go,
up to Cythaerus top, I hate thy meat.
Heavens! he's distracted, now doth fury right,
when thus against her self, her self doth fight.
It is I (man) here, it is Pylades, not Pluto.
Ha, Pylades, I, they have banished him,
but grandsire look too't, I'll tear out your maw,
Pylades, Pylades I come.???
Why I am he, look friend, dost not know me?
Yes, yes thou were with me when I killed my mother,
and see, the Furies now would whip thee too.
Alecto! look, look, here's Alecto too.
O Clytemnestra, hay, how the Lion skips,
and Taurus he would toss me on his horns.
Look on the Ram, see the Bear roars at me,
and Charon he would fling me into Styx.
He fears the heavenly signs, nay then now time
hath brought true punishment on every crime.
Dash out the puppets brains, the little boy,
the bastard, my mothers bastard: so blood spin,
my mother kilt my father, kilt the King,
but she got little by it, look on her breast,
it bleeds, it bleeds; so, so Aegystheus, so.
O what a strange distemper stirs his brain!
Thou gentle Somnus, in whom care doth rest,
kind father of cold death, and son of peace,
which comes to Kings and poor men all alike,
bind his disturbed brain, tie up his sense;
let him but live to die, now tic not long
before we both shall sing our funeral song.
Ha! must I sink? can I not keep aloft?
What is the stream so strong? why then I'll dive,
and come to hell the sooner.
So gentle sleep,
thou gather'st up his wandering brains again,
this is but half dead, yet half dead he lies,
but tic not long, before he wholly dyes. Music within.
Hark they play Music; O these sounds do harm,
enticing wo with their melodious charm.
These please not men in woe, these time do keep,
but miseries best falling is to weep.
Our stops are nought but sobs, our hearts we bring,
whereon we prick the sol-fa which we sing.
Weep, weep you Argonauts,
Bewail the day
That first to fatal Troy
You took your way.
Weep Greece, weep Greece,
Two Kings are dead,
Argos, thou Argos, now a grave
Where Kings are buried.
No heir, no heir is left,
But one that's mad,
See Argos, hast not thou
Cause to be sad?
Sleep, sleep wild brain,
Rest rock thy sense,
Live if thou can
To grieve for thy offence.
Weep, weep, you Argonauts, &amp;c.
Peace Music, peace, our plaints have louder cries,
a heart that's sad can never harmonise.
Grief cannot keep his time, all time's too long,
sighs are best sem-briefs to his doleful song.
My ditties mournful, though thou sweetly play,
thus do we all even blow our lives away.
But dost thou wake, Orestes? is rest fled?
sleep ne'er dwells long in a molested head.
Hark, hark, the Furies entertain my mother,
Orpheus would fetch Euridice from hell,
see, he looks back, would venture so, thou fool?
I'd see my mother burnt before Id go,
why should thou bring her? she would stifle thee,
stifle thee in thy bed as my mother did.
Still harping on thy mother?
Harping, no,
let Orpheus harp: O, I, she was, she was,
a very, very Harpy.
Thus madness plays,
and keeps a certain measure in his words.
O I sucked out my mothers dearest blood,
I did indeed, O she plagues me for it now,
O I must go lie down in Tytius place,
Ixion too, he Sir would fain resign.
I scorn your petty plagues, I'll have a worse,
O the vulture, the wheel, the vulture.
See how his conscious thoughts, like fiends of hell,
do arm themselves, and lash his guilty soul!
He see's no vulture, nor no Scorpion strikes,
yet doth his conscience whip his bloody heart;
he needs no witnesses, he hath within
a thousand thoughts which testify his sin.
No punishment so strict, no deadly smart,
as private guilt, that smites on the heart.
I did, I do confess I did, I killed them all,
ripped up the womb that bear me; nay I did.
O Tantalus thy plague; some meat, some meat;
who pulls those apples hence? let them alone,
nay sink to the bottom, I will follow thee,
the rivers dry, my mother hath drunk all.
Alas, come, go with me, we will find drink.
Is Pluto's buttry op; his drink's too hot,
I doubt twill scald me, but I'll taste on it yet.
The Eumenides stand to whip me as I go:
Nay I will pass you, I will out-slip them all.
See in his conscience lies hells punishment,
our own thoughts judges, none are innocent.
Exit.
We that have here been born to see this change,
may leave the Court, and tell our children tales,
of the dier fall of Inachus great house.
the young Prince mad, the Princess killed her self,
old Strophius dead for grief; and murder heaped,
corps upon corps, as if they meant t'invite,
all hell to supper, on some jovial night.
Nay but my Lord, this is most pitiful,
that the young Prince should thus from door to door,
beg for his food, and yet none dare to give.
I saw him wandering yesterday alone,
flying from every Crow, or prattling Pie,
crying out mother, and as if there had
tormenting furies followed him with fraud;
and truth, I thought to tell old Tyndarus,
to move his ruthful years to pity him:
and will you join petitioner with me,
we'll tell the case, it is good to ease misery.
My Lord I like your motion, and will join,
for Agamemnons sake my honoured Master.
My fury leaves me, now I'm at my last,
and now me thinks thou truly art a friend:
now with undaunted spirit prevent my grief,
and let thy rapier drink blood greedily,
as if it loved it because it is thy friends,
now rid me of my woe, thy friendly vow
never did truly show it self till now.
Why then dear friend, I thus erect this arm,
and will be strong to thee, as thou to me,
we'll look upon our deaths with better face
then others do on life; come Tyndarus, see,
we scorn to live when all our friends are dead,
nor shall thy fury make base famine be
the executioner to my dearest friend,
whilst I can kill him, therefore spite of thee,
we'll free our selves past all calamity.
Yes Pylades, we will beguile our time,
and make him search through every nook of the world,
if he in all his race can ever spy,
two that like us did live, like us did die:
But we delay our death, now bravely come,
and the last parting word shall be, strike home.
O bravely struck dear friend, yet once again.
Yes, at one thrust two friends must not be slain.
O, how I love these wounds! heaven dropping showers,
when the outrageous dog makes clouds of dust
upon the thirsty earth, come not more sweet,
then the blessed streams of blood thy rapier rains.
Hence weapon; for my loins now scorn all props,
but my friends arms, O, bear good legs a while;
the weight of murder sits upon my soul,
and bends my staggering joints unto the earth.
Haste, haste, I faint, but O, yet let my strength be Atlas to sustain the falling world;
Breathe, breathe sweet vapors of two trusty hearts,
and let our breaths ascend to heaven before,
to make a room hard by the frozen pole,
where that our winged souls shall mount and sit,
more glorious then the Concubines of Jove,
wreathed with a Crown of rich enamelled stars,
leaving all ages to deplore our death,
that friendships abstract perished with our breath.
Fly thou best part of man, where Hecate
born on the swarthy shoulders of the Even,
sits in a grove of oaks, till gray eyed morn
bids her to throw off nights black Canopy.
Will it die before me? Stay, stay, I come.
O grasp me then, our names like Gemini,
shall make new stars for to adorn the sky.
Is thy breath gone?
O, yes, it is almost past,
then both together, thus we'll breath our last.
Went they this way? my Lords, you move me much,
could I find him now, I would seat him new,
in his right Kingdom, which doth weigh down me.
I see my Lord, Orestes and his friend,
without your leave, have made themselves an end.
Then now is Argos Court like to some stage,
when the sad plot fills it with murdered Trunks
and none are left alive but only one,
to ask the kind spectators plaudit,
all else have bid valet to the world,
the man reserved for that, is Tyndarus,
who thus hath seen his childrens childrens end,
his Grandchild, a bad son, a most dear friend;
the Scene must now be overflowed with groans,
each man sits down to wail his private mons.
one for the Queen doth weep, one for the King,
all taste the bitter waters of this Spring:
the Nurse bewails the child, that part she bears,
all have their subjects to bedew with tears;
each one yet have but one; but all of me,
challenge a part in griefs sad sympathy.
Orestes, Clytemnestrae I must call,
these all for mine, thus must I weep for all:
let none believe this deed, or if they doe,
let them believe this punishment then too.
It is vile to hate a Father, but such love,
as breeds a hate to'th Mother, worse doth prove.
Our life consists of ayre, our state of wind,
all things we leave behind us which we find;
saving our faults; witness Orestes here,
who was his own tormentor, his own fear;
Who flying all, yet could not fly himself,
but needs must shipwreck upon murders shelf:
and so his breast made hard with misery,
he grew himself to be his enemy.
Thus grief and gladness still by turns do come,
but pleasure least while doth possess the room.
Long nights of grief may last, but lo, one day
of shining comfort slideth soon away.
He, whom all fear on earth, must fear a fate,
for all our powers are subordinate.
Three hours space thus well can represent,
vices contrived and murders punishment.
A Monarchs life can in this little space,
show all the pomp that all the time doth grace.
His risings and his falls, and in one span
of time can show the vanity of man.
For none of us can so command the powers,
that we may say, to morrow shall be ours.
Now fortunes wheel is turned, and time doth call,
to solemnise this friendly funeral.
No force so great, no so disaster wrong,
as can unknit the band which holds strong
united hearts: who since they thus are dead,
one room, one tomb shall hold them buried.
And as these friends joined hands to bear their Fate;
so we desire you them to imitate.
Who since they all are dead, we needs must crave,
your gentle hands to bring them to their grave.

