Tax me with these hot tainters?
You are too sudden;
I doe but gently tell you what becomes you,
And what may bend your honour! how these courses
Of loose and lazy pleasures; not suspected
But done and known, your mind that grants no limit
And all your Actions follows, which loose people
That see but through a mist of circumstance
Dare term ambitious; all your ways hide sores
Opening in the end to nothing but ulcers.
Your instruments like these may call the world
And with a fearful clamour, to examine
Why, and to what wee govern. From example
If not for virtues sake ye may be honest:
There have been great ones, good ones, and it is necessary
Because you are your self, and by your self
A selfe-peece from the touch of power and Justice,
You should command your self, you may imagine
Which cozens all the world, but chiefly women.
The name of greatness glorifies your actions
And strong power like a pent-house, promises
To shade you from opinion; take heed mother,
And let vs all take heed, these most abuse vs
The sins we doe, people behold through optics,
Which shows um ten times more then common vices,
And often multiplies um: then what justice
Dare we inflict upon the weak offenders
When we are thieves our selves?
This is, Martell,
Studied and pend unto you, whose base person
I charge you by the love you owe a mother
And as you hope for blessings from her prayers,
Neither to give belief to, nor allowance.
Next I tell you Sir, you from whom obedience
Is so far fled, that you dare tax a mother;
Nay further, brand her honour with your slanders,
And break into the treasures of her credit,
Your easiness is abused, your faith fraited
With lies, malicious lies, your merchant mischief,
He that never knew more trade then Tales, and tumbling
Suspicious into honest harts; what you or hee,
Or all the world dare lay upon my worth,
This for your poor opinions: I am she,
And so will bear my self, whose truth and whiteness
Shall ever stand as far from these detections
As you from duty; get you better servants,
People of honest actions without ends,
And whip these knaves away, they eat your favours,
And turn em unto poisons: my known credit
Whom all the Courts a this side Nile have envied,
And happy she could site me, brought in question
Now in my hours of age and reverence,
When rather superstition should be rendered,
And by a Rush that one days warmth
Hath shot up to this swelling; give me justice,
Which is his life.
This is an impudence,
And he must tell you, that till now mother
Brought ye a sons obedience, and now breaks it
Aboue the sufferance of a son.
Bless vs!
For I doe now begin to feel my self
Turning into a halter, and the ladder
Turning from me, one pulling at my legs too.
These truss are no mans tales, but all men's trobles,
They are, though your strange greatness would out stare v'm:
Witness the daily Libels, almost Ballads
In every place, almost in every Province,
Are made upon your lust, Tavern discourses,
Crowds crammed with whispers; Nay, the holy Temples
Are not without your curses: Now you would blush,
But your black tainted blood dare not appear
For fear I should fright that too.
O ye gods!
Doe not abuse their names: they see your actions,
And your concealed sins, though you work like Moles,
Lies level to their justice.
Art thou a son?
The more my shame is of so bad a mother,
And more your wretchedness you let me bee so;
But woman, for a mothers name hath left me
Since you have left your honour; mend these ruins,
And build again that broken fame, and fairly;
Your most intemperate fierce have burnt, and quickly
Within these ten days take a Monastery,
A most strict house, a house where none may whisper,
Where no more light is known but what may make ye
Believe there is a day where no hope dwells,
Nor comfort but in tears
O misery!
And there to cold repentance, and starved penance
Tie your succeeding days; or curse me heaven
If all your gilded knaves, brokers, and bedders,
Even he you built from nothing, strong Portalyde,
Be not made ambling Geldings; all your maids,
If that name doe not shame um, fed with spunges
To suck away their rancknesse; and your self
Only to empty Pictures and dead Arras
Offer your old desires.
I will not curse you,
Nor lay a prophecy upon your pride,
Though heaven might grant me both: unthankful, no,
I nourished ye, it was I, poor I groaned for you,
It was I felt what you suffered, I lamented
When sickness or sad hours held back your sweetness;
It was I paid for your sleeps, I watch your wakings:
My daily cares and fears, that rid, plaid, walked,
Discoursed, discovered, fed and fashiond you
To what you are, and am I thus rewarded?
But that I know these tears I could dote on em.
And knecle to catch um as they fall, then knit um
Into an Armlet, ever to be honoured;
But woman, they are dangerous drops, deceitfuil,
Full of the weeper, anger, and ill nature.
In my last hours despised.
That Text should tell,
How ugly it becomes you to err thus;
Your flames are spent, nothing but smoke maintains ye,
And those your favour and your bounty suffers
Lye not with you, they doe but lay lust on you,
And then embrace you as they caught a palsy;
Your power they may love, and like spanish Jennets
Commit with such a gust.
I would take whipping,
And pay a Fine now.
But were ye once disgraced,
Or fallen in wealth, like leaves they would fly from you,
And become browse for every beast; you willed me
To stock my self with better friends, and servants;
With what face dare you see me, or any mankind,
That keep a race of such unheard of relics,
Bawds, Lechers, Letchecs, female fornications,
And children in their rudiments to vices,
Old men to show examples: and lest Art
Should loose her self in act, to call back custom,
Leave these, and live like
I told you how
And when your eyes have dropped away remembrance
Of what you were. I am your son! perform it.
Am I a woman, and no more power in me,
To tie this Tiger up, a soul to no end,
Have I got shame and lost my will; Brunhalt
From this accursed hour, forget thou bor'st him,
Or any part of thy blood gave him living,
Let him be to thee, an Antipathy,
A thing thy nature sweates at, and turns backward:
Throw all the mischiefs on him that thy self
Or women worse then thou art, have invented,
And kill him drunk, or doubtful.
Such a sweat,
I never was in yet, clipped of my minstrels,
My toys to prick up wenches withal; uphold me,
It runs like snowballs through me.
Now my varlets,
My slaves, my running thoughts, my executions.
Lord how she looks!
Hell take ice all.
Wee shall bee gilt.
Your Mistress,
Your old and honoured Mistress, you tired curtalls
Suffers for your base sins; I must be cloistered,
Mewed up to make me virtuous, who can help this,
Now you stand still like Statues; come Protaldye,
One kiss before I perish, kiss me strongly,
Another, and a third.
I fear not gelding
As long as she holds this way.
The young courser,
That vnlickt lump of mine, will win thy Mistress,
Must I be chaste Protaldye?
Thus and thus Lady:
It shall be so, let him seek fools for Vestalls,
Here is my cloister.
But what safety Madam
Find you in staying here?
Thou hast hit my meaning,
I will to Thierry son of my blessing,
And there complain me, tell my tale so subtly
That the cold stones shall sweat; and statues morn,
And thou shalt weep Protaldie in my witness,
And there forswear.
Yes, any thing but gelding,
I am not yet in quiet Noble Lady,
Let it be done to night, for without doubt
Tomorrow we are capons.
Sleep shall not seas me,
Nor any food befriend me but thy kisses.
Ever I forsake this desert, I live honest?
He may as well bid dead men walk, I humbled
Or bent below my power? let night dogs tear me,
And goblins ride me in my sleep to Jolly,
Ere I forsake my sphere.
This place you will.
What's that to you, or any,
Ye dosse, you powdered pigsbones, rubarbe glister?
Must you know my designs, a college on you,
The proverb makes but fools:
But Noble Lady.
You a saucy ass too, off I will not,
If you but anger me, tell a sowgelder
Have cut you all like colts, hold me and kiss me,
For I am too much troubled make up my treasure,
And get me horses private, come about it.
Thought I assure my self (Martell) your counsel
Had no end but alleagance and my honour:
Yet I am Jealous, I have passed the bounds
Of a sons duty; for suppose her worse
Then you report, not by bare circumstance
But evident proof confirmed he's given her out:
Yet since all weaknesses in a kingdom, are
No more to be severely punished, then
The faults of Kings are by the Thunderer
As oft as they offend, to be revenged:
If not for piety, yet for policy,
Since some are of necessity to be spared,
I might, and now I wish I had not looked
With such strict eyes into her follies.
Sir, a duty well discharged is never followed
By sad repentance, nor did your Highness ever
Make payment of the debt you owed her, better
Then in your late reproofs not of her, but
Those crimes that made her worthy of reproof.
The most remarkable point in which kings differ
From private men, is, that they not alone
Stand bound to be in themselves innocent,
But that all such as are elide to them
In neeren esse, or dependence, by their care
Should be free from suspicion of all crime;
And you have reaped a double benefit
From this last great act: first in the restraint
Of her lost pleasures, you remove th'example
From oath????????? of the like licentiousness,
Then when it is known that your severity
Extended to your mother, who dares hope for
The least Indulgence or conniuence in
The easiest slips that may prove dangerous
To you or to the kingdom?
I must grant
Your reasons good (Martell) if as she is
My Mother, she had been my subject, or
That only here she could make challenge to
A place of being; but I know her temper
And fear (if such a word become a king,)
That in discovering her, I have let loose
A Tigress, whose rage being shut up in darkness,
Was grievous only to her self; which brought
Into the view of light, her cruelty
Provoked by her own shame, will turn on him
That foolishly presumed to let her see
The loathed shape of her own deformity.
Beasts of that nature when rebellious threats
Begin to appear only in their eyes,
Or any motion that may give suspicion
Of the least violence, should be chaind up;
Their fanges and teeth, and all their means of hurt,
Pard of, and knocked out, and so made unable
To do ill; they would soon begin to loath it.
I'll apply nothing, but had you grace done,
Or would do yet, what your less forward zeal
In words did only threaten, far less danger
Would grow from acting it on her, then may
Perhaps have being from her apprehension
Of what may once be practised: for believe it,
Who confident of his own power, presumes
To spend threats on an enemy, that hath means
To shun the worst they can effect, gives armour
To keep off his own strength; nay more, disarms himself, and lies vngarded against all harms
Or doubt, or malice may produce.
It is true,
And such a desperate cure I would have used,
If the intemperate patient had not been
So near me as a mother; but to her,
And from me gentle unguents only were
To be applied: and as physicians
When they are sick of fevers, eat themselves
Such viands as by their directions are
Forbid to others, though alike diseased,
So she considering what she is, may challenge
Those cordials to restore her, by her birth,
And privilege, which at no suite must be
Granted to others.
May your pious care
Effect but what it aimde at, I am silent.
What laughed you at Sir?
I have some occasion,
I should not else; and the same cause perhaps
That makes me do so, may beget in you
A contrary effect.
Why, what's the matter?
I see and joy to see that sometimes poor men,
(And most of such are good) stand more indebted
For means to breathe to such as are held vicious,
Then those that wear like Hypocrites on their foreheads,
Th'ambitious titles of just men and virtuous.
Speak to the purpose.
Who would ever have thought
The good old Queen, your Highness reverend mother,
Into whose house (which was an Academ,)
In which all principles of lust were practised,
No soldier might presume to set his foot;
At whose most blessed intercession
All offices in the state, were charitably
Conferred on panders, o're-worne chamber wrestlers,
And such physicians as knew how to kill,
With safety under the pretence of saving,
And such like children of a monstrous peace,
That she I say should at the length provide
That men of war and honest younger brothers,
That wold not owe their feeding to their codpiece,
Should be esteemed of more then mothers, or drones,
Or idle vagabonds.
I am glad to hear it,
Prithee what course takes she to do this?
One that cannot fail, she and virtuous train
With her Jewels and all that was worthy the carrying,
The last night left the court; and as it is more
Then said, for it is confirmed by such as met her,
She's fled unto your brother.
How?
Nay storm not,
For if that wicked tongue of hers hath not
Forgot its pace, and Thierry be a Prince
Of such a fiery temper, as report
Has given him out for; you shall have cause to use
Such poor men as my self; and thank vs too
For coming to you, and without petitions;
Pray heaven reward the good old woman for it.
I foresaw this.
I hear a tempest coming,
That sings mine and my kingdoms ruin; hast,
And cause a troop of horse to fetch her back:
Yet stay, why should I use means to bring in
A plague that of her self hath left me? Muster
Our soldiers up, we'ele stand upon our guard,
For we shall be attempted; yet forbear
The inequality of our powers will yield me
Nothing but loss in their defeature: something
Must be done, and done suddenly, save your labour,
In this i'll use no counsel but mine own,
That course though dangerous is best. Command
Our daughter be in readiness, to attend vs:
Martell, your company, and honest Vitry,
Thou wilt along with me.
Yes any where,
To be worse then I am here, is past my fear.
You are here in a sanctuary; and that viper
(Who since he hath forgot to be a son,
I much disdain to think of as a brother)
Had better in despite of all the gods,
To have razed their Temples; and spurned down their altars,
Then in his impious abuse of you,
To have called on my just anger.
Princely son;
And in this worthy of a near name,
I have in the relation of my wrongs
Been modest, and no word my tongue delivered
T'expresse my insupportable injuries,
But gave my hart a wound: nor has my grief
Being from what I suffer; but that he
Degenerate as he is, should be the actor
Of my extremes; and force me to divide
The fires of brotherly affection,
Which should make but one flame.
That part of his
As it deserves shall burn no more, if or
The tears of Orphans, widows, or all such
As dare acknowledge him to be their Lord,
Joined to your wrongs, with his hart blood have power
To put it out: and you, and these your servants,
Who in our favours shall find cause to know
In that they left not you, how dear we hold them;
Shall give Theodoret to understand,
His ignorance of the prizelesse Jewel, which
He did possess in you, mother in you,
Of which I am more proud to bee the doner,
Then if the absolute rule of all the world
Were offered to this hand; once more you are well-come,
Which with all ceremony due to greatness
I would make known, but that our just revenge
Admits not of delay; your hand Lord General.
Your favour and his merit I may say
Have made him such, but I am jealous how
Your subjects will receive it.
How, my subjects?
What do you make of me? Oh heaven! my subjects!
How base should I esteem the name of Prince,
If that poor dust, were any thing before
The whirlwind of my absolute command?
Let them be happy, and rest so contented:
They pay the tribute of their harts and knees,
To such a Prince that not alone he has power,
To keep his own but to increase it; that
Although he hath a body may add to
The famed night labour of strong Hercules:
Yet is the moister of a continence
That so can temper it, that I forebear
Their daughters, and their wives, whose hands though strong,
As yet have never drawn by unjust mean
Their proper wealth into my treasury.
But I grow glorious, and let them beware
That in their least ripening at my pleasures,
They change not a mild Prince, (for if provoked
I dare and will be so) into a Tyrant.
You see there's hope that we shall rule again,
And your fallen fortunes rise.
I hope your Highness
Is pleased that I shall still hold my place with you,
For I have been so long used to provide you
Fresh bits of flesh since mine grew stale, that surely
If cashiered now, I shall prove a bad Cator
In the Fishmarket of cold chastity,
For me I am your own, nor since I first
Knew what it was to serve you, have remembered
I had a soul, but such a one whose essence
Depended wholly on your Highness pleasure,
And therefore Madam---
Rest assured you are,
Such instruments we must not lose.
Our service.
You have viewed them then, what's your opinion of em?
In this dull time of peace, we have prepared em
Apt for the war. Ha?
Sir, they have limbs
That promise strength sufficient, and rich armours
The soldiers best loved wealth: more, it appears
They have been drilled, nay very prettily drilled,
For many of them can discharge their muskets
Without the danger of throwing off their heads,
Or being offensive to the standers by,
By sweating too much backwards; nay I find
They know the right, and left hand file, and may
With some impulsion no doubt be brought
To pass the A, B, C, of war, and come
Unto the Horne-booke.
Well, that care is yours;
And see that you effect it.
I am slow
To promise much; but if within ten days,
By precepts and examples, not drawn from
Worm eaten presidents of the Roman wars,
But from mine own, I make them not transcend
All that ever yet bore arms, let it be said,
Protaldye brags, which would be unto me
As hateful as to be esteemed a coward:
For Sir, few Captains know the way to win him,
And make the soldiers valiant. You shall seem
Lie with them in their trenches, talk, and drink,
And be together drunk; and what seems stranger,
We'ele sometimes wench together, which once practiced
And with some other care and hidden acts,
They being all made mine, i'll breathe into them
Such fearless resolution and such fervor,
That though I brought them to besiege a fort,
Whose walls were steeple high, and cannon proof,
Not to be vndermind, they should fly up,
Like swallows, and the parapet once won;
For proof of their obedience, if I willed them
They should leap down again; and what is more,
By some directions they should have from me,
Not break their necks.
This is aboue belief.
Sir, on my knowledge though hee hath spoke much,
He's able to do more.
She means on her.
And howsoever in his thankfulness,
For some few favours done him by my self,
He left Austrachia, not Theoderet,
Though hee was chiefly aimde at, could have laid
With all his Dukedoms power, that shame upon him,
Which in his barbarous malice to my honour,
He swore with threats to effect.
I cannot but
Believe you Madam, thou art one degree
Grown nearer to my hart, and I am proud
To have in thee so glorious a plant
Transported hither; in thy conduct, we
Go on assured of conquest, our remove
Shall be with the next sun.
Amazement leave me, it is hee.
We are again undone.
Our guilt hath no assurance nor defence.
If now your ever ready witfaile to protect vs,
We shall be all discovered.
Be not so
In your amazement and your foolish fears,
I am prepared for it.
How? Not one poor welcome,
In answer of so long a journey made
Only to see your brother.
I have stood
Silent thus long, and am yet vnresolude
Whether to entertain thee on my sword,
As fits a parricide of a mothers honour;
Or whether being a Prince, I yet stand bound
(Though thou art here condemned) to give thee hearing
Before I execute. What foolish hope,
(Nay pray you forbear) or desperate madness rather,
(Unless thou come assured, I stand in debt
As far to all impiety as thy self)
Has made thee bring thy neck unto the axe?
Since looking only here, it cannot but
Draw fresh blood from thy seared up, conscience,
To make thee sensible of that horror, which
They ever bear about them, that like Narrow,
Like said I? thou are worse: since thou dare strive
In her defame to murder thine alive.
That she that long since had the boldness to
Be a bad woman, (though I wish some other
Should so report her) could not want the cunning,
(Since they go hand in hand) to lay fair colours
On her black crimes, I was resolude before,
Nor make I doubt but that she hath impoysonde
Your good opinion of me, and so far
Incensed your rage against me, that too late
I come to plead my innocence.
To excuse thy impious scandals rather.
Rather forced with fear to be compelde to come.
For bear.
This moves not me, and yet had I not been
Transported on my own integrity,
I neither am so odious to my subjects,
Nor yet so barren of defence, but that
By force I could have justified my guilt,
Had I been faulty: but since innocence
Is to it self an hundred thousand guards,
And that there is no son, but though he owe
That name to an ill mother, but stands bound
Rather to take away with his own danger
From the number of her faults, then for his own
Security, to add unto them. This,
This hath made me to prevent th'expence
Of blood on both sides, the injuries, the rapes,
(Pages, that ever waite upon the war:)
The account of all which, since you are the cause,
Believe it, would have been required from you;
Rather I say to offer up my daughter,
Who living only could revenge my death,
With my hart blood a sacrifice to your anger,
Then that you should draw on your head more curses
Then yet you have deserved.
I do begin
To feel an alteration in my nature,
And in his full sailed confidence, a shower
Of gentle rain, that falling on the fire
Of my hot rage hath quenched it, ha! I would
Once more speak roughly to him, and I will;
Yet there is something whispers to me, that
I have said too much. How is my heart divided
Between the duty of a son, and love
Due to a brother! yet I am swayed here,
And must ask of you, how tic possible
You can affect me that have learned to hate,
Where you should pay all love?
Which ioynde with duty,
Upon my knees I should be proud to tender,
Had she not used her self so many swords
To cut those bonds that tide me to it.
Fie, no more of that.
Alas it is a theme,
I take no pleasure to discourse of; would
It could asloone be buried to the world,
As it should die to me: nay more, I wish
(Next to my part of heaven) that she would spend
The last part of her life so here, that all
Indifferent Judges might condemn me, for
A most malicions slanderer: nay text it
Upon my forehead, if you hate me mother,
Put me to such a shame, pray you do, believe it
There is no glory that may fall upon me,
Can equal the delight I should receive
In that disgrace; provided the repeal
Of your long banished virtues, and good name,
Ushered me to it.
See, she shows her self
An easy mother, which her tears confirm.
Tic a good sign, the comfortablest rain
I ever saw.
Embrace: why this is well,
May never more but love in you, and duty
On your part rise between you.
Do you hear Lord General,
Does not your new stamped honour on the sudden
Begin to grow sick?
Yes I find it fit,
That putting off my armour, I should think of
Some honest hospital to retiro to.
Sure although I am a bawd, yet being a Lord
They cannot whip me for it, what's your opinion?
The beadle will resolve you, for I cannot,
There is something that more near concerns myself,
That calls upon me.
Note but yonder scarabs,
That lived upon the dung of her base pleasures,
How from the fear that she may yet prove honest,
Hang down their wicked heads.
What is that to me?
Though they and all the polecats of the Court,
Were trustde together, I perceive not how
It can advantage me a cardekue,
To help to keep me honest.
How, from whence?
These letters will resolve your grace.
What speak they? Reads:
How all things meet to make me this day happy?
See mother, brother, to your reconcilement
Another blessing almost equal to it,
Is coming towards me; my contracted wise,
Ordella daughter of wise Dataricke
The King of Are gone is on our confines;
Then to arrive at such a time, when you
Are happily here to honour with your presence
Our long deferde, but much wished nuptial,
Falls out aboue expression; heaven be pleased
That I may use these blessing poured on me
With moderation.
Hell and furies aid me,
That I may have power to avert the plagues
That pressed upon me.
Two days journey say thou,
We will set forth to meet her, in the mean time
See all things be prep??rde to entertain her:
Nay let me haud your companies, there's a Forest
In the midway shall yield vs hunting sport,
To ease our travail, ilenot have a brow
But shall we are mirth upon it, therefore clear them,
We'cle wash away all sorrow in glad feasts,
And the war we mean to men, we'ele make on beasts.
Oh that I had the Magic to transform you
Into the fhape of such, that your own hounds
Might tear you peece-meale; are you so stupid?
No word of comfort? Have I fed you mothers
From my excess of moisture, with such cost,
And can you yield no other retribution,
But to devour your maker, pander, sponge,
Impoysner, all grown barren?
You yourself
That are our mover, and for whom alone
We live, have failed your self in giving way
To the reconcilement of your sons.
Which if
You had prevented, or would teach vs how
They might again be severed, we could easily
Remove all other hindrances, that stop
The passage of your pleasures.
And for me,
If I fail in my office to provide you
Fresh delicates, hang me.
Oh you are dull, and find not
The cause of my vexation; their reconcilement
Is a mocke-castle built upon the sand
By children, which when I am pleased to o'rethrow,
I can with ease spurn down.
If so, from whence
Grows your affliction?
My grief comes along
With the new Queen, in whose grace all my power
Must suffer ship wrack: for me now,
That hitherto have kept the first, to know
A second place, or yield the least precedence
To any others, death; to have my sleeps
Less inquired after, or my rising up
Saluted with less reverence, or my gates
Empty of suitors; or the Kings great favours
To pass through any hand but mine, or hee
Himself to be directed by another,
Would be to me: do you understand me, yet
No means to prevent this.
Fame gives her out
To be a woman of a chastity
Not to be wrought upon, and therefore Madam
For me, though I have pleased you, to attempt her
Were to no purpose.
Tush, some other way.
Faith I know none else, allmy bringing up
Aimdeat no other learning.
Give me leave,
If my art fail me not, I have thought on
A speeding project.
What first? but effect it,
And thou shalt be my AEsculapius,
Thy image shall be set up in pure gold,
To which i'll fall down and worship it.
The Lady is fair.
Exceeding fair.
And young.
Some fifteen at the most.
And loves the King with equal ordor.
More, she dotes on him.
Well then, what think you if I make a drink
Which given unto him on the bridal night,
Shall for five days so rob his faculties
Of all ability to pay that duty,
Which new made wives expect, that she shall swear
She is not matched to a man.
'T were rare.
And then
If she have any part of woman in her,
She'll or fly out, or at least give occasion
Of such a breach which ????????? can be made up,
Since he that to all else did never fail
Of as much as could be performed by man,
Proves only ice to her.
It is excellent.
The Phystian
Helps ever at a dead lift; a fine calling,
That can bothraise, and take down, our upon thee.
For this one service I am ever thine,
Prepare it; isle give it him my self, for you Protaldye,
By this kiss, and our promised sport at night, (do conjure you) to bear up; not minding
The opposition of Theodoret,
Or any of his followers; what so ere
You are, yet appear valiant, and make good
The opinion that is had of you: for my self
In the new Queens remove, being made secure,
Fear not, isle make the future building sure.
This Stag stood well, and cunningly.
My horse
I am sure, has found it, for her sides are
Blooded from flank to shoulder, wheres the troop?
Past home-ward, weary and tired as we are,
Now Martell, have you remembered what we though of?
Yes Sir, I have snigled him, and if there be
Any desert in his blood, beside the itch,
Or manly hear, but what decoctions
Leaches, and callises have cramde into him,
Your Lordship thall know perfect.
VVhats that, may not I know too?
Yes Sir,
To that end we cast the project.
What first?
A desire Sir,
Upon the gilded flag your graces favour
Has stuck up for a General, and to inform you,
For this hour hee shall pass the test, what valour,
Stayed judgment, soul, or safe discretion
Your mothers wandering eyes, and your obedience
Have flung upon vs, to assure your knowledge,
He can bee, dare be, shall be, must be nothing,
Load him with piles of honours; set him off
With all the cunning foils that may deceive vs:
But a poor, cold, vnspirited, vnmannerde,
Dishonest, vnaffected, undone, fool,
And most unheard of coward, a mere lump
Made to load beds withal, and like a nightmare
Ride Ladies, that forget to say their prayers,
One that dares only be diseased, and in debt,
Whose body mews more plasters every month,
Then women do old faces.
No more, I know him,
I now repent my error, take your time
And try him home, ever thus far reserved,
You tie your anger up.
I lost it else Sir. violence,
Bring me his sword fair taken, without
For that will best declare him.
That's the thing.
And my best horse is thine.
Your graces servant.
You'll hune no more Sir,
Not to day, the weather
Is grown too warm, besides, the dogs are spent,
We'ele take a cooler morning, let's to horse,
And hollow in the troop.
I marry Twainer,
This woman gives indeed, these are the Angels
That are the keepers saints.
I like a woman
That handles the dears dowsets with discretion;
And pays vs by proportion:
Tic no treason
To think this good old Lady has a stump yet
That may require a currall.
And the bells too,
She has lost a friend of me else, but here's the clarke,
No more for fear ath bell ropes:
How now Keepers,
Saw you the King?
Yes Sir, he's newly mounted,
And as we take it ridden home.
Farewell then.
My honoured Lord, Fortune has made me happy
To meet with such a man of men to side me.
How Sir? I know ye not,
Nor what your fortune means.
Few words shall serve, I am betrayed Sir,
Innocent and honest; malice, and violence
Are both against me, basely and foully laid for;
For my life Sir, danger is now about me,
Now in my throat Sir.
Where Sir?
Nay I fear not,
And let it now power down in storms upon me,
I have met a noble guard:
Your meaning Sir,
For I have present business.
O my Lord,
Your honour cannot leave a gentleman
At least a fair design of this brave nature,
To which your worth is wedded, your profession
Hatched in, and made one piece, in such a peril,
There are but six my Lord.
What six?
Six villains sworn, and in pay to kill me.
Six?
Alas Sir, what can six do, or six score now you are present,
Your name will blow em off, say they have shot too,
Who dare present a piece? your valour's proof Sir.
No, i'll assure you Sir, nor my discretion
Against a multitude; it is true I dare fight,
Enough, and well enough, and long enough:
But wisdom Sir, and weight of what is on me,
In which I am no more mine own, nor yours Sir,
Nor as I take it, any single danger,
But what concerns my place, tells me directly,
Beside my person my fair reputation,
If I thrust into crowds, and seek occasions
Suffers opinion, six? Why Hercules
Avoided two man, yet not to give example:
But only for your present dangers sake Sir,
Were there but four Sir, I cared not if I killed um,
They will serve to set my sword.
There are but four Sir,
I did mistake um, but four such as Europe
Excepting your great valour.
Well considerde,
I Will not meddle with um, four in honour,
Are equal with fourscore, besides they are people
Only directed by their fury.
So much nobler shall be your way of Justice.
That I find not.
You will not leave me thus?
I would not leave you; but look you Sir,
Men of my place, and business, must not
Be questioned thus.
You cannot pass Sir,
Now they have seen me with you, without danger,
They are here Sir, within hearing, take but two.
Let the Law take um, take a tree Sir,
Isle take my horse, that you may keep with safety:
If they have brought no hand-sawes, within this hourc
Isle send you rescue, and a toil to take um.
You shall not go so poorly, stay but one Sir.
I have been so hamperde with these rescues,
So hewde and tortured, that the truth is Sir,
I have mainly vowed against um, yet for your sake,
If as you say there be but one, isle stay,
And see fair play a both sides.
There is no
More Sir, and as I doubt a base one two.
Fie on him, go lug him out by the ears.
Yes:
This is he Sir, the basest in the kingdom.
Do you know me?
Yes for a general fool,
A knave, a coward, and upstart stallion bawd,
Beast, barking puppy, that dares not bite.
The best man best knows patience.
Yes,
This way Sir, now draw you sword, and right you.
Or render it to me, for one you shall do.
If wearing it may do you any honour,
I shall be glad to grace you, there it is Sir.
Now get you home, and tel your Lady Mrs.
She has shot up a sweet mushrump, quit your place too,
And say you are counselde well, thou wilt be beaten else
By thine own lanceprisadoes; when they know thee,
That tunes of oil of roses will not cure thee;
Go get you to your foyning work at Court,
And learn to sweat again, and care dry mutton;
An armour like a frost will search your bones,
And make you roar you rogue; not a reply,
For if you do your cares go off.
Still patience.
It is your place, and though in all things else
You may and ever shall command me, yet
In this isle be obeyed.
Sir, the consent
That made me yours, shall never teach me to
Repent I am so, yet be you but pleased
To give me leave to say so much; the honour
You offer me were better given to her,
To whom you owe the power of giving.
Mother,
You hear this and rejoice in such a blessing
That pays to you so large a share of duty,
But fie no more, for as you hold a place
Nearer my heart then she, you must fit nearest
To all those graces, that are in the power
Of Majesty to bestow.
Which i'll provide,
Shall be short lived, Leisure.
I have it ready.
It is well, waite on our cup.
You honour me.
We are dull,
No object to provoke mirth.
Martell,
If you remember Sir, will grace your feast
With something that will yield matter of mirth,
Fit for no common view.
Touching Protaldye.
You have it.
What of him? I fear his basenosse aside
In spite of all the titles that my favours
Have clothed him, which will, make discovery
Of what is yet concealed.
Look Sir, he has it,
Nay wee shall have peace when so great a soldier
As the renoumde Protaldye, will give up
His sword rather then use it.
It was thy plot,
Which I will turn on thy own head. aside
Pray you speak,
How won you him to part from it?
Won him Sir,
He would have yielded it upon his knees
Before he would have hazarded the exchange
Of a phillip of the forehead: had you willde me,
I durst have undertook he should have sent you
His nose, provided that the loss of it
Might have saved the rest of his face; he is Sir
The most vnutterable coward, that ere nature
Blessed with hard shoulders, which were only given him,
To the ruin of bastinados.
Possible:
Observe but how shefrets.
Why belecue it:
But that I know the shame of this disgrace,
Will make the beast to live with such, and never
Presume to come more among men; i'll hazard
My life upon it, that a boy of twelve
Should scourge him hither like a parish top,
And make him dance before you.
Slave thou least,
Thou dare as well speak treason in the hearing
Of those that have the power to punish it.
As the least fillable of this before him,
But it is thy hate to me.
Nay, pray you Madam,
I have no ears too hear you, though a footo
To let you understand what he is.
Villain.
You are to violent.
The worst that can come
Is blanketing; for beating, and such virtues
I have been long acquainted with.
Oh strange!
Behold the man yon talk of.
Give me leave,
Or free thy self (think in what place you are)
From the foul imputation that is laid
Upon thy valour (be bold, i'll protect you)
Or here I vow (deny it or forswear it)
These honours which thou wear unworthily,
Which be but impudent enough and keep them,
Shall be torn from thee with thy eyes.
I have it,
My valour! is there any here beneath,
The stile of king, dares question it?
This is rare.
Which of my actions, which have still been noble,
Has tendered me suspected?
Nay Martell,
You must not fall off.
Oh Sir, fear it not,
Do you know this sword?
Yes.
Pray you on what terms
Did you part with it:
Part with if say you?
So.
Nay study not an answer, confess freely.
Oh I remember't now, at the flags falls,
As we to day were hunting, a poor fellow,
And now I view you better, I may say
Much of your pitch: this silly wretch spoke of,
With his petition falling at my feet,
(Which much against my will he kissed,) desired.
That as a special means for his preferment,
I would vouchsafe to let him use my sword,
To cut off the stags head.
Will you hear that?
This lie bears a similitude of truele,
I ever courteous, (a great weakness in me)
Granted his humble suite.
Oh impudence!
This change is excellent.
A word with you,
Deny it not, I was that man disguised,
You know my temper, and as you respect
A daily cudgelling for one whole year,
Without a second pulling by the ears,
Or tweakes by the nose, or the most precious balm
You used of patience, patience do you mark me,
Confess before these kings with what base fear
Thou did deliver it.
Oh! I shall burst,
And if I have not instant liberty
To tear this fellow limb by limb, the wrong
Will break my hart, although Herculean,
And somewhat bigger; there's my gage, pray you here
Let me redeem my credit.
Ha, ha, forbear.
Pray you let me take it up, and if I do not
Against all odds of armour and of weapons,
With this make him confess it on his knees,
Cut off my hcad.
No, that is my office.
Fie, you take the hangmans place.
Nay good my Lord
Let me atone this difference, do not suffer
Our bridal night to be the Centaurs feast,
You are a Knight and bound by oath to grant
All just suits unto Ladies; for my sake
Forget your supposed wrong.
Well, let him thank yon,
For your sake he shall live, perhaps a day,
And may be, on submission longer,
Nay, Martell, you must bee patient.
I am yours,
And this slave shall be once more mine.
Sit all;
One health, and so to bed, for I too long
Defer my choifest delicates.
Which if poison
Have any power, thou shalt like Tantalus
Behold and never taste; be careful.
Fear not.
Though it be rare in our sex, yet for once
I will begin a health.
Let it come freely.
Leisure, the cup; here to the son we hope
This night shall be an Embrion.
You have named
A blessing that I most desired, I pledge you,
Give me a larger cup, that is too little
Unto so great a god.
Nay, then you wrong me,
Follow as I began.
Well as you please.
First done?
Unto your wish, I warrant you,
For this night I durst trust him with my mother.
So, it is gone round, lights.
Pray you use my service.
It is that which I shall ever owe you Madam,
And must have none from you, pray you pardon me.
Good rest to all.
And to you pleasant labour:
Martell your company, Madam good night.
Nay you have cause to blush, but I will hide it,
And what's more I forgive you; first not pity
That thou that art the first to enter combat
With any woman, and what is more, overcome her,
(In which she is best pleased,) should be so fearful
To mere a man.
Why would you have me lose
That blood that is dedicated to your service,
In any other quarrel?
No, reserve it
As I will study to preserve thy credit,
You sirha; be it your care to find out one
That is poor though valiant, that at any rate
Will, to redeem my servants reputation,
Receive a public baffling.
Would your highness
Were pleased to inform me better of your purpose:
Why one Sir, that would thus be boxde,
Or kicked; do you apprehend me now?
I feel you Madam,
The man that shall receive this from my Lord,
Shall have a thousand crowns.
Hee shall.
besides
His day of bastinadoing past ore,
He shall not lose your grace, nor your good favour.
That shall make way to it.
It must be a man
Of credit in the Court, that is to be
The foil unto your valour.
True, it should.
And if he have place there, it is not the worse:
It is much the better.
If he be a Lord,
Twill be the greater grace.
Thou art in the right.
Why then behold that valiant man and Lord,
That for your sake will take a cudgelling,
For be assured when it is spread abroad
That you have dealt with me, the'ile give you out
For one of the nine Worthies.
Our you pander,
Why to beat thee is only exercise
For such as do affect it, lose not time
In vain replies, but do it: come my solace,
Let vs to bed, and our desires once quenched,
We'ele there determine of Theodorets death,
For he's the engine used to ruin vs:
Yet one worko more, Leisure, art thou assured
The potion will work?
My life upon it.
Come my Protaldye, then glut me with
Those best delights of man, that are denied
To her that does expect them, being a bride.
Sure I have drunk the blood of Elephants,
The tears of mandrake and the marble dew,
Mixed in my draught, have quenched my natural heate,
And left no spark of fire but in mine eyes,
With which I may behold my miseries:
Ye wretched flames which play upon my sight,
Turn inward, make me all one piece, though earth;
My tears shall overwhelm you else too.
What moves my Lord to this strange sadness?
If any late discerned want in me,
Give cause to your repentance, care and duty
Shall find a painful way to recompense.
Are you yet frozen veins, feel you a breath,
Whose temperate heate would make the North star reel,
Her icy pillars thawed, and do you not melt?
Draw nearer, yet nearer,
That from thy barren kiss thou moist confess
I have not heate enough to make a blush.
Speak nearer to my understanding, like a husband.
How should he speak the language of a husband,
Who wants the tongue and organs of his voice?
It is a phrase will part with the same ease
From you with that you now deliver.
Bind not his cares up with so dull a charm,
Who hath no other sense left open; why should thy words
Find more restraint then thy free speaking actions,
Thy close embraces and thy mid-night sighs,
The silent orators to slow desire?
Strive not to win content from ignorance
Which must be lost in knowledge: heaven can witness
My farthest hope of good reached at your pleasure,
Which seeing alone may in your look be read:
Add not a doubtful comment to a text
That in it selfe's direct and easy.
Oh thou hast drunk the juice of hemlock too,
Or did upbraided nature make this pair
To show she had not quite forgot her first
Justly praised workmanship, the first chaste couple
Before the want of joy, taught guilty sight
A way through shame and sorrow to delight:
Say, may we mix as in their innocence
When turtles kissed, to confirm happiness,
Not to beget it?
I know no bar.
Should I believe thee, yet thy pulse beats woman;
And says the name of wife did promise thee
The blessed reward of duty to thy mother,
Who gave so often witness of her joy,
When she did boast thy likeness to her husband.
It is true, that to bring forth a second to your self,
Was only worthy of my Virgin losle;
And should I prize you less vnpatternde Sir,
Then being, exemplified, first not more honour
To be possessor of vnequalde virtue,
Then what is paralleled? give me belief,
The name of mother knows no way of good,
More then the end in me: who weds for lust
Is oft a widow; when I married you,
I lost the name of maid to gain a title
Aboue the wish of change, which that part can
Only maintain, is still the same in man,
His virtue and his calm society,
Which no gray hairs can threaten to dissolve,
Nor wrinkles bury.
Confine thy self to silence, lest thou take
That part of reason from me is only left
To give persuasion to me, I am a man:
Or say thou hast never seen the rivers haste
With glad-some speed to meet the amorous sea.
We are but to praise the coolness of their streams.
Nor viewed the kids taught by their lustful sires,
Pursue each other through the wanton lawns,
And liked the sport.
As it made way unto their envied rest,
With weary knots binding their harmless eyes.
Nor do you know the reason why the dove,
One of the pair your hands wont hourly feed,
So often clipped and kissed her happy mate.
Unless it were to welcome his wished sight,
Whose absence only gave her mourning voice.
And you could douelike to a single object
Bind your loose spirits to one, nay such a one
Whom only eyes and ears must flatter good,
Your surer sense made useless, my self, nay
As in my all of good already known.
Let proof plead for me, let me be mewed up
Where never eye may reach me but your own;
And when I shall repent, but in my looks, if sigh,
Or shed a tear that's warm.
But in your sadness.
Or when you hear the birds call for their mates,
Ask if it be St. Valentine, their coopling day.
If any thing may make a though suspected,
Of knowing any happiness but you,
Divorce me by the title of most falsehood.
Oh who would know a wife, that might have such a friend?
Posterity henceforth lose the name of blessing,
And leave the earth inhabited to people heaven.
All happiness to Thierry, and Ordella.
It is a desire but borrowde from me, my happiness
Shall be the period of all good men's wishes,
Which friends, nay dying fathers shall be queath,
And in my one give all: is there a duty
Belongs to any power of mine, or love
To any virtue I have right to? here, place it here,
Ordellas name shall only bear command,
Rule, title, sovereignty.
What passion sways my son?
O mother, she has doubled every good
The travail of your blood made possible
To my glad being.
He should have done
Little to her, he is so light hearted.
Brother, friends, if honour unto shame,
If wealth to want in large the present sense,
My joys are unbounded, instead of question
Let it be envy, not bring a present
To the high offering of our mirth, banquets, and masks;
Keep waking our delights, mocking nights malice,
Whose dark brow would fright pleasure from vs,
Our court be but one stage of Revels, and each eye
The scene where our content moves.
There shall want
Nothing to express our shares in your delight Sir.
Till now I ne'er repented the estate
Of widower.
Musique, why art thou so slow voycte? it stays thy presence
My Ordella, this chamber is a sphere
Too narrow for thy al-mouing virtue.
Make way, free way I say;
Who must alone, her sexes want supply,
Had need to have a room both large and high.
This passion's aboue utterance.
Nay credulity.
Why son what mean you, are you a man?
No mother I am no man, were I a man,
How could I be thus happy?
How can a wife be author of this joy then?
That being no man, I am married to no woman;
The best of men in full ability,
Can only hope to satisfy a wife,
And for that hope ridiculous, I in my want
And such defective poverty, that to her bed
From my first cradell brought no strength but thought,
Have met a temperance beyond hers that rocked me,
Necessity being her bar; where this
Is so much senseless of my deprived fire,
She knows it not a loss by her desire.
It is beyond my admiration.
Beyond your sexes faith,
The unripe virgins of our age to hear't
Will dream themselves to women, and convert
The example to a miracle.
Alas it is your defect moves my amazement,
But what ill can be separate from ambition?
Cruel Theodoret.
What of my brother?
That to his name your barrenness adds rule;
Who loving the effect, would not be strange
In favouring the cause; look on the profit,
And gain will quickly point the mischief out.
The name of father to what I possess
Is shame and care.
Were we begot to single happiness
I grant you; but from such a wise, such virtue
To get an heir, what Hermit would not find
Deserving argument to break his vow
Even in his age of chastity?
You teach a deaf man language.
The cause found out, the malady may cease,
Have you heard of one Forts?
A learned Astronomer, great Magician,
Who lives hard-by retired.
Repair to him, with the just hour and place
Of your nativity; fools are amazed at fate,
Griefs but concealed are never desperate.
You have timely wakende me, nor shall I sleep
Without the satisfaction of his art.
Wisdom prepares you to it, Leisure, met happily.
The ground answers your purpose, the conveyance
Being secure and easy, falling just
Behind the state set for Theodoret.
It is well, your trust invites you to a second charge,
You know Lefortes cell.
Who constellated your fair birth.
Enough, I see thou know him, whore's Bawdber?
I left him careful of the project cast,
To raise Protaldies credit.
A sore that must be plasterde, in whose wound
Others shall find their graves, think themselves sound,
Your care, and quickest apprehension.
This man of war will advance.
His hours upon the stroke.
Wind him back as you favour my ears,
I love no noise in my head, my brains have hitherto
Bin employed in silent businesses.
The gentleman is within your reach Sir.
Give ground whilst I drill my wits to the encounter,
Deuitry. I take it.
All that's left of him.
Is there another parcel of you, if it be at pawn
I will gladly redeem it to make you wholly mine.
You seek too hard a penywoth.
You to ill to keep such distance, your parts have bin long known
To me, howsoever you please to forget acquaintance.
I must confess I have bin subject to lewd company.
Thanks for your good remembrance,
You have bin a soldier Deuitry, and borne arms.
A couple of unprofitable ones, that have only served to get me a stomach to my dinner.
Much good may it do you Sir.
You should have heard me say I had dined first, I have built on an unwholesome ground, raised up a house before I knew a Tenant, matched to meet weariness, fought to find want and hunger.
It is time you put up your sword, and run a way for meat sir, nay if I had not withdrawn ere now, I might have kept the; fast with you: but since the way to thrive is never late, what is the nearest course to profit think you?
It may be your worship will say bawdry.
True sense, bawdry.
Why is their five kinds of em, I never knew but one.
Isle show you a new way of prostitution, fall back, further yet, further, there is fifty crowns, do but as much to Protaldye the Queens favourite, they are doubled.
But thus much.
Give him but an affront as he comes to the presence, and in his drawing make way like a true bawd to his valour, the son's thy own; if you take a scratch in the arm or so, every drop of blood weighs down a ducats.
After that rate, I and my friends would beggar the kingdom. Sir you have made me blush to see my want, whose cure is such a cheap and easy purchase, this is male bawdery belike.
See, you shall not belong earning your wages, your worke's before your eyes.
Leave it to my handling, isle fall upon it instantly:
What opinion will the managing of this affair
Bring to my wisdom? my invention tickles
With apprehension on it:
These are the joys of marriage Lady,
Whose sights are able to dissolve virginity.
Speak freely, do you not envy the brides felicity?
How should I, being partner of't?
What you enjoy is but the banquets view,
The taste stands from your palate; if he impart
By day so much of his content, think what night gave?
Will you have a relish of wit Lady?
This is the man.
If it be not dear Sir.
If you affect cheapens, how can you prize this sullied ware so much? mine is fresh, my own, not retailde.
You are saucy sir.
The fitter to be in the dish with such dry stockfish as you
Are, how strike?
Remember the condition as you look for payment.
That box was left out of the bargain.
Help, help, help.
Plague of the scruiners running hand,
What a blow is this to my reputation?
What villain dares this outrage?
Here me Sir, this creature hired me with fifty crowns in hand, to let Protaldye have the better of me at single rapier on a made quarrel; he mistaking the weapon, lays me over the chops with his clubfist, for which I was bold to teach him the art of memory.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Your General, mother, will display himself
Spite of our peace I see.
Forbear these civil jars, fie Protaldye,
So open in your proiects, avoid our presence sir.
Willingly, if you have any more wages to earn,
You see I can take pains.
There's somewhat for thy labour, more then was promised, ha, ha, ha:
Where could I wish my self now? in the Isle of dogs,
So I might scope scratching, for I see by her cats eyes
I shall be clawed fearfully.
Weal hear no more on it, musique drown al sadness; soft
Command the Revellers in, at what a rate I do purchase musique
My mothers absence, to give my spleen full liberty.
Speak not a thoughrs delay, it names thy ruin.
I had thought my life had borne more value with you.
Thy loss carries mine with it, let that secure thee,
The vault is ready, and the door conuyes too't,
Falls just behind his chair, the blow once given,
Thou art unseen.
I cannot feel more then I fear, ime sure. withdraws:
Be gone, and let them laugh their own destruction.
You will add unto her rage.
Foot I shall burst unless I vent my self, ha, ha, ha.
Me Sir, you never could
Have found a time to inuit more willingness,
In my dispose to pleasure.
Would you would please to make some other choice
It is a disgrace would dwell upon me Lady.
Should you refuse.
Your reason conquers; my grandmothers looks
Have turned all ayre to earth in me, they sit
Upon my heart like night charms, black and heavy. The Dance.
You are too much libertine.
The fortune of the fool petswades my laughter
More then his cowardice; was ever ratte
Tan by the tail thus? ha, ha, ha.
Forbear I say.
No eye looks this way, I will wink and Strike,
Behind the state stabe Theodoret.
Lest I betray my self.
Ha, did you not see one near me?
How near you, why do you look so pale brother?
Treason, treason.
Oh my presage! Father.
Brother.
Prince, noble Prince.
Make the gates sure, search into every angle
And corner of the court; oh my shame! mother,
Your son is slain, Theodoret, noble Theodoret,
Here in my arms, too weak a sanctuary
Against treachery and murder, say is the traitor taken.
No man has past the chamber on my life Sir.
Set present fire unto the place, that all unseen
May perish in this mischief who moves slow to it,
Shall add unto the flame.
What mean you? give me your private hearing.
Persuasion is a partner in the crime,
I will renounce my claim unto a mother,
If you make offer on it.
Ere a torch can take flame, I will produce
The author of the fact.
Withdraw but for your ilghts.
Oh my too true suspicion?
Martell, Memberge.
Speak, whore's the engine to this horrid act?
Here, you do behold her, upon whom make good
Your causeless rage; the deed was done by my incitement,
Not yet repented.
Whither did nature start, when you conceived
A birth so unlike woman? say, what part
Did not consent to make a son of him,
Reserved it self within you to his ruin.
Ha, ha, a son of mine! do not dissever
Thy fathers dust, shaking his quiet urn,
To which thy breath would send so soul an issue,
My son, thy brother?
Was not Theodoret my brother, or is thy tongue
Confederate with thy hart, to speak and do
Only things monstrous?
Hear me, and thou shalt make thine own belief,
Thy still with sorrow mentionde, father lived
Three careful years in hope of wished heirs,
When I conceived, being from his jealous fear
Enioynde to quiet home, one fatal day:
Transported with my pleasure to the chase,
I forced command, and in pursuit of game
Fell from my horse, lost both my child and hopes.
Despair which only in his love saw life
Worthy of being, from a gardeners arms
Snatched this vn'ucky brat, and called it mine,
When the next year repaid my loss with thee:
But in thy wrongs preserved my misery,
Which that I might diminish though not end,
My sighs and wet eyes, from thy fathers will,
Bequeath this largest part of his dominions
Of France unto thee, and only left
Austracia unto that changeling, whose life affords
Too much of ill against me to prove my words
And call him stranger.
Come, do not weep, I must, nay, do believe you,
And in my fathers satisfaction count it
Merit, not wrong, or loss:
You do but flatter, there's anger yet flames
In your eyes.
See, I will quench it, and confess that you
Have suffered double travail for me.
You will not fire the house then?
Rather reward the author, who gave cause
Of knowing such a secret, my oath and duty
Shall be assurance on it.
Protaldye, rise good faithful servant, heaven knows
How hardly he was drawn to this attempt.
Protaldye? he had a gardeners fate i'll swear
Fell by thy hand, Sir, we do owe unto you for this service.
Why look thou so dejected?
I want a little shift Lady, nothing else.
The fires are ready, please it your grace withdraw,
Whilst we perform your pleasure.
Reserve them for the body; since he had the fate
To live and die a Prince, he shall not lose
The title in his funeral.
His fate to live a Prince,
Thou old impiety, made up by lust and mischief,
Take up the body.
Doest think Lefortes sure enough?
As bonds can make him, I have turned his eyes to the east; and left him gaping after the morning star, his head is a mere Astrolobe, his eyes stand for the poles, the gag in his mouth being the coachman, his five teeth have the nearest re???semblance to Charles Wane.
Thou hast cast a figure which shall raise thee, direct my hair a little; and in my likeness to him read a fortune suiting thy largest hopes.
You are so far Above likeness you are the same,
If you love mirth, persuade him from himself,
It is but an Astronomer out of the way,
And lying will bear the better place for it.
I have profitabler use in hand, hast to the Queen,
And tell her how you left me changed.
Who would not serve this virtuous active Queen?
She that loves mischief above the man that does it,
And him aboue her pleasure, yet knows no heaven else:
How well this loanes suits the art I seek,
Discoueting secret and succeeding fate,
Knowledge that puts all lower happiness on,
With a remiss and careless hand,
Fair peace unto your meditations father.
The same to you, you bring Sir.
Drawn by your much famed skill, I come to know
Whether the man who owes this character,
Shall ere have issue.
A resolution falling with most ease
Of any doubt you could have named, he is a Prince
Whose fortune you enquire.
He is nobly borne.
He had a dukedom lately fallen unto him
By one called brother, who has left a daughter.
The question is ofheires, not lands.
Heirs, yes he shall have heirs.
Begotten of his body, why look thou pale?
Thou can not suffer in his want.
Nor thou, I neither can nor will
Give farther knowledge to thee.
Thou must, I am the man my self,
Thy sovereign, who must owe unto thy wisdom
In the concealing of my barren shame.
Your grace doth wrong your stars; if this be yours,
You may have children.
Speak it again.
You may have fruitful issue.
By whom? when? how?
It was the fatal means first struck my blood
With the cold hand of wonder, when I read it,
Printed upon your birth.
Can there be any way vnsmooth, has end
So fair and good?
We that behold the sad aspects of heaven,
Leading sense blinded, men feel griese enough
To know, though not to speak their miseries.
Sorrow must lose a name, where mine finds life,
If not in thee, at least ease pain with speed,
Which must know no cure else.
Then thus,
The first of femalls which your eye shall meet
Before the sun next rise, coming from out
The Temple of Diana, being slain, you live
Father of many sons.
Call thou this sadness, can I beget a son
Deserving less then to gin recompense
Unto so poor a loss? what ear thou art,
Rest peaceable blessed creature, borne to be
Mother of Princes, whose grave shall be more fruitful
Then others marriage bends: me thinks his art
Should give her form and happy figure to me,
I long to see my happiness; he is gone,
As I remember he named my brothers daughter,
Were it my mother, 't were a gainful death
Could give Ordellas virtue living breath.
Your grace is early stirring.
How can he sleep,
Whose happiness is laid up in an hour.
Hee knows comes stealing toward him, o Martell!
I'st possible the longing bride, whose wishes
Outruns her fears, can on that day she is married
Consume in slumbers, or his arms rust in ease,
That hears the charge, and sees the honoured purchase
Ready to gild his valour? Mine is more
A power aboue these passions; this day France,
France that in want of issue withers with vs;
And like an aged river runs his head
Into forgotten ways, again I ransom,
And his fair course turn right: this day, Thierry,
The son of France, whose manly powers like prisoners
Have bin tied up, and fettered, by one death
Give life to thousand ages; this day beauty
The envy of the world, pleasure the glory,
Content aboue the world, desire beyond it
Are made mine own and useful.
Happy woman
That dies to do these things.
But ten times happier
That lives to do the greater; o Martell,
The gods have hard me now, and those that scorned me
Mothers of many children, and biest fathers
That see their issues like the stars vnnumber'd,
Their comfort more then them, shall in my praises
Now teach their infants songs; and tell their ages
From such a son of mine, or such a queen,
That chaste Ordella brings me blessed marriage,
The chain that links two holy loves together,
And in thee marriage, more then blessed Ordella,
That comes so ne'er the sacrament it self,
The Priests doubt whether purer.
Sir, year'lost.
I prithee let me be so,
The day wears;
And those that have bin offering early prayers,
Are now retiring homeward.
Stand and mark then,
Is it the first must suffer.
The first woman.
What hand shall do it Sir?
This hand Martell,
For who less dare presume to give the gods
An incense of this offering?
Would I were she,
For such a way to die, and such a blessing
Can never crown my parting.
What are those?
Men, men Sir, men.
The plagues of men light on um,
They cross my hopes like hares, who's that?
a Priest Sir.
Would he were gilt:
May not these rascals serve Sir,
Well hanged and quartered?
No.
Here comes a woman:
Stand and behold her then.
I think a fair one.
Move not whilst I prepare her: may her peace
Like his whose innocence the gods are pleased with,
And offering at their altars, gives his soul
Far purer then those fires; pull heaven upon her,
You holy powers, no humane spot dwell in her,
No love of any thing but you and goodness,
Tie her to earth, fear be a stranger to her,
And all weak bloods affections, but thy hope
Let her bequeath to women: hear me heaven,
Give her a spirit masculine, and noble,
Fit for your selfes to ask, and me to offer.
O let her meet my blow, dote on her death;
And as a wanton yen bows to the pruner,
That by his cutting off more may increase,
So let her fall to raise me fruit; hail woman,
The happiest, and the best (if thy dull will
Do not abuse thy fortune) France ere found yet.
She is more then dull Sir, less and worse then woman,
That may inherit such an infinite
As you propound, a greatness so near goodness;
And brings a will to rob her.
Tell me this then,
Was there ere woman yet, or may be found,
That for fair fame, unspotted memory,
For virtues sake, and only for it self sake
Has, or dare make a story?
Many dead Sir,
Living I think as many:
Say, the kingdom
May from a women's will receive a blessing,
The king and kingdom, not a private safety.
A general blessing Lady.
A general curse
Light on her hart denies it.
Full of honour;
And such examples as the former ages
Were but dim shadows of, and empty figures:
You strangely stir me Sir, and were my weakness
In any other flesh but modest women's,
You should not ask more questions, may I do it?
You may, and which is more, you must.
I joy in it,
Aboue a moderate gladness, Sir, you promise
It shall be honest.
As ever time discovered.
Let it be what it may then, what it dare,
I have a mind will hazarde'it.
But hark ye,
What may that woman merit, makes this blessing?
Only her duty Sir.
It is terrible.
It is so much the more noble.
It is full of fearful shadows.
So is sleep Sir,
Or anything that's merely ours and mortal,
We were begotten gods else; but those fears
Feeling but once the fires of nobler thoughts,
Fly like the shapes of clouds we form to nothing.
Suppose it death.
I do.
And endless parting
With all we can call ours, with all our sweetness,
With youth, strength, pleasure, people, time, nay reason:
For in the silent grave, no conversation,
No joyful tread of friends, no voice of lovers,
No careful fathers counsel, nothing's hard,
Nor nothing is, but all oblivion,
Dust, and an endless darkness; and dare you woman
Desire this place?
It is of all sleeps the sweetest,
Children begin it to vs, strong men seek it,
And kings from height of all their painted glories
Fall, like spent exhalations, to this center;
And those are fools that fear it, or imagine
A few unhandsome pleasures, or lifes profits
Can recompense this place; and mad that stays it,
Till age blow out their lights, or rotten humours,
Bring um despers'd to the earth.
Then you can suffer.
As willingly as say it.
Martell, a wonder,
Here is a woman that dares die, yet tel me,
Are you a wife?
I am Sir.
And have children,---
She sighs, and weeps.
O none Sir.
Dare you venture,
For a poor barren praise you ne'er shall hear,
To part with these sweet hopes?
With all but heaven;
And yet die full of children; he that reads me
When I am ashes, is my son in wishes,
And those chaste dames that keep my memory,
Singing my yearly requiems, are my daughters.
Then there is nothing wanting but my knowledge;
And what I must do Lady.
You are the king Sir,
And what you do i'll suffer, and that blessing
That you desire the gods shower on the kingdom.
Thus much before I strike then, for I must kill you,
The gods have willed it so; they are made the blessing
Must make France young again, and me a man,
Keep up your strength still nobly.
Fear me not.
And meet death like a measure:
I am steadfast.
Thou shalt be sainted woman, and thy tomb
Cut out in Crystal, pure and good as thou art;
And on it shall be graven every age,
Succeeding peers of France that rise by thy fall,
Tell thou least there like old and fruitful nature.
Dare thou behold thy happiness?
I Dare Sir.
Ha? Pulls off her voice, lets fall his sword.
O Sir, you must not do it.
No, I dare not,
There is an Angel keeps that paradise,
A fiery angel friend; o virtue, virtue,
Ever and endless virtue.
Strike Sir, strike;
And if in my poor death fair France may merit,
Give me a thousand blows, be killing me
A thousand days.
First let the earth be barren,
And man no more remembered; rise Ordella,
The nearest to thy maker, and the purest
That ever dull flesh showed vs, ----- o my hart-strings.
I see you full of wonder, therefore noblest
And truest amongst women, I will tell you
The end of this strange accident.
Amazement
Has so much woven upon my hart, that truly
I feel my self unfit to hear, o Sir,
My Lord has slighted me.
O no sweet Lady.
Robbed me of such a glory by his pity
And most unprovident respect.
Dear Lady,
It was not meant to you.
Else where the day is,
And hours distinguish time, time runs to ages,
And ages end the world, I had bin spoken.
I'll tell you what it was, if but your patience
Will give me hearing.
If I have transgressed,
Forgive me Sir.
Your noble Lord was counselled,
Grieving the barrenness between you both,
And all the kingdom with him, to seek out
A man that knew the secrets of the gods,
He went, found such a one, and had this answer,
That if he wooed have issue, on this morning
For this hour was prefixed him, he should kill
The first he met being female, from the Temple;
And then he should have children, the mistake
Is now to perfect Lady.
Still it is I Sir,
For may this work be done by common women,
Durst any but my self that knew the blessing,
And felt the benefit, assume this dying,
In any other, t'ad bin lost, and nothing,
A curse, and not a blessing; I was figured;
And shall a little fondness bar my purchase?
Where should he then seek children?
Where they are
In wombs ordained for issues, in those beauties
That bless a marriage bed, and makes it proceed
With kisses that conceive, and fruitful pleasures;
Mine like a grave, buries those loyal hopes,
And to a grave it covets.
You are too good,
Too excellent, too honest; rob not vs
And those that shall hereafter seek example,
Of such inestimable worthies in woman,
Your Lord of such obedience, all of honour
In coveting a cruelty is not yours,
A will short of your wisdom; make not error
A tombestone of your virtues, whose fair life
Deserves a constellation: your Lord dare not,
He cannot, ought not, must not run this hazard,
He makes a separation nature shakes at,
The gods deny, and everlasting justice
Shrinks back and sheathes her sword at.
Ell's but talk Sir,
I find to what I am reserved, and needful,
And though my Lords compassion makes me poor
And leaves me in my best use, yet a strength
Aboue mine own, or his dull fondness finds me,
The gods have given it to me. draws a knife.
Self destruction,
Now all good angels bless thee, o sweet Lady
You are abused, this is a way to shame you,
And with you al that knows you, al that loves you,
To ruin all you build, would you be famous,
Is that your end?
I would be what I should be.
Live, and confirm the gods then, live and be laden
With more then olives bear, or fruitful Autum;
This way you kill your merit, kill your cause,
And him you would raise life to; where, or how
Got you these bloody thonghts? what devil durst
Look on that Angel face, and tempt? do you know
What'tis to die thus, how you strike the stars,
And all good things aboue? do you feel
What follows a self blood, whither you venture,
And to what punishment? excellent Lady,
Be not thus cozened, do not fool your self,
The priest was never his own sacrifice,
But he that thought his hell here.
I am counselled.
And I am glad on it, lie I know you dare not.
I never have done yet.
Pray take my comsort,
Was this a soul to lose? two more such women
Would save their sex; see, she repents and prays,
O hear her, hear her, if there be a faith
Able to reach your mercies, she hath sent it.
Now good Martell confirm me.
I will Lady,
And every hour advise you, for I doubt
Whether this plot be heavens, or hells; your mother
And I will find it, if it be in mankind
To search the center of it: in the mean time
I'll give you out for dead, and by your self,
And show the instrument, so shall I find
A joy that will betray her.
Do what's finest;
And I will follow you.
Then ever live
Both able to in gross all love, and give.
I am in labour
To be delivered of that burdenous project
Thaue so iong gone with; ha? here's the mid-wife,
Or life, or death:
If in the supposition
Of her death in whose life you die, you ask me,
I think you are safe.
Is she dead?
I have used
All means to make her so, I saw him waiting
At the Temple door, and used such art within,
That only she of all her sex, was first
Given up unto his fury.
Which if love
Or fear made him forbear to execute
The vengeance he determinde, his fond pity,
Shall draw it on himself: for were there left
Not any man but he to serve my pleasures,
Or from me to receive commands, which are
The joys for which I love life; he should be
Remote, and I alone left to be Queen
O'er any part of goodness that's left in me.
If you are so resolude, I have provided
A means to ship him hence: look upon this,
But touch it sparingly, for this once used,
Say but to dry a tear, will keep the eyelidde
From closing, until death perform that office.
Giue't me, I may have use of't, and on you
I'll make the first experiment: if one sigh
Or heavy look beget the least suspicion,
Childish compassion can thaw the ice
Of your so long congealde and flinty hardness.
Slight, go on constant, or I shall.
Best Lady,
We have no faculties which are not yours.
Nor will be anything without you.
Be so,
And we will stand or fall together, for
Since we have gone so far, that death must stay
The journey which we wish should never end,
And innocent, or guilty we must die,
When we do so, let's know the reason why?
The King.
We will be alone.
I would I had
A convoy too, to bring me safe off,
For rage although it be allaide with sorrow,
Appears so dreadful in him, that I shake
To look upon it.
Coward, I will meet it
And know from whence it is b??????t: son, kingly Thierry.
Is cheating grown so common among men,
And thrives so well here, that the gods endeavour
To practice it aboue!
Your mother.
Ha! or are they only careful to revenge,
Not to reward? or when for your offences
We study satisfaction, must the cure
Be worse then the disease?
Will you not hear me?
To lose th'ability to perform those duties
For which I entertained the name of husband,
Asked more then common sorrow; but t'impose
For the redress of that defect, a torture
In marking her to death, for whom alone
I felt that weakness as a want, requires
More then the making the head bald? or falling
Thus flat upon the earth, or cursing that way,
Or praying this, oh such a scene of grief,
And so set down, (the world the stage to act on)
May challenge a Tragedian better practiced
Then I am to express it; for my cause
Of passion is so strong, and my performance
So weak, that though the part be good, I fear
The isle acting of it, will defraud it of
The poor reward it may deserve, men's pity.
I have given you way thus long, a King, and what
Is more, my son, and yet a slave to that
Which only triumphs over cowards sorrow
For shame look up.
I'st you, look down on me;
And if that you are capable to receive it,
Let that return to you, that have brought forth
One marked out only for it: what are these?
Come they upon your privilege, to tread on
The tomb of my afflictions?
No not we Sir.
How dare you then omit the ceremony
Due to the funeral of all my hopes,
Or come unto the marriage of my sorrows,
But in such colours as may sort with them?
Alas, we will wear any thing.
This is madnesle,
Take but my counsel.
Yours? dare you again
Though armed with the authority of a mother,
Attempt the danger, that will fall on you
If such another syllable awake it?
Go, and with yours be safe, I have such cause
Of grief, nay more, to love it, that I will not
Hane such as these be sharers in it.
Madam.
Another time were better.
Doe not stir,
For I must be resolude and will, be statues.
I, thou art welcome, and upon my soul
Thou art an honest man; do you see, he has tears
To lend to him whom prodigal expense
Of sorrow has made banker out of such treasure,
Nay thou doest well.
I would it might excuse
The ill I bring along.
Thou make me smile
In the height of my calamities, as if
There could be the addition of an Atom
To the giant body of my miseries.
But try, for I will hear thee; all sit down, it is death
To any that shall dare to interrupt him
Inlooke, gesture, or word.
And such attention
As is due to the last, and the best story
That ever was delivered, will become you.
The grieude Ordella, (for all other titles
But take away from that) having from me
Prompted by your last parting groan, enquired
What drew it from you, and the cause soon learned:
For she whom barbarism could deny nothing,
With such prevailing earnestness desired it,
It was not in me though it had bin my death,
To hide it from her; she I say, in whom
All was, that Athens, Rome, or warlike Sparta,
Have registered for good in their best women:
But nothing of their ill, knowing herself
Marked out (I know not by what power, but sure
A cruel one) to die, to give you children;
Having first with a settled countenance
Looked up to heaven, and then upon her self
(It being the next best object) and then smiled,
As if her joy in death to do you service,
Would break forth in despite of the much sorrow
She shout she had to leave you: and then taking
Me by the hand, this hand which I must ever
Love better then I have done, since she touched it,
Go, said she, to my Lord, (and to go to him
Is such a happiness I must not hope for,)
And tell him that he too much prized a trifle
Made only worthy in his love, and her
Thankful acceptance, for her sake to rob
The Orphan kingdom of such guardians, as
Must of necessity descend from him;
And therefore in some part of recompense
Of his much love, and to show to the world
That't was not her fault only, but her fate,
That did deny to let her be the mother
Of such most certain blessings: yet for proof,
She did not envy her, that happy her,
That is appointed to them, her quick end
Should make way for her; which no sooner spoke,
But in a moment this too ready engine
Made such a battery in the choicest castle
That ever nature made to defend life,
That strait it shook, and sunk.
Stay, dares any
Presume to shed a tear before me? or
Ascribe that worth unto themselves to merit
To do so for her? I have done, now on.
Fallen thus, once more she smiled, as if that death
For her had studied a new way to sever
The soul and body, without sense of pain;
And then tell him quoth she what you have seen??,
And with what willingness it was done: for which
My last request unto him is, that he
Would instantly make choice of one (most happy
In being so chosen) to supply my place,
By whom if heaven bless him with a daughter,
In my remembrance let it bear my name,
Which said she did.
I hear this, and yet live,
Hart art thou thunder proof, will nothing break thee?
She's dead, and what her entertainment may be
In the other world without me is uncertain,
And dare I stay here vnresolude?
Oh Sir!
Dear son:
Great King.
Vnhand me, am I fallen
So low, that I have lost the power to be
Disposer of my own life?
Be but pleased
To borrow so much time of sorrow, as
To call to mind her last request, for whom
(I must confess a loss beyond expression)
You turn your hand upon your self, it was hers
And dying hers, that you should live and happy
In seeing little models of your self,
By matching with another, and will you
Leave any thing that she desired vngranted?
And suffer such a life that was laid down
For your sake only to be fruitless?
Oh thou doest throw charms upon me, against which
I cannot stop my ears; bear witness heaven
That not desire of life, nor love of pleasures
Nor any future comforts, but to give
Peace to her blessed spirit in satisfying
Her last demand, makes me defer our meeting,
Which in my choice, and sudden choice shall be
To all apparent.
How? do I remove one mischief
To draw upon my head a greater?
Go, thou only good man, to whom for her self
Goodness is dear, and prepare to inter it
In her that was; o my hart! my Ordella,
A monument worthy to be the casket
Of such a jewel.
Your command that makes way
Unto my absence is a welcome one,
For but your self there's nothing here Martell
Can take delight to look on; yet some comfort
Goes back with me, to her, who though she want it,
Deserves all blessings.
So soon to forget
The loss of such a wife, believe?? it will
Be censurde in the world.
Pray you no more,
There is no argument you can use to cross it,
But does increase in me such a suspicion
I would not cherish, ---who's that?
One, no guard
Can put back from access, whose tongue no threats
Nor prayers can silence, a bold suitor and
For that which if you are your self, a King,
You were made so to grant it, Justice, Justice.
With what assurance dare you hope for that
Which is denied to me? or how can I
Stand bound to be just, unto such as are
Beneath me, that find none from those that are
Aboue me?
Their is justice, it were unfit
That any thing but vengeance should fall on him,
That by his giving way to more then murder,
(For my dear fathers death was parricide)
Makes it his own.
I charge you hear her not:
Hell cannot stop just prayers from entering heaven,
I must and will be heard, Sir; but remember
That he that by her plot fell, was your brother,
And the place where, your palace, against all
Th'inuiolable rites of hospitality,
Your word, a kings word, given up for his safety,
His innocence, his protection, and the gods
Bound to revenge the impious breach of such
So great and sacred bonds; and can you wonder,
(That in not punishing such a horrid murder,
You did it) that heavens favour is gone from you?
Which never will return until his blood
Be washde away in hers.
Drag hence the wretch.
Forbear: with what variety
Of torments do I meet? oh thou hast opende
A book in which writ down in bloody letters,
My conscience finds that I am worthy of
More then I undergo, but i'll begin
For my Ordellas sake, and for thine own,
To make less heavens great anger: thou hast lost
A father, I to thee am so; the hope
Of a good husband, in me have one; nor
Be fearful I am still no man, already
That weakness is gone from me,
That it might
Have ever grown insepurably upon thee, aside
What will you do? is such a thing as this
Worthy the loved Ordellas place, the daughter
Of a poor gardiner?
Your son,
The power
To take away that lowness is in me.
Stay yet, for rather then that thou shalt add
Incest unto thy other sins, I will
With hazard of my own life utter all.
Theodoret was thy brother.
You denied it
Upon your oath, nor will I now believe you,
Your Protean turnings cannot change my purpose.
And for me, be assured the means to be
Revenge on thee vile hag, admits no thought,
But what tends to it.
Is it come to that?
Then have at the last refuge; art thou grown
Insensible in ill, that thou goosed on
Without the least compunction? there, take that
To witness that thou had a mother, which
Foresaw thy cause of grief, and sad repentance,
That so soon after blessed Ordellas death
Without a tear thou can embrace another,
Forgetful man.
Mine eyes when she is named
Cannot forget their tribute, and your g????????????
Is not vnuseful now.
He's past all cure, that only touch is death.
This night i'll keep it,
Tomorrow I will send it you, and full of my affliction.
Is the poison mortal?
Aboue the help of physic.
To my wish.
Now for our own security, you Prosaldye
Shall this night post towards Austrachia,
With letters to Theodorets bastard son,
In which we will make known what for his rising
We have done to Thierry: no denial,
Nor no excuse in such acts must be thought of,
Which all dislike, and all again commend,
When they are brought unto a happy end.
No war, no money, no master; banished the Court, not trusted in the city, whipped out of the country, in what a triangle runs our misery: let me hear which of you has the best voice to beg in, for other hopes or fortunes I see you have not; bee not nice, nature provided you with tones for the purpose, the peoples charity was your heritage, and I would see which of you de???serves his birth-right.
We understand you not Captain.
You see this cardecu, the last and the only quintessence of 50 crowns, distilled in the lembicke of your gardage, of which happy piece thou shalt be treasurer: now hee that can soonest per???swade him to part with it, enjoys it, possesses it, and with it, me and my future countenance.
If they want art to persuade it, isle keep it my self.
So you be not a partial judge in your own cause, you shall.
Omnes. A marth:
I'll begin to you, brave Sir; bee proud to make him happy by your liberality, whose tongue vouchsafes now to petition was never heard before less then to command: I am a soldier by profession, a gentleman by birth, and an officer by place, whose poverty blushes to be the cause that so high a virtue should des???send to the pity of your charity.
In any case keep your high stile, it is not charity to shame any man, much less a virtue of your eminence, wherefore pre???serve your worth, and i'll preserve my money.
You persuade, you are shallow, give way to merit, ah by the bread of good man, thou hast a bonny countenance and a blithe, promising mickle good to a sicker womb, that has trod a long and a soar ground to meet with friends that will owe much to thy reverence, when they shall hear a thy tourtesie to their wandering countryman.
You that will use your friends so hardly to bring them in debt Sir, will deserve worse of a stranger, wherefore pead one, pead on I say.
It is the welch must do it I see, comrade man of vrship, St. Tauy bee her patron, the gods of the mountains keep her cow and her cupboard, may she never want the greene of the leek, nor the fat of the onion, if she part with her bounties to him that is a great deal away from her cozines, and has too big suites in law to recover her heritage.
Pardon me Sir, I will have nothing to do with your suites, it comes within the statute of maintenance: home to your coznes and sow garlic and hempeseede, the one will stop your hun???ger, the other end your suites, gammawash comrade, gammawash.
Foot he'll hoard all for himself.
Yes, let him; now comes my turn. i'll see if hee can an???swear me: save you Sir, they say you have that I want, money.
And that you are like to want, for ought I perceive yet.
Stand, deliver.
Foot what mean you you will not rob the Excheckor?
Do you prate?
Hold, hold, here captain.
Why I could have done this before you.
And I.
And I.
You have done this, brave man be proud to make him happy, by the bread of god man thou hast a bony countenance, comrade man of vrship, St. Tauy be her patron, out upon you, you vncurried colts, walking cans that have no souls in you, but a little rosin, to keep yonr ribs sweet, and hold in liquor.
Why, what would you have vs to do Captain?
Beg, beg, and keep Constables waking, wear out stocks and whipcord, mander for butter milk, die of the ian???dize, yet have the cure about you, lice, large lice, begot of your own dust, and the heate of the bricke-kills; may you statue, and fear of the gallows which is a gentle consumption too't, only prefer it; or may you fall upon your fear, and bee hanged for selling those purses to keep you from famine whose monies my valour empties, and bee cast without other evidence; here is my fort, my castle of defence, who comes by shall pay me toll, the first purse is your mittimus slaves.
The purse, foot we will share in the money Captain, if any come within a furlong of our fingers.
Did you doubt but wee could steal as well as your self, did not I speak welch?
We are thieves from our cradells, and will die so.
Then you will not beg again.
Yes, as you did, stand, and deliver.
Hark, here comes handsel, it is a trade quickly set up, and as soon cast down.
Have goodness in your minds varlets, and too't like men; he that has more money then we, cannot be our friend, and I hope there is no law for spoiling the enemy.
You need not instruct vs farther, your example pleads e???nough.
Disperse your selves, and as their company is, fall on.
Come, there are a band of em, i'll charge single.
It is wonderful dark, I have lost my man, and dare not call for him, lest I should have more followers then I would pay wages too; what throws am I in, in this travail? these bee hono???rabble adventures; had I that honest blood in my vcines again
Queen, that your feats and these frights have draind from me, honour should pull hard ere it drew me into these brakes.
Who goes there?
Hey ho, here's a pang of preferment.
Hart, who goes there?
He that has no hart to your acquaintance, what shall I do with my jewels, and my letter, my codpiece, that's to loose, good, my boots, who first that spoke to me, here's a friend?
We shall find that presently, stand, as you love safety stand.
That unlucky word of standing, has brought me to all this, hold or I shall never stand you.
I should know that voice, deliver.
All that I have is at your service gentlemen, and much good may it do you.
Zones down with him, do you prate?
Keep your first word as you are gentlemen, and let me stand, alas what do you mean?
To tie you to vs Sir, bind you in the knot of friendship.
Alas Sir, all the physic in Europe cannot bind me.
You should have jewels about you, stones, precious stones.
Captain away, there's company within hearing, if you stay longer we are surprised.
Let the devil come, i'll pillage this frigate a little better yet.
Foot we are lost, they are upon vs.
Ha, upon vs, make the least noise, it is thy parting gasp.
Which way shall she make Sir?
Every man his own; do you hear, only bind me be???fore you go, and when the companie's past, make to this place a???gain, this karuell should have better lading in him, you are slow, why do you not tie harder?
You are sure enough I warrant you Sir.
Darkness befriend you, away.
What Tyrants have I met with, they leave me alone in the dark; yet would not have me cry. I shall grow wondrous melancholy if I stay long here without company; I was wont to
get a nap with saying my prayers, isle see if they will work upon me now; but then if I should talk in my sleep, and they hear me, they would make a recorder of my windpipe, slit my throat: heaven be praised, I hear some noise, it may bee new purchase, and then I shall have fellows.
They are gone past hearing, now to task Deuitry, help, help, as you are men help, some charitable hand, relieve a poor distressed miserable wretch; thieves, wicked thieves have robed me, bound me.
Foot would they had gaged you too, your noise will betray vs, and fetch em again.
What blessed tongue spake to me, where, where are you Sir?
A plague of your bawling throat, we are well enough, if you have the grace to be thankful for it, do but snore to me, and it is as much as I desire, to pass away time with till morning, then talk as loud as you please Sir, I am bound not to stir, wherefore lie still and snore I say.
Then you have met with thieves too I see?
And desire to meet with no more of em.
Alas what can we suffer more? they are far enough by this time; have they not all, all that we have Sir?
No by my saith have they not Sir, I gave em one trick to boot, for their learning, my boots Sir, my boots, I have saved my stock, and my jewels in them, and therefore desire to hear no more of them.
Now blessing on your wit Sir, what a dull slave was I, dreamt not of your conveyance? help to unbind me Sir, and i'll undo you, my life for yours no worse these then my self meets you again this night.
Reach me thy hands.
Here Sir, here, I could beat my brains out, that could not think of boots, boots Sir, wide top boots, I shall love em the better whilst I live, but are you sure your jewels are here Sir?
Sure say thou? ha, ha, ha.
So ho, illo ho.
Within soldiers. Here Captain, here.
Foot what do you mean Sir?
A trick to boot ?????????
chase, purchase, the soul of the rock, diamonds, sparkling dia???monds.
I am betrayed, lost, past recovery lost, as you are men.
Nay Rooke, since you will be prating, we will share your carrion with you, have you any other conveyance now Sir?
Foot here are letters, epistles, familiar epistles, we will see what treasure is in them, they are sealed sure.
Gentlemen, as you are gentlemen spare my letters, and take all willingly, all: isle give you a release, a general release, and meet you here to morrow with as much more.
Nay, since you have your tricks, and your convey???ances, we will not leave a wrinkle of you unsearched.
Hark, there comes company, you will be betrayed, as you love your safeties beat out my brains, I shall betray you else.
Treason, unheard of treason, monstrous, monstrous villainies.
I confess my self a traitor, show your selves good sub???jests, and hang me up for it.
If it be treason, the discovery will get our pardon Captain.
Would we were all lost, hanged, quartered, to save this one, one innocent prince; Thierry's poisoned, by his mother poi???son'd, the Mistress to this stallion, who by that poison ne'er shall sleep again.
Foot let vs mince him by piecemeal, tell he eat himself up.
Let vs dig out his heart with needles, and half broil him, like a mussel.
Such another and I prevent you, my blood's settled al???ready.
Here's that shall remove it, toad, viper; drag him unto Martell, unnatural parricide, cruel, bloody wo???man.
On you dogfish, leech, caterpillar.
A longer sight of him will make my rage turn pity, and with his sudden end prevent revenge, and torture, wicked, wic???ked Brunbalt.
Not sleep at all no means.
I will assure you he can sleep no more
Then a hooded hawk, a sentinel to him,
Or one of the city Constables are tops.
How came he so?
They are too wise that dare know
Somethings amiss, heanen help all.
What cures has he? some with glisters.
Armies of those we call physicians,
Some with lattice caps, some posit drinks, some pills,
Twenty consulting here about a drench,
As many here to blood him;
Then comes a Don of Spain, and he prescribes
More cooling opium then would kill a turk,
Or quench a whore ith dogdayes; after him
A wise Italian, and he cries, tie unto him
A woman of fourscore, whose bones are marble,
Whose blood snow water, not so much heate about her
As may conceive a prayer: after him
An English Doctor, with a bunch of pot herbs;
And he cries out Endiffe and suckery,
With a few mallow roots and butter milk,
And talks of oil made of a churchmans charity,
Yet still he wakes.
But your good honour
Has a prayers in store if all should fail.
I could have prayed, and handsomely.
But age and an ill memory:
Has spoiled your primmer.
Yet if there be a man of faith in the Court,
And can pray for a pension.
Here's the King Sir,
And those that will pray without pay.
Then pray for me too.
How does your grace now feel your self?
What's that?
Nothing at all Sir, but your fancy:
Tell me,
Can ever these eyes more shut up in slumbers,
Assure my soul there in ?????????
And rest for humane labours? do not you
And all the world as I do, out stare time,
And live like funeral lamps never extinguished?
Is there a grave, and do not flatter me,
Nor fear to tell me truth, and in that grave
Is there a hope I shall sleep, can I die,
Are not my miseries immortal? o
The happiness of him that drinks his water
After his weary day, and sleeps for ever,
Why do you crucify me thus with faces,
And gaping strangely upon one another,
When shall I rest?
O Sir, be patient.
Am I not patient? have I not endured
More then a maingy dog among your dosses?
Am I not now your patient? ye can make
Unwholesome fools sleep for a guarded foote-cloth;
Whores for a hot sin offering; yet I must crave
That feed ye, and protect ye, and proclaim ye,
Because my power is far aboue your searching,
Are my diseases so? can ye cure none
But those of equal ignorance, dare ye kill me?
We do beseech your grace be more reclaimed,
This talk doth but distemper you.
Well, I will die
In spite of all your potlons; one of you sleep,
Lie down and sleep here, that I may behold
What blessed rest it is my eyes are robbed of:
See, he can sleep, sleep any where, sleep now,
When he that wakes for him can never slumber,
I'st not a dainty ease?
Your grace shall feel it.
O never I, never, the eyes of heaven
See but their certain motions, and then sleep,
The rages of the Ocean have their slumbers,
And quiet silver calms; each violence
Crowns in his end a peace, but my fixed fires
Shall never, never set, who's that?
No woman,
???1 line???
Ere thou shalt sleep, doest thou see him?
Yes, and curse him,
And all that love him fool, and all live by him.
Why art thou such a monster?
Why art thou
So tame a knave to ask me?
Hope of hell,
By this fair holy light, and all his wrongs
Which are aboue thy years, almost thy vices,
Thou shalt not rest, not feel more what is pity,
Know nothing necessary, meet no society,
But what shall curse and crucify thee, feel in thy self
Nothing but what thou art, bane, and bad conscience,
Till this man rest; but for whose reverence
Because thou art his mother, I would say
Whore, this shall be, do ye nod? isle waken ye
With my swords point.
I wish no more of heaven,
Nor hope no more, but a sufficient anger
To torture thee.
See, she that makes you see Sir,
And to your misery still see, your mother,
The mother of your woes Sir, of your waking,
The mother of your peoples cries, and curses,
Your murdering mother, your malicious mother:
Physicians, half my state to sleep an hour now;
Is it so mother?
Yes it is so son;
And were it yet again to do, it should be.
She nods again, swing her.
But mother,
For yet I love that reverence, and to death
Dare not forget you have bin so; was this,
This endless misery, this cureless malice,
This snatching from me all my youth together,
All that you made me for, and happy mothers
Crowned with eternal time are proud to finish,
Done by your will?
Brun. It was, and by that will.
O mother, do not lose your ?????????
It is all the soul of woman, all the sweetness;
Forget not I beseech you what are children,
Nor how you are groaned for um, to what love
They are borne inheritors, with what care kept,
And as they rise to ripeness still remember
How they imp our your age; and when time calls you,
That as an Autum flower you fall, forget not
How round about your hearse they hang like penons.
Holy fool,
Whose patience to prevent my wrongs has killed thee,
Preach not to me of punishments, or fears,
Or what I ought to be, but what I am,
A woman in her liberal will defeated,
In all her greatness crossed, in pleasure blasted,
My angers have bin laughed at, my ends slighted,
And all those glories that had crowned my fortunes.
Suffered by blasted virtue to be scattered,
I am the fruitful mother of these angers,
And what such have done, read, and know thy ruin.
Heaven forgive you.
She tells you true, for millions of her mischiefs
Are now apparent, Protaldye, we have taken
An equal agent with her, to whose care
After the damned defeat on you, she trusted
The bringing in of Leoner the bastard
Son to your murdered brother; her physician
By this time is attached to that damned devil.
It is like he will be so, for ere we came,
Fearing an equal justice for his mischiefs,
He drench't himself.
Hee did like one of mine thine.
Must I still see these miseries, no night
To hide me from their horrors, that Protaldye
See justice fall upon.
Now I could sleep too.
Isle give you yet more poppy, bring the Lady
And heaven in her embraces; give him quiet
Madam, vnuaile your self.
I do forgive you.
And though you sought my blood, yet isle pray for you,
Art thou alive?
Now could you sleep.
For ever.
Go carry her without wink of sleep, or quiet,
Where her strong knave Protaldye's broke oath wheel,
And let his cries and rores be music to her,
I mean to waken her.
Do her no wrong.
Nor right as you love justice.
I will think,
And if there be new curses in old nature,
I have a soul dare send um.
Keep her waking.
What's that appears so sweetly? there's that face.
Be moderate Lady.
That angels face.
Go nearer.
Martell, I cannot last long, see the soul,
I see it perfectly of my Ordella,
The heavenly figure of her sweetness there,
Forgive me gods, it comes, divinest substance,
Kneel, kneel, kneel every one, Saint of thy sex,
If it be for my cruelty thou come,
Do ye see her hoe?
Yes sir, and you shall know her.
Down, down again, to be revenged for blood,
Sweet spirit I am ready, she smiles on me,
O blessed sign of peace.
Go nearer Lady.
I come to make you happy.
Hear you that sirs?
She comes to crown my soul: away, get sacrifice
Whilst I with holy honours.
She's alive Sir.
In everlasting life I know it, friend,
O happy, happy soul.
Alas I live Sir
A mortal woman still.
Can spirits weep too?
She is no spirit Sir, pray kiss her; Lady;
Be very gentle to him.
Stay, she is warm.
Are you the same Ordella still?
The same Sir,
Whom heavens and my good angel staid from ruin.
Kiss me again,
The same still, still your servant.
It is she, I know her now Martell; sit down sweet,
O blessed and happiest woman, a dead slumber
Begins to creep upon me, o my jewel!
O sleep my Lord.
My joys are too much for me.
Brunhalt impatient of her constraint to see
Protaldie tortured, has choked her self.
No more, her sins go with her.
Love I must die, I faint, close up my glasses.
The Queen faints too, and deadly.
One dying kiss.
My last Sir, and my dearest, and now
Close my eyes too.
Thou perfect woman,
Martell, the kingdome's yours, take Memberge to you,
And keep my live alive; nay weep not Lady,
Take me, I go.
Take me too, farewell honour. dies both.
They are gone for ever.
The peace of happy souls go after um,
Bear um unto their last beds, whilst I study
A tomb to speak their loves; whilst old Time lasts,
I am your King in sorrows.
We your subjects.
Deuitry, for your service he near vs,
Whip out these instruments of this mad mother
From Court, and all good people; and because
She was borne noble, let that title find her
A private grave, but neither tongue, nor honour:
And now lead on, they that shall read this story,
Shall find that virtue lives in good, not glory.

THe hushed contentment of two silent hours,
Breath pleasing airs on these attentive ears;
And since wee see in this well furnished room,
All our best neighbours are so kindly me,
Wee would devise some pleasing talk to spend:
The lazy hours of the tedious night:
But for our own invention, it was too weak,
Whereon our young Muse durst wholly lean.
We here present for to revive a tale,
Which once in Athens great Eurypedes
In better phrase at such a meeting told
The learned Athenians with much applause:
The same we will retell unto your ears,
Whose Attic judgment is no less then theirs:
We here as builders which doe oft take stones,
From out old buildings, then must hew and cut,
To make them square, and fitting for a new;
So from an old foundation we have taken,
Stones ready squared for our new aedifice,
Which if in pleasing our weak skill offends
In making corners disproportionate,
Some room too narrow or some loft too high;
Yet we will hope, if the whole structure fall,
Your bands like props will serve to bear up all.
NOw a fair blessing bless my dearest earth,
And like a Bride adono thy royal brow,
With fruits rich Garand; a new married Bride
Unto thy King and Husband, who too long
Hath left thee widowed: O, me thinks I see
How all my Gracious with unsatiate looks
And greedy eyes doe bid me welcome home:
Each ear that hears the clamour seems to grieve
It cannot speak, and give a (welcome King:)
Come Clytemnestra, let no anger make
His wrinkled seat upon my loves fair brow,
I have too long been absent from thy bed,
Chide me for that anon, when arm in arm
I shall relate those proiects in love terms,
Which when they first were acted, made Mars fear
To see each man turned to a God of war.
O my dear Lord, absence of things wee love,
Thus intermixed, makes them the sweeter prove:
That your departure pierced my tender soul,
Witness those Crystal floods which in my eyes
Did make a sea, when you should go to sea,
Those streams which then flowed from the veins of grief
At your return doe overflow the banks.
But tic with joy.
Now these ears indeed
Have changed their place: they which were wont to hear
No musique but the summoning of war
Blown thorough discords brazen instrument,
Are blessed now with accents that doe fill
My age-dry'd veins with youthful blood again.
These eyes which had no other object once,
But Hector twixt the arms of Greece and Troy,
Hewing down men, and making every field
Flow with a sea of blood, now see's blood flow
In my Orestes cheek: heaven bless this plant
Sprung from the sap of this now iuicelesse oak,
Now be thy branches greene, under whose shade
I may be shadowed from the heat of war.
Rise young Orestes, Oh how it glads my soul,
To see my Queen and Son, my Son and Queen.
But come my Lord, true love still hates delays,
Let no ears first be blessed with your breath,
Till on my breast resting your wearied head,
You tell your war, whe that the field's your bed.
My Queen shall have her will, see how times change,
I that last night thought all the world a sea,
As if our common mother earth, had now
Shot her self wholly into Neptunes arms,
And the strong hindges of the world had cracked,
Letting the moon fall into the swelling waives,
Such watery mountains oft did seem to rise,
And quite o'rwhelme vs, all the winds at war,
Banded the sea one to the others coasts,
Jove thinking Neptune began to strive for heaven,
Sent a new sea from thence, and with his thunder,
Bad silence to the waives, they uncontrolled,
Kept on their noise, and let their fury swell,
Turning heaven, earth, sea, clouds, and all to hell,
Such Trojan that was saved then' began to cry,
Happy were they that did with Priam die.
It glads me now to think, that that night was
No star, no, not Orion there appeared,
But this night's turned to day, and here doth shine,
For a good Omen my embraced Queen
With whom her Agamemnon still will stay,
Till age and death shall bear him quite away.
ANd that shall be ere long, tush (shall be's) slow,
My vengeful thoughts tell me thou now art dead.
Fie saint Apollo, weakling infant-God,
Why would thou let lame Vulcan's hammers beat
Down those brave Turrets which thou help'dst to build?
Venus, I see thou art a woman now,
Which here are like to take a double foil,
For me, that meanwhile reveled in thy camp
In the sweet pleasures of incestuous sheets
Must leave our loved unsatiate desires:
But now begin, thou black Eumenides,
You hand-mayds of great Dis, let such a flame
Of anger burn me, as doth Etna's forge,
On fury, on, our hate shall not die thus:
I'll draw my poisonous arrow to the length,
That it may hit the mark and fly with-strength.
COme now my dearest friend, my other self,
My empty soul is now filled to the top,
Brimful with gladness, and it must run o'er
Into my dear friends heart: those silver hairs,
Which Time hath crowned my Fathers brow withal,
Doe shine within mine eyes, and like the Sun,
Extract all drossy vapors from my soul,
Like as the earth, whom frost hath long benumbed,
And brought an Icy dryness on her face,
Her veins so open at a sudden thaw,
That all plants, fruits, flowers, and tender grafts,
Kept as close prisoners in their mothers womb,
Starts out their heads, and on a sudden doth
The sad earths countenance with a summer look,
So in this breast, here in this breast, dear friend
Whiles Annus ten times circled in the world
Ten clumsy winters, and ten lagging springs
Hath with my Fathers absence frozen been
All thoughts of joy, which now shall make a spring
In my refreshed soul;
" Things that wee daily seeth' affections cloy,
" Hopes long desired bring the greatest joy:
Nay, but dear Cousin, give not the reins too much
To new received joys, lest that they run
With so much speed, that they out-Breath themselves;
Your Father is come home; but being come
Should now some wilful afterclap of fate
(Which Omen Jove forbid should come to pass)
But take him hence again, and cross your joy:
Each spark of gladness which you now conceive,
Would turn a flame, for grief still on extreme
Altering his course, turns to the divers theme.
Tush Pylades, talk not of what may be,
Wee may, indeed in the clearest afternoon
Expect a storm.
Yes, and such storms oft come,
And wet shrewd too, before we get at home.
O, but I'll be above all fatal power;
I that have such a Father new come home,
I that have such a friend, such too rare gifts,
Who gave me these gifts, thought no scowling frown
Of angry fortune ever should throw me down:
Call them not gifts Orestes, they are but lent,
Mere landings friend, and landings we must pay,
When ever the owner shall appoint his day.
True, Pylades, but owners use to warn
Their debtors when they must bring in their sums,
But heavens tell me with favouring aspects,
I still must keep their landings, and possess,
With fro like joy, all their happiness.
Trust not the heavens too much, although they smile,
Good looks doe mortal hearts too oft beguile:
The heavens are usurers; and as oft it is seen
A full pouched churl give a most fair good Even
To his poor Creditor: who trusting that
Hath slackt his payment: on the morrow next
He hath been rooted out by the tusky boar,
Which gave thee fair good Even the day before:
The heavens can doe thus too 
Tush: mortals must
Lean on the sacred Heaven with greater trust;
But it grows far in night, come let vs in
To morrow shall our joys a fresh begin.
Night, now only spread thy sable wings
Over this climate, gather all thy fogs
That they may meet, and make thy face more black;
Let horrid murder take thee by the hand
And come along: I have a prodigy
Equal to all the murders, all the blood
That hath been shed in all Troys ten years siege
So, snore returned King; good Morpheus hang
Thy leaden weights upon his drowsy eyes
Let him not wake till he shall see himself,
Drenched in a sea of his vermilion gore:
Thou doest no Trojan, now no Hector fear,
But yet I'll show thee a new Hector here.
See, I'll turn man too now, and to the hate
Which women bear, I'll add a manly strength,
My mind does tremble, what I mean to doe
Breath forth your vapors, O ye stygian powers,
And listen to hateful women's prayers.
Pluto stand by me, for to aide my hand
I may strike home now, and perform an act
May make Medea blush, she thought not of
Could the old dry boned dotard ever dream,
Now he had drawn forth all his strength abroad,
He could be welcome to lye bedred here
And supple his numb joints in my fresh arms?
Spoke like a queen, spoke like Aegysteus love,
Now great Thyestes Genies, which did prompt
Me to this act, come, be spectator now,
And see revenge for Athens bloody feast.
And thou wronged Clytemnestra call to mind
How his unsatiate, lustful, loathed desire
Doted on every female face he saw,
Raped the Priests daughter, and so brought a plague
On all the Grecian host:
yes, yes, Aegysteus, ye
And raped young Briseis from Achilles bed;
Crowd all revengeful thoughts into this hour,
Now let thy sword let out that lustful blood
Wound him Aegisteus, kill him not at once,
We'll be true Tyrants, let him feel he dies
Help Clytemnestra, help me my dear Queen.
Yes dotard I will help thee, thus, yes thus:
Remember the Priests daughter: this for her,
And this for Briseis:
see, my Gracious, see,
Your King which you so gladly entertained:
Sol hide thy self in everlasting night,
Or when thou resist let thy blushing face,
Make these to blush;
I, so, curse on, curse on:
O Clytemnestra, O my once dear wife,
Is this the entertainment that thou giu'st;
Thy new come husband, gratulat'st thou thus
My ten years absence? see these frosty hairs
Would even move Hecuba to pity me,
Look on these aged arms which in this bed
Thought to have been blessed with thy kind embrace,
Yes, mine or Cassandra's, old adulterer?
Kinsman Aegisteus; O my dearest wife
Whom shall I call; me thinks you both are mine,
What Titius, what Megaera hath put on
Aegysteus and my Clytemnestra's shapes?
Call thou vs friends?
O be not so, and I'll not call you so:
Let not your coward weapons wound this head;
That erst did scorn to shrink at Priams blow.
O hew me not down thus for my sons sake,
Dear Clytemnestra for Orestes sake.
Is this the Trojan tale how I should tell!
That here great Hector slew Antiochus,
And here that Meontiades was slain,
And poor Prothesilaus dear to Laodamie:
I thought to tell how these men lost their blood;
And see my blood is thus let forth at home.
Is your hot blood yet cold!
breath dotard, do?
You shall have gapes enough to let your soul
Find a free passage to his deserved flames.
No pity yet? O then, no pity light
On you, nor yours; but let dire revenge
Come learn how she may after handle you:
O, I am drowned in blood, and now must yield
To murderers weapons; treason wen's the field;
Alas this coming home hath had small joy,
Argos hath worser foes then ever Troy.
Now I am Clytemnestra right, now I deserve
To add one more to the three Furies, now
Doe I count this more then my nuptial night
It is mine, tic thine Egystheus, and none else
Shall share a minute of this right, but we.
Me thinks I now go equal with the stars
And my proud head touches the highest pole,
Hark, Hell applauds me, and me thinks I hear
Thyestes tell me I have done enough:
And now I kiss my hands, whilst yet they bear
This tincture on them, and embrace my Queen,
Now made my love; lets in, this night the Fates
Have amply fed vs with revengeful cates.
WHat horrid dreams affright me? I see nought
That I should fear, and yet me thinks I fear.
Mine eyes scarce closed, my busy fancy saw
A sight that dashed all comforts of the day:
Me thought my Father lying in his tent,
Hateful Achilles for his wronged love
Comes in with Briseis, and they two let forth
Streams of fresh blood from out his aged side,
With that his Echoed schrieke did make me wake;
But I remembered then he was come home,
And yet I'll see him, still me thinks I quake,
Doe I still dream? are not mine eyes unclosed?
Is this a torch? yes, it is, it burns, I see
I am awake, doe not delude me night!
Now stand on tiptoes Atlas, lift heaven higher,
I may have ayre enough to breath my woes,
O let me yet recall thy posting soul
If Charon have not hurried thee too fast
If yet thou hast not drunk on lethes poole,
Come back, and tell me who it is this night,
Hath don this deed far blacker then the night?
Ha! art thou fled past call? why thou were old
Me thinks thou should not haste so fast away:
Was it for this thou swe'rst so oft in Arms!
Was it for this that the froth swelling foam
When thy ships top touched Heaven, and deep placed hell,
That thou must yet escape curled Neptune's waives
To be a Palinurus in thy shore
There drown thy aged locks in crimson gore.
O if one spark yet of thy Princely Soul
Remain within this trunk, now let it shine
And light my ignorant eyes to read the names
Of these night vultures, whose devouring bills
Have made a Titius of thy royal corps:
Who did not fear great Agamemnons sleep?
Arm, arm your selves all you, all potent Gods
You which we term Just ministers of Heaven,
Shoot forked lightning from the marble poale
Let the all-seeing eye of heaven shoot flames
Which may parch up the marrow from their bones
Should they lye couched in the breast a'th Thunderer,
Or be entrenched with guards of Furies,
Heaven, earth, nor hell should keep them from my sword
Dost thou sleep Jove? O could thou snore so fast,
And let thy great vicegerent thus be torn?
Some of th'immortall powers have had fathers,
And know what'tis to have them murdered thus.
But I turn woman now, O I rave out
My passions; doe grief, pour out thy self,
That thou may make room in my empty heart
To fill it with revenge.
HOw now? what ails our son, how now Orestes!
O some are come now to help me grieve,
See, see mother, see, your husband and my Father,
The King of Greece, great shepherd of his Land
See, see him here:
O help now good heaven to keep my sex
Let me dissemble.
Help my Lords the Queen.
O why let you not my soul, that whilst he lived,
Was linked to his, and would too now have fled
With winged desire to have been with him,
What doe I live for, Agamemnon slain,
My Lord, my King, my Husband, wake my Lord,
What bloody Trojan followed thee from thence
To kill thee here, could he not one night
Have let me rested in thy sweet embraces?
Must he for sureness make so many holes
For thy sweet soul to fly to be a God?
O let my tears be balm to these thy wounds,
Let my lips kiss, and warm thy gelid lips,
Let my hair wipe these clots of blood away
From thy age-honor'd side: O dry your tears,
Join knees and prayers with me, awake ye Gods,
And send our vows, since we can send no wounds:
Come son, we women still know how to curse,
Let him that did it be an Adulterer;
Faith she begins well, sure she knows the man:
Let him be conscious he hath done a deed
Deserves revenge, whether it fall or no;
Let him for ever bear in mind this night,
And who it was helped him in this bloody act.
Yes, he will remember how you curse him now,
If ever he have children let them be
Murdered before his face, that he may know
How nature binds a father and a son,
Now hands I thank you, now my soul: grows glad,
Had not he grieved thus, I had lost revenge.
But come my son, now let vs talk of graves,
Of Epitaphs, and tombs, and's soul being fled,
Let's lap his Trunk up in a sheet of lead.
Me thinks I see a Tragedy at hand,
To which this night hath as a Prologue bin;
I'll make a prayer now worthy Atreus grandchild,
Let the foul Adder sting me as I walk,
The poisonous toad belch her black venom forth
In my despised face, let it be thought
I never had a father, but some monster
Bred by a slimy exhalation;
If my revenge fly not with ample wing,
Till then rest soul, hate told may lose his sting.
O Ye dead Troians leap within your graves,
O mother that thou had lived this night,
Now thou'ldst be glad to have lost so many sons,
The Gracious are revenged upon themselves,
I thank thee soul, that thou keptst here till now
To let me see Greece overcome it self;
I live, I live, I'm here, I live to see it:
I doe not dream on it, no, I saw the blood
Run from his side, whole Catarackts, all Greece:
Apollo how am I bound now for this
That I doe only see this happiness,
Hecuba, Priame, young Astianax
Look Hecuba, Greece now doth act your woes,
Laugh Hecuba, for now Electra weeps:
And Tyndarus he knows not what to doe:
Come little Cousin, come my Astianax,
Orestes is in a worse case then thou.
Still I had others for to weep with me,
But none are left to laugh now, but my self;
What should he fear at home? A conqueror fear?
Tic don, it is done, leave fighting Hector, leave,
The Gracious mean to fight against themselves,
From Tyndarus the first brand took fire
Which burnt down Troy: and now an other here
Kindles from him, to set a fire Greece,
Gray iuuenca venit, quae se, patremque virum{que}
Perdidit, Io laetor, Gray iuuenca venit:
Helen, thy sister Helen, nay shoe's thine:
Who could have thought that Hector being slain,
Old Priame made a sacrifice to death,
Troy turned to cinders, poor Andromacha
Dragged by her hair to death, Astianax
Sent out of the world before he well came in,
Ha, ha, who could have thought after all this
Cassandra should have ever laughed again,
One hour of laughter following many years
Of discontent, doth help to sweeten tears.
Fair morning to my Queen, nay more, my love,
How likes my sweet her change of bedfellow?
Look as a hollow leafelesse failing oak,
To whom for that he hath bin her weight too long,
The earth denies to lend him moisture, so
His sap fails, and he stands on a green
Amongst sprouting Elms, that they may seem more fresh
Whilst hoe's but held a monument of years,
Such one seemed Agamemnon; a dry tree:
Thou like a sprouting elm, whom I embrace
Like twining Ivy, with these now-blest arms,
Blessed whilst this treasure in them they holdlockt.
O who'ld not doe a murder for a woman!
Heaven had but two things for the Gods reserved
Fire, and women, when with Giant thought
Promotheus had tan one, Jove in his rage
Threw him the to'ther, bad him keep 'em both,
O they are rare creatures, they have such Maeanders,
Their tears will come and go with such Art,
Come now my Queen, one sweet Ambrosian kiss;
O Nectar! prethe had thou taught thy tears
How they should flow before:
No, trust me love,
I knew my tears would soon be at command,
And faith the boy had almost made me weep
Really once: were not my curses rare?
Yes, all was woman like, but yet that boy
He took it deeply, would he were with his father,
So gon, it skills not how, were he away
We would act freely all our lustful play:
O but my love, hoe's mine; nor can the raven
Dig her sharpe beak into her own birds breast;
He will forget his father: woe will break,
It is not the greatest grief that most doth speak.
O but he will bear a still suspicious eye
And who in bloody Scenes doth act a part,
Thinks every eye doth penetrate his heart.
Nor can we ere be free, or I enjoy
True pleasures, we must be but thieves at most,
Close in delights, and have a Pander still
To be a Factor, twixt thy bed and mine
This we could have before, what now we doe
The world should see done, and applaud it too.
Why my dear Love, I that would set my hand
To stain my marriage sheets with husbands blood
Would let these hands instructed now in ill,
Not leave one arm of that vprooted tree;
Could but Aegystheus give me any hope,
That from this top there should one spreading branch
Grow up and flourish.
Now thou art thy self,
Yes, yes my love, there shall one spring from vs
Shall be a lofty Pine, let this be cropped,
Murder must murder guard, guilt add to guilt,
After one drop whole streams of blood be spilt.
Dear friend, what mean you, to o'rwhelme your self,
In such a sea of grief?
Father dear Agamem.
Nay let this tempest fall, thou hast lost a father,
Why, tic but change, my father shall be thine,
I'll be thy brother, nay, I'll be thy self,
Weep when thou weep, and where thou go I'll go,
And bring thee on thy pilgrimage of woe.
Brother, look up, have not I lost a father?
Yes, and would a river of fresh tears
Turn Lethes stream, and bring him from the wharf,
With a North gale of windy blowing sighs,
I would expire my soul, become all tears.
Come, you have lost a father, I a brother,
The Queen a Husband, all the Land a King,
Yet all thi's but a man; Therefore must die:
Our woes may all be in one balance poised,
His book of life the Fates had ouer-read,
And turned the leaf where his last period stood
Now an immortal wreath circles his brow,
And makes him King in heaven, who was before
At most a God on earth; Hence difference springs,
Kings are earths Gods, and Gods are heavenly Kings.
Let vs join words then now, and Swan-like sing,
The doleful dirge to a departed King:
Thou friend did of this misery divine,
Therefore the burden of the song is mine:
Words Orators for woe, which plead the cause,
When griefe's the Judge, and sighs are all the laws,
Each one a sob, for Diapason bears,
Our tunes shall drown the musique of the spheres:
O what Hirudo with unsatiate thirst,
Could draw the blood from out those Princely veins,
From whence flows comfort to so many souls.
Mother, when wept you last, here take a scarf
Dry your eyes, now by Jove you need none,
What shine of comfort hath dri'd up your tears?
Our sonne's too saucy with his mother Queen:
Why, Sir, shall you tell vs a time to weep?
Vs? good: Who is it makes the plurality?
It was wont to be my father, does he live?
Sir, curb this lavish speech, or I'll forget
You are my son, and make you but a subject.
Good Cousin add not disobedience
Unto your mothers griefs.
My mother, no,
She is not here, no, she hath hid her self
In some odd nook, or angle unperceived,
She might not see this impious stygian world.
Aegistheus, can thou still suffer thy dull sword in the sheath?
Take the rank head from this o'r-growing weed.
Remember Clytemnestra, he's your son.
He is so, and I'll learn him to be so:
Had I a brazen bull, it should be heat,
Hotter then for the Tyrant: Disobedient?
More harsh then Adders hisses is thy voice,
Sir, you shall die, but with a living death,
He still shall live, but live to know he dies;
Who strait threats death, knows not to Tyrannise.
What temper's grown on the distracted Queen!
Hath grief conceived for her late husbands death,
Brought her so far, she hath forgot her self?
No Uncle, no, by heaven, I doe suspect,
O, my prophetic soul divines much ill:
Well, I will fly, but hear this stratagem,
It shall be rumor'd in the ear of the Court
I was found dead, I'll put a new shape on,
And live alone, to hear how things go here.
Nay, not alone Orestes, whilst I live,
Should make thy bed upon the rigid Alps,
Or frozen Caucasus, wrapped in sheets of snow,
I'd freeze unto thy side; we will tell tales
Of Trojan warriors, and deposed Kings,
Tell of strange shipwreck, of old Priams fall,
How mad Andromacha did tear her hair,
When the wild horses tore brave Hectors limbs:
We'll think they all doe come, and weep with vs;
Grief loves companions, and it helps woe,
When it hears every one groan forth his (Oh)
It eases much, and our plaints fall more sweet,
When a whole consort, in one tune doe meet.
The halfe-dead ship-man, which hath shipwreck borne
Seeing many drowned, it makes him less to morn:
It made Deucalion care the less to die,
When hee had all the world in company.
Thus we will sit, and our tears turns shall keep,
Thou for thy father, I for thee will weep;
If actors on the stage having no cause,
But for to win an hearers hands applause,
Can let fall tears, we'll think wee Actors be,
And only doe but play griefs Tragedy.
O, but dear friend, should we but act a part,
The play being ended, passion left the heart,
And we should share of joy, but my whole age
Must never move from off this woeful Stage:
But we must take our leave; Uncle, farewell,
Remember what I spake; and Sister, you
Must tarry here, my thoughts shall busied be,
To find the man that let my father blood;
Can I but find Aegystheus did consent,
To spill one drop, O I would pierce his heart
With venomed daggers, and so butcher him,
That all Apollo's skill in physic herbs,
Nor Aesculapius the Epidaurian God,
Should keep his soul out of Enio's hand;
Come my dear friend, to all the rest farewell,
If heaven relate it not, I'll know it ftom hell.
WHat, is Orestes fled? sure there's some plot,
If you dear Queen, but search Elect. well,
You'll find she knows whither her brothers gone,
If in her heart there be but lodged a thought,
Unknown to me this hand shall rip her breast,
And search her inparts: but I'll find it out.
Mysander, call Electra:
O, were that moat tan from our comforts beams,
No cloud could ever then o'rshade our joys,
His life must be cut off without delay,
Mischief by mischief finds the safest way;
But here's Electra:
Why, how now Minion, what a blubbering still?
Huswife, pray vvhere's your brother, whore's my son?
Mother, pray wher's my father, wher's your husband,
Hail to my gracious Queen, here's one at door
Brings you a message, hee will not relate
To any, but your self, he says tic sad.
Why, the more dismal, the more welcome it is,
But as for you.
Good mother doe your worst,
No plague can ever make me more accursed,
Nothing is worse then death, that I'll not fly.
Yes, life is worse to those that fine would die.
But vvhere's the messenger?
WHat whirlwind rising from the womb of earth
Doth raise huge Pelion unto Ossa's top,
That both being heaped, I stand upon them both
And with an hundred Stentor-drowning voice,
Relate unto the world the saddest tale,
That ever burdened the weak jaws of man:
Why, what portentuous news? Amaze vs not,
Tell vs what ever it be.
Were my mind settled, would the gellid fear,
That freezes up my sense, set free my speech,
I would unfold a tale which makes my heart
Throb in my entrails: when I seem to see it.
Relate it quickly, hold's not in suspense.
Upon the mount of yonder rising cliff,
Which the earth hath made a bulwark for the sea,
Whose peerless head is from the streams so high,
That whosoe'r looks down, his brain will swim
With a vertigo: The space removed so far
The object from the eye, that a tall ship
Seemed a swift flying bird: upon this top
Saw I two men making complaints to heaven,
One's voice distinctly still cried, Father, King,
Great Agamemnon: whose diviner soul
Fled from thy corps, exiled by buchers hands,
His friend still sought to keep his dying life
With words of comfort, that it should not rush
Too violently upon the hands of Fate.
He deaf as sea, to which he made his plaints,
Still cried out, Agamemnon, I will come,
And find thy blessed soul where ever it walk,
In what fair Tempe of Elisium
So ever it be, my soul shall find it out;
With that his friend knit him within his arms,
Striving to hold him but when it was no boot,
They hand in hand, thus plunged into the maine.
Strait they arose, and strived, me thought, for life,
But swelling Neptune not regarding friends,
Wrapped their embraced limbs in following waives.
Until at last, their dear departing souls
Hastened to Styx, and I no more cloud see.
O, it was Orestes, it was my Pylades,
Which arm in arm did follow him to death.
O my Orestes, O my dearest brother
It is he, it is he that thus hath drowned himself.
Why, then if Agamemnon and his son
Have brought their leaf of life to the full end;
I am Thyestes son, and the next heir,
To sit in Argos Throne of Majesty.
Thanks to our Alpheus sea, who as't'ad strived
To gratify Aegystheus, raised his force,
And gathered all his waters to one place,
They might be deep enough to drown Orestes:
But come my Queen, let vs command a feast.
To get a kingdom, who'ld not think it good,
To swim unto it through a sea of blood.
Our daughter send for vs? how fares she? well?
She mourns I'm sure for her husbands death.
My Lord, she took it sadly at the first:
But time hath lessened it.
I, grief soon ends
That flows in tears; they still are women's friends:
But how is it rumord now in Argos, though,
That Agamemnon died.
Why, hee was old,
And death thought best to seize on him at home,
It was a long home, hee got by coming home,
Well, well, Misander, I like not the course,
The peoples murmur makes my cheeks to blush.
My gracious Lord, who trusts their idle murmur,
Must never let the blush go from his cheek,
They are like flags growing on muddy banks,
Whose weak thin heads blown, with one blast of wind,
They all will shake, and bend themselves one way:
Great minds must not esteem what small tongues say.
All things in state must ever have this end,
The vulgar should both suffer, and commend,
If not for love, for fear; great majesty
Should doe those things the vulgar dare not see.
O, Sir, but those that doe commend for fear,
Doe in their hearts a secret hatred bear.
Ever learn this; the truest praise indeed,
Must from the heart, and not from words proceed.
I fear some foul play: doth Aegystheus mean,
Then totally for to invest himself
In Agamemnons seat? Whore's young Orestes?
Why my Lord? hee for the great grief conceived,
Being young, not knowing well to rule himself
With sway of reason, ran upon his death,
And threw himself with my Lord Strophius son,
Into the midst of Alpheus, so was drowned.
How took my daughter that?
Why, wisely too,
And like her self; not being in despair:
Her royal womb will bring forth many more,
Shall be as dear as ever Orestes was.
I fear heaven cannot look with equal eyes
Upon so many deaths, but means to send
Plague after plague; for in a wretched state,
One ill begets another dismal Fate:
But go and tell my daughter I will come,
And help to solemnise her nuptial night:
Her hasty wedding, and the old Kings neglect,
Makes my conjectural soul some ill suspect.
IF ever God lent any thing to earth,
Whereby it seemed to symphatize with heaven,
It is this sacred friendship: Gordian knot
Which Kings, nor Gods, nor Fortune can undo.
O what Horoscopus, what constellation,
Held in our birth so great an influence,
Which one affection in two minds vnites?
How hath my wo been thine, my fatal ill
Hath still been parted, and one share been thine!
Why, dearest friend, suppose my case were thine,
And I had lost a father, would not thou
In the like sort participate my grief?
Yes, witness heaven I would.
So, now thou hast lost a father,
True, Pylades, thou putst me well in mind,
I have lost a father, a dear, dear father,
A King, a brave old King, a noble soldier,
And yet he was murdered: O my forgetful soul;
Why should not I now draw my vengeful sword,
And strait-way sheath it in the murderers heart?
Minos should never have vacation,
Whilst any of our progeny remained.
Well, I will go, and so massacre him,
I'll teach him how to murder an old man,
A King, my Father, and so dastardly
To kill him in his bed.
Alas, Orestes!
Grief doth distract thee who first thou wilt kill?
Why, he, or she, or they that killed my father.
I, who are they?
Nay, I know not yet,
But I will know.
Stay thy vengeful thoughts,
And since thus long we have estranged our selves
From friends and parents, lets think why it is,
And why we had it noised in the Court,
We both were dead; the cause was thy revenge,
That if by any secret private means,
We might but learn who'twas, that drenched their swords
In thy dear fathers blood, wee then would rouse
Black Nemesis in flames from out her cave,
And she should be the umpire in this cause.
Mans soul is like a boisterous working sea,
Swelling in billows for disdain of wrongs,
And tumbling up and down from day to day,
Grows greater still in indignation,
Turns male content, in pleaselesse melancholy,
Spending her humours in dull passion, still
Locking her senses in unclosed gins,
Till by revenge she sets at liberty.
O, now my thirsty soul expects full draughts
Of Ate's boiling cup: O, how two'ld ease
My heart, to see a channel of his blood,
Streaming from hence to hell, that killed my father,
I, but dear friend, thou must not let rage loose,
And like a furious Lyon, from whose den
The forester hath stolen away his young,
Hee missing it, strait runs with open jaws
On all he meets, and never hurting him
That did the wrong; wise men must mix revenge
With reason, which by providence will prompt,
And tell vs whore's the mark, whereat we aim.
Till then in Cinders we'll rake up our grief,
Fire thus kept, still lives, but opened dies,
From smallest sparks great flames may one day rise.
True, friend, but, O, who ever will reveal
This hideous act! what power shall wee invoke?
Yes, harken friend, I have bethought a means;
Not distant far from this place where we live,
There stands a cave hard by a hollow oak,
In a low valley where no Sun appears,
No musique ever was there heard to sound;
But the harsh voice of croaking ominous ravens.
And sad Nyctimine the bird of night,
There's now a shed under whose ancient roof,
There sometimes stood an Altar for the Gods,
But now slow creeping time, with windy blasts
Hath beaten down that stately Temples walls,
Defaced his rich built windows, and vntil'd
His battlemented roof, and made it now
A habitation, nor for God, nor men:
Yet an old woman, who doth seem to strive
With the vast building for antiquity,
In whose rough face time now hath made such holes,
As in those uncouth stones she there hath made
Her self a cell, wherein to spend her age;
Her name's Canidia; great in Magique spells,
At whose dire voice, the gods themselves would quake,
To hear her charm the second time pronounced.
One that can know the secrets of Heaven,
And in the ayre hath flying ministers,
To bring her news from earth, from sea, from hell:
Which, when thick night hath compas't in the world,
Then doth she go to dead men's graves and tombs,
And sucks the poisonous marrow from their bones,
Then makes her charm, which she ne'er spent in vain,
Nor doth she comes as suppliant to the Gods,
But making Erebus, and Heaven to quake,
She sends a spell drowning infernal thunder,
By which all secrets that were ever don,
In fair white parchment writ in lines of blood,
Locked in the inmost room of hell it self
Is brought unto her: and by her we may
Have leave to look in Pluto's register,
And read the names of those most loathed Furies,
Which rent thy Fathers soul from out his trunk,
But she must see thy Fathers dead bones first,
Them we must bring her, for by them she works:
This if thou dare assay, I'll go along.
If I dare assay? yes, yes, dear friend,
Were it to burst my Fathers sepulchre,
And wake his Manes, show them Radamanth,
Their iterated sight will burn my soul
With such a sparkling flame of dire revenge,
As Nessus shirt did burn great Hercules,
If that the scroll which did contain their names,
Were in a lake of flaming brimstone drenched,
I'd take it out, or fetched from Pluto's arms:
But come; I feath have such a creature as can tell,
Twill save a journey for this once from hell.
ALL years of happy days, all hours of Joy
So circle in thy state, as doth this crown
Wreath and combine thy princely temples in,
All speak! Jove still protect Aegystheus.
Thanks to my Fathers subjects:
Now Argos swell up to the brim with joy,
And streams of gladness flow on Tyndarus,
Now made our Father; see old King, see here's
My Queen doth mean to make thee a grandfather,
See how thy royal blood shall propagate,
Whose Kingly drops like heaven distilling dew
Shall add fresh life unto thy withered root.
Yes, but Aegystheus, there were arms before
Grew on this tree; but the Fates envious axe
Hath cut them off before th'ad time to sprout:
O Sir, the Fates needs must have leave to make
Ways for themselves to manage what they doe:
Had Agamemnon and Orestes lived,
They could not then have blessed me with these gifts:
Still when the heavens and Fates doe work their will,
They intend good, though sometimes there come ill.
O but pray Jove the Fates now were not forced,
But deeds like words no man can ever recall,
Be it good or ill; once don, we must bear all.
Come Father sit we down, and make a feast,
To glad our hearts; Heaven still doth for the best.
O let my latter age not live to see
Aegisteus wear great Argus diadem:
Fear not good uncle, there will be a time
To pull him down, although he yet doth climb:
Who ever trusted much on fortunes gifts,
On wife, on state, on health, on friends, on lands,
May look on Agamemnons coming home:
Fortune me thinks ne'er showed her power more,
How quickly could she turn her Fatal sword
Upon his breast, that thought himself past harm,
She that had used death like an angry dog,
Holding him up, when that he should have bit,
When al the game was past, and's fury laid,
The King being past all danger, safe at home,
Then he slip's collar, never until then;
And fortune she stood hissing of him on,
Till he had torn the good Kings soul away.
Nay but good Father let pass elegies,
You draw fresh tears now from your daughters eyes,
Who shed enough before it's funeral,
Let's talk who are to live, not who are dead;
And think what progeny shall spring from vs
May bear your Image stamped upon the face,
This we must talk of now, not what griefs past
But of the joy to come:
My Queen not well?
Now good Electra look unto your mother,
Lucina be propitious to the birth;
Why, will not now a young Aegystheus be,
As grateful as an old Orestes was?
Thou times good lengthener, age, posterity,
Spread thy self still upon Aegistheus line,
Help me to treasure up antiquity,
And from Thyestes loins let spring an heir,
Shall ever sit in great Thyestes chair.
Near to this shady grove, where never light
Appears, but when `tic forced with some charm,
Canidia dwells, in such a dusky place,
That the night goblins fear to come too near it,
Here let vs knock.
Nay, Pylady, see here,
O give me leave to descant on these bones:
This was my Fathers scull; but who can know
Whether it were some subjects scull, or no:
Where be these Princely eyes, commanding face,
The brave Majestic look, the Kingly grace,
Wher's the imperious frown, the Godlike smile,
The graceful tongue, that spoke a soldiers stile?
Ha, ha, worms eat them: could no princely look,
No line of eloquence writ in this book,
Command, nor yet persuade the worms away!
Rebellious worms! could a King bear no sway?
Injurious worms! what could no flesh serve,
But Kings for you? By heaven you all shall starve:
Had I but known't; what must my father make
A feast for you? O ye devouring creatures!
Now some Archilocus to help him make
Vengeful Iambiques, that would make these worms
To burst themselves; Passion must please
It self by words, grief told it self doth ease.
You cowardly bones, would you be thus unclothed
By little crawling worms! by Jove I never thought
My Fathers bones could ever have been such cowards:
O you ungrateful worms how have you used him;
See their ingratitude: O ambitious creatures,
How they still domineer, or`e a Kings carcass,
How could they think Orestes, when thou came to the crown
That thou should bear, that these should eat thy father,
True? Pylades, should not I rend their maws,
Devise some new tortures? O most horrible treason,
That worms should come unto a great Kings face,
And eat his eyes: why, I would undertake
But at one stamp to kill a thousand of 'em,
And I will kill these:
Go you Kings-eating creatures: I will mar
All your digestion.
Alas, where be his wits?
He stands declaming against senseless worms,
And turns more senseless then the worms themselves;
Wher's now the oracle you should consult,
The great Magician, now the Centaurs thought
Shall be example to all future years,
And now transcend Proserpina's invention,
Ha, hast thou found them out, ha, were they worms?
O prethe laugh not at me me, call her, call her;
Whilst I stand gathering up my Fathers bones,
His dear disiected bones; O, I remember, here
Ran the strong sinews, twixt his knitting joints,
Here to this bone was joined his Princely arm,
Here stood the hand that bare this warlike shield,
And on this little joint was placed the head,
That Atlas-like bare up the weight of Greece,
Here, here betwixt these hollow yawning jaws
Stood once a tongue, which with one little word
Could have commanded thousand souls to death:
Good hands endure this your weighty task,
And good eyes strive not to make moist his bones
With weeping tears:
What sin's our Procustes ever could
Have hacked a King into such things as these;
Alas her's every part now so deformed,
I know not which was his, yet all was his.
PRotect vs O ye Ministers of Heaven,
Stand near me my good Genius, my soul hath lost
His humane function, at this hellish sight.
Who is it disturbs our cave, what messenger
Hath Pluto sent, that would know ought from vs,
What are you, speak, Canidia cannot stay.
Prompt vs some Ghost,
Great fear of earth, and governess of nature,
In whose deep closet of that sacred heart
Are written the characters of future Fate;
And what is done, or what must be thou know:
Whose words make burning Acheron grow cold,
And Jove leave thundering, when he hears thy name,
To thee we come: O turn thy secret book,
And look whose names thou there shalt see inscribed
For murderers, read over all the catalogue,
Until thou find there, engraven those
Which kilt the King of Greece, great Agamemnon.
Yes, he that did owe these bones which worms have eat;
It is not now one of the meaner sort
That craves this boon, but it is the heir of Greece,
Heir only now but to my Fathers grave;
I not command, but my astonished soul
Entreats to know.
If in thy book it be not yet put down,
Command the Gods to unlock the gates of Heaven;
And fetch forth death, command him to relate
Who it was put Agamemnon in his hands,
This is our business, this, great prophetess,
Made vs approach to thy most hallowed cell.
Ho, ho, ho, I tell thee fond young Prince!
A lesser power thou might have implored,
Which might have urged th'vnwilling fiends to this:
Our dire enchantments carry such a force,
That when the stars, and influence of heaven,
Have sucked the lively blood from out men's veins,
I at my pleasure bring it back again;
I knew each hour in the Trojan fight,
What Grecian, or what Phrygian should die,
And fierce Achilles had no sooner pierced
Great Hectors side, but fate did send me word:
Earth, Sea, deep Chaos, all the stony hills,
Will op themselves to show me prodigies;
Night will unmask her brow, to let me see
What black conceptions teem within her womb.
O then relate great Mistress of thy Art,
The things we crave:
What time of night is it?
Upon the stroke of twelve.
Strait when a cloudy Even clappeth the Ayre,
And all light's drench't in misty Acheron,
When the black palpherys of the full cheektmoone,
Have got behind this parta'th Hemisphere,
And dark Aldebor, and is mounted high
Into the fable Cassiopeias chair,
And night full mounted in her seat of jet,
Sits wrapped within a cabinet of clouds,
When serpents leave to hiss, no dragons yell,
No birds doe sing, no harsh tuned toads doe croake,
The Armenian Tiger, and the ravenous woolfe,
Shall yield up all their tyranny to sleep,
And then none walk but hells disturbed spirits,
Children of night, such as belong to me,
I'll show thee thy desire; give me these bones.
Here, take them Mother, use them gently,
They were a Kings bones once; O not so hard.
Why senseless boy, dost think that I respect
A Kings dead bones, more then an other mans;
O they smell rankly; I, this sent doth please,
But I must now to work: why Sagana.
Look here thou King of Greece, fond Menelaus,
Thou which did bring so many goodly shapes,
Into such things as these, and all for Helen,
Which when the worms bred of her dainty flesh,
Shall have knaw'd off her tender ruby lips,
And left her gumlesse, look upon her then;
And thou would even disgorge thy self to see,
Such putrid vermin to lye kissing her.
This head had once a royal diadem,
Now knock it, beat it, and twill ne'er cry treason.
Why Sagana.
There was a player once upon a stage,
Who striving to present a dreary passion,
Brought out the urn of his late buried son,
It might the more affect him, and draw tears:
But I, as if I had no passion left,
Not acting of a part, but really
In a true cause having my Fathers bones,
His hollow scull, yet crawling full of worms,
I cannot weep, no not a tear will com.
Why Sagana, Veia, Erictho, know you not your time?
what would you Beldam?
Hath not triform'd Hecate put on
Her Styx-died mantle, is it not now fit time
To work our charms in?
We here are ready against thy sacred charm.
You two, sitby, and bear in mind this charge,
Who ever you see, who ever I present;
Let your tongues be percullist in your jaws,
Stir not, nor speak not, till the charm be done.
Fear not, it shall be chained with silence.
Night, and Diana sacred Queen,
Which ever hast spectator been
Unto our baleful hideous rights,
Ne'er acted but in darkest nights,
Now in this fatal hers-bred hour,
Show to my rites thy greatest power.
Erictho when my torch shall twinkle,
Auernall water thou shalt sprinckle
About the room, now let vs kneel,
Our heavy burden Hell shall feel:
Lets all coin words, now we may see
Who it was did work this prodigy.
Pluto, great Pluto, we command,
Thou send unto vs out of hand,
The shapes of those that kilt the King,
Great Agamemnon.
O it is aboue my bearing, were I linked here with chains,
I would like Cerberus draw Alcides back:
Stay, stay, by heavens, revenge shall 
Nay, I will follow you, should they take 
Where Aetna vomits fire, I would in:
My mother, Clytemnestra, Aegystheus, was it they?
Nay, I will o'rtake them.
O son, remember what I told you son,
Many a rocky hill and stony mount,
Many a sea, and vast Charybdis gulf,
Stands betwixt them and thee, though they seem near.
O piety! O most prodigious nature!
What creatures hast thou made to live on earth?
How hast thou clothed black darkness with a scarf
Of unstained purity, and put a godly face
Upon portentuous devils? Oh, how my mother wept!
How Clitemnestra! how that Hiena wept!
No more my mother, I abjure the name,
She did not bring me forth, I know she did not:
But I'll o'rtake 'em; show me Canidia where,
Which way they went, where have they hid themselves.
Should they mount up to the chariot of the Sun,
And in his Carre fly to the Antipodes,
Or in the farthest nook of yonder sphere:
Get up and place themselves betwixt Taurus horns,
The fire-breathing bull, nor Lerna's Hydra,
Were there no entrance but ten Lyons jaws,
I'd run through all, and make my way my self:
I'd fix them to the Excel tree of heaven,
Where their infectious Carcasses should hang,
Abait for flying spirits in the Ayre.
Canidia, I thank thee for thy pains;
Still may thy sacred Act reveal such deeds,
Still keep the gates of Orcus yawning op,
Make the dark powers ready at command.
But let vs haste dear friend, this vast worlds room
Allows vs none, but thy dead fathers Tomb:
Here's nought but airs of death, no bed but stones
Our pillow's a dead scull, companions bones,
Thi's all our comfort, if wee needs must die,
We have a grave prepared wherein to lie.
Now pale Tisiphone, O for thy Snakes!
O that renonw'ned spirit, that more then man,
Whom all the Trojan host could not o'rwhelme,
Murdered; but what brave warrior wore a crown,
By guilding a dire sword in his dear blood?
Hector, nor Priam, no, nor Mars himself,
Only his wife was his Bellona now.
O miserable valour, to scope foes,
And come for to be murdered of his friends:
O shameful conquest! O most coward Fate,
That a weak woman was competitor
In Agamemnons death: had it been any, yet
It should have been a Goddess at the least,
And yet snee's but a Queen, a mortal woman.
Were she a Goddess, I would make he mortal;
Dull coward that I am, and, worse then all,
After so many wrongs, yet unrevenged,
Their Palace now should fire o'er their heads,
And the huge beams dash out their guilty brains:
The roof, should fall on me, so't fell on them.
Begin revenge, and now perform an act,
May give a theme to all posterity,
Ever to talk of, fraught so full of horror,
Aegystheus and my mother, may with their's,
Yet none was ever greater, yes, my deed.
Revenge is lost, unless we doe exceed.
But a bad mother, friend, thou should not hurt,
The law of nature doth forbid such thoughts.
Nor Gods, nor nature shall keep me enough,
Why towards my mother, by heavens Parliament,
Who is most guilty, is most innocent.
Shall I thus by some magique Art, my son,
Take both their pictures in pure virgin wax?
And wound the place where that the hurt should stand,
And so wound them?
Tush, this is too little.
Shall I breed them hate?
Too little too.
Shall I consume their children?
All this too little.
Hell and the furies shall stand all amazed,
Alcto shall come there for to behold
New kinds of murders which she knew not yet:
And nature learn to violate her self,
I'll instantly to th'Court, and what I doe,
My self will see done, yes, and act it too.
Thanks great Canidia, this black night being done,
Revenge now knows her game whereat to run.
Never but when a royal off-spring comes
From a Kings loins, can hee be truly King,
Then doth he sit firm, rooted in his state,
Then is he truly man, and then the Gods
He knows doe love him, which when Kings doe want,
The curse of nature doth deny them fruit,
And brands their bed with loathed sterility.
Aegystheus, since the Gods have blessed you so,
Have care their blessings turn not to your woe.
Your joy, my daughters joy, and my joy too,
Have care it be preserved, and brought up well:
And take heed, son, of Agamemnons blood,
Pierce not with envy the Babes tender heart.
Tush father, now not without grief I speak
All brookes which from the Princely Ocean ran,
Are quite dried up, only Electra here,
Our dear Electra, whose great weight of love
Is in our balance equally so poised,
That she shall ever think her father lives,
Our heart shall be so parallel with hers.
Yes, great Aegystheus, were it but our mothers will,
What she thinks good of, I must not think ill:
Besides, your love ever since my fathers death,
As am from his departing soul,
And  with had revived again in you,
 prospectiu for me, to see
oubled, though the obiect's changed,
 a brother, if you please,
That I may challenge in your royal blood,
Here doe I tie with all affections bands,
My self unto this Babe, which is as dear
Unto my soul, as were Orestes here.
Daughter, your heart now with obedience strung,
Makes a sweet musique sounding from your tongue.
Nurse, bring the Babe, give it Electra, so,
You daughter shall have oversight of it.
O, shall I part from it then?
No, good Nurse, no,
Electra with her care, you with your pains.
Now by Lucina, had it gone away,
I should have sit, and sobbed away my heart;
It is the sweetest Babe that ever Nurse did kiss.
Look here good father, look my nobles here,
Upon this Babe scarce crept yet out of earth,
For you shall grow an Autumn of ripe years,
When time hath brought it to maturity,
Look on thy Grandchild, Tyndarus, see, it is thine,
This came from thee, old man, see how it smiles
Upon the Grandsire, as if wise nature had
Taught him his kindreds names fore he came forth.
I see it Aegystheus, and my aged blood grows warm,
As if my self were a new father made,
And all the blessings I can render it,
Shall drop like golden showers on the head:
Me thinks it doth recall my sliding age,
And makes swift time retire back again:
It doth unfold those wrinkles in my face,
Which grief and years had fixed as their signs
Upon my brow, and now it shall be seen,
Althoug my hairs are gray, my joys are greene.
Long may our father his opinion hold,
And you, our daughter, let not sinister thoughts
Wrong your suspicious mind, though this being young,
It makes our Lord, and me to speak our joys,
Yet our affection and our natural love,
Is not a whit to you diminished.
A mother can be mother unto many,
And as from one root hid within the ground,
Springs many flowers, that lends sap to all:
So from a parents heart run veins of love;
Which, though to many, they without doe flow,
Yet from one heart, one root, they all doe grow.
I hope our gracious mother cannot think
We doe suspect her love, witness this charge,
Which you have blessed my arms and soul withal,
And as your love committed it with care,
My care shall still defend it with my love.
We thank our daughter, come Lord Strophius, come,
Grief still sits heavy on your sighing heart,
Be frolic, learn of vs, in all the grace,
And pleasure our Court extends, you shall have place.
I thank my gracious Lord, time hath by this
Almost eat out the memory of our son,
And since the heavens let fall their dew on you,
And watered Argos with such springing hopes,
I will not seem a stock, incapable
Of such a general comfort, but revive
My buried thoughts, and for my Souerignes sake,
Old Strophius will a young mans person take.
We thank old Strophius, and if honour can
Keep thee still young, our Princely hand is wide,
And freely shall extend all graces on thee,
And you all our subjects, which bear part
Thus in our joy; and here I doe proclaim,
And personally from my own mouth pronounce,
Sealing it with the signet of my State,
A general immunity to all
Murders, rapes, treasons, thefts, conveyances,
Which have been from the birth of our dear child,
In all the confines of our Empire done;
Nor shall your licence date be quite expired,
Till the slow year seven times runs out his course.
Our self thus speak it; until then ell's free,
Kings win their subjects by immunity.
Electra, you are happy in your charge.
Yes, Uncle, and you happy in my favour.
Madam, shall I stay here until you come?
Yes, Nurse, sit down and sing, look to the Babe,
I'll only with my Uncle change a word.
Lullaby, lullaby Baby,
Great Argos joy,
The King of Greece thou art borne to be,
In despite of Troy.
Rest ever wait upon thy head,
Sleep close thine eyes,
The blessed guard tend on thy bed
Of Deities.
O, how this brow will beseem a crown!
How these lockes will shine!
Like the rays of the Sun on the ground,
These lockes of thine.
The Nurse of heaven still send thee milk,
Moist thou suck a Queen.
Thy drink Ioues Nectar and clothes of silk,
A God may thou seem.
Cupped sit on this Rosin cheek,
On these ruby lips
May thy mind like a Lamb be meek,
In the vales which trips,
Lullaby, Lullaby Baby, &amp;c.
You never heard from my brother, Uncle,
Nor from your son, they have been long away?
In troth, Electra, I am in despair,
Almost of ever seeing them again;
Sure if Orestes live, and ever hear,
Unto what pass Aegystheus brings his state,
Seated him in the throne of his mothers bed,
And like to leave Argos hereditary
To his posterity, it cannot ever be borne,
Orestes spirit will endure no scorn.
Uncle, his long delays make me surmise,
Or he will never come, or come with prize;
Hee, if now come, hee must not show himself,
But live unknown, unnamed, or change his name.
His name, Electra, yes, and's nature too,
Which I doe fear me hee will hardly doe.
But if we hear not from them now ever long,
I'll listen by some means about the land,
To hear of them; mean time you to your charge,
Officious duty must our lives enlarge.
Come Nurse.
O, here's the Palace under whose kind roof
My tender years were gently fostered:
But now the sight on it seems to strike my soul,
When I but think it holds within the walls,
The patrons of such lust incarnate devils,
Mere Pythonists, that fascinate the world.
Nay, but Orestes, think now of your self,
Complain not of your wrongs, but seek to right them.
We might have lived in the woods still to complain,
And to that purpose wee may turn again.
Whet up your former thoughts, and spend not time,
To rave, but to revenge this odious act.
We know they were their shapes, and no Chimera's.
O, Pylades, knew I thou art my friend?
I hope you think it.
I doe, I dare swear it,
So I dare swear it was Aegystheus, and
The dumb witch, the O, what things enough
To be an attribute to term her by.
The Clytemnestra, O, wee saw her do it.
It was a black deed indeed, and past all thought.
O, hell it self has not the pattern to it:
Some stench, some fogs, vapours stop their breath,
Exhald from out the dampish womb of Styx,
Did ever foul, disastrous, friendlike hands,
Cast up so huge a heap of hell-bred mischief.
Were I to dive to'th depth of Phlageton,
Or fetch young Ganimed from the arms of Jove,
To rend Proserpina from Pluto's bed,
Or take the vulture from off Titius heart,
And set it on my mothers, I'd do it;
I'll break op doors, and nayle'em to their bed;
Hark, revenge calls me, I, I come, I come,
Nay, still outrageous friend, good now contain
Your heady fury in wisdoms reyne:
Harken to my advice.
I will, dear friend,
Thou hast plaid musique to my doleful soul;
And when my heat was tympaniz'd with grief,
Thou lauedst out some into thy heart from mine,
And kepst it so from bursting; thou hast tide
With thy kind counsel, as these loosned strings,
They should not crack asunder with their weight.
Then listen now, the best plot I can think,
Is this: wee here will live a while unknown:
Orestes, thy profession shall be physic,
I as your friend t'company you at Court;
Carry it neatly, learn a few strange words,
Palliate your woe a while, and coop up grief,
You may in time so minister to the King,
Physiques occasion fit revenge may bring.
Rarely invented, I'll speak Amphorismes,
Sublimed purgations, Quintessence distilled.
Each dose I give shall make a heart to bleed,
And prove a true Physician so indeed.
It was my good Genius guided me here now,
To hear conspiracy; wherefore I'll attach them.
Save you Gentlemen.
Save you too, if you please.
Sir, it was small manners to interrupt our talk,
And give no warning of your being near.
Warning? you shall have warning, yes, I know
I heard you both, and understood your plot,
You'll turn Physician, Sir, and give rare glisters,
Shall work like Stibium, to purge out hearts,
You thought to act well true Physicians parts.
Therefore on thee our medicine first shall work.
Help, murder.
Nay Parasite I'll gag you,
You shall not fawn again, or wag your tail,
When the King nods.
O help me, I am slain.
Stop his breath quickly, if but he be dead,
We may escape the danger of the treason,
Nay he is silent; O but we are beset.
Look out, me thought I heard one cry out murder,
Some voice I am sure did disturb the court,
It was Misanders voice me thought that cried,
And see hoe's slain; one whom the Kings esteem
Did rank among the best; there are the murderers,
Fellows, how durst you thus abuse the court?
Go, haste to'th' Kings tell him the men be here.
Gentlemen, we as lovers to the court,
Came here as strangers, for to see the King,
This man being coming out, too soon for vs;
And for himself used vs uncivilly,
We have been gentlemen, though our Fortunes now
Have put on beggars weeds upon our backs
Who answering in the same sort he proposed,
He struck vs, and men cannot endure blows:
So thinking much to be struck again,
He grew so hot, he drw and made a Stab;
At which encounter both enclosing him
Twixt vs, he took a wound worse then we thought
To give, for we did think to have given none;
But since it is thus, we must appeal to the King.
Yes; and here comes his Majesty in person,
A Guard there on vs, here is murder don,
What is Misander kilt our trusty servant?
Where are the villains?
O hold good heart, hark, hark, he calls vs villains
What is the matter, speak, how came he dead?
They shall die two deaths, that did cause him one.
O I am now undone; he must sit judge,
To condemn vs that should massacre him.
Nay keep a temper, hold good friend a while.
My gracious Sovereign, these two be the men,
Which have confessed the deed:
Are you the men which thus abused our state,
Was it one or both, if both, you both shall die,
If one, that one, we are just in our decree.
WHat, is my Queen come here, to hear the cause,?
We'll then ascend, and judge them instantly
O crack my eye-strings, let these balls drop out
Or the quick sights like darts fly to their souls,
And pierce their entrails; he King, my mother Queen!
The Briseis and Achilles, that in my dream,
We come to be condemned amongst our friends,
I will to speak to them, Electra's there,
And Strophius your old father, Pylades.
Show thy self valorous, overcome thy self,
If we be known, we surely are condemned.
Father, Lord Strophius sit and hear the cause.
Why, my Lord, what is it makes the business thus?
My queen shall strait way know, bring them away,
Although it is not fallen out of our mind,
Of a free act or pardon of all faults,
Committed in the date of such a time,
Our hand of mercy must not be so soft,
To cover over with gentle lenity,
Such ulcerous sores as these; there is no place
For mercy left; murder must not find grace:
Therefore our doom is past, one needs must die,
Blood still for blood unto the gods will cry.
Then, if thy doom be spent, great King here stands;
The man that did it, showing his guilty hands.
O hold thy doom a while, it was not he,
His serious studies in the learned Arts.
Hearing acute Philosophers dispute
twixt life and death, and of a future state
Would fine haste to it; but the man was I,
Believe not him, it was his desire to die.
No King, it is he which in his desperate thoughts,
Would aloof the bands betwixt his soul and him,
Ones self against ones self is witness store,
My self confesses, what would thou have more.
Believe him not, upon my knees I vow,
These hands are only branded with the guilt,
And for ones blood, let not two lives be spilt.
And on my knees I the like oath doe take,
I gave the stab, my dagger's bloody yet.
That was my dagger King, he took't from me,
He do's me wrong, by heaven it was ever mine.
This doth amaze vs, I ne'er yet saw two
Turns Rhetoricians so to plead for death.
Would not the pardon of this odious fact,
Like a foul stench, or an unwholesome ayre,
Send an infectious vapour through the land,
And choke up Justice; this fidelity
Should for this one time set two murderers free.
Now good my love, me thinks I pity them,
And prithee for my sake, I know them not,
Abate thy edge of Justice for this once.
O what she spoke, to dambe, it had been better.
My love, thou know I never look too sterne,
Upon a fault that could ask lenity.
But this is so transcendent, and so great,
It must not be slipped without impunity,
To doe a heinous murder, and in the court,
In the place of Justice, where the King might hear,
Upon a chief attendant of the Kings,
Murder it self is past all expiation,
The greatest crime that Nature doth abhor,
Not being, is abominable to her,
And when we be, make others not to be,
It is worse then bestial, and we did not so,
When only we by natures aid did live,
A Heterogeneous kind, as semibeasts,
When reason challenged scarce a part in vs,
But now doth manhood and civility
Stand at the bar of justice, and there plead,
How much the'r wronged, and how much defaced
When man doth die his hands in blood of man,
Judgment it self would scarce a law enact
Against the murderer, thinking it a fact,
That man against man would never dare commit,
Since the worst things of nature doe not it.
O how his words now rail against a sin,
Which beat upon his conscious thoughts within.
His tongue speaks fair, his inparts, look on them,
And they like Iury-men himself condemn
But O great King, if justice must have right,
Let me stand only guilty in thy sight.
No it is not King, it was I that did the deed,
And for my action, let no other bleed.
In troth this make my doom it cannot fall:
Will none of you confess?
Yes, I confess.
No King, it is I confess.
How now Lord Strophius, what affect you so,
That makes your tears be wrayers of some passion.
My gracious sovereigns, this strange spectacle
Renues the memory of my once great loss,
And my dear Queens, we once were blessed with two,
Which so had linked themselves in bands of Love,
As these men now doe seem to me they have.
One stream of love did in two hearts so glide,
One with the other lived, with other did.
And would my Queen be my competitor,
For our sons sake my suits should join with her,
Since Justice craves but one, and both will go,
Even save them both, and right wrong justice so.
I, good my love, let justice come and look,
If she can find in all her statute book,
Two men for the same crime should rightly die;
She will not say so, justice cannot lie.
And since they both will die, let ones love save
The others life, and so both life shall have.
In troth my Queen, and my old Lord have moved
Well, since your loves are both so strongly tide,
And friendship like an old acquaintance sends
To her friend, Justice, that she should be mild,
And looks with eyes of mercy, on your fault,
Considering our immunity proclaimed,
And such petitioners as you both have got,
Death in our sentence now shall have no part,
Whilst who should have done worst confession strives,
Too much confession thus saves two men's lives:
But now we must demand what you made here,
What business or condition you profess.
Great King, our duty owes to thee our lives,
And were we men that strived to set a cloud
Before these gifts, Art hath instructed vs:
Or we have purchased at a most dear rate,
Of cost and labour, yet thy clemency
Commands vs to lay open all to thee,
Yet for my self I rather count my state,
Blessed that I lighted on this happy man,
Whose accurate and watchful indagation,
Hath taught him for to heal the wounds of Nature,
By his exceeding skill in wholesome herbs,
One that when I did think my thread of life
Had been quite cut, did tie it up again,
And make it last: resold my youthful days,
And made me Aeson-like become thus young,
For which great practises I did owe my life,
And thence proceeded our late pious strife.
Nay then I'm glad our mercy did extend
On men whom such rare virtues doe commend;
Or love shall then grow greater, and our court
Shall entertain you, and't may chance we will,
My queen and I make trial of your skill.
My gracious sovereign, words must not have wings
To pass and out-flye the bounds of truth,
Only to win the Elixir of opinion;
But for my friend doth here profess so much,
And for my life doe stand so deeply bound,
That all my Art can ne'er make recompense,
Please but your graces self and your dear queen,
Appoint the secrets of the safest room,
To let me show my self to none but you;
Though Nature dried up with too much time,
Deny to spring in fruit from forth your loins,
Or any other strange impediment,
Or Art preserves from sickness ruining,
And twill be blessed to show it to a King.
Ha, prithee let me speak with thee apart.
Thou strik'st on tunes now, make me glad to hear,
We will commit our secrecy to thee,
Cans't water barren wombs with such a dew,
Shall make'em flourish and wax green with fruit?
Although we cannot altogether blame,
That Nature hath been too unkind to vs,
Yet we would plant each corner of our Realm,
With springing branches of our royal self,
To compass in our selves, and we stand in the midst:
Kings in their children doe great blessing find,
And great men love to propagate their kind.
Great Sovereign, boasting words shall ne'er outweigh
The things I will perform, I speak not fame,
But what I first have said, I'll doe the same.
We like thy temper well, and we will trust,
Therefore this night we will appoint it so,
Thou shalt be guided to our secretest room,
And there shalt use thy skill; which if it take,
Or love shall honour thee for Physics sake.
Good heavens I thank you, your effectual power
Hath showed your justice in this blessed hour,
Now is occasion put, thus murder lays
The trap wherein it self, it self betrays.
Old Lord a word with you,
and with you Lady.
Had not you once a Son loved the young Prince?
Yes Sir, but Fates envied my happiness,
And holds both Prince and Son away too long.
And had not you a brother Lady once?
When heard you of him last? he went travel.
In truth I had, but I can hear no news.
O see my son, welcome my dearest boy.
Our brother, our Orestes is come home.
It is they indeed, O how my blood revives,
Let me embrace them, O ye'r welcome home,
Now is the Autumn of our sorrow done.
What silent place hath smothered you so long!
Of what great power have you counsel taken,
Concerning the great plot you had in hand.
Uncle, and sister, we must not stand now
Embracing much, and bidding welcome home,
You see before I come, how things doe stand;
My business hastens, and my friend, and I,
Have yet a greater project to perform:
Only Electra we must have your aid,
To help with their child, for now's the time,
When blessed occasion strives to help revenge.
Why brother, is the child in any fault,
That was unborn when that our Father did?
And it is a lusty boy: O hurt not that.
Tush, I must have it, it shall have no hurt,
Worse then my Father:
Shall it not, indeed.
Believe me, no worse hurt; but let's be gone.
I'll be tripod Paracelsian.
BOy, sweep the room, set each thing in his place,
The King and queen take Physic here to night.
Sir, and you'll help me, I am ready here,
Fetch them two chairs boy.
Yes, Sir,
What carpet mean you shall be spread a'th board.
That of red velvet, set the silver cups,
There may be use of them to take the potion:
So, now ell's well, the room is well prepared.
Is this the room, friend, where the King must be?
Yes, this is the room Sir, it is the priuat'st, this.
You must avoid it then, and tell his Grace,
That I stay here provided against he come.
His grace shall know it.
I Faith Orestes prithee spare the child,
It hath no fault, but it is too like the mother.
Like my mother, O most execrable
Had ranked the confused Chaos of all sins,
Thou could not have found out a fault more black,
More stinking, more infectious to my heart,
Art like my mother, O transcendent crime!
Some say I'm eyed like her, but in the face
I doe resemble most the King my father.
Poor babe.
The King thy father, yes, too like them both,
Electra says I'm somewhat like Orestes,
Her brother that is dead.
How, like Orestes! when did see him child.
Indeed I never saw him, but I love him.
Alas, dear friend, see the pretty knave.
Would thou were not my mothers, I could weep
But see, O see now my relenting heart,
Must now grow flinty, see my Father, see,
Now to show pity were Impiety.
Why flags revenge? see thy now yielding soul,
Made me burst op my strong iawd sepulchre,
And rip the feare-cloth from my wounded breast,
O can a child smile blank the memory,
Of all these horrid wounds, which make me groan,
In the dark caverns of the vncoucht earth,
From whence I come for to infect thy soul
With ayre of vengeance, may make Acheron,
Yea, and our selves at the performance quake;
Fruit of our loynts, first vigour of our youth,
Look on these wounds, as on the Gorgons head,
And turn thy heart to stone, hovering revenge
Is fallen into thy hands, O grasp her close
By her snake knotted front, and make her doe
Things may incite a horror to her self.
Forget all, mother, in that disloyal witch,
Whose damned heate raging in strumpets blood,
So soon did condescend to murder me.
By all the rites of Father, I conjure thee:
By Atreus, Atreus, he whose revengeful soul
Is echoed through the world superlative;
Doe thou make Nemesis as great a feast,
And be enthroniz'd in her fiery chair,
In her triumphant chariot ever ride,
In which, Bears hurry her from the womb of hell,
And bear this Title as thy deserved hire,
The brave revenger of thy murdered sire.
Think on me, and revenge.
Stay, stay, and see it,
Stay Spright, thou strik'st no terror to my soul
For vnamaz'd I now would dare out-looke
Ranks of Medusa's, and the grim aspect
Of the most frowning object hell affords:
Think on me, and revenge: yes, those two words
Shall serve as burden unto all my acts,
I will revenge, and then I'll think on thee:
I'll think on thee, and then again revenge,
And stab, and wound, and still I'll think on thee.
I have a dropsy now to suck up fumes,
And drink the reeking streams of vengeance some:
Great Agamemnons Ghost, I will be dew,
Thy hearse with blood in steed of brinish tears,
And build a pile up of their murdered trunks,
To burn thy marrow less consumed bones.
Arrows of forked lightning never flew,
More swiftly from the awful arms of Jove,
Then Nemesis black Scorpions from me.
It was a strange fight.
I, did thou see it, friend?
All of those wounds will I stick in his breast.
Alas, one will be enough for him!
I, but she shall have more, a while go by:
Were all the world their lives, the world should die.
Now Tragedy fetch out thy crimson robes,
And buckle sure thy purple buskins on,
Stooped ten grains deeper in their scarlet die;
This night shall give me now a deep carouse,
Of Clytemnestra's and Aegystheus blood,
And Cerberus himself stand by to pledge me,
Whilst to hells fire I shall sacrifice
Three Hecatombs; it doth the furies good,
When ever wee wet the Altars with such blood.
And now ye fiends of hell, each take a place,
As it were spectators at a first days play,
Raise all the hellish winds to expel nature;
Great Goddess give me leave now to forget
All strains of duty; all obedient thoughts
Die in me quite: a mothers memory,
Pious affections take no hold on me.
Be all my senses circled in with Fiends,
And let Erynnis hold her flaming brand
To guide my murderous sword; for all lights else,
Vanish from out this Center, be this room fraught
So full of mischief, may make the Fabric crack,
And let no time, now come into my thoughts,
But that dire night wherein my father died.
I'll only be a Doctor now in word,
Each potion that I give shall be my sword:
But I must change.
O Doctor, you are busy for our coming:
My gracious Lord, I had no cause to fail.
Nay, but is this fit time for physic Doctor?
First, Madame, for the physic that I give,
Now the diastall fabrique of your pulse.
Shows all your passions most hystericall,
Pleases your grace sit down? one at each end of the Table.
Yes, must wee sit, sit there my Queen.
Yes, now is Saturn, governor of nature,
In free conjunction with the planet Venus:
And just at this time, Iupiter begat
Great Hercules, Sol, Luna, Mercury,
In that Diameter, now favour propagation,
And now will my Alexipharmacum,
Stir the Analeptique veins and arteries:
If you out-liue this night, you'll live to see
A royal, strange, and Princely progeny.
Think thou so Doctor?
Think it, nay, I know it: Hem.
Surely hee means to work rare Art upon vs.
Pray God thy physique take.
Yes, it shall take. Hem.
Treason, we are betrayed.
Nay, tic your priuat'st room,
View me well mother, ha, do you know me yet?
Here, here's the drugs my Art hath thought upon,
Be pitiless now Pylades, be my friend.
O Help me father, else these men will kill me.
O my boy, my boy.
O, yee'r fast bound,
Yes, hee is thine, thy face, thy eyes, thy heart,
And would I knew where Nature had couched most,
Of thy damned blood, I thus would let it out,
And thus't should spirt in thy most loathed face
O, now, the heavens rain vengeance on our head
O mother, mother, save, me save me father.
Hold Pylades, be steadfast, for by heaven
He wounds me, that persuades me not to wound.
O turn thy bloody weapon on my breast
It was this womb that brought forth this Babe and thee
If that be guilty, I have made it so.
Rip up this place which first did bring thee forth
It is I'intreat thee, it is the mother, she
Which gave thee house-roome here within this breast,
Upon whose dugs thy infant lips did hang.
It was my father, he entreated you,
Who many a time had clipped you in his arms,
Who made you Queen of Greece, yes, it was hee
Good Agamemnon, he did plead for life.
Bathe not thy hands in a poor infants blood,
Nor in thy mothers, I deserve to die:
And yet remember how my doom saved thee,
How easily mercy did obtain her suit.
Nay, but Aegystheus, you can aggravate
To doe a heinous murder, and in the Court;
In the place of Justice, where the King might hear,
Upon a chief attendant of the Kings.
Murder it self is past all expiation,
A crime that nature most of all abhors,
And look how manhood and civility,
Stand at the bar of Justice, and there plead,
How much they are wronged, and how much defaced,
When man doth dye his hands in blood of man.
Now harken King, I'll use thy Rhetoric,
Thou did a heinous murder in the Court,
Not which the King did hear, but which he felt;
When no petition could (good man) prevail,
Therefore this dies, this first shall have his due.
This mischief done, revenge shall prompt a new:
O, the Gods blush, and heaven looks pale at this,
A fathers face besmeared with his own blood.
My haste deceives my will; tush, al this yet,
May be called piety, you shall taste too mother.
O, why dos't banish nature from his place?
Look on thy mothers teares' worse then those groans,
And pangs she had, when she first brought thee forth,
When of thy friends or parents thou hast wrong,
Patience, not fury doth to thee belong.
Is this the blessing that thy knee should ask?
Repay'st thou thus my kisses and my tears,
Which flowed from me to thee in tender years.
O why did you so banish woman-hood,
When you and this damned villain, base adulterer,
Made in my fathers side so many wounds,
And brought a brave old King into this state:
See, here's his bones, my pocket can contain
Great Agamemnon; and repayd you thus
His kind embraces? all his loving signs?
Aegysteus, you are thirsty, you shall drink,
Yes, you shall clear your throat, by heaven you shall.
O mischief aboue mischief! what
Bred on a stony rock, could ever endure
To see a fathers thirst quenched with such blood?
Hast thou no measure? hath revenge no end?
Who first doth mischief, may keep mean in the deed,
But who revenges, must all mean exceed.
Nay, mother, we'll not bar you of your draught.
O Nature, see here all thy law infringed
A mothers prayers prevail not with her son.
Pray with Thyestes, it shall never move me:
But first, Aegystheus, do thou haste revenge.
O, I am wounded, O when dost thou end?
Nay, I have scarce begun, now mother, you,
So now I'll stand and look, and on hell call,
Nay, my revenge must not be usual;
One more for thee. Aegystheus; only let out,
The blood you drank before.
O, my heart feels it,
Now mother you, and your love the same.
O kill me quickly, time prolongs my woe,
And since I must die, let me quickly go.
You know your sentence, let him feel hee dies.
Who strait threats death, knows not to tyrannise.
This brings ten deaths.
Would it would a hundred bring,
One death's too little to revenge a King.
Hence, hence, adulerous soul to Tantalus,
And let hell know who it was sent thee thither:
Now, mother, you shall follow, but he first,
Lest that like lovers you go hand in hand.
Why son, whose death is it thou dost revenge?
Thy fathers? but on whom? upon thy mother!
On her which brought thee forth, which took most care,
To bring thee up, from whom thou took thy self,
You're sure thou art mine, but dost not know,
Who it was begat thee.
Will it Bastardise me?
Yes, mother, yes, I know I was his son:
Alas! why, what are you? a senseless piece
Of rotten earth can doe as much to corn,
As you to me, bear it, and bring it forth,
But Agamemnon he that seed did sow,
And only unto him my self I owe:
And for him thou shalt die.
O, I confess,
My conscience tells me, I deserve no less:
And thus thy mother from thee doth depart,
Leaving vexation to torment thy heart:
Now friend, I see my father live again,
And in his royal state at Argos Court:
This is the night in which hee first came home,
Oblessed powers of hell, divine Canidia,
Now am I satisfied, now hath revenge perfection.
And nothing grieves me, but that Tyndarus,
My mothers father, did not see her dye.
Isle in and tell him, my thoughts must reveal
Those acts I doe: this night who would conceal?
Now soul treeumph, whilst that my deeds shall shine,
In the face of the Court, and all the world know it mine.
MY Lord your daughters potion works most rarelie.
The King's asleep, God bless his Majesty.
O: doe not wake him, faith it is pity, la:
What doe I see? ha, blood? the little child
Dead; his daughter bleed, Aegysteus killed?
Your Lordships eyes doe fail, it is but spilt w
Lay hands of the villain, it is the Physicians de
Nay friends, hands off, it is no Physician now:
See, see, old Tyndarus, dost thou know me yet?
Fetch me my Crown and robes, nay, I'll ascend:
Is not Atrides eldest son your King?
What hast thou done, foul Viper, to eat out
Thy mothers bowels, what, was this thy deed?
Thy silence says it was thine, what Tanais
Tygris or Rhenus, or what flowing sea,
Should wash thee in the salt Meotis stream,
Or Tithes at full tide o'rflow thy banks,
Still would the spots of murder stick on them.
Why Grandsire, I go not about to wash,
By heaven, it was all the fruit thought to win,
To think all mischief here could be no sin.
See, see, thy mother, look upon her now,
On her, whose eyes thou hast for ever closed,
Which eyes have often wakned at thy cry,
And hushed thee with a lullaby to sleep:
See, see, these hands, which oft with so much care,
Wrapped gently up thy vnset tender limbs:
See, see, this face, wont at thy signs to smile,
When nature gave not leave unto thy tongue.
To utter thy child's meaning.
See, see these bones, these nasty rotten bones,
Which had so often locked his hands in hers;
Here stood the tongue which oft had called her sweet,
Dear Glytemnestra, and then stopped his speech,
And told his love in a more speaking sign.
Here stood those eyes, which fed upon her face,
And made her of thy daughter, a great Queen,
And thee made him a dish for loathed worms.
Suppose she did, there was but one yet dead,
And with ones death again should be repaid.
No, Tyndarus, had I desired but one,
I should have thought I had desired none.
Why, me thinks, I should too have killed thee,
The number is too little yet of three.
Into what land, what country wilt thou fly?
All earths, all lands, all countries will fly thee:
The heavens will look with a more cheerful brow
On Cerberus.
Why, let heaven look as twill, it is my crown,
That I have done an act shall make heaven frown:
O, what earth loves so much a guilty soul,
That it can bear thee?
Why, Sir, this is mine,
And this shall bear me. Am I not righ heir?
Thou heir to kingdoms! thou a subject rather,
To help to make a Players Tragedy.
Why, that will make me swell with greater pride,
To think my name shall drop in lines of blood;
From some great poets quills, who well shall paint
How bravely I revenged my fathers death,
That is the thing I wished, and it is my glory,
I shall be matter for so brave a story.
But whore's my Crown?
No murderers, we'll rather join with him,
This old man here to take away thy life,
Then such an homicide shall frame vs laws,
Who hath himself raced out the laws of Nature.
Yes, and we'll set here Argos Crown on him,
Who shall enact some punishment for thee;
Which although none can equalise this deed,
Yet what our griefs can think, all shall be done,
And we'll forget you're Agamemnons son.
Why, think you upon your worst, I scorn to crave.
I had three lives, you but my one shall have.
Then since vile wretch thou hast committed that,
Which while there is a world, throughout the world
Will be pronounced for the most horrid deed
That ever came into the thought of man;
A thing which all will talk of, none allow;
I here disclaim that name of Grandfather,
And I must quite forget that in thy veins,
My blood doth flow, but think it then let out,
When thou letst out my daughters; and since you
Kind Lords commit the state unto my years,
Years too unfit, heavens know, to bear a state:
My mind, me thinks, contends for to decree
Somewhat, which to my self I dare not tell:
Just conceived wrath, and my affection strives,
Hate forbids pity, pity forbids hate,
And exile is but barren punishment:
Yet let me banish thee from out these eyes,
O never let thy sight offend me more,
All thy confederates, and all thy friends.
You, Pylades, which did so smoothly cloak,
The damned profession hee did undertake:
You, Strophius.
My Lord, I know not ought,
Yet, since one foot is now in Charons boat,
If it please you, let tother too afloat.
Not so, but I will banish you the court,
And you Electra, come, I must forget
Affection too towards you, you gave the child,
Which you had charge of to the murderers sword.
Why Grandsire, I herin no wrong do find,
Since all these go, I would not stay behind.
Nay, but no one shall company the other,
Hence thou Cocytus stream of this offence,
Strophius &amp; Pylades, Electra, hence:
Why farewell Grandsire, since thou bid, I fly,
And scorn companions for my misery.
Unto this punishment this one more I add,
That none shall dare to give Orestes food,
And this decree shall stand; I speak with grief,
And here pronounce Orestes no relief.
Hence with these corps; poor child what had thou don?
Thy Nurses prayers, that there might spring a rose,
Where ever thou trod'st could not keep back thy foes.
Some plague he hath, but such a matricide
Should never die, although he ever did.
THus never less alone, then when alone,
Where to ourselves we sweetly tell our woes,
Thou Uncle, chief companion to our griefs,
And sole partaker of our miseries,
Why doe we live, when now it is come to pass,
It is scarce known that Agamemnon was,
He dies far easier, who at first doth drown,
Then he which long doth swim, and then sinks down.
Nay Niece, me thinks I now doe see the Haven.
Where my ag'de soul, must leave this tossed bark,
Made weak with years and woes, yet I commend
Unto my Son the heart of a true friend,
That's all the will I leave, and let him know
Friendship should ever be, but most in woe.
And so I leave thee Niece, I first must die,
To haste a period to this Tragedy.
O envious Fates could you not use me thus?
Have not I grief enough to burst my heart?
Was my life's thread twisted and knit so strong?
That the keen edge of all these miseries
Can never cut it off; Must I bear more?
It is all my safety now not to be safe,
Are there so many ways to rid ones life?
And can I hit on none? they say that death
Is every where, and yet I find him not:
Tush, but I seek him not, why my own hand
Might grasp him to me, if I did but strive.
Now hand help ease my heart, and make a way
To let out grief, that hath so long dwelt here,
Now knife tha'st don good service, there lie by,
Heaven well decreed it, nothing life can give,
But every thing can make vs not live.
NOw Priams ghost, haste, haste, I say to look,
With cheerful eyes on the sinister book,
And there to Hecuba my mother show
The tragic story of thy conquered foe.
And let Andromacha my sister see,
What Agamemnons race is come to be.
Now Troy gratify that most sad doom,
Conquered by those that thus themselves or'ecome,
Let Greece so flourish still, let Argos be
Puffed with the pride of their great victory.
Let it bear Soldiers, so withal it bear
Orestes too; now mother never fear
Argos makes me to laugh, which made thee weep,
The Troians in the grave now sweetly sleep.
Their sorrow hath the end, now these begin
To overflow themselves with mutual sin:
And after all, Orestes, we may see,
Hath lost his reason, mans sole property.
BY heaven you shall not, nay, I am decreed,
Doe tear, tear me, yes, I have deserved it.
O brave, O brave, hoe's mad as well as I;
I'm glad my madness hath got company.
Mother, why mother will you kill my father?
Then I'll kill you; tush, I have don't already.
Much patience will grow fury in time,
Follow you me, you beast, you damned Aegysteus,
I'll hew thee piece by piece, look of my mother.
I am she, or one loves thee well.
Out you witch, you witch.
Murderer, murderer,
Dost whisper with the devils, to torment me,
O how they lash me with their snaky whips,
Why Megaera, Megaera, wilt not hold thy hand?
Are you there too, Erynnis? hay, all hell,
My Grandsire Atreus he stands fighting there,
But he will ha'th better on it; keep Cerberus keep,
Keep the fates fast, or all hell breaks loose.
Mother I see you, O you are a whore,
Did I kill you witch, dost thou lash, dost thou?
Why this is fine, my very looks doe whip him.
Could I but get the stone from Sysiphus,
I'd dash thy brains out; O are you there I faith,
A bed so close with you adulterer,
I'll stab your lustful souls with your own knives.
O clap, clap, O rare beyond expectation,
Hold good heart, do not burst with laughter,
Will you not wake, sleep, sleep then your last,
Look how they flyi'th ayre,
I see them see them,
Why Jove, dost mean to let them into heaven,
O you are come down, and gon to hell,
Pluto, see Pluto hoe's afraid of them,
O spare my sides, my sides, my sides, the blood
O now you touch my ribs:
Hay, how he skips, O excellent, whips himself,
O sweet Catastrophe, do's none see it but I?
Clap, clap, again, would all Priams sons,
And daughters were here now to help me laugh.
Lash on, lash on Canidia, arth thou there?
Why grandsire would it were to doe again,
Nay Oecus I fear no whipping posts,
Laugh thou, thou witch? I'll follow thee to hell.
THus seeking others, I have lost my self,
My friend and father banished, and whilst I
Wander to seek them for to ease their woe,
I hear more grief proclaimed against my friend,
That none must succour, none must give him food,
And yet I'll seek him, and should all the laws,
That Tyranny should think upon, restrain,
I'd draw my blood forth for let him drink,
But O what's here? O I have found too son,
One which I sought, my Fathers wearied soul
In sighs hath now expired out it self.
Now O ye Sisters, your great task is done,
You ne'er vntwinde what you have once begun.
Thus obvious to our Fates t'our selves unkind,
We haste to seek, that which too soon we find.
Alas why doe our souls too greedy burn,
To hasten thither whence we ne'er return,
We run to it of our selves, though death were slow,
Should he come tardy, we too soon should go.
For the first day that gives vs our first breath,
Doth make vs a day nearer unto death.
All this huge world, which now on earth so strive.
To morrow this time may not be alive.
Great Troy is down since Agamemnon fell,
Since my dear Father, which but now was well.
O art thou come dear friend, for thee I sought,
Her's some food yet, in spite of all the laws:
Wilt bid me to dinner Pluto, ha, with what?
Give me no snakes, I, I go, I go,
Up to Cythaerus top, I hate thy meat.
Heavens! hoe's distracted, now doth fury right,
When thus against her self, her self doth fight.
It is I man here, it is Pylades, not Pluto;
Ha, Pylades, I, they have banished him,
But grandsire look too't, I'll tear out your maw,
Pylades, Pylades I come 
Why I am hee, look friend, dost not know me.
Yes, yes thou were with me when I kilt my mother
And see, the Furies now would whip thee too,
Alecto look, look, here's Alecto too,
O Clytemnestra, hay, how the lion skips,
And Taurus he would toss me on his horns.
Look on the Ram, see the Bear roars at me,
And Charon he would fling me into Styx.
He fears the heavenly signs, nay then now time
Hath brought true punishment on every crime.
Dash out the puppets brains, the little boy,
The bastard, my mothers bastard: so blood, spin,
My mother kilt my Father, kilt the King,
But she got little by it, look on her breast
It bleeds, it bleeds; so, so Aegystheus, so.
O what a strange distemper stirs his brain,
Thou gentle Somnus, in whom care doth rest,
Kind father of cold death, and son of peace,
Which comes to Kings and poor men all alike:
Bind his disturbed brain, tie up his sense.
Let him but live to die; now tic not long
Before we both shall sing our funeral song.
Ha, must I sink, can I not keep a loft?
What is the stream so strong? why then I'll dive,
And come to hell the sooner.
So gentle sleep,
Thou gather'st up his wandering brains again,
This is but half dead, yet half dead he lies,
But tic not long; before he wholly dies.
Hark they play music; O these sounds do harm,
Enticing woe with their melodious charm;
These please not men in woe; these time doe keep,
But miseries best falling is to weep.
Or stops are nought but sobs, our hearts we bring.
Whereon we pricked the soulefa which we sing.
Weep, weep you Argonauts,
Bewail the day
That first to fatal Troy
You took your way.
Weep Greece, weep Greece,
Two Kings are dead,
Argos, thou Argos, now a grave
Where Kings are buried.
No heir, no heir is left,
But one that's mad,
See Argos, hast not thou,
Cause to be sad?
Sleep, sleep wild brain,
Rest rock thy sense;
Live if thou can
To grieve for thy offence.
Weep, weep you Argonauts, &amp;c.
Peace Musique, peace, our plaints have louder cries,
A heart that's sad can never harmonise.
Grief cannot keep his time, all time's too long,
Sighs are best sembriefes to his doleful Song.
My ditties mournful though thou sweetly play.
Thus doe we all even blow our lives away.
But doest thou wake Orestes? is rest fled,
Sleep ne'er dwells long in a molested head,
Hark, hark the Furies entertain my mother,
Orpheus would fetch Euridice from Hell,
See, he looks back, would venture so thou fool,
I'd see my mother burnt before Id go,
Why should thou bring her? she would stifle thee,
Stifle thee in thy bed as my mother did.
Still harping on thy mother?
Harping, no,
Let Orpheus harp: O, I, she was, she was,
A very, very Harpy.
Thus madness plays,
And keeps a certain measure in his words,
O I sucked out my mothers dearest blood,
I did indeed, O she plagues me for it now,
O I must go lie down in Tytius place,
Ixion too, he Sir would fine resign.
I scorn your petty plagues, I'll have a Worse,
O the vulture, the wheel, the vulture.
See how his conscious thoughts, like fiends of hells
Doe arm themselves, and lash his guilty soul.
He see's no vulture, nor no Scorpion strikes,
Yet doth his conscience whip his bloody heart,
He needs no witnesses, he hath within
A thousand thoughts which testify his sin.
No punishment so strict, no deadly smart,
As private guilt that smites on the heart.
I did, I confess I did, I kilt them all,
Ripped up the womb that bare me; nay I did,
O Tantalus thy plague, some meat, some meat,
Who pulls thoseapples hence? let them alone,
Nay sink to the bottom, I will follow thee,
The rivers dry, my mother hath drunk all.
Alas, come, go with me, we will find drink.
Is Pluto's buttry op, his drinks too hot,
I doubt twill scald me, but I'll taste on it yet
The Eumenides stand to whip me as I go,
Nay I will pass you, I will out-slip them all.
See in his conscience lies hells punishment,
Our own thoughts judges none are innocent.
WE that have here ben born to see this change,
May leave the court, and tell our children tales,
Of the dire fall of Inachus great house,
The young Prince mad, the Princess kilt her self,
Old Strophius dead from grief; and murder heaped,
Corps upon corps, as if they meant t'inuite,
All hell to supper, or some Jovial night.
Nay but my Lord this is most pitiful,
That the young Prince should thus from door to door,
Beg for his food, and yet none dare to give,
I saw him wandering yesterday alone,
Flying from every crow, or prattling Pie,
Crying out mother, and as if there had
Tormenting Furies following him with fraud,
And truth I thought to tell old Tyndarus,
To move his ruthful years to pity him,
And will you join petitioner with me,
We'll tell the cause, it is good to ease misery.
My Lord I like your motion, and will join
For Agamemnons sake my honoured Master.
MY Fury leaves me, now I'm at my last,
And now me thinks thou truly art a friend,
Now with undaunted spirit prevent my grief,
And let thy rapier drink blood greedily,
As if it loved it, cause it is thy friend,
Now rid me of my woe, thy friendly vow,
Never did truly show it self till now:
Why then dear friend I thus erect this arm,
And will be strong to thee, as thou to me,
We'll look upon our deaths with better face,
Then others doe on life; come Tyndarus, see,
We scorn to live when all our friends are dead,
Nor shall thy Fury make base famine be
The executioner to my dearest friend,
Whilst I can kill him, therefore spite of thee,
We'll free our selves past all calamity,
Yes Pylades, we will beguile our time,
And make him search through every nook a'th world,
If he in all his race can ever spy,
Two that like vs did live, like vs did die:
But we delay our death, now bravely come
And the last parting word shall be strike home.
O bravely rstook dear friend yet once again.
Yes at one thrust two friends must not be slain,
O, how I love these wounds, heaven dropping showers,
When the outrageous dog makes clouds of dust
Upon the thirsty earth, come not more sweet,
Then the blessed streams of blood, thy rapier rains.
Hence weapon: for my loins now scorn all props,
But my friends arms, O, bear good legs a while,
The weight of murder sits upon my soul,
And bends my staggering joints unto the earth.
Haste, haste, I faint, but O, yet let my strength
Be Atlas to sustain the falling world;
Breath, breath sweet vapours of two trusty hearts,
And let our breaths ascend to heaven before,
To make a room hard by the frozen pole,
Where that our winged souls shall mount and sit,
More glorious then the Concubines of love,
Wreathed with a crown of rich enamelled stars,
Leaving all ages to deplore our death:
That friendships abstract perish with our breath:
Fly thou best part of man, where Hecate
Borne on the swarthy shoulders of the Even,
Sits in agroue of oaks, till gray eye'd morn,
Bids her to throw off nights black Canopy.
Will it die before me? Stay, stay, I come.
O grasp me then, our names like Gemini,
Shall make new stars for to adorn the sky.
Is thy breath gone?
O, yes, it is almost past,
Then both together, thus we'll breath our last.
WEnt they this way? my Lords, you move me much,
Could I find him now, I would seat him new,
In his right Kingdom, which doth weigh down me.
I see my Lord Orestes, and his friend,
Without your leave have made themselves an end.
Then now is Argos Court like to some stage,
When the sad plot fills it with murdered Trunks,
And none are left alive but only one,
To ask the kind spectators (plaudit)
All else have bid (valet) to the world,
The man reserved for that, is Tyndarus,
Who thus hath seen his childrens childrens end,
His Grandchild, a bad son, a most dear friend;
The Scene must now be overflowed with groans,
Each man sits down to wail his private mons:
One for the Queen doth weep, one for the King,
All taste the bitter waters of this Spring:
The Nurse bewails the child, that part she bears,
All have their subjects to bedew with tears;
Each one yet have but one; but all of me,
Challenge a part in griefs sad sympathy.
Orestes, Clytemnstra, I must call,
These all for mine, thus must I weep for all:
Let none believe this deed, or if they doe.
Let them believe this punishment then too.
It is vile to hate a Father, but such love,
As breeds a hate to'th mother, worse doth prove:
Our life consists of ayre, our state of wind,
All things we leave behind vs which wee find,
Saving our faults; witness Orestes here,
Who was his own tormentor, his own fear.
Who flying all, yet could not fly him self,
But needs must shipwreck upon murders shelf:
And so his breast made hard with misery,
He grew himself to be his enemy.
Thus grief and gladness still by turns do come,
But pleasure leastwhile doth possess the room.
Long nights of grief may last, but lo, one day
Of shining comfort slideth soon away.
He, whom all fear on earth, must fear a fate,
For all our powers are subordinate:
Three hours space thus well can represent,
Vices contrived and murders punishment.
A Monarchs life can in this little space
Show all the pomp that all the time doth grace
His risings and his falls, and in one span
Of time, can show the vanity of man.
For none of vs can so command the powers
That we may say, to morrow shall be ours.
Now Fortunes wheel is turned, and time doth call,
To solemnise this friendly funeral.
No force so great, no so disaster wrong,
As can vnknit the bands which holds strong
United hearts: who since they thus are dead,
One room, one tomb shall hold them buried:
And as these friends joined hands to bear their Fate;
So we desire you to imitate.
Who since they all are dead, we needs must crave
Your gentle hands to bring them to their grave.

IT must be all my ear; theres all my love,
And that pulls on the tother, had I been left
In a son behind me, while I had been here
He should have shifted as I did before him;
Lived on the freeborne portion of his wit:
But a daughter, and that an only one, oh
We cannot be to careful ore, to tender,
Tic such a brittle niceness: a mere cupboard of glasses,
The least shake breaks, or crakes em; all my aim is
To cast her upon riches: thats the thing
We richmen call perfection, for the world
Can perfect nought without it, it is not neatness
Either in handsome wit; or handsome outside
With which one gentleman (far indebt) has courted her
Which boldness he shall rue. He thinks me blind,
And ignorant, I have let him play along time,
Seemed to believe his worth; which I know nothing.
He may perhaps laugh at my easy confidence
Which closely I requite upon his fondness.
For this hour, snaps him; and before his Mistress
His Saint forsooth, which he inscribes my girl,
He shall be rudely taken and disgraced,
The trick will prove an everlasting Scarcrow,
To fright poor gallants from our rich-mens daughters,
Sister? Iue such a joy to make you a well-come of,
Better you never tasted.
Good sir spare it not,
Colonels come, &amp; your son Captain Ager;
My son! 
I know your eye would be first served,
Thats the souls taster still for grief, or joy,
Oh if a mothers dear suit may prevail with him,
From England; he shall never partagen,
No question he'll be ruled, and grant you that,
Isle bring all my desires to that request.
Affectionate sister, she he's no daughter now
It follows all the love must come to him,
And he has a worth deserves it, were it dearer.
I must not give way too't,
Whats here to question,
Compare young Captain Ager, with the Colonel,
Young? why, doe you make youth stand for an imputation: that which you now produce for his disgrace,
Infers his nobleness, that being young
Should have an anger more inclined to courage
And moderation then the Colonel:
A virtue as rare as chastity in youth.
And let the cause be good; (conscience in him
Which ever crowns his acts, and is indeed,
Valours prosperity) he dares then as much,
As ever mad him famous that you plead for;
Then I forbear to long.
His worth for me.
Here is noble youths, belike some wench has croft'em, and now they know not what to doe with their blood.
How now!
Hold, hold, whats the incitement,
So serious at your game, come, come, the quarrel,
Nothing good faith sir.
Nothing, and you bleed,
Bleed, where, pish, a little scratch by chance sir,
What need this niceness, when you know so well
That I must know these things, and truly know 'em,
Your daintiness makes me but more impatient,
This strange concealment frets me.
Words did pass
Which I was bound to answer, as my opinion
And love instructed me, and should I take in general fame,
Into 'em, I think I should commit no error in it,
What words sir, and of whom,
This gentleman.
Paralleled Captain Agers worth with yours,
With mine.
It was a thing I could nor listen to
With any patience.
What should ail you sir,
There was little wrong done to your friend i'that,
How little wrong, to me,
I said so, friend.
And I suppose that you'll esteem it so;
Compatisons?
Why sis? twixt friend, and friend,
There is so even and level a degree
It will admit of no superlative.
Not in terms of man-hood?
Nay gentlemen,
Good sir give me leave, in terms of manhood?
What can you dispute more questionable
You are a captain sir, I give you all your due,
And you are a Colonel, a title
Which may include within it many captains,
Yet sir, but throwing by those titular shadows,
Which ad no substance to the men themselves;
And take them vncompounded, man and man;
They may be so with fair equality,
You're a boy sir,
And you have a Beard sir.
Virginity and marriage are both worthy,
And the positive purity there are some
Have made the nobler.
How now?
Nay good sir,
I shrink not, he that goes the foremost,
May be oretaken.
Death, how am I weight?
In an even balance sir, a beard put in
Gives but a small advantage: man and man
And lift the scales,
Patience shall be my curse
If it tide me further;
How now Gallants?
Believe me then, I must give aim no longer,
Can words beget swords and bring um forth, ha?
Come they are abortive propagations;
Hide um for shame, I had thought Soldiers
Had bin musical; would not strike out of time,
But to the consort of Drum, Trumps and Fife.
Tic madman-like to dance without musique.
And most unpleasing shows to the beholders,
A Lydian ditty to a Doric note
Friends embrace with steel hands? fie, it meets to hard,
I must have those encounters here debarred,
Shall I loose here what I have safe broughthome
Through many dangers?
Whats that sir?
My fame,
Life of the life, my reputation,
Death? I am squared and measured out, my heights
Depths, breadth, all my dimensions taken,
Sure I have yet beyond your Astralobe
A spirit unbounded;
Sir, you might weigh,
Tush, all this is weighing fire, vain &amp; fruitless,
The further it runs into argument
The further plunged, beseech you no more on it,
I have a little claim, sir, in your blood
As near as the brother to your mother,
If that may serve for power to move your quiet
The rest I shall make up with courtesy
And an Uncles love.
I have done sir, but
But! Isle have no more shooting at these buts,
We'll to pricks, when he please,
You rove all still
Sir, I have no motive proof to digest
Your raised choler bak into temperate blood,
But if you'll make mine age a counsellor
(As all ages have hitherto allowed it)
Wisdom in men grows up as years increase,
You shall make me blessed in making peace,
And doe your judgment right,
In peace at home
Gray hairs are Senators: but to determine
Soldiers and their actions;
Tic peace here sir,
And see, here comes a happy Interim,
Here enters now a Scene of loving arms;
This couple will not quarrel so;
Be advised Sir,
This gentleman Fitzallen is your kinsman,
You may'orethrow his long labord fortunes
With one angry minute, tic a rich churl
And this his sole inheritrix, blast not
His hopes with this tempest,
It shall calm me,
All the towns conjurers and their Daemons
Could not have laid my spirit so,
Worthy Cousin
I gratulate your fair return to peace
Your swift fame was at home long before you;
It meets (I hope) your hapy fortunes here
And I am glad int, I must salute your joys, cousin,
With a solders encounter
Worthy Captain Ager,
I hope my kinsman shortly, 
You must come short indeed,
Or the length of my devise will be ill shrunk,
Why now it shows finely, Isle tell you, sir,
Sir, nay son, I know in the end, twill be so,
I hope so, sir,
Hope? nay tic past all hope, son,
Here has been such a stormy encounter,
Betwixt my cozen Captain and this brave Colonel
About I know not what, nothing indeed,
Competitions, degrees and comparatiues
Of Soldiership: but this smooth passage
Of love has calmed it all, come Isle have it found,
Let me see your hearts combined in your hands,
And then I will believe the league is good,
It shall be the grapes if we drink any blood.
I have no anger sir,
I have had none,
My blood has not yet rose to a quarrel,
Nor have you had cause,
No cause of quarrel?
death? if my father should tell me so:
again?
Good sir, for my sake,
Faith, I have done, Cousin,
You doe too hastily believe mine anger,
And yet to say, deminiting valour
In a soldier is no cause of quarrel.
Nay then Isle remove the cause to kill th'effect,
Kinsman, Isle press you too't, if either love
Or consanguinity may move you too't,
I must disarm you, though year a soldier,
Pray grant me your weapon, it shall be safe
At your regress from my house, now I know
No words can move this noble soldiers sword
To a man vndefenc't so, we shall parley,
And safely make all perfect friends again,
To show my will sir, accept mine to you,
As good not wear it as not dare to use it.
Nay then sir, we will be all exampled.
We'll have no Arms here now but lovers arms.
No seconds must begin a quarrel,
Take mine sir.
Why Law, what a fine Sun shines here? these
clouds my breath has blown into another Climate,
Isle be your armourers, they are not paun'd,
These were the fish that I did angle for,
I have caught 'vm finely, now for my trick,
My proiect's lusty, and will hit the nick.
What first a match beauty? I would now have,
Alliance with my worthy Captain Ager,
To knit our loves the faster; hears witness
Enough if you confirm it now.
Sir my voice,
Was long since given, since that I gave my hand,
Would you had sealed too,
That wish comes too late,
For I too soon fear my delivery:
My fathers hand sticks yet sir, you may now
Challenge a lawful interest in his,
Hee took your hand from your enraged blood,
And gave it freely to your opposite
My Cozen Ager, me thinks you should claim from him,
In the less quality of calmer blood,
To join the hands of two divided friends,
Even these two that would offer willingly
Their own embrace.
Troth, she instructs you well
Colonel: and you shall doe a lovers part
worth one brave act of valour.
Why, I did
misdoubt no scruple, is there doubt in it?
Faith sir, delays, which at the least are doubts,
But hears a constant resolution fixed,
Which we wish willingly he would accord to,
Tush he shall do it, I will not be denied,
Hee owes me so much in the recompense
of my reconcilement, Captain Ager
You will take our parts against your uncle
In this quarrel?
I shall doe my best, sir,
Two denials shall not repulse me, I love
Your worthy kinsman and wish him mine, I know
He doubts it not.
See, hes returned.
Your qu.
Be sure you keep it, twill be spoken quickly.
Therefore watch it.
Lets set on him all at once.
Sir, we have a suit to you.
What! all at once.
All, all, i faith, sir.
On speaker may yet deliver, say, say,
I shall not dare to stand out against so many,
Faith sir hears a brabbling matter hangs on demur,
I make the motion for all, without a fee
Pray you let it be ended this term,
Ha, ha, ha.
Thats the rascals qu, and he has mist it. 
What is it? what is it sir?
Why sir, here's a man;
And heir's a woman; you're scholar good enough,
Put 'am together; and tell me what it spells,
Ha, ha, ha, theres his qu once again,
Oh hoe's come, humh:
My moister laughs, that's his qu to mischief,
What say you, sir
Sir.
Ha? what say you sir?
Sir, theres a couple desire speedily to speak with you.
A couple sir, of what, hounds, or horses?
Men sir, gentlemen or yeomen, I know not which;
But the one sure they are
Hast thou no other description of them.
They come with commission, they say, sir to
taste of your earth: if they like it, they'll turn it into gunpouder.
Oh, they are Salt-peetermen, before me
And they bring commission: the kings power indeed,
They must have entrance, but the knaves will be bribed,
Theres all the hope we have in Officers,
They were too dangerous in a common wealth,
But that they will be very, well corrupted, necessary varlets,
Shall I enter in sir?
By all fair means sir.
And with all speed sir give um very good words,
To save my ground vnrauisht, vnbroke up,
Mines yet a virgin earth: the worm hath not been seen,
To wriggle in her chaste bowels: and Id be loath
A Gunpowder fellow should deflower her now.
Our suit is yet delayed by this means sir,
Alas I cannot help it, these fellows gone
(As I hope I shall dispatch um quickly)
A few Articles shall conclude your suite,
Who? Mr. Fitzallen: the only man
That my adoption aims at.
Theres good hope then.
Save you, sir,
You are welcome sir for ought I know yet,
We come to take a view and taste of your ground, sir,
I had rather feed you with better meat, Gentlemen,
But doe your pleasures, pray:
This is our pleasures, we arrest you, sir, in the Kings name
Ha! at whose suite?
Howe's that?
Our weapons, good sir furnish vs.
Aye me,
Stay stay, Gentlemen, lets enquire the cause,
It may be but a trift; a small debt,
Shall need no rescew here.
Sir betwixt three Creditors: Mr. Leach, Mr. Swallow, and Mr. Bonesuck, the debts are a thousand pvunds.
A thousand pounds?
Beshrow me a good mans substance.
Good sir our weapons weal teach these varlets to walk in their own part coloured Coats, that they may be distinguished from honest men.
Sir, attempt no rescue, hoe's our prisoner,
you'll make the danger worse by violence.
A plague upon your Gunpowder treason;
Ye quick dimbed Varlets, is this your salt peter proving,
Your tasting earth, would you might never feed better,
Nor none of your Catchpole tribe:
Our weapons good sir, weal yet deliver him.
Pardon me sir,
I dare not suffer rescue here,
At least not by so great an accessory
As to furnish you; had you had your weapons,
But to see the Ill fate on it, my fine trick In faith,
Let Beggars beware to love Richmens Daughters,
I'll teach um the new morris, I learned it
My self of another careful Father.
May I not be bayld?
Yes, but not with swords,
Slaves, here are sufficent men;
I ith field,
But not in the City, sir, if this Gentleman
Will be one, we'll easily admit the second.
Who I? sir, pray pardon me, I am wronged,
Very much wronged in this, I must needs speak it,
Sir, you have not dealt like an honest Lover,
With me nor my child, here you boast to me
Of a great revenue, a large substance
Wherein you would endow &amp; state my daughter,
Had I mist this, my opinion yet
Thought you a frugal man, to understand,
The sure wards against all necessities,
Boldly to defend your wife and Family,
To walk unmuffled, dreadlesse of these fleshhookes,
Even in the daring'st streets through all the City,
But now I find you a loose Prodigal,
A large unthrift, a whole thousand pound?
Come from him girl, his inside is not found?
Sir I am wronged,
These are malicious plots,
Of some obscure enemies that I have,
These debts are none of mine.
I all say so,
Perhaps you stand engaged for other men,
If so you doe, you must then call it your own,
The like arrerage doe I run into
Should I batle you; But I have vowed against it,
And I will keep my vows: that's religious.
All this is nothing so sir.
Nothing so?
By my faith it is sir, my vows are firm,
I neither owe these debts,
Nor engaged for others.
The easier is your liberty regained,
These appear proofs to me,
Liberty sir?
I hope you'll not see him go to Prison,
I do not mean to bear him company
So far: but Isle see him out of my doors,
Oh sir, let him go to Prison, it is a School
To tame wild bioods, heel be much better fort,
Better for lying in Prison,
In prison,
Believe it many an honest man lies in prison,
Else all the keepers are knaves,
They told me so themselves.
Sir, I doe now suspect you have betrayed him,
And vs to cause vs to be weaponless,
If it be so you're a blood suckng Churl,
One that was born in a great frost, when charity
Could not stir a finger, and you shall dye
In heate of a burning fever in the Dog days,
To begin your hell to you, I have said your grace for you,
Now get you to supper as soon as you can,
Pluto the Moister of the house is set already,
Sir you doe wrong mine Uncle.
Pox on your Uncle,
And all his kin, if my Kinsman mingle
No blood with him.
You're a foul mouthed fellow,
Foul mouthed I will be, you are the son of a whore,
Ha! Whore! plagues and furies Isle thrust that back,
Or pluck thy heart out after, son of a whore?
On thy life Isle prove it,
Death I am naked,
Uncle, Isle give you my left hand, for my sword,
To arm my right with; Oh this fire will flame me
Into prsent ashes,
Sir, give vs Weapons,
We ask our own, you will not rob vs of them?
No sir, but still restrain your furies here,
At my door Isle give you them, nor, at this time
My Nephews, a time will better suit you,
And I must tell you sir, you have spoke swords,
And'gainst the law of arms poisoned the blades
And with them wounded the reputation
Of an unblemished woman: would you 'were out of my doors.
Pox on your doors, and let it run all your house ore,
Give me my sword.
We shall meet Colonel?
Yes better provided, to spur thee more,
I do repeat my words Son of a Whore.
Come sir, it is no worse then it was:
You can doe nothing now.
No, Isle bar him now, away with that beggar,
Good sir, let this persuade you for two minutes stay,
At this prise (I know) you can wait all day.
You know the Remora that stays our ship always.
Your ship sinks many when this hold lets go,
Oh my Fitzallen what is to be done,
To be still thine is all my part to be,
Whether in freedom or captivity,
But art thou so engaged as this pretends?
By heaven, sweet Iane it is all a hellish plot
Your cruel smiling father all this while,
Has candied o'er a bitter pill for me,
Thinking by my remove to plant some other,
And then let go his fangs.
Plant some other?
Thou hast too firmly stamped me for thine own,
Ever to be rast out, I am not currant
In any others hand; I fear too soon
I shall discover it.
Let come the worst,
Bind but this knot with an unloosed line,
I will be still thine own..
And Isle be thine.
My watch has gone two minutes M.
It shall not be renewed, I go sir, farewell.
Farewell, wee both are prisoned, though not togeither:
But heers the difference in our luckelesse chance.
I fear mine own, wish thy deliverance.
Our hearts shall hourly visit, isle send to thee,
Then tic no prison where the mind is free.
So, let him go, now wench I bring thee joys,
A fair sun-shine after this angry storm:
It was my policy to remove this beggar:
What shall rich men wed their only daughters
To two fair suites of clothes? and perhaps yet
The poor Taylor is unpaid; no, no my gentle,
I have a lad of thousands coming in;
Suppose he have more wealth then wit to guide it
Why, theres thy gains, thou kep'st the keys of all
Dispose all: and for generation,
Man does most seldom stamp um from the brain,
Wisemen begets fools, and fools are the fathers
To many wise Children. Histeron, Proteron,
A great scholar may be get an Idiot,
And from the plow tail may come a great scholar:
Nay, they are frequent propogations.
I am not well, sir.
Ha? not well my girl?
Thou shalt have a Physician then,
The best that gold can fetch upon his footecloath,
Thou know my tender pity to thee ever,
Want nothing that thy wishes can instruct thee
To call for, before me, and thou look half ill indeed,
But Isle bring one within a day to thee
Shall rouse thee up: for hes come up already,
One M. Chaugh a Cornish Gentleman:
He's as much land of his own fee-simple,
As a Crow can fly over in half a day:
And now I think on it, at the Crow at Algate
His lodging is, He shall so stir thee up,
Come, come, be cheard, think of thy preserment,
Honour and attendance, these will bring thee health
And the way to um is to clime by wealth.
The Son of a VVhore?
There is not such another murdering piece
In all the stock of Calumny: it kills
At one report two reputations,
A mothers and a Sons: if it were possible
That souls could fight after the bodies fell,
This were a quarrel for 'em; he should be one indeed
That never heard of heavens joys or hells torments
To fight this out: I am too full of conscience,
Knowledge and patience, to give Justice too't,
So careful of my Eternity, which consists
Of upright actions: that unless I knew
It were a truth I stood for, any Coward
Might make my breast his footepace, &amp; who lives
That can assure the truth of his conception,
More then a mothers carriage makes it hopeful.
And i'st not miserable valour then,
That man should hazard all upon things doubtful
Oh ther's the cruelty of my foes advantage,
Could but my soul resolve my cause were just,
Earth's mountain, nor seas surge should hide him from me,
Ee'ne to hells threshold would I follow him,
And see the slanderer in before I left him,
But as it is it fears me, and I never
Appeared too conscionably just till now:
My good opinion of her life and Virtues,
Bids me go on: and fine would I be ruled by it,
But when my judgment tells me shees but woman,
Whose frail to let in death to all mankind,
My valour shrinks at that, certain shees good,
There only wants but my assurance in it,
And al things the were perfect how I thirst for it,
Here comes the only she that could resolve,
But it is too wild a question to demand indeed.
Son l'ue a suite to you.
That may doe well.
To me good Madame, you're most sure to speed in it.
Beet i'my power to grant it,
Tic my love
Makes the request, that you would never part
From England more,
With all my heart tic granted,
I'm sure Ime in the way never to part from it,
Where left you your dear friend the Colonel?
Oh the dear Colonel, I should meet him soon,
Oh fail him not then, hes a Gentleman
The same and reputation of your time
Is much engadg'de to.
Yes, and you knew all mother.
I thought I'd known so much of his fair goodness,
More could not have bin looked for.
O yes, yes Madam.
And this his last exceeded all the rest.
For gratitudes sake let me know this, I pre thee.
Then thus, and I desire your censure freely,
Whether it appeared not a strange noble kindness in him.
Trust me I long to hear't,
You know hes hasty,
That by the way.
So are the best conditions
Your Father was the like.
I begin now
To doubt me more, why am not I so too then,
Blood follows blood through forty generations,
And I'ue a flow paced wrath, a shrewd Dilemma,
Well, as you were saying sir,
Marry thus good Madame,
There was in company a foul mouthed villain, stay, stay,
Who should I liken him to, that you have seen,
He comes so near one that I would not match him with,
Faith just a'th Colonels pitch, hes ne'er the worse man,
Usurers have bin compared to Magistrates,
Extortiners to Lawyers, and the like,
But they all prove ne'er the worse men for that,
 hats bad enough, they need not,
This rude fellow,
A shame to all humanity or manners,
Breaths from the rottens of his gall and malice,
The foulest stain that ever mans same blemished,
Part of which fell upon your honour Madame,
Which heighthend my affliction.
Mine? my honour sir?
The Colonel soon enraged,
(As hoe's all touch-wood)
Takes fire before me, makes the quarrel his,
Appoints the Field, my wrath could not be heard
His was so high pitched, so gloriously mounted,
Now whats the friendly fear, that fights within me,
Should his brave noble Fury undertake,
A cause that were unjust in our defence,
And so to loose him everlastingly,
In that dark depth where all bad quarrels sink,
Never to rise again, what pity it were,
First to dye here and never to dye there.
Why whats the quarrel, speak sir: that should raise
Such fearful doubt, my honour bearing part ou't:
The words what ere they were:
Son of a whore.
Thou lie, &amp; were my love ten thousand times more to thee,
Which is as much now, as ere mothers was,
So thou should feel my anger. Dost thou call
That quarrel doubtful; where are all my merits,
Not one stand up to tell this man his error.
Thou might as well bring the Sun's truth in question,
As thy birth or my honour.
Now blessings crown you for it,
It is the ioyful'st blow that ere flesh felt.
Nay stay, stay sir, thou art not left so soon,
This is no question to be slighted of,
And at your pleasure closed up fair again,
As though you'd never touched it, no honour doubted,
Is honour deeply wounded, and it rages
More then a common smart, being of thy making.
For thee to fear my truth, it kills my comfort,
Where should fame seek for her reward, when he
That is her own by the great tie of blood,
Is fardest of in bounty, O poor goodness!
That only pay'st thy self with thy own works,
For nothing else looks towards thee. Tell me pray,
Which of my loving cares dost thou requite
With this wild thought? which of my prayers or wishes?
Many thou owe me for, this seven year hast thou known me
A widow, only married to my vow:
Thats no small witness of my faith and love
To him that in life was thy honoured Father,
And live I now to know that good mistrusted.
No, t'shall appear that my belief is cheerful,
For never was a mothers reputation
Nobler defended, tic my joy and pride,
I have a firm to bestow upon it.
Whats that you said sir?
It were too bold, and soon yet
To crave for giuenesse of you. I will earn it first,
Dead or alive, I know I shall enjoy it.
Whats all this sir?
My joys beyond expression:
I do but think how wretched I had been,
Were this another quarrel, and not mine.
Why, is it yours?
Mine! Think me not so miserable,
Not to be mine: then were I worse then abject,
More to be loathde then villnes; or sins dunghill:
Nor did I fear your goodness (faithful Madame)
But came with greedy joy to be confirmed in it,
To give the nobler onset, then shines valour,
And admiration from her fixed Sphere draws,
When it comes burnished with a righteous cause,
Without which I'm ten sadomes under coward,
That now am ten degrees aboue a man,
Which is but one of virtues easiest wonders.
But pray stay; all this while I understood you,
The Colonel was the man
Yes, hoe's the man,
The man of injury, reproach and slander,
Which I must turn into his soul again.
The Colonel do it, thats strange
The villain did it:
Thats not so strange;  your blessing and your leave
Come, come, you shall not go.
Not go; were death
Sent now to summon me to my Eternity,
I'd put him off an hour: why the whole world
He's not chains strong enough to bind me from it:
The strongest is my Reverence to you,
Which if you force upon me in this case;
I must be force to break it.
Stay I say.
In any thing command me but in this Madame.
Lass, I shall loose him, you'll hear me first.
At my return I will.
Youl'e never hear me more then.
How?
Come back I say:
You may well think theres cause I call so often.
Ho, cause! what cause?
So much, you must not go.
How?
You must not go.
Must not, why?
I know a reason for it,
Which I could wish you'd yield to, &amp; not know
If not, it must come forth. Faith, do not know,
And yet obey my will.
Why I desire
To know no other then the cause I have,
Nor should you wish it, if you take your injury
For one more great, I know the world includes not.
Yes, one that makes this nothing,yet be ruled,
And if you understand not, seek no further.
I must, for this is nothing.
Then take all,
And if amongst it you receive that secret
That will offend you, though you condemn me,
Yet blame your self a little, for perhaps
I would have made my reputation sound
Upon an others hazards with less pity;
But upon yours I dare not.
How?
I dare not,
'T was your own seeking; this,
If you mean evilly
I cannot understand you, nor for all the riches
This life has, would I.
would you never might.
Why, your goodness, that I joy to fight for.
In that you neither right your joy nor me.
What an ill Orator has virtue got here?
Why, shall I dare to think it a thing possible
That you were ever false?
Oh fearfully!
As much as you come to.
Oh silence, cover me.
Iue felt a deadlier wound then man can give me, false?
I was betrayed to a most sinful hour.
By a corrupted soul I put in trust once.
A Kinswoman.
Where is she? let me pay her.
Oh, dead long since.
Nay then sh'as all her wages:
False, do not say it, for honours goodness doe not,
You never could be so, he I called Father,
Deserved you at your best, when youth &amp; merit
Could boast at highest in you, y'ade no grace,
Or virtue that he matched not, no delight
That you invented but he sent it crowned
To your full wishing soul.
That heaps my guiltiness.
Oh, were you so unhappy to be false,
Both to your self and me, but to me chiefly,
What a days hope is here lost, and with it
The joys of a just cause. Had you but thought
On such a noble quarrel, you'd ha dyed
Ere you'd ha yielded, for the sins hate first,
Next for the shame of this hours cowardice:
Cursed be the heate that lost me such a cause,
A work that I was made for. Quench my spirit,
And out with honours flaming lights within thee:
Be dark and dead to all respects of manhood,
I never shall have use of valour more:
Put off your vow for shame, why should you hoard up
Such Justice for a barren widowhood,
That was so injurious to the faith of wedlock.
I should be dead, for all my lifes works ended,
I dare not sight a stroke now, nor engadge
The noble resolution of my friends,
That were more wild. Their here, kill me my shame,
I am not for the fellowship of honour.
Captain, fie come sir, we have been seeking for you
very late to day, this was not wot to be,
Your enemies ith field,
Truth enters cheerfully.
Good faith sir you've a royal quarrel on it,
Yes, in some other Country, Spain or Italy.
It would be held so.
How, and first not hereso?
Tic not so contumeliously received
In these parts, and you mark it.
Not in these?
Why prithee what is more, or can be?
Yes,
That ordinary Commotioner the lye
Is Father of most quarrels in this Climate,
And held here capital, and you go to that.
But sir, I hope you will not go to that,
Or change your own for it, Son of a Whore,
Why theres the Lye down to posterity.
The lye to brithe, the lye to honesty,
Why would you cousin you self so, and beguile
So brave a cause, Manhoods best Master piece,
Doe you ever hope for one so brave again.
Consider then the man Colonel,
Exactly worthy, absolutely noble,
How ever spleen and rage abuses him:
And tic not well, nor manly to pursue
A mans infirmity.
O miracle!
So hopeful, valiant and complete a Captain,
Possessed with a tame devil, come out, thou spoilest
The most improude young soldier of seven kingdoms,
Made Captain at nineteen, which was deserved
The year before, but honour comes behind still,
Come out I say, this was not wont to be,
That spirit never stood in need of provocation,
Nor shall it now. Away sir.
Urge me not.
By Manhoods reverend honour but we must.
I will not fight a stroke.
O blasphemy
To sacred valour!
Lead me where you lift.
Pardon this traitorous slumber, clogd with euils.
Nay Master, you must not be covered to me,
The Patient must op to the Physician
All her dearest sorrows: Art is blinded else,
And cannot show her mystical effects.
Can Art be so dimsighted, learned sir?
I did not think her so in capacious:
You train me (as I guess) like a Conjurer,
One of our five Oraculous wizards,
who from the help of his Examinant,
By the near guess of his suspicion
Appoints out the thief by the marks he tells him:
Have you no skill in Physiognomy?
what colour (says your coat) is my disease?
I am unmarried, and it cannot be yellow,
If it be Maiden greene, you cannot miss it.
I cannot see that vacuum in your blood:
But Gentlewoman, if you love yourself,
Love my advise, be free and plain with me,
where lies your grief?
Where lies my grief indeed?
I cannot tell the truth where my grief lies,
But my Ioy's imprisoned.
This is mystical.
Lord, what plain questions you make problems of,
Your Arts such a regular high way
That put you out of it, and you are lost:
My heart is imprisoned in my body, sir:
Theres all my joy, and my sorrow too
Lies very near it.
They are bad adiuncts,
Your joy and grief lying so near together,
Can propagate no happy issue, remove
The one (and let it be the worst) your grief,
If youl'e propose the best unto your joy.
why, now comes your skill: what physic for it?
Now I have found you out, you are in love.
I think I am, what your appliance now?
Can all your Paracelsian mixtures cure it,
'T must be a Surgeon of the Civil Law,
I fear that must cure me.
Gentlewoman,
If you knew well my heart, you would not bee
So circular, the very common name
Of Physician might reprove your niceness,
wee are as secret as your Confessors,
And as firm obliged, tic a fine like death
For vs to blab.
I will trust you, yet sir,
I had rather doe it by Attorney to you,
I else have blushes that will stop my tongue
Have you no friend so friendly as your self
Of mine own Sex, to whom I might impart
My sorrows to you at the second hand.
why law, there I hit you, &amp; be confirmed,
Isle give you such a bosom counsellonr,
That your own tong shall be sooner false to you,
Make your self unready, and be naked to her:
Isle fetch her presently.
I must reveal
My shame will else take tongue, &amp; speak before
Tic a necessity impulsiue drives me: me,
Oh my hard fate, but my more hard father,
That Father of my fate, a father said I?
What a strange Paradox I run into,
I must accuse two fathers of my fate
And fault, a reciprocal generation,
The father of my fault would have repairde,
His faulty issue, but my Fates Father hinders it:
Then Fate and fault, where ever I begin,
I must blame both, and yet it was love did sin.
Look you Mistress, heres's your closer put in,
What you please, you ever keep the key of it,
Let me speak private, sir.
With all my heart,
I will be more then mine ears length from you.
You hold some endeared place with this Gent.
Hoe's my brother forsooth, I his creature,
He does command me any lawful office
Either in act or counsel.
I must not doubt you,
Your brother he's protested secresic,
And strengthened me in you: I must lay op
A guilty sorrow to you: I am with child,
Tic no black Swan I show you, these spots stick
Upon the face of many go for maids,
I that had face enough to do the deed,
Cannot want tongue to speak it: but tic to you,
Whom I accept my helper.
Mistress, tic locked
Within a Castle that's invincible,
It is too late to wish it were undone.
I have scarce wish within my self so strong
For understand me, tic not all so ill,
As you may yet conceit it: this deed was done
When heaven had witness to the Iugall knot,
Only the barren ceremony wants.
Which by an adverse Father is abridged.
Would my pity could help you.
Your counsel may.
My Father yet shoots widest from my sorrow,
And with a care indulgent seeing me changed
From what I was, sends for your good brother
To find my grief, and practise remedy:
You know it, give it him, but if a fourth
Be added to this counsel: I will say
Ye' are worse then you can call me at the worst.
At this advantage of my reputation.
I will revive a reputation,
That women long has lost, isle keep counsel.
Isle only now oblige my teeth to you,
And they shall bite the blabber if it offer
To breath on an offending syllable.
I trust you, go, whisper, here comes my Father.
Sir. you are welcome, more and most welcome,
All the degrees of welcome: thrice welcome sir.
Is this your daughter, sir?
Mine only joy, sir.
Isle show her the Cornish hug, sir,  I have kissed you now sweet heart, and I never doe any kindness to my friends, but I use to hitte'am in the teeth with it presently.
My name is Trimtram forsooth, look what my master does, I use to doe the like.
You are deceived, sir, I am not this Gentlewomans servant, to make your curtsy equal.
You doe not know me Mistress.
No indeed, I doubt I shall learn too soon.
My name is Chawgh, a Cornish Gentleman, my mans mine own countryman too in faith: I warrant, you took vs for some of the small Islanders.
I did indeed, between the Scotch and Irish.
Red-shankes: I thought so by my truth, no truly, we are right Cornish Diamonds.
Yes, we cut out quarrels, and break glasses, where wee go,
If it be hidden from her Father, yet
His ignorance understands well his knowledge,
For this (I guess) to be some rich coxcomb
He would put upon his daughter,
Thats plainly so.
Then only shoe's beholding to out help
For the close delivery of her burden,
Else ell's overthrown.
And pray be faithful in that. sir.
Tush, we Physicians are the truest
Alchemists, that from the ore and dross of sin,
Can new distill a Maidenhead again.
How doe you like her sir?
Troth I doe like her sir in the way of comparison to any thing that a man would desire. I am as high as the Mount in love with her already, and thats as far as I can go by land, but I hope to go further by water with her one day.
I tell you sir, she has lost some colour,
By wrestling with a peevish sickness now of late.
Wrestle? nay and she love wrestling, Isle teach her a trick to overthrow any peevish sickness in London, what ere it be.
Well, she had a rich beauty though I say it,
Nor is it lost: a little thing repairs it.
She shall command the best thing that I have in Middlesex, in faith.
Well sir, talk with her, give her a relish
Of your good liking to her, you shall have time
And free access to finish what you now begin,
What means my father? my loves unjust restraint,
My shame were it published, both together
Could not afflict me like this odious fool:
Now I see why he hated my Fitz-Allen.
Sweet Lady, your father says you are a wrestler,
if you love that sport, I love you the better. I faith I love it as well as I love my meat after supper, tic indeed meat, drink and cloth to me.
Me thinks it should tear your clothes, sir.
Not a rag in faith: Trimtram hold my cloak, Isle wrestle a fall with you now, Isle show you a trick that you never saw in your life.
Oh good sir for bear, I am no wrestler.
Good sir take heed, you'll hurt the Gentlewoman.
I will not catch beneath the waste believe it, I know fair play,
Tic no women's exercise in London, sir.
I'll ne'er believe that, the hug and the locke betweene man and woman, with a fair fall, is as sweet an exercise for the body, as you'll desire in a summers evening.
Sir, the Gentlewoman is not well,
It may be you are a Physician, sir.
Tic so, sir.
I say then, and isle stand too't, three ounces of wrestling with two hippos, a yard of a greene gown put together in the Intourne, is as good a medicine for the greene sickness as ever breathed.
Come sir, take your cloak again, I see here will be ne'er a match.
A match? I'd rather bee matched from a Muskets mouth, and shot unto my death.
Isle wrestle with any man for a good supper.
I marry sir, isle take your part there, catch that catch may.
Sir, she is willing too't. There at my house,
She shall be private, and near to my attendance,
I know you not mistrust my faithful care,
I shall return her soon and perfectly.
Take your charge sir, go with this gentleman (Iane)
But prithee look well this way, ere thou go,
It is a rich Simplicity of great Estate:
A thing that will be ruled, and thou shalt rule,
Consider of your sexes general aim,
That domination is a women's heaven.
I'll think on it sir.
My daughter is retiring, sir.
I will part at Dartmouth with her, sir, Oh that thou did but love wrestling, I would give any man three foils on that condition.
There's three sorts of men that would thank you for um, either Cutlers, Fencers, or Players.
Sir as I began, I end, wondrous welcome.
What, will you go to school to day? you are enterd you know, and your quarterige runs on.
What? to the roaring school? pox on it, it is such a damnable noise, I shall never attain it neither: I doe wonder they have never a Wrestling School, that were worth twenty of your fencing or dancing schools.
Well, you must learn to roar here in London, you'll never proceed in the reputation of Gallantry else.
How long he's Roaring been an exercise, think thou Trimtram.
Ever since Guns came up, the first was your roaring Meg
Then it was a woman was the first roarer:
I, a fire of her tuch-hole, 'that cost many a proper mans life since that time: and then the Lyons they learned it from the Guns, living so near um, then it was heard to the Banckeside, and the Bears they began to roar: then the boys got it, and so ever since there have been a company of roaring boys.
And how long will it last, think thou?
As long as the Water runs under London Bridge, or Watermen at Westminster stayres.
Well, I will begin to roar too, since it is in fashion, Oh Corineus, this was not in thy time, I should have heard on it by the tradition of mine Ancestors (for In me sure there were Choughs in thy days) if it had been so, when Hercules and thou were on the Olimpicke mount together, then was wrestling in request.
I, and that Mount is now the Mount in Cornwall. Corineus brought it thither under one of his arms, they say.
Oh Corineus my predecessor: that I had but lived in those days to see thee wrestle, on that condition I had dyed seven year ago.
Nay, it should have been a dozen at least, in faith, on that condition.
Well, your wills now.
Our Wills? our Loves, our Duties
To honoured Fortitude: What wills have we
But our desires to Nobleness and Merit?
Valours advancement, and the sacred Rectitude
Due to a valorous cause.
Oh, thats not mine.
War he's his court of Justice, that's the field,
Where all cases of Manhood are determinde,
And your case is no mean one.
True, then it were virtuous:
But mine is in extremes, foul and unjust:
Well, now you've got me hither, you're as far
To seek in your desire, as at first minute:
For by the strength and honour of a vow,
I will not lift a finger in this quarrel.
How? not in this? be not so rash a sinnen:
Why sir, doe you ever hope to fight again then
Take heed on it, you must never look for that,
Why the universal stock of the Worlds injury,
Will bee too poor to find a quarrel for you:
Give up your right and title to desert, sir,
If you fail virtue here, she needs you not:
All your time after, let her take this wrong,
And never presume then to serve her more:
Bid farewell to the integrity of arms,
And let that honourable name of Soldier
Fall from you like a shivered wreath of Laurel
By Thunder struck from a desertlesse forehead,
That wears another right by usurpation.
Good Captain, do not wilfully cast away
At one hour all the same your life he's won:
This is your native seat, here you should seek
Most to preserve it, or if you will dote
So much on life (poorelife) which in respect
Of life in honour is but death and darkness
That you will prove neglectful of your self,
Which is to me too fearful to imagine,
Yet for that virtuous Ladies cause (your mother)
Her Reputation, dear to Nobleness
As grace to penitence, whose fair memory,
Ee'n crowns fame in your issue, for that blessednes,
Give not this ill place, but in spite of hell,
And all her base feats, be exactly valiant,
Ohoo
Why, well said, thetes fair hope in that,
Another such a one.
Came they in thousands?
Tic all against you.
Then poor friendless merit,
Heaue be good to thee, thy professor leaves thee:
Hoe's combed, do but you draw, we'll fight it for you.
I know too much to grant that.
O dead manhood!
Had ever such a cause so faint a servant?
Shame brand me if I do not suffer for him.
Iu'e heard sir, ya'ue bin guilty of much boasting,
For your brave earlines at such a meeting,
You've lost the glory of that way this morning:
I was the first to day.
So were you ever.
In my respect sir.
O most base Praeludium!
I never thought on Victory our Mistress
With greater reverence then I have your worth,
Nor ever loved her better.
Slight, I could knock his brains about his heals, me thinks.
Peace, prithee peace.
Success in you has been my absolute joy,
And when I have wished content, I have wished your friendship.
Stay, let me but run him through the tongue a little,
Theres Lawyers blood in it, you shall see foul gear straight
Come you are as mad now, as hoe's cowardous.
I came not hither sir for an Encomium.
No, the more Coxcomb he, that claws the head
Of your vain glory with it!
I came provided
For Storms and Tempests, and the foulest Season
That ever Rage let forth, or blew in wildness
From the incensed prison of mans blood.
Tic otherwise with me, I come with Mildness,
Peace, constant Amity, and calm Forgiveness,
The weather of a Cristian and a friend.
Give me a valiant Turk, though not worth ten pence, rather.
Yet sir, the world will judge the injury mine.
Insufferable mine, mine beyond injury,
Thousands have made a less wrong reach to hell,
I, and reioyc'st in his most endless vengeance,
(A miserable triumph, though a just one)
But when I call to memory our long friendship
Me thinks it cannot be too great a wrong.
That then I should not pardon, why should man,
Eor a poor hasty syllable or two,
(And vented only in forgetful fury)
Cheine all the hopes and riches of his soul
To the revenge of that, dye, lost for ever:
For he that makes his last peace with his Maker
In anger, anger is his peace eternally:
He must expect the same return again,
Whose venture is deceitful. Must he not sir?
I see what I must do, fairly put up again:
For here'le be nothing done, I perceive that,
What shall be done in such a worthless businesset
But to be sorry, and to be forgiven.
You sir to bring repentance, and I pardon.
I bring repentance sir?
If it be too much
To say Repentance: Call it what you please sir:
Choose your own world, I know you're sorry for it, and thats as good.
I sorry? by fems honour, I am wronged:
Doe you seek for peace, and draw the quarrel larger?
Then tic: I'm sorry that I thought you so.
A Captain, I could gnaw his title of.
Nor is it any misbecomming virtue, sir,
In the best manliness to repent a wrong,
Which made me bold with you.
I could cuff his head off,
Nay: pish.
Pox on him, I could eat his buttock baked me thinks.
So, once again take thou thy peaceful rest then,
But as I put thee up: I must proclaim
This Captain here, both to his friends and mine,
That only came to see sayre valour righted,
A base submissive coward; so I leave him.
Oh, heaven has pitied my excessive patience,
And sent me a cause: now I have a cause:
A coward I was never: Come you back sir?
How?
You left a coward here?
Yes sir, with you.
Tic such base mettell sir: twill not be taken,
It must home again with you.
Should this be true now.
Impossible, coward do more then bastard?
I prithee mock me not, take heed you do not,
For if I draw once more, I shall grow terrible,
And rage will force me doe what will grieve honour.
Ha, ha, ha.
He smiles, dare it be he? what think you Gentleme?
Your judgements, shall I not be cussend in him?
This cannot be the man? why he was bookish,
Made an invective lately against fighting,
A thing in truth that moved a little with me,
Put up a fowler contumely far
Then thousand cowards came to, &amp; grew thankfull
Blessed remembrance in time of need?
I'd lost my honour else.
Do you note his joy?
I never felt a more severe necessity.
Then came thy excellent pity.-.Not yet ready?
Have you such confidence in my just manhood:
That you dare so long trust me, and yet tempt me
Beyond the toleration of mans virtue,
Why? would you be more cruel then your injury?
Do you first take pride to wrong me, &amp; then think me
Not worth your fury, do not use me so:
I shall deceive you then: sir, either draw,
And that not sleightingly, but with the care
Of your best preservation; with that watchfulness,
As you'd defend your self from circular fire,
Your sins rage, or her Lord, this will require it,
Or you'll be too soon lost for I'ue an anger
Has gathered mighty strength against you: mighty;
Yet you shall find it honest to the last,
Noble and Fair.
I'll ventur'te once again.
And if it be but as true, as it is wondrous,
I shall have that I come for; Your leave Gent.
If he should do it indeed, &amp; deceives al now:
Stay, by this hand he offers; fights in faith.
Fights: by this light he fights sir.
So me thinks sir.
An absolute Punto: hey.
!It was a Passado sir.
Why let it pass, and it was, I'm sure, t'was somewhat,
Whats that now.
Thats a Punto.
O go to then,
I knew it was not far off: What a worlds this?
Is coward a more stirring meat then bastard, my Masters?
Put in more eggs for shame when you get children,
And make it true Court custard. Ho? I honour thee:
Tic right and fair, and he that breathes against it,
He breathes against the justice of a man,
And man to cut him off: tic no injustice.
Thanks, thanks, for this most unexpected nobleness.
Truth never fails her servant, sir, nor leaves him With the days shame upon him.
You have redeemde
Thy worth to the same height it was first esteemed.
Alas, how is it sir: give vs some hope
Of your stay with vs: Let your spirit bee seen
Aboue your fortune, the best fortitude
He's been of Fate ill friended: Now force your Empire,
And reign aboue your blood, spite of deiection,
Reduce the Monarchy of your abler mind,
Let not flesh straighten it.
Oh, just Heaven has found me,1
And turned the strings of my too hasty Injuries
Into my own blood, I pursued my ruin,
And urged him past the patience of an Angel.
Could mans revenge extend beyond mans life:
This would have waked it, If this flame will light me
But till I see my sister: tic a kind one.
More I expect not from it, Noble deserver:
Farewell most valiant, and most wronged of men,
Do but forgive me, &amp; I am Victor then.
Sweet Fro, to your most indulgent care,
Take this my hearts joy, I must not tell you,
The value of this jewel in my bosom.
Dat you may vell. sir, der can niet forstoore you.
Indeed I cannot tell you, you know Nurse,
These are aboue the quantity of prise,
Where is the glory of the goodliest trees
But in the fruit and branches? The old stock
Must decay, and sprigs, syens such as these
Must become new stocks from vs to glory,
In their fruitful issue, so we are made
Immortal on by other.
You spreke a most lieben fader, and Ec fall do de best of tender Nurses to dis Infant, my pretty Frokin.
I know you will be loving, here sweet friend,
Heere's earnest of a large sum of love and coin.
To quit your tender care.
I have some reason too,
To purchase your dear care unto this Infant.
You be de witness of de Baptime, dat is, as you spreken: de godimother, ec vell forstoor it so.
Yes, I am the bad mother: If it be offence.
I must be a little kind too.
Much tankes to you all: dis child is much belouen: and Ec sall see much care over it.
Farewell good sister: Show her the way forth,
I shall often visit you, kind Nurse.
You sall be velcome.
Oh sir, what a friend have I found in you?
Where my poor power shall stay in the requital,
Your self must from your fair condition
Make up in mere acceptance of my will.
Oh, pray you urge it not, we are not borne
For our selves only, self love is a sin,
But in our loving donatiues to others,
Mans virtue best consists, love all begets,
Without, all are adulterate and counterfeit.
Your boundless love I cannot satisfy,
But with a mental memory of your virtues,
Yet let me not engage your cost withal,
Beseech you then take restitution
Of pains and bounty which you have disbursed
For your poor debtor.
You will not offer it:
Doe not esteem my love so mercenary,
To be the hire of coin? Sure, I shall think
You doe not hold so worthily of me
As I wish to deserve.
Not recompense!
Then you will beggar me with too much credit,
If not sufficient, you preserve my name,
Which I had forfeited to shame and scorn:
Cover my vices with a veil of love,
Defend and keep me from a fathers rage,
Whose love yet infinite (not knowing this)
Might (knowing) turn a hate as infinite:
Sure he would throw me ever from his blessings,
And cast his curses on me: yes, further,
Your secrecy keeps me in the state of woman:
For else what husband would choose me his wife:
Knowing the honour of a Bride were lost.
I cannot number half the good you doe me,
In the concealed retention of my sin,
Then make me not worse then I was before.
In my ingratitude, good sir.
Again.
I shall repent my love (if you'll so call it)
To be made such a Hackney, give me coin?
I had as leave you gave me poison (Lady)
For I have Art and Antidotes gain'st that,
I might take that, but this I will refuse.
Well you then teach me how I may requite you,
In some small quantity.
'T was that I looked for.
Yes, I will tell you Lady a full quittance,
And how you may become my Creditresse.
I beseech you do sir.
Indeed I will Lady,
Not in coin, Mistress, for silver though white,
Yet it draws black lines: It shall not rule my palm
There to mark forth his base corruption:
Pay me again in the same quality
That I to you tendered, thats love for love:
Can you love me Lady? you have confessed
My love to you.
Most amply.
Why faith then,
Pay me back that way.
How do you mean, sir?
Tush, our meanings are better understood
Then shifted to the tongue, it brings along
A little blabbing blood into our cheeks,
That shames vs when we speak.
I understand you not.
Fie, you doe, make not your self ignorant
In what you know, you have tan forth the lesson
That I would read to you.
Sure then I need not,
Read it again, sir.
Yes, it makes perfect,
You know the way unto Achillis spear,
If that hurt you, I have the cure you see.
Come, you're a good man, I do perceive you:
You put a trial to me, I thank you,
You're my just Confessor, and believe me,
I'll have no further penance for this sin,
Convert a year unto a lasting ever,
And call it Apollo's smile, it was onces then never.
Pray you mistake me not, indeed I love you.
Indeed, what deed?
The deed that you have done.
I cannot believe you.
Believe the deed then.
Away, you're a Blackamoor, you love me?
I hate you for your love: Are you the man
That in your painted outside seemed so white?
Oh, you're a soul dissembling Hypocrite,
You saved me from a thief that your self might rob me,
Skin'd'ore a greene wound to breed an ulcer.
Is this the practise of your Physic College?
Have you yet uttered all your niceness forth?
If you have more, vent it, certes I think
Your first grant was not yielded with less pain,
If'twere, you have your prise, yield it again.
Pray you, tell me sir, (I asked it before)
Is it a practise amongst you Physicians.
Tush, thats a secret, We cast al waters.
Should I reveal, you would mistrust my counsel:
The Lawyer and Physician here agrees
To women Clients they give back their fees,
And is not that kindness?
This for thy love,
Out, outside of a man: thou Cinnamon tree,
That but thy bark hast nothing good about thee
The Unicorn is hunted for his horn,
The rest is left for carrion: Thou false man.
Tha'st fished with silver hooks and golden baits:
But I'll avoid all thy deceiving sleights.
Doe what you lift, I will do something too:
Remember yet what I have done for you,
You've a good face now, but twill grow rugged.
Ere you grow old: old men will despise you:
Think on your Grandam Helen the fairest Queen
When in a new glass she spied her old face:
She (smiling) wept to think upon the change,
Take your time, you're crazed, you're an apple fallen
From the tree, if you be kept long, you'll rot.
Study your answer well, yet I love you.
If you refuse I have a hand aboue.
Poison thy self, thou soul Empoysoner:
Of thine own practique drink the Theory.
What, a White Devil have I met withal?
What shall I doe? What do? i'st a question?
Nor shame, nor hate, nor fear, nor lust, nor force
(Now being too bad) shall ever make me worse,
What have we here? a second spirit.
Mistress,
I am sent to you.
Is your message good?
As you receive it, my brother sent me,
And you know he loves you.
I heard say so;
But it was a false report.
Pray, pardon me, I must doe my message,
Who lives (commanded) must obey his Keeper.
I must persuade you to this act of woman.
Woman! of Strumpet
Indeed of Strumpet,
He takes you at advantage of your fall,
Seeing you down before.
Curse on his fained smiles.
Hoe's my brother Mistress, &amp; a curse on you
If ere you bless him with that cursed deed,
Hang him, poison him, he held out a Rose,
To draw the yielding sense, which come to hand
He shifts, and gives a canker.
You speak well yet.
I, but Mistress, now I consider it,
Your reputation lies at his mercy,
Your fault dwells in his breast, say, he throw it out,
It will be known, how are you then undone?
Think on it, your good name, and they are not to be sold
In every market, a good name's dear,
And indeed more esteemed then our actions,
By which wee should deserve it.
Aye me most wretched.
What? doe you shrink at that?
Would you not wear one spot upon your face,
To keep your whole body from a leprosy,
Though it were vndiscouerd ever, hang him,
Fear him not. Horseleeches suck out his corrupt blood,
Draw you none from him, less it be pure and good.
Do you speak your soul?
By my soul doe I.
Then yet I have a friend; but thus exhort me,
And I have still a collumbe to support me.
One fault Heaven soon forgives, and tic on earth forgot,
The Moon her self is not without one spot.
Now sir, where is he? speak, why comes he not?
I sent you for him; bless this fellows senses:
What has he seen? a soul nine hours entrancst,
Hovering twixt hell and heaven, could not wake gastlier,
Not yet return an answer? What say you sir?
Where is he?
Gon?
What say thou?
He is gone Madame.
But as we heard, unwillingly hee went
As ever blood enforced.
Went, whether went he?
Madam, I fear, I ha said too much already.
These men are both agreed, speak, whether went he?
Why toI would you'd think the rest your self Madame.
Meek Patience bless me.
To the field.
To fight, Madame.
To fight!
There came two urging Gentlemen,
That called themselves his seconds, both so powerful,
As tic reported they prevailed with him,
With little labour.
O hes lost, hes gone,
For all my pains, hoe's gone; two meeting torrents
Are not so merciless as their two rages,
Hee never comes again,wretched affection.
Have I belied my faith? injured my goodness?
Slandered my honour for his praeseruation?
Having but only him: and yet no happier.
Tic then a judgment plain, truths angry with me,
In that I would abuse her sacred whiteness,
For any wordly temporal respect:
Forgive me then thou glorious women's virtue,
Admired where ere thy habitation is,
Especially in vs weak ones: Oh forgive me.
For tic thy vengeance this, to belie truth,
Which is so hardly ours, with such pain purchased
Fastings, and prayers, continence and care,
Misery must needs ensue: Let him not dye
In that unchaste belief of his false birth,
And my disgrace: What ever Angel guides him,
May this request be with my tears obtained,
Let his soul know, my honour is unstained,
Run, seek, away, if there be any hope,
Let me not loose him yet; when I think on him,
His deerenes, and his worth, it earns me more,
They that know riches tremble to be poor.
My passion is not every women's sorrow,
She must be truly honest feels my greese,
And only known to One, if such there bee,
They know the sorrow that oppresses me.
Truth sir, I must needs blame you for a Truant, having but one lesson read to you and neglect so soon: fie, I must see you once a day at least.
Would I were whipped Tutor if it were not long of my man Trimtram here.
Who, of me?
Tak't upon the Trim. Isle give the five shillings, 'as I am a Gentleman.
Isle see you whipped first: well, I will too; faith sir, I saw he was not perfect, and I was loath he should come before to shame himself.
How? shame sir? is it a shame for Scholars to learn? Sir, there are great Scholars that are but slenderly read in our profession: sir, first it must be Economical, the Oecumenicall: shame not to practise in the house how to perform in the field: the nail that is driven takes a little hold at the first stroke, but more at the second, and more at the third, but when tic home to the head, then tic firm.
Faith I have been driving it home to the head this two days.
I helped to hammer it in as well as I could too sir.
Well sir, I will hear you rehearse anon, mean time peruse the exemplary of my bills, and tell me in what langauge I shall roar a Lectue to you; or isle read to you the Mathematicall science of Roaring.
Is it Mathematical?
Oh sir, does not the winds roar? the Sea roar? the Welkin roar? indeed, most things doe roar by nature, and is not the knowledge of these things Mathematical?
Pray prooceed sir.
The names of the languages, the Sclanonian, Parthaminion, Barmeothian, Tiburnian, Wappinganian, or the moderne Londonian. Any man or woman that is desirous to roar in any of these languages, in a week they shall be perfect, if they will take pains; so let'um repair into Holborn to the sign of the Cheat loaf.
Now your bill speaks of that, I was wondering a good while at your sign, the loaf looks very like bread in faith, but why is it called the cheat loaf?
This house was sometimes a Bakers sir, that served the Court where the bread is called cheat.
I, I, it was a Baker that cheated the Court with bread.
Well sir, choose your languages: and your Lectures shall be read, between my Usher and my self, for your betla instruction, provided your conditions be performed in the premises beforesaid.
Look you sir, theres twenty pound in hand, and twenty more, I am to pay when I am allowed a sufficient Roarer.
You speak in good earnest sir.
Yes faith doe I Trimtram shall be my witness.
Yes indeed sir, twenty pound is very good earnest.
Sir one thing I must tell you belongs to my place, you are the youngest Scholar, and till another comes under you, there is a certain garnish belongs to the School, for in our practise we grow to a quarrel: then there must be wine ready to make all friends, for thats the end of Roaring, it is valiant but harmless, and this charge is yours.
With all my heart in faith and I like it the better: because no blood comes on it, who shall fetch?
Isle be your Spaniel sir.
Bid Vapor, bring some Tobacco too,
Doe and heere's money for it.
No, you shall not, let me see the money: so, Isle keep it, and discharge him after the Combat, for your practise sake you and your man shall roar him out on it, (for indeed you must pay your debts so: for thats one of the maine ends of Roaring) and when you have left him in a chafe, then Isle qualify the Rascal.
Content in faith Trim. weal Roar the rusty Rascal out of his Tobacco.
I and he had the best Craccus in London.
Observe Sir, wee could now roar in the Slauonian Language, but this practise hath been a little sublime: some hairs breadth or so aboue your Caput; I take it for your use and understanding both it were fitter for you to taste the moderne assault, only the Londonian Roar.
In faith sir, that's for my purpose, for I shall use all my
roaring here in London: in Cornwall wee are all for wrastling, and I doe not mean to travel over sea to roar there.
Observe then sir, but it were necessary you took forth your tables, to note the most difficult points for the better assistance of your memory.
Nay sir, my man and I keep two Tables.
I sir, and as many trenchers, cattes meat and dogs meat enough.
Note sir,  Dost thou confront my Cyclops?
With a Briarean Brousted:
Cyclops.
Briarean.
I know thee and thy lineal pedigree,
It is Collateral: as Brutus and Posthumus.
Brutus.
Posthumus.
False as the face of Heccate; thy sister is a 
What is my Sister Centaur?
I say thy Sister is a Bronstrops.
A Bronstrops!
Tutor, Tutor, ere you go any further, tell me the English of that, what is a Bronsterops pray.
A Bronsterops is in English a Hippocrene.
A Hippocrene, note it Trim. I love to understand the English as I go.
Whats the English of Hippierene.
Why Bronsterops?
Thou dost obtrect my flesh and blood,
Again, I denounce, thy sister is a fructifer,
What's that Tutor?
That is in English a Fucus or a Minotaure.
A Minotaure:
A Fucus.
I say thy mother is a Callieut, a Panagron, a Duplar and a Sindicus.
Dislocate thy Bladud.
Bladud shall conjure, if his Daemons once appear,
Advance thy respondency.
Nay good gentleman, doe not fallout, a cup of wine quickly Trimtram.
See my steel hath a glister,
Pray wipe him, and put him up again good Usher.
Sir at your request I pull down the Flag of defiance.
Give me a boule of Wine my fury shall bee quenched, here Usher.
I pledge thee in good friendship.
I like the conclusion of Roaring very well in faith.
It has an excellent conclusion indeed, if the Wine be good, always provided.
O the wine must be always provided be sure of that.
Else you spoil the conclusion, and that you know crowns all.
Tic much like wrestling in faith: for wee shake hands ere we begin: now thats to avoid the Law, for then if hee throw him a furlong into the ground, hee cannot recover himself upon him, because it was done in cold friendship.
I believe you sir.
And then we drink afterwards, just in this fashion, wrestling and Roaring are as like as can bee in faith, even like long sword and half pike.
Nay they are reciprocal if you mark it, for as there is a great Roaring at Wrestling: so there is a kind of wrestling and contention at Roaring.
True in faith, for I have heard um roar from the six windmills to Islington: those have been great falls then.
Come, now a brief rehearsal of your other days lesson, betwixt your man and you, and then for to day wee break up school.
Come, Trimtram; if I be out Tutor, Isle be bold to look in my tables, because I doubt I am scarce perfect.
Well, well, I will not see small faults
The wall,
The wall of me, to thy kennel spannell,
Wilt thou not yield precedence?
To thee, I know thee and thy brood
Know thou my brood, I know thy brood to,
thou art a Rooke;
The nearer a kin to the Choughs?
The Rooks a kin to the Choughs?
Very well maintained,
Dungcoer, thou least,
Lie, enucleate the kernel of thy scabbard,
Now if I durst draw my sword, it were valiant in faith:
Draw, draw, howsoever,
Have some wine ready to make vs friends I pray you,
Chaugh, I will make thee fly and roar,
I will roar if thou strik'st me,
So tic enough now conclude in wine, I see you will prove an excellent practitioner: wondrous well performed on both sides:
Here Trimtram I drink to thee,
I'll pldge in good friendship,
Is there not one Moister Chauogh here,
This is the Gentleman sir;
My moister, sir, your elected father in law, desires speedily to speak with you:
Friend I will follow thee, I would thou had come a little sooner, thou shouldest have seen Roaring sportysaith,
Sir Isle return that you are following,
Doe so: Isle tell thee Tutor, I am to marry shortly, but I will defer it a while till I can roar perfectly, that I may get the upper hand of my wife on the wedding day, 'tmust be done at first or never.
'T will serve you to good use in that sir.
How lik'st thou this Whister?
very valiantly in faith sir,
Tush, thou shalt see more by and by.
I can stay no longer indeed sir, who pays me for my Tobocco?
How, pay for Tobacco, away ye sooty mouthed piper: you rusty piece of Martlemas bacon, away.
Let me give him a Mark for it.
No Trimtram, doe not strike him, weal only
roar out a curse upon him.
Well, doe you begin then,
May thy Roll rot, and thy pudding drop in pieces, being sophisticated with filthy urine.
May Sergeants dwell on either side of thee, to fright away thy two penny customers.
And for thy penny ones, let them suck thee dry.
When thou art dead, moist thou have no other sheets to be buried in but mouldy Tobacco leaves.
And no strawings to stick thy Carcass, but the bitla stalks.
Thy mourners, all greazie Tipsters,
With foul Tobacco pipes in their hats in stead of rotten Rose mary: and last of all may my man and I live to see all this performed and, to peace reeking even upon thy grave
And last of all for me, let this Epitaph bee remembred over thee.
Here coldly now within is laid to rot,
Aman that yesterbay was piping hot:
Some sap he died by pdding, some by prick,
Others by role and ball some lease, all stick
Fast in censure, yet think it strange and rare,
(He lived by smoke, yet died for want of ayre)
But then the Surgeon said when he beheld him,
It was the burning of his Pipe that kilt him.
So, are you paid now whisler?
All this is but smoke out of a stinking Pipe,
So, so, pay him now Usher.
Doe not henceforth neglect your schooling M. Chaugh.
Call me Rooke if I doe Tutor.
And me Raven, though my name be Trimtram.
Farewell Tutor.
Farewell Usher.
Thus when the Drum's unbraced, and Trumpet cease, Soldiers must get pay for to live in peace.
Oh my most worthy brother, thy hard fate it was: Come hither honest Surgeon, and deal faithfully
With a distressed Virgin: what hope is there?
Hope, Chillis was escaped miraculously Lady.
Whats that sir.
I care but little for his wound'ith Orsophag, not thus much trust me, but when they come to Diaphragma once, the small Intestines, or the Spinal Medull, or in the Roots of the Emunctories of the noble parts, then straight I fear a Syncops; the flanks retiring towards the back, the Urine bloody, the Excrements purulent, and the Dolor pricking or pungent.
Alas I'm ne'er the better for this answer.
Now I must tell you his principal Dolor lies in the region of the Liver, and theres both inflammation and Turmafaction feared, marry I made him a Quadragular plumation, where I used Sanguis Draconis; by my faith, with powders incarnatiue, which I tempered with oil of Hypericon, and othere liquors mundificatiue.
Pox a your Mundies figatiues, I would they were all fired,
But I purpose Lady to make an other experiment at next dressing with a Sarcotricke medicament, made of Iris of Florence. Thus Masticke, Calaphena, Apopanax, Sacrocolla:
Sacro-halter, what comfort is i'this to a poor Gentlewoman; pray tell me in plain terms what you think of him?
Marry in plain terms I know not what to say to him, the wound I can assure you inclines to Paralisme; and I find his body Cacochimicke: being then in fear of Fever and inflamation, I nourish him altogeither with Viands refrigeratine and give for potion the juice of Sauicola, dissolved with water Cerefolium: I could doe no more Lady, if his best Guiguimos were dissevered.
What thankless pains does the tongue often take,
To make the whole man most ridiculous:
I come to him for comfort, and he tyres me
Worse then my sorrow, what a precious good
May be delivered sweetly in few words:
And what a mount of nothing he's he cast forth.
Alas his strength decays: how cheer you sir,
My honoured Brother?
In soul never better.
I feel an excellent health there, such a stoutness,
My invisible enemy flies me, seeing me armed
With penitence and forgiveness, they fall backward,
Whether through admiration, not imagining
There were such armoury in a Soldiers soul,
As pardon and repentance: or through power
Of ghostly valour? but I have been Lord
Of a more happy conquest in nine hours now,
Then in nine years before: Oh kind Lieftenants
This is the only war we should provide for,
Where he that forgives largest &amp; sighs strongest,
Is a tried Soldier, a true man in deed,
And wins the best field, makes his own heart bleed.
Read the last part of that Will sir.
I also require at the hands of my most beloved Sister, whom I make full Executrix, the disposure of my body in bureal at S. Martins in the field: and to cause to be distributed to the poor of the same parish, forty Mark, and to the Hospital of maimed Soldiers a hundred: lastly I give and bequeath to my kind, dear, and virtuous sister, the full possession of my present estate in riches, whether it be in Lands, Leases, Money, Goods, Plate, Jewels, or what kind soever, upon this condition following, that she forthwith, tender both her self and all these Infeoffments, to that noble Captaine my late Enemy Captain Ager.
How sir?
Read it again sir, let her hear it plain.
Pray spare your pains sir, tic too plain already.
Good sir, how doe you, is your memory perfect?
This Will makes question of you: I bestowed
So much grief and compassion a your wound,
I never looked into your senses Epilepsy:
The sickness and infirmity of your judgment
Is to be doubted now, more then your bodies,
Why is your love no dearer to me sir,
Then to dispose me so upon the man,
Whose fury is your bodies present torment?
The Author of your danger: one I hate
Beyond the bounds of malice, doe you not feel
His wrath upon you? I beseech you sir,
Alter that cruel article.
Cruel sister? (forgive me natural love)
I must offend thee, speaking to this woman, am I content,
Having much kindred, yet to give thee all,
(Because in thee I'd raise my means to goodness)
And can thou prove so thankless to my bounty,
To grudge my soul her peace? is my intent
To leave her rich, whose only desire is
To send me poorer into the next world,
Then ever Usurer went, or politic Statist?
Is it so burdensome for thee to love
Where I forgive? Oh wretched is the man
That builds the last hopes of his saving comforts
Upon a women's charity? hes most miserable,
If it were possible, her obstinate will
Will pull him down in his midway to heaven,
I'ue wronged that worthy man past recompense,
And in my anger robbed him of fair fame:
And thou the fairest restitution art
My life could yield him: if I knew a fairer,
I'd set thee by and thy unwilling goodness,
And never make my sacred peace of thee:
But theres the cruelty of a fate debarred,
Thou art the last, and all, and thou art hard.
Let your grieved heart hold better thoughts of me,
I will not prove so sir, but since you enforce it,
With such a strength of passion Isle perform,
What by your will you have inioynd me to,
Though the world never show me joy again.
Oh this may be fair cunning for the time,
To put me off, knowing I hold not long,
And when I look to have my joys accomplished,
I shall find no such things: that were wild cosenage,
And not to be repented.
By all the blessedness,
Truth and a good life looks for, I will do it sir,
Comforts reward you for it, when ere you grieve,
I know if you dare swear I may believe.
No sooner have I entrance i'this house now,
But all my joy falls from me, which was wont
To be the sanctuary of my comforts:
Me thought I loved it with a reverent gladness,
As holy men doe consecrated Temples
For the Saints sake, which I belieu'd my mother,
But proved a false faith since, a fearful heresy,
O who'd erect th'assurance of his joys
Upon a women's goodness? whose best virtue,
Is to commit unseen, and highest secrecy,
To hide but her own sin, ther's their perfection,
And if she be so good, which many fail of to,
When these are bad, how wondrous Ill are they,
What comfort I'st to fight, win this days fame,
When all my after days, are lamps of shame,
Blessings bee firm to me, hoe's come tic hee,
A surgeon speedily;
A surgeon? why madam,
Perhaps you'll say tic but a little wound
Good to prevent a Danger: quick, a surgeon,
Why madam,
I, I, thats all the faust of valiant men,
Theile not be known a their hurts till rhei'r past help,
And then to late they wish for it:
Will you hear me.
Tic no disparagement to confess a wound,
I'm glad sir tic no worse, a surgeon quickly,
Madam,
Come, come sir, a woun'ds Honourable,
And never shames the wearer,
By the Justice
I owe to honour, I came of vntouch't,
I'd rather believe that;
You believe truth so,
My tears prevail then, welcome, welcome sir,
As peace and mercy to one new departed,
Why would you go though, and deceive me so,
When my abundant love took all the course
That might be to prevent it, I did that,
For my affections sake, goodness forgive me for it,
That were my own lifes safety put vppon't,
Id rather dye then do it, think how you used me then,
'And yet would you go, and hazard your self too,
It was but unkindly done.
Whats all this Madame?
See then how rash you were and short in wisdom,
Why wrong my faith I did, slandered my constancy,
Belied my truth, that which few Mothers will,
Or fewer can, I did, out of true fear
And loving care, only to keep thee here.
I doubt I am too quick of apprehension, now
And that's a general fault, when we here joyfully,
With the desire of longing fort, I ask it:
Why? were you never false,
May death come to me,
Before Repentance then?
I heard it plain sure,
Not false at all?
By the reward of truth,
I never knew that deed
That claims the name on it.
May then that glorious reward you swore by,
Be never failing to you, all the blessings
That you have given me since obedient custom
Taught me to kneel &amp; ask um, are not valuable
With this immaculate blessing of your truth:
This is the Palm to victory.
The Crown for all deserts past, and to come,
Let 'em be numberless, they are rewarded,
Already they are rewarded: bless this frame
I feel it much too weak to bear the joy on it.
Rise Sir,
O pardon me
I cannot honour you too much, too long,
I kneel not only to a Mother now,
But to a woman that was never false,
Year dear, and year good too: I think a that,
What reverence doe's she merit tic fit such
Should be distinguished from the prostrate sex,
And what distinction properer can be shown,
Then honour done to her that keeps her own,
Come sir, Isle have you rise,
To doe a deed then,
That shall for ever raise me: O my glory,
Why this, this is the quarrel that I looked for,
The tother but a shift to hold time play,
You sacred ministers of preservation,
For Heavens sake send him life,
And with it mighty health, and such a strength,
May equal but the cause, I wish no foul things,
If life but glow in him he shall know instantly
That I'm resolved to call him to account for it.
Why hark you sir,
I bind you by your honour, Madame,
You speak no hindernce too,
Take heed, you ought not
What an unhappiness have I in goodness,
It is ever my desire to intend well
But have no fortunate way in it, for all this
deserve I yet no better of you: but to be greeud again?
Are you not well with honest gain of fame,
With safety purchased, will you needs tempt a ruin,
That avoids you?
No you've prevailed: things of this nature sprung,
When they use action must use little tongue.
Now sir, the news?
Sir theres a gentlewoman,
Desires some conference with you.
How, with me?
A Gentlewoman? what is she?
Her attendant
Delivered her to be the Colonels Sister.
Oh for a storm then,
'Lasse poor virtuous Gentlewoman,
I will endure her violence with much pity,
She comes to ease her heart good noble soul,
Tic ee'ne a charity to release the burden,
Were, not that remedy ordained for women,
Their hearts would never hold three years together,
And here she comes, I never marked so much of her,
That face can be the mistress of no anger
But I might very well endure a month me thinks,
I am the man speak Lady, Isle stand fair.
And Ime enioynd by vow to fall thus low,
And from the dying hand of a repentant
Offer for expiation of wrongs done you,
My self, and with my self all that was his,
Which upon that condition was made mine,
Being his souls wish to depart absolute man,
In life a soldier death a Christian.
Oh Heaven has touched him nobly, how it shames
My virtues slow perfection: rise dear brightness,
I forget manners too, up matchless sweetness,
I must not sir, there is not in my vow
That liberty, I must be received first,
Or all denied, if either, I am free,
He must be without soul should deny thee,
And with that reverence I receive the gift,
As it was sent me, worthy Colonel,
Has such a conquering way in the blessed things,
Who ever ouercomes, he only wins.
Hark of these hard-hearted Blood-hounds: these Butchers are ee'ne as merciless as their Dogs, they knock down a Women's fame, ee'ne as it walks the Streets by um.
And the Captain here that should defend vs, walks by like Iohn of the Apple loft.
What for interiections Prisse? Hem, Euax, Vah: let the Carnisexes scour their throats: thou know there is a curse hangs over their bloody heads, this year there shall be more Butchers Pricks burnt then of all trades besides.
I doe wonder how thou came to be a Captain.
As thou came to be a Baud Meg, and Prisse to be a whore, every one by their deserts.
Baud, and Whore? out you unprofitable rascal, hast not thou been at the new Play yet, to teach thee better manners: truly they say they are the finest Players, and good speakers of Gentle-women of our quality; Baud and Whore is not mentioned amongst um, but the handsomest narrow-mouth'd names they have for vs, that some of them may serve as well for a Lady, as for one of our occupation.
Prithee Patronise, lets go see a piece of that Play: if we shall have good words for our money, tic as much as we can deserve in faith.
I doubt it is too late now, but another time Servant.
Let's go now sweet face I am acquainted with one of the Pantomimick, the Bulchins will use the Irish Captain with respect, and you two shall bee boxed amongst the betla sort.
Sir Captain Albo, I doubt you are but whiteliuer'd, look that you defend vs valiantly, you know your penance else: Patronise, you remember how you used him once?
I servant, and I shall never forget it, till I use him so again: doe you remember Captain?
Mum Meg, I will not hear on it now.
How I and my Amazons stripped you as naked as an Indian.
Why Meg?
And then how I bound you to the good behaviour, in the open fields.
And then you strewn oats upon his hoppers.
Prithee sweet face.
And then brought your Ducks to nibble upon, him you remember?
Oh, the remembrance tortures me again, no more good sweet face.
Well, lead on Sir: but hark a little.
Did thou bargain for the bladders with the Butcher Trim?
I sir, I have um here, I'll practise to swim too sir, and then I may roar with the water at London bridge, he that roars by land and by water both, is the the perfect Roarer.
Well Isle venture to swim too: if my father in Law gives me a good dowry with his daughter, I shall hold up my head well enough.
Peace, sir, heere's practise for our roaring, heir's a Centaur, and two Hippocrenes.
Offer the jostle Trim.
Ha? What meanest thou by that?
I mean to confront thee, Cyclops.
Isle tell thee what a means, is this thy Sister?
How then sir?
Why then I say she is a Bronsterops: and this is a Fucus.
No indeed sir, we are both Fucusses.
Art thou military? art thou a Soldier?
A Soldier, no I scorn to be so poor, I am a Roarer.
A Roarer?
I sir, two Roarers.
Know then my fresh water friends, that I am a Captain.
What, and have but two to serve under you?
I am now retiring the field.
You may see that by his Bag and Baggage.
Deliver up thy Panagron to me.
And give me thy Sindicus.
Deliver?
I pray you Captain bee contented, the Gentlemen seem to give vs very good words.
Good words? I if you could understand um, the words cost twenty pound.
What is your pleasure Gentlemen?
I would enucleate my Fructifer.
What says he Patronise?
He would inoculate: I understand the Gentleman very pithily.
Speak, are you Gentile or Plebeian, can you give Arms?
Arms? I sir, you shall feel our arms presently.
Salt you the Women, Isle pepper him till he stinks again: I perceive what Country-man hee is, let me alone with him.
Dare thou charge a Captain?
Yes, and discharge upon him too.
Foh, tic poison to my Country, the slave has eaten pippins: Oh shoot no more, turn both thy Broad-sides rather then thy Poop: it is foul play: my Country breeds no poison: I yield, the great O Tool shall yield on these conditions.
I have given one of um a fair fall Trim.
Then thus far wee bring home Conquest: foallow me Captain, the Cyclops doth command.
Follow me Tweaks, the Centaur doth command.
Any thing sweet Gentlemen, wilt please you to lead to the Tavern, where weal make all friends.
Why now you come to the conclusion.
Stay, Trim; I have heard your Tweakes are like your Mer maids, they have sweet voices to entice the passengers: lets have a Song, and then weal set um at liberty.
In the commendation of Roaring, not else Sir,
I, in the commendation of Roaring,
The best we can Gentlemen.
THen here thou shalt resign
Both Captain and Commander,
That name was never thine,
But Apple-Squire and Pander.
And henceforth will wee grant,
In pillage or in monies,
In clothing or provant,
What ere wee get by Cones:
With a hone, a hone, a hone,
No Cheaters nor Decoys,
Shall have a share, but alone
The bravest Roaring Boys.
What are we get by Gulls,
Of Country or of City:
Old Flatcaps or young Heirs,
Or Lawyers Clarks so witty:
By Sailors newly landed,
To put in for fresh waters:
By wandering Gander-mooners:
Or muffled late night-walkers. 
What are we get by Strangers,
The Scotch, the Dutch, or Irish:
Or to come nearer home,
By Masters of the Parish.
It is concluded thus,
By all and every wench,
To take of all their coins,
And pay um back in French. 
Melodious Minotaure.
Harmonious Hippocrene.
Sweet-brested Bronsterops.
Most runable Tweak.
Delicious Duplar.
Putrefactious Panagron.
Calumnious Calieut.
And most singular Sindicus.
We shall never be able to deserve these good words at your hands Gentlemen.
Shake golls with the Captain, hee shall be thy valiant friend.
Not yet Captain, wee must make an end of our Roaring first.
We'll serve um as we did the Tobacco-man: lay a curse upon um, marry we'll lay it on gently, because they have used vs so kindly, and then we'll shake gols together.
As gently as you can, sweet Gentlemen.
For thee, Oh Pander: moist thou trudge till the damned soles of thy boots fleet into dirt, but never rise into Ayre.
Next, moist thou fleet so long from place to place, till thou be kicked out of Fleetstreet.
As thou hast lived by bad flesh, so rotten mutton be thy bane.
When thou art dead, may twenty whores follow thee, that thou moist go a Squire to thy grave.
Enough for me sweet faces, let me sleep in my grave.
For thee old Sindicus, may I see thee ride in a Caroch with two wheels, and drawn with one horse.
Ten Beadles running by, in stead of foot-men.
With every one a whip, steed of an Irish dart.
Forty Barbers Basins sounding before in steed of Trumpets.
This will be comely indeed sweet Gentlemen Roarers.
Thy Ruse starch't yellow with rotten Eggs.
And moist thou then be drawn from Holborn, to Hounslow-Heath.
And then be burnt to Colebrooke for destroying of Maidenhead.
I will study to deserve this kindness at your hands Gentlemen.
Now for thee little Fucus, Moist thou first serve out thy time as a Tweak, and then become a Bronstrops as she is.
Moist thou have a reasonable good Spring, for thou art like to have many dangerous soul falls.
Moist thou have two Ruffs torn in one week.
May Spiders only weave thy Cobweb-lawne:
Moist thou set up in Rogue Lane.
Live till thou stink'st in Garden-Allyes.
And die sweetly in Tower-Ditch.
I thank you for that good sir Roarer.
Come, shall we go now Trim, my father in law stays for me all this while.
Nay, I'll serve um as wee did the Tobacco-man: Isle bury um altogether, and give um an Epitaph.
All together Trim, why then the Epitaph will be accessory to the sin: alas, he has kept the door all his life time, for pity let um lye together in their graves.
Even as thou wilt Trim, and I thank you too sir.
He that the reason would know, let him hark,
Why these two were buried near Maribone Park:
These three were a Pander, a Band, and a Whore,
That sucked many dry to the bones before.
Well you know how they lived? heer't may be red,
The low Countries did ever find um bred,
They lived by Flushing, by Sluice, and the Greyne,
Sickened in France, and dyed under the Line.
Three letters at last commended um hither,
But the hangman broke one in putting together.
P. was the first, who cries out for a Pardon,
O. craves his book, yet could not read such a hard one,
An X. was the last, which in conjunction
Was broke by Brandon, and heere's the conclusion.
By three trees, three letters; these three, Pander, Band, Whore:
Now stink below ground, stunk long aboue before.
So, now we have done with you, remember Roaring Boys.
Farewell Centaur.
Farewell Bronsterops.
Farewell Fucus.
Well Meg: I will learn to Roar, and still maintain the name of Captain over these Launcepresadoes.
If thou dost not, moist thou bee buried under the Roaring curse.
Will you be obstinate?
Torment me not,
Thou lingering Executioner to death,
Greatest disease to Nature, that striu'st by Art
To make men long a dying, your practise is
Upon men's bodies, as men pull Roses,
For their own relish, but to kill the flower
So you maintain your lives by others deaths,
What eat you then by carrion?
Fie bitterness,
Ye'ad need to candy ore your tongue a little,
Your words will hardly be digested else,
You can give your self a vomit to return um,
If they offend your stomach,
Here my vow
You are to be married to day.
A second torment,
Worse then the first, cause unavoidable,
I would I could as soon annihilate
My Fathers will in that as forbid thy lust.
If you then tender an unwilling hand,
Meet it with revenge, marry a Cuckold.
If thou wilt marry me, Isle make that vow,
And give my body for satisfaction
To him that should enjoy me for his wife.
Go to, Isle mar your marriage.
Doe, plague me so.
Isle rather bear the brand of all thats past,
In Capital Characters upon my Brow,
Then think to be thy whore or marry him,
I will defame thee ever.
Spare me not.
I will produce thy Bastard,
Bring thee to public penance,
No matter, I care not,
I shall  have a clean sheet, Isle wear twenty
Rather then one desil'd with thee.
Look for Revenge.
Pursue it fully then, out of his hate,
I shall pursue (I hope) a loathed fate.
Am I rejected, all my baits nibbled off,
And not the fish caught? Isle trouble the whole stream,
And choke it in the mud, since hooks not take,
Isle throw in nets that shall or kill or break.
This is the Bridegrooms man, hark sir, a word.
It is a busy day sir, nor I need no physic,
You see I scour about my business.
Pray you a word sir, your Moister is to bee married to day.
Else all this Rosemaries lost.
I would speak with your moister sir.
My Moister sir, is to bee married this morning and cannot be within while soon at night.
If you will doe your moister the best service,
That ere you did him, if he shall not curse
Your negligence hereafter slacking it:
If he shall bless me for the dearest friend
That ever his acquaintance met withal,
Let me speak with him ere he go to Church.
A right Physician, you would have none go to the Church, nor Churchyard till you send them thither; well, if death doe not spare you your selves, hee deals hardly with you, for you are better benefactors and send more to him then all diseases besides.
What Trimtram, Trimtram?
I come sir. Hark you, you may hear him, hoe's upon the spur and would fine mount the saddle of Matrimony, but (if I can) Isle persuade him to come to you.
Pray you doe sir: Isle teach all peevish niceness
To beware the strong advantage of revenge.
Who's that would speak with me?
None but a friend sir.
I would speak with you.
Why sir, and I dare speak with any man under the vniuerse, can you roar sir?
No infaith sir.
I come to tell you mildly for your good,
If you please to hear me: you are upon Marriages
No sir, I an towards it, but not upon it yet.
Doe you know what you doe?
Yes sir, I have practised what to doe before now, I would be ashamed to be married else: I have seen a Bronstrops in my time, and a Hippocreene, and a Tweak too.
Take fair heed sir, the wife that you would marry is not fit for you.
Why sir, have you tried her?
Not I believe it sir, but believe with all, She has been tried.
Why sir, is she a Fructifer? or a Fucus?
All that I speak sir, is in love to you, Your Bride, that may be, 'has not that portion that a Bride should have.
Why sir? she has a thousand and a better penny.
I doe not speak of rubish, dross, and ore, But the refined Mettle, Honour sir.
What she wants in honour shall be made up in worcestership sir, money will purchase both.
To be plain with you, she's nought.
If thou can not roar you are a dead man, my Bride nought?
Sir, I doe not fear you that way, what I speak, My life shall maintain, I say shoe's nought.
Dost thou not fear me
Indeed I doe not sir.
Isle never draw upon the while I live for that trick, put up and speak freely.
Your intended Bride is a whore, thats freely sir,
Yes saith, a whor's free enough, and she hath a conscience: is snee a whore? Foot I warrant she has the Pox then?
VVorse, the Plague, it is more incurable,
A plague whore? a pox on her Isle none of her,
Mine accusation shall have firm evidence.
I will produce an vnaubided witness,
A bastard of her bearing.
A Bastard? snails, ther's great suspicion shoe's a whore then, Isle wrestle a fall with her father for putting this trick upon me as I am a Gentleman.
Good sir mistake me not, I doe not speak
To break the contract of united hearts,
I will not pull that curse upon my head,
To separate the husband and the wife,
But this (in love) I thought fit to reveal,
(As the due office betwixt man and man)
That you might not be ignorant of your ills,
Consider now of my premonishment,
As your self shall please.
Isle burn all the Rose mary to sweeten the house, for in my conscience tic infected: has she drunk Bastard? if she would peace me wine Vinegar now nine times a day I'd never have her, and I thank you too.
Come, will you come away sir, they have all Rosemary and stay for you to lead the way.
Isle not de married to day Trimtram, has't ere an Almanacke about thee? this is the nintenth of August, look what day of the month it is.
It is tenty nine indeed sir.
VVhat's the word? what says Bretnor?
The word is sir, theres a hole in her coat.
I thought so, the Physician agrees with him, Isle not marry to day.
I pray you sir, there will be charges for new Rosemarye else, this will be withered by to morrow.
Make a Bon fire ont to sweeten Rosemary Lane prethee Trim. entreat my father in law that might have be, to come and speak with me.
The Bride cries already and looks to there way, and you be so backward too, we shall have a fine arseward wedding on it.
You'll stand to your words, sir?
Isle not fly the house sir, when you have need call me to evidence.
If you'll prove she has borne a Bastard, Isle stand too't shoe's a whore.
Why how now son what causes these delays? All stay for your leading.
Came I from the mount to be confronted?
How's that sir?
Can thou roar old man;
Roar? how mean you sir?
Why then Isle tell thee plainly thy daughter in a Bronstrops.
A Bronsterop? Whats that sir?
Sir if she be so she is a Hippocrene.
Nay worse she is a fructifer.
Nay then she is a Fucus, a Minotaure, and a Tweak.
Pray you speak to my understanding sir,
If thou wilt have it in plain terms: She is a Callicut, and a Panagron.
Nay then she is a Duplar and a Sindicus.
Good sir, speak English to me.
All this is Cornish to thee, I say thy Daughter has drunk Bastard in her time.
Bastard you doe not mean to make her a whore?
Yes but I doe, if she make a fool of me, Isle ne'er make her my wife, till she have her maidenhead again?
A whore? I doe defy this Calumny.
Dost thou? I defy thee then.
Doe you sir, then I defy thee too, fight with vs both at once in this quarrel if thou dare.
I could have had a whore at Plimouth.
I or at Perin.
I or under the Mount.
Or as you came, at Evil.
Or at Hoc-kye hole in Somersetshire.
Or at the hanging stones in Wiltshire.
Or at Maidenhead in Berkshire: and did I come in by Maidenhead to go out by Staines? Oh that man woman or child, would wrestle with me for a pound of patience.
Some thief has put in poison at your ears.
To steal the good name of my child from me:
Or if it be a malice of your own,
Be sure I will enforce a proof from you.
Hes a goose and a woodcock that says I will not prove any word that I speak.
I either goose or Woodcock he shall sir with any man.
Physician, Mauz auez Physician.
Is he the author?
Sir, with much sorrow for your sorrows sake,
I must deliver this most certain truth,
Your daughter is an honour stained Bride,
Indeed she is the mother to a child,
Before the lawful wife unto a husband.
Law, thats worse then I told thee, I said she had borne a Bastard, and hee says she was the mother ont too.
I'm yet an infidel against all this,
And will believe the Sun is made of Brass,
The Stars of amber.
And the moon of a holland cheese.
Rather then this impossibility, oh, here she comes,
Nay come daughter, stand at the bar of shame,
Either now quit thy self, or kill me ever:
Your marriage day is spoiled if all bee true.
A happy misery, whose my accuser?
I am that knows it true I speak,
Yes and Ime his witness.
And I.
And I again.
And I again too,
theres four thats enough I hope.
How can you witness sir that nothing know,
But what you have received from his report.
Must we not believe our Physicians? pray you think
I know as much as every fool do's.
Let me be Trimtram: I pray you too sir.
Sir if this bad man have laid a blemish
On my white name: he is a most false one,
Defaming me for the just denial
Of his soul lust, nay now you shall be known sir.
Sir Ime his sister and do better know him,
Then all of you give not too much belief
To his wilde words, hoe's oftentimes mad sir.
I thank you good sister.
Are you not mad to doe this Office,
Fie upon your malice.
Isle presently produce both nurse and Child,
Whose very eyes shall call her mother, before it speaks.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, by my troth Id spend a shilling on that condition to hear that, I think in my conscience I shall take the Physician in a lye if the Child call her mother before it can speak, Isle never wrestle while I live again.
It must be a she child if it doe sir, and those speak the soonest of any living Creatures they say.
Bow waw, a dog will bark a Month sooner, hoe's a very puppy else.
Come tell truth twixt our selves, heers none but friends
One spot a fathers love will soon wipe off?
The truth and they try my love abundant,
Isle cover it with all the care I have
And yet (perhaps) make up a marriage day.
Then its true sir, I have Child.
Hast thou?
Well wipe thine eyes, Ime a Grandfather then,
If all bastards were banished, the City would be thin,
In the thickest term time, well now let me alone
Isle try my wits for thee, Richard, Francis, Andrew,
None of my knaves within?
Hears one of'um, sir, the Guests come in apace.
Doe they dick? let um have wine and sugar, weal before um presently, but hark Dick.
I long to hear this child speak in faith, Trim, I would this foolish Physician would come once.
If it calls her mother, I hope it shall never call you father.
No, and it do Isle whip it in faith, and give thee leave to whip me.
Run on thy best legs Dicke.
Isle be here in a twinkling sir.
Now Gentlemen, believe your eyes, if not my tongue Doe not you call this your child?
Phew, thats not the point you promised vs the child should call her Mother, if it do's this month, Isle ne'er go to the roaring school again.
Whose child is this Nurse?
Dis Gentleman's, so he to me redden.
Snails shees the Physicians Bronstrops, Trim.
His Fucus, his very Tweak, in faith.
A glister in his teeth, let him take her with a purgetion to him.
It is as your sister said: you are stark mad, sir,
This much confirms it, you have defamed
Mine honest daughter: Isle have you punished fort,
Besides the civil penance of your sin,
And keeping of your bastard.
This is fine,
All your wit and wealth must not thus carry it.
Sir Chaugh a word with you.
Isle not have her in faith, sir, if Trimtram will have her and he will let him.
Who I, sir? I scorn it, if you'll have her, Isle have her too, Isle doe as you doe, and no otherwise.
I doe not meant to either, this only, sir,
That whatsoere you've seen, you would be silent,
Hinder not my child of another husband,
Though you forsake her.
Isle not speak a word, in faith,
As you are a gentleman.
By these basket hilts, as I am a youth,
A gentleman a Roarer.
Charm your man I beseech you too.
I warrant you sir hee shall doe nothing but what I doe before him.
I shall most dearly thank you, Oh are you come,
Welcome son in law: this was beyond your hope,
We old men have pretty conceits sometimes,
Your Wedding daye's prepared, and this is it,
How think you of it?
As of the ioyfulst
That ever welcomed me, you show your self now
A pattern to all kind fathers: my sweetest Iane,
Your captivity I meaned but as sauce,
Unto your Wedding dinner, now, I'm sure
It is far more welcome in this short restraint
Then had it freely come:
A thousand fold.
I like this well.
I have not the heart to see this Gentleman gulled so, I will reveal, I make it mine own case tic a foul case.
Remember you have sworn by your hilts.
Isle break my hilts rather then conceal, I have a trick Doe thou follow me, I will reveal it, and yet not speak it neither.
It is my duty to follow you sir.
 Take heed in time oh man unto thy head,
 All is not gold that glisters in bed.
Why sir? why sir?
Look too't I say, thy Bride's a Bronsterops,
And knows the thing that men wear in their slops,
How's this sir?
A Hipocrene, a Tweak, for and a Fueus,
Let not fond love with foretops so rebuke vs.
Good sir.
Behold a baby of this maids begetting,
A deed of darkness after the sun-setting.
Your Oath sir.
I swear and sing thy Bride has taken Phisike,
This was the Doctor curd her of that Ptisicke.
If you'll believe me I will say no more,
Thy Brides a Tweak as we doe say that roar.
Bear witness Gentlemen I have not spoke a word,
My hilts are hole still.
This is a sweet Epithalamium,
Unto the Marriage bed, a musical
Harmonius Io: sir, yaue wronged me,
And basely wronged me, was this your cunning fetch,
To Fetch me out of prison, for ever
To marry me unto a Strumpet?
None of those words good sir,
Tic but a fault, and tic a sweet one too,
Come sir, your means is short, lengthen your fortunes,
With a fair proffer: Isle put a thousand pieces
Into the scale to help her to weigh it up,
Aboue the first dowry.
Ha? you say, well
Shame may be bought out at a dear rate,
A thousand pieces added to her dowry.
Theres five hundred of um to make the Bargain,
I have worthy guests coming and would not delude um,
Say: speak like a Son to me.
Your blessing sir, we are both yours, witness Gentlemen these must be made up a thousand pieces, added to a first thousand for her dowry, to father that child,
Oh is it out now?
For tother thousand Isle do it my self yet.
Or I, if my Moister will.
The Bargaine's made, sir, I have the tender
And possession both; and will keep my purchase,
Take her even to you with all her movables, isle wear my bachelors buttons still.
So will I in faith; they are the best flowers in any mans garden, next to hartsease.
This is as welcome as the other sir,
And both as the best bliss that ere on earth,
I shall enjoy, sir, this is mine own child,
You could not have found out a sitter Father
Nor is it basely bred as you imagine
For we were wedded by the hand of heaven
Ere this work was begun.
At Pancridge, isle lay my life on it,
I'll lay my life on it too, it was there,
Some where it was, sir,
Wa'st so in faith son?
And that I must have reuea'ld to you, sir,
Ete I had gone to Church with this fair groom,
But thank this gentleman, he prevented me,
I am much bound unto your malice sir.
I am a shamed
Shame to amendment then.
Now get you together for a couple of cunning ones,
But son, a word, the latter thousand pieces
Is now more then bargain.
No by my faith sir
Here's witness enough ont, must serve to pay my fees
Imprisonment is costly
By my troth the old man he's gul'd himself, finely, well sir, Isle bid my self a guest, though not a groom, Isle dine and dance, and roar at the wedding for all this.
So will I sir, if my Moister does,
Well sir, you are welcome, but now, no more words on it,
Till we be set at dinner for there will mirth
Be the most useful for digestion,
See, my best guests are coming.
Recovered say thou.
May I bee excluded quite out of Surgeons hall else, marry I must tell you the wound was fine to be twice Coroded, it was a plain Gastrolophe, and a deep one, but I closed the lips on it with Bandages and Sutteures, which is a kind conjunction of the parts separated against the course of nature.
Well sir, he is well
I feared him I assure you Captain before the Surture in the belly, it grew almost to a convulsion, and there was like to be a bloody issue from the hollow vessels of the kidneys.
Theres that, to thank thy news and thy Art togethere.
And if your worship at any time stand in need of incission, if it be your fortune to light into my hands, isle give you the best.
Uncle, the noble Colonels recovered,
Recovered.
Then honour is not dead in all parts Cusse.
Behold him yonder sir.
My much unworthiness is now found out,
Tha'st not a face to fi it.
Sir yonders Captain Ager.
O Lieutenant the wrong I have done his same,
Puts me to silence, shame so confounds me,
That I dare not see him.
I never knew how poor my deserts were,
Till he appeard'; no way to give requital,
Here shame me lastingly; do it with his own,
Return this to him, tell him I have Riches
In that abundance in his sisters love,
These come but to oppress me, and confound
All my deservings everlastingly:
I never shall requite my wealth in her say,
How soon from virtue and an honoured spirit,
May man receive what he may never merit.
This comes most happily, to express me better,
For since this will was made there fell to me
The manner of Fitz-dale, give h'um that too,
Hoe's like to have chardge theres fair hope
Of my sisters fruitfulness, for me
I never mean to change my mistress,
And war is able to maintain her servant,
Read there, a fair increase sir, by my faith,
He hath sent it back sir, with new additions.
How miserable he makes me, this enforces me
To break through all the passadges of shame
And headlong fall,
Into my arms dear worthy.
You have a goodness
Has put me past my answers, you may speak,
what you please now; I must be silent ever,
This day has shown me joys vnualeu'd treasure,
I would not change this brotherhood with a monarch,
Into which blessed alliance sacred heaven
H's placed my kinsman, and given him his ends
Fair be that Quarrel makes such happy friends.

