A Wife the happiest state? It cannot be.
Yes, such a wife as I, that have a man
As if my self had made him: such a one
As I may justly say, I am the rib
Belonging to his breast. Widow and Maid,
Your lives compared to mine are miserable,
Though weal•• and beauty meet in each of you.
Poor virgin, all thy sport is thought of love,
And meditation of a man, the time
And circumstance ere thou can fix thy thoughts
On one thy fancy will approve.
That trouble already may be past.
Why if it be.
The doubt, hee will not hold his brittle faith,
That he is not a compatible choice,
And so your noble friends will cross the match,
Doth make your happiness uncertain still:
Or say you married him, what hee would prove.
Can you compare your state then to a Wife?
Nay, all the freedom that a virgin hath
Is much to be preferred. Who would endure
The humours of so insolent a Thing
As is a husband? Which of all the Heard
Runs not possessed with some notorious vice,
Drinking or whoring, fighting, Jealousy,
Even of a Page at twelve, or of a Groom,
That rubs horse-heeles? Is it not daily seen,
Men take wives, but to dress their meat, to wash
And starch their linen: for the other matter
Of lying with them, that's but when they please:
And whatsoere the joy be of the bed,
The pangs that follow procreation
Are hideous, or you wives have gulled your husbands
With your loud shrikings, and your deathful throes.
A Wife or Widow to a Virgins life?
Why should the best of you think ye enjoy
The rest and rule, that a free widow doth?
I am mine own commander, and the bliss
Of wooers, and of each variety
Frequents me, as I were a maid. No Brother
Have I to dice my patrimony away, as you
My maiden Madaine may. No husbands death
Stand I in doubt on: for thanks be to heaven
(If mine were good) the grievous loss of him
Is not to come; if hee were bad, hoe's gone,
And I no more embrace my injury.
But be yours ill, you nightly clasp your hate;
Or good, why he may dye, or change his virtue.
And thou (though single) hast a bed•fellow
As bad as the worst husband, thought of one,
And what that is, men with their wives do doe,
And long expectance till the deed be done.
" A wife is like a garment used and torn:
" A maid like one made up, but never worn.
"A widow is a garment worn thred-bare,
Selling at second hand, like Brokers ware.
But let vs speak of things the present time
Make happy to vs, and see what is best.
I have a servant then the crown of men,
The fountain of Humanity, the prize
Of every virtue, Moral and Divine;
Young, valiant, learned, well-borne, rich and shaped
As if wise Nature when she fashioned him,
Had meant to give him nothing but his form,
Yet all additions are conferred on him,
That may delight a woman: this same youth
To me hath sacrificed his heart, yet I
Have checked his suite, laughed at his worthy service,
Made him the exercise of my cruelty,
Whilst constant as the Sun, for all these clouds
His love goes on.
Peace, here's the man you name.
Widow. We'll stand aside.
Good morrow to the glory of our age.
The Lady Perfect, and the Lady Bright,
The virtuous wife and widow: but to you
The Lady Honour, and my Mistress,
The happiness of your 〈◊〉.
By thy• •ight, I never heard one speak so scu••lly,
Utter such s•ale wit, and pronounce so ill.
But to you,
My Lady Honour, and my Mistress,
The happiness of your wishes.
Stop your wit,
You would fine show these Ladies what a hand
You hold over your servant. To shall not need,
I will express your tyranny well enough.
I have loved this Lady since I was a child,
Since I could construe Am•: now she says
I doe not love her, because I doe not weep,
Lay mine arms ore my heart, and wear no garters,
Walk with mine eyes in my hat, sigh, and make faces
For all the Poets in the town to laugh at,
Pox a this howling love, ti's like a dog
Shut out midnight. Must love needs be poudred,
Lie steeped in brine; or will it not keep sweet?
Is it like beef in summer?
Did you ever
Hear one talk •ustian like a Butcher thus?
It is foolish, this same telling folks we love,
It needs no words, to will show it self in deeds,
And did I take you for an entertainer,
A Lady that will wring one by the finger,
Whilst on another toes she treads, and cries
By Gad I love but one, and you are hee:
Either of them thinking himself the man,
I'd tell you in your ear, put for the business,
Which granted, or denied, Madam God b'wee.
Come these are daily slanders that you raise,
On our infirm and unresisting Sex,
You never me• I am sure with such a Lady.
O• •any by this light, I have seen a Chamber
Frequented like an office of the Law,
Clients succeed at midnight one another:
Whilst the poor Madam 〈◊〉 be•no so distressed,
Which of her Loves to show most 〈…〉
That hi• dull Husband he's perceived her wiles.
Nay perhaps taught her, many of those Husbands
Are base enough
To live upon it.
I have seen another of 'em
Cheat by this light at Cards, and set her women,
To talk to the Gentlemen that plaid,
That so distracted they might over see.
Oh fie upon ye, I dare swear you lie.
Doe not fair Mistress, you will be for sworn.
You men are all soul mouthed, I warrant, you
Talk thus of me and other Ladies here,
Because we keep the City.
Oh prophance.
That thought would damn me, will you marry yet?
No I will never marry.
Shall we then
Couple unlawfully? for indeed this marrying
Is but proclaming what we mean to doe;
Which may be done privately, in civil sort
And none the wiser, and by this white hand La:
The wrack, Strapado, or the boiling boot,
Should never force me tell to wrong your honour.
May I believe this?
Let it bee your Creed.
But if you should prove false. Nay ne'er vnhang
Your sword, except you mean to hang your self:
Why where have you been drinking? sfoot you talk
Like one of these same rambling boys,
That reign in Turnebull-street.
How doe you know?
Indeed my knowledge, is but speculative
Not practique there, I have it by Relation,
From such observers as your self dear Servant,
I must profess, I did think well of thee,
But get thee from my ••light, I never more
Will hear or see thee, but will hate thee deadly,
As a man enemy, or a woman turned.
Ladies come forth, see Sir what Courtesy
You have done to me, a strange praise of you
Had newly left my lips, just, as you entered,
And how you have deserved it, with your carriage?
Villain, thou hast hurt mine honour to these friends,
For what can they imagine but some ill▪
Hath past betwixt vs by thy broad discourse?
Were my case theirs, by Virgin Chastity,
I should condemn them: hence, depart my sight.
Madam, but here me, oh that these were men,
And durst but say or think you ill, for this
I have so good a cause upon my side.
That I would cut their hearts out of their breasts:
And the thoughts out of them that injured you.
But I obey your best, and for my penance,
Will run a course never to see you more,
And now I loose you, may I loose the light:
Since in that beauty dwelt my day or night.
Is this the virtuous youth?
Your happiness?
Wherein you thought your seat so far above ours,
If one man could be good, this had been hee.
See here comes all your suitors, and your Husband,
And•oome for Laughter, heir's the Lord Feesimple,
What Gentlewoman do's hee bring along?
One and thirty good-morrows to the fairest, wisest,
chastest, richest VViddow that ever conversation coapt
withal.
Three score and two unto the wisest Lord,
That ever was trained in university.
Oh Courteous, bounteous Widow, she he's out∣bid
me 31. Good morrows at a clap.
But my Lord Feesimple you forgot the business im∣posed
on you.
Gentlewoman, I cry thee mercy, but ti's • fault in
all Lords, not in me only, we doe use to swear by our Ho∣nors:
and as we are Noble, to dispatch such a business for
such a Gentleman and wee are bound, even by the same
Honours wee swear by, to forget it in a quarter of an hour.
And look as if wee had never seen the Party, when wee
meet next, especially if none of our Gentlemen have bin
considered.
I, but all yours have, for you keep none my Lord:
Besides though it stands with your Honour to forget men's
businesses; yet it stands not with your Honour, if you doe not
doe a women's.
Why then Madam, so it is that I request your La∣diship
to accept into your service this Gentlewoman, for
her truth &amp; honesty I will be bound, I have known her too
long to be deceived, this is the second time I have seen her.
Why how now my Lord: a preferrer of Gentle∣women
to service like an old knitting woman? where hath
She dwelt before.
She dwelt with young Boulds sister, hee that is my
Corival in your Love, she requested me to advance her to
You; for you are a dubbed Lady: so is not she yet.
But now you talk of young Bold, when did you see
him Lady?
Not this month Moister Well-tri'd.
I did conjure him to forbear my sight:
Indeed swore if he came Il'd be denied.
But tic strange you should ask for him, ye two were wont
never to be asunder.
Faith Madam we never were together but wee
differd on some argument or other,
And doubting least our discord might at length
Breed to some quarrel, I forbear him to.
He quarrel? Bold: hang him, if he durst have quar∣rel'd,
the world knows hoe's within a mile of an ok he's
put him too't, and soundly, I never cared for him in my life,
but to see his sister, hoe's an ass, pox an arrant ass, for doe
you think any but an arrant ass, would offer to come a
wooing, where a Lord attempts? he quarrel: hee dares not
quarrel.
But hee dares fight my Lord, upon my knowledge,
And rail no more my Lord, behind his back,
For if you doe my Lord blood must ensue.
Oh, oh my honour dies, I am dead.
Vd'slight whats the matter, wring him by the nose
A pair of riding spurs now were worth gold,
Pins are as good, prick him, prick him
Oh, oh.
Hoe's come again, lift him up.
How fa•es your Lordship?
Oh friends, you have wronged my spirit to call 〈◊〉
back, I was 〈◊〉 in Elizium at rest.
But why sir did you sown?
Well though I die Moister Wel-tri'd before all these
I doe forgive you, because you were ignorant of my infer∣mite,
oh sir, i'st not up yet, I die again, put up now whilst
I wink, or I doe wink for ever.
Ti's up my Lord, op your eyes, but I pray tell me
Is this antipathy twixt bright steel and you natural, or
how grew it?
Il'e tell you sir, any thing bright and edged, works
thus strongly with me, your hill•s now I can handle as bold∣lie,
look you else.
Nay never blame my Lord Moister Well-tri'd, for
I know a great many will sown at the sight of a shoulder
of mutton or a quarter of Lamb, my Lord may be excused
then, for a naked sword.
This Lord, and this knight in dogge-collers would
make a fine brace of beagles.
But on my faith •it was mightily overseen of your
father, not to bring you up to foils, or if hee had bound
you Prentice to a Cutler or an Ire-monger.
I a pox, hang him old gouty fool, he never brought
me up to any Lordly exercise, as fencing, dancing, rumbling,
and such like: but forsooth I must write and read, &amp; speak
languages, and such base qualities, fit for none but Gentle∣men.
Now sir would I tell him, Father you are a Count, I
am a Lo: a pox a writing and reading, and languages, let
me be brought up as I was borne.
But how my Lord came you first not to 〈◊〉 the
sight of steel.
Why I'll• tell you Sir, when I was a child, an infant,
an Innocent.
T'was e'•e now.
I being in the kitchen, in my Lo: my fathers house,
the Cooke was making minced pies: so sir, I standing by the
Dresser, there lay a heap of plums. Here was hee mincing;
what did me I sir, being a notable little witty coxcomb,
but popped my hand just under his chopping knife, to snatch
some Raisins, and so was cut •re the hand, and never •ince
could I endure the •ight of any edge-toole.
Indeed they are not fit for you my Lord, and now
you are all so well satufied in this matter, pray Ladies how
like you this my Gentlewoman?
In troth Madam exceeding well I, if you be pro∣uided,
pray let me have her.
It should be my request, but that I am full.
What can you doe? What's her name my Lord?
Her name? I know not. What's her name Mr. Well-try'd?
Her name? slid, tell my Lady your name.
Mistress Mary Princox forsooth.
Mistress Mary Princax: she has wit, I perceive that
alrea•y. Me thinks she speaks as if she were a my Lords
brood.
Brood Madam, it is well known I am a Gentle∣woman.
My father was a man of 500. per annum, and hee
held something in Capite too.
So does my Lord, something.
Nay, by my troth, what I hold in capite is worth lit∣tle
or nothing.
I have had apt breeding, how ever my misfor∣tune
now makes me submit my self to service: but there is
no ebb so low, but hath his tide again: when our days
are at worst, they will mend in spite of the frowning De∣stinies.
For wee cannot be lower then earth, and the same
blind Dame that hath cast her blear eyes hitherto upon
my occasions, may turn her wheel, and at last wind them
up with her white hand to some pinnacle that prosperously
may flourish in the Sunne-shine of promotion.
Oh mouth, full of agility, I would give 20. Marks
now to any person that could teach me to convey my
tongue (sance stumbling) with such dexterity to such a pe∣riot.
For her truth and her honesty I am bound before, but
now I have heard her talk, for her wit I will be bound body
and goods.
V'dslight, I will not leave her for my hood.
I never met with one of these eloquent old Gentlewomen
before. What age are you Mistress Mary Princox?
I will not lye Madam, I have numbered 57. Sum∣mers,
and just so many winters have I past.
But they have not past you, they lye forzen in your
face.
Madam, if it shall please you to entertain me, so:
if not, I desire you not to misconstrue my good will, there's
no harm done, the doore's as big as it was, and your Lady∣ships
own wishes crown your beauty with content. As for
these frumping Gallants, let them doe their worst: it is not
in mans power to hurt me: it is well known I come not
to be scoff•d. A woman may bear and bear till her back
burst. I am a poor Gentlewoman, and since virtue has now
a days no other companion but poverty, I set the Hares
head against the Goose giblets, and what I want one way
I hope I shall be enabled to supply the other.
A'nt please God, that thou were not past children;
First even so my Lord? nay good Princox do not cry,
I doe entertain you, how doe you occupy? what can you
use?
Any thing fit to be put into the hands of a Gentle∣woman.
What are your qualities?
I can sleep on a low stool, if your Lady-ship be
talking in the same room with any Gentle-man, I can read
on a book, sing love songs, look up at the loouer light,
hear and be deaf, see and be blind, be ever dumb to your
secrets, swear and equiuocate, and whatsoever I spy, say
the best.
Oh rare Croon? how art thou endued? but why did
Master Boulds sister put you away?
I beseech you Madame to neglect that desire,
though I know your Lady-ships understanding to be suffice∣ent
to partake or take in the greatest secret; can be imparted:
yet.—
Nay prithee tell the cause, come heir's none but
friends.
Faith Madame, heigh ho, I was (to confess truly)
a little foolish in my last service, to believe men's oaths, but
I hope my example, though prejudicial to my self, will be
beneficial to other young Gentle-women in service, my mi∣stresses
brother (the Gentle-man you named e' now, master
Bold) having often attempted my honour, but finding it im∣pregnable,
vowed love, and marriage to me, at the last I, a
young thing and raw, being seduced, set my mind upon him,
but friends contradicting the match, I fell into a grievous
consumption, and upon my first recovery, least the intended
sacred ceremonies of Nuptials should succeed, his sister
knowing this, thought it fit in her judgment, we should be
farther a sunder, and so put me out of her service.
Ha, ha, ha.
God a mercy for this discovery in faith,
Oh man what art thou? when thy cock is up? come will your
lordship walk in? tic dinner time.
Whose this? whose this?
This is our Land-lord, Master Seldom,
An exceeding wise Citizen, a very sufficient understanding
man, and exceeding rich.
Miracles are not ceasd.
Good morrow Land-lord, where have you been
sweating?
Good morrow to your Honours, thrift is industrious,
your Lady-ship knows we will not stick to sweat for our
pleasures, how much more ought wee to sweat for our pro∣fits?
I am come from master Engine this morning, who is mar∣ried
or to be married, and though your Ladyships did not
honour his Nuptials with your presence, he hath by me sent
each of you a pair of gloves, and Grace Seldom my wife is
not forgot.
God give him joy, God give him joy.
Let all things most impossible change now.
Oh perjured man! oaths are but words I see.
But wherefore should not we that think we love
Upon full merit, that same worth once ceasing
Surcea•e our love to, and find new desert?
Alas we cannot, loue's a pit, which, when
We fall into we ne'er get out again,
And this same horrid news which me assaults
I would forget, love blanches blackest faults:
Oh! what path shall I tread for remedy?
But darkest shades, where love with death doth lie.
Sir I have often heard my husband speak of your
acquaintance.
Nay my virtuous wife,
Had it been but acquaintance, this his absence
Had not appeared so uncouth, but we two
Were Schoole-fellowes together, borne and nursed,
Brought up, and lived since like the Gamins,
Had but one suck, the Tavern or the Ordinary.
Ere I was married, that saw one of vs
Without the other, said we walked by halfes,
Where dear, dear friend have you been all this while?
Oh most sweet friend the World's so vicious,
That had I with such familiarity
Frequented you since you were married,
Possessed and used your fortunes as before,
As in like manner you commanded mine,
The deprau'd thoughts of men would have proclaimed
Some scandalous rumours from this love of ours,
As saying, mine reflected on your Lady,
And what a wound had that been to our souls?
When only friend-ship should have been the ground
To hurt her Honour, and your confident peace,
Spite of mine own approved integrity.
Wife, kiss him, bid him welcome poxo'th World,
Come, come you shall not part from me in hast,
I doe command thee use this Gentle-man
In all things like my self, if I should die
I would be queath him in my will to thee.
Sir, you are most welcome, &amp; let scandalous tongues
No more deter you, I dare use you Sir,
With all the right belonging to a friend,
And what I dare, I dare let all man see
My conscience rather, then men's thoughts be free.
Will you look in?
We'll follow you. Now friend
What think you of this Lady?
Why sweet friend,
That you are happy in her, she is fair,
Witty and virtuous, and was rich to you,
Can there be an addition to a wife?
Yes, constancy, for it is not chastity
That lives remote from all attempters free,
But there, ti's strong and pure where all that woo
It doth resist, and turns them virtuous too;
Therefore dear friend, by this, loves masculine kiss,
By all our mutual engagements past,
By all the hopes of amity to come,
Be you the settler of my jealous thoughts,
And make me kill my fond suspect of her,
By assurance that she is loyal, otherwise
That she is false, and then, as shoe's past cure,
My soul shall ever after be past care.
That you are fittest for this enterprise
You must needs understand, since prove she true
(In this your trial) you my dearest friend,
(Whom only, rather than the World besides
I would have satisfied of her virtue) shall be,
And best conceal my folly, prove she weak,
It is better you should know it than any man,
Who can reform her, and doe me no wrong,
Chemical metals, and bright gold it self
By sight are not distinguished, but by the test,
Thought makes good wives, but trial makes the best:
To the unskilful owners eyes, alike
The Bristow sparkles as the Diamond,
But by a Lapidary the truth is found,
Come you shall not deny me.
Doe not wrong
So •air a wife (friend) and so virtuous,
Whose good name is a theme unto the World,
Make not a wound with searching where was none,
Misfortune still such projects doth pursue,
He makes a false wife, that suspects a true;
Yet since you so importune, give me leave
To ruminate a while, and I will straight
Follow and give you an answer.
You must do it.
Assure your self dear—Coxcomb, I will do it
Or strangely be denied, ell's as I wished,
This was my aim, although I have seemed strange.
I know this fellow now to be an Ass;
A most unworthy husband though in view
He bear himself thus fair, she knows this too,
Therefore the stronger are my hopes to gain her:
And my dear friend that will have your wife trid'e,
I'll try her first, then thrust her if I can,
And as you said most wisely I hoped to be
Both Touch-stone to your wise and Lapidary.
HVsband these gloves are not fit for my wearing,
I'll put 'em into the shop and sell 'em, you shall
give me a plain pair for them.
This is wonderful, wonderful, this is thy sweet care
and judgment in all things, this goodness is no• usual in
our wives, well Grace Seldom, that thou art fair is nothing,
that thou art well spoken is nothing, that thou art witty is
nothing, that thou art a Citizens wife is nothing; but Grace,
that thou art fair, that thou art well spoken, that thou art
witty, that thou art a Citizens wife, and that thou art ho∣nest
I say, and let any mun deny it that can, it is something,
it is something, I say, it is Seldomes something, and for all
the Sunne-shine of my joy mine eyes must rain upon thee.
By your leave Master Seldom, have you done the
hangers I bespoke for the Knight?
Yes marry have I Mistress hic &amp; hac, i'll fetch 'em to
you.
Z'oones, does not your husband know my name, if
it had been some body else I would have called him Cu∣ckoldlie
slave.
If it had been some body else perhaps you might.
Well I may be even with him, ell's clear; pretty
rogue I have longed to know thee this twelve months, and
had no othermeanes but this to speak with thee, there's a
letter to thee from the party.
What party?
The Knight Sir Iohn Lo•all.
Hence lewd impudent
I know not what to term thee man or woman,
For nature shaming to acknowledge thee
For either; hath produced thee to the World
Without a sex, some say thou art a woman,
Others a man; and many thou art both
Woman and man, but I think rather neither
Or man and horse, as the old Centaurs were feigned.
Why how now Mistress, what lack ye? are you so
so fine with a pox? I have seen a woman look as modestly
as you, and speak as sinceerely, and follow the Friars as
zealously, and she has been as sound a jumbler as ever paid
for it, it is true Mris. •ipenie, I have sworn to leave this letter.
Do ye hear, you sword and target (to speak in
your own key) Marie Vmbree, Long-Meg,
Thou that in thy self (me think) alone
Look like a rogue and a whore under a hedge:
Bawd, take your letter with you and begone,
When next you come (my Husband's Constable)
And Bridewe•l is hard by, y•aue a good wit,
And can co••eiue.
Look you, here are the hangers.
Let's see them.
Fie, fie, you have mistook me quite,
They are not for my turn (b'y mistress Seldom)
Heere's my Lord Proudly.
My Horse Lackey, is my sister Honour aboue?
I think her Ladyship, my Lord, is not well, and keeps
her Chamber.
Al's one, I must see her, have the other La. dined?
I think not my Lord.
Then i'll take a pipe of Tobacco here in your
shop if it be not offensive, I would be loath to be thought to
come just at dinner time. Garsoon; fill, sirrah,
What said the Gold-Smith for the money?
He said my Lord he would lend no man money
that he durst not arrest.
How got that wit into Cheapside trow, hee is a
Cuckold.
Saw you my Lady to day, what says she?
Marry my Lord, she said her old husband had a
great payment to make this morning, and had not left her
so much as a jewel.
A pox of her old Cats chops, the teeth she had,
have made a transmigration into hair, she hath a bigger
beard than I by this light.
This custom in vs Citizens is good,
Thus walking off when men talk with our wives,
It shew's vs courteous, and mannerly,
Some count it baseness, hoe's a fool that does so,
It is the highest point of policy
Especially when we have virtuous wives.
Fie, fie, you talk uncivilly my Lord.
Uncivilly, mew, can a Lord talk uncivilly? I think
you a finical taffeta pipkin may be proud isle sit so near it,
uncivilly mew.
Your mothers Cat he's kitten'd in your mouth sure:
Prithee but note yo• Fellow, do's he not walk &amp; look
as if hee did desire to be a Cuckold?
But you doe not look as if you could make him one,
now they have dind my Lord.
God save your Lordship.
How dost thou Cos, hast thou got any more wit yet?
No by my troth I have but little money with that
little wit I have, and the more wit ever the less money, yet
as little as I have of either: I would give some thing that I
durst but quarrel,
I would not be abused thus daily as I am.
Save you my Lord.
Good Moister Wel-tri'd, you can inform me, pray
how ended the quarrel betwixt young Bold, and the other
Gentleman.
Why very fairly my Lord, on honourable terms,
Young Bold was injured and did challenge him,
Fought in the field, and the other gave him satisfaction
Under his hand, I was Boulds second, and can show it here.
It is strange there was no hurt done, yet I hold
the other Gentleman, far the better Man.
So doe not I.
Besides they say the satisfaction that walks in the Or∣dinaries,
is counter-feit.
He lies that says so, and isle make it good,
And for I know my friend is out of town,
What Man soever wrongs him is my foe,
I say he had full satisfaction,
Nay that which wee may call submission:
That the other sought peace first, and who denies this,
Lord, Knight, or Gentleman, English, French, or Scot,
I'll fight and prove it on him with my sword.
No sweet Moister Well-tri'd, let's have no fighting
till (as you have promised) you have rid me from this foolish
fear, and taught me to endure to look upon a naked
Sword.
Well and il'e be as good as my word.
But doe you hear Cozen Proudly? they say my old
Father must marry your sister Honour, and that hee will dis∣inherit
me, and entail all his Lordships on her, and the heir
he shall beget on her body, i'st true or not?
There is such a report.
Why then I pray God he may die an old Cuckold∣lie
slave, oh world what art thou? where is Parents love?
Can he deny me for his natural Child,
Yet see (oh fornicator) old and stiff,
Not where he should be, that's my comfort yet,
As •or you my Lord: I will send to you as soon as I dare
fight and look upon steel, which Moister Wel-tri'd I pray
let be with all possible speed.
What do ye this afternoon.
Faith I have a great mind to see long-megg and the
ship at the Fortune.
Nay afaith let's up and have a rest at Primero.
Agreed my Lord, and toward the Evening il'e car∣rye
you to the Company.
Well no more words.
I wonder Sir you will walk so and let any body
•it prating to your wife! were I a man It thrust'em out ot'h
shop by the head and shoulders.
There were no policy in that wife, so should I loose
their custom, let them talk them selves weary, and give
thee love tokens still, I loose not by it.
Thy chastitie's impregnable, I know it,
Had I a dame whose eyes did swallow youth,
Whose unchaste gulf together did take in
Masters, and Men, the Foot-bodies and their Lords,
Making a Gally-moferie in her blood,
I would not walk thus then: but virtuous wife,
He that in chaste ears poores his ribald talk
Begets hate to himself, and not consent;
And even as dirt thrown hard against a wall
Rebounds and sparkles in the throwers eyes,
So ill words uttered to a virtuous Dame,
Turn and defile the speaker with red shame.
Z'oones, you are a whore, though I entreat him fair
Before his face, in complement, or so,
I not esteem him truly as this rush,
Ther's no such thing as friend-ship in the world,
And he that can not swear, dissemble, lie,
Wants knowledge how to live, and let him die.
Sir I did think you had esteemed of him
As you made show, therefore I used him well,
And yet not so but that the strictest eye
I durst have made a witness of my carriage.
Plague a your carriage, why he kissed your hand,
Looked babies in your eyes, and wink't and pink't,
You thought I had esteemed him, S'blood you whore,
Doe not I know, that you doe know you lie,
When did thou hear me say and mean one thing?
Oh I could kick you now, and tear your face
And eat thy Breasts like vdders.
Sir you may, but if I know what hath deserved al this
I am no woman, because he kissed my hand, unwillingly.
A little louder pray.
You are a base fellow, an unworthy man
As ever poor Gentlewoman matched withal,
Why should you make such show of love to any
Without the truth, thy beastly mind is like
Some deca•'d Tradesmen that doth make his wife
Entertain those• for gain he not endures,
Pish, swell and burst, I had rather with thy sword
Be hewed to pieces, then lead such a life,
Out with it valiant si•, I hold you for
A drawer upon women, not on men,
I will no more conceal your hollow heart,
But even report you as you are in truth.
This is called marriage, stop your mouth you whore.
Thy mother was a whore if I be one.
You know ther's company in the house, sweet friend
What have you writ your letter?
It is done, dear friend, I have made you stay too long
I fear you'll be benighted.
Fie, no, no,
Madame &amp; sweetest wife farewell, God bless vs,
Make much of master Subtle here my friend
Till my return, which may be ee'n is it happens,
According as my business hath success.
How will you pass the time, now fairest Mistress.
In troth I know not, wives without their husbands
Me thinks are lowering days.
Indeed some wives
Are like dead bodies in their Husbands absence.
If any Wife be, I must needs be so
That have a Husband far aboue all men,
Untainted with the humours others have,
A perfect man, and one that loves you truly,
You see the charge he left of your good usage.
Push, hoe's an Ass, I know him, a stark Ass.
Of a most barbarous condition,
False-hearted to his friend, rough unto you,
A most dissembling and perfidious fellow,
I care not if he heard me, this I know,
And will make good upon him with my sword
Or any for him, for he will not fight.
Fie servant, you show small civility
And less humanity, do ye requi•e
My husband• love thus ill, or what ••ee think
Of me, that you will utter to my face
Such harsh, unfriendly, slanderous injuries
Even of my Husband? Sir, forbear I pray
My ears, or your own tongue, I am no hous-wife
To hear my Husbands merit thus deprau'd.
His merit is a halter by this light,
You think hoe's out of Town now, no such matter
But gone aside, and hath importuned me
To t•ie your chastity.
It cannot be,
Alas he is as free from jealousy,
And ever was as confidence it self,
I know he loves me to, too heartily
To be suspicious, or to prove my truth.
If I doe fine in ought, ne'er may I purchase
The grace I hope for, and fair Mistress
If you have any spirit or wit, or sense,
You will be even with such a wretched slave,
Heaven knows I love you, as the ayre I draw,
Think but how finely you may cuckold him,
And safely too, with me, who will report
To him, that you are most invincible,
Your Chastity not to be subdued by man.
When you know, I'm a whore.
A whore, fie, no,
That you have been kind, or so, your whore doth live
In Pict-hatch, Turnebole-streete.
Your whore li•es there,
Well Servant leave me to my self a while,
Return a none, but bear this hope away,
T•shall be with you, if I at all do• stray.
Why heir's right wordly friendship, ye are well met;
Oh men! what are you? why is our poor sex
Still made the di•graced subjects, in these plays?
For vices, folly, and inconstancy?
When were men looked into with such critical eyes
Of observation, many would be found
So full of gross and base corruption,
That none (unless the Devil himself turned writer)
Could fine so badly, to express them truly;
Some wives that had a husband now like mine,
Would yield their honours up, to any man,
Far be it from my thoughts, oh let me stand,
Thou God of marriage and chastity,
An honour to my sex, no injury,
Compel the virtue of my breast to yield,
I'ts not revenge for any wife, to s•aine
The nuptial bed, although she be yok't ill,
Who false, because her husband so hath done,
Cures not his wound, but in her self makes one.
Who brought this Letter?
A little Irish foot-boy, Sir, he stays without for an
answer.
Bid him come in Lord.
What deep dissemblers are these females, all,
How far unlike a friend, this Lady used me,
And here, how like one mad in love, she writes:
So bless me Heaven, but thou art the prettiest boy
That ever ran by a Horse, hast thou dwelt long
With thy fair Mistress?
I came but this morning, Sir.
How fares thy Lady, boy?
Like to a turtle, that hath lost her mate,
Drooping she sits, her grief Sir cannot speak,
Had it a voice articulate, we should know
How, and for what she sufters; and perhaps,
(But it is unlikely) give her Comfort Sir,
W••ping she sits, and all the sound comes from her,
Is like the murmur of a silver Brooke,
Which her tears truly, would make there about her,
Sate she in any hollow continent.
Believe me boy▪ thou hast a passionate tong,
Live•y expression, or thy memory
Hath carried thy lesson well away,
But wherefore mourns thy Lady?
Sir, you know,
And would to God I did not know my self.
Ah las, it cannot be for love to me,
When last I saw her she reviled me (boy)
With bitter'st words, and wished me never more
To approach her sight, and for my marriage, now
I doe sustain it, as a penance, due
To the desert, that made her banish me.
Sir, I dare swear, she did presume, no words
Nor dangers, had been powerful to restrain
Your coming to her, when she gave the charge—
But are you married truly?
Why my Boy?
Dost think I mock my self, I sent her gloves.
The gloves she he's returned you Sir by me,
And prays you give them to some other Lady
That you'll deceive next, and be •e•iur'd to.
Sure you have wronged her Sir, she bad me tell you,
She ne'er thought goodness dwelt in many men,
But what there was of goodness in the world,
She thought you had it all, but now she sees
The jewel she esteemed is counterfeit
That, you are but a common man, your self,
A traitor to her, and her virtuous love;
That all men are betraiers and their breasts
As full of dangerous gulphes, as is the S••,
Where any woman thinking to find Herb•r,
She and her honour are praecipitated,
And never to be brought with safety off:
Alas my haplesse Lady, desolate,
Distressed, forsaken Virgin.
Sure this Boy
Is of an excellent nature, who so newly
Tan to her service, feels his Mistress grief,
As he •nd they were old famili•r fri•nds,
Why weep thou gentle L•d?
Who hath one tear,
And would not sau't from all occasions,
From Brothers slaughters, and from mothers deaths
To spend it here, for my 〈◊〉 Lady;
But Sir my Lady did com••not me beg
To see your wife, that I may bare to her
The sad report, what creature could make you
Untie the h•nd-fast plighted unto her.
Wife, wife, come forth-now Gentle boy, be judge
If such a face as this being paid with scorn
By her I did adore, had not full power
To make me marry.
By the God of Love,
Shees a fair Creature, but faith should be fairer.
My Lady, Gentle Mistress, one that thought
She had some interest in this Gentleman,
(Who now is only yours) Commanded m•
To kiss your white hand, and to figh and weep,
And wish you that content she should have had
In the fr•ition of her Love you hold,
She •ad me say, God give you joy, to both;
Yet this withal (if ye were married)
No one, her foot-steps ever more should me•e,
Nor see her face, but in a winding sheet.
Alas poor Lady, 'saith I pity her,
And, but to be in the same state, could forgo
Any thing I possess, to ease her woe.
Loves blessing light upon thy gentle soul,
Men rail at women Mistress, bu•t is we
Are false and cruel, ten times more unkind,
You are smoother far, and of a softer mind:
Sir, I have one request more.
Gentle Lad, It must be one of a strange-qualitie
That I deny thee, both thy form, and mind.
Inform me that thy n•rture hath been better,
Than to betray thee to this present life.
•'is, that you would vouchsafe to entertain me,
My fee•e do tremble under me, to bear
My by•ie back unto my uncouth Lady,
To assure her grief; what heart so hard, would owe
A tongue, to tell so sad a tale to her?
Alas, I dare not look upon her eyes,
Where wronged love, •its like the Basilisk,
And sure would kill me for my dire report,
Or rather should not I appear like death,
When every word I speak shot through her hart,
More mortally than his v•sparing dart.
Let me speak for the Boy.
To what end (love)
No, I will sue to him, to follow me,
In truth I love thy sweet condition,
And may live to i•form thy Lady of thee;
Come in dry, dry thine eyes, respit thy woe:
The effects of causes, crown, or overthrow.
S'light, what should be become of her, you swear
she past not forth of do•es, and in the house she is not?
Did you not see her Princox?
This same Bawd has brought her letters from
some younger brother, and she is stole away.
Bawd, I defy you, indeed your Lordship thinks,
you may make Bawds of whom you please, i'll take my oath
upon a book, since I met her in the necessary house in the
morning, I ne'er set eye on her.
Sh•e went not out of doors.
Sure she has an invisible ring.
M•rrie she's the honester woman, for some of their
ring are visible enough, the more shame for them, still say
I, let the pond at Islington be searched: go to, there's more
have drowned themselves for love this year then you are
aware of.
Pish, you are a fool.
S'hart call him fool again.
By this light and I will, as soon as ever you have
showed me the Swaggerers.
Her clothes are all yonder my Lord.
And even those same she had on to day.
Madam where is your Husband?
Rid into the Country.
Of my conscience, rid into France with your sister.
Away, away for shame.
Why, I hope she is not the first Lady that has run
away with other women's husbands.
It may be shoe's stolen out to see a play.
Who should go with her, man?
Upon my life you'll hear on her at Master Engines
house, some love past betwixt them, and we heard that he
was married to day, to another.
S'hart, isle go see.
Come to the Swaggerers.
Mercy upon me, a man or a—Lord now?
Heere's a quoile, with a Lord and his sister.
Princox, hast not thou pined in that Ruff yet, ah!
how thou fumble.
Troth Madam, I was ne'er brought up to it, it is
Chamber-maids work, and I have ever lived Gentlewoman.
And been used accordingly.
Shoe's a rare wife believe it Sir, were all such,
Wee never should have false inheritors.
Pish friend, there is no woman in the world
Can hold out in the end, If youth, shape, wit,
Met in one subject, doe assault her aptly,
For failing once, you must not faint but try
Another way, the path of women's minds
Are crooked, and diverse, they have by-waies
To lead you to the Palace of their pleasures,
And you must woo discreetly; first observe
The disposition of her you attempt,
If she be sprightly, and heroical,
Possess her that you are valiant, and have spirit,
Talk nothing but of beating every man
That is your hinderance, though you doe not doe it,
Or dare not, it is no matter. Be she free
And of a liberal soul, give bounteously
To all the servants, let your angels fly
About the room, although you borrowed 'em.
If she be witty, so must your discourse
Get wi•, what shift•so'ere you make for it,
Though't cost you all your land, and then a song
Or two is not amiss, although you buy 'em,
There's many in the Town will furnish you.
But still I tell you, you must use her roughly,
Bea•e her face black and blew, take all her cloth's
And give them to some Punk, this will be ground
For me to work upon.
All this I have done.
I 〈…〉 her now, as bare, that should I die,
Her foe•tune (ô my conscience) would be
To marry some Tobacco-man, she has nothing
Bu• 〈◊〉 old black-woorke wastco•e, which would serve
Exceeding well to •it in the shop and light
Pipes for the lousy Footmen (and sweet friend)
First heere's a jewel to present her, then
Here is a So•net writ against my self,
Which as thine own thou shalt accost her with,
Farrow•ll and happy success attend thee.
Ha, ha, ha.
Fair•d, still wilt thou be true
To a man so false to thee?
Did be le•d a Husbands due,
Thou did owe him loyalty•;
But will curses, wants and blows
Breed no change in thy white soul•
Be not a fool to thy first vow•s,
Since his breach, doth thy faith control,
No be•utie else, could be so chaste,
Think not thou honour'st women then,
Since by thy co•science, all disgra•'t,
Are robed of the dear loves of men;
Then grant me my desire that vow to prove
A real husband, his adul•erate love.
Took ever man more pains to be a Cuckold?
Oh! monstrous age where men themselves we see,
Study and pay for their own infamy.
Give me my sister, Isle have her forth thy heart.
No earthly Lord can pull her out of that,
Till he have plucked my heart first out, my Lord
Were it not inhospitable, I could wrong you here
In mine own house▪ I am so full of woe,
For your lost sister that by all my joys
Hoped for in her, my heart weeps tears of blood,
A whiter virgin, and a worthier,
Had ne'er creation: L•da's Swan was black
To her virginity, and immaculate thoughts.
Where hast thou hid her? give her me again,
For by the God of vengeance, be she lost,
The female hate shall spring betwixt our names,
Shall never die, while one of either house
Survives, our children shall at seven years old
Strike knives in one another.
Let Hell gape
And take me quick, if I know where she is,
But am so charged with sorrow for her loss,
Being •no cause of it (as no doubt I am)
That I had rather •al upon my sword
Then breath a minute longer.
Oh sir! hold.
Thou shalt not need, I have a sword to b•the
In thy false blood, inhumane murderer.
Good Sir be pacified, i'll go, i'll run
Many a mile to find your sister out;
She never was so desperate of grace,
By violence to rob her self of life,
And so her soul in danger; comfort Sir,
Shoe's but retired somewhere on my life.
Prithee let me alone—
Doe I stand to defend that wretched life
That is in doubt of hers, here worthy Lord,
Behold a breast, framed of thy sisters love,
Hew it, for thou shalt strike but on a stock,
Since she is gone that was the cause it lived.
Out false dissembler, are not married?
No, behold, it is my younger brother dressed,
A man, no woman, that hath gulled the world,
Intended for a happier event
Than this that followed, that she now is gone,
Oh fond experiments of simple man,
Fool to thy fate, since all thy project man't
But mirth, is now converted unto death.
Oh doe not burst me joy, that modesty
Would let me show my self to finish all.
Nay, then thou hast my sister somewhere villain,
It is plain now, thou wilt steal thy marriage,
She is no match for thee, assure thy self.
If all the law in England, or my friends
Can cross it, t•shall not be.
Would it were so well,
And that I knew the Lady to be safe.
Give me no ill words; Sir, this Boy and I
Will wander like to Pilgrims, till we find her:
If you doe love her as you talk, doe so:
The love or grief that is expressed in words,
Is slight and easy, it is but shallow woe
That makes a noise, deep'st waters stillest go;
I love her better then thy parents did,
Which is beyond a Brother.
Slave, thou least.
Z'oones.
Kill him.
Oh hold; Sir, you dishonour much your brother,
To counsel him against hospitality,
To strike in his own house.
You, Lord insolent, I will fight with you,
Take this, as a challenge, and set your time.
To morrow morning Engine,
It is that I covet, and provoke thee for.
Will you not strike him now?
No, my good Boy
Is both discreet and just in his advise,
Thy glories are to last but for a day;
Give me thy hand, to morrow morning thou shalt be no Lo.
To morrow noon, thou shalt not be at all.
Pish, why should you think so, have not I arms▪
A soul as bold as yours, a sword as true:
I doe not think your Honour in the field
Without your Lordships liveries will have odds.
Farewell, and lets have no excuses, pray.
I warrant you, pray say your prayers to night,
And bring no ink-horne w•ee, to set your hand to
A satisfactory recantation.
Oh wretched Maid, whose sword can I pray for?
But by the others loss, I must find death,
Oh odious brother, if he kill my love,
Oh bloody Love, if he should kill my brother;
Despair on both sides of my discontent,
Teal's me no safety rests but to prevent.
What's a clock Princox?
Bed-time an't please you Madame.
Come, undress me, would God had made me a man.
Why, Madame?
Because I would have been in bed as soon as they,
wee are so long vnpinning and unlacing.
Yet many of vs Madame are quickly undone some∣time,
but herein we have the advantage of men, though 〈◊〉
they can be a bed sooner than we, i'ts a great while when
they are a bed ever they can get up.
Indeed if they be well laid Princox, one cannot get
them up again in hast.
Oh God Madame, how mean you that, I hope
you know, ill things taken into a Gentlewoman's ea•es, are
the quick corrupters of maiden modesty, I would be loath
to continue in any service unfit for my virgin estate, or where
the world should take any notice of light behaviour in the
Lady I follow: for Madame, the maine point of chastity in
a Lady, is to build the rock of a good opinion amongst the
people by circumstances, and a fair show she must make, Si,
non caste, tamen ca•te Madame, and though wit be a wanton
Madame: yet I beseech your Lady-ship for your own cre∣dit
and mine, let the bridle of judgement be always in the
chaps of it to give it head, or restrain it, according as time
and place shall be convenient.
Precise and learned Princox, dost not thou go to
Black-fryers.
Most frequently Madame, unworthy vessel that
I am to partake or retain any of the delicious dew, that is
there distilled.
But why should thou ask me what I meant even
now, I tell thee there's nothing uttered that carries a double
sense, one good, one bad, but if the hearer apply it to the
worst, the fault lies in his or her corrupt understanding, not
in the speaker, for to answer your latin: prauis omnia pra∣•a,
believe me wench, if ill come into my fancy, I will purge
it by speech▪ the less will remain within: a pox of these
nise mouthed creatures, I have seen a norrow pair of lips vt∣la
as broad a tail, as can be bought for money; Indeed an
ill tale vnutter'd, is like a maggot in a nut, it spoils the
whitest kernel.
You speak most intelligently Madame.
Have•t not done yet? thou art an old fumbler, I per∣ceiue
me thinks thou doest not doe things like a woman.
Madame, I doe my endeavour, and the best can
doe no more, they that could doe better, it may be would
not, and then it were all one, but rather then be a burden
to your Lady-ship, I protest sincerely, I would beg my bre•d,
therefore I beseech you Madame to hold me excuse•d, and
let my good will stand for the action.
Let thy good will stand for the action? If good will
would doe it, there's many a Lady in this Land would be
content with her old Lord, and thou can not be a burden
to me, without thou lie upon me, and that were preposterous
in thy sex; take no exceptions at what I say, remember you
said stand e'ne-now, there was a word for one of your coat
indeed.
I sweat Madame, you are very merry, God send
you good luck, he's your Ladyship no waters, that you use at
bed-time?
No in truth, Princox.
No Complexion?
None but mine own I swear, did thou ever use any?
No indeed Madame: now and then a piece of
scarlet, or so; a little white and red Cerusse; but in troth Ma∣dame,
I have an excellent receipt for a night masque, as ever
you heard.
What is it?
Bores grease one ounce, Iordane Almouds blanch't
and ground a quart, red Rose-water, half a pint,
Mares urine, newly covered, half a score drops.
Faugh, no more of thy medicine, if thou love me,
few of our Knights errant, when they meet a fair Lady
errant, in a morning, would think her face had lien so ply∣ster'd
all night: thou hast had some Apothecary to thy sweet
heart: but leaving this face physic, for (by my troth) it may
make others have good ones; but it makes me make a scur∣uie
one. Which of all the Gallants in the Town would
thou make a husband of, if thou might have him for thy
choosing?
In troth Madame, I but you'll say I speak blindly,
but let my love stand a side.
I think it not fit indeed your love should stand in the
middle.
I say Master Bold; oh, do but mark him Madame,
his leg, his hand, his body, &amp; all his members standin print.
Out upon thee Princox; no, me thinks Weltered• a
handsome fellow, I like not these starch'• Gallants: miscue∣line
faces, and masculine g•stirs please me best.
How like you Master P•rt?
•ie upon him, when he is in his scarlet clothes, he
looks like man of wax, and I had as leave have a dog a
wax, I do not think but he lies in a case a nights, he walks
as if he were made of gyves, as if nature had wrought him in
a frame, I have seen him sit discontented a whole play, be∣cause
one of the purls of his band was fallen (out of his
reach) to order again.
Why? Bold Madame is clean contrary.
I but that's as ill, each extreme, is a like vi•ious; his
careful carelessness is his stud•e, he spends as much time to
make himself sloue•lie, as the other to be spruce, his garters
hang ever on the calves of his legs, his doublet unbuttoned,
and his points untrust, his hair in's eyes like a drunkard, and
his hat worn on his hinder part of his head, as if he cared
more for his memory, than his wit: makes him look as if he
were distracted; Princox, I would have you lie with me, I
doe not love to lie alone.
With all my heart Madame.
Are you clean skinned?
Clean skinned Madame• there's a question, do you
think I have the itch? I am an English-woman, I protest, I
scorn the motion.
Nay prithee Princox be not angry, it's a sign of ho∣nestie
I can tell you.
Faith Madam I think ti's but simple honesty that
dwells at the sign of me scab.
Well, well, come to bed, and wee•le talk further of
all these matters.
Fortune, I thank thee, I will owe thee eyes
For this good turn, now is she mine indeed,
Thou hast given me that success my project hoped
Of, false disguise that hast been true to me,
And now be Bold, that thou ma•'st welcome be.
Dam-me, we will have more wine, sirrha, or we'll
down into the Seller, and drown thee in a Burred of Malme∣sey,
and he wall the Hogs-heads in pieces.
Hang him rogue, shall he die as honourably as the
Duke of Clarence; by this flesh lets have wine, or I will cut
thy head off, have it roasted and eaten in Pie-corner next
Bartholmew-tide.
Gentlemen, I beseech you consider where you
are, Turne-bole street, a civil place, do not disturb a number∣ber
a poor Gentlewomen, Master Whoore-band, Ms: Bots,
Ma: Teare-chops, and Ma: Spill-bloud the Watch are abroad.
The Watch? why you rogue, are not we Kings of
Turne-bole?
Yes marry are ye, Sir, for my part, if you'll be
quiet, isle have a sign made of ye, and it shall be called the
four Kings of Turn bole.
Will you fetch vs wine?
And a whore (sirrah)
Why what do ye think of me, am I an Infidel, a
Turk, a Pagan, a Saracen, I have been at Bess Turnips,
and she swears all the Gentlewomen went to see a Play at
the Fortune, and are not come in yet, and she believes they
sup with the Players.
Dam-me, we must kill all those rogues, we shall no∣for
keep a whore honest for them.
Go your ways, sirrha, we'll have but a gallon a
peace, and an ounce of Tobacco.
I beseech you, let it be but pottles.
S'hart you rogne?
Master Well-tri'd, welcome as my soul.
Noble Lad, how dost thou?
As welcome, as the Tobacco and the Wine Boy.
Dam-me thou art.
Bless me (save you Gent) They have not one
face among 'em. I could wish my self well from them, I
would I had put out something upon my return, I had as
leave be at the Barmuthoes.
Pray welcome this Gentleman.
Is he valiant?
Faith hoe's a little faulty that way: somewhat of a
bashful and backward nature, yet I have brought him
amongst you, because he hath a great desire to be fleshed.
Yes faith Sir, I have a great desire to be fleshed:
now Mr. Well-tri'd said, hee would bring me to the only
flesh-mongers in the town.
Sir, he cannot endure the sight of steel.
Not steel? zoones.
Now I am going.
Here's to you sir, i'll fetch you again with a cup of sack.
I pledge you sir, and begin to you in a cup of Claret:
Hark you my Lo: what will you say, if I make you
beat all these out of the room?
What will I say? why I say it is impossible, ti's not is
mortal man.
Well drink apace, if any brave you out brave him,
Isle second you, they are a Company of cowards believe me.
By this light I would they were else, if I thought so, I
would be upon the Jack of one of 'em instantly, that same
little Dame me, but Mr. Wel-tri'd if they be not very valiant
or dare not fight! how come they by such Cuts and gashes,
and such broken faces?
Why their whores strike 'em with Cans, and glasses,
and quart pots, if they have nothing by 'em, they strike
'em with the Pox, and you know that will lay ones nose as
flat as a basket hilt Dagger.
Well let me alone.
This bullie dares not drink.
Dare I not Sir.
Well said, speak to him man.
You had best try me Sir.
Wee fouer will drink four healths to four of the
seven deadly sins, Pride, Drunkenness, wrath &amp; Leeherie.
I'll pledge 'em, and I thank you, I know 'em all,
hears one.
Which of the sins?
By my troth even to Pride.
Why well said, and in this doe not you only pledge
your Mistress health, but all the women's in the world.
So now, this little Cup to Wrath, because he and I
are strangers.
Brave boy, Dame me he shall be a Rorer.
Dame me, I will be a rorer, or't shall cost me a fall.
The next place that falls, pray let him have it.
Well, I have two of my healths to drink yet, Leche∣rye
and Drunkenness which and shall go together.
Why how now my Lord, a Morralist?
Dame me, art thou a Lo: what virtues hast thou?
Virtues? enough to keep ere a Dame me Company
in England, me thinks you should think it virtue enough
to be a Lord.
Will not you pledge these healths? we'll have no
observers.
Why, Mounser Whore-bang? I am no play maker,
and for pledging your healths, I love none of the four,
you drank to so well.
Zoones you shall pledge me this.
Shall I?
Whats the matter, dost here Moister Weltered, use
thine own discretion, if thou wilt not pledge him, say so?
and let me see, if ever a Dame me of 'em all, will force thee.
Puff, will your Lordship take any Tobacco? you
Lord with the white face?
Heart he cannot put it through his nose.
Faith you have near a nose to put it through, dee heart
blow your face sir.
You'll pledge me Sir?
Indeed I will not.
Dame me hee shall not then.
Lord, use your own words, Dame me is mine,
I am known by it all the town o'er, do ye hear?
It is as free for me as you, do ye here Patch?
I have paid more for it.
Nay Isle bear him witness in 〈◊〉 truth, his soul lies
fort my Lord.
Wel-tru'd, you are grown proud since you got
good Clothes, and have followed your Lord.
I have known you lousy, Well trid,
Rorer you lie.
Oh Iesu.
Zoones cleave or be cleft: pell mell, sl•sh arms
and legs.
Hart let me alone with 'em.
Why now thou art a worthy wight, indeed a Lord
a Lorn.
I am a mad man, look is not that one of their heads?
Fie no my Lord.
Dam me but tic, I would not wish you to cross me
a purpose, if you have any thing to say to me, so, I am ready.
Oh brave Lord, many a rorer thus is made by wine:
come it is one of their heads my Lord.
Why so then, I will have my •umour, if you love me,
let's go break windows somewhere.
Drawer, take your plate, for the reckoning there's
some of their cloaks: I will be no shot-log to such.
Gods blessing o'your heart, for thus ridding the
house of them.
UN•iuill man, if I should take thy I •e,
It were not to be weighed with thy attempt:
Thou hast for ever lost me.
Madam▪ why?
Can love beget loss? Doe I covet you
Unlawfully? Am I an unfit man.
To make an husband of? Send for a Priest,
First consumma•e the match, and then to bed
Without more trouble.
No, I will not do it.
Why you confessed to me as you're Gentlewoman,
I was the man your heart •id most affect:
That you did doa•e upon my mind and body.
So, by the sacred and inviolate knot
Of marriage, I doe, but will not wed thee.
Why yet enjoy me now. Consider Lady,
That little, but blessed time, I was in bed,
Although I lay as by my sisters side,
The world is apt to censure otherwise:
So it is necessity that wee marry now.
Pish, I regard not (at a straw) the world:
Fame from the tongues of men doth injury
Oftner then Justice▪ and as conscience
Only makes guilty persons, not report:
(For show we clear as springs unto the world,
If our own knowledge doe not make vs so,
That is no satisfaction to our selves▪)
So stand wee ne'er so leprous to men's eye,
It cannot hurt hart-knowne integrity.
You have trusted to that fond opinion,
This is the way to have a widowhood,
By getting to her bed: Alas young man,
Should thou thy self tell thy companions
Thou had dishonoured me (as you men have tongues
Forked and venomed against our subject sex)
It should not move me, that know it is not so:
Therefore depart, Truth be my virtuous shield.
Few widows would doe thus.
All modest, would.
To be in bed and in possession
Even of the mark I aimed at, and go off
Foiled and disgrac't, come, come, you'll laugh at me
Behind my back, publish I wanted spirit,
And mock me to the Ladies, call me child,
Say you denied me but to try the heate
And zeal of my affection toward you,
Then clapped up with arime, as for example.
Hee coldly loves, retires, for one vain trial,
For wee are yielding, when we make denial.
Servant I make no question, from this time
You'll hold a more reverent opinion
Of some that wear long coats, and tic my pride,
To assure you that there are amongst vs good:
And with this continence, if you go away,
I'll be so far from thinking it defect,
That I will hold you worthiest of men.
S'hart, I am Tantalus, my longed for fruit
Bobs at my lips, yet still it shrinks from me.
Have not I that, which men say never fails
To overcome any? opportunity?
Come, come, I am too cold in my assault.
By all the virtues, that yet ever were
In man, or woman, I with reverence
Doe love thee Lady, but will be no fool
To let occasion slip, her fore-top from me.
You will fail this way to, upon my knees
I doe desire thee to preserve thy virtues,
And with my tears my honour; it is as bad
To loose our words to them, or to deceive
Who have held worthy opinions of vs,
As to betray trust: all this I implore
For thine own sake, not mine, as for my self,
If thou be violent, by this stupid night,
And all the mischiefs her dark womb hath bred,
I'll raise the house, I'll cry a rape.
I hope you will not hang me, that were murder Lady,
A greater sin, then lying with me sure.
Come, flatter not your self with argument,
I will exclaim; the law hangs you, not I,
Or if I did, I had rather far confound
The dearest body in the world to me,
Then that, that body, should confound my soul.
Your soul, alas Mistress, are you so fond
To think her general destruction
Can be procured by such a natural act,
Which beasts are borne to and have privilege in?
Fie, fiie, if this could be, far happier
Are sensitive souls in their creation
Than man the prince of creatures, think you Heaven
Regards such mortal deeds, or punishes
Those acts, for which he hath ordained vs?
You argue like an Atheist, man is never
The prince of creatures, as you call him now,
But in his reason, fail that, he is worse
Than Horse or Dog, or beasts of wilderness,
And tic that reason teaches vs to doe
Our actions unlike them: then that which you
Termed in them a privilege beyond vs,
The baseness of their being doth express,
Compared to ours, Horses, Bulls, and Swine,
Doe leap their Dams, because man does not so,
Shall we conclude his making happilesse?
You put me down, yet will not put me down,
I am too gentle, some of you I have heard,
Love not these words but force, to have it done
As they sing prick-song, even at the first sight.
Go too, keep off, by Heaven and Earth, i'll call else.
How if no body hear you?
If they doe not,
I'll kill you with mine own hand, never stare,
Or failing that fall on this sword my self.
Oh widow wonderful, if thou be not honest.
Now God forgive my mother and my sisters.
Think but how finely Madam undiscovered
For ever you and I, might live all day your Gentlewoman
To doe you service, but all night your man
To doe you service, newness of the trick,
If nothing else might stir ye.
It is a stale one
And was done in the Fleet ten years ago,
Will you begone? the door is open for you.
Let me but tarry till the morning Madam,
To send for clothes, shall I go naked home.
It is best time now, it is but one a clock,
And you may go unseen, I swear by Heaven,
I would spend all the night to sit and talk w'ee,
If I durst trust you, I doe love you so,
My blood forsakes my heart now you depart.
S'hart, will you marry me hereafter then?
No, you are too young, and I am much too old;
I and unworthy, and the world will say,
We married not for love, good morrow servant.
Why so? these women are the erranst Jugglers in
the World, the wry-leg'd fellow is an Ass to 'em. Well I
must have this wddow, what ever come on it: Faith she has
turned me out of her service very barely, hark, whats here,
musique.
Rise Lady Mistress, rise:
The night hath tedious been,
No sleep hath fallen into my eyes,
Nor slumbers made me sin.
Is not she a Saint then say,
Thought of whom keeps sin away?
Rise Madame, rise and give me light,
Whom darkness still will cover.
And ignorance darker than night,
Till thou smile on thy lover;
All want day 〈◊〉 thy beauty rise,
For the grate morn breaks from thine eyes.
Now sing it sirrha.
S'foote, who's this? young Master Bold? God save
you, you are an early stirrer.
You say true Master Subtle, I have been early
up, but as God help me, I was never the near.
Where have you been Sir?
What's that to you Sir? at a women's labour.
Very good: I near took you for a man Mid-wife
before.
The troth is, I have been up all night at dice, &amp;
lost my clothes, good morrow Master Subtle, pray God the
Watch be broke up: I thank you for my Musique:
Tic palpable by this air, her husband and being abroad,
Bold has lain with her, and is now con•••'d out of doors.
Is this the Lady Perfect with a pox? The truth is, her ver∣tuous
chastity, began to make me make a miracle of her,
still holding out to me, notwithstanding her husbands most
barbarous usage of her, but now indeed it is no marvel
since another possesses her. Well Madame, Isle go find out
your Cuckold, isle be revenged on you and tell a tale
Shall tickle him, this is a cheat in love,
Not to be borne, another to beguile
Me of the game, I plaid for all this while.
You see, we made bold with your lodging, indeed,
I did assure my self, you were fast for this night.
But how the Devil came this fool in your company?
S'foote man, I carried him last night among the
Rorers, to flesh him, and by this light he got drunk, and
beat i'm all.
Why then he can endure the sight of a drawn
sword now?
Oh God Sir, I think in my conscience, he will eat
steel shortly, I know not how his conversion will hold
after this sleep, but in an hour or two (last night) he was
grown such a little dam-me, that I protest, I was afraid of
the spirit, that I my self had raised in him: but this other
matter of your expulsion thus mads me to the heart; Were
you in bed with her?
In bed by Heaven.
I'll •e hanged, if you were not busy to soon, you
should have let her slept first.
Z'oones man, she put her hands to my breasts and
swore I was no maid, now I being eager to prove her words
true, took that hint, and would violently have thrust her
hand lower, when her thought being swifter then my
strength, made her no sooner imagine that she was betrayed,
but she leaps out of the bed, whips me down a sword that
hung by, and as, if fortitude and justice had met to assist
her, spite of all argument fair or foul she forced me away.
But is it possible thou should have no more wit,
would thou come away upon any terms, but sure ones,
having night, her chamber and her self naked in thine
arms? By that light, if I had a son of •4 whom I had
help 't thus far, that had served me so, I would breech him.
S'hart, what would you have me done?
Have done? done, done twice at least.
Have plaid Tarquin and ravished her.
Pish, Tarquin was a block-head, if he had had any
wit and could have spoke, Lucre•ce had never been ravished,
she would have yielded, I warrant thee, &amp; so will any woman
I was such an erroneous heretic to love, and
women, as thou art, till now.
God's precious, it makes me mad, when I think
on it: was there ever such an obsur'd trick? now will she a∣buse
thee horribly, say thou art a faint-hearted fellow, a
milk-sop and I know not what, as indeed thou art.
Z'oones, would you had been in my place.
Z'oones, I would I had, I would have so jumbled her
honesty: would thou be held out at staves end with words?
dost not thou know a widdow's a weak vessel, and is easily
cast if you close.
Weltri'd, you deal unfriendly.
By this light I shall blush to be seen in thy company.
Pray leave my chamber.
Pox upon your chamber,
I care not for your chamber, nor your self
More than you care for me.
S'blood I as little for you.
Why fare you well.
Why, fare-well you. Weltri'd, I prithee stay,
Thou know I love thee.
S'hart, I love you as well; but for my spleen, or
choler I think, I have as much as you.
Well friend, this is the business you must doe for me,
Repair unto the widow, where give out,
To morrow morn, I shall be married,
Inuit her to the wedding, I have a trick,
To put upon this Lord to, whom I made
My instrument to prefer me.
What shall follow,
I will not ask, because I mean to see it.
The •ars twixt friends, still keeps their friendship sweet.
Why Weltri'd, you rogue, whats that a vision?
Why how now my Lord? who do you call rogue?
the Gentleman you name is my friend, if you were wise I
should be angry.
Angry with me? why dam me Sir, and you be;
Cut with your sword, it is not with me I tell you
As it was yesterday, I am flesh•man, I.
Have you any thing to say to me?
Nothing but this, how many doe you think,
you have slain last night?
Why five, I never kill less.
There was but four: my Lord, you had best pro∣uide
your self and begone, three you have slain stark dead.
You jest.
It is most true, Weltri'd is fled.
Why let the Rorers meddle with me another time,
as for flying, I scorn it, I kilt 'em like a man; when did you
ever see a Lord hang for any thing? we may kill whom we
list, marry my conscience p•icks me; ah plague a this drink,
what things it makes vs doe, I doe no more remember this
now than a puppie-dogge.
Oh bloody Lord that art bedaubed with gore,
Vain world adieu, for I will roar no more.
Nay stay my Lord, I did but try the tenderness
of your conscience, all this is nothing so, but to sweeten the
tale (I have for you) I foretold you this feigned mischance.
Is it a tale belonging to the Widow?
I think you are a witch.
My grand-mother was suspected.
The Widow has desired you by me to meet her
to morrow morning at Church in some v•known disguise,
least any suspect it, for quoth she,
Long hath he held me fast in his moist hand,
Therefore I will be his in nuptial band.
Bold, I have ever taken you to be my friend, I am
very wise now, and valiant, if this be not true, dam•me Sir,
you are the son of a whore, and you lie, and I will make it
good with my sword.
I am, what ever you please Sir, If it be not true, I will
go with you to the Church my self, your disguise I have
thought on; the Widow is your own. Come, leave your
fooling.
If this be true, thou little Boy,
So true, as thou tel'st to me,
To morrow morn when I have the Widow,
My dear friend shalt thou be.
Sir, it is most true and in this shall you be
unlike to other Citizens that arrest
To undo Gentlemen: your clemency here
perchance saves two lives, one from the others sword,
The other from the Laws; this morn they fight,
And though your debtor be a Lord, yet should he
Miscarry, certainly your debt were lost.
Dost thou serve the Lord Proudly?
Sir, I do.
Well, such a Boy as thou, is worth more money
Then thy Lord owes me, it is not for the debt
I doe arrest him, but to end this strife,
Which both may loose my money and his life.
My Horse there, Z'oones I would not for the world
He should alight before me in the field,
My name and honour were for ever lost.
Good morrow to your Honour, I doe hear
Your Lordship this fair morning is to fight,
And for your honour: Did you never see
The Play, where the fat Knight hight Old-castle,
Did tell you truly what this honour was?
Why, how now good man flat-cap, what do ye lack?
Who doe you talk to, sirrha?
We arrest you.
Arrest me, rogue? I am a Lord ye curs, a Parliament
man.
Sir, we arest you though.
At whose suit?
At mine, Sir.
Why thou base rogue, did not I set thee up,
Having no stock, but thy fair shop and wise?
Into my house with him.
Away with him, away with him.
A plot, a trick by Heaven. See Engines foote-boy, it is
by his Masters means, oh coward, slave; i'll put in bail, or
pay the debt.
I, I, I, we'll talk with you within—thrust him in.
If I miscarry Frank, I prithee see
All my debts paid, about five hundred pounds
Will fully satisfy all men, and my land
And what I else possess, by natures right
And thy descent, Frank, I make freely thine.
I know, you doe not think I wish you dead
For all the benefit: besides, your spirit
So opposite to counsel, to avert
Your resolution, that I save my breath,
Which would be lost in vain, to expire and spend
Upon your foe, if you fall under him.
Frank, I protest you shall doe injury
Unto my foe, and much disturbance to
Unto my soul departing, die I here
Fairly, and on my single enemies sword,
If you should not let him go off vntouch't.
Now by the Master of thy life and mine,
I love thee Boy, beyond any example,
As well as thou dost me, but should I go
Thy second to the field, as thou dost mine,
And if thine enemy kilt thee like a man,
I would desire, never to see him more,
But he should bear himself off with those wounds
He had received from thee, for that time safe,
And without persecution by the Law,
For what hap is our foes, might be our own,
And no mans judgment, sits in Justice place,
But weighing other men's as his own case.
He has the advantage of you being a Lord,
For should you kill him, you are sure to die,
And by some Lawyer with a golden tongue,
That cries for right, ten angels on his side;
Your daring meet him, called presumption:
But kill he you, hee, and his noble friends
Have such a golden snaffle for the jaws
Of man, devouring Pithagorean Law,
Thei'le reyne her stubborn chaps, even to her tail?
And though she have iron •eeth to meaner men,
So master her, that who displeased her most,
She shall lie under like a tired jade,
For small boats on rough seas are quickly lost,
But ships ride safe, and cut what by they list.
Follow what may, I am resolved dear Brother,
This monster valour, that doth feed on men,
Groans in me for my reputation.
This charge I give thee to, If I doe die,
Never to part from the young Boy, which late
I entertained, but love him for my sake:
And for my Mistress the Lady Honour,
Whom to deceive, I have deceived my self.
If she be dead, pray God I may give up
My life a sacrifice on her, brothers sword;
But if thou liu'st to see her gentle brother,
If I be slain, tell her I dyed because
I had transgressed against her worthy love.
This sword is not well mounted, lets see thine.
Your staying Sir, is in vain, for my Lord Proudly,
Just at his taking horse to meet you here,
At Seldomes suit the Citizen, was arrested
Upon an action of two hundred pounds,
I saw it Sir, it is true.
Oh, scurvy Lord,
It had been a cleanlier shift then this to have had
It hindered by command, he being a Lord,
But I will find him.
You see, valiant Sir, I have got loose
For all your stratagem, oh rogue are you there.
Most ignoble Lord.
Coward thou did this
That I might be disabled for the fight,
Or that thou might have some excuse to shun me,
But it is my left arm, thou hast lighted on.
I have no second; here are three of you,
If all doe murder me, your consciences
Will more then hang you, damn you; come prepare.
Brother walk off, &amp; take the boy away, is he hurt much?
Nothing or very little.
I•le bind your wound up first, your loss of blood
May sooner make you faint.
Engine, thou art a worthy Gentleman, for this courtesy,
Go-too i'll save thy life, come on Sir: hay,
I'll cut your codpeice point Sir, with this thrust,
And then down goes your breeches.
Your Lordships merry
I had like to have spoiled your cut-worke band.
Oh Master, hold your hand, my Lord hold yours,
Or let your swords meet in this wretched breast,
Yet you are both well, what blood you have lost
Give it as for the injury you did, and now be friends,
S'hart, it is a loving rogue.
Kind Boy, stand up, it is for thy wound he bleeds,
My wrong is yet unsatisfied.
Hence away it is a Sisters loss, that whets my sword.
Oh stay, my Lord, behold your sister here
Bleeding by your hand Servant see your mistress
Turned to thy servant running by thy Horse,
Whose means it was to have prevented this, but all in vain.
Oh noble Lady.
Most worthy pattern of all women kind.
Engine, I am satisfied, put up your sword.
Sister, you must with me, I have a husband
The Lord Fee-simple• father, old, but rich:
This Gentleman is no match for you; kneel not,
That portion of yours, I have consumed,
Thus marrying, you shall never come to want.
Oh I s•eet my Lord, my brother do not force me,
To break my faith or to a loathed bed.
Force you, he shall not, brother bear her hence,
She is my wife, and thou shalt find my cause
Ten times improu'd now.
Oh, have at you Sir.
Hold, hold for heavens sake, was ever wretched Lady
Put to this hazard? Sir, let me speak
But one word with him, and in•e go with you,
And undergo, what ever you command.
Do it quickly, for I love no whispering,
It is strange to see you Madame with a sword,
You shou•d have come hither in your Ladies clothes.
Well, as you please my Lord, you are witness,
whatsoever before
Hath past betwixt vs: thus I doe undo.
Were not I mad to think thou coldest love me
That would have slain my Brother?
Sai'st true sister.
Oh thou fair creature! wilt thou be as false as other
Ladies?
Thou art my example,
Isle kiss thee once, farewell for ever, come my Lord, now
Match me, with whom you please, a tumbler.
I must doe this, else had they fought again.
Mine own best Sister, farewell Mr. Engine.
Oh ancient truth to be denied of no man,
An Eel by the taile's held surer than a woman.
She is not to be cast.
It cannot be: had you a wife, and I were in your
case.
I would be hanged even at the chamber door
Where I attempted, but i'll lay her flat.
Why tell me truly, would it please you best,
To have her remain chaste, or conquered.
Oh friend it would do me good at the heart
To have her over come, she do's so brag
And stand upon her chastity forsooth.
Why then in plain terms Sir, the fort is mine,
Your wife has yielded, vp-tailes is her song,
The deed is done, come, now, be merry man.
Is the deed done indeed? come, come, you jest,
Has my wife yielded? is vptailes her song?
Faith come, in prose, how got you to the matte• first, ha.
Pish, you are so bashful now.
Why, by my troth i'll tell you, because you are my
friend, otherwise you must note it is a great hurt to the art
of whooremasterie to discover, besides the skill was never
mine of the price.
Very good, on sir.
At the first she was horrible stiff against me, then
Sir I took her by the hand, which I kissed.
Good Sir.
And I called her pretty Rogue, and I thrust my fin∣ger
betwixt her breasts, and I made lips; at last, I pulled her
by the chin to me, and I kissed her.
Hum, very good.
So at the first, she kissed very strangely, close, &amp; un∣toward;
then said I to her, think b•t upon the wrongs, the
intolerable wrongs, the rogue your Husband does you.
I that was very good, what said she to you then sir?
Nay, I went on. First quoth I, think how he hath
vs•d you, left you no means, given all your clothes to his
Punckes, struck you, turned your gray eyes into black ones,
but yet—
A pre•ie conceit.
Quoth I, these things are nothing in the Rascoll,
think but what a base Whoore-master, the Rascoll is.
Did you call me Rascoll so often are you sure.
Yes, and oftner, for said I, none comes amiss to
the rogue, I have known him quoth I, doe three lousy beg¦gorse
under hedges in the riding of ten mile, and I swore
this to.
It was very well, but you did lie. On I pray.
Pish, one must lie a little, now sir by this time she
began to kiss some what more openly, and familiarlie, her
resistance began to slacken, and my assault began to stiffen,
the more her Bulwark decayed, the more my battery forti∣fied,
at last sir, a little fumbling being past to make the Con∣quest
more difficult, she perceiving my readiness mounted,
false me flat upon her back, cries me out aloud
Alas I yield, use me not roughly friend,
My fort, that like Troy town, ten years hath stood
Besieged and shot at did remain vnwon:
But now tic conquered. So the deed was done•
Then came the hottest service. Forward with your tale sir.
Nay Caetera, quis nes•t, lassi requienimus ambo▪
Proueniant medii sic mihi sape dies.
Which is as much to say: I am a Cuckold, in all Lan∣guages,
but sure tic not so, It is impossible my wife should
yield.
Hoyday, en now, it was impossible she should hold
out, and now it is impossible she should yield, stay you but
here &amp; be an ear witness to what follows, Isle fetch your
wife. I know he will not stay.
Good faith Sir but he will. I doe suspect some kna∣very
in this.
Here will I hide my self, when thought as gone,
If they doe ought unfitting I will call
Witness, and straight way sue a divorce.
I knew hee would not ••ay. Now noble Mistress,
I claim your promise.
What was that good seruan
That you would lie with me.
If with any man,
But prithee first consider with thy self
If I should yield to thee, what a load thy Con•cence
Would bear about it, for I wish quick thunder
May strike me, If I yet have lost the truth,
Or whiteness of the hand I gave in Church,
And twill not be, thy happiness (as thou think)
That thou alone should make a woman fall,
That did resist all else, but to thy soul
A bitter Corrosive, that thou did stain,
Virtue that else had stood immaculate,
Nor speak I this, as yielding unto thee,
For tic not in thy power, were thou the sweetest
Of natures Children, and the happiest,
To conquer me, nor in mineowne to yield,
And thus it is with every pious wife.
Thy daily railing at my absent Husband
Makes me endure thee worse, for let him doe
The most preposterous ill relishing things
To me, they seem good, since my Husband does 'em,
Nor am I to revenge or govern him,
And thus it should be with all virtuous Wives.
Pox a this virtue and this chastity,
Doe you know fair Mistress, a young Gentleman
About this town called Bold, where did he lie
Last night, sweet Mistress, oh oh, are you caught,
I saw him slip out of the house this morn,
As naked as this truth, and for this cause
I have told your Husband that you yielded to me,
And he I warrant you, will blaze it thoroughly,
As good doe now then as bee thought to doe.
No, twill not be yet, thou injurious man,
How wilt thou right me in my Husbands thoughts,
That on a false surmise, and spite hast told,
A tale to breed uncurable discontent?
Bold was that old wench that did serve the Widow,
and thinking by this way to gain her love
Mist of his purpose, and was thus cashiered,
Nor cares she to proclaim it to the world.
Zoons, I have wronged you Mistress. On my knees
I ask you pardon, and will never more,
Attempt your purity, but neglect all things
Till that soul wrong I have bred in your Knight
I have expelled, and let your loves aright.
Which now is done already Madame wife,
Upon my knees, with weeping eyes, heaved hands,
I ask thy pardon, oh sweet virtuous creature,
I prithee break my head.
Rise, rise, Sir pray▪
You have done no wrong to me, at least I think so;
Heaven hath prevented all my injury,
I doe forgive and marry you a new.
Come, we are all invited to the weddings,
The Lady Honour to the old rich Count.
Young Bold unto another Gentlewoman,
We and the Widow are invited thither,
Embrace and love, henceforth more really,
Not so like worldlings.
Here then ends all strife
Thus false friends are made true, by a true wife.
HEalth and all joy unto this fair assembly,
My brother, who last tide is gone for France,
A branch of willow feathering his hat,
Bad me salute you Lady, and present you
With this same letter written in his blood,
He prays no man, for his sake evermore
To credit woman, nor no Lady ever
To believe man, so either sex shall rest
V•niur'd by the other, this is all, and this I have delivered.
I and well, you pronounce rarely did you never play?
Yes, that I have, the fool, as some Lords doe.
Set forward there.
Oh, oh, oh, a pox a this cold.
A cold a this pox you migt say, I am a feared.
How full of ghastly wounds this letter shows,
oh, oh.
Look to my sister.
S'hart the Lady swoons.
Strong-water there.
If strong breath would recover her, I am for her.
Alas good Lady, hum, hum, hum. coughs perpetually
He has fet her again with coughing.
Convey me to my bed send for a Priest
And a Physician, your Bride I fear,
In stead of Epithalamious shall need
A Dirge, or Epitaph, oh lead me in,
My body dies for my souls perjured sin.
Hymen comes towards vs in a mourning robe.
I hope friend, we shall have the better day.
I'll fetch the Parson and Physician
They are both ready for you.
Madam, this is the Gentlewoman.
Who something bashful does desire your pardon, that she
Does not vnmasque.
Good Master Wel-tri'd, I would not buy her face,
and for her manners if they were worse, they shall not dis∣please
me.
I thank your Ladyship.
Look, how the old Ass my father stands, he looks
like the Bear in the play, he has killed the Lady with his ve∣rye
sight as God help me, I have the most to do to forbear
vnmasquing me, that I might tell him his own, as can be.
Fie, by no means.
The Widow comes towards you.
Oh, oh, oh, oh.
Servant, God give you joy, and Gentlewoman,
Or Lady as full joy, I wish to you,
Nor doubt that I will hinder you, your love,
But here am come to doe all courtesy
To your fair self, and husband that shall be.
I thank you heartily.
S'hart, speak smaller man.
I thank you heartily.
You're going to this gear to Mr. Bold, um, um, um.
Not to your couching gear my Lord, though I
be not so old, or rich as your Lordship, yet I love a young
wench as well.
As well, as my Lord, nay by my faith, that you do
not, love a young wench as well as he, I wonder you will be
unmannerly to say so.
Faith Master Wel-tri'd, troth is I love them well,
but they love not me, um, um, um, you see, what ill luck, I
have with them, vmp, vmp, vmp, a pox a this cold still say I.
Where got you this cold my Lord? it can get in no
where that I can see, but at your nostrils, or eyes, all the o∣there
parts are so barricaded with fur.
It got in at his eyes, and made that birdlime there
where cupids wings doe hang entangled.
Is this your wife, that (um, um, um) shall be, Ma.
Bold, i'll be so bold as kiss her.
Sir, forbear, I have one bold enough to kiss my
〈◊〉, oh old coxcomb, kiss thine own natural son, it is
worse then a Justices lying with his own daughter, but Mr.
Wel-tri'd when will the Widow break this matter to me?
Not till the very close of all, she dissembles it yet,
because my Lo•• your Father is here, and her other suitor
Bold.
That's all one, he's of the plot a my ••de:
It is needless Master Bold, but I will doe
Any thing you require to satisfy you,
Why should you doubt, I will forbid the banes,
For so your friend, here told me? I should rather
Doubt that you will not marry.
Madam by heaven, as fully I am resolved to marry now,
And will to, if you doe not hinder it,
As ever lover was, only because
The World has taken notice of some passage
Twixt you and me, and then to satisfy
My sweet heart here, who poor soul is a feared,
To have some public disgrace put upon her,
I doe require some small thing at your hands.
Well, I will doe it and th•s profess besides,
Married, you shall as welcome be to me
As mine own brother, and your self fair Lady,
Even as my self, both to my board, and bed.
Ah, ah, how like you that?
Now she begins, abundant thanks unto your wid∣dow-hood.
Z'oones my Fathers a sleep on's wedding day,
I wondered where his cough was all this while.
I pray forbear the chamber, noise does hurt her.
Her sickness I guess rather of the mind
Than of her body, for her pulse beats well,
Her vital functions not deceit a whit,
But have their natural life and operation.
My Lord, be cheered, I have an ingredient about me,
Shall make her well I doubt not.
In Master Parson, it shall be yours I pray,
The souls Physician should have still the way.
How cheers she pray?
In t•oath exceeding il•▪
A very weak woman indeed she is, and surely
I think cannot scope it.
Did you mark how she eyed the Physician?
Oh God I, she is very loath to die.
I that's ne'er the better sign, I can tell you.
And when the Parson came to her, she turned away,
And still let the Physician hold her by the hand.
But see what thought the Bridegroom takes,
my conscience knows now, this is a most praeposterous
match, yet for the commodity, we wink at all inconueni∣encie.
My Lord, my Lord.
Vmp, vmp, vmp, I beshrow you for waking of me,
now shall I have such a fit of coughing, hum, hum—
Oh haplesse wife, that shall have thee, that either
must let thee sleep continually, or be kept waking her self
by the cough.
You have a proper Gentleman to your son, my
Lord, he were fitter for this young Lady than you.
Do ye mark that again?
Oh sweet widow.
He a wife, he a fools head of his own.
No, of my Fathers.
What should he doe with a vmp, vmp?
What with a cough? why he would spit, and that's
more than you can doe.
Your bride my Lord is dead.
Marry, even God be with her, grief will not
help it, vmp, vmp, vmp.
A most excellent spouse.
How fares she Mr. Doctor. Z'oons, whats here
Bold, Widow, Wel-tri'd, Fee-simple, hoy-day.
Husband, Wife, Seldom, Ms. Seld. Subtle: how now?
Look, look, the Parson joins the Doctors hand
&amp; hers; now the Do. kisses her by this light.
Now goes his gown off, hoy-day, he has
read breeches on: Z'oones, the Physician is got
of the top of her, be like it is the mother she has,
hark the bed c•eakes.
S'hart, the doors fast, break 'em open, we are betrayed.
No breaking open doors, he that stirs first
I'll pop a leaden pill into his guts.
Shall purge him quite away, no hast good friends,
When they have done (whats fit) you shall not need
To break the door, thei'l open it them selves.
Thy blood base villain shall answer this
I'll dye thy nuptial bed in thy hearts go•e.
Come, come, my Lord, it is not so easily done,
You know it is not. For this my attempt
Upon your sister, before God and man
She was my wife, and ne'er a bed-rid gout
Shall have my wench, to get diseases on.
Well mai'st thou term her so that has consented,
Even with her will to be dishonoured.
Not so, yet have I lain with her.
But first (witness this Priest) we both were married,
True it is Domino.
Their contract's run into a marriage,
And that my Lord into a carriage.
I will undo thee Priest.
It is to late,
I'm undone already, wine and Tobacco, I defy thee
Thou temporal Lord, party thou never shalt
Keep me in jail, and hence springs my reason,
My act is neither Felony nor Treason.
I sir, but you do not know, what kindred she may have.
Come, come, there is no remedy.
And weigh't right in my opinion my honoured Lord,
And every bodies else, this is a match,
Fitter ten thousand times, than your intent.
Most certain it is.
Besides, this Gentleman your brother in law well
parted, and fair meant, and all this come about (you must
conceive) by your own sisters wit as well as his.
Come, come, it is but getting of me knighted my
Lord, and I shall become your Brother well enough.
Brother your hand, Lords may have projects still,
But there's a greater Lord, will have his will.
This is dispatcht. Now Madam is the time,
For I long to be at it, your hand sweet heart.
Now, boys.
My Lord, and Gentlemen, I crave your witness
To what I now shall utter. Twixt this Gentleman
There has been some love passages and my self,
Which here I free him, and take this Lady.
Law ye, and take this Lady.
Which with a mothers love, I give to him,
And wish all joy may crown their marriage.
Nay Madame, yet she is not satisfied.
Bold gives her a ring, and she puts it on her thumb.
Further, before ye all I take this ring
As an assumpsit, by the virtue of which
I bind my self in all my lands and goods,
That in his choice, i'll be no hinderance:
Or by forbidding banes, or claiming him
My self for mine, but let the match go on
Without my check, which he intends now.
And once again I say, I bind my self.
Then once again, I say, widow you're mine▪
Priest marry vs, this match I did intend,
Ye are all witnesses, if thou hinder it,
Widow your lands and goods are forfeit mine.
Ha, nay take me to, since there's no remedy,
Your Widow (without goods) sells scurvily.
Whoop, God give you joy.
S'light, I am consent of all sides, I had good hope
of the Widow my self, but now I see every body leaves
me saving um, um, um.
'Troth my Lord, &amp; that will stick by you I warrant.
But how Sir, shall we salve this Gentlewoman?
Hang her whore.
Fie, you are too uncivil.
Whore in thy face, I doe defy thy taunts.
Nay hold fair Lady, now I think upon it.
The old Count has no wife, lets make a match.
If he be so contented.
With al my heart.
Then kiss your Spouse.
S'foot she has a beard: how now, my son?
It is the Lord Fee-simple.
Father, lend me your sword, you and I are made a
couple of fine fools, are we not? If I were not valiant now,
and meant to beat 'em all, here would lie a simple dis∣grace
upon vs, a Fee-simple one indeed, mark now what i'll
say to 'em, do ye hear my Masters, Dam-me, ye are all the
son of a whore, and ye lie, and I will make it good with
my sword, this is called Roaring Father.
I'll not meddle with you Sir.
You are my blood.
And I fleshed you, you know.
And I have a charge coming, I must not fight now.
Has either of you any thing to say to me?
Not we Sir.
Then have I something to say to you. Have you
any thing to say to me?
Yes marry have I Sir.
Then I have nothing to say to you, for that's the
fashion, Father if you will come away with your cough, doe?
Let me see how many challenges must I get writ: You shall
here on me believe it.
Nay, we'll not now part angry, stay the Feasts
That must attend the weddings, you shall stay.
Why, then all friends, I thought you would not
have had the manners to bid vs stay dinner neither.
Then all are friends, and Lady, wife, I crown
Thy virtues with this wreath, that 'tmay be said,
There's a good wife.
A Widow.
And a Maid.
Yet mine is now approved the happiest life,
Since each of you hath changed to be a wife.

LEt the world feel thee, and those Demigods,
Proud with the name of Kings, debase themselves
To honour thee, this Crown commands as much
Wherewith I doe invest thy happy brow,
Happy indeed if that succeeding times
Shall set up virtue, so to lessen crimes.
Thus from the ashes of dead Solyman
Is raised another Phoenix great Corcutus;
Live equally adored, when Princes bend
To better courses, all their subjects mend.
Crowns make not Kings, nor can that glittering show
Perfect thine honour, take another sign
Of thy Imperial dignity, it is thine.
That adds a God-like grace unto thy brow,
This binds due honour, that prostrates every knee
Before thy throne, then live, and may that arm
Secure thy subjects from all foreign harm.
What seasoned knowledge, learnings prudent Queen
Hath blessed thee with, must now initiate thee
In the paths of war, all studied Arts
Are but degrees unto some wished end▪
And steps of hope whereby we doe ascend
Unto the top; and level of our thoughts.
But Kings then prove most happy when they are
Watchful in peace, and provident in war.
Those are their utmost ends, which that they may
O're-take, Art, and the sword, make fairest way.
The Muses no•rc'd thee up, and thou did draw
The pleasant juice of learning from their breasts,
In thy first non-age; here then we bestow
The second help, to which good Princes owe
Much of their welfare; swords are the first ground
Of peace, and war; they both defend and wound.
Thus are we vowed to thee, let thy dread fame
Thunder amazement through the spacious world,
That when thou lifts thine arm, thy foes may say
Not Jove, but great Corcutus rules the day.
Which that applause hath crowned, and with it
Will ever spite of traitors joying sit
As now we doe; nor shall my watchful care
Be wanting to you, whilst this •ubtill ayre
Feeds mine industrious spirits, I shall fill
The good with joy, by cutting of the ill
Corrupted rags of men; Jove let me stand
An object in thine eye, when thy swift hand
Fails in the stroke of Justice, virtue return
From thy sad exile, I will purge the walls
From spotted vice, and make this City free
To entertain so fair a Queen as she.
Then (Bassaes) I embrace what you have thrown
Upon me, and these signs of honour thus
We re-bestow; their power still stays with vs.
Could this vast body of the Common-wealth
Stand fast without a soul? each man should see
I am not greedy of this dignity:
This burdenous weight which some must undergo,
The gods are busied with diviner things,
And put Earths care into the hands of Kings.
And is Baiazet arrived?
So fame report•
Yet how he doth digest Corcutus Reign,
That every Bird sings not; but sure with pain.
A Turkish Baiazet, and suffer wrong,
May for a time conceal his grief, not long.
Eagles soar high, and scorn that shorter Plumes
Should reach the clouds, which their proud wings can touch,
Corcutus must not reign, to keep his fathers right
Due to his father, nor will he if he might,
Hoe's learned, therefore just, Arts not allow
To were a Crown due to another brow.
Dare thou oppose his greatness? is not Gr••••
Already wrecked enough? have thy provd Towers
Reared up their lofty spires? which steeped in blood,
Threw a reflex of red back to the clouds,
And blush'• at their own ruins, are thy crude wounds
Already stopped, and is that day forgot,
In which the Turkish Mavors Ott•man,
Wielded a sword of death within thy Walls?
Charon grew weary with hurrying souls to •ell,
When threescore thousand Greeks in one day fell.
We know their force, and sad experience says,
Move not again, Greece welters still in blood
And every crackling thunder of the heavens
Speaks the shrill echo of the Turkish drums,
Then are we drawn by you, so let it bee,
About these great affairs as you decree.
This phrase becomes the Greeks, submissive states
Must bend, 〈◊〉 Conqueror must rule the fates.
And such are you, our vanquished hearts must bend,
But bad beginnings have a fatal end▪
Me thinks I see great Baiazet in arms▪
Spreading his fearful Ensigns in the ayre,
Like some prodigious Comet, wee may fear
Speedy revenge vulesse some quick advise
Work a prevention of his future hate,
Tic he must sway the Sceptre, or wee shall hear
A dreadful defiance rattled in our ear,
Hes strong in friends, and power, we must descend,
To our just duty, or our latest end.
Renowned Vice-roy, thy persuading thoughts
Have predeuin'd most truly these effects,
And we applaud thy Counsel, let vs three
Join our best strength, that these ensuing •arres
May be composed without the stroke of Wars:
Cor••te is wise, and mild, and being so,
He hates the rumour of a public foe.
Nobly resolved (Greece sings) if the event,
Prove but so happy, as honest the intent.
But stand aside, Baiazet is come.
Am I not Emperor? hee that breaths a no,
Damnes in that negative •illable his soul,
Durst any god gain-say it, he should feel
The strength of fiercest Giants in mine arms,
Mine angers at the highest, and I could shake
The firm foundation of the earthly Globe:
Could I but grasp the Poles in these two hands,
I'd pluck the world asunder; drop thou bright Sun,
From thy transparent Sphere, thy course is done,
Great Baiazet is wronged not shall thine eye
Be witness to my hateful misery.
Madness and anger makes my tongue betray,
The Chaos of my thoughts: under this breast,
An heap of indigested ca•es are pressed.
What is it that I doubt? through every joint
Dances a trembling agve, this dull blood,
That courses through my veins divines no good.
Ha, shovts of joy, at dead men's obsequies?
I'm in a maze of woes, what thou wilt throw
On me, Jove, let it come, isle stand thy blow.
Live happy Baiazet.
Happy in my fear,
That word sounds sweet in my distracted ear.
Happy in what?
In thy friends,
That grieve to see thy wrongs.
My wrongs,
There sticks the string my thoughts did harp upon;
But who hath wronged me in this high content?
The fates doe sometime frown, yet bless th'event,
And sequel of our woes, it cannot be,
I should be thwarted in my jollity.
But if I can unfold it—for the more,
I know them not the greater is my sore.
In that read all thy woes, take there a brief,
Contract of all thine ills, sad lines of grief.
How's this? my youngest son advanced to my seat.
Corcutus Imperator, sure I dream:
These are but •mpty apparitions
Feigned by the god of sleep to vex my soul,
Were they not so—ere this black night
Had thrown her sable mantle ore the heavens
To hide me from my shame; but is it so?
I doe but flatter up my self, they are true
And real griefs, my Passion says they are,
Isaac, Achmetes, are they not?
Too true
Great Baiazet:
Corcutus Imperator,
Would I had seen thy name writ in the book
Of dark damnation, rather then these lines.
Cracked not mine eye-strings when I viewed this text?
See how each letter spreads abroad in pomp,
As if they scorned my tears, how I could dwell
On these two words, Corcutus Imperator.
Hither repair, the watchful paper worms
That scan old records over to a line:
Here in two words imprinted shall you see,
The model of a doleful history;
Virtue dishonoured, breach of filial love,
Right shouldered ovt by wrong, nor can you fine,
A crime, which these two words doe not contain,
But now I ray•e, not grieve. O nimble ayre,
Let my plaints vanish as they spoken are,
Off with this womanish mildness, I will find
A shorter trick then this to ease my mind,
Pluto beware, I come to reign in hell,
Fates bid me rule, and birth-right to excel.
Stay Baiazet, that arm can break a path
Unto thy earthly Monarch, ere thou come
To bless the banks of sweet Alias•um,
With thy wished presence: Mahomet forefend
That thou should seal a Kingdom to thy son,
By this untimely death, Corcutus reigns,
But at thy better pleasure; when he shall hear
Thou art arrived, then he will twixt joy and grief,
Start from his throne, and nimbly run to meet,
Thy pomp, and throw his Sceptre at thy feet:
If hee but slack that duty here are by,
Achmetes strong and bold, Isaacke and I.
Devoted to your service, yet the world stands
On wavering doubts, ready to clap their hands.
My desires are crowned,
And from the gate of Li•by, where I sate,
I feel my spirits knock against the heavens.
Achmetes? In that name I hear an ease
Of all my griefs pronounced, he shall suffice
To banish usurpation from my throne,
Did furies guard it round, hoe's able well
To reach my Kingdoms from the gripes of hell.
My sword, and life, both which are vowed to thee,
Are still at thy command: walk but along,
Corcutus shall resign, thou have no wrong.
Death, and the furies plunge the obsequious •laues,
Would he have joined with vs? we would have kept
Corcutus high, and honoured, where he sits
In spite of a whole host of Baiazets.
Me thinks your power might have bin greater far
Over Achmetes, one adict to you
By no less bond of duty, then the son
Is to the father:
Mustapha Isle tell you
Had not my daughter been espoused to him,
I had named his death, and by some plot
Worked him a quick destruction long ever this;
Now let vs temporise with Baiazet;
Yet keep thy nature ever, and be true
To thine own profit; Fortune may advance
Some other Prince, worth both thy love and mine.
Weal stay her leisure,
See more Harpies gathered to catch a Crown,
O tic a charming bait.
Me thinks these City walls smile on our entrance,
As if they knew great Baiazets three sons,
Were come to grace their beauty.
But We should frown
On them which harbour such black treasons, Well,
Were I great Baiazet, I'd ring a noise
Of spiteful horror, that should make the grovnd
Tremble beneath their weight at such a sound:
A younger son enthroned an Emperor.
Brother contain your self, come lets away,
To see the end that waits on this sad day.
What Mahomet?
And Trizham? heer• a sight
Of one mans issue, Noble Baiazet,
Brothers we have jumped together?
All save one,
And hoe's a great deal better so alone.
Corcutus it is you mean, who though he reign,
Aboue vs now, yet must fall back again,
Into our rank, it is Baiazet must rise,
And hee descend, such a report there flies.
Did he not frown, and storm?
It moved him much,
And wrought strange passio•s in him, when he read
Your name, and found your name so entitled.
Cling to my temples thou blessed ornament,
Be ever vnremoued, though all the gods
Chide me in thunder for this insolence,
Am I in heaven? in state placed on the sphere
Of eminence, but barely to appear,
With faint, and borrowed luster, then descend,
Ranked with the vulgar heads, first let me feel,
The Titio• vulture, or Ixions wheel;
And the worst torture hell it self can bring,
To scourge my soul, ô let me dye a King;
But stay, I must bethink me at what rate,
I purchase these fair trappings: ha? the curse
Of him that got me: start my daunted spirits,
Shall I usurp a throne, and sit aboue my father,
Whilst the gaping pit of hell,
With wide stretched jaws, yawns for my fall,
O I am struck with horror, and the slaves of styx,
Already sting my wounded soul.
Will you fair Prince reject all future hopes
Of just succession, and afflict your Sire,
By your unjust detainment of his Crown.
I am distracted, and me thinks I burn,
Under these robes of state, a boiling heate,
Runs from them through my veins, Ioues hardy son,
When he bewrapt himself in Nessus shirt,
Felt not more bitter agonies, then I,
Clothed in the trappings of my Majesty.
I am resolved; Bassaes, go me•te our father,
Allure him home with this: I am begun
To be no King, but a repentant son.
Pallas I ask thy pardon, I have strayed
A graceless truant from thy happy schools,
Whither I'll now return; theres not a rank,
Place, or degree, can sort vs out true bliss
Without thy Temple, there my dwellin•g is:
Amongst the Sacred monuments of wit,
Which Classique authors carefully have writ
For our instruction, I will wast my time;
So to wash out the spots of this sad crime.
Court honours, and you shadows of true joy
That shine like stars, till but a greater light
Drown your weak luster, I adjure your sight,
Even from my meditations, and my thoughts
I banish your enticing vanities,
And closely kept within my study walls,
As from a cave of rest, henceforth Isle see,
And smile, but never taste your misery.
I but as yet am floating on the waives,
Of stormy danger, nor am sure to scope
The violent blast of angry Baiazet.
Blow fair my hopes and when I touch the shore,
Isle venture forth on this rough surge no more.
See where he comes, oh how my guilty blood
Starts to my face, and proves my cause not good.
Our duty to our father,
Ours to the Emperor.
Why kneels great Baiazet? I am thy son
Thy slave: and if thy wrath but frown, undone.
Why kneels great Baiazet, heavens hide thy face,
From these preposterous doings.
What, not ashamed
To circle in thy brow with that bright Crown,
Yet blush to see me kneel? though filial rites,
And moral precepts say the son must bend
Before the Father, yet your high degree
And power bids you rise, commands my knee.
Those ornaments be thine, Here Baiazet
I Crown thee Monarch of the spacious West,
Asia, and Africa: if ought be mine,
Greater then these I here proclaim it thine.
Live Baiazet our mighty Prince,
Live, rule, and flourish.
Is this your zeal? is it? did every voice
Breath out a willing suffrage? I am crowned,
My joys are fully perfect, and I feel
My lightened spirits caper in my breast.
Rise thou starre-bright mirror of thine age,
By thee our iron days prove full as good,
As when old Saturn thundered in the clouds.
Be an example to succeeding times,
How sons should use their Parents: and I vow
(When I shall fail) this honour to thy brow.
Attend vs Bassa•s, Isle lead on to joy,
Never was Father blessed with such a Boy.
Freed from a Princely burden, I possess
A Kingly liberty, and am no less
Princely; observance wait on him, on me
Thoughts undisturbed, I shall then happy be.
Scarce had I set my foot within these walls
In expectation of a solemn hear•e,
Due to the wandering Ghost of Mahomet;
But loud alarms of abundant joy
Ring in mine ears, and every servile groom
Congratulates the Coronation
Of Baiazet: hark how they roar it out.
A cold disturbance like a gelid ••oct
Settles my blood within me, and I hate
His cheerful triumphs, more then mine own Fa•e.
It is true indeed, I proved not the first fruits,
An elder off-spring of my Fathers breed,
Yet was it so that Baiazet and I
Both tumbled in one womb, perhaps the Queen
Of women's labours doted at our birth,
And sent him first abroad, or else I slept,
And he before me stole into the world,
Must I then loose my glory, and be hurled
A slave beneath his feet? no, I must be
An Emperor as full as great as he.
Divorced my Daughter? fond and insolent man,
Isle crush thee into nothing, if I can
Endure the noise of my disgrace I know
How to return it; I am a flame of fire,
A chafing heat distempers all my blood.
Achmetes thou must cool it, when thy limbs
Are emptied of that moisture they suck in,
And thy stained blood enchanted from thy veins,
Then shall I be appeased, mean while I live
Thy mortal foe: But stay, let me contain
Mine anger undiscovered. Friend how is it?
Know you not Isaac?
What?
The flight of Zemes
Hence to Armenia.
O• Zemes?
Yes •e walked
About the City disguised, and unseen
Till his escape.
Tic strange and full of fear.
We meet him frequent in the vulgar mo•th.
Zemes is valiant, and Armenia strong,
Here's Baiazet, he must beware the wrong.
What is it thou murmurst, Baiazet and wronged?
Something it is thou know concerning vs:
Take thee fair leave, and speak it.
Yes I know
Matter of weight, such as concern thy life.
Such as concern my life? Speak out thy tale,
We are so fleshed in joy, bad news proves strange,
And touch my sense too harshly.
But you must hear.
Your brother Zemes, when swift winged Fame
Told him your father Mahomet was dead,
Flew quickly hither first to celebrate
His funeral pomp, then to assume his State,
His Crown, and Sceptre: which he rightly knew,
Unto your hand, and head, both to be due.
But when applausiue joys, and peals of mirth,
Sounded loud Mosique in his troubled ears,
Of you enthroned; then he began too late
To brawl at heaven, and wrangle with his Fate.
So he went hence and cried; revenge be mine:
Quake thou great City of proud Constantine
At my fierce anger, when I next return,
With clouds of misty powder, I shall choke
Thy breath, and dull thy beauty with it's smoke.
This posted he hence to Ammoniac King,
There to implore his aid, which he will bring
To front thy power: nor doth he yet despair,
To dispossess, and fright thee from thy chair.
First from my body shall he fright my soul,
And push me into dust. Isaac make hast
To muster up our forces, strike up our Drums,
Let them proclaim destruction through the world.
Clear up your dusty armour, let it cast
Such an amazing lustre on the Foe,
As if Bellona danced on every crest.
The bright sun of my glory is eclipsed,
Till Zemes be extinct: he must not shine
To dull my beams, si•ce the whole heaven is mine.
Call forth Achmetes, his unconquered arm,
Shall keep vs safe from this intended harm.
My Liege, you have forgot Archmetes •ath,
In which he vowed never to draw his sword
In your defence.
I had forgot it,
But now I remember, such was the vain
Heat of my youth, but I recall again
What ever I protested, tell him so.
Rash words must be dispensed with.
Then Isle go.
My Father once in ordering of a Camp,
Preferred me to be Captain of a wing,
So when the Battles joined, and life and death
Where struggling who should win power of our breath,
Our Armies proved the stronger; only my guide
Failed, and a base repulse fell on my side;
At which my Father stormed, and in my place
Seated Achmetes, for which black disgrace,
I vowed a sue•t revenge, even by his shame
That wore mine honour, to redeem my fame▪
Which when Achmetes heard, he deeply swore,
Never with wit and strength to guide me more.
But now he must, see where he comes, and armed.
What strange device is plotting in his brain?
Honoured Achmetes.
Royal Emperor.
Thine arm must then uphold my Royalty.
Why lies thy valour, prostrate at our feet,
When like fierce lightnings it should run and meet
My harms like a rock vnmou'd? oppose.
The course, and headlong torrent of my foes.
I am a man of peace, mistake me not.
I made a vow, nor can it be forgot,
Till you revoke your oath.
Which here I doe,
Great Mahomet be witness, that I mean
Sincerely what I speak, Achmetes now
VVe're friends, and thus I nullify my vow;
Heavens on this concord lend a gracious smile.
Achmetes I have placed thee in my bosom,
Gave thee an honoured title in my love;
And of as lasting constancy, as is
The sun which looks so cheerfully on this.
Go fit the Janissaries to the wars,
Kindle new fire of valour in their breasts,
Thou art their Genius, even the breath they draw,
Raise then thy plumes, and keep thy foes in awe.
Stood there a Pluto at thy city walls,
And with a band of furies had besieged
Thy people, I would conjure them away,
And send them back to hell: so thou shalt stand
As fast as in the skies, under mine hand.
I am Crowned in thee, nor can I fall,
Whilst such a valour breathes within our wall,
Zemes depose me? hee must be more strong,
Then Mars, that can doe Baiazet that wrong.
Wee hate thy brother, therefore lend thee aid,
It is not our duty to expostulate
Thy right unto the Crown, on to your wars,
Thrive in your proiects, I shall joy to see
A quarrel fought twixt Baiazet and me.
Isle second thy encounters, and we two
Like the two Roman thunder-bolts of war,
Will with the flashes of our fiery swords
Keep their composed ranks, that they shall stand
Aghast, to see two Scipi•es in one band,
Thanks great Arm•ian King, and when I am
Wheeled to that height, which now my brother holds,
I shall require these benefits, and vow
That kindness, which I can but promise now.
Come let's away, our armies are well set,
Ready to march, now tremble Baiazet.
Caigubus, public dangers call me forth,
And I must leave thee now unto thy self
My son, thou see unto what height of fame
We are ascended, yet the sun shines clear,
And not one dusky cloud of discontent
Dimmes the unspotted brightness of our joys,
Not Baiazet is more beloved then I:
Such strict observance is there showed to me,
By all that know my worth, and hear me named,
As if I grasp't Ioues thunder in my hands:
By all my hopes, I fear some tragic scene
Will trouble our calm fortune▪ Son beware,
The top of honour is a narrow plot
Of ground, whither we have already got,
It is brittle, and uncertain, if thou tread
One careless •leppe aside, thou fall down dead,
The shute from thence is deep, and underneath,
Ruin gapes wide, thy body to receive.
Stand firm Caigubus: though thou start'st not away
Yet blasts of envy often force aside
The weariest footsteppe: these where ever they shall,
Blow strong▪ will make them stagger if not fall.
I shall forget to sleep, to breath, to live,
Sooner then these thy precepts, they are fixed,
And printed in my thoughts.
Enough, no more,
That Isaac Bassa trust him not too much:
I have divorced his daughter from my bed,
For her adulterate looseness, hence, hee hides
A mass of fretting ranchor in his breast,
Which he hath varnished yet, and gilded o'er
With coloured shows of love, but he is false,
And subtle as a Serpent, that will wind
Into thy breast, stinging thee ere thou find
Or o•ce suspect his hatred; I must away,
Hasty alarms call me hence, thus, and farewell,
Envy grows greater, as our states excel:
Father, adieu.
Alaready marched so near, Zemes make hast
To death, as if he longed our wrath to taste.
Trizham, and Mahomet, it concerns you now,
To fly hence nimbly to your Provinces,
Zemes is come too near vs to escape,
He cannot fly the ground whereon he treads,
But through your countries, hast then, if the wars
Crack not his thread of life, his flight will bee
When you may intercept it; if we presume
Only on bold Achmetes, and our selves,
In beds of down supinely, sleep at home,
Zemes may scope the tempest of our wrath.
Then we hope best, when each event we see,
Thwarted with their preventing policy.
Doubt not our hast and truth, he shall as soon
Break through the fiery fabric of the skies,
As through my Provinces:
Through hell as soon as mine.
Go, I have done my part; Mars and my fate
Give fair success to my designed plot,
And Zemes is entrapped, already dead:
That hand secures me that strikes off his head.
The battle will prove great and dangerous,
But were their number double more then ours,
The justice of our cause bids vs go on,
And like a cheerful drum strikes panting fear
From every breast. Father, lead you the vangard,
The reare-ward be your charge, the right wing yours,
My self will gui•e the left, this day shall crown
Your valour in full pride, Zemes must down.
Time hath outstripped our hast, our foes doe stand,
Waving their golden plumes, as if the gods,
Were come to meet great Zemes in the field,
Their armies planted, and a distilling cloud,
Hovers aboue their heads, as if it wept,
At their approaching fate. Arm•nia's King
Lead you the vanguard, under your command
The reareward shall march on, the Phalance
Be your care brave Captains, as we're informed,
Achmetes rules the left wing of our foe,
Isle rule the right wing of ours, so when I meet,
Him in his pride Isle prostrate at his feet.
Our men are ordered, Zemes lead the way,
The skies look dusky black on this sad day.
Great Queen of chance; but do I call on this
Inconstant St•pdame? be thou propitious Mars,
Rough god of war: steel up this weary arm,
And put a ten fold vigour in my bones;
What shall Achmetes fall, and in his loss,
Great Baiazet, be wronged? it cannot bee
Death comes to wound thee Zemes, I am hee.
Zemes?
Achmetes? Opportunelie met,
Here staggers all the fortune of the field,
This hour must bless me, and a single fight
Purchase thee honour, and to me my right:
Honour to thee, to die by Zemes hand,
My right to me, an Empire to command.
Brave Prince, I more lament thy case then can thy self
That run with such madness on the edge
Of desperate ruin, thou art but young and weak,
Manhoods soft blossoms are not fully spread
Upon thy downy chin; but riper years
Have settled the compacture of my joints,
And they are strongly knit: twill vex my soul
In the clear morn of thine vp-rising hopes,
To wrap thee in a fatal cloud of death.
Submit thee to thy brother, thou shalt find
Me thy true friend, him merciful and kind.
Submit? had I a right to Io•es high Throne,
And stood in opposition of his power,
Should all the gods advise me to submit,
I would reject their counsel: much more thine.
Guard thee Achmetes, • thy stroke abide,
I cannot gore thy Prince but through thy side.
The day be thine, and Zemes stand thy Fate;
Strike home, In•e l•st the day, and life I hate.
Have at thee then.
Not stir? now by my sword
Thou shalt have fairer play before thy death:
Take back thy sword, in that I recommit
My forfeit to thy charge, thy life with it.
Oh! hold thy conquering hand, and give my soul
A quiet pas•age to her rest; my blood
Begins to wast, and a benuming cold,
Freezes my vital spirits: Achmetes go,
Tell Baiazet that thou hast slain his •o.
Farewell, brave •on of Mars, thy fame shall stay
With vs, although thy soul flit hence away.
I have not lie•d, Achmetes thou hast slain,
My hopes, and therefore me, my wounds are shallow,
But my state desperate, Ha? what shall I doe?
Armenia's King is 〈◊〉 ask to his home,
Cold enter•ainment will attend me there;
The field is empty, every man r•tired,
Only a few dead ca•casses, and I,
Then whither shall I bend my steps? to Rome!
To Rome then let it bee: Bishop I come,
You are a religious thing, and I will trust,
My life to one so innocently just.
Indeed we may be thought upon in time,
When there be Countries more then there be men,
We may get some preferment: sit at home
And prove good boys, and please our father well.
My thoughts are two unbridled, Baiazet,
I neither can, nor will endure thy curb,
My comprest valour like a strangled fire.
Breaks out in violent flames, and I must rule.
Trizham and Mahomet are slipped in hast
Each to their several Province, we must stay,
That are their Elders for another day;
This Court will prove our scaffold where we stand
Placed in the eye of angry Baiazet:
Who thvvarts him in his fury is but dead,
And in that passio•s heate, off goes his head.
I must not line thus.
I could bee content,
He fears not death, whose thoughts are innocent.
I tha•ke you brother, then belike some crimes
Lye heavy on my conscience, and I fear,
Unless I shift my station, twill be known;
You think well of me kind Mahometes.
As well as of a brother I can think.
If by a rash applying to your self,
My words have been distasteful, blame not me.
Can I apply them then unto my self?
Am I so loose in manners? by heaven and earth,
Thou shalt repent this deeply.
Stop that oath,
Brothers agree, or walk hence but along
Into my garden, where each springing herb
Smiles on my fair content, there you shall see,
How flowers of one stock, so twisted are,
One in the others twinings, that they show,
One stands by th'others help, both jointly grow;
These shall suffice your quarrels to remove,
And dumb examples teach a lively love.
Come let vs go.
Straight I will follow you.
Away fond wretches, ô that every breast
Were of so dull a temper as you two.
But who coma's here?
Brother Corcutus whither are you bent▪
What from the Court so soon?
My father bids,
I go to undertake the charge, his love
Hath thrown upon me; That's rich Ionia.
You go to rule there?
Yes:
Heavens speed you well.
Dear Selymus adieu.
Brother farewell.
Revenge and you, three furious twins of night,
Ascend up to our theater of ill,
Plunge my black soul twice in your Stygian flood,
That by it's virtue it may be congealed,
And hardened against remorse: Pluto enrich
My breast, with a diviner policy,
Then every trifling brain can reach unto;
Isle fill the world with Treasons, and my wit
Shall put new tracts to death: Charon shall see,
His wa•tage still in use by company,
Sent thither by my care, • twill doe well,
To blast the earth with want, and furnish hell,
Tush, ver•ue makes men fools, Isaac be wise,
Shake off the tender fetters of remorse,
And hug that chance, that opens thee the way
To ruinate Achmetes: did he stand
On terms of conscience, neighbourhood or love,
When he cashiered my daughter from his house,
And to the worlds broad eye, opened her crime?
No: he was swift and bitter in his hate,
And so will I, he is but now returned
In Triumph from the field, as full of pride
As I of envy, hence Isle ground my hate.
When fierce Bellona smiled on Baiazet,
Amidst the fiery tumults of the War,
She offered Zemes to Achmetes hand,
They fought, Achmetes conquered at his foot,
Fell the proud rebel, wounded, but not slain,
There might Achmetes with a blow of death
Cut off our fears, continued in his breath:
This shall incense the angry Emperor,
And crush Achmetes in his fairest hopes.
True politicians work by others hands,
So I will by the Prince, my plot stands firm:
See where he comes, now sly Mercurius, whet
My tongue, to kindle hate in Baiazet,
Isaac how thrived Achmetes in his Wars,
Fame is of late grown dumb of his renown,
Surely unwelcome news clogs her swift wings,
Else had she now bin freqvent in our Court;
And we had fully known the chance of all.
We had, yet could not the event,
Lie so concealed, but Isaac found it out,
Which when I first discovered, straight it wrought
Tempests of passions in me, joy and grief
Reigned at one instant in the self same breast.
As how?
As thus. I joyed that Zemes fell,
Was sorry he escaped.
Fell and yet escaped?
Beneath Achmetes feet the traitor fell.
And yet escaped, good Io•e how may this bee.
Thus it might be, and was so: when sad death
Was glutted with the ruin of each side,
When slaughtering Mars had stained the field with blood,
And cast a purple colour o'er the earth,
At length some milder providence desired,
An end of those hot tumults that were seen,
To last in Zemes breath; so that their fire
Would be extinct, when Zemes should expire
Then from the middle skirmish forth were brought
He and Achmetes, being met they fought,
Zemes was vanquished by a violent blow,
Which struck him trembling lower then his knees▪
Now whither flattering, or present gifts
Redeemed him from his fate I cannot show
Something they plotted, what, none yet can know.
Can thou advise me Isaac how to sound
The depth of all his mischief.
Thus you may,
He being come from Z•mes overthrow,
And yet luke-warme in blood, and full of joy,
You may in way of honour and free mind,
Call him this night to banquet, then being se•,
When the hot spirits of caroused healths,
Have spoiled his wit of smooth and painted tales,
And wine unlocked the passage for the truth,
Bid him relate the manner of his war,
The chances and events; then when he comes
To Zemes, if he err about his •light,
His ends are bad, his bosom black as night.
Thou art my good Angel, Isaac I applaud
Thy faithful plot, Achmetes were thy soul
As dark as hell, and thy enclosed thoughts,
As subtle as a winding Labyrinth,
By such a guide as can remove each doubt,
And by a quill of thread •'de track them out.
But Isaacke, if we trappe him in this wiles,
How shall we kill the traitor? We have a trick,
Already strange to catch him in the nick.
Easily thus: our laws allow a custom,
Not used of late, yet firm still in effect,
And thus it is; when there doth breath a man,
Direfully hated of the Emperor,
And he in strict severity of right
Cannot proceed against him, then he may
O•ewhelme him in a robe of mourning black,
Which we have called •eaths mantle, that thing done,
The man thus v•'d, is for•et•ed to fate,
And a devoted sacrifice to him
Whom he had er'•t offend•, neither can
Strength or intr•atie, w•est him from his death,
Both which are treason, and inexpiable.
Thus then you may prose•e, when banquets done,
And all their comic merrim•ned run on
To the last scene, and every man expects
A solemn gift, due to Achmetes worth,
Call for a robe therewith to deck your friend,
An• perfect all his glory, let that bee
This robe of fate, in which ready at hand,
You may entomb the traitor, and bewrappe
His pampered body in a veil of death,
So let him dye, dream not on the event,
Vice is rewarded in it's punishment.
I will be fierce and sudden, Isaac inuit
Achmetes to a feast: he dies this n•light.
I shall: would not a private vvarning serve
But open penance must correct my child,
And a severe divorcem•ned q•ite degrade
Her o•her honoured Matrimonial rights?
Were he as strong, as steele-like jointed Mars,
As much applauded through our popular streets,
As er'st Dictator F•bius was in Rome,
Or great Augustus, yet the slave should feel
The wrath of an inflamed father light
Heavy upon his soul, and that ever the next sun
Appear, Achmetes all thy glorie's done.
I fair• your sa•ety and ••voutly prayed
The sword of justice, which your hand did swaye,
Might be of conquering force.
Thy prayers were heard
And I am here as safe as I went forth,
Vntouch't by the rough hands of desperate war,
Nor did I once spy danger in the field,
But when I fronted Zemes, then there met
Two streams of valour, sith on vs was set
The chance of the whole combat, others stood
Expecting which of vs should loose his blood:
But heaven was just, and to compose the strife,
This sword at one sad blow took thence his life.
The heavens were just indeed, but who comes here▪
Isaac, Mesithes, and Baiazets three sons,
They come to gratulate my late success,
I see their errand •oulded in their smiles,
How cheerfully they look upon my joys,
All happiness attend Achmetes.
Thanks Noble friends, how fares the Emperor.
Well by your guard, and he hath sent vs now,
All to invite your presence to a feast,
We must be frolic, and this following night,
Shall Crown your joy with revels and delight,
Or else deprive thy soul of that good light.
We must be frolic Captains, think not then
On my loud drums, and staring trumpeters,
Such whose strong •••gs roar out a bellowing voice,
Would make a man dance Antic in the fire,
Weal have a choicer musique, and my feet,
Shall tread a neater march, then such harsh strains
Can teach them, with more pleasure, and less pains.
Since it hath pleased the E•peror to grace
Our slender merits thus: we shall be there,
To taste his bounty.
Weal lead on before.
Isle follow you.
Ne'er to return more,
I am happy aboue envy, and my state,
Not to be thwarted with 〈◊〉 •ate,
I could disburden all my jealous thoughts,
And shake that currish vice supition, off
From my sincere affection, I have wronged
Sure I have wronged thee Isack thy chaste love,
Cloaks not intended mischief, black deceit
Cannot lie hid under so pure a white,
But it would cast a coloured shadow out,
Through such a slender veil, thy generous thoughts,
Nourish no base detraction; thy free love
Thy professed actions, say it were no just fate
That good men's deeds should die by ill men's hate.
Pray heaven they doe not.
fear not, I am guest
To Baiazet, expected at the feast,
The day's far spent, is not Achmetes come?
Not yet great Emperor.
Vice-roy of Greece, say now there were a man
Whom my mind honoured, and I should command,
To cloth his body in a suite of gold,
Studded with gems, worth all the Indian snore,
D•rst any tongue gainsay it:
Surely no.
What if I hated him, and should command
To wrap him in a sable coloured black,
And sentence him to death?
Then he must die.
My thoughts are troubled.
What should these questions mean,
Abrupt demands, one to confound the other?
My liege, your guests are come.
Blessed be the hour in which I see Achmetes safe returned
Bring in our banquet soldiers: boys kneel round,
A ring of braver lads ne'er blessed the ground,
Supply vs here with nectar, give it me,
Achmetes, noble warrior, heir's to thee,
A health to thy blessed fortunes, it shall run
A complete circle ere the course be done.
My duty bids me pledge it. I return
Good health to Isaac, and in this wee'• drowned
All concealed enmities.
Jove split me with his thunder, if my breast
Harbour one bad thought, when this draught is past.
And so I greet thy son? health to Caigubus.
Mahometes the turn lights next on you.
Isle pledget freely, Viceroy her's to you.
Ach•mates, to you I must commend
The welfare of Achmetes in this cup.
To you Mesithes, thus I prove my love.
Young Prince I doe commit this health to you.
I am the last▪ be prodigallin wine,
Fill up my bowl with Nectar, let it rise
Aboue the goblets side, and may it like
A swelling Ocean flow aboue the banks,
I will exhaust it greedily, it is my due.
Weal drink with Bacchus and his roaring crew.
Already done, so quickly run about,
One health to me, faith sith you are set too't,
Heir's a carouse to all,
Weal pledge it round.
It is the last draught to some, or I shall fail,
In mine intendments▪ let a •o escape?
When he was trampled down beneath his feet,
There must be treason in it; how my blood
Boils in my breast, with anger, not the wine
Could work such strong effect; my soul is vexed,
A chafing heat distempers all my blood,
Achmetes thou must cool it when thy limbs
Are emptied of that moisture they suck in,
And thy stained blood vnchannel'd from thy veins,
Then shall I be secure, a quiet rest
Shall rock my soul asleep, it is thy last hour,
Must set a period to my restless fears.
What are you merry friends? drink on your course,
Then all arise: and now to consummate
Our happy meeting, and shut up our joys,
Discourse Achmetes of your finished wars;
After an age of woes it proves at last
A sweet content to tell of dangers past.
Let'• know your whole events.
Great Emperor
Scarce had the rosie day-starre through the East,
Displayed her silver colours through the heaven,
But all the watchful soldiers ready armed,
Dim'd her pale cheeks, with their transparent steel,
And added lustre to the dull sight morn,
So stood we in full pride till the bright Sun
Climbing the glass pavement of the skies,
Roused the slow spirits of the backward foe,
And urged them to the field; at length stepped forth
Zemes, in all the trappings of his state:
And like a well-taught H•ctor, ranged his troupes,
Into their several orders, all prepared
Titan being fearful stepped behind a cloud,
Lest when he saw our limbs bathed all in blood,
And purple streams gush't from our wounded breasts,
Like water from their springs; he in a fear
Should be eclipsed, or startle from his sphere,
The ayre was thick and dim, our armies joined,
The skirmishes grew hot, and angry Mars
Enthroned upon the battlements of heaven,
Left either side to tug with their own strength,
Till their oppressing multitude bore down,
The justice of our cause, and our whole side,
Not daring to withstand, scorning to fly,
Stood trembling on the utmost brink of hope,
Then the propitious Gods singled me out
Zemes, the life and spirit of our foes:
We met and fought, such was my happy fate,
That at the first encounter Zemes fell,
And I disarmed him, when in proud contempt,
He spit defiance in the face of death,
Opened his breast, and dard me to the stroke,
Whereby I might hane sent him hence to hell,
But I in admiration of his worth,
Armed his right hand once more and bad him fight,
Chance did direct my sword upon his head,
He fell before me, and cried, Achmetes hold▪
I'm wounded to the death, and Captain go
Tell Baiazet that thou hast slain his foe.
I left the dying Prince, our wars were done
And ceased with him, by whom they were begun.
The plot has took.
Treason by Mahomet.
I left the dying Prince.
Pursue the project.
Worthy Achmetes,
Well we may give, but not reward by gifts,
And thank, but not requite thee, I would hate
That liberality which would ab•te
The worth of the receiver▪ thy true fame,
Outstrips the length of titles, and a name
Of weighty honour, is a slender price,
To grace thy merits with, as for a voice,
To crown thee after death, thou art the choice,
Of euerliuing glory, on thy crest,
Is her abode, and when the latest rest
Of nature, hath betrayed thee to thy grave,
Then shall she print in characters of gold
How brave a man thou wast, how great, how bold;
Though we be dumb, yet shall the world vplift,
Thy name, and thou shalt live without our gift.
Yet thy blessed fates, have not created thee
So clearly Godlike, but some other chance,
May cross thy greatness, and thy high renown
The envy of some God may shoulder down,
Then thus weal make thee happy, future events
Ne'er shall oppress thy worth nor envious chance
Blot thy ensuing fame, Ach••tes know,
Death an immortal gift, we 〈…〉
Treason, treason. O my Father treason,
Help lanizaries.
Stop the furious youth.
Bring in an Heads-man. Traitor, Zemes dead?
He lives to see this hand untwine thy thread.
What means this outrage?
Cruel homicide.
Vngrate•ull wr•tch.
Tyrant.
Meet hilts in's guts.
First let his own hands take that Mantle off.
Help! Treason! I am slain.
Help? why? From whom?
Is not thy Guard about thee.
Hemn'd in with death? My friends beset me round
Not to preserve my life, but murder me.
B•ush you pale heavens at this abhorred fact,
That they may see their crimes, and be ashamed
Of this unheard offence: Valiant Janissaries,
Sheath up these weapons of rebellion,
Print not that ugly sin upon your brow,
Let my tree pardon woe you to submit.
Keep your allegiance firm.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
One word more damnes thee.
How prettily he began to talk
Of sin and pardon. Baiazet behold
Here stands a man mild, honoured, gracious,
Valiant, and faithful; gentle in command,
At home beloved, and feared amongst our •os,
Yet hath thy hand of cruelty assayed
The hated murder of so de re a friend:
Blush you pale heavens at this abhorred fact,
That he may see his crimes, and be ashamed
Of this new bloudinesse. Wicked Baiazet
These admonitions fit the teacher well.
But hear me speak.
First set Achmetes free, then speak thy fill.
What shall I be compelled?
And quickly too.
We cannot brooke to see him stand thus clothed.
Your anger will have way. Achmetes go.
There take him. They have saved thee from this woe.
Pernicious villains, they have crossed my plot,
It was intercepted even in the last deed:
What should Achmetes mean thus to engross
The best affections of my Janissaries?
Will he defrand me of my Crown and life?
My life I weigh not: but to loose my Crown
Were to be sentenced to a hell of woes.
I am full stuffed with choler. Slavish Peasants
Held I a sword of power in mine hand,
I would disjoined them peece-meale; can I not?
Am I not Emperor? men call me so:
A reverend title, empty attributes,
And a long page of words follow my name,
But no substantial true prerogative.
Good health to Baiazet.
Indeed that's nothing, since your counsel failed.
Use your best patience it may be regained.
Affection in your stubborn multitude
Is a prone torrent not to be withstood.
Were you as sacred as their household gods,
Yet when you thwart the current of their will,
They'll break the bands of duty, and profane
That holiness to which they bound their thoughts.
Mine eyes are witness with what lively joy
They bore him through the streets upon their necks,
Offering the use of their best strength.
No more.
I am already gone. Why did not then
His proud ambitious tongue bid them go fetch
My Crown, and with quick speed disrobe a wretch?
It was in his power: we are distracted Isaac▪
Lend vs thy wholesome counsel to prevent
My ruin, and their dangerous intent.
Mine is a blunt advice, and deep in blood
To cut off those base Peasants that withstood
The force of your decree.
To cut them off?
Me thinks I see my self yet circled in
With their revengeful swords, ha? cut them off?
Could I but curse the Traitors from the earth,
Or were my doom pronounced but of effect,
I'd rattle such new torments in their ears,
Should stagger their high courage; but my fears
Strangle my furies, and my envious fate
Force•th my tongue to flatter, where I hate.
Here lies the safest course, to rid these griefs
Give out, you'll go to war, so to enlarge your territories,
And to this end fetch home,
Those warlike Soldiers placed in Garrison.
Let them remain without the walls; at last,
When things shall fit your purpose, lead them all
By night into the City, and in one stroke
Strike off so many thousand perjured heads,
As shall amaze posterity to hear,
How many lives redeemed thee from thy fear.
The weight of all mine honour leanes on thee,
That or some nearer course shall quell the pride
Of strong Achmetes, and confound his side.
If your intents be virtuous, and desire
Of eminent place quite banished from your thoughts,
My house shall be your Cast•e: that I deny
My men and Arms to aid you in your broils,
Think it kind usage: should my Holinesle
Feed your ambition, and make strong your hand
Against your brother it were too light a brand
Of flaming hot dissention, and to set
The world in a combustion: all would then
Quarrel by my example: No sweet Prince
Romes holy Bishop must not so transgress.
If you will dwell within my sacred roof
Set•e irregular Passions, and begin
A quiet life, repentance wipes out sin.
My waxen wings are melted, I will soar
Against the sun, through such thick clouds no more.
The middle Region shall contain my flight,
Your counsel sways my wishes, my late deeds
Were full of sin: now let my brother know
Zemes repents; (and that's the greatest woe.)
To mans aspiring thoughts, how sweet is hope
Which makes them (like Chameleons) live on ayre
And hug their slender plots: till coo•e despair
Doth so benumme his thoughts, that he falls dead
From his sublime height, and his lofty head
Which leveled at the skies, doth drop below
His humble feet, this hath experience taught
In that mans head-long ruin, whose proud thoughts
Aimed at the Turkish Diadem; but now cross Fates
Have forced his stubborn Fates to bow.
What speaks your entrance?
Health to Romes Bishop.
And Peace from Baiazet, who commends his love
With this his Letter, and expects from you
A gracious answer. He reads the Letter.
Let Zemes die by an un•emily death,
Else for our love you shall provoke our hate.
Hoe's not our brother, but our hated foe:
And in his death you shall prevent our woe.
Return our service back: tell Baiazet
What he hath given in charge; shall by my hand
Be carefully dispatcht.
Good peace attend you.
Imperious Turk,
Am I not Gods Vize-gerent here on earth,
And dare thou send thy letters of command?
Or speak to me in threatening menaces?
It grates my patience to obey this monster,
Yet must I murder Zemes, what doe I know
Whether my fathers •whole did transmigrate
Into his breast or no? be dumb remorse,
The Turk is great and powerful, if I win
His love by this, t'will prove a happy sin.
Am I so poor in worth? still kept so low?
Was I •egot only to live and dye,
To fill a place, move idly to and fro
Like other naturals? unmanly life,
The world shall take more notice of my fame,
Else will I with the venomed sting of war,
Deface the beauty, of the vniuerse.
Po•teritie shall know, once there did breath
A Selymus, a mortal deity,
A man at whose blessed birth the planets smiled,
And spent their influence to create a boy,
As brave as Greece ever hatched, or Rome, or Troy.
Heir's Isaac Bassa, hoe's already mine,
He courts my father, but intends for me,
And furthers all my counsels; Noble friend▪
How stand our hopes?
Great Sir, most happily,
The Bassaes murmur at Achmetes wrong:
Seize on their wavering love, their breasts are op,
To him that first will enter ther's free scope;
Drop down thy frank affection in their hands,
To bribe is lawful, and it is strongly proved
By good examples, Otho ne'er was loved,
Till he had bought the soldiers, that once done,
Gal•a grew out of fashion• so must wee
Addict them to vs by a gainful fee:
Give freely, and speak fairly I'll be gone▪
Stay, here, the Basso• will be here anon.
I shall observe thy precepts, Mesithes welcome,
How fare you in these days of discontent?
My duty bids me ask, and wish you well;
I have been long a barren debtor to you,
At length I may prove thankful: wear my love,
It is yours without refusal, a slight gift,
Yet your looks tells me, twill help out my drift.
This curtsy exceeds my weak deserts
Sweet Prince but when occasion calls me forth,
To help you, I'm devoted to your worth.
Your kind acceptance of that recompense,
Binds me more strictly to you.
Sir, farewell,
So one hath took, see where another comes:
All health to Mustapha.
Thanks gracious Prince,
Your gentle pardon for my boldness Sir.
Command my pardon, and commend my lo•e
To thy bright daughter: tell her I admire
Her virtuous perfection; let that chain
Make me remembered often in her mind.
When my weak strength, or wealth shall stretch so far,
As to continue—
No Cynic complement, good Mustapha.
Then I return you thanks
Health follow you,
And honour me; here is a third at hand.
Continuance to your health Sir.
Thanks gentle Prince▪
Please you to use my service?
Yes, thus far
Spend me that purse of gold.
What means your Highness?
But to deserve your kindness, and avoid
The hated censure of ingratitude,
This is your liberal virtue not my deeds,
But you shall find me thankful.
So I hope;
Three steps are trod already to a Throne,
And I am rich in friends, these pr•fferd gifts
Conjure observance from their servile breasts:
Oh powerful gold, whose influence doth win
Men with desire for to engender sin.
Isaacke Bassa?
Even the man you wished;
What did the golden 〈◊〉 work good effect?
And make the Bassaes stoup unto your mind?
Words are but empty shadows, but if deeds
Answer their words, we cannot doubt their faith,
They stoup beneath my feet, I seem to be
As true as Jove, but sly as Mercury,
Here comes Mesithes muttering back again,
But step aside and we shall know his mind.
But he is cruel, bloody, and his pride
Unsufferable great—
Ha?
Proud Baiazet,
Thou hast usurped a title, thy defcent
Could never reach unto, thou wrongst the world
Since thou detain'st the Crown, which heavens decree
Due to a better brow, thou art defamed
With Tyranny and wrong, but Selymus
Is void of blemishes as truth of lies;
Bad stocks must be cut down, the good must rise.
He davnted me at first, but now I find
The golds bright lustre made his judgement blind,
Mustapha comes.
Fortune hath wheeled me up aboue the stars,
Under a Monarch Isle not sell my hopes:
Bold Selymus Isle second thy designs,
And thou shalt Queen my daughter, that being done
With mine own splendour Isle eclipse the Sun.
I'st so? a while Isle feed thy airy hopes
Then dash thee into nothing.
Heir's a third.
A purse of gold? I can untie the knot,
The close aengima soy's, I would be King.
Brave Selymus I like thy mounting thoughts,
Work out thy proiects, thou can never need
Or ask my help, but thou art sure to speed.
What we resolved, stands firm, but the event
Be scened when leisure serves, weal now prevent
My brothers hopes, and by a sudden •ate
Unto their lives and days give equal date,
To compass a blessed end: now we begin
Jove hath offended if it be a sin
To throw a father down: Saturn did dwell
Once in the heavens, Jove• threw him down to hell.
But stay. Achmetes, and our fathers friends?
Achmetes I have injured thy deserts,
Subbornd accusers, wronged my credulous ears,
And my rash censure undervalued much
Thy noble spirits, when it first condemned
Then of intended treason, rense thy soul
In the dull river of oblivion,
We halt beneath the burden of thy hate,
Think my moved anger made me hot and wild▪
I cannot sleep till we be reconciled.
The gods neglect my welfare here on earth,
And when I shall put off this more•all load,
Let me be out-law'd from the Court of heaven,
If in this bosom there lye •id one thought
That doth not honour Baiazet.
Wee know—
Thy virtues make vs happy: ••liant Sir,
Thy feet once more m•st ••ead • warlike ma•ch▪
Under our fear•ull banner, thou •halt pace
Even to the walls of Rome, there dwells our foe,
Where our half Moon reared in the middle camp,
Like a distempred Meteor in the ayre,
Shall strike amazement in the cloistred monks
And shake the prelates Meter from his head,
Till he yield Zemes up alive or dead.
When we have moved thee from thy Ianuzaries,
Thou shalt not travel far.
A subtle trick
And well pretended, I admire thy wit.
Let me march hence, and Baiazet shall know,
How little I befriend my Princes foe,
Isle cast a ring of soldiers round 〈◊〉
The walls of Rome, if Zemes scope thence out,
Cut of my breath: he that's deep in blame,
Must hazard boldly to regain his fame.
What means our father, noble Baiazet,
To work untimely horrors through the world,
Desolate ruin, public discontent
Have printed deep impressions in our path,
Danger and fear scare emptied from our town,
The shaken members of our common wealth,
Yet staggers with their wounds, when discord shall
Make but a second breach, they faint and fall.
Short peace hath charmed your subjects all asleep,
And thrown a quiet slumber ore their eyes,
Whilst with a sweet restorative she heales
Their Ma•tired joints, and wipes out their scars
Writ on their bosoms by the hand of wars,
Zemes is safely cloystred up at Rome,
The prelate dares not aid h•m, all the gods
Smile on the entrance of triumphant peace,
War lies fast bound, nor can she work our pains
Unless we loose the fury from her chains.
Our sons instruct vs? must your pregnant wits,
Cross my command? Basso• prepare for war,
An• since your grave discourse argues a will,
To stay at home▪ you shall; weal lay you up,
Where no loud echoing drums shall break your •leepe,
Even in the bowels of your mother earth
I will entomb you: Put them both to death.
What means great Baiazet?
To murder you, unless you strangle them.
But hear vs speak.
Stop up the damned passage of their throat,
Or you are all but ghosts. what; stare you friends?
Isaacke and Selymus, a garter;
Twist me that fatal string about his neck,
And either pull and an end,
Mesithes come
Join force with me, by 〈◊〉 •were best make hast,
Or thou art shorter lived then is that bratte.
Tug strongly at it.
So; let the bastard drop,
We have out-liud our tutors: dunghill sl•ues,
Durst they breath out their Stoic •entences
In opposition of our strict command?
So: things run well along, and now I find
Io•e hears my prayers, and the gods grow kind.
Did not I send these to their Provinees
To hinder Zemes flight? and did not they
Dejected bastards give him open way?
Mine anger hath been just.
None doth deny it;
You may proceed in your edict for wars,
And make Achmetes general of the camp.
It is enough: Achmetes go to hell,
The devils have rung out thy passing bell,
And look for thine arrival.
Shined me slaves.
They fly before my breath like mists of ayre,
And are of less resistance, Isle pursue.
Oh! I am slain, Tyrant thy violent hand,
Hath done me pleasure, though against thy will,
Had I as many lives as drops of blood,
I'd not outlive this hour: fly hence vain soul,
Climb yonder •acrid mount, strive upwards, there,
There where a guard of stars shall hem thee round,
Build thee a safe tribunal—I am gone—
Oh tragic cruelty—behold—the end
Of two right Noble sons—one faithful friend
Have all forsaken me? and am I left
A pray unto my self; did all their breath
Pass through his organs? and in his sad death,
Have I abruptly cracked the vital thread
Of all my Bassaes?
Ha? where am I now?
In some Gehenna, or some hollow vault,
Where dead men's ghosts sigh out their heavy groans:
Resolve me Mahomet, and rid me hence,
Or I will spoil the fabric of thy tomb,
And beat away the title of a God.
Dost thou not move? a trunk? a stock? to die,
Is to put on your nature, so will I.
Hold, hold, and live.
How come these bodies dead?
Father, it was your self.
Let me revoke
My wandering sense, Oh what a stream of blood
Hath purged me of my black suspicion,
Two sons, one valiant Captain hence are wrought
By mine own hand, to cure one jealous thought,
As it is, they are the happier, I out-liue,
Them whom I wished to fall: only to grave,
Bear forth their bodies; Bassaes carry them out,
We were cursed in this,
And shall entomb with them much of our bliss,
•ndeed wee had resolved to spend this day
In things of more solemn•itie, less woe.
Now our more wished council shall begin
And bitter deeds weigh up the scales of sin.
Ama•in is a province rich and strong,
Mahomates it is thine, keep it as long
As I have power to give it go, prou•de
For thy conveyance, at the next fair tide.
Farewell dear father.
Worthy son adieu.
The love my dead sons wanted, false to you,
As an hereditary good.
Then we
May veil our heads in black, no mourners be.
Mahomates, thy worth
Deserves some trophies of our love,
Which to let slip unmentioned, were to add
To this black day, a fourth offence as bad;
Govern Man•sia, now the people stand
Disfurnisht of an head, let thy command,
Be great amongst them, so; make speedy hast.
Honour ayes for thee.
Now the storms are past.
Father adieu;
Mahomates, farewell.
Now to my lot, I thought it would ne'er a fell,
Now Selymus, wee know thy hop̄es are great,
And thine ambition gapes with open jaws,
To swallow a whole Dukedom: but young Sir,
We dare not trust the rains of government
Into the hands of Phacton. Desire,
Rashly fullfild, may set the world on fire;
Greene youth, and raw experience are not fit,
To shoulder up a Kingdoms heavy weight,
Mix wit with stayed discretion, and spend
Wild years in study, then we doe intend
To settle more preferment on thy head
Then thou can hope for.
Wilt thou envious dotard
Strangle my greatness in a meshing hole?
The world's my study Baiazet, my name,
Shall fill each angle of this round-built frame.
I know he grumbled at it; but it is good
To calm the rebel heat of youthful blood
With sharpe rebukes.
Health to the Emperor.
What will your message?
Duty first from Rome,
Commended by the Bishop to your service,
With a firm promise to dispatch your will
What ever it employed, and would but stay
Till •ems •weft circle should bring forth a day
Secure for the performance.
It is enough.
Thanks for your care. This was to murder Zemes.
Wa•re with the Bishop? 'thad been pretty sport,
I knew my powerful word was strong enough
To make him do• my pleasure: simple Priest,
Only I used it as a trick, to send
Achmet•s from the City and his friends;
But Fate to smiled upon me, that I found
A shorter me•n•s his life and hopes to wound
With my sententious sons, that when my foe•
Fled through their Province, finely let him go;
Which being wholly finished, straight to please
My friends, I played raging Hercules;
Then to shut up the Scene, neatly put on
A passionate humour, and the worst was done.
But who comes here?
I like not this. Mahomat•s beloved
So dearly of the Comminalty: ha?
Hoe's wise, faire-spoken, gently q•alified,
Powerful of tongue; why hoe's the better son,
Not to supplant his Father. I mislike
The prodigal affection thrown on him
By all my •ubiects. I belied my hopes
When I presumed this day had freely rid
Me of my worst vexation: I was borne
To be a Jade to Fate, and Fortune•es scoff,
My cares grow double-great by cutting off.
If ever man loved sorrow wished to grieve
Father I doe for thee. Could I deprive
My senses of each object, but thy death,
Then should I joy to sigh away my breath:
Be Godhood to my grief, then shall these eyes
With tributary tears bedeck thy shrine:
And thus I doe invoke thee: nimble Ghost
What ever •rbe of Heaven, what ever coast
Affords thee present mansion, quickly thence
Flit hither, and present unto my sense
Thy self a feeling substance, let me see,
Acknowledge and admire thy Majesty.
Put off that airy thinness which denies
Me to behold thee with these duller eyes,
Then shall they sending down a powerful flood,
Rinse thy cold members from each drop of blood,
And so return thee back, that thou may soar
Up to the skies, much purer then before.
Had the just course of nature wrought thee hence,
I would have made the gods know their offence,
And back restore thy soul: but thou art dead,
And it was a fiercer hand that clipped thy thread.
Fiercer, and bolder, which did ever thrive
By mischief, and once coffinde thee alive
Up in deaths mantle, but then would not use
Such open violence, nor durst abuse
One of such sacred worth, till fury st•uk
His reason dead, and made his treacherous hand
Creepingly stab thee, both unseen and foul,
As if he would have •tolne away thy soul.
But oh!
But of indeed!
Why what?
As bad
A stroke attends thee as thy Father had▪
Princes suspicion is a flame of fire,
Exhaled first from our manners, and by desire
Of rule is nourished, fed, and rores about
Till the whole matter dye, and then goes out.
Unfold a Scene of murders: Fates work on,
We'll make a path to Heaven, and being gone
Down from the lofty towers of the skies
Throw thunder at the Tyrant; will he press
The earth with weight of slaughtered carcasses?
Let him grow up in mischief, still shall her womb
Gaping, reserve for him an empty tomb.
We doe but tread his path; and Bassa since
It stands upon thee, now to cure thy Prince
Of his distempered lunacy, go fetch
The instrument of death, whilst I a wretch
Expect thy sad return.
I go; and could
It stand with mine allegiance, sure I should
Employ my service to a better end,
Then to disrobe the Court of such a friend.
He that is judged, down from a steepy hill
To drop unto his death, and trembling still
Expects one thence to push him, such a slave
Doth not deserve to live, nor's worth a grave.
Then Lachisi•, thou that deuid'st the thread
Of breath, since this days Sun must see me dead,
Thus I'll prevent thy pain, thus I'll out-runne
My Fate; and in this stroke thy work is done.
Eternal mover, thou that whirl'st about
The skies •n circular motion hear me out
What I command, see that without control
Thou make Heaven clear, to entertain my soul,
And let the nimble spirits of the ayre
Print me a passage hence up to thy chair,
There will I sit, and from the Azure sky,
Laugh at obsequious base mortality.
Vanish my soul, enjoy, embrace thy Fate
We are prevented; see the fates command
False deeds, must dye though by the Actors hand.
Return to Baiazet, and bear that corpse.
So now I am alone, nor need I fear
To breath my thoughts out to the silent ayre;
My conscience will not hear me, that being deaf
I may joy freely: first thy hated breath
Achmetes vanished, next Caigub•• fell,
Thus we clime Thrones, whilst they drop down to hell.
The glorious eye of the all-seeing sun,
Shall not behold (when all our plots are done)
A greater Prince then Selymus; it is hee
Must share with Jove an equal Majesty.
But for my self his Enginer I'll stand
Aboue mortality, and with a hand
Of power, dash all beneath me into dust,
If they but cross the current of my lust.
What I but speak, it is Oracle and Law,
Thus I will rule and keep the world in awe.
Noble assistant.
Happy Selymus.
It is thou must make me so, for should I stay
Waiting my Fathers pleasure, I might stand
Gazing with envy at my Brothers pride,
My self lying prostrate, even beneath their feet.
Towns, Cities, Countries, and what ere so ever
Can give high thoughts content, are freely theirs,
I only like a spend thrift of my years
Idle my time away, as if some god
Had razed my name out of the roll of Kings,
Which if he have, then Isaac be thy hand
As great as his, to print it in again
Though Baiazet say nay.
No more: I will;
An Empire be our hopes; that to obtain
We'll watch, plot, fight, sweat, and be cold again.
Cannot my words add solace to your thoughts?
Oh! you are gulft too deep in a desire
Of sovereign pomp, and your high thoughts aspire.
All the vnshadowed plainen•sse of my life
Doth but contract thick wrinkles of mislike
In your Majestic brow, and you distaste
Moral receipts, which I have ministered
To cool Ambitions Fever.
Pardon Sir,
Your Holiness mistakes my malady,
Another sickness grates my tender breast,
And I am ill at heart: alas, I stand
An abject now as well in Natures eye,
As erst I did in Fortunes: is my health
Fled with mine honour? and the common rest
Of man, grown stranger to me in my grief?
Some unknown cause hath bred through all my blood
A colder operation, then the juice
Of Hemlock can produce: O wretched man:
Look down propitious Godheads on my woes:
Ph••bus infuse into me the sweet breath
Of cheerful health, or else infectious death.
If there an Angel be whom I have crossed
In my tormented boldness? and these griefs
Are expiatory punishments of sin?
Now, now repentance strike quite through my heart,
Enough of pains, enough of bitter smart
Have tied me to it. I have already bin
Bolted from joy, content can enter in,
Not at the open passage of my heart,
I neither hear, nor see, nor feel, nor touch
With pleasure; my vexation is so much.
My grave can only quit me of annoy;
That prevents mischief, which can bring no joy.
Now I could curse what mine own hand hath done,
And wish that he would vomit out the draught
Of direful poison, which infects his blood.
Ambitious fire? why it is as clean extinct,
As if his heart were set beneath his feet,
Grief hath boiled out the humours of vain pride,
And he was mere contrition.
What's the news?
Zemes as now he left you, pale and wan,
Dragging his weak legs after him, did fall
Dead on the stony pavement of the Hall,
Not by unhappy chance, but as he walked,
Fold•ng his arms up in a pensive knot,
And railing at his Fate, as if he staged
The wounded Priam, or some falling King,
So he, oft lifting up his closing eye,
Sunk faintly down, groaned out, I dye, I dye.
It grieves my soul: let Baiazet know this
Could our own shortened life, but lengthen his
By often sighs I would transfuse my breath
Into his breast, and call him back from death.
Let not my absence steal away my love,
Or local distance weaken the respect
Which you have ever borne me: I must fly
To shake the yoke of bondage from my neck:
My Fathers eyes shall not scan out my life
In every action; then when I am gone,
Our love like precious mettle shall not crack
In the protraction, but be gently framed
Into a subtler thinness, which shall reach
From either part, not crazed by any breach.
Return with ruin painted in thy brow,
Pale death triumphant in thy horrid crest,
Danger limm'd out upon thy threatening sword,
The Turkish thraldom portrayed on thy shield,
We'll meet thee in thy horror, and unfold
Our arms as wide as heaven to take thee in.
We trust you: if there lie unspoken love
Hid in your bosoms? we must bury it
In silent Farewells.
Noble Prince adieu,
Since thy frank deeds have printed in our hearts
So true a pattern of thee, we will feed
Our contemplation with thy memory.
When thou art really departed, thus
A better part of thee shall stay with vs.
So the swift wings of flight shall mount me up
Aboue these walls into the open ayre,
And I will tower aboue thee Baiazet.
Farewell soft Court; I have been kept too long
Within thy narrow walls, and am new borne
To golden liberty; now stretch out you heavens,
Spread forth the dewy mantle of the clouds
Thou powerful Sun of Saturn, and remove
The terminating Poles of the fixed earth
To entertain me in my second birth.
Not yet rid from our wars? Fair Prince take heed,
Treason's a Race that must be run with speed:
Aelus beckons, and the flattering winds
Join all to help our project: quickly hence:
Ell's full of d•nger. Did your Father know
He would stop your flight, and breath at one deaths blow.
Friend I am gone: thou hoary God of Seas,
Smooth the rough bosom of thy wrinkled tide,
That my winged Boat may gently on it glide.
How the obsequious duty of the world
Hangs shiver•ng on the skirts of Majesty,
An• mells out all her footsteps: I could yet
Never steal leisure reform my thoughts,
S•nce my pale brow was first hooped in with gold
Till this b•est hour: and now great Baiazet
Empty thy breast of her imprisoned joys,
Which like the smothering winds, could with a blast
Rip up a passage. I am crowned in bliss,
Placed on the rocks of strong s•curity,
Without the reach of Fate. Envy shall gnash
And pine at my full pleasures; the soft feet
Of labouring Ambition, shall quite tire
Ere touch the starry-height on which I stand.
Achmotes and his son with my two boys
Are fallen, to clear the sun-shine of my joys,
Achomates I fear not, Selymus
L•ues caged within the compass of mine eye,
All that I doubt is of Mahomates,
That blazing star once darkened, I will throw
The lustre of my pomp from me, as clear
As if three Suns were orbed all in one Sphere.
What news brings Isaac?
Unwelcome news.
Be quick in the delivery.
Then thus.
Young Selymus is fled.
Fled?
Fled this night to the Tartarian King.
Would he had sunk
To the Tartarian deep. Isaac, you are false,
And every hair dependant from thy head
Is a twined serpent. Isaac I say you are false,
I read it in thy brow.
By heaven I am not.
Come; answer my demands, first, at what time
Let he the Court?
I know not.
Know he is fled,
And know not when he fled, how can this be?
After our strict enquiry, it was our chance
To light on one that saw him take a ship,
At the next haven.
On one; bring forth that one,
Isle sound the depth of these villainies.
What's here?
A barrel reared an end upon two feet?
Sirrah, you guts and garbage—did you see
Selymus leave the Court?
So please it your—
Please it? thou monster, are you now so pleasing.
My Liege hold in your fury: spend not one drop
Of your fierce anger, on so base a worm,
Keep it entire and whole, within your breast,
That with it's vigour it may crush the bulk
Of him whose treasons move it.
So it shall,
Neptune reine back thy swelling Ocean,
Invert the current of thy guilty streams
Which further treacherous plots, mild Aeolus,
(That when a peevish goddess did entreat,
Scattredst a Trojan Navy through the seas)
Now Baiazet a Turkish Emperor
Bids thee send forth thy jarring prisoners,
Into the seas deep bowels, let them raise
Tempests shall dash against the firmament
Of the vast heavens, and in their stormy rage,
Either confound or force the vessel back,
In which the traitor sails; now, now begin
Or I shall think thee conscious of this sin.
What would this monk?
Only your blessed alms.
I'm in a liberal vain—
Trait•r I'm slain,
I feel the bullet run quite through my sides,
Great Mahomet hath kept you safe from harm,
It never touched you.
Oh—I am slain,
Open the gates of sweet Elysium,
Take in my wounded soul: Bring forth that Monk,
Isle make him my souls harbinger, he shall
Fore-runne my coming and provide a place
Amongst the gloomy banks of Acheron,
Then shall he dwell with me in those black shades
And it shall be my bliss to torture him.
Hoe's gone already, I have sent him hence.
Fly then my soul, and nimbly follow him,
He must not scope my vengeance: Char•n stay,
One waftage will serve both, I come, away.
Let not conceit thus steal away your life.
Me thinks I feel no blood ebb from my heart,
My spirits faint but slowly.
Hear me Sir,
You are not wounded.
Ha? not wounded.
Untouched as yet;
His quaking hand deceived him of his aim,
And he quite mist your body, here behold
The bullet yet unstained with blood.
Now I believe thee: oh the baleful fate
Of Princes, and each eminent estate!
How every precious jewel in a Crown,
Charms mad ambition, and makes envy dote
On the bewitching Beauty of it's shine;
Indeed proud Majesty is ushered in
By superstitious awful reverence,
But cursed mischiefs follow; and those are
Treasons in peace, black stratagems in war.
But wher's the dwarf? Isaac go send him in▪
Bid bold Mesithes, and sage Mustapha
Quickly attend vs;go.
I shall.
This hour,
Hath hatched a richer project in my brain,
Whose wished event, shall strangle envies breath,
And strike ambition dead in every breast.
Sirrah, draw hence the body to the ditch,
Whither the filth of the whole City runs,
There ouerwhelm't in blood;go, quickly do it;
What dost thou grin thou visage of an ape?
Isle rather hang my self then endure this.
Nay, come; be patient and Isle use thee well,
Why—it was a Sceptre struck thee, and twill work
Diviner operation in thy blood
Then thou can dream of.
I'd rather be struck arose the teeth with a pudding
Then cross the back with a sceptre.
A man would guess so, that ouer-viewes the dimen∣sions
But to thy business.
Bassa•s stand ye round,
Stay: who comes here? sure I should know that sature,
Observe him nearly.
Tic no Courtier.
Mahometes it is time to look about,
Selymus fled? Achomates adored?
My name scarce heard of through the popular• roots?
Had that unhappy arm of that dam'nd Monk,
Not staggerd from the Mark at which he aimed,
Who ever sent him hither, I had leapt
Into the empty throne, and cropped the fruit
Budding from treasons root; but Isle return
Back to my Province, this unknown disguise,
Shall search my Fathers closest policies.
Mahometes disguised.
By heaven it was he
He pries •nto my counsels: let it bee.
We'll forward in our business, which being done,
Weal cool the hot ambition of each son,
As mine already is, quick moving time
Hath cast a snowy whiteness on my hairs,
And frosty age hath quel'd the heate of youth,
Mine intellectual eyes, which ever yet
Gazed on the worlds rich gilded vanities,
Are now turned inward, and behold within,
Dismal confusion of vnpardoned •inn▪
Ever since I first was settled on this Throne,
My cares have clogged the swiftness of the hours,
And wrought a tedious irkesomne•se of life,
Murders have masked the forehead of the Sun
With purple-coloured clouds, and he hath blushed
At the blood-sucking cruelty of state.
Ther's not one little angle of this Court,
Whose guilty walls have not concealed a knot
Of traitors, squaring out some hideous plot,
Against my safety; now at last I spy
The dangers of perplexed Majesty.
And were it not for a religious fear
Of after-harmes, which wretchedly might tear
And spoil the body of this Monarchy,
Here at this •nstant would I strike the sail,
And proud top-gallant of mine eminence,
Hurl up my sceptre, dis-inthrone my self,
And let the greene heads scramble for the Crown.
Age hath taught me a staider providence
Then my rash youth could reach to; I intend
To place this glittering babble, on the head
Of some successor, ever I yet am dead,
So give it out; thereby • le try the love
And favour of the people: whom they seem
Most to affect •'le raise to that esteem,
How doe you like the counsel?
As we could like
A voice of health sent from the careful gods.
This news will lay the •ury of your sons,
And breed low duty in them all in hope
Of the reward proposed.
Awake preventions eyes, we must not sleep
If we would see proud Baiazet displaced,
And Selymus elated to his height.
Name him the people favours;—heeaffects
Achomates: and knows the multitude
Wrapped with his heavenly wisdom, cry for him,
We must be quick and wary, here are keys
Left, and laid up by Selym•s, that store
Shall visit empty purses, and enchant
The needy sort of men, that the ones wealth,
Shall weigh up 'tothers wisdom in the scale
Of their light judgement; lend your best endeavours
We'll cross thee Baiazet, and thy hopes shall dye
By thine own ill-contriued policy.
Leave vs; Wee would be private with our friend,
It is thou must do it sweet Asmehemides,
Mahomates and thou are two near friends;
He will suspect in others close deceit,
Thee, for thy generous virtues he will stand
With obvious embraces to receive
Into his bosom; whither when thou art
Wound in, be sure to strike him through the heart.
I am offended, it is just piety
To sacrifice his body at the shrine
Of my displeasure, doe it, I am thine.
Were he as dear to me, as the half part
Of mine own body, as the breath I draw;
I'd doe this charge: wee mortals must obey
When Gods command, and Emperors are they.
So willing to be damned? had I adjoined
Some virtuous office, surely he would then
Have said, that good deeds are not deeds of men.
But let them go; Maho•etes must dye,
And for my other boy fierce Sly••s
The boisterous hand of war must snatch him hence,
My other son Corcutus liuesimmur'd
Within Mineru•'s cloister, thus I clear,
A path through which Achomat•s shall run
Up to my throne when all their hopes are done.
The promise was direct and absolute,
To bless my •emples with a sacred Crown,
With protestations of a quick dispatch,
Ere his own right were cancelled by fate,
So to cut off all rivals in my joys.
What intercedent chance hath made his care
So slack in the performance? by heaven I fear,
Delays willproue delusions of my hopes
And that homebred Mercurian Selymus,
Will split the expectation of my bliss,
Forefend it Mahomet, or I shall be
A sad revenger of indignity.
How now? what speaks this bold intrusion?
Health to Achomates from Baiazet.
From 〈◊〉? unfold thy welcome news,
How fares our Noble Father?
In full health;
And wills you thus by me: to muster up
Your surest forces, and with moderate hast,
Repair unto the Court, where you shall find
Employments worthy of a valorous mind.
To muster arms? can thou surmise the cause?
With confidence I dare not; but tic said,
Against that haughty Noble Selymus.
Who of the Tartar King implored aid,
To an uncertain end: himself gives out
To fight with Hungary, and stretch the bounds
Of the old Turkish regiment▪ But •am
With panting voice, bids Baiazet beware,
And whispers in his ear, he is the foe,
Proud Selymus intends to overthrow.
Enough, regreet our Father with our love
Tell him wee shall not sleep to his command;
Fly nimbly back▪ dares the audacious boy,
Trouble the world with his tempestuous arms?
Isle chastise him with iron whips of war,
If either strength or stratagems shall serve,
To spoil the gavvdy plumes of his high crest,
I'll use the strongest violence of both;
I am swollen big with hate, and I could break
Untimely passage with a wholesome •tab
To vent the monster strangled in my womb.
Father I come, he that detains a Crown
Bequeathed to me, must thunder-strike me down.
Buzzing reports have pier't my sluddy walls,
And clogged my meditations airy wings,
By which I mount aboue the moving spheres
And search the hidden closets of the heaven,
I cannot live retired, but I must hear
Mine own wrongs sounded in my troubled ear:
What? will my father falsify that oath;
In which he vowed successions right to me,
When I resigned my honours up to him,
He deeply swore; when the uprising Sun
Of his bright-shining royalty had run
It's complete course through the whole heaven of state,
And fainting dropped into the Western lapse;
My brightness next should throw it's golden beams,
Upon the worlds wide face, and ouer-peere
The dusky clouds of hidden privacy,
And shall Echo•ates succeed? Shall hee
Shine in the spangled robes of Majesty?
Then Baiazet is false, let it be so
I am secured from a huge mass of woe.
Yet Isle toth'Court, that when Achomates
Shall spy me, and rememb•• but my due
Twill stain his lustre with a blushing hue,
My cares are grown to great to be compri•'d,
Within the narrow compass of my breast,
Vice-roy of Greece, Isle power into thy heart
Part of my secrets; which being entered in,
Locke them as close up, as thou would a sin
Committed, yet not known: I must impart
Things worth thy faithful ••lence.
Worthy Sir,
By the enclosure of my soul I swear—
Isle not hear out•hen oath, in brief it is thus
The Bassaes are all false a•d love not vs;
Nor doth my 〈…〉 prompt 〈◊〉 thus,
I read it in their gestures, 〈◊〉,
Actions, and counsels, my suspicious eye
Hath found a great breach in their loyalty.
Surely this ca••ot bee.
By heaven it is true,
Each man that guards mine honour is my foe,
Isle shake these splendent robes of Majesty
From my ore-burden'd shoulders, and to ease
My self, bequeath them to 〈◊〉.
Achomates?
Even he, vnle••e the voice
Of the whole City interdict my choice.
Here comes the 〈◊〉,
Sure I see bad news
Portrayed on the Index of their fronts.
Bad news? We have out-liu'd good days too long,
We can expect no other, come vnclaspe
Volumes of mischiefs, and make deaf my ears
With an infused multitude of cares.
Young Selymus hath crossed Danubius flood,
And seized upon the Provinces of Thrice,
And with a Navy ploughed the Euxine Sea.
Peace bellowing night-rauens, with how cheerful noise
Their pussing lungs croak out the baleful note,
Are these the wars against Hungary? you powers
Of heaven, brush off your cloddy patience,
If you but wink at these notorious crimes,
I'll say you dare not check our stubborn times.
Well as yet, I'll make use of his pretence
Vize-roy of Greece, bear you this Embassy
To that suspected Traitor Selymus,
Tell him the wars against the Hungarian foe,
Are full of dangers and approved harms,
Never attempted by our Ancestors,
Without repulse or damage bid him dismiss
His rough Tartarian youth, then if he stand
Vnmou'd and stiff•, feign vengeance is at hand.
Make thy best speed.
I shall, twill be well done
To reconcile a Father and a Son.
Though he tumultuous vprores could deserve
The favour of his Prince: he has trod awry,
And mist the path that leads to Majesty.
These bright Imperious ornaments shall grace
No rebell-monster nor base runne-away.
My resolution's firm, it shall not be;
Bassaes, this day an Herald shall proclaim
In the worlds ear, my great successors name.
Are you c•ntent?
We are.
Call forth an Herald.
As our allege•ce binds vs we'll obey.
But what we grant, the Soldiers will gainsay.
Thou shalt not thrive in this: I dare be bold
My golden hooks have taken a faster hold.
Herald,
Be my loud Echo, ratify my deed,
And say Achomates shall next succeed.
Baiazet the second by the appointment of our great
Prophet Mahomet, the only Monarch of the World, a mighty
God on earth, an invincible Caesar, King of all Kings, from the
East unto the West, Governor of Greec•, Sultan of Babylon,
Sovereign of Persia and Armenia, triumphant Tutor of 〈◊〉,
Lord possessor of the Sepulchre of the Crucified God,
subverter and sworn enemy of the Christians, and of all that
call upon Christ; proclaims Achomates his second son next
and immediate successor.
None but Baiazet, none but Baiazet.
By heaven they are corrupted: none but I?
It is no love borne to me that moves this cry.
Great Bays•t the cause why they deny
This just proposal, rises from an use
And customary licence long observed;
To wit, when their crowned Emperor is dead,
The interposed vacation is a time
Of lawless freedom: then they dare to spoil
The Jewish Merchants of their traffic wares,
And prey upon all strangers: so that should
Your Honour be conferred upon your son
Whilst you your self yet breath, then should they loose
The long expected gains; therefore refuse
What you proposed.
If that be all the cause,
We'll give them such a Kingly donatiue,
As doubly shall buy out those ill-got spoils
Five hundred thousand Ducats, if they please
With my free choice to crown Achomates,
Proclaimed to be their due.
Baiazet the second by appointment of our great Pr•∣phet
Mahomet, &amp;c. proclaims that he will attribute 500.
Thousand Ducats if you yield allegiance
To Achomates his successor.
None but Baiazet, none but Baiazet.
Achomates I sent for, how he will digest
These gross illusions, I may justly fear:
By this I had discouraged Selymus,
And killed his hopes; by this I had cut off
The growth of hate, and choked discords seed.
Bear this to Selymus with thy best care.
And this.
And this: fly, let thy winged speed
Return a sudden answer, elie we bleed.
Go on brave Prince; Lead on thy marshaled trow•pes,
Degrade the Turkish Monarch, let him faint
At the deep wounds, which thy revengeful hand
Shall print upon the bosom of his land.
Go on; Me thinks I see Victoria sit
Triumphant on thy steely Burganet.
Farewell; now I will meet thee Baiazet
With a career as free as if Heavens Jove
Had bid me go: bespeak the stoutest gods
To take thy part; tell them that thou must meet
A Sly•••, who when the wars are done,
Will scale the Forts and Castles of the Sun,
Break up the brazen gates of Acheron,
And bury Nature with the world together.
Captains lead on; Now shall the sword and fire
By public ruins crown my just desire.
Sleep H•ngary, I'll not break off thy rest
With the unwelcome Music of my Drums;
I'll turn the edge of my revengeful sword
Upon the bosom of my native soil;
There dwells the motive of my Tragic wars,
Whose ruthless sad Catastrophe shall wound
Posterity in vs: Infants shall morn
Over their Fathers tombs as yet unborn.
But who comes here? I'll meet him.
Noble Vize-roy.
Peace and health to Selymus.
Health, but not peace, whilst yonder light can see
Mortals, whom Turkish force could ne'er subdue.
Yet what if Bays•t our honoured Lord
Bid you roll up those flaxen signs of war,
And sheath the sword drawn forth against his foe?
When duty says obey, what shall say no.
My courage and a proud contempt of all
Corival Nations, could send back a no,
Able to fright a Parliament of gods.
It could so: but if Baiazet gainsay
My plumy valour flags, my thoughts gave way.
Then thus he wills you to discard your force,
And send the black Tartarians to their home,
Withal averring the Hungarian foe
(Against whose power, you have summoned Arms)
Is full of strength and power, ne'er opposed
Without the bitter downfall of our side.
Nor would the worlds great Monarch 〈◊〉
Impair his fame so much, as to be said,
He tamed a Foe by Tartars borrowed aid.
Ha: I am vilely non-plust. Courteous Vize-roy
Return our duty back to Baiazet,
Even in the humblest terms wit can invent,
Tell him 〈◊〉 ha•h a son of that high spirit,
As doth detest a cowardly retreat.
Were all the dead Heroes of our foes
All that are now, and all that are to come
Met in one age, I'd face them drum to drum.
Bid our dear Father be secure of me
And my proceedings: then true valour shines
Most bright, when busied in the greatest designs.
Is not this answer fair?
Most true: and yet
Twill prove distasteful.
No, it cannot be:
If there be too much valour in this breast,
Blame him that placed it there, even Ba•azet.
My virtues and my blood, are both derived
From his first i•fluency, and I must either hate
Disgraceful calum•'s, or degenerate.
All this I'll tell your Father, yet he will rest
As much unsatisfied as at the first,
He will expect the head-strong pride of youth
Should strike low sail to his grave providence.
And so it shall: sage Vize-roy I obey,
And reverence his counsel more, then fear
An host of armed foes: tell him I'll come
To his Court gates with neither man nor drum.
I'll tell it him with joy, which when he hears,
He will be disburdened of a thousand fears.
Remember my just duty: it is no matter,
I will retain that till I come my self.
I am not out-reach'd yet by all these tricks,
My hopes are farther strong, I'll to the Court
With a close march, in no submissive sort,
And steal upon them: Instantly I go
To meet my Fa•h•r, but a subtle foe.
Good health to Selymus.
Good health: From whom?
I•aack, Mesithes, Mustapha salute you.
Those good Trinm v•i what is it they, speak?
(To feed on hopes is but a slender diet)
It is short, but full of weight: to feed on hope
Is but a slender diet. Let it be.
I'll mend my table though no feast with me.
(Fair opportunity is bald behind)
It is true indeed Mes•these. Never fear
I'll twist my fingers in her golden hair.
What speaks the third? This writes more at large,
And comments on the prefixed principalls.
(Your Father did proclaim who should succeed
Public denials nullified his deed,
Your hast will be convenient; things concur
To bless your hopes, Fate bids you not demur)
I am thine,
And come to finish up our great design.
Unquiet anguishments and jealous fear
Fly from any thoughts, like night before the Sun:
I'm lifted to the highest Sphere of joy,
My top enveloped in the azure cloud,
And starry rich habiliments: my feet
Set rampant on the face of Natures pride,
The rarest work weaved by her handmaid Art
Clothes my soft pleasures, I'm as great as Jove.
Only I rule below, he reigns aboue.
Oh! the unspoken beauty of a Crown,
Whose empty speculation mounts my soul
Up to an heavenly Paradise of thoughts.
Father, I come that thou may crown my head,
Whilst apprehensive reason stands amazed,
Amidst the blissful shades of sweet conceit.
Then I'll call back my wandering intellect
From dreams, and those imaginary joys,
I'll teach my soul to twine about a Crown
To sweat in raptures, to fill up a Throne
With the bigge-swelling looks of Majesty,
I'leamble through a pleasures Labyrinth,
And wander in the path of happiness,
As the true object of that faculty.
Great Baiazet I come. Thou must descend
From Honours high Throne, and put off thy right
To build me up an heaven of choice delight.
The Emperor begins to smell de•eit.
I know by his ill looks and sparkling eye
That he affects vs not.
I doubt as much.
Young Selymus he's wronged our loyalty
In his so slack proceedings; we were rash
And indiscreetly-forward in consent,
When we joined on to raise his government.
Peace, it is too late to chide at what is done,
We have so deeply waded in the streams
Of those procellous plots, nor can revoke
Repentant footsteps, or securely creep
Back to the Throne of safety, it is now good
To venture on, and swim quite through the flood.
Here comes the Emperou•.
Attend vs Bassaes.
Ar't sure hoe's dead?
Mahometes is dead.
There's nothing moving of him but his soul,
And that robbed of his body by this hand.
Enough. That soul revives to see him dead
That wronged the body; Oh! my bloody heart,
Must in his frenzy act an horrid part.
Follow thy Prince to hell.
To death! Oh devilish ingratitude:
I'm slain. I dye.
And justly: would each foe
And Traitor to my state were thwarted so.
Bassaes convey this hated body hence,
The sight of that damned villain moves offence:
Now pause a while my soul, and reckon up
What obstacle•• are yet to be removed
Echo•ates must stay the peoples leisure.
Corcutus dally with Minor•aes Nymphs.
The last and worst, proud Selymus shall dye.
Thus I'll compose a firm security.
Arrived already noble Cherseogles?
You're careful in our cause: but speak the news
From our pert Soldier. What means Selymus?
To track the path backward from whence he came,
To strip himself of martial ornaments,
And to fill up the duty of a Son,
Come visit you in low submission.
These are too fairly promised, to be meant,
Ambition hath already chained his soul
Too surely in the captive bonds of pride,
Then that he now should cloth his stately hopes
In the ply•no sordid weeds of penitence,
He doth but varnish o'er some treacherous plot
In this smooth answer: come, wee'•e lead along
To our Imperial seat of 〈◊〉,
That strongly fortified, we need not fear
The weak attempts an home-bred foe can dare.
Ha! we are sweetly plunged, if cold despair
Benumme his youthful courage, and he faint,
Would I were fairly rid of all these cares,
Dejected Cowards: are you not ashamed
Thus to give up the goal of dignity
To heartless fear? Here comes the Messenger.
What news from Selymus?
Even nothing certain:
Ambiguously he promised to be here
As soon as I.
I'st even so?
We are quite dished—undone.
Lift up your downe-cast spirits—who comes here?
Who? Selymus?
Where? sweet Isaac doe not tell him,
That we were sending forth faith's latest breath.
Enough, I will not—happy Selymus.
Long live great Sly•us.
We thank you friends:
Your care hath fostered up our infant hopes
Beyond the pitch of expectation.
We hear that Baiazet is going now
From hence to Constantinople; my men
Lie closely ambushed in the middle way,
Close by a ruinous city, there expect
A sudden on-set, but till then farewell.
When we meet next, our ensigns wau'd on high,
Shall shine like Meteors blazing in the sky.
Fortunes best care go with thee.
Brave boy y'faith.
I shall adore him whilst I breath for this.
Again in heart?
Let's follow Baiazet, come lads away,
The sun of all his glory sets this day.
Come on the honoured youth of Tartary,
My brothers and joint sharers of my woe,
Draw forth the weapons of inflamed revenge,
Against this horrid monsters Tyranny;
I •gem like Romes great Caesar, when oppressed
With Pompeys grating malice he led forth
His noble French-men through the snowy Alps,
I have my Curio Isaacke in the Court,
And Cherseogles like grim Catoes ghost,
Soothes the rough humour of fierce Baiazet,
These men's examples, were we faint and loath
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
Would set sharpe spurs unto ourslow paced wrath,
And whet our dull-eged anger▪ but I see
In your smooth brow perfect alacrity;
We stand to thwart the passage of a fiend,
Through whose wide yawning throat hath coasted down.
The blood of Princes, in continual streams,
He's fed and pampered up his appetite
With the abhorred destruction of his own,
And glutted on the blood of jnnocents.
Stood wee like marble statues in his way,
And had no use of policy and wit,
Our Ireful Prophet Mahomet would send
Sense, life, and valour through our stony joints,
That we might ruinate this ghastly bore,
Made by some hellish fury to confound
The order of this wondered Vniuerse.
Isle grapple with the monster, hoe's at hand,
If you stand firm▪ the Common Wealth may bee,
A slave to Baiazet, but Isle live free.
No Drum nor Trumpet hath disturbed the ayre,
Within the reach of mine attention.
And I admire it, '•were a miracle
If that ambitious boy intend no harm.
What noise is that?
Help Baiazet, the vauntgard's almost slain,
The Tartars lay in ambush.
What? so near?
Set up our standard, Isle give battle here,
Hang out defiance, scorn, and proud contempt,
Write in the blood-red colours of your plumes,
Summon our Army
From these skirmishes,
Speak out the traitors doom in thine alarms.
Thought he to daunt our courage?
Valiant soldiers;
When I behold the manner of this war
Then treason copes with awful Majesty,
A graceless son, with his own aged Sire,
Me thinks to bid you fight, were full as vain
As to bid heavy clouds fall down in rain:
But when I view the Chaos of the field,
And wild confusion striking valour dead,
I called you, not (as Captains doe to boys)
To read a lecture of encouragement,
But that your ancient virtue may be shown
In this my last defence: I wish to dye
Revenged, that death sorts best with Majesty,
Selymus?
Baiazet?
Jove lend me but a minutes patience.
Unnatural son.
Vencharitable Father.
Father? My sword shall hew that title off.
And cut in twain kindreds continued line,
By which thou can derive thy blood from mine.
Abortive monster—thou first breath of sin,
We had but slender shadows of offence,
Till thou crep•st forth to the offended light,
The very mass, and stock of villainy.
Crimes in all others, are but thy influence.
Nature he's planted viprous cruelty,
In thy dark breast, the scandal of her works
Her error, and extract perfection
Of vices; the first well-head of bad things
From whence the world of ills draw their weak springs,
Then hear me speaketoo: you have bin to me
No Father, but a sour Pedantic wretch,
One that with frosty precepts, strived to kill
The flaming heate of my ambitious youth,
As vainly as to strangle fire with straw:
You sit so daily hovering on your Throne,
As if you'd hatch new Monarchies to feed
The hungry gulf of your unbridled pride,
You've surfeited on titles, you've engrossed
Honour, you are the moth of eminence,
And liberal fortunes answered your desires;
You had deflow'rd th'infinitie of Crowns,
With your adulterate ambition,
You're Sovereignties horse-leach, and have spilled
The blood of State, to have your own veins filled.
Hold, hold thy venomed tongue, if there be hid
More of this kind vn-vttred, I le rip up
Thy full fraught bosom, and to save mine ear
Mine eyes shall overview what I'll not hear.
Dare thou fight Traitor?
Dare I• be eal'd a King?
Dare I unsheathe my sword, or gather might?
If I dare ought of these, I dare to fight.
Guard thee, I'd not omit the sweet desire
And pleasure of revenge, were heaven my hire.
The slave has escaped the power of my wrath,
Midst the disseur'd troops of scattered foes
I lost him in a smoky cloud of dust,
So thick as if the tend• Queen of love,
Had wrapped her brat Aeneas from my sight.
Joy to my Liege, of his last victory.
The bold Tartarians flew like fearful Harts
Before the hue•ters rage.
So let them fly;
Heaven rain down vengeance on their cursed heads;
It is our honour that the frighted slaves
Owe their lives dearest safeties to their heals.
How now, whence come you?
From yonder hayricke Sir.
Did thou see Selymus when he fled the field?
No indeed, I was two far crept in.
O you are brave attendants.
Let's forward in our journey; these affairs
Achomates must know, his golden wish,
The people have delayed, perhaps heel frown,
And trample filial duty under feet
As this hath done: but let them storm their fill
Vertu's not shipwrecked in a sea of ill.
An honoured Legate? an Ambassador?
As if that title like Meda•s charm
Could stay the untamed spirit of my wrath,
Had he bin sent a messenger from heaven,
And spoke in thunder to the slavish world;
If he had roared one voice, one syllable
Cross to my humour, I'd a searched the depth
Of his unhallowed bosom, and turn out
His heart, the profane seat of saucy pride.
Slain an Ambassador? no less: it is done,
And '•was a noble slaughter, I conceive
A joy ineffable to see my sword
Bathed in a blood so rare, so pr•cious,
As an Ambassador s; must we be told
Of times delays, and opportunities?
That the basesoldier hath gaine-sayd our bliss?
Thought Baiazet, his son so cold, so dull,
So •nnocently blockish, as to hear
An Embassy most harsh and grossly bad
The people to deny me? we contemn
With strange defiance Baiazet, and them.
Mischief on mischief, all our hopes are dead,
Slain in the haplesse fall of Selymus.
I think the devils fought for Baiazet
And all the infernal hags; how could he else
With a confused army, and half slain,
Break the well-ordered ranks of a strong foe?
And unexpected to—now Isaacke! what
Sadly repenting for thy last misdeeds.
Plots and conspiracies against thy Prince?
Faith we must hang together—
Good Mes•these
It is nothing so: they say 〈◊〉
Disdaining to be mocked out of his hopes,
And most desired possession of the Crown,
He's in contempt of Baiazet and all,
Slain the Ambassador, and vows revenge
On every guilty agent in his wrong.
I looked for that; and therefore first shranke back,
When Baiazet made choice of one to send
On such a thankless errand as that was.
Grant the report be true: what's that to vs?
Fame in mine ear ne'er blabbed a sweeter tale,
This shall redeem our low dejected hopes,
To their full height. no more; be it my charge,
To chase out the event—whats this comes here?
Upon my life, the body of the slain
Ambassador.
It is so.
We greet you friends,
And your sad spectacle.
Tic sad enough
To banish peace and patience, from each breast
That owes true loyalty to Baiazet.
And so it shall; lay down the injured corps.
Achomates he's wronged his Fathers love,
To grossly, in the murder even of him
That bore his sacred person, and should stand
Inviolably honoured by the law
Of men and nations,
But here comes Baiazet.
A tragic spectacle? whose trunk is this?
The body of your slain Ambassador.
Slain? by what cursed violence? what slave
Durst touch the man that represented me?
Achomates.
Achomotes?
The same
Highly displeased with the unexpected news
Of a denial from the peoples mouth,
His reason slipped in fury, and contempt
Hath thus abused your gracious Majesty.
Withal, he threatened to maintain this sin
With force of arms, and so resolved to win
Your Crown, without such tarriance—
Oh! no more,
I am unfortunate in all my blood.
Hath he thus guerdon'd my fair promises,
My daily sweat and care, to further him,
And fix him in the paradise of joy?
Nations cry out for vengeance of this fact,
I'll scourge this black impiety to hell.
Muster our forces to the utmost man,
Once more I'll bury this my aged corps
In steely armour, and my coloured crest
Like a bright star shall sparkle out revenge
Before the rebels faint amazed eyes.
Loose not a minute, Bassaes hence, be gone
Muster our men, stay not; that from the tide
Of our fierce wrath, no drop may •bbe away
By causeless lingering.
Whom speak you General?
Whom but my self? whom doth the cause concern
More nearly then my self?
My honoured Liedge,
Bear your best care about you; it is a time
Of double danger, but remove the one,
The other straight called forward, Sly••s
Great in the favour of Tartaria's King,
Is manned afresh with soldiers; his assault
Threatnes as much as fierce 〈◊〉,
And must be borne off with your ablest forces,
Then if you leave the City to subdue,
One of these two, expect ever you return
Tother possessed, and seated on your throne.
Distraction rends my soul: what shall I do?
Force out one nail with tother of these two,
Choose him you most affect, and best dare trust,
Allure him fairly home, wink at his crimes,
And then create him you• high General,
To lead against his brother, since your self
Cannot at once oppress two foes so stout
Try if one heate can drive another out.
Isaac we like thy counsel: but of these
Which can we pardon? either so deboyst,
So guilty of rebellion, so 〈◊〉
From pious loyalty, that my soul even both
With bitter hatred equally may loath.
First weigh their f•ults, the one a brain-sick youth,
Endeavoured to supplant your Majesty,
The other in defiance, and contempt,
Of God and man profaned the holy rights
Of an Ambassador.
For which dire fact,
Should it slip up unpunished, the name,
The fearful name of 〈◊〉 would pro•e
The subject of each libel, and the scoff
Of petty Princes.
Enough, we have decreed
Achomates shall quake beneath the stroke
Of our fierce anger. Isaac speed away
To Selymus, he shall con•ront the slave
The best of two so bad, go—stay—yet go,
It is hard when we beg succour of a foe:
Beg? stay again—first will I drop before
The sword of proud Achomates—go—tell him,
Upon his low submission we will deign
To make him Champion to his sovereign.
My dear Corcutus welcome.
Royal Father.
Arise thou only solace of mine age,
It was a night of harmless innocence,
Of peace and rest, in which kind nature laid
Thee in thy mothers womb: Right virtuous boy,
How hast thou lived vnta•nted with the breath
Of that infectious vice Rebellion,
Right noble Father, it is a faithful rule
In moral rites, that who desires a good,
And most suspects his right to it, is bold
And turbulent, and eager in pursuit,
Whereas the man to whom this good is due,
Rests happily contented; till time fit
Crown him in the possession of his wish.
Well moralised: I understand thee Boy,
My grant shall melt thy prayers in full joy.
Once more (in hope to gain, and fear to lose
A Crown and Kingdom) we have marched thus near
The seat of a dread Emperor, to try
The chance of war, or resolutely die.
Fear no cross blow, for with this hand I mou•
The wheel of Fate: and each success shall run
Even with our pleasures, till our hopes are spun
Up to their full perfection, this days light
That looks so cheerfully, shall see as bright
As it, my crown and glory.
What stranger's this? my blessed Genius haunts me.
Isaac I take thee in with open love.
What speaks they Presence?
Good news to Selym•s.
From whom?
From Baiazet.
It is strange if good.
And full as good as strange March quickly hence.
I'll tell you as we walk; if constant Chance
Smile on our project ever this Sun go down,
We may salute you with a glorious Crown.
I follow even to death. Grand M•rs to thee
I'll build an Altar if thou prosper me.
Revenge my black impiety; each brow
Seems with a scornful laughter to deride
Those empty Menaces of 〈◊〉.
And Baiazet is not our Father now,
Sith he hath wronged the duty of a Son,
But a scorned Enemy whose prostrate soul
Shall make a step by which I will ascend
Up to the heavenly throne of heavenly state,
If you but lend your help and free consent.
Lead vs along the misty banks of hell
Through Seas of danger, and the house of death,
We are resolved to follow, and by one
To second each step of Achomates.
This resolution is as great as just,
Continue it brave spirits: he's a slave
That having sinned, dares not defend his sin,
The world shall know I dare: For though our cause
Be wrong, yet we will make good the breach of laws.
Would I had slept with Trizham, and that hand
That strangled Mahomet, had stopped my breath,
Rather then live to see my self thus wronged.
Despair not sweet Corcutus, what I promised
I'll keep most true, and here again I vow
When I am dead, this honour to thy brow.
I have called home that rebel Selymus,
Only to tame a Traitor: And that done,
We have no other heir, no other son
Beside Corcutus, to whose free command
We doe bequeath the duty of this land.
Is Isaac not returned?
My Liege he is.
And Sly••s with him.
Let them approach.
Let your high sp•rit shrink below it self
In a diss•mbled she• of penitence.
Tush I can bow, as if my joints were old,
And tumble at his feet.
Practise your skill.
Less show, and more good meaning Selymus.
Arise: these crouching feats, give slender proofs
Of inward loyalty.
Right noble Father,
Mine expedition to avenge your cause
Upon the head of proud Achomates,
Be my just trial.
Hast then: May thy arm
By breathless treason raise up a full joy,
And turn that monster back unto the earth
From whence it leapt, a most prodigious birth.
We fly to the performance; who both dare
And will correct his boldness: now we tread
The path to honour, and me thinks I hear
The peoples Viva,• Echo in mine ear.
New insolence: The Bassaes slipped away,
How the obsequious villains
As if he were their Godhood.
I suspect
Some plotted mischief, else they durst not leave
Your person thus unguarded.
Plot and hang.
We weigh not all their treasons at a straw,
One must not rule too long, it is subjects law.
Long live S•lymus, La Selymus,
Magnificent Emperor of the Turks.
Hell and the furies vex their damned souls.
What people? Ho? what Nation is it we live in?
Is it our State and Monarchy? good gods
Two Emperors at once. Live Selymus?
Can slavish vassailes thus supplant their Prince?
What's this enshrines my head? a type for fools
To fleare at a divided ornament:
Fail not my sense and courage, let me live
To find my self again. Vize-roy of Greece,
Did thou not see a Baiazet withdraw
And vanish hence? tell thou most faithful man,
What is become of that forgetful name?
Or who hath stole it from me? Selymus!
Oh that damned villain with his treacherous plot,
Hath robed me of that glory. Death a sense
If t'haue a soul of Adamant or Steel,
Else had that hated n•ise reft it in twain:
What are thou? or whence come thou?
From a Prince.
Yet I believe thee.
From thine enemy.
Yet I believe thee.
From the Emperor.
And I believe thee still; yet slave thou least,
These parts must know no Emperor but me,
Vnle•se base usurpation hath stept-vp
Unto my chair of honour. Right, it is so:
It is so indeed. Well then, what will your Emperor?
That by my hand you yield him up his crown!
Traitor his crown? so: now I am resolved.
I have forgone my self, else had this hand
Tore out thy spotted heart, and that one word
Of yielding had been cause enough to spoil
Thee and thy generation. Heartless slave,
Why sneak'st thou from our presence? stay, behold
Here I commend this gorgeous ornament,
These trappings to thy Emperor, as full
Bestead with curses as my heart with woes,
That it may clog his ears, and vex his head
With daily terrors. Hence thy Prince is sped.
Vize-roy of Greece, to thee our last farewell,
Thou worthiest truest best deserving man,
That ever made vs happy: if thy faith
Respect me, not my fortune, Doe this charge,
Fly to Achomates, and rather aid
Him then this faithless Bastard Selymus,
The scandal of our race, the mark for heaven
To shoot revenge. But all in vain,
I strive to word away my inward pain.
Nor this nor that I'll favour, may I 〈◊〉
Bays•t shall live to see both bleed.
Mask up thy brightness Phabus, lovely night,
Hurl thy thick mantle over all the heavens,
Let this black day for ever be forgot
In the eternal registers of time:
Which of you sacred powers are not ashamed
To see a Prince so sinfully abused
By his own issue and unrevenged.
But stand we, who comes here? a face of brass.
Else would it blush: now thou Saturnine Jove,
Thou God of great men, thunder that the world
Drenched all in sin, may shake and fear the noise
That horrid scourge of villainies.
Father?
Slave
Avaunt: • feel a strong Antipathy
T'wixt thee and me, thy sight makes my dead heart
Distill fresh drops of blood, and work new smart.
What furious Bays•t, and raging hot?
I hug the amorous pleasure that I feel
Creep through •y joints: observe our Father,
Else by some wilful murder he will prevent
My purposed project, I'd not loose the guilt
Of his destruction for a crown: heaven knows
I love him better then to let him dig
Himself a grave, whilst I may take the pains.
Now mount my soul, and let my soaring plumes
Brush the smooth surface of the Azure sky.
With this I charm obeyfance from the world:
Thou golden counterfeit of all the heavens:
See how the shining stars in car•l•sse ranks
Grace the composure; and the beauteous Moon
Holds her irregular motion at the height
Of the four poles; this is a complete heaven,
And thus I wear it: but me thinks it is fixed
But weakly on my brow, whilst there yet breath
Any whose envy once reflect on it,
And those are three: the angry Baiazet,
Puling Corcutus, proud Achomates:
One of these three is cared for, that's Corcutus
Who ere the blushing morn salutes the Sun,
Shall be dispatcht by two most hideous slaves,
Whom I have bred a purpose to the fact:
The other rival, wise Achomates,
I'll bear aside by force of men and arms,
Which ready Mustered, but attend the stroke,
Then attend our Fathers.
Here's one deals for him,
Shall send him quick to hell. It is decreed.
He that makes lesser greatness soon shall bleed,
Hamon draw near, most welcome my dear Hamon,
What guess of your patient Baiazet?
Is he all healthful?
No my gracious Prince.
Neither his body nor his mind is free
From miserable anguish.
A sad case.
Hamon I love him, and would rid him from it.
Were I so skill•'d in naturals as you.
All that my art can work to cure his grief
Shall be applied.
Vnapprehending fool:
I must speak broader. Hamon is he ill
In mind and body both?
Exceeding ill.
Then should I think him happier in his death,
Then in so hateful life and so weak breath.
And that's the readier way to cure his ill.
(He has found me now) but Hamon can thy Art
Reach to the cure?
With easy diligence.
Then let it.
I'm yours.
Walk, and thy pains,
Shall be rewarded highly, with the like
As thou bestow on Baiazet: the Court
Makes it a fashion now first to bring the event
About, and then hang up the instrument.
Thus Cherseogles hast thou wound thy self,
Out of thy self to act some fearful plot,
By which the Authors of this public woe,
Shall skip into their graves, it is confirmed
A deed of lawful valour to defeat
Those of their lives, that robed the world of peace.
On this side the false hearted Selymus
With his confederate Bassaes lie encamped
Just opposite the proud Achomates;
The Sun now sunk into the Western lap,
Bids either part, unlace their warlike helmes
Until to morrow light where both intend
The hazard of a battle: but you powers
That with propitious cares, tender the world
And vs frail mortals, help me to pre•ent
A general enemy by the fall of some;
Assist my spirits in a deed of blood,
Cruel, yet honest and austerely good.
Who? Selymus? as I expected.
What?
A soldier thus licentious in his walks,
A stranger? Ha? What art thou?
A sworn friend, a servant to thy greatness.
Then return
Back into thy ranks and orders, no edict
From me hath ratified this liberty,
To scout at random from the standing camp.
It is true my honoured Lord, nor have I dared
For some poor trivial prey thus to remove
My self, but for a cause of greater weight
The ruin of our enemies.
How's that?
The ruin of our enemies?
No less;
The quick fall of great Achomat•
Can work it.
Soldier as thou hop'st to live,
Mock not my thoughts with false and painted tales,
Of a supposed stratagem.
I swear—
What wilt thou swear?
By all the heavenly powers
I speak the truth, and if I fail in ought,
Grind mine accursed body into dust.
Enough, unfold the meaning and the way
By which this happy project must be wrought.
It is thus; at the twelfth hour of this black night.
Achomates I have induced to walk
Forth to this valley weapon'd, but vnmand,
In expectation of your presence there,
Where being met, heel urge a single fight,
Twixt you and him: after a stroke or two,
I have engaged my self closely to start
From ambush, and against you take his part.
Then thou art a traitor?
Worse then a devil, should my heart
Have made that promise with my tongue;
But heaven bear witness that my inward thoughts
Labour his welfare only, whom you powers
Have proved most worthy, therefore only yours.
Meet but this foe, whom I have flattered thus,
To his destruction: and great Selymus
Shall see my strength employed to offend
Achomates, and stand thy faithful friend.
Oh were thou faithful—
If I •hrinke in ought
That I profess, death shall strike me to the grave.
So thrive all falsehood, and each perjured slave.
You have won our credit, bear a noble mind
About thee, then to find me forward trust
This night when sleep triumphant hath subdued
Her wakeful subjects, and the midnight clock
Sounded full twelve, in this appointed place,
Expect my presence, and till then adieu
Our next shall be a tragic interview.
The first is cared for—here a second comes,
Assist me thou quick jssue of Ioues brain,
And this one night shall make their labours vain.
It shall be so, my fears are too to great,
To join all in one on-set: a strong band
Shall with a circle hem the traitor round,
And intercept the passage of their flight;
How now? from whence come thou? what at thou?
A Lieg-man to Achomates.
To me?
Yet noble Prince, and one whose life is vowed
To further your desert, and therefore yours.
We thank you, and pray you leave vs.
I can unfold an easy stra•agem,
Would crown the hopes of great Achomates.
What means the fellow?
To secure your state
By Selymus his fall.
What i'st thou breath?
Speak it again, for many careful thoughts
Possess my soul, that every blessed voice,
Steals in the passage twixt my ear and hast,
By Selymus his fall, to secure my state?
I can:
Delude me not, and I will rain
Such •n unmeasured plenty in thy lap,
Heap such continual honours on thy head
That thou should snrinke, and stagger with the weight.
Judge of the means; this night I have induced
Young Selymus to walk forth in this grove,
At the twelfe hour, in hope to meet you here▪
Where having urged a combat, and both met
In •ager conflict I have pawned my vow.
To rush from yonder thicket, and with him
Join against you.
Villain.
And devils had,
My heart made promise with my tongue,
But heaven bear witness that my soul affects
None but Achomates, try but my faith,
And meet this foe, whom I have baited thus,
With golden hopes, and you will •end my deed
In your defence all promise shall succeed.
I'm resolved soldier, when day is past▪
And the full fancies of mortality
Busy •n dreams and playing visions,
At the sad melancholy hour of twelve,
Isle meet thee in this plain.
And you shall find
Me here before you.
Be so; Who denies
To strike in time, can seldom hope to rise,
These two will meet, and I must take both parts.
Now for a trick to send them both to hell,
In the full growth of expectation;
Heavens know they have deserved it then it would be
An happy murder: and behold the men
Whom • have decreed should doe it, once again
I must betake me to my former note;
Health to the friends of our great Emperor,
The three strong pillars that uphold true worth.
Sir, your intrusion is unseasonable.
And your salute, impardonably bold.
Perhaps the news I bring, may frame excuse
For both these faults.
Speak out thy mind in brief.
Then thus: to night here present on this plain,
You may encounter two fierce enemies,
Achomates, and Cherseogles, both at the full stroke of twelve.
How (Mesithes) we're blessed.
This night at twelve of the clock?
Upon my life—
What shall we doe?
But meet me on this plain
At the appointed hour, and I will place
You three aside, from whence you shall oppress
Your foes at unawares.
Is it a match?
It is done at twelve a clock.
See thou prove faithful.
If I shrink in ought
That I profess, death strike me to the grave.
So thrive all falsehood and each perjured slave.
How easily base minds are drawue to strike
Their foes at least advantage—beauteous morn,
Pale witness to a thousand deeds of sin
Veil up thy light, that darkness may help on
These black stratagems, and unhallowed hands
Strike in mistaken bodies, even th• soul
Themselves adore, and cheerfully defend,
But time grows fast upon me, hit all right
Two Princes, and three Bassaes dye this night.
Heaven whither run these projects? is the thought
Of man so senseless, void of wit, yet fraught
With threatening ambition? to what end
Doth this di•tempered madness headlong bend?
Bless me my Genius from these hated toils
Of murdering warfare, and these sweating broils,
Of watchful policy; Phoebus let it be
That I may know no other god but thee.
Learned experience says, ambiguous fates
Vex eminent fortunes, and he only sty••s
Without the beams of envy, whom the hands
Of some propitious power, hath ranked below
Those short delights that troubled thoughts doe know;
A Crown's a golden mark, which being hit,
Falls not alone, but off the head with it:
Honours are smokey, nothing, then let the Queen
Of learning, great Minerua, and the nine
Chaste sisters, that adorn the Grecian hill,
Devote me to themselves, but let me still
Within Apollos sacred Temple sit,
And spend my body to increase my wit;
Reign Selymus, for I shall ne'er thee hate,
Thy supreme power, nor envy thy state,
Corcutus stands divorced from a life,
Engaged to vain ambition factious state,
And empty power of Kings; Hoe's great in fame
Not who seeks after, but neglects the same.
Since thou hast grieved me Phoebus, free my wit,
That I my ease my grief by speaking it;
If thou deny fond god, twill be in vain,
Sorrow can sing, though thou not tune the strain.
Then thou sweet Muse from whence there flows,
words able to express our ill,
Teach me to warble out my woes,
and with a sigh each accent fill:
Infuse my breast with doleful strains,
Whose heavy note may speak my pains,
O let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night deprive my woes with sleep.
The pleasing murmurers of the ayre,
that gently fan each moving thing,
I being heard, straight doe repair,
and bear a burden whilst I sing,
An heavy burden doleful song,
The fathers grief the subjects wrong,
O let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguiles my woes with sleep.
The gre•ed Flora hangs the head
Of every youthful plant and tree
And flowery pleasures are stark dead,
at my lamenting melody,
Then all you Muses he•pe my strain
To reach the depth of bitter pain.
Oh let me sigh, and •ighing weep
Till night beguiles my woes with sleep.
Me thinks I hear the singing spheres,
tune their melodious strains to mine,
The dewy clouds dissolve in tears,
as if they grieved to see me pine;
Thus each thing joins to help my moan,
Thus seldom come true sighs alone;
Then let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguile• my woes with sleep.
He sleeps: Then enter two murder•s
Who slaying him, •ear him away.
A dark and heavy night, as if the gods
Winckt at our projects, and had clad the heavens
In a propitious black, to bless my plot;
Revenge, to thee I dedicate this work,
And I will pamper thy wild appetite
With blood and murder, thy dull slow pac'• feet
Shall caper to behold our fea•efull scenes
Drenched in a scarlet Ocean,
Tic full twelve—
I hear a quiet foot pace, and it beats
Directly towards. It is Selymus,
Joy of expectation.
Thou Queen of shades;
Bright Cynthia, and you starry lamps of heaven,
What sphere hath told you? oh you're envious all,
And therefore hate to grace the time, in which
I ruinate my latest foe; this is the sand
On which I am to wrestle for a Crown,
And I am entered full of greedy lust,
To m•et my adverse champion; here's my god,
Whom I adore with greater confidence
Then all those beauties, Sun, or Moon, or Stars
That with malicious absence have disrobed,
This gracious hour of i'ts due respect.
Oh thou the silent darkness of the night,
Arm me with desperate courage and contempt,
Of gods—loved men, now I applaud the guile,
Of our brave roarers which select this time,
To drink and swagger, and spurn at all the powers
Of either world, blessed mortals, had that mother
Strangled her other infant, white faced day,
And brought forth only night, my limbs are stiff,
And I must bath them in my brothers blood,
Isle steep this grass in a red purple gore,
Scatter the carcass piecemeal, and that done
Isle rear a lasting monument, Isle sign
A trophy, which inscribed, shall speak my deed•
To after ages, that's my chief intent,
Hoe's coldly praised that's written innocent;
Whose there? my soldier?
Soldier and slave, great Prince at your command,
I will jnoble thee place thee my second self
In all my power for thy rare faith.
VVhere's our Achomates?
I heard one softly track full hitherwards,
And think tic he; it is needful that I meet him,
And give some proof that I continue his,
Else jealous of my faith, he will return,
And we be both deluded; when you're met,
Parley before you fight, till I prepare
My self to run upon him unawares,
Mean while Isle go to meet him.
Go, make hast,
But if this base rascal should deceive
My trust? a trifle—my nerues are plumped up
And filed with vigour, strong enough to fright,
A million of such big backed, drowfie •laues;
I hear them both approach.
See where he stands, I shall not be flow
To second your encounter being met,
Parley before ye fight, till I prepare
My self, to run upon him vnaware,
Mean while I'll withdraw—now for my Bassaes,
A time of dismal blackness, and my soul
Is dull and heavy, as if envious night,
Strived to subdue my fatal watch fullness.
But I have rushed upon my foe: whose there?
Answer thy Prince first I say, what art thou?
He that vsurp's the title of a villain.
But he that wears it is a Saint, and such am I.
You are a treacherous slave.
Achomates thou lie, this night shall prove
I shrink not to vnmake what I have done.
Oh heavens so jmpu•ently bad?
Good brother we know your virtues, one that
Gain country, gods, and men,
Slew an Ambassador which here we must revenge.
Hark in thine ear,
Isle whisper forth thy mise 〈◊〉, least the heavens
Should tear and snatch them hence from my reave•ge,
In greediness of wrath—they whisper.
See where they stand.
Achomates and Selymus?
Both:
They are two, we four, lets run upon them,
It is very dark, be certain in your aim,
And all strike home.
A match.
Isa•ck, and I will take the nearest.
And we the other.
Strike home, and sure, and here's at them.
I have the Crown, and I will, Oh, oh, oh.
Oh, òò, O villain I am slain.
It is not Cherseogles we have slain.
Not Cherseogles villain, whom then? speak.
Achomates and Selymus.
Ha.
None other.
Hast thou betrayed vs so?
Be silent, hear me.
There lie the Captains of both Armies dead,
Breathless, and so stupid to neglect
The use of opportunities.
What use?
Are you not rich, wealthy in powerful gold,
Go whilst the Soldiers lye thus destitute
Of any Leader, frankly bribe both parts
Buy their unsettled love at any rate,
And creep into their bosom, then in this
Dead wa•t and dearth of Princes, they will
Cleave to Isaac, and at length salute
Me Emperor?
You apprehend it right.
What blessed angel art thou?
It is no time for id•e complement.
Thy counsel's good.
I would not let slip this sweet occasion,
For all the precious plenty of the world.
Come let's away.
First make some quick dispatch with these now rivals.
True, they'll not endure my Sovereignty.
Hast no sudden wits how to remove them both?
No wile but strength; are not we two?
They are no more; we must encounter them, it is man to man:
The match no whit unequal.
I am thine:
I hate to have co-partners in my state:
There shall not breath a man whose envious eye
Dares look a squint on my dread Majesty.
They that bring news first, are still most welcome.
Experience speaks it true.
Let vs hast, now Selymus we come to gratulate
Stay—
Stand.
How?
What means this?
Fate to your lives.
Sweet doings.
It is no less, Sir witness this,
Traitor I'm slain.
Cross fortune, wicked chance:
But I must make the best of it. Is he dead?
Villain he is, and thy bad turn is next:
What devil did incite thee, to incite
Isaac against friends? Injurious slave.
Urge him to no confession, till the rack
Force from his closest thought unwilling truth,
He shall be doomed for this notorious fact
Unto continual pains,
Hunger, oppression, want and slavery.
That struck me full.—Have at thee:
Hold thou art victor. I have met the price
Of treason death, and as I hoped to raise
By blood, I fall, so have I mist my scope;
D•lusion is the end of lawless hope.
Mesithes stay one moment, art thou gone,
I am not far behind, I feel the blood
By slow degrees ebb, from my fainting breast,
I am heart struck, and wounded even to death,
A Scene of slaughterthis.—O just heavens
Still I plighted faith to each of these,
I wi•ht that if I failed in one, I vowed
Death would thus strike me, I have gained my wish,
Then you imperial Fates that intercept
The brittle courses of frail mortality,
Continue this firm justice, and enact
A constant law, that all •alse meaning hearts
That think of oaths as of a puff of wind,
May as I doe, thus sink into the grave
My dying wish: so thrive each perjured knave.
The •ight overblown, and five a clock,
I wonder at their absence; what are these
Our Generals murdered, our dear Selymus,
With his three Bassaes, and Achoma•es,
Whose bloody hand is guilty of this fact?
A trembling shakes me, it was some power
That frowned at our proceedings.
Baiazet is new bore•e to his Sovereignty.
Let's take their bodies, bear them hence in pomp
Unto their greatness, and advise the foe
Of their slain General sterne A•homates,
Sound peaceful rumours; we must resubmit
To Baiazet, so heaven hath thought it fit.
Set down the Book and Candle, go and pr•uide
The Potion to prevent my Feauer-fit,
Till when I mean to study: go make ha•.
Fortune I thank thee, you're a gracious Whore.
Thy happy anger hath immured a Prince
Within the wall•s of base security.
Farewell thou swelling sea of Government,
On whose bright crystal bosom •l•ates along
The gravelled v•ssell of proud Majesty.
Ambition empty all thy bag of breath,
Send forth thy blast among the quiet waives,
And work huge tempests to confound the Art
Of the usurping Pile•e Selymu•s.
Treason and envy like to bickering winds,
Shake the unsettled abrick of his State,
That from my study windows I may laugh,
To see his broken fortune swallowed up
In the quick sands of danger, and the sail
Puffed with the calm breath of slattering Chance,
By furious whirle-windes rended into rags,
And peece-meale scattred through the Ocean:
But peace my chiding spirit; Come thou man
Of rare instinct, blessed Author of a book
Worthy the studies of a reading God,
Thou dost present before my wearied eyes,
Tiberius sweating in his policies,
Dull Claudius gaged by dull flattery,
Ner• vnbowelling Nobility,
Galba undone by servants hardly good,
Otho o're-whelm'd in love, and drenched in blood,
Vittelli•s sleeping in the chair of State,
Vespatian called to government by Fate,
Still as thy Muse doth travel o'er their age,
A Princes care is writ in every Page.
Thus I unfold the volume of thy wit,
The chiefest sol•ce of my moving wit,
Caedes eo fuit nobilior, queen filius
Patrem interfecit. Tacit. Hist. lib. 20.
Avaunt thou damned wizard, did thy god
Apollo teach thee to divine my fall?
What hath thy cursed Genius tract my steps
Throught the Meanders of dark Privacy,
And will he dwell with me in these close shades
To vex my banished soul, banished from joy,
Removed from the worlds eye? I am accursed,
And hated by the Synod of the gods,
A knot of envious deceits, the day will be
When they shall smart for this indignity.
Triumph my Plantiffes, Nemesis your Queen
Is Pierced quite through with your continual groans.
See, see, the prostrate body of a King,
Clad in the weeds of pining discontent,
Lies open to your wrath, and doleful hate:
But I conjure you not to touch his skin,
Nor hurt his sacred person, those three Fates
(Those srightfull sisters) told me they decree
For Baiazet another destiny:
But vex his soul with your deluding blows,
And let him dream of direful anguishments,
Each in the proper order of his Fate,
Vent the comprest con•usion of his hate.
Awake, awake thou tortured Emperor,
Look with the eye of fury on the heavens,
Threaten a downfall to this mortal stage,
And let it crack with thee, thy life is run
To the last Scene, thy Tragic part is done.
You meager devils, and infernal hags,
Where are you? Ha? what vanished? am I found?
Did I not feel them tear and rack my flesh,
And foreamble it amongst them? heaven and earth
I am deluded, what thin airy shapes
Durst fright my soul, I'll hunt about the world,
Search the remotest angles of the earth,
Till l'ue found out the climate hold sthese fiends,
Or build a bridge by Geometric skill,
Whom lineal extension shall reach forth
To the declining borders of the sky,
On which I'll lea•e mortality along,
And break a passage through those brazen walls,
From whence Jove triumphs o'er this lower world:
Then having got beyond the utmost sphere,
Besiege the concave of this vniuerse:
And hunger-starue the gods till they confess
What furies did my sleeping soul oppress.
Ha? did it lighten? or what •imble flame
He's crept into my blood? me thinks it steals
Through my distempered joints, as if it feared
To urge m• to i•n•atience.
Hamon, accursed Hamon stan• my soul
Aboue the power of these inu•nom'd drugs:
Am I in hell alive? the Stygian flames
Could not produce an heat so violent
As burns within my body: Oh I feel
My heart drop into cinders, I am dust;
Jove for thine own• sake Jove, confine my soul
Within these walls of earth: for in the sky
When I am there, none shall be Jove but I.
Still, still I boyle, and the continued flames
Are aggravated: He is done, subdued
(By the base Art of a damned Empiric)
Whose empty name sent terror through the world:
Is not the heaven bespangl'd all with stars,
And blazing Meteors, whose bright glimmering flames
Like ceremonial Tapers should adorn
My solemn Hearse? what doth the golden Sun
Ride with it's wonted motion? are the waives
Bridled within their narrow Continent
No deluge? not an earthquake? Shall a Prince,
An Emperor, a Batazet decease
And make no breach in nature? fright the world
With no prodigious birth? Are you asleep
You thundering beggards that so awe the world?
I'll hasten to revenge this strong neglect
Of my deceasing spirits, mount my soul,
Brush off this cloddy heavy element:
So Jove I come excorporate, divine,
Immortal as thy self, I must contest
With thee proud god, with thee to arm my mind,
Only my soul ascends earth stays behind.
Is Selym•s deceased?
He is my Lord.
Who Solymus? what Fate durst be so bold:
Oh, I could act an holy frenzy now
Selymus deceased? What did not Atlas tremble
At such a burden? Can he support the Orb
That holds up Selymus? is not yet the Pole
Cracked with his weight? doe not the heavens preparr
His funeral Exequies? Jove I inuol•e thee now,
Command the heavens that the prone Chandler shops
Command that idle Phoebus, that he exhale
Matter from earth to make thy •unerall Tapers:
Or I'll make Torches of the vniuerse
In stead of Comets; flaming Countries, Cities
Shall be thy cer•moniall Tapers:
Or if not this; I'll ransack Christendom,
Kings Daughters I'll disembowel for a Sacrifice,
Their fat with vestal fire will I refine,
And offer verge••s ware unto thy shrine.
Start back bright Phoebus, let thy fiery Steeds
Keep Holiday for Selymus. tell thy host
Proud Neptune now expects another deluge,
That all the earth may weep for Selymus.
What doe you smile you Heavens? are ye conscious,
And guilty of this execrable treason?
What dare the fields to laugh when I doe morn?
I'll dye your motley coloured weeds in scarlet,
And cloth the world in black destruction.
Nemesis, I'll nail thee to my greedy sword,
Destruction shall serve under me a Prentiship.
Courage brave Sell•xie, with thy Princely boat
Through Styx even all mortality shall float;
I'll levy Soldiers through the Vniuerse,
With which thou shalt beguirt Elizeum;
Thus barren Nature shall repent thy fall,
Grieving that she did not the event fore-stall;
Death I will hate thee: the world shall wear
Thy sable livery embroidered with fear:
Thy Trophies every where the world shall gaze on:
Thy Arms in sable and in gulls I blazon.
My Lord this Crown ent•eats you leave off these
Ground-creeping meditations, and to think
Of Majesty, wherefore we invest your brow
With this rich robe of glory, and doe vow
To it our due allegiance: thus you shall
Mount up aloft aboue your Fathers fall.
Thus our dear Father, those bright robes of state,
For which so lately thou hast sweat in blood,
Thou wear upon my shoulders in thy stead:
Thus are we crowned, and thus our labours bee,
Made gainful unto thine, though not to thee.
Live then, and reign most mighty Emperor,
Whilst that our care and watchful prou•dence,
Shall fence thy safety, and keep Sentinel
Over thy sacred person, were black treasons,
Hatched in the Center of the darkest earth,
The massy element should be prospective
For all our piercing eyes; should Pluto send
His black Apparator to summon thee
To appear before him, by that Mahomet
We would confront him boldly, and excuse
Thy absence unto Pluto, by our presence;
Death we will disarm thee, if thou dar'starrest
Thy fury on our Solyman, or we will bale his person
With our imprisonment.
By our death thou shalt live; our City walls
May with warlike ruin be battered,
But our allegiance, that European Bull,
Shall never push from vs, with his golden horns;
Nor shall his gilded showers quench our loves:
No golden Enginer shall undermine
The Castles of our faith, nor blow them up
With blasts of hoped preferment, were thy walls▪
But paper, were they made of brittle glass,
Our faiths should make them marble, and as firm
As Admant: not walls, but subjects love,
Doe to a Prince the strongest Castle prove.
Behold great Prince allegiance mixed with love
Locked in our breasts: thou art the living key
To shut, and to unlock them at thy pleasure:
No golden pick-lock shall ever s•rue it self
Into these faithful locks, whose only springs
Can be no other then our own heart strings,
Our greedy swords which erst embrued in blood,
Did seem to blush at their own Masters acts,
And upbraid vs with our bloody facts
Though peace hath now cond•damned to pleasing rust,
Yet at thy beck we will sheath them in the breast
Of daring Christians, thus in war we will fight
For thee, whilst thou dost strive for victory:
Here to describe such Princely virtues, which
Should more adorn thy Crown then Orient pearls,
Were but to show a glass, and to commend
Thy self unto thy self. Be gracious,
Magnificent, courageous, or mild,
Or more compendiously, be more thy self,
Reign then, and Mahomet grant that thou may pass
Nestor in years, as much as now thou dost
In wisdom and in valour; Herald proclaim
To the world his title, and let swift-winged Fame
Second thy trumpet.
Long live Solymon, &amp;c.
We thank you friendly Actors of our bliss,
Our patience hath at length tired out the gods;
Our Empire hath been racked enough with treasons,
And black seditions, as if no Christians
Were left to conquer, wee yield our Turkish blades
Against our selves, imbowelling the State
With bloody discord, by our strength we fall
A scorn to Christians, with our hands we shed
That blood which might have conqu•red Christendom;
Thus while we hate our selves we love our enemies,
And heal them with our sores, whilst we lye weltering
•n bloody peace: the die of the public safety
Hath been already cast by th'hand of war,
Treasons have made a blot, which may provoke
The enemy to enter, and bear our men
To dark Auernus, Envy might have blushed,
Though always pale at all our projects: now
This bloody deluge is quite past, return
Sweet Peace with th'Oliue branch, enough of wars,
It is thou must power oil into our scars.
Fly hence Hereditary hate, discords dead,
Let not succeeding omnities and hatred live.
Let none presume to cover p•iuate sores
With public ruins, nor let black discord
Make an Anatomy of our too lean
Empire, let it w•• sat again; when peace
Hath knit her knots, then shall the wanton sounds
Of Bells give place to thundering By•bardes,
And blood wash out the smoothing oil of Peace,
Every Soldier I'll ordain a Priest
To ring a fatal knell to Christians,
And every minute unto earths wide womb,
Shall sacrifice a Chrisitians Hecatomb:
Then shall we make a league with Aeolus,
The winds shall strive to further our proceedings,
Then will we load the Seas, and fetter Neptune
With chains that hold our Anchors; he shall quake
Lest he to Pa• resign his watery Empire,
And three fork'd-mace unto my awful Sceptre;
The Whales and Dolphins shall amazed stand,
That they shall yield their place to Bears and Lyon•,
Sylla shall howl for fear when she shall see
The Sea become a Forest, and her self
Mountanie, then let Sirens quake
For fear of Satyrs, then let the Christians think,
Not that our Navy, but the Country it self
Is come to move them from the growing earth;
Comets, fiery swords shall be my Heralds,
Threatening to th'world sudden combustion:
Let our arms be steely bows, our arrows
Thunderbolts, and in stead of warlike Drum•,
Thunder shall proclaim black destruction;
Vulcan I'll tax thee, exercise thy Forge,
Prepare to me for all the world a scourge,
The Fates to me their powers shall resig•e,
Which with this hand will rend the strongest twine
Of humane breath, first for the I'll of Rhodes
Destruction there shall keep his mo•rnf•ll Stage:
Th'inhabitants shall act a bloody Tragedy,
And personate themselves; Then for Nayos Isle
Death there shall keep her Court, then I will make
Vienna all a Shambles; yea gaping Famine
Ever devouring, always wanting food,
Shall gnaw their bowels, and shall lean them nothing
Besides themselves to feed on; their dead corpse
Shall be entombed in their neighbours bellies.
There every one shall be a li•ing Sepulchre,
An unhallowed Churchyard; famine shall feed it self,
Then shall they envy beasts, and wish to be
Our Jade, our Mules, Matrons shall strive to bring
Into the hateful light abortive Brats;
The Infants shall return, and the lean womb
Shall be unto the Babes a sudden tomb.
Then shall they hoard carcasses, and strive
Only to be rich in Funerals; I'd rejoice
To see them stand like Screech-Owles, gaping when
Their Parents should expire, and bequeath
To hell their wretched souls, to them their death.
Long live great Solymon our noble Emperor.
All this, and more then this I'll doe, when peace
Hath glutted our new greedy appetites,
When it hath filled the veins of the Empire full
With vigour, then lest too much blood should cause
Armies of vices, not of men to kill vs,
And strength breed weakness in our too great Empire,
Then, then, and only then we shall think good,
With war to let the body politic blood,
Mean time we will think on our Fathers Funeral:
Oh, I could be an holy Epicure,
In tears, and pleasing sighs, Oh I could now
Refresh my self with sorrow, I could emblem
Thy corpse with holy groans from putrefaction:
Oh, I could powder up thy thirsty corpse
With brinish tears, and wipe them off with kisses,
And that I might more freely speak my grief,
These eyes should be still silent Orators,
Till blindness shut them up were I a woman:
But I am Solyman, Emperor, the Turk,
Blood shall be my tears, I'll think thee slain
Amongst the Christians, and translate my grief
To fury, every member of my body
Shall execute the office of a weeping son.
Thus in my tears an Argus will I bee,
My head, heart, hands, and all shall weep • or thee.
Oh that the cruel Fates were half so mild
As to drive streams of tears from forth the springs,
Great sorrows have no leisure to complain,
Least ills vent forth, great griefs within remain:
See Selymus, sometimes a fore-string instrument
Feeding his Soldiers w•th sweet Harmony,
Doth now tune nought to vs but Lacrymy,
Could n' Aesculapius be found to tune
His disagreeing elements treasons cracked
The string which else an headache would vntune.
Every disease is a ragged fort
To wear these strings asunder, treason did lend
Death, which both age, and sickness did intend;
What then remains, but that his Funeral rites
With our Grandfather, Uncles be solemnised,
That so black discord may be with them buried:
But noble Selymus what Tomb shall I prepare
For thy memorial? shall a heavy stone
Press thy innocent ashes? Shall I confine
Thy wandering ghost in some high marble prison?
Or shall I hither fetch the flying I •mbe
Of proud Mausolus the rich Carian King?
No; Religion shall cloak no such injury,
No hired Rhetoric shall adorn thy coarse,
No prattling stone shall trumpet forth thy praise,
The world's thy tomb, thy Epitaph I'll ca•ue
In Funerals, destruction is the book
In which we will write thy annals, blood's the Ink,
Our sword the Pen; A Tragedy I intend,
Which with a Plangity, no Plaudity shall end.

GRacious Spectators, not to vex your ears
With some old Negative Prologue, saying, Here's
No Soldier, no Parasite, no Whore,
No Baud (for many understand no more
Then such cheap stage-ware) to unfold our Scene,
And without veil to Open what we mean
Behold.  Our Poet knowing our free hearts
Has here invited Heaven and All the Arts
To entertain His Theater, and does bring
What he prepared for our Platonic King:
Deeming Your judgements able to supply
The absence of So Great a Majesty.
But his free conscience does protest, the mirth
Of this his night was but a Fiue-weekes birth;
Yet no Abortive; if your courteous hands
Shall wrap the Infant in his swathing bands.
It Speaks Already and each Art, to raise
Delight, does use it's Own Distinguished phrase.
Lend your Purged ears. If any doe look grim,
Our Author says they wrong the Arts not Him:
He strives to Please. But yet he scorns to be
So vile, to Bargain for a Plaudit;
And from your seats, at a Compacted clap,
Hug an Abusing joy. If it is his hap
To have your Free applause, to This he stands,
The Arts shall not more crown him, then Your Hands.
GEOGRAPHVS,in a white Beaver, with a white and greene Feather, a little Band, a light-colour'd Satin suite, im∣brodered Gloves, red-silke Stockings, blue Garters and Roses, white Pumps, a Cloak whereon was described the terrestrial Globe in two Hemispheres, and on the Cape the two Poles.
ASTRONOMY, in an azure Gown, and a Mantle seeded with stars; on her head a Tiara, bearing on the front the se∣uen stars, and behind, stars promiscuously; on the right side the Sun, on the left the Moon, in Gloves, and white Pumps.
FANTASTIC, In a branched velvet Jerkin with hanging sleeves buttoned and looped, a short pair of Breeches, a greene Cloak with silver lace, lined through with velvet, red-silke Stoc∣kings, party-colour'd Garters, a low-crown'd Hat with broad brims, with a Peacocks feather in it, in a yellow Band, Gloves, and red Pumps.
FANTASTIC, leave vs.
I might very well be here, Sir, at a wooing match; but, I go: yet I will not be far off. 
Come, now you shall, Astronomy.
What shall I, Geographus?
Kiss.
What? a' spite of my teeth?
No not so, I hope you doe not use to kiss with your teeth.
Marry and I hope I doe not use to kiss without them.
I, but (my fine Wit-catcher) I mean you doe not Show your teeth when you kiss: — 't is thy Ambrosiake lip (sweet Nymph) which thus I salute after the fine French— thus,  the gracious Spanish, — (hold still) thus the slavering Dutch — (nay, I will) and thus the devouring Italian fashion — I'm a Courtier sweet Nymph, I'm a Courtier; pardon my (you know the Court-humor) boldness.
What? is it the Court humour then to kiss a Maid out of breath?
No, sweet chuck, but to kiss them In breath; to make them long-breath'd in kissing, and able to endure a Smothering and Revive again.
Faith for my part Sir Courtier, then I am not ac∣quainted with a long breath; though, I think, they that use kissing much, are acquainted with long breaths, for, I warrant them, they may be smelt far enough off.
Come, my Heaven, I must take off your Zone; shall Astronomy bee in girt with a Zone, and not Geographus? e∣specially since all we Lovers live under Zona torrid.
If it bee So Sir, then I pray you keep you there still; for My Zone, Isle assure you, as yet is a Temperate one; pardon me Sir, Ʋngirt Ʋnblest: if I am not Fast, I'm Loose, untie the Heavens and take away their Zones, we should have brave Skie-falling.
Geog. I, and brave Larke-catching, (pretty Bird) ah! were they all such as Thee, it should bee my First wish.
I perceive Sir, then you Courtiers are ready to take a Maid at the Fall; Well Sir, but let go your hand from my girdle, he that has that, shall have me and all.
With all my heart (my double soul) I have Al∣ready travelled over the whole Earth, and am now again in Travel to be Delivered of a second Attempt, the Peregrina∣tion of the Heavens; which to effect, I know no more expo∣dite Course, then to have Recourse to Astronomy.
Pray le bee; be Modest yet; I think you'll force me to say be Honest, leave, or Isle Cry.
I, but Isle make you Laugh.
Nay, pray you, bee not Elephantine; I suppose you have been in India, and pierce the Phrase.
Nay, but Nymph, Won't you then?
Won't I? what?
Bee kind.
Bee kind? how?
(The plague of Lovers! crossing in the point;  Yon∣der comes thy mother Physica) why bee kind as she has been.
Marry—
It may be she won't consent.
O Sir, your apprehension it too nimble; I was saying, marry gracious are the Fates, to deliver a Maid from the violence of a Ravisher.
Nay, good love,  think this but an exiliencie of my affection, or rather think not out at all, but only (O my Venus lipped) of this Wooers modest kiss, that is but lent till the next meeting: but farewell, I see thy Mothers aged brow wrinkled already; and I had rather again undertake my performed journey about the World, then thou should bee shent for me; once more farewell, Geographus his Astro∣nomia. 
I must behave my self now as demurely, as a Gentlewoman when shoe's eating an Egg, well Isle prevent her, and go meet Her, or else she will be Meet with Me.
PHYSICA with a Cornet on her head, bearing on the front a Woman with two Children sucking at her breasts, and a CE∣RES Horn passing up between her arms; round about on the border of her Coronet were Beasts and Trees; in a loose-bodied Gown of greene branched Taffeta, in Gloves and White Pumps.
FOrsooth, and 't please you—
Who was that?
And please you forsooth it was—
I, who was it? that's the question I ask.
It was forsooth and please you—
Yes, it pleases me to know, though I fear when I doe know it will scarce please me.
Why then forsooth since it pleases you—
Oh, is the excuse made now?
Alas forsooth, I was coming of mine accord, to tell you forsooth.
Well, now I hope forsooth, so many forsooths have made up one excuse by this time.
It was forsooth—.
Yet again?
My Uncle Ethicus.
That came to teach you manners belike, and that's the reason you use so many mannerly forsooths.
No forsooth, hee came to inuit me to his House to a Banquet.
To a Banquet? Indeed you are better fed then taught.
And marveled that you and I were so great stran∣gers at his house.
Nay, that's not strange, nowadays, for the no∣rer kin, the farther off in friendship, and therefore the greater strangers.
But I promised, for my self, my oftener presence hereafter, and bid Ethicus persuade himself, that though you did not come to him in person, yet that your love and best Affections dwelt always with him; and I did my best to make part of an excuse for you.
As you doe now for your Self: but Minion doe you expect a thank of me, for your excuse? I believe ra∣there, you'll stand more in need of an excuse your self; it seems your are well skilled in the framing of them. What?
who bid you put on this apparel to day? you must be in your skie-colour'd Gown every day, in your best apparel holy-dayes and working-dayes: and had you never a worse head-tyre to put on to day but this with coloured Ribbons tied like Stars? but, Minion, the mystery of the truth; come, I must know it: Does your Uncle Ethicus look of that fashi∣on? is he a Courtier? a Trauellour? a Puppet? does he make himself a verier Fool then the Taylor makes him? has hee a Jury of Nations come in to give their verdict, for the making up of one suit of apparel for him? is hee for your long Hat, short Cloak, little Band? are his old hams grown sup∣ple again? is he for your knee-congey? the throwing of a wavering head off his shoulders in a salutation? or the brea∣king of his high-heeld Shoes, or (which is better) some∣times of his crazie legs, when in a wanton pride they cannot stand upon his giddy feet? you'd make a fine creature of your Uncle; but, my fine Minion, my Periphrasis has encircled your companion, as his arms did your middle even now: you apprehend? ah Astronomy, thy face was never made for the colouring of a lye; oh how this one untruth has Eclipsed thy beauty? thou never receiu'dst such a vile Nature from thy Mother Physica: no; no; I know from whom this corruption proceeds; it is that false, that vile Astrology, that infects thee thus, and whom I observe, still to follow at thy heals: but I fret mine old age too much, which is enough anguish to it self: in, in you light Huswife—. 
GEOMETRIC in a coloured Hat ascending in a Pyramidal form, with a Square in it in stead of a Feather, in a light-co∣lour'd suit of Satin, a Ruffe-band, a Cloak whereon were de∣scrib'd divers Geometrical Instruments, and a man taking the height of a Tower with a Iacobs Staff; in blue-silke Stock∣ings, Garters, Roses, Gloves, and white Pumps.
MAGVS in a black suit with a triple Crown on his head, beset with Crosses, and other Magical Characters; in black Shoes, with a white wand in his hand.
LEt Geometric never use Measure more, if hee loves not his dearest Magus beyond measure: Oh, the Gods! that you and I could never know one another before! but First it should be my luck to be acquainted with Astronomy, Then with your Self! Sir, if your occasions can make use of my best endeavours, the employment shall bee a favour: if at a∣ny time you want any Characters, and strange Figures for your Circles, or Circles themselves, for the confining of your Spirits, know Sir, They shall not be more obedient unto You, then My officious gratitude, employ Me Sir, I protest I'm grown Infinite in love with the fairest Astronomy, with your self.
Sir, let me never use my Great Art more, if my love to You bee not greater then my Art: the Spirits that I Command, shall not bee so quick in my Ambassages, as the Spirit of my Love, in the effecting your desires, ti's as my Circle, most capacious and without End.
Well, Sir: I need not then you think to fear Goo∣graphus; for indeed though he be proud, yet I am sure Astro∣nomia is much more Highminded: and yet were her Altitude as high as Heaven, could not I Measure it? besides what can she count of him, but as of a giddy fellow, whose Head is Guided by his Heals? but for Me, it is well known, I have the Rule of my self: indeed there's Poet, him I fear, for he plays at his Mistress with his Hexameter, and Pentameter, as a Fencer lies at his Rapier and Dagger-foile; but from Him you say Youl' Ward me.
I warrant you Sir, as securely as with an Inchan∣ted shield: (and now Sir to Descend to Realities) I will brief∣lie acquaint you with some of the Mysteries of our Sacred Science; and first with this. There are three ways, by one of which your desire may be effected, the first i• Fascination; the second Conjuration, and the third Medicine. The first can bee wrought only by opportunity, by being in company with Astronomy.
Alas! that's the Unmeasurable Depth of my grief,
for I can never almost get into her company, but yet Sir ac∣quaint me with the device that I may not lose occasion it of∣fer'd.
I will Sir; This Fascination is, when one does work love in a woman by looking on her.
But is that possible?
O, Sir, in a moderate sort very familiar; I have known a man and a woman by an earnest looking one upon another, when they fell in love, both become stark blind.
Strange! Wonderful! but if that should happen me, how should I enjoy the sight of her beauty?
Sir, my care shall exempt you from that fear; but to unfold unto you the manner of this admirable opera∣tion —
I Sir, I desire to know what Proportion it can bear with truth.
It is thus: The instrument of fascination is a va∣pour pure, and subtle, arising from the heate of the heart, out of the purer bl•ud, which through the eyes doth project beams like it self; those beams doe carry with them a pure vapour, which sometimes carries with it blood, (as wee see in bleare-ey'd folks, who hurt by looking on) which being eiaculated upon the eyes of a woman (being sent forth with a labouring violence) enter into her eye, pierce her heart, in∣fact the blood and Spirits, then by a continuance of the eia∣culation, produce an assimilation in the object.
Sir, this is Deep; but is this Rule infallible?
There are a sort of your Philosophers that deny this; but (alas!) unexperienced fellows, that never went be∣yond the Circle of their Science; but wee men of practice correct and surpass the narrow bounds of their empty Spe∣culations: and now Sir for the guarding of your self, and the more powerful operation, I will furnish you with an Vncti∣on of Doves, or Sparrows blood.
Dove, nor Sparrow is so hot, as my love to you, dearest Magus: but you made mention of a second, Conjuration.
Sir, by that I can present unto you, your love.
Presently?
Presently.
Will you?
What will I not for you?
I am yours Soul and Body.
Well, stay you here then, Isle but step forth. 
That ever thou wast borne! that ever thou wast borne, Divine Magus! well, the Devil take me if I doe not turn Magician,  what ever it cost me. O Astronomy!—
Come, Sir, stand you here, and move not beyond this Circle, and speak not a word; and now prepare your self to be satisfied with the beauty of your Love.
Bael, Agares, Marbas, Pruflas.
Loray, Valefar, Morax, N•berus. 
Good Magus leave off, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, I shall never be able to endure.
Classialabolas—
Oh, Isle cry out if ye won't leave.
Amduscias, Zagan, Elauros, Orobas.
Oh, I shall—
Hagaenti, Vual, Zaleos.
I cannot endure it, oh I cannot endure it.
What a faint-hearted Lover is this? I must send them away again, before they are come.
Va, Va, Va, Acim, Acim, Acim,
Ei, Ei, Ei: Hau, Hau, Hau.
Procul hinc, procul ite profane; redite, redite. Come, Sir, will you rise to see your Love?
Is she gone yet?
Why? Doe you love her so well, that you would have her gone?
Oh! I cannot endure it.
Not endure her? Marry you love her well then it is likely. 
Well, I besecch you, Sir, fall to your last remedy, Medicine: for this is intolerable.
Well, Sir, that do's not belong to you.
No? why? Must not I take Physic to make her fall in love with me?
No, Geometric: what device dost thou think should be in that?
Nay alas I can't tell, I doe but ask; come I pray, let's be gon hence, I cannot endure to stay here, we'll talk further of this in some other place. Good Magus, let me hold by you till we are gone a pretty way hence.
Come, you're a brave Mars for a Venus! 
ASTROLOGY, in a Loose-bodied Gown of Red-branched Velvet; a dark starry Mantle, in a Tiara beset with dim stars, in the front of which was described the Scheme of a Na∣tiuitie; on the two sides the Sun and Moon Eclipsed, in Gloves and black Pumps.
ARITHMETICA, in a greene Gown of Silk; on her head a Coronet, bearing in the front a Table of Multiplication, and round about the border, the nine radical Figures, and a Cipher; in Gloves and white Pumps.
MVSICA, in a Wast-coat and Petty-coat of Red-branch'd Vel∣uet; in a Coronet bearing in the front the Table of the Gamm∣vt, with the first six Musical notes, ascending, and descending; and aboue that a Bag-pipe and a Harp; bearing on the border divers other Instruments; and on the top of two Arches, rising from the circle of the Coronet, was expressed Fame sounding a Trumpet; in Gloves and white Pumps.
COme, Lasses: i'faith I have been arraigned, condemned and executed, without holding up my hand at a Bar.
Why? Did thou ever offend the Heavens in thy life, Astronomy?
No. But it seems I have offended Nature; for Ime sure my mother Physica has powered out her affection to∣ward me.
As how, I prithee?
Nay, I have been held upon her Items: Item, for
being in company with Geographus: Item, for being in com∣pany with Astrology —
With me?
Item, for wearing my best clothes every day: Alas, alas, do's my Mother think All Natures desire the same things? It pleases Her in Summer to wear one kind of gar∣meant; in Winter another; in Autumn and Spring as diffe∣rent: another perhaps would count this pride in her: I wear always the same, which me thinks her age (but that, Age is froward) might interpret, as a three-sold virtue, Humility, Thrift, and Constancy: but —
Oh! I can easily guess why she speaks against me: I perceive all eminence of gifts is attended on by en∣uy: but •ush, Old — I say no worse: let her chide the gods that gave me my Fore-knowledge of things aboue her apprehension: believe me, I saw this great contention be∣fore, in the present Conjunction of Saturn and Mars: But for Geographus, I would wish your Height of worth, Astrono∣mia, would not Descend unto his Baseness.
You abuse me, Astrology: baseness?
Nay, then I perceive there is somewhat of fate in love; and that the Stars doe not rule men, but men the Stars; why there's no Proportion of worth between him and Geometric, a man cut out by the very Square of all virtue.
I, and let Arithmetica be cast out of the Number of the Sciences; if in his very face (I speak it freely behind his back) appear not to my eye the very Figure of sincerity.
Alas! would you Parallel Geometric with Geogra∣phus? you may as well liken the Middle of the Earth to the whole Circumference: or, but some Angle to a whole Map.
Nay, you are the whole Heauen-wide, Astronomy, on the contrary part; for though Geometric think there bee too great Disparity between him and me, and that Arithme∣tica stands now but for a Cipher in his account; yet, that con∣ceit of his shall never make a Fraction or Division in my love, but as hee was once mine Entire, so shall I ever hold it the golden Rule of friendship, rather to Add unto, then Sub∣strict from my first affection: but let vs not multiply words:
Musica, prithee what dost thou think of this?
Truly, I think Geographus to be a liberal Gen∣tleman, and therefore may not consent unto Astrology, when she calls him base, yet I think hee has some Crotchets now and then of a Traveller: and for Geometric, I take him for a plain Solid fellow: but in my conceit, in his discourse hoe's somewhat obtuse, blunt, blunt.
I, that's but thy conceit.
Indeed I must confess I have more conceit then judgment: But in my fancy, there's Poet, he has more love in's little finger, then both they in their whole bodies.
Marry thou say true, for I think there hee is in∣deed. Come, let's begone; for I think every one now a Spy: for my mother told me she would set more Eyes beside Musicaes to attend me hereafter: but Musica, doe thou turn that way and meet him, that if he be one, I may know whom to thank for my mothers next kind salutation.
POET, in a black Satin Suite, a larkin with hanging sleeves buttoned together behind, a black Beaver, with a garland of Baize about it, a Ruffe-band, in yellow silk Stockings, black silk Garters tied across, black Roses, Gloves, &amp; white Pumps.
MELANCHOLICO, in a black Suite, a black Hat, a black Cl•ke wrapped about his shoulders, a blacke-worke Band, black Gloves, and black Shoes.
FA, la, la, la, la, Sol, la, mi, fa.
How now my Treble, my Minikin, art thou so pleasant?
Oh sir, I see you keep your old Tenor still: you are always Descanting.
But my little Fidde, where hast thou been?
Sounding your Harmonious virtues, to a Consort of Ladies.
Mine? If I had not called thee my Fiddle before, I might now call thee my Trumpet, but I will yet call thee my Pipe, my Syrinx, a piece of Pan's Reed: but prithee, sirrah, who were they? O Melancholico! here's a Wench, if her Mistress would part with her, would make thee live one seven years longer, but to be in her company.
It is a merry Wench indeed.
Why, there was my Lady, with Astrology, and Arithmetica.
Thy Lady? Indeed I have heard thy Lady loves Music well, and for that respect I have had a conceit to Her my self.
A conceit? Well, I can't stay or else I could say more.
Hold her, Melancholico, she shall not begone yet.
Why how now Sir? Faith, Poet, your man looks as if hee would fall in love with me. Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa.
Nay, prithee Musica, tell me how thou came to attend on Astronomy first.
Alas, it is beyond my remembrance to tell that: only I have heard a certain Philosopher that was in love with Astronomy, bestowed me upon her when I was but a child: but I'm sure she entertains me so well, that I care for no other service now under Heaven, shoe's a Divine Lady, A Divine Lady, and since my coming thither, she has made rare devices, rare devices to cause Harmony: but I must bee gone, I can't stay. Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa. 
It is a merry Wench.
But a Divine Lady! but a Divine Lady! I cannot tell what ails me, but I am not very well. Follow me in, Me∣lancholico.
I follow, Sir. 
WHat should I cry out now against the iniquity of the 〈◊〉, for wrapping up all in blind Fortune, and for
the unequal distribution of their gifts? I have indeed been about all the world, and brought home nothing but a World of care. I could cry, I confess, but that I can't find in my hart to be such a fool, unless my tears would turn to gold, as those of Phaetons sisters did to Amber; and then in faith I'd turn a most devout penitent: but, Fantastic, put up the Si∣quis, put up the Siquis.
I will, I will.
Faith I'm almost extracted, I'm come to the Mercury already; there's nothing left but my wits: but what if I can get no customers now?
Faith you had best turn Paper-man, &amp; sell Maps; and yet that trade is almost down the wind now: or you may get a pretty young—one—and set up a Tabacco-shop.
Foh! that's a stinking trade.
Oh your fattest soils are most full of dirt; and I have known a fellow, that was not worth a hair of his head, nay, that had not an hair of an honest man, gather more gold out of this dung-hill, then ever Maro did out of his Ennius; that now he cares not for any man in the Parish: Oh! this is the trade that yields è fumo fulgorem; Gold out of smoke.
Oh, Astronomy! there's my chiefest grief, I con∣fesse; for as it is held policy in rich men to love; so I fear it will prove ridiculous in me, if once I grow poor.
Sir, not many years since, before I undertook with you our journey about the wide world, I was my self driven to the like straights; I mean, Sir, in that Cod-piece-ago, when the innocence of men did not blush to show all that Nature gave them, indeed, because they did no more, then, that taught them: then, when they wore doublets with crawes, and sleeves with pockets, then (I say) the fashion was so long at a stand, that I had like to have been at a fall: then your Philosopher in the University, scorned nothing but (the unjust cause of scorn) fine apparel, showing the severity of his profession, by the ruggedness of his gown: but since, I think, I have fashioned them all; though, of late, some of your gor-belli'd country-chuffes, have cast themselves into their frieze jerkins, with great tinn'd buttons silvered over, ra∣there
out of a proud niggardliness then an honest thrift.
Well, but what course shall I take, if I get money?
Mary, Sir, this: wear apparel of the best, be mer∣rye, wanton, toying, bold; affront any man: get a faire-false-diamond — on your finger, and by all means have a gilt watch, which sometimes, to know how the day passes, you must draw out in the Market-place, though peradventure there be a Clock hard by within the view of your eye; twill imply, you reckon not your day by the peoples Dial: or sometimes you may draw it forth before a rich mans door, (you know in our travails wee observed the like in a Gentle∣man at Venice) and assure your self, at the next meeting, he will give you the salutation.
Oh! thou hast a rare wit, my fine Fantastic! well, let's commit it to the heavens, and if my stars bless me but to obtain Astronomy; Isle count it as an enjoying of the whole world, which I have yet but seen. 
ANd did she not say, Melancholico, she was a divine Lady?
Yes, she did.
And did she not say she had made rare devices, rare devices (for she repeated it) to cause Harmony?
Yes, she did.
Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa, hum—and did she not say she would not change her service for any under Heaven?
Yes, she did.
Hum. And did she not say she could say more?
Yes, she did.
Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa, pretty little Musica! Fa, la, la, la, la, sol, la, mi, fa, for she sung it three times I remem∣ber, pretty Musica; divine Astronomy!—the juice of the Gods Nepenthe were vinegar to one of her kisses: divine A∣stronomia!
Unjust, blind god of love, or not enfire
My breast; or, if thou dost, crown my desire. What Si∣quis is that?
Isle read it, Sir.
If there be any Gentleman, that, for the accomplishing of his na∣tural endowments, entertains a desire of learning the languages, especially, the nimble French, maiestike Spanish, courtly Italian, masculine Dutch, happily-compounding Greek, mystical He∣brew, and physical Arabic; or that is otherwise transported with the admirable knowledge of foreign policies, complemen∣tall behaviour, natural dispositions, or whatsoever else belongs to any people or country under heaven; he shall, to his abundant satisfaction, be made happy in his expectation and success, if he please to repair to the sign of the Globe.
Good, good; Isle monopolise this commodity;  when I shall have so many tongues to woo, I will not doubt to obe∣tayne Astronomy.
LOGICVS, In a wide-sleeu'd gown, and a square cap, &amp;c.
GRAMMATICVS, In a pair of breeches close to his thigh, his stockings garter'd aboue knee: a sharpe-crown'd hat with the sides pinned up; a ruffe-band; and a Ferula at his back, &amp;c.
SIr, you did that by a Poetica licentia.
SO, Grammaticus, you'd fine Rule me still:— Et nos ergo manum ferulae subduximus.
Nay, Poet, you must not abuse him that hath been your Master, he hath been your Master, Ergo, you must not abuse him.
Why, how now, Logicus? will you be the Neptune, to calm these Seas with your three-fork'd Mace? I thought you could spent nothing but Aristotle.
Aristotle? saucy boy? Aristotelis libri sunt omne ge∣nus elegantia referti; pro Omnis generic.
Nay, Poet, we must grant you the eloquence: No∣bis
non licit esse tam deserts disertos.
Why how, no, Logicus? hast thou caught the itch of Grammaticus? I should rather have thought, thou would have infected him.
How now? boys talk? by the soul of Priscian, A praeceptore vapulabis.
Nay, then in faith: Atrepido vex abstinetira Magistro.
 What? insolent? Faciam vt mei{que} ac huius diei, ac loci, semper memineris.
Melancholico, doe thou crack an argument with clog-head, there.
 Isle doe my best to crack his pate, if I can.
He bites, he bites: O, do you scratch, you coward?
Yes, Sir, because you have the itch.
To him, Melancholico.
 Nay, let me alone, I warrant you: we are at it, tooth and nail.
Well, Poet, Refero ad Senatum.
Will you come again, Sir!
N•n si me obsecres. 
I believe thee, in faith; Logicus, will you return?
I see no reason for it: Ergo, I won't. 
O, have we broke off one of the forks of your Mace? he most valiantly now runs away upon two feet: Stay, here comes Choler, Grammaticus his man.
Who was that ran away last there? Logicus?
Yes.
Did you beat him?
Yes.
And who was the other? my Master?
Yes
Did you beat him?
Yes, Sir: what say you to that?
What say I to that? mary, I say, I would have
fought as long as I could have stood, if you had not left bea∣ting of my Master.
Oh! is that all! Domini similes es; farewell, valiant Champion.
Oh! is that all? Domini similes es; farewell, valiant Champion. 
How? bafled? by my masters Ferula, Isle quarrel with the next man I meet, who ever he be: and yonder comes Sanguis, Medicus his man; but hee looks as if hee would say somewhat; Isle therefore stand aside first, and hear what he will say.
SANGVIS, in a red suite; on the breast whereof was a man with his nose bleeding; on the back, one let blood in the arm; in a red hat, red band, stockings, red pumps, &amp;c.
MY Master is now in a consumption; he is come to put∣ting up a Si-quis already for want of custom; and if hee had not lately been more beholding to Ʋenus then to Mars, he had been quite spent, long ever this: She indeed now and then sends him in, those customers that are sick in her quarters; for most men now prevent physic, either by death or wariness; either by running upon violent and quick deaths, and so dying ever physic comes; or if they fall out, never coming to bloud-shed, but only to a few foolish words in their idle choler.
What? does he speak of me? nay, that's enough.
But I'll put up my Siquis and pray most devoutly to Aesculapius, or else my Master will be the first that will have so much need of his own physic, as Salus her self will be scarce able to save him.
Soft, Sir, did not you misvse me, behind my back?
Misvse thee? alas! I thought not on thee.
No! did not you say, Idle Choler? you shall know I am not idle.
Why, how now Choler, are you so hot?
Yes, Sanguis, as hot as you for your blood.
I shall be about your ears, straight.
 I shall vex all the veins in your heart then.
O, my head! my head's broke.
It is no matter, Sanguis; ther's custom for thy Ma∣ster, beyond his expectation.
And beyond mine too; I'll pray no more this good while for this trick; the gods are quick of hearing, I per∣ceiue; Aesculapius has sent my Master a patient too soon, but the gods know it is a sorry one; but I shall remember you, Choler. 
Doe, doe; I gave you a remembrance on purpose; but, what had the Rogue in this Si-quis? I'll put it together again.
If there be any man woman, or child, that's affected with any disease, whether it be luxation or dislocation of the bones, rupture, inflammation, obstruction, impostumation, consumption, or any vl∣cer, whether it be pox, plague, or pestilence, or any destruction of nature, as dumbness, deafness, blindness, whether temporary and by accident, or continued from the birth; or whatsoever disease in∣cident to the body of man, that hath been ever yet counted vncu∣rabble; may it please him, or her, or that child, to repair to the sign of the Urinal, and they shall find a speedy salvation.
Why? doe not I know Medicus? and did I ever know that he knew this before? well, he that performs all this, must be a god or a devil: but now I think on it better, I'm half sor∣rye I broke Sanguis his head; for if my Master be hurt, he must repair to this Medicus; and then will Sanguis either pay my Master for my sake; or make my Master pay me for his sake: I see, he that strikes in his choler, doth but repent afterwards; well, I'll correct his hastiness of nature. 
POLITES, In a black gown, a black Satin suit, a black beaver with a gold hat-band; with a white staff in his hand, &amp;c.
ETHICVS, In a black hat with broad brims, a long gray beard, a coat with velvet lace, hanging-sleeues, and broad skirts, a pair of trunke-hose with panes, with a velvet pouch by his side,
in a ruff band, his garters tied aboue knee: with a walking staff in his hand.
OECONOMA, In a black close-bodied gown, a ruff, a broad brimd hat, a white apron, &amp;c.
HISTORY, In a greene gown of branched velvet, a laced ruff, on her head a coronet, about the border whereof stood the nine Worthies, and on the top of two cross arches arising from the circle of the coronet stood Time, an old man with a long beard, at his feet lay a sith, holding in one hand a crown, in the other a whip: in gloves and white pumps.
RHETORICA, In a greene silk gown a laced ruff, wearing on her head a coronet, the border whereof was beset with red and white roses, in the front was expressed a garland of baize with a palm of a band in the midst, and round about the border, a∣above the roses, were described palms of hands, in gloves, and white pumps.
WEll, History, I see loue's unruly even in the wisest; you may doe what you will; but if you would be ruled by your friends, my counsel should be that you would never fancy this Poet, a fellow of that kind of profession, which all Wise men have ever banished out of the common-wealth, as being the Mother of lies, the Nurse of abuse, and at the Best, but the worst of knowledge; perhaps you may think Polites uses this dissuasion because Poeta's poor; (which also I confess in the Policy of an ordinary Discretion is to be considered) but I profess I'm chiefly moved at the uncertainty of his courses; which I think would not very aptly consort with your sober consistency and staidness of life: but Isle say no more; good Ethicus, supply my room.
Reverend Polites—
Nay, nay—
Nay? nay? nay truly Ethicus, it is good manners, to let her answer in her own defence.
Nay, Rhetorica, we know you have words at will; every woman has two tongues, and you have Four, twill
come to a fine pass in a while, if wee suffer every young pert thing to be prachant, especially towards their elders, I may be thy father, wench, and I will speak. Thou art a greene-head, History; I say that Poeta's a licentious fellow, a Drin∣kerr, a Decor, a Wencher, a Ballad-maker, a Seducer of young minds, a Scoffer, a Libeller, a Shirker, an Humorist, an Epi∣cure; proud, fantastical, sullen, slothful, lewd, irreligious, and in a word an enemy to all the Gods and Virtues.
Have you done? you have stuck cloves enough in your Orange to make it smell.
 Nay, thou wench, I like thee better, though thou hast a shrewd Tongue: for thou hast set thine affection upon Logicus, a fellow of some understanding, and though hee has some of thy fault (as a piece of thy tongue) yet it is likely he will make a good House-keeper; hoe's thrifty, thrifty, and I like that.
 Nay, pray History, take Oeconoma's counsel, or (at least) hear it, Isle speak moderately.
I shall the rather hear you then.
Indeed I think that Poet will never prove a good house-keeper; for he must have nothing (unless it be himself) out of Order in his house; but every thing forsooth so neat, so trim, as if folks had nothing to doe but wait upon his hue∣morose sloth: but we that keep houses (by cock a'py) must have room for baking, brewing, spinning, carding, washing, wringing, starching, setting, sleeking, pinning, folding, smoothing; here a chair, there a tub; here a pan, there a kettle; here a wheel, there a reel; and a hundred such clutterments.
It seems you keep a cleanly house; but I pray, how long have you been married?
Married? why, thirty five years last Valentines day; next Valentines day twill be—just as can be—thirty six years full, blessed be the day when it comes.
You may then indeed have forgot loue-sports by this time; well, you are not angry with me for hearing you? are you?
No.
Why then, I must pray you likewise that you will not be offended, if I doe not follow what I hear.
Well, you may (if you will) let your own young head guide you; fare you well, fare you well Shrews; Isle pray, that you may have good House-keepers to your Hus∣bands.
And I, that you may have good Citizens.
And I, that you may have Honest men: farewell Shrews. 
Fare you well; you have had a time to love and woo, and so must we have. These old folks think their Old Age must carry it away, as if they had won as clear a Victory from vs, as can be; alas! Isle give them leave to use their Dead Precepts, but if they once come to lively Exam∣ples, Isle undertake my Self to convince their best Expire∣ence. Poeta's love indeed of late is much alienated from me, but as long I love him, Isle speak in his defence; did you see how Polites did only speak an Accusation against him? and Ethicus Abuse his froward Age; and Oeconoma Chafe out her weak conjecture? and then, (when they had rather showed the Weakness of their Age; then the Strength of their Rea∣son,) flung away, as if their Objections could not be Ensue∣red, because they would not Hear an Answer. I would en∣quire of Polites (if my Ancestors have not mis-inform'd me in Antiquity) whether in the Time of Herodotus, and after that, of Zenophon (and since of many others) there has not bin a like conjunction to Poeta's and Historia's; and whether your chiefest Common-wealths-men, either of Former times as Plato; or of Later, as the great Solon of the Ʋtopian Com∣mon-wealth, have not made a Poetical invention their chie∣fest glory? but there is no discoursing with Age; especially, when it is poss•ssed with a perverse prejudice.
And did you mark with what a Strength of Heate, his Cold Feebleness set upon me? and I was Mistress Tongue; and I was Nimble-tongu'd, and I had Four tongues. But if the Eye of Age bee not so Dim, but that it may Re∣flect upon it self: if the Ear of Age be not so Perverse, but that it may Admit a free Attention; if the Reason of Age,
will but yield to Reason; then shall his Eye, his Ear, his Rea∣son, bring in their several informations against his Age. If wee should inquire with whom does reside the most refined Expolition of Language; would it bee answered with Olde-folkes? if we should inquire with whom does abide the most nimble vigour of purest Apprehension; would it be answered with Old-folkes? if we should inquire who are most tried for Quick Dispatch of weighty Affairs, would it be answered your Old-folkes? whose Age brings Care, Care Weakness, Weakness Frowardness, Frowardness Distraction, Distraction Childishness: and thus running Round in the Circle of Time, growing Giddy, they fall down upon all Four again, like Children: Children I may call them for their Impotence, not Innocence: for their Perverseness, not Hopefulness; for their Impatience, not Tenderness; for then would they afford a more Tender censure, of our more Tender loves: but let's bee gone, and though they Chide, yet will wee Love; and I will sooner confess my Tongue to want Eloquence, then my Love of Logicus to want Reason.
And I will truly acknowledge History Unhappy in her love, but never Poet, unworthy of her love. 
I Perceive yet I am not so Hastie-natur'd, but there bee some as Hasty; why, I would have sworn Logicus had bin a fellow of Reason and very stayed, but (Heaven defend me) I almost quake to think what a thundering he kept, when he came to my Masters House, one while hee would Fight with Poet, that hee would; then hee would have him in the Law, then again he would Fight with him, then again hee would go to Law with him; at the last hee resolves to doe both, though I know not whether hee will Perform either: if hee go to Law; my Master (in Policy) will let his Own cause fall, to come in as a Witness for Logicus; but in the mean time I must serve for a Messenger to Carry this Challenge from Logicus to Poet; which I must see, that if I have occa∣zion
to send one to Sanguis, I may know how to draw Blood of him, before we ever come into the Field; let's see.
O Poet, thou Poet, base Nayle-byter, Deske-thumper, Head-scratcher: O Poet, thou Poet; the very Bottle-Ale of frothy Humour, and, the floating Cork of Sponge Va∣night; since thou hast (though not per te, but, per alium) by thy man Melancholico, (but woe to thy man Melan∣cholico!) with most audacious and injurious indignity flown up into my face (but, oh dreadful flying up in∣to my face!) know, if thou doest not make thy peace with me, by a reconciling submission (which you may doe, and I had rather you should doe, then fight. I never provoked you) I doe to thy perdition (O speedy perdition! think upon that, and let me not fight, I doe not provoke you) challenge thee O Poet, thee Poet, thy very self (mark that) to single Combat at any of these several Weapons, (for I only grant thee the choice of thy death) Battle-Axe, Single Rapier, Case of Poniards, Case of Pistols, Bodkins, or Pins: but know that by my art before∣hand, I do Define thee a man of death; &amp;, for the executing of that dire-full judgment, which yet thou may prevent (and ô prevent by not provoking me to fight) I will cleave thee from the crown of thy head down to thy girdle, with the fury of a Division. Briefly if thou art not reckon∣cil'd, I shall gore thee with the Horns of this Dilemma. If thou Come, Mine Innocence will overcome thee, if thou dost Not Come, thine Own Cowardliness: farewell till our next meeting with horror, and then eternally thy or∣deigned Destroyer;
But I will not name my self, lest the sound thereof should kill thee with an astonishing fear, and so snatch thee from the terror of my prodigious fury.
Well, Isle go carry Poet this Letter of Commission for his Execution, and if he have the heart to read it through, with∣out fallng into half a dozen sounds, Isle say hee has a good heart; but I must haste, or else I think Logicus himself will overtake me. 
O The soul of Aristotle! I was never in such a Praedica∣meant before in all my life: well, Isle to Causidicus, they say his house is here about, and I think this bee it: ho, who's within?
 Who's there?
There's an answer indeed; when I ask who's within? he asks, who's without?
O, save you Sir, do's not one Master Causidicus dwell here?
Yes, what would you have Sir?
Have Sir! nay, I have more already then I would have.
If you have any business, you may impart it to me.
Business? then I perceive you are all for Busi∣ness, you have but little entertainment for a friend; well Sir, are not you a Lawyer?
I may not deny my profession, Sir.
If then you are a Lawyer Sir, you are either a Civil Lawyer, or an uncivil, you must admit a Division, Sir, for your Lawyers are Aequiuocall, and therefore carefully to be distinguished before you be defined.
Sir, I must confess, I am not a Civil Lawyer, yet I trust not an Uncivil.
Nay, Sir, my Division holds; I prove it; Either you are a Civil Lawyer, or you are not a Civil Lawyer: But you confess you are not a Civil Lawyer: Ergo, you are an Uncivil Lawyer.
Well then, Sir, if you would have it so, I am an Un∣civil Lawyer.
Marry Sir, I then fear you will scarce plead my cause well: for my complaint is against an Uncivil fellow, and therefore I much suspect your uprightness: but yet since I cannot make choice, I must use you; but Sir, you must give me leave to hold you a little longer upon some Interrogatories:
if you are an Uncivil Lawyer, then you are either an Extraor∣denariate Lawyer or a Common Lawyer.
Faith, I am no extraordinary Lawyer, and there∣fore (if you will) a Common Lawyer.
Indeed had you bin an Extraordinary Lawyer, you had bin a Disorderly Lawyer: for, though they are called Canon Lawyers, yet are they most Extravagant. But again Sir, if you are a Common Lawyer, you are to be suspected; for commonly your Common Lawyers are to be suspected.
But who comes yonder? Phlegmatico, my valiant Armor-bearer.
Before love most Meteorological Tobacco! (again) Pure Indian! (again) Not a lot Sophisticated (a∣gain) A Tobacco-pipe is the Chimney of perpetual Hospi∣talitie (again) Before love most Metropolitan Tobacco!
TObacco's a Musician
And in a Pipe delights;
It descends in a Close,
Through the Organ of the nose,
With a Relish that inuiteth.
This makes me sing So ho, ho, So ho ho boys,
Ho boys sound J loudly;
Earth ne'er did breed
Such a jovial weed
Whereof to boast so proudly.
Tobacco is a Lawyer,
His pipes doe love Long Cases:
When our brains it enters,
Our feet doe make Indentures,
Which we Seal with stamping paces.
This makes me sing, So ho, &amp;c.
Tobacco's a Physician
Good both for Sound and Sickly:
It is a Hot Perfume
That expels Cold Rheum,
And makes it flow down quickly.
This makes me sing, &amp;c.
Tobacco is a Trauellour
Come from the Indies Hither;
It passed Sea and Land
Ere it came to my hand,
And escaped the Wind, and Whether.
This makes me sing, &amp;c.
Tobacco is a Critic,
That still Old Paper Turns;
Whose Labour, and Care
Is as Smoke in the Air,
That ascends from a rag when it burns.
This makes me sing, &amp;c.
Tobacco's an Ignis fatuus,
A Fat and Fury vapour;
That leads men about
Till the Fire be Out,
Consuming like a Taper,
This makes me sing, &amp;c.
Tobacco is a Whiffler,
And cries Huff Snuff with fury;
His Pipe's his Club and Link;
Hoe's the visor that does drink;
Thus armed I fear not a Jury.
This makes me sing So ho ho, So ho ho boys,
Ho boys sound I loudly:
Earth ne'er did breed
Such a Jovial weed,
Whereof to boast so proudly.
Faith it is my man Phlegmatico, hoe's at his rheu∣matike antidote; but Isle —
My Master, and I saw him not!
 Nay, never put up your pipe, you shall not be gon so. A fire burn this Tobacco.
It would, if you would have let it alone, Sir.
You're my Target-bearer, sirrah, are you not? a present defence at a desperate combat: bear this also home with you, till I bring you more my self, you slavering rogue.
Look Master Causidicus, I have by Action expressed, what my Passion before would scarce have afforded words to deliver; I my self was in like sort beaten by a Varlet, but upon an unlike cause, most injuriously; and now I come to you to be my advocate, and if you will stand my friend, I shall not bee wanting to content you in any reasonable sort; and, because you Lawyers are somewhat Tongue-tide, suffer me to be the Midwife to cut the string thereof, with this Silver Penny. Nay, 'pray Sir be not womanish, you shall take it.
Sir, I count my Profession Crowned, when I plead most causes: and since I have at this present Sir, some impor∣tunate auocation of businesses; I will promise you a medita∣ted defence, and when you please but to intimate the instant of your necessity, I shall fly to you as swiftly, as with the wings of Angels. Sir, I partly know you, is not your name Master Logicus?
I am called so, Sir.
Then fare you well, good Master Logicus. 
Fare you well good Master Causidicus. Now look to thy self Poet, for I shall make thee fly to thy railing Jam∣becks: but look to thy self, I say, for I have put a sword into a mad-mans hand against thee. 
I Perceive to what Center all the lines of your Circle tend.
You would rather say to what Circumference all the lines run from my Center.
Lo, now you have confessed: and is it Astronomy that must so Out-shine Arithmetica? well, were her beauties as the Stars, Isle make them want the beauty of all beauties, Number; that they shall only bee vncertainely gazed upon, under an Indefinite multitude.
You're out, you're out in your Account Arithmeti∣ca, believe me you are: I only intimated your suspicion, not expressed mine own desires.
Well, Geometric, I have known the time when your love to Arithmetica was more Solid, and not thus Su∣perficiall; the time was when Geometric would not doe any thing without Arithmetica; not measure a Foot of ground, but ask of Arithmetica how many Inches it was; not an Inch but inquire of Arithmetica how many Grains were in it: but now forsooth the pride of his desires is raised to an Higher pitch; and now Astronomy is the Star upon which his eye is fixed, and now Astronomy is the Magnate{que} Pole, after which the Load-stone of his heart doth turn. And Astronomy—
Peace.
What? can't you endure to hear the name of your dearest Astronomy?
Not from that mouth.
Because I cannot praise her Infinitely? why then me thinks not from your own, because you cannot praise her without Measure; well, Geometric, forgive me, but I must love thee. Come, dearest; Isle be a Globe, be thou the Axle-tree: Isle be a Circle, be thou the Diameter: Isle be —
A chaste virgin! I think she'll get her self with child by an imagination, without marrying; for she doth already, me thinks, Multiply exceedingly, and Bring forth: well, Isle leave you, or else there is no way, Arithmetica, to
stay your Progression. 
Well, Geometric, know, when thou once forsakest Number, thou then run'st headlong into confusion; but this is the misery of inthral'd affections; yet since I cannot disset∣tle them, I will mitigate them; and so long count them at least supportable, as they shall not exceed Number and Measure.
 HIst, Melancholico, passion of me! I had almost forgot the maine point of the business: here— give that to Causidicus. A man may as well open an Oyster without a knife, as a Lawyers mouth without a fee; but if he were half dead, that would (like strong-water to a dying man) make him Gape, though he could not speak. O the Serpentine ingra∣titude of man! that these snakes, whom I have nourished in my bosom, should now sting me! This Logicus, a base, dry-brain'd kecks-witted clinch-fist, not long ago, perceiving his fortunes to bee brought to a desperate praecipitation; through the incomprehensible difficulty of his Artless curi∣osities, most fawningly embosomes himself into my ac∣quaintance, upon a former consideration of my alluring fa∣culty; and in the dusty terms of some cob-web eloquence, blunderingly stammerd out his extreme, his extreme wants: for he had only so much enforced rhetoric, as to bring out those words twice, &amp; so by chance light upon a sorry Figure; then brutishly he expressed the rest, rather by crying then spea∣king; (&amp; indeed he had no more moisture else in him, then on∣lie to bewail his own misery) when asking what was his re∣quest, he answered, that I would turn his unpleasant rules in∣to pleasant Verse: I straight out of the open freeness of my na∣ture and an effuse goodness, prevented the repetition of his suit, by a quick consent; thereupon set my self a work, and after some travail performed it: Some Travail I say; for by the Nine Muses, I think I was aboue Nine Months in tra∣uaile with that monstrous birth: If one but consider what
splay-footed verses they were, a man would swear, that some infernal hag, not a Muse (though unwilling) had been the mother of them; which unhappy labour when I had showed unto him, the reviving wretch falls on's knees, ad∣mires the work, calls me the Aesculapius of his salvation, and with hands lifted up, vows to pay his vows at the Mu∣ses altar; that I now more admired at his admiration, then at the deformities of mine own Work: for, by Jove, they are such unblessed, such unlucky verses, that, besides the loss of custom, which they may justly procure the Author, they are able to make a man bee suspected for a Conjurer; there wants nothing but a Circle to make a complete conjuration.
Fecana, Caieti, Defines, Hebare, Gedaco,
Gebali stant, non stant, Febas, Hobos, Hecas.
Sure I think it should have been Hecate. Well, he enjoys them; and upon the happiness of this success came Gramme∣ticus to me with the like suit: faith I did it, and cast most of his Rules likewise into Verse: but by Jove, since the proud Schoolmaster has showed himself thus ungracious and stiffe-necked towards me, Isle bee even with him; and now I think on it, there's all his Syntaxis yet to doe; but by this hand, if ever I turn line of it into Verse, let me hereafter bee a mere Heteroclite, and the very Aptoton of a fool per omnes casus.
PHYSIOGNOMVS. CHEIROMANTES. The one of a greater stature, the other little: attired like Rogues, in tottered ap∣parrell, with black faces like Gypsies; in flat round caps close to their heads, without bands and girdles, with trun∣cheons in their hands.
LEt's set upon him. The gods preserve you Sir, from the black dragon of the night.
The broad eye of the Heavens still attend you Sir.
And grant that the sweet Fairies may nightly put
money in your shoes Sir.
And sweep your house clean Sir.
And make you the rich husband of many wives.
And the blessed father of many children.
The gods of the night send you happy dreams.
And that you may never pare your nails upon a Friday.
And that the horse-shoo may never bee pulled from your threshold.
And that your Stables may bee always free from the queen of the Goblins.
That your nose may never bleed only three drops at a time.
That a yellow Death-mould may never appear upon your hand, or any part of your body.
That you may never stumble at your going out in the morning.
That you may—
Be rid of you Varlets. What Egyptian darkness has seized upon your faces?
Wee are indeed from Aegypt-land, and't please your good vrship: Brother, by the Ruffian, I think this is a queer cove, he cuts such queer whidds: Good Sir, if you be a Gentry cove, vouchsafe some small Win or but a Make, for wee have neither Lower, nor Libbeg, nor Libkin.
No by Solomon, unless it be Strommell sometimes in a Skipper; wee had rather Mawnd then Mill to keep vs from Trining.
Good Gentry cove vouchsafe vs a little Lower, or some old Duddes, as a Caster or a Commission.
Marry if I had a Commission▪ I knew what to doe with you.
Ah, your good vrship, to cover our Quarommes, that our wants may not drive vs to the Chates — let me see your Famble good Master.
My Famble Villain? This is almost as bad as the language of Logicus.
Ah your good vrship! it is the Gypsy language: the
vrship of the gods bless your fair Glasiers, and look out with your merciful eyne.
Gentle Ruler of this place, if so you be, vouchsafe to favour vs in the way of truth for the gods cause.
Somewhat towards a meals meat, Well and Wise∣lie bestow upon vs, and the Go-ads reward you for it.
Ah good Master well and wisely, give me but an old sheet against the cold, or an old Petticoat or smock of my Mistress's (Heaven save her life) for my poor Doxy.
Good Sir give but a cup of your best drink well and wisely. The gods save the King and his Counsel, and the governors of this place; you shall have a fair wife Master, and many children.
Ha! a fair wife and many children? how know thou that? what's thy name?
Physiognomus, good Master.
And thine?
Cheiromantes, and't like your good vrship.
Physiognomus, and Cheiromantes? Why what can you doe?
We can tell the will of the Heavens good Master; we can tell your fortune, Master.
We can tell the will of the Heavens good Master; we can tell your fortune, Master.
My fortune? why what's my fortune?
You shall have a very fair wife.
Shall have? thou mean, Would have.
No History ever made mention of so fair a one; she shall be as beautiful as the Stars.
Ha! as beautiful as the Stars? and no History ever made mention of so fair a one? why that is, it shall not be History but Astronomy. I'm crowned! Sirrah, you flatter me.
It is the decree of the gods Sir.
Why now my dreame's out.
You shall have many children, and one of them shall be borne with Teeth in his head, and his name shall be Satyrico.
Nay, Isle bear with any misfortune in my children, so I may bee happy in my wife. O divine Astronomy, why? was not this my very dream?
 ME thought as on a shady bank I lay,
The whilst a murmuring Brooke did gently play
With his soft sliding waives, and did complain
How Astronomy did my love disdain;
A Lady, like my Love, in Heaven did stand,
The Sun and Moon waiting on either hand:
And when I spake, she Frowned: and, when I cried,
She, with a wanton smile, seemed to deride.
At last the Sun and Moon did both descend,
And unto me, me thought, their course did bend.
But when they were drawn nigh, they both appeared
Cole-blacke; that with the wonder I was feared.
They came and kissed me, and then suddenly
They both did vanish from my trembling eye.
The Lady then, seeming to smile, did make
A sign unto me, and did bid me take
The Teian Poet, sweet Anacreon,
My individual companion,
And in my native language to translate
His Niobe, and as it was her fate
To turn into a stone; so I by this
Should find a stranger Metamorphosis:
And she, that I did love, should change her heart
Of stone, and by her love release my smart.
I took my book and straight translated it;
(Lines soon are penned when Love doth dictate wit)
With that me thought she pulled me up unto her,
And said; Isle now refresh thee my grieved wooer.
She pulled me up, and when I was even crowned
With Heaven, she let me fall back to the ground.
When with the fall me thought I lost my dear
Anacreon, and that increased my fear.
Then with this double fear I straight awake,
And my faint joints with a chill horror shook.
Isle comment thus: that face that from aboue
Appeared, was the fair image of my love,
Bright Astronomy: and the darkened Sun
And Moon that graciously vouchsafed to run
From their own Sphere to kiss me, were these two
Black, but glad messengers (if this be true
They doe pronounce) and therefore they were sent
From heaven, because they knew the gods intent.
The turning of Anacreon doth imply
I shall obtain her love by Poësie.
And, ere I rose, this morn I made my quill
Express Anacreons Iönian skill.
Verses can draw the Moon from Heaven; then may
My lines, if blessed, win Astronomy.
Her letting me fall down, was not true story,
But feigned by envious sleep to make me sorry.
So was the losing my Anacreon:
But dearest friend, as yet thou art not gone:
No, no, my hopes and joys are too too great;
And these doe flatter me too much—
But stay—O my Anacreon, my Anacreon, I have lost my Ana∣croon: Varlets, Villains, I'm deluded, my pockets are picked; I have lost my Anacreon: did I dream? or did I make Verses? or was I mad? now my dreame's out, it is out indeed, all; for now I remember me, I left out the worst part vnexpounded, and that was their vanishing from me: well, this it is to be a Starre-gazer, and fall into a pit; I was thinking of Astrono∣mia, when I was by promise to have met with Geographus: well, Isle pursue my first intendment, and to Geographus for the learning of the languages; and fear ne'er a corival under Heaven, now Mithridates, and Scaliger are dead. 
MEDICVS, in a Physicians gown, a laced ruffe-band, a black Satin suit, silk stockings, garters, roses, &amp;c.
I, But Medicus, who brought you word that Poet was sick?
Why, History has sent one unto me, now to in∣treat
me to minister unto him my best physic; and the mes∣senger told me (as he heard, it seems) the occasion thereof, which was, that History who was in love with him, hearing that he was hurt in a fray with Logicus and Grammaticus, out of the jealous fear of her abundant love, sent to me thus care∣fully, upon the suspicion of his hurt.
Why, Physiognomus, did Poet seem to you, to be well?
Yes, in faith; or if hee were sick it was more in mind then in body.
Well, Medicus, whore's the messenger?
Why, at my house expecting my return.
Back then, in all haste, and by her servant send him poison, that if he be sick he may die: and so one may be removed out of Geometric his way. And if the poison chance to be discovered, thou moist pretend it was her treachery, be∣cause he does not love her, and that thy physic was good.
Let me alone, I warrant you; but if I can but once come to the handling of him my self, Isle give him but a clyster, &amp; blow him up with a Powder, I warrāt him. 
But, Physiognomus, are you sure it was he? did not you mistake him?
Faith, neither of vs knew him very well; but Cheiromantes has brought some testimonies from him.
What, I prithee? what?
Mary, Sir, a book, and that I think is a sign of a Scholar; but I have a purse too, and that, I think, is not a sign of a Scholar.
What's in it? what's in it?
Nay, Isle swear, wee both ran since I Nimb'd it, that wee durst not be so bold yet, as to take leisure to look in it, but now Isle see.
What's this? Anacreon? an old bawdy Poet? a fit companion for such a Gallant.
A fire burn it; here's nothing but a scurvy paper.
But a murren, how could thou possibly get these things from him?
Faith, Cheiromantes, by the slight of the Hand did it very neatly.
I, faith, I have the trick on it: for (a rapture of love seizing on him, and casting him into an ecstasy) hee fell a tal∣king to himself of a dream he had: I seeing he was fallen in∣to a Dream, persuaded my self he was fast asleep; and so presumptuously dived into his pockets, whence I brought these spoils.
Good, good, prithee let's see the paper.
Anacreons Niobe, or his Lyricks to his love, beginning with the daughter of Tantalus or Niobe, thus,
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉.
Translated by me this morning upon occasion of my celestial vision.
Pretty, pretty, why these Poets, they are all of them borne, I think, upon Friday at the sixth hour, for then Ʋenus has the dominion of the Day, &amp; Mars of the Hour; now the Planet of the Day does chiefly govern their Actions, and the Planet of the Hour does admixe a Subordinate In∣fluency, and that's the reason that your Poets have more of Venus in them then Mars; yet sometimes they are in com∣bats, as lately Poet: so on the other side your Warriors for the most part are borne upon Tuesdays at the third hour, for then Mars has the dominion of the Day, and Venus of the Hour, and therefore your Warriors have more of Mars then Venus.
Well, let's read them.
NIOBE, as they say, once stood
Turned to a stone by Phrygian flood,
PANDIONS daughter (so fame sings)
Changed to a Swallow had swift wings,
But I a Looking-glasse would bee,
Still to be looked upon by Thee:
Or I (my Love) would be thy Gown,
By Thee to be worn up and down.
Or a pure Well full to the brims,
That I might wash Thy purer limbs.
Or I'd be precious Balm to Anoint
With choicest care each Choicest joint.
Or, if I might, I would be (fine)
About Thy neck thy happy Chain.
Or would it were my blessed hap
To be the Lawn o'er Thy fair Pap.
Or would I were thy Shoo to bee
Daily but Trod upon by Thee.
Pretty, pretty, by the dimpled chin of my Astrology, pretty; Isle give the rascal his Anacreon again (because I cannot tell what to doe with it) for this trick, and tell him I found it, and so make him fall in love with me most poetically; well, my little rascals, expect a better booty of some richer body the next time; be gone: but be in readiness, there is to be a ban∣quet at Ethicus his house, for the reconciling of Logicus, Grammaticus, and this Poet, if hee can be there, and I with Astrology are invited thither, wherefore if there should be a∣ny occasion of employment for you, be at hand.
Wee warrant you.
Now, Astrology, take that powder, and according to my instructions at the banquet, see that Astronomy drink it off, and I warrant her then, twill make her love our more loved Geometric.
Fear not, I know already by the Stars twill take effect. 
Farewell; I must to Geometric, or else i'faith he'll Conjure me for staying. 
FOr the learning of your languages, Sir, I must confess, I doe highly approve of it, but I see no such necessity of tra∣uailing, beside the danger and expense that must be un∣dergone.
O, Sir, I could tell you such wonders, as would in∣flame you with a desire.
As what, I pray you, Sir?
Sir, I can impart such rarities of relation unto you, as would amaze you; and yet they are familiar to a Trauai∣lore. In a City of Greece, I remember I saw the admired net, which Vulcan made to entangle Mars and Venus; and it is hanged up in a Temple dedicated to the same god, and by himself was given thereunto, to the terror of all Cuckold-makers for ever.
O strange! but, Sir, as I remember that net was invisible.
Hum—oh—true Sir, it was invisible, but, Now Sir— it is to be seen.
Sir, I will take leave to help a little my Masters memory, not his invention; for by Jove, Sir, and by the Are∣temisian Mausoleum, which these eyes, not without amaze∣meant, have beheld, it is true; thus it was, Sir: it can be seen by any honest man; but if any Adulterer casts his eyes to∣wards it, he presently loses his sight, and therefore it is their manner of Trial for those that are accused of adultery.
O wonderful!
Nay, Sir, in another place of Greece there is a round, close Valley, encompassed with exceeding high Hills; only on one side there is a narrow entrance into it &amp; through the midst of it runs a delicate stream, by the bank of which if a man stand, he shall as perfectly hear the Music of the Spheres, as if he were amongst them: and the cause of this, by the inhabitants is thought to be the height of the Hills: which keeping-in the sound, and bringing it down to the wa∣la, does by an aëriall resultancy produce a most reciprocal representation of the divine harmony.
Oh, that I was not made a trauailour!
Nay, Sir, moreover it is so sweet, that the hearer can never leave hearing of his own accord, but stands still.
O wonderful! but then I pray, Sir, how does hee come away?
Hum—faith I was told the device of that, but I have forgot.
O, Sir, I perfectly remember it, it was thus: The in∣habitants
have, at the foot of the out-side of the Hill, dug forth an entrance, and underneath have made a Vault which reaches just to the bank of the River, all along the side of which, they have made a many trap-doores, and so when a man has heard enough, they vnbolt the trap-doores within, and let him slide down gently.
Oh admirable! but me thinks when the door is open, they should hear it below likewise in the Vault, and stand still there too.
Well, Sir, by my Mothers soul (that oath I learned in Spain) it is a truth; and the reason it cannot be heard lower, is, because the sound does not descend below the water.
Indeed, that's an excellent reason.
Nay, by Jove, Sir, I scorn to lie; I scorn to speak any thing without reason, by Jove; by Jove, Isle give as good a reason of those things I know, as any man under the cope of Heaven; I will, by Jove.
Why, I have seen white bears with faces would make you fall in love with them.
O strange! white bears! and yet indeed I have heard that a late in America there are white bears, but they are most terrible.
Nay, Sir, and these have long tails.
That's somewhat worth the admiration; and yet I think all Bears at first had long tails, or else why should the Bear in the heavens have one!
It is true; yet (if you mark it) it is broken.
O, that came thus; when Iupiter pulled him up to heaven by the tail, the weight of his body broke it, where∣upon Iupiter caught him by the rump, and so tied his tail together again, &amp; that is the reason of the knot in the middle of it, and so it has ever since hung slopeling downward, if you mark it.
Again, Sir, in my travails in Tuscany, I beheld a most curious piece of Architecture; it was an hall built in the form of a cross, that, which way soever the wind sate, or the sun shined, a man might always go to one of the ends,
and so decline the present violence of the season: and as in an arbour unto which the Sun has access, you shall see boughs at the top correspondently represented on the ground in the shadow: so whatsoever curious work was seen in the roof of this building, the same underneath was expressed in the Floor.
I fancy the conceit prettily.
Nay, Sir; Isle tell you a wonder, wee met with a Trauailour that could speak some six languages at the same instant.
How? at the same instant! that's impossible.
Nay, Sir, the actuality of the performance puts it beyond all contradiction. With his tongue he would vowel you out as smooth Italian, as any man breathing: with his Eye he would sparkle forth the proud Spanish: with his Nose blow out most Robustious Dutch: the Creaking of his High-heel'd Shoo would articulate exact Polonian: The knocking of his shin-bones Foeminine French: and his Belly would grumble most pure and Scholer-like Hungary.
How? his Belly speak?
Alas, that's the least wonder, for at what time Pie∣thagoras flourished, that was a familiar thing with his Scho∣lers: and I may confirm it by a persuasive induction drawn from your Pythonisses, and your new-fashion'd Lutes that sound from within, Sir, from within: nay, besides all this, Sir, at the same time his Ears could sing, and his Brains crow; and he could Laugh till the tears stood in's Eyes.
O wonderful! wonderful!
If you please, Sir, now to employ me, not only my Wants, but also my Love shall make me diligently re∣spectfull.
Sir, I courteously accept your offered endeavours.
Ah, dearest Astronomy, it is for thy sake I doe thus. 
How? for Astronomia's? [hee spake that to himselfe] Sir, I am on a sudden less well affected, wherefore par∣don, I pray you, an abrupt entreating of your present depar∣ture, and some speedy occasion shall shortly offer a second meeting.
Well Sir, we thank you; Apollo be always the Pa∣trone of your Muse and Health.
For Astronomia's sake? why? is he in love with her? (For Astronomia's sake!) or is hee in love with me! I won't torture my self, Isle expound gently; Hoe's in love with me, and because (it may be) he hears I love her, hee accounts (it may bee) that hee does this, that I may obtain her: and thus (it may be) hee means hee does this for Her: This is Scurvy; Master Geographus you have marred your own Market; my stomacke's turned; I have Tongues enough for a wise-man; thousands before me have got Wife and Children, more then thy could keep, without learning the Languages; and there∣fore from hence-forth, for fear of the worst, you may, Master Geographus, (if you please) undertake a second Travel.
POET in his Night-cap and Slippers, unbuttoned and untrust.
 BE not far off.
That nothing is entire!
Nothing all-blest! but still some new desire
Brings a new torture! and this Fate does lie,
An heavy weight on all mortality!
It does; thus was not lately my affection
Chained to History by a strong subjection?
Did I not pull, and pine, entreat, and cry?
Pretend a sickness? threaten I would die,
If she not loved me? did I not act all
The frantic parts wherewith Love does enthral
His Rebell-Subiects? Did I not look Sad
If she but Frowned; and, if she Smiled, look Glad?
I did; and took delight to be enchained
To her, Hope said at last she might be gained.
Yet see the wheel of change! I now doe scorn
Her tears, and now she thinks her self forlorn.
Pardon my intrusion Sir, History 
Hearing you were hurt lately in a Fray,
Has in her jealousy of love sent here
Some Physic, to prevent a greater fear.
She should have sent me Poison, far from her
I count it so; yet let the Messenger
Return our courteous gratitude. Begone. 
Lo, thus vexations never come alone;
Well, I won•t love her; nay, Isle ha•• her more
Hence-forth; she plagues me worse then before.
Pardon once more, Sir, here comes sent by her,
Medicus, Servant to administer
The Physic.
—Why, I prithee know I lack
No Physic, there it is, thou moist carryit back.
The Gods forbid, Sir, this is Poison. 
— How!
It is Poison, Sir.
—Why? it was sent but now
From my Loue-sicke History.
—So 't may be:
They'ue changed my Masters Physic.
—Oh to see
The Treachery of women! well, conceal
The fact as yet; just time shall all reveal.
O Women, Witches, Monsters, Furies Devils,
The impure extract of a World of evils;
Natures great Error; the obliquitie
Of the Gods Wisdom; and the Anomaly
From all that's good; I'll curse you all below
The Center, and, if I could, then further throw
Your cursed heads; and if any should gain
A place in Heaven, Isle time 'em down again
To a worse ruin; yet me thinks I hear
How Astronomy whispers in mine ear,
And begs a Pardon for them; well; to thee
I'll yield, thou stand aboue mortality.
Aspire, my gentle Muse, inflame my breast;
Then thus my graceful love shall be expressed.
Her Brow is like a brave Heroic line,
That does a sacred Majesty enshrine.
Her Nose Phaleuciake-like in comely sort
Ends in a Trochee, or a long and short.
Her Mouth is like a pretty Dimeter;
Her Eie-browes like a little-longer Trimeter.
Her Chin is an Adonicke; and her Tongue—
Is an Hyp•rmeter, somewhat too-long.
Her Eyes, I may compare them unto two
Quick-turning Dactyles, for their nimble View.
Her Neck A•clepiad-like turns round about
Behind, before a little bone stands out.
Her Ribs like Staves of Sapphickes doe descend
Thither, which but to name were to offend.
Her Arms like two Iambickes raised on hie,
Doe with her Brow bear equal Majesty.
Her Legs like two strait Spondies, keep a pace
Slow as two Scazons, but with stately grace.
Thanks to my Muse; yet why doe I admire
Her thus, whom I enjoy but by desire?
For more I never shall; this is my weight
Of grief, and this my preordained Fate.
 Come, come, thou part of Heaven, companion
Of all my woes and loves, thou that alone
Dost in the midst of sorrows yield relief,
And though not take away, make less my grief.
My dearest Lute, Apoollo's best invention
Wherewith he does compose the wilde dissention
Of our untuned desires, which would confound
Vs quite, but that they break forth with a sound!
Sighs frō our breasts are like sounds frō thy womb,
Borne dead, and buried in an aërie Tomb.
Sigh then to Cupped, tell him he's too blame
Not raising in my love a mutual flame.
Ho, Melancholico.
—Here Sir.
—Begone.
Did you not call me Sir?
—Sirrah, begone.
Ho, Melancholico.
—Sir.
Dance, I say, Dance.
—I can't.
—Sirrah, dance that which I play.
Begone:  Sirrah, begone.
—Away, away,
Charmer, Enchanter, tic a truth to say,
Our bodies cast their shapes into the Ayre,
And can appear when they are gon; so rare
Philosophers have held, and so I hold:
Pardon, great Astronomy, I was bold,
Too-bold, I doe confess, but my dim sight
Could not before behold thee though so bright.
But now mine eyes are cleared; on my bowed knee,
I ask a Pardon of thy Majesty.
Pardon thy Poet, and vouchsafe this grace, 
That thy rich beauties he may thus embrace.
And now, dear Love, add hereunto one kiss,
And then thou shalt in heaven my soul with bliss.
Maro, thy Riddle's solved: I thus untie
The knot, which thou did knit, men's wits to try.
Dic quibus in terris (&amp; eris mihi magnus APOLLO)
Tres patient Coeli spatium (non amplius) vlnas?
Maro, it is here; here's Astronomy;
Here's Heaven closed in those narrow limits; nay,
Here's Deity, the object of all loves,
Enough to make a thousand Heavens of Ioues.
See,  see, how she ascends! mount, mount, great Queen
Of Heaven, and in full lustre be thou seen
Mortalities amazement; see, she's gone
To mount yet higher to a stately Throne,
Placed on the Azure pavement of the Stars,
Guarded by Days, Months, Hours, then sees the wars
Of Pygmie-mortals—. 
—Sir, here's Ethicus
Is come, and says he would speak with you.
—With vs?
Admit him in. 
—Hay! scarce dressed yet! how so?
What? comes your froward age to chide vs?
—No.
But to inuit you to a Feast, my self your friend,
Desirous of your peace, to set an end
To your contentions with Grammaticus
And Logicus, to night doe purpose thus
To make you friends.
But—
—Nay, no buts: Be there.
I will.
—Why thanks. Welcome shall be your cheer.
Well then, Isle in and dress me, and so come,
Yet better 〈◊〉 purchance you had my room. 
〈…〉 •…o deal with spirits?
〈…〉 •…lie a Grometrician, it is law∣full
for you to deal only with bodies: but if you will un∣dertake Our Superior faculty, it is not only lawful, but most honourable; why Sir, it is one of the greatest gifts of the Gods to have command over Spirits; but for the approbati∣on of it, you may only look back unto the antiquity thereof, which is drawn from more then eight hundred years before the Siege of Troy, in the time of Agonises, and of the renowned Zoroaster a King of the Bactrians, who de∣scribed the high Mystery of this Divine Science in an hun∣dred thousand verses; after these there flourished Iobeth, Toluscol, Zamolxis, whose admired fame was afterwards e∣mulated by Almadal, Alchindus, and Hipocus Arabians: A∣puscorus, Zaratus, and Cobares, Medians: Marmaridius, a Ba∣bylonian: Zarmocenidas, an Assyrian, Abbaris, an Hyperborean, Thesphetion, an Ethiopian, Arnuphis, an Egyptian, Theur∣gus, a Chaldean: with these I may recite Cambyses, Zamares, Charondas, Dam•gorgon, Gobrias, Arbatel, Apollonius, Gog, Hostanes, Attire, Choastes—
Good Sir, doe not conjure.
No Sir, these are nothing but the names of the Sacred Professors of this Divine Science.
I but it may be Sir, they had conjuring names.
Alas, Sir! it is not so easy a matter to work effe∣ctually in our Sacred Science, as most men think it is, and as I will most manifestly declare unto you; for this is a rule, you must be first an Absolute Astrologian; upon which fundamen∣tall Supposition I thus proceed: before you can obtain the knowledge of Astrology, you must be a most Grounded Phi∣losopher, a sound Physician, and an exquisite Mathematici∣an; by the helps of which Sciences you shall know the cour∣ses of the Stars; the number of the Orbs; your Poles; the Circles; the Vertical and Pedall points; the Azimuth, or Ver∣ticall Circle; the Almucantarath or Circles of Altitude; the Concentricitie and Eccentricity of the Orbs; the Ascen∣dent, and Descendant Knots, or Syndesmes, that Cut the E∣cliptike; your Orbs Aequant, Epicyclicall, and Deferent of the Apogeum, and Perigeum, or of the Highest and Lowest Absis; the Planetary Aspects, or Configurations, either Right
as Conjunction and Opposition, or Collateral as Sextile, Quadrate, and Trine; the Direct motion of the Planets, their Retrogradation &amp; Station; then Sir, your Astrology is either Canonical for the Influence of the Stars, or Thematicall for the Erection of a Scheme of the Heavens, wherein is to bee known the Order of the Domicils, and the Inscription. Then there is your Iudiciarie, which is either Genethliacall, or Catholic instructing in predictions, either Idiomaticall or Symptomaticall; the eight and twenty Mansions of the Moon; the Symbolisation of Occult qualities in Herbs, with the Planets; Signacles, Pentacles, Planetary Suffumiga∣tions, Vnctions, Pailters, Rings, Allegations, Suspensions; the twelve Scales of the Numbers; the Duodenarie Scale, either Cabalisticall or Orphicall; the Characters, Seals, and Bands of Spirits—
You'll give me all this in writing Sir; won't you?
Yes Sir, yes. Then are there divers kinds of your Magic, as Necromancy, Anthropomancie, Gastromancie, Cheiromancie, Coscinomancy,—
I pray, doe you your self know how many there are in all?
Sir, One and twenty. Isle begin them over again, if you will. Necromancy, Anthropomancie—
Nay, good Sir hold, we have enough already: But I perceive you Magicians have admirable memories to get hard words by heart; I marvel you doe not turn Dictio∣narie-makers: Why? I warrant there's no hard word but you can tell the meaning on it: you'd put all their noses out of joint quite.
I, and put them out of their wits, if wee list: But then, Sir, to know the Spirit of Every Day, and Hour; his Name, Power, and Legions under him, his Form of appea∣ring, whether like a Dragon, or an Horse, or a Wolf, or a flame of fire; the Region whence he comes; the Gift hee be∣stowes, whether Learning, Riches, Beauty; his Name, his Characters: these, these, are the wonders, the amazements of our Spiritual Science; Spiritual I may justly call in, since eve∣rye Art receives an Excellence from its Object; and yet (alas!)
I confess, I am but young in it yet, and have scarce served a 'prentice-ship in it, if it may bee called a servitude, wherein there is such Freeness, and Euagation of spirit in such exqui∣site knowledge; nay, Dominion over Spirits.
Young say you? marry, I think, you are absolutely grounded in it, that can know all these Mysteries; ah, were it the will of the gods, I had but half of this skill, I'd give all that I have, and get more as I could; but can you doe all these Wonders?
Far stranger, far stranger; most amazing trance∣formations; why, there was Apuleius so skilful in this Art, that he turned himself into an Ass, and Lucian was turned in∣to an Ass, before he studied it.
O strange! but can a Spirit give Learning?
Oh, there was Hermolaus Barbarus, when he stu∣died Philosophy, and less understood any place, hee would call up a Spirit to instruct him; so the famous Cardans father carried one always in a Ring on his finger; and Agrippa had his Dog with a Characterised Collar.
But can you by your Art, tell me whether or no I shall have Astronomy?
Any thing.
How!
Why, I can doe it by Coscinomancie.
What's that?
By the turning of a Sieve.
But I have heard, that's only for things stolen.
Ah, it is more general, and that you shall see; stay here, Isle but step forth. 
Well, this is the man whom the Heavens have or∣deigned to make me happy; O Ʋenus, be favourable unto me, and Isle build thee a fairer Temple then ever the Ephesians di∣rected to Diana. 
Come Sir, here are Shears and a Sieve; I must fa∣sten the Shears? now doe as I bid you; Hold up the side of the Shears with your finger.  Nay, come, your middle-finger: So; now must I say a mystical form of powerful words, and then name those that wee suss∣pect
shall have her; and amongst them name you also; and at whose name the Sieve turns, he shall have her.
If it do's not turn at mine, I shall die: 'pray make it turn at mine.
Nay, then it must go for nothing, for it must turn of its own accord. Be silent now. Dies mies, Ieschet, been doefet, Dowim•, Enitemaus. Who shall have Astronomy? Shall Poet?  Who shall have Astronomy? Shall Logicus?
Hoe's not in love with her, Sir; 'pray doe not you put in him too.
O vile! peace; now must I begin again. Diet mies, Ieschet, Been doefet, Dowima, Enitemaus. Who shall have Astronomy? Shall Poet?  Who shall have A∣stronomia? Shall Logicus?  Who shall have A∣stronomia? Shall Geographus?  Who shall have Astronomy? Shall Geometric?  Shall he obtain her by Conjuration?  Shall hee obe∣taine her by Medicine?  Shall hee obtain her by Fascination? 
Magus, what's mine is yours, goods, life, soul, and all: Ʋenus, thy temple shall be a mile in length; thy Image in it shall be greater then the Colossus at Rhodes, it shall bee all white Marble: The temple at Millaine shall look like pale-fac'd ••llow to it; it shall have as many pillars, as there are hours in the year, and as many windows as there are minutes; and the Spire shall be higher then Tenariffa, or the Tower of Babylon by eight score Measured surlongs at the least. Magus, I have enough, I have enough.
Nay but, Sir, you must Measure your joy; divers have died with ouer-much rejoicing, and so may you; and then you'd both break your vow to the Goddess, and lose your Love besides.
You say true.
Besides, you must use a means you see, Fascinate∣on; which you shall use at the Banquet, which (you know) we are invited unto.
Nay, let me alone for looking on her; Isle look
thorough her, and thorough her; and make her as Perspective, as I am Solid.
Besides, there was a little mooing, you saw, at the name of Geographus: to signify hee will bee fair for her too. And again, there was a little mooing at the word Medicine, and therefore that must bee used too: but for that take you no care.
Well, you learned men put so many doubts—but I care not, I shall have her in the end: come, I'ue enough, now let's go.
Measure your joy, I say.
You're mine, you're mine, Astronomy, I'm in Heaven already; Geographus may go travail again, and Poet, in stead of Bays, may go wear a Willow-garland.
Come, let's in. 
MArry, and I bee thus troubled with you when you woo me, and seek to please; what should I expect and wee were married once?
Nay, dearest Logicus, let not the excellence of your reason bee so severe, but that it may admit a gracious appre∣hension of a smiling love; let not the exactness of your wise∣dome be so regulated, but that it may express a courteous ac∣ceptance of a Lovers admiration; let not—
Nay, and you once fall to Set speeches, I am gone; I perceive you are not for common talk; I wonder, now I think on it, in what Praedicament a women's tongue is; let's see: yet, what if I make it a Transcendent? and yet it can't be so, for it is neither vnum, nor verum, nor honum: faith, and't bee in any Praedicament, it shall bee in Quantitate Continua, and that's opposite to Discrete; or rather, since it is so irregu∣lar, and therefore can hardly bee admitted into any Order, I will count it that Monster in Nature, and Contradiction of Philosophy, Infinitum in act.
Why lo, now your self has made a set speech; and
thus whilst you Reprehend, you Offend: whilst you Direct, you Neglect: whilst you Reform, you Deform: whilst you—
Hey day! this is tick-tack: Here's another shorter trick: well, I perceive there's no other course — which is your way?
Which is your way?
Doe you speak first.
Nay, doe you speak first, you are the better Man.
Why, mine lies this way.
Why so does mine; weal go together.
I, But I must go this way to doe a little business first.
Why so must I.
But I must walk here alone a little to think on it first.
Why, and I must walk here alone a little first.
Why, then fare you well; I can think on my business by the way.
Why, and I can very well think on my business by the way.
Why, you won't follow me? I am going to a Feast.
Why, and I am going to a Feast.
I am going to Ethicus.
Why, and I am going to Ethicus.
O you gods! which of you will come to deliver me? Well, if wee must together, and if you will stick so close un∣to me; yet, good Mistress Tongue, do not cleave to the roof of my Mouth.
No, no; your lip is all that I desire.
TAra, ding de ding, ding de ding, lan, tan, dan, dido.
How now my nimble Crotchet? who was the first Fiddle-maker?
Thats's a question, Sir.
Why, for that reason I proposed it.
Why, for that reason you might have proposed ma∣ny more.
I, but Answer.
I, but I must know first; it is a great controversy.
What then was the first kind of Instrument?
Why, that's as hard.
Why, I can tell.
What?
An Harp.
I but you're deceived, I rather think it was a Bagge-pipe.
A Bag-pipe? why prithee?
Why? marry, first understand this reason, and then Isle show you: You know every Art both draws it's imita∣tion from Nature, and labours to perfect it, which it does by finding comforts to preserve it: Music then at the first was found out as an antidote against grief: and by this means, when men were grieved, they cried Oh, and there was one Note: then Hey-ho, there were two Notes more. So, when they laughed, they observed three more by Ha, ha, ho. These being first joined together, and afterwards variously in∣termixt, were the first harmony in voice; which being repea∣ted unto grieved minds, were as it were a pretty deluding of their sorrows; and these by observation were afterwards reduced to instrument—
I conceit it, Musica.
Thus, men perceiving that these notes were con∣ceiu'd in the belly, and afterwards, (as it were) formed in the passage of the throat, sowed Leather in the form of a Belly, or bag; and with a Reed made a long Neck unto it, and a Winde-pipe; which when they blew full of wind, and per∣ceiu'd it gave no sound, they cut many holes in the reed to let it out, and then alternately stopping the holes, they found an admirable variety of harmony; and as the holes serve for distinction of notes in a Winde-instrument, so doe your frets on a String'd-instrument.
Indeed I think this a truth; for as the voice was before the Instrument, so the Winde-instrument before the
stringed. But then how came your Trumpet up?
Why, on this manner: When Triton came to help the gods in the Wars of the Giants, he wanted a weapon, and finding the shell of a Fish, he did blow in it, which yeel∣ded a most hideous noise: the Giants thinking it had been some terrible beast, fled away affrighted, and since by a per∣fecting imitation, men have altered both the matter, and the form of that Instrument.
Nay, I do believe there is a great virtue in Music.
O Sir, it is your only medicine of the mind.
Indeed I think so, and that's the reason, it is likely, why Apollo is the god both of Music and Physic: and now I remember it, in one place where we came, in our tra∣uailes, there were no Physicians, but all their sick folks were cured by Music; where was it, Fantastic? I have quite for∣got.
Why it was in Create Sir, where Iupiter was nursed, and the Music was made with those Kettle-drums, which they sounded to drown the crying of Iupiter, when he was in his swathe-bands: in reward of which love, hee procured of Apollo, in the favour of the Creations, that at the sound of those Kettle-drummes all sick folks, whose time of death was not come, should without any languishing sickness im∣mediately recover; and therefore the order is, when any one is sick, they carry him presently in a Litter to the Temple where these Drums are kept; and if hee does not straight-wayes recover, they carry him home again, as a man that must dye, and so provide for his funeral.
Where is this Sir? in Create?
Yes, in Create.
I, but I have heard, the Creations are mighty liars.
Upon the Faith of a Trauellour, the Honesty of a Courtier, and the Word of a Gentleman, it is a most confirmed truth.
Indeed these three are much about one value.
Well, Musica, I could talk with thee all day—
I, and all night too.
But I cannot stay now; I'm afraid they stay for me
at the banquet. Is thy Mistress there?
Yes, I think, by this time.
Well, farewell till anon: you'll meet vs at supper? won't you?
Yes, yes; I'm going for Music. 
Come, my pretty Pigeon, let's bill a little; is it pos∣sible, Fantastic and Musica should meet, and part without a kiss?—now farewell. 
Ah: these Courtiers are lycourish-lip'd: but I must go fetch the Music, To ra ding de ding, ding de ding, lan, tan dan dido. 
WElcome, welcome, all of you; i'good faith, I'm even young again, to see such a jolly company of my friends together: but, passion of me! why, Oeconoma?
I, I, presently, presently,  wee'r making all haste wee can.
Ah, there's a good huswife, neither meat of the table, nor cloth laid, nor any thing in a readiness. Good friends pardon vs, wee are somewhat unmannerly to make you stay thus; we'll talk till supper is served in; but whore's Geogra∣phus?  Oh here is; welcome, welcome.
Thanks,  courteous Ethicus—save you gallants— fair Ladies—
Fantastic, and Choler,  and thou Musica, now thou art come, be a little forward to make a supply for our backwardness, and step in to my wife to help out supper quickly:  why it is well, it is well, now it is as it should be, all friends, all friends: but whore's History?
History? why, ask Poet.
Me?
I, you; they say shoe's sick of love.
Poet, whore's your man Melancholico?
Faith, when I was coming hither, hee was in a dump, and therefore I thinking him not fit to come to a ban∣quet, left him behind me; and indeed that's his fault, hee will not commonly be merry in company.
Logicus, whore's your man Phlegmatico?
Faith, as I was coming, my Slauerer was at his Tobacco, but, I think, I made him smoke for his labour, and so would not let him come, for hee would nothing but have spawl'd in your room,  and have turned your stomachs.
Well, remember this Fantastic.
What?
That you carry in the march-pane and not I, but Isle—
What? amn't I the better man?
Would supper were done: I'd bum you.
What's the matter?
Why, Sir, he's angry that I brought in the march∣pane.
 Come, be mannerly.
Why, sirrah, Choler, will you still be quarrelling?
You should let him be my man a little; faith I should be as froward as he; we two should have a bickering once a day. 
I would supper were done once for your sake.
Why, sirrah, are you still grumbling?
Come, friends, you are all welcome, we have made you stay here too-long for a little sorry cheer; come husband will you place the guests?
Sit down, you know your places; sit down 
wife, bid them welcome.
You are all heartily welcome, heartily welcome.
Why, Musica, where are the Musicians?
Here, Sir, here.
Come on, play, feed you our ears, whilst we seed our bellies.
O Happy state
Above power of fate
Which you, blessed Arts, enjoy!
You were little Gods,
If you fell not at odds,
And did not your selves annoy.
But when pride does once tickle,
It makes vs too fickle
And vain:
Till some good Old-men
Do temper vs then,
And bring vs in tune again.
Then learn of me
Thus wise to bee
To have a yielding mind;
With weather-cocke art
To play well your part
And turn with each strong wind.
So you shall by prevention
Escape all contention
And iars:
So you shall be secure,
And never endure
The affliction of Learned wars.
O harmless feast
With Mirth increased,
Where Music and Love do meet!
Where the Piper does find
A more delicate wind
To make his pipe sound more sweet:
Whiles his stick does belabour
The head of his Tabor
Amain.
Where the Wine in the boules,
And every tongue roules,
Yet never disturbs the brain.
Ioues Trojan boy
Was no such joy,
Nor all his Heavenly whores:
There's no such delight
By day or by night
Ever felt by feigning wooers;
As is the soft pleasure
At such honest leisure
To sport:
When all are so merry,
They sing till they're weary,
And trip it in comely sort.
Here, Logicus, you shall drink to Poet,
I accept your Proposition, Sir; Poet, to set a Con∣clusion to our former dissentions, and to make a plain De∣monstration of reconcilement, I drink to you. 
With the most ingenuous freedom of a Poet, I ac∣cept it: Grammaticus, that our contention ending in love, may make a Tragike-Comedie, I drink to you. 
I protest to you, Sir, I doe put all former wrongs in the praeter-plu-perfect Tence, and am glad of this happy Con∣iunction, and that we are all of vs in such a merry Mood: but by the way, my Masters, these Noune-Adiectiues of the Foe∣minine gender, sit all this while vn-drunke to: Astronomy.—
Intrude, Grammaticus, I am not in Case to pledge you: I pledged Astrology even now, and I am not since half well.
Arithmetica—
If you Count again, you shall find that I drunk last.
Rhetorica—here's to moisten your eloquent tongue.
An eloquent tongue is never dry, Astrology will pledge you for me.
Astrology—
In troth I have been drinking my Belly full of No∣ctar; but just now, my thoughts were upon the present Con∣iunction of Mars and Ʋenus.
Why how now, Grammaticus! who doe you drink to? faith thou art now a Noune Substantive indeed, for thou standst alone by thy self, without being joined to any of these Adiectiues.
Nay, doe not you jest.
What? dost thou make a Easter of me?
Nay, I Conjure you both; by our present meeting, that you go not out of the Circle of harmless mirth.
Me thinks I see a Direct line pass from the Eye of Geometric to Astronomia's.
Nay, will you, Poet? you make Astronomy blush.
Some Aqua vitae, I say, for Geometric.
Why, Poet?
Why, hoe's a dying I think, his eyes are fixed in's head already.
It may be, Poet, you measure Geometric his looks by your own.
Me thinks I see a Direct line pass from the Eye of Geometric to Astronomia's.
I'm even stifled, I doe not use to be in such a close Room, I love the Open Air.
Alas! Astronomia's extreme ill. 
Friends, you are all heartily welcome, rest you here I pray, and weal in with her. 
Astrology, follow her, and see you be never from her all the while shoe's sick.
I saw this disastrous chance in the stars, for as Mars and Venus were sporting, they were beheld by the rest of the envious gods. 
Isle in too, to sit and Talk with her, whiles shoe's
sick. 
Isle in too, that I may —
Be made sit down again.
Alas, my Mistress!
She did not look well.
Astronomy sick? then all the Heauen's awry, and my Musike's quite out of tune. 
It was, I fear me, a fit of an Ague.
Astronomy in a fit of an Ague? I never understood the Motus trepidationis of the Heaven before.
Musicians, depart the room. The Musicians go out.
By Jove I came to be merry, and I will be merry. Here's an health to Astronomy. 
Here's a health to Astronomy. 
Here's a health to Astronomy. 
Sir, you wrong vs all, not to take off your full measure.
Oh, Sir, they that drink with Measure, drink without Measure.
I, indeed, for they that Number their cups, com∣monly Multiply their cups.
He loves not Astronomy, that does not pledge her a whole one.
Well, because it is to her, Isle do it, 
I can't drink.
Nor I.
Nor I.
You won't, I know, require it of me.
Well, and you won't, here's to you that will: A second health to Astronomy. 
A second health to Astronomy. 
A second health to Astronomy. 
By Jove I must be merry, and I will be merry; can you sing?
Begin, we'll follow.
Begin, we'll follow.
Have at you then.
FIll up my boule to the brim-a,
That my lips in wine may swim-a;
That my Muse may slow
And the world may it know:
Fill up my boule to the brimme-a
That my Muse may slow
And the world may it know:
Fill up my bowl to the brimme-a.
Hoe's a puny cannot swagger,
Carouse and yet never stagger,
But be soberly drunk
And closely have his punk:
Hoe's a puny cannot swagger.
But he soberly drunk
And closely have his punk:
Hoe's a puny cannot swagger.
O my Iacobs staff is broken,
And thats a disast'rous token,
My Compasses did slide,
My Ruler slipped aside:
O my Iacobs staff is broken.
My Compasses did slide
My Ruler slipped aside
O my Iacobs-staffe is broken.
Come kiss, come kiss, my Corinna,
And still that sport we'll begin,
That our souls so may meet
In our lips, while they greet:
Come kiss, come kiss, my Corinna.
That our souls so may meet
In our lips, while they greet:
Come kiss, come kiss, my Corinna.
Here's a health to Astronomy.
Here's a health to Astronomy.
Here's a health to Astronomy. Prithee Poet doe thou sing a Catch alone, and we'll sing the Close with thee.
A match, hay boys.
THe black Jacke
The merry black Jack
As it is tossed on by-a
Grows,
Flows,
Till at last they fall to blows,
And make their noddles cry-a.
—Grows,
Flows,
Till at last the fall to blows,
And make their noddles cry-a.
The browne bowl,
The merry browne bowl,
As it goes round about-a.
Fill
Still
Let the world say what it will
And drink your drink all out-a.
—Fill
Still
Let the world say what it will
And drink your drink all out-a.
The deep Canne
The merry deep Canne
As thou dost freely quaff a.
Sing.
Fling.
Be as merry as a King
And Sound a lusty laugh a.
Sing.
Fling.
Be as merry as a King
And sound a lusty laugh a.
Here's a health to Astronomy. 
Faith, I can drink no more, Poet.
Nor I.
How? not pledge me? Choler, fill the bowl again; by Jove, not pledge me? pledge me, pledge me, Geographus: for by Jove—
What?
I will drink with thee, and I will sing with thee, and I will fight with thee.
Nay, 'pray let's have no fighting.
By Jove. I will drink with thee, I will sing with thee, and I will fight with thee.
By Jove you're almost foxed.
By Jove  you lowsie-shirted rogue, you sit aboue me? did not you beg entertainment of me to∣there day?
Sleep, sleep, Poet. 
A rope of a drunken fool; I'ue lost my supper by this: I must follow my Master. 
Ten-toes, I know you're a good footman; Come, Geometric, I hope you'll sit squarely to it still.
Nay, if I cannot Rule others, I will Rule my self. 
And if Geometric depart, Arithmetica will be none of the Number. 
Farewell, Hostess; we shall be sure to have no rec∣koning now Arithmetica's gone: and yet Isle pay you some∣what, Clinch-fist.  Hay tables! Hay!
Well, you drunken rogue, Isle have an Opposition
for you before Polites, that you shall not be able to Answer to. 
Farewell block-head: now pae-da-gog, pa-da-gog: I must say my Part to you too.
I, but, I can't stay to Hear you, now.
Choler, will not you fight for your Master, valiantly?
No, I thank you, Sir, your moisture does allay my heat. 
Are you all gone? then, Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto. I am King, I am King: by Tantalus I am as dry as an Horse.  O, some drink, some drink.
Alto dormi, Irioni, Chiriori, Essera, Chuder, Fere; Pox, Caspor, Prax, Melchior, Max, Balthazar, Ymax, Adi∣max, Galbes, Galbat, Galdes, Galdat, Hex, pox, max, alto dormi. Poet snores: Magus waives his rod over him, and runs round about him. Oh, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho; O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. Dragons fly swift∣lie, Dragons fly swiftly.
 O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.
Ye gods that dwell
In darkest cell
Of lowest Hell,
Vouchsafe this grace
A little space
To guard this place.
Let now a deep
And moystning sleep
His watch here keep.
We would obtain
This, for this swain,
Whom wine doth chain.
That so since day
Is fled, we may
Make him our pray.
O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho,  ho, ho, ho, hoy—
O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. 
What a Rogue's this? hee laughs at vs in his Dream.
O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho. O ho, ho, ho, ho, ho: Some drink, Tantalus, some drink, some drink; or I will—
What will he doe?
By the—by the—
He's about to swear sure by somewhat.
By the great—By the great—
He will swear by the Great.
By the great—By the great—
It is so great 'twoun't come out.
By the great Hogs-head at Heidelburge, Logicus is a Blockhead.
Well said i'faith, I perceive there is some remem∣bronco of ones friends in Wine.
Corinna, will you kiss? will you kiss cockle-kisse? close, close, you Whore.
Oh, here's a brave Dreamer!
I will make this Verse like a Nut-hooke-like a Nut-hooke-and then pull down—pull down the Moon with it. 
Sure, Magus, you have not charmed him well.
Let me alone; I warrant you.
Come kiss, my Pigeon, come kiss, my pretty Corinna, Nibble a little, my Love; nibble again, and again.
Hay day! he's it's Hexameter and Pentameter Ver∣ses in our tongue: 'saith I think in some such humour this kind of Verses was first made amongst vs.
My purse is richer thē the Mines rich India brings forth.
You shall not need to make a short Verse to that Sir: weal be very short with you. 
Take off your whole one, or take a sows of the chops.
Beshrow his drunken fingers; Magus you have not charmed him well.
Altè dormi, pox, prax, max; aliè dormi, Galbos, Gal∣bat:
Galdes, Galdat: pox, prax, max, alto dormi.
See what's in his pocket.
A murren on it, here's nothing but a Purse with a paper in it.
Let's see it, why, whats here? Verses!
Translated by me upon occasion of Ethicus his inviting me to Supper.
The fruitful Earth does drink the rain;
Trees drinks the fruitful Earth again.
The Sea does drink the liquid Ayre;
By the Suns beams the Sea-waues are
Drunk up; which is no sooner done,
But straight the Moon drinks up the Sun.
Why then, companions, doe you think
I may not with like freedom drink?
This had been lost, if I had not given the Rogue his Ana∣croon again. Is this the rich Purse? Come, in faith we'll even serve for a Voyder, and carry him away, whiles hee is drunk, rid the room of him.
Room for a Poet, Room for a Poet, Room for a Poet. 
ANd have you been in Italy too?
In the most parts of the World, Sir.
You have disposed your observations by heads! have you not?
They are yet Sir but a miscellany, but I am now in reducing of them.
And what may the sum of them be?
Sir, they are principally drawn from the People, and Country: discoursing upon the policy, and natural dispo∣sition of the first; as on the situation, and fertility of the se∣cond.
Hum, the method is sufficiently approoueable: but I like that very well that you place Policy first; and would wish you to prosecute that fully, with the most subtle exam∣nations of your purest judgment: twill be worth your tra∣uaile: and it is a maine fault of your common Geographers, that nowadays doe rather garnish the margin of a Map, then materially describe it; and only draw a company of lines through it; as if they had rid over the Country to take notice only of the high-wayes; which yet a Carriers Horse knows better then they; neglecting in the mean time more solid observations; whilst their fancies (I will not say judge∣mints) are weakly satisfied with these fruitless superficialities; not unlike your sedentary Students, who for the attaining of a little glory with some few less judicious of their own Sect, stirred up with a contemplative ambition, earnestly prosecute those studies, which themselves shall never reduce unto pra∣ctice, in the actions of their life.
Sir, the observation of government was my first and principal intendment, especially in some secrets of state, as yet (to my knowledge) not observed, at least not reueal'd by any.
As what?
I will show unto you.
But how could you come unto the knowledge of them?
You shall understand that too. The secret is concer∣ning the happy detection of such, as from enemy-states, are usually sent to the subversion of a Land; my means of attay∣ning to the knowledge of this Mystery, was my acquaintance with a Gentleman in Italy, who having been one of the most practised Intelligencers in Europe, upon the death of his Lord, who employed him, fell into great wants; when, out of the fullness of a grieved mind, and the rather to excite in me a compassion of his griefs, unfolded unto me the whole secret.
Proceed.
The Italian Lord, that employed this Gentleman, furnished him always with money, that hee might cast him∣self
into what shape he would, then sent him to the enemies Land, where living, (either concealing his own Country, or professing a dislike of it) and insinuating himself into the acquaintance of men next to the best, would, commonly by entertaining their humours, and giving occasion of such dis∣course at any meeting, with much Art and ease, allure every man, to discover (even for glory, to show who could show most) all intended and secret employments into foreign Lands; by this means hee would learn the whole design, agent, time, and whatsoever other necessary circumstance; then the person to be employed, being commonly of estate not beyond himself, hee would upon some sought (though but slight) occasion, grow so far acquainted with him, as to entreat the curtsy of Nations of him, to carry a Letter from him to that Country; which being with all curtsy granted, he would, against the time of his departure, provide a Letter fairly written, containing nothing but some com∣plement, or lighter business to his friend —
Who? to his Lord?
No, Sir, but to another agent, whom his Lord im∣ploy'd at home, as this Gentleman abroad.
Proceed then.
Withal giving his friend in charge, upon their love, to give all courteous entertainment to the bearer thereof; as, to provide him a fit lodging, with all other complements of friendship: then reading this Letter to the Gentleman, to free him from all suspicion of false dealing, would seal it in his presence, and deliver it to him—
What device was there-in this?
This Letter, Sir, being written by the Art of Stage∣nography, contained the whole intendement of this employed Messenger. That Art (as Trithemius has at large discovered, or rather taught it) proceeds upon many devices, as the put∣ting together every first letter of a word, or every last, or eve∣rye second, according to the compact before laid between these two friends. Upon the receipt of which, proceeded first a most courteous entertaining, and then upon the maturity of his intendements, an artificial detection of al his designs.
All this bears a just probability of truth. Well, Geographus, we shall take a further notice of your wants and worth; and since you have ingeniously discovered both your free education, present state, and unavoidable affection to Astronomy, and, as you say, hers mutually to you, I shall, I trust, effectually, in your behalf, remove the unwilling∣ness of her Mother Physica. But withal, I hold it a course, not altogether without Policy, to inquire of Astronomy, the dislikes, for which she does except against you, and therein by a praeuenient discretion, exactly to manifest a reformation; for this time the expectation of some business admits not a further continuance of our discourse.
I shall rest, Sir, at the bounty of your virtue.
A Gentleman of parts worth the taking notice of; well, such wits must bee nourished: it is the saying of my Taci∣tus: Ingenia, study{que} oppresseris faciliùs quàm reuocaueris; &amp; I re∣member he there shows an analogy between men's wits and their bodies: They are (saith hee) both of them long a ma∣king, but soon marred. And indeed, young wits that are worth the nourishing, when they see themselves neglected, are too-too prone to fall to desperate resolutions, arguing thus with themselves, That if Virtue and Learning cannot advance them; by a reason from the contrary, neither Vice nor Ignorance can debase them; thus from bad premises draw∣ing a worse conclusion, they overthrow in a moment the workmanship of many years. But my Kins-woman History said she would be here by this. Oh, here she comes.
NOw Cousin, what? always sad? always sad?
Doe you admire at my sadness, when you know, nay when you are the cause of it?
I? Cousin? how? how?
Your continual declamations, Sir, against my most
loved Poet, a man whose praises admit no Hyperbole; no, they transcend all; and whose worth we may admire rather then express.
Why Cousin? my declamations have been one∣lie against his faults, not his person, and so far —
Nay, for your State-distinctions you may reserve them to your self, you can love and hate the same man at the same time by a distinction; I doe but plainly relate the truth unto you, and I think there is hardly any man could more violently have inveighed against him then your self; excepting old froward Ethicus; his age indeed must always be correcting some body.
Why, but why should you regard him, when it seems he little regards you?
Marry, and little reason he hath, when he sees the best of my friends, your self, and Ethicus to neglect him. But otherwise I'm sure he did love me once: there have bin of the Histories that have been well beloved by Poets, and those the most renowned in all ages: as by admired Homer, the greatest glory and Shame of Greece, the one for his worth, the other for his wants: then by divine Maro, that beautiful wonder of Nature; and especially by one Lucan, a worthy Gentleman of Rome, besides many more; that if you would vouchsafe but to grace him, his Laurel would be the crown of your glory.
I but he bears love to Astronomy.
I understand so much: but I think that rather the ex∣iliency of some passion, then any consistency of a settled de∣sire. I have indeed heard also of some of the Astronomias that have been beloved by Poets; as by Manilius, Pontanus, and some other, who have written whole Books in the praise of their beauties; but it seems their beauties had such small divinity in them, that they could not raise, to any height of poetic rapture, the wits of their admirers. And there was also one Lucretius, a Roman Gentleman, in former times that fell in love with Physica, she from whom Physica the mother of Astronomy derives now both her name and linage, which Gentleman, in the passion of his love, writ books in the praise
of her beauty; but what wrinkle-fac'd Verses they are, let the present age judge; and if her beauty was like his lines, sure she was past her Three-score, when hee fell in love with her; but alas, there was never any of that family that ever came near the Histories for beauty.
Well, Cousin, then what is the employment wherewith you will task me?
Why, if you mean to have me alive long, change your dislike of Poet into love, and reform him if you will, but not hate him; admonish him, entreat him, woo him, and in a word, win him unto me; and those hymns of your praises, and relations of your glory shall bee put in the mouth of posterity; that sooner shall the Common-wealth dye, then your fame.
Well, Cousin, you have now enough admonished me, entreated me, wooed me, and in a word won me: re∣far the finding out of means, and the accomplishing of your desire to the privacy of my meditations.
Reverend Polites, pardon the vnmannerlinesse of my disordered passions; love resisted grows rude and furi∣os: but I will not instruct your wisdom; only remem∣ber my life lies in your hands.
And that shall not perish if I can save it. There are many accusations in against this Poet, and some of them I perceive will be prosecuted; he has bad, and good parts; he has a wilde head, yet may be reformed, and then there's a man saved: a good purchase; nay, History is saved, that's a dou∣ble. Well, then since I must love him, I will save him: if hee prove good, I win two; if bad, twill bee but the loss of one, of History; who already professes, that, without him, she shall be lost.
OH, I'm so hot, I could drink a whole River of water.
Nay, if you talk of drinking, I could drink my
self half a dozen Helicons off at a draught: Musica, fetch a flagon of Wine.
Nay, let it be pure Water.
Have a care what you doe: it is as much as your life's worth.
By Jove wee will have our liquor about vs. Go Wench, why, Sir, should not she drink?
Why, to drink in the heat of an Ague is present death; and I remember Galen in his Book de consuetudine, relates a Story of Arius a Peripatetic, who dyed suddenly, being forced to drink a full draught of cold water in the hey• of his Fever; though according to the prescriptions of his Physi∣cians: yet, I confess, in him there was another adjoined cause, which Galen in the same place makes mention of, to wit, his stomach being always very cold, hee resolved on a perpetual abstinence from all cold nourishments, so that this aduentitious cold of the water hee drank, wrought not only against his disease, but also against his constitution.
Oh that was it, that was it; then fill out the liquor.
You Poets would make mad Physicians; or at the best but desperate Paracelsians; But Astronomy, you stir too much; and so the heate of your disease increases to an inflame∣motion: you must rest more, you must rest more.
Nay, I shall never live, if I leave moving.
I, but not so fast; you walk as fast as you do when you are in health.
Indeed, me thinks, she keeps always the same pace.
I, but if you mark it, it is not a direct Progression, but a kind of giddy turning Round, which proceeds from a lightness of the head, cause by her disease.
I dislike your diet; for in the very hottest of Sum∣mer, when the Sun is in Cancer, you eat the hottest meat, feeding altogether upon Crab; which two concurrent heats of the Meat and of the Weather, are able to cast any man in∣to the inflammation of a Fever.
Indeed, I confess that; and it is at that season, my only diet.
I, but it is bad; and again it is very good to feed up∣on variety of meat.
Say you so! marry, I think, you'll prove a para∣doxicall Paracelsian your self; if you hold such Tenants: for you know, Sir, it is the most received opinion of Physicians, that variety of meates disturbs concoction.
Sir, I hold that opinion rather to argue the Authors superstition, then judgment: for our nature delights in variety, and those meats which the stomach doth with plea∣sure desire, it doth most embracingly attract, and concoct most faithfully, besides the substance of our bodies consisting of a various nature, as moisture, ayre, and the like, one of these parts may be more spent then another, by labour, or o∣there means; so that a man had need, for the undoubted sup∣ply of all these parts, receive a great variety of nourishments, that there may be a reparation for whatsoever the body does evacuate.
I understand Sir.
Besides, Astronomy, going abroad you never take care in what Ayre you walk.
Indeed, I confess, I am too neglective of that.
Oh, that's a chief matter to bee provided for; for the very same ayre sometimes is hurtful for one part of the body, and good for another.
How? is that possible?
Sir, it is a truth observed by Guido Cauliacensis; and in particular of the ayre of Paris; where, if the same man have a wound in his head, and another in his thigh; it hurts the one and heales the other.
That's pretty i'faith: the reason, the reason, Master Physician.
It is thus, Sir, the ayre there is cold and moist, and therefore most hurtful for the head; and again, the same ayre by an obscuration of the spirits, a degrauation of the blood, and a condensation of the humours, whereby they are made less quick to flow down, does therefore make the wounds of the thighs more curable, whiles the course of the humours is intercepted, whose defluence or flowing down
would hinder the cure of the wound.
You Physicians, I perceive, sometimes have some of Apollo in you.
Pray, Medicus, tell me one thing; you're a Physician; I have heard Geographus relate of a place in his Travels, where the people are healed by Music: is that possible?
O yes: Isle confirm it by mine own experience: I knew a young Gentle man that married a young Gentlewo∣man; who being extraordinarily fair, and he as melancholy, grew into a great jealousy, that she had made him a Cuc∣kold, upon which conceit, at the first but light, the strength of his melancholy and jealousy working together; he fell in∣to a strong persuasion that he had Horns: the best Physici∣ans were sent for, used all medicines and inventions to cure him, nothing prevailed, whereupon they left him, entreating his wife to be patient, and expect his recovery in time. Away they went, and none but a little boy was left in the room to tend the Gentleman, when upon a sudden there comes me by, a Bag-pipe-player, at the sound of whose Pipe the Gen∣tleman suddenly arose, leaps about the Chamber, beats his head against the wall, so long, till at last he had broke his face in divers places that the blood gushed out; upon the effu∣zion of which melancholy blood, that had corrupted his brain and fantasy, the Gentleman's Horns were beaten off against the wall, and the Gentlewoman became as honest a woman after that time, as any in Europe.
In good faith, you Physicians are the only fell∣lowes in the world to tell Tales by Gentlewoman's Bed-sides, whiles they are sick.
I, this Cure was by the effusion of blood, but they whom Geographus told of, were healed without any such means.
Isle satisfy you in that by another particularity of experience: I knew another Gentleman, who being very sick of a contagious disease, and finding no remedy by Medicine, the Physicians cause Musicians to bee brought into the room, and play; at the hearing of which Music, hee sud∣dainely leaps and continued dancing so long, till the labori∣os
exagitation of his whole body, had by sweat and brea∣thing dissipated the contagion.
I wonder you Physicians doe not turn Trauailors, you'd have an advantage beyond them all, by making good your Relations, by giving a reason for them.
O by no means, Sir; for if wee should travail into foreign Lands, our skill would there fail vs; by reason of the difference of the Country, and our ignorance of their constitutions and diet.
Musica, some drink; me thinks, I have not one jot of moisture in me.
Musica, fetch none, she shall drink no more.
I must drink, the World was not in such a com∣bustion at Phaeton's driving the Chariot of the Sun, as I am in now.
Come, come, Medicus, the strictness of your pre∣scriptions must be dispensed with, a little.
Will you spoil her, Astrology?
Isle warrant you, she'll never dye of this disease, I have calculated her Nativity, to know so much beyond your Art: the sixth House of her Horoscope, wherein all her diseases are Prefiguratiuely registered, promises a better issue of her sickness then so: besides, she shall have an happy Womb, for I find in her Horoscope, Ʋenus in her Exaltation, to wit, in Pisces, and Iupiter in the fifth House, the Radiation of Ʋe∣nus falling on the First House, and of Iupiter on the Eleventh, Luna being in the Seventh, illustrating the Fifth House with a Sextile Radiation; she shall have a beautiful Daughter, her name shall be Optica: there shall appear at her Birth four Suns, and as many Rain-bowes, and the Ayre ouer-against these Rain-bowes, shall seem to bee full of Looking-glasses, and in the middle of each Rainbow shall appear a Pea∣cocks tail, which being reflected from the Looking-glasses, shall project an infinity of colours in the Ayre.
Astronomy, you go too much, you'll never leave your Walking, and if Copernicus were alive again, in faith he would make you stand still.
Some drink.
Help, Astronomy false.
Marie, Heavens forbid.
I, here's your drink.
Ah, Astrology, you made no Reckoning of this sickness, I shall scarce ever trust you again, as long as I know you: Come, let's have her in, let's have her in.
NOw my sweet Devils, I am even sick with expecting when Medicus will come and visit me: I fear, his phy∣sick cannot work upon Poet: that rogues Verses, I think, are a counter-charme against all our conjurations: a rope on his sixe-footed lousy Hexameters: sure, the slaves skin is in∣chanted; the quilting of Aiax shield was but a thin Cheu'rill to it.
Why, but doe you think it is impenetrable?
Oh, far tougher then a Tanners: I have heard of a Poet, that having been buried a matter of two or three hundred years, has been taken up again whole, with∣out the least perishing of his skin, as fair as any Ʋellome.
Nay, by this Hand, I hold them to be everlasting villains.
And I know by his looks, if he once settle his af∣fection upon a wench, he will pursue her more swiftly then ever Apollo did Daphne; for he will overtake her before her Meta∣morphosis.
I, and I know the rascal to have a soft and moist Hand, by which I also infallibly know hee loves: for take a Poet without his wine &amp; his wench; and if he make not dry, pitiful dry Verses, Isle forswear Fortune-telling as long as I live.
But, I hope, that wench shall not be Astronomy.
Ne'er fear that: I have seriously observed (taking an opportunity the other day to look on her) the whole com∣posure of her Face; and first for her beauty, I must confess it absolute; for there are the two causes of all beauty; a most exquisite Symmetry, or correspondent commensuration of the parts; and an exact mixture of colours, which adds un∣to the proportion an incomprehensible pulchritude: since which time, I have taken a like view of Geographus and Goo∣metres; now for their heights, Geographus is somewhat lower then she; but Geometric is of her pitch just; for the lines of proportion in their faces, I must confess, I can hardly judge which is most like her, well, I hope yet twill be Geometric, or if Geographus doe win her, twill be by his comely deport∣meant: faith I wish him well, but wee must work for them that feel vs in the fist.
Well, Ravens, croak here, and whosoe'r comes by, make a prey of him; in the mean time Isle to Astrology, for I know not what's the reason on it, but my Spirits cannot in∣form me of any thing she does, so that I must of necessity to Astrology, to know how things proceed: but there's one Galilaus an exquisite Mathematician, an Italian: whom I came very lately acquainted with, by admirable luck; and he has promised to help me to a glass, by which I shall see all things as perfectly represented in Astronomia's house, as if I were there: till which time I must take the pains to have it by relation; but to your charge, to your charge; croak Ra∣uens, croak.
HEre comes some body, Physiognomus; set a good Face on it and Affront him; and Isle set my Fingers a work, presently.
Hold thy Hands there, it is Sanguis, hoe's of our side, stay a little.
Well, I shroudly suspect my Master for this phy∣sick:
but mum, I am o're-heard, I fear.
How now, Sanguis? why doest thou blush so?
Doe I blush?
I'm sure thou look as red as fire; I think all the Blood in thy body is in thy face.
Well, well, all your words will not make me a jot redder then I am: but, if you talk of blushing, I think you have more need to blush, if you knew the report that goes of you.
Of vs?
I, of you; but especially of Cheiromantes.
Of me? what?
Nothing, but that you are a Cut-purse.
I defy mine accusers, and I call honesty it self to witness, that I get my living by my fingers ends.
Come, come, leave these protestations: a bad cause is better defended by silence, then argument.
Faith it is true; let vs be friends: and since thy Ma∣ster Medicus has taught thee to Kill, we'll teach thee to Steal: but honestly, Sanguis, honestly.
We three will set upon the next man we meet.
I would it were Choler that broke my head t'other day: of that condition, I'd stay; but my Master has sent me to Magus. I must begone.
Nay, stay a little longer now, Sanguis: who comes yonder? doe you know his Face?
Well, you wo will help me?
My Hand shall be always ready to help my friend.
Choler, I'm Sanguis, and here's my head.
Sanguis, I'm Choler and here's my hand.
How? three against one? Hercules himself could not fight with such disadvantage: there's no ingenuity in this; Isle take his part for pittie-sake at adventure, be it right or wrong. 
O my nose, my nose—
Isle make you too Sanguis cry your Bloody nose before I have done.
O my hand! my hand! O you rogue, you bow it quite double almost.
Why men, beasts, furies, what doe you mean?
Choler, Choler, draw thy knife, and flit Physiogno∣mus his nose.
Ah you dull rogue, doe you kick?
Oh, Phlegmatico! you're welcome; but prithee throw away thy pipe; unless it were one could make them dance after it, and so cool their fury.
Why, ho!
Orpheus, they say, by music held beasts by the ears; let Musica then hold the beastly furies of you, that are now by the ears.
Why, ho!
He has picked my pocket. Sirrah, Cheiromantes, you rogue, whore's my hand-kercher?
Nay, give him his hand-kercher, I saw you take it: there, there is thy hand-kercher, Melancholico: why I thought thou had been no fighter.
Faith, ingenuity made me fight, when I saw three upon one.
Come, come, for shame, be friends; you shall all be friends before you part.
Nay, I'm angry with no body: I did but fight, to make them leave fighting.
Nor we; for the quarrel was not ours.
Nor we; for the quarrel was not ours.
I thought it was Choler, and Sanguis, they still are provoking one another: What hast thou in thy bottle, Mu∣sica? Nepenthe to reconcile the Gods?
Faith here's drink to reconcile these furies, if they will?
Come, Musica, doe you begin, and we'll all dance after thy pipe.
You have spoke truer then you think, for there is a Piper coming after me, and somebody else; they'll be here
anon: well, here's to you all then.
Phlegmatico, here's to thee.
Sanguis, here's to thee.
Choler, here's to thee.
Cheiromantes, have at you.
Work. (Choler drinks) Physiognomus, will you taste this liquor?
Play off: (Cheiromantes drinks) Well then, I am last, Isle drink to you all; Isle leave ne'er a jot: (Hee drinks) there, Musica, there's thy bottle.
Sanguis and Choler shake hands; are you friends?
With all my heart.
With all my heart.
Cheiromantes, they say, you can tell fortunes; is it true?
Try me.
Let's know all our fortunes then.
Come on, let me see your hand, sweet Musica: you shall be beloved of two, a Courtier and a Scholar; you shall love the Courtier more; but the Scholar shall have you; and it shall so come to pass, that the Courtier shall afterword be your servant: your husband shall be exceeding melancholy: you shall have three sons; the first shall be called by his fa∣theirs name (but I know not what that shall be) and hee shall be extreme discontent and solitary; and if he prevent a con∣sumption, he may live till forty; for longer he cannot, being of a cold and dry constitution: the second shall be called Ti∣mido, and he will be endanger of being bit with a mad dog; which if he scope, he may live till fifty: the third shall be cal∣led Iucundo; the other two took after their father; but he will take after his mother; hee will be exceedingly given to good cheer, music, and women: he will be in danger of a Surfeit; and of Fire; and if he scope these two, especially burning, he may live to be an old man.
Tell me mine next.
You, Phlegmatico; twill be long ere you can get you a wife; yet you'll have one, and one daughter; the child will die very young, of the black Iaundice, and your wife of the dropsy.
Sirrah, I saw you steal before, and now I hear you lie, you rogue.
Tell me mine next.
Isle tell you yours in your ear. 
Thanks, dear Cheiromantes.
Nay, and fortunes be so good that are told in ones ear; Isle have mine told in my care too.
Thus it is then. 
Pish, this is no such fine fortune.
Tell me mine openly.
Why, this it is: You, Choler, shall be somewhat happy in your wife: her name shall be Poenitentia; you shall have two children; and one shall take only after you, his name shall be Furioso. He shall die in his young age, in an Ale-house, of a stab in at the mouth, which shall pass thorough his tongue, and brains. The other child shall be a daughter; she shall take after her mother; her name shall be Lachryme, a modest sober girl, and one that shall be well beloved by wise men.
Well, this is a pretty mixed fortune; now, what's thine own fortune and thy fellows?
Oh, stark nought, stark nought; Isle conceal them.
Then fare you well; I can stay no longer.
Faith you shall not go yet; what have you in your pack?
What's that to you?
Prethec, Musica, tell me, what thou hast in thy pack?
Why, because you speak kindly now, and entreat me, Isle show you.
Hay, brave! what's here?
Morrice-bels?
And waste-coates, and napkins?
Why, how came thou by them?
Why, thus: my Mistress had been ill a good while, and because I tended her very carefully; she gave me leave to recreate my self to day; and i'faith I light on merry com∣panie, where they used these jinglers: and when they had
done, they prayed me to carry them home with this bottle of drink.
Faith, and there were enough, weed dance.
Enough? now I think on it, there's just enough, there's six pair.
Faith we'll to it then, but what would thou doe, Musica?
Why, Isle play the maid Marian.
A match, a match: dress, dress, we'll have brave jingling. 
I can't dance.
Nay, prithee be not sullen, good Melancholico.
If I doe, Isle wear no bells.
Why then lay one pair aside.
But I won't dance now.
Why, Melancholico?
I won't dance, unless I have one of the wrought waste-coates.
Why, now they have put them on.
I care not, I won't dance else.
Come prithee, Cheiromantes, slip off thine again and change with him; Melancholico must have his sullen hue∣morse. So, now we want nothing but the Tabor wee talked of: but it is no matter, since he does not come, we'll sing, and so make music to our selves. Who can tune the Morris best?
Oh,  here they are both, here they are both.
O my arm, my arm!
O my shin!
Ah, murren on him; who the deuill's this?
I have hurt my breast.
O the side of my face!
A rope on you, must you throw me quite down?
Prithee dance the morris quietly with vs: up, up, ho, and we'll dance. 
A murren go with you—Musica, who played in the hobby-horse?
No, I must not tell.
Come then, we'll go now to Barly-breake.
I but there's one odd: what shall he doe? sit out every time?
Yes faith, and give a reason of the other three cou∣ples meeting.
Agreed: run.
A murren on it, must I be the first man must sit out? nothing angers me but that.
Nay Choler, thou't fret and chafe now —
Come Choler, your reasons.
Why, thou and Musica are met together—be∣cause—Sanguine folks are most fit for Music and sports. Physiognomus and Chieromantes met, because they feared wee would have suspected they would have picked our pockets, if they had joined with any of vs—
We thank you Choler, wee shall be even with you, and't come to our turn.
Melancholico, and Phlegmatico joined; because one's too dry; and the other's too moist: and so they'll serve for Medicines one for another: come run again: Isle be sure to catch some body this time.
I can tell you Choler, you had almost missed this same time too. Well, to my task, since it is my luck. Sanguis and Melancholico met, because one's cold and dry, and the other's hot, and sufficiently moist: Choler and Phlegmatico (have at you Choler) are like a flap-dragon, or a piece of bread sopt in Aqua-vitae, and then set afire—
Thank you Physiognomus.
And Musica met with Cheiromantes, because the hand in this sense, in respect of Music, may most justly bee called the Instrument of instruments: and therefore most fit∣lie to be coupled with it.
I'faith Cheiromantes you are beholding to him, he has graced you.
Come, run again.
What? is it my course?
Hay! Melancholico will give gallant reasons.
I, he will be exceeding witty, I warrant you.
Nay, I believe he will give incomparable reasons.
Come on Melancholico.
Let's hear the first.
He looks as if he would give profound ones.
What? doe you mean to abuse me? Isle give none. Isle play no more.
That's a poor put-off i'faith; either play on, or else Isle call thee Block-head as long as I know thee.
Doe, doe.
Block-head, block-head.
Come, you saucy Ass, because you are so hot, Isle take you down: Isle propose a riddle.
Let it be a good one, and it shall bee for all the rea∣sons thou should have given.
Yes faith, and't be a good one.
Well, take it as it is: Riddle me, riddle me, what's this? It is not, and yet we see it: it is like a picture, and yet it is no picture: and it was drawn by a blind Painter.
This is impossible.
Nay Choler, you are too rash in your judgment— It is not, and yet we see it, — why, it may be you mean honesty, which peradventure you think is no-where truly: but seems to be some-where.
No, no, your conjecture halts.
It is not, and yet we see it? — If it had been, It is not, and yet wee hear it, I could have given a reasonable conjecture.
As how? I prithee.
Why, I could have thought it to be Fame.
Indeed that had been reasonable: but you see it is not so proposed; neither could that hold with the parts that follow: well, to the next.
It is like a picture, and yet no picture? Isle give a very strong conjecture at that.
Let's hear it.
Why, it may be a Gentlewoman's face painted.
That conjecture is plausible, but twill not hold with the rest. To the last.
And it was drawn by a blind Painter.
That's altogether impossible.
You're too quick again, Choler. I can conceive how that may be.
How?
How? Why the Painter might lose his sight after he had drawn the picture, And so be a blind Painter.
Pretty, pretty, pretty.
But you are out, Sir.
Well, what was it now?
Nay, since you are so hot, you shall not know.
Nay, prithee what is it.
No, I won't tell it.
Nay what sullenness is this? Prithee tell. What is it?
I won't.
A pox on it, I long to know. Prithee what is it Melancholico?
Come, what is it, Melancholico?
Nay, I'm a block-head, I'm a block-head, Choler, 'pray what is it? your delicate wit, I doubt not can easily tell.
A rope of all sullen noddies: hee sees every one greedy to know, and therefore out of a doggedness con∣ceales it.
A rope, if hee had never proposed it, it would no∣for have angered me. Will you tell, Melancholico?
Alas, I'm a block-head.
Well, we'll waite his leisure.
I shall not sleep for thinking on it, if he does not tell me.
I shall dream on it all night.
Good Melancholico, what is it?
Alas, I'm a block-head.
Pish, why then Good block-head, what is it?
Nay, you won't tell who danced in the Hobby-horse, you.
In saith I will, if you'll tell this first, and swear you will not be angry with him, for throwing you down.
Nay, Isle know that first, and without all conditions.
Doe 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 pr•thee doe.
Isle tell you 〈◊〉 in your ear, Melancholico.
Nay, he have it told openly, it concerns every one as much as me.
Why then if you would know, it was Fantastic; that had bin at the same merry-making with me.
Fantastic! Indeed I have heard hoe's the only fell∣low in the Country to dance in an Hobby-horse: but hee might have used his friends the humours better.
But you'll forgive him I hope now.
For thy sake we will.
Well. Now Melancholico, what is it?
I but Musica, you shall kiss me first.
Come on then.
Kiss me again.
Why and again.
And again.
And again.
Now you shall all recant the word Block-head, and say Melancholico is no block-head: say so.
Melancholico is No block-head.
So Musica, kiss me once more, and then Isle tell.
Why thus I doe, sweet Melancholico, that art no block-head.
Well said, you little rogue. Why now I'll tell you, It is the Rainbow described by Homer; but you shall have it by parts: It is not, and yet we see it, — the colours in the Rain bow are not true and very colours, but only seem so to be; as I have heard Physica often say. It is like a picture, and yet is no picture, —that's manifest. And it was drawn by a blind Painter, — Homer was blind and a Poet, now a Poet as I have heard my Master say, may fitly bee called a
Painter; as painting may be called Poēsie in picture.
The elation is superfluous to apprehensive ears.
Isle remember this i'faith; where are my Bells, and Wast-coates, and Napkins? Well, now fare you well all. 
Farewell, Musica.
Farewell, Gallants; my business lies this way too.
Who goes this way?
That doe I.
Come on then; farewell, Lads.
Fare you well: I'm glad they are all gone, I have got some what.
What is it?
The pair of Bells which Melancholico would not wear.
I protest, I never perceived, when thou did nimbi them.
Nor I.
Nay, I'ue the slight of the hand exactly; if I steal not some what where ere wee come, let me be hanged: come, Boys, we'll have some liquor for these Iinglers: i'faith, Sang∣uis, we must take a Cup or two before you go to Magus.
I care not now for drinking.
Fie, fie, forsake thy liquor? 'twil breed good blood: Sanguis, twill breed good blood: Come along Boys.
POLITES in a Scarlet Gown, Hood, and Cap with Ermins, a white Staff, &amp;c.
I Doe find my self at this present affected with that which should not touch a good Magistrate, an unwillingness to doe Justice: yet I profess it proceeds not from a desire to bee
injurious, but merciful; not for an ill-will to either, but a love to both. Whilst heretofore, I understood of this dissen∣tion, as I was somewhat cast down with sorrow, so I was rai∣sed with an hope of happy reconcilement, but now that hope also which before was the cause of an uncertain joy, is become the ground of my most certain grief; and the rather to see the state of our most blessed Commonwealth (which the gods have decreed shall be eternal, if our selves hinder not) to be thus torn with our civil Discords. You are not igno∣rant of the miraculous means which the gods have used in raising vs to this greatness: not by riches, but poverty; not by plenty, but want; that what to others has been the occa∣zion of disgrace, has to vs been the means of our present honour: It is the observation of the Gracious, Tacitus, and truest Oracle of Greece, Thucidides, that the Athenians Com∣mon-wealth was not raised to that glory (like the rest of Greece) by the fruitfulness but barrenness of the soil: for which cause whilst the Inhabitants lived secure from the in∣vision of Borderers, others growing rich, were at last con∣summed by their own dissentions: so that for the avoiding of public disturbance, when any were afflicted, they retired to the Athenians, with what they had left, before all were lost; who as they did partake of the Athenians security, so mutu∣ally offered to the Athenians the participation of their wealth: the like I may say of our present estate; we have not sought unto others; yet who have not sought to vs? we had nothing, yet what want we, unless it be a moderation of our felicity? All other Mechanic faculties, of whatsoever Corporate∣once, have they not forsook themselves to retire to vs? and yielded up their estates, which they thought unhappy, to re∣ceiue them as an happiness from our bounty? I speak not these things unto you as an instructor, but a remembrancer: Not to impose on you a new belief beyond your experience, but to imprint in your minds a just consideration of your dangerous contention. I have yet but begun to speak; but sorrow is a bad Orator, and I must continue my speech with a silent Rhetoric. 
Press the abuse thoroughly, as I instructed you.
I warrant you Sir.
How now, Sir! What doe you whispering with my Lawyer?
With yours? I'd laugh at that, i'faith.
With mine? I, mine, I'm sure I gave him a fee.
But I'm sure I gave him a couple.
How now! what new contention's this?
And't please you, he abuses me before your face; hee bribes my Lawyer.
Yours! hoe's mine.
Thine? he's none of thine. He's mine.
He can be Advocate but for one: ask him whose he is.
Causidicus, are not you my Lawyer?
Yes.
How! thou Varlet! why? art thou not mine?
— Yes.
What new face of impudent villainy is this, which does appear unto vs? O thou Monster of a double tongue and heart.
Pardon, honoured Polites.
Varlet, thou profaner of Justice! pardon?
Honoured Polites—
Varlet, abuse not mine honest name with that mouth: with what face can thou ask for mercy, unless thou had another face too? with what tongue wilt thou beg for mercy, unless thou hast a third! with what heart wilt thou manifest a truth of sorrow, unless thou hast a third also? doe not speak, kneel, mutter; one Lawyer come to plead two causes? O new confidence! stand aside, thy absence per∣adventure might sooner cause vs to forget thy crime: then thy presence, though with most fawning dissimulation, to pardon it: Logicus, you are the accuser; propose your own cause; then shall Poet answer for himself; and lastly, Gram∣maticus your witness, shall allege what he knows. Begin, Logicus.
And't please you, Grammaticus was soundly beaten by this fellow Poet, and, I forsooth, by his man a clogge-headed Rogue; but that riming Rascal set him on.
Fie, Logicus, fie, fie; how shamefully you wrong your self, by these unseemly terms? besides, the Gentle∣mans worth is well known.
He's a Rascal to Me I'am sure.
Fie, Logicus, fie; you see I give you ne'er a foul word, and that the goodness of my Cause, moves even the Judge in my defence.
And't please you Polites, every one counts him but a dissolute Rascal, and so hee has in all times been held but for my faculty, what age ever flourished in which that flourished not?
Nay, Logicus, you have little reason to say so, I can tel you: for if we take a view of the most illustrious Age, that ever the world enjoyed, which I think to be the time of the twelve Roman Caesars; wherein Arms and Learning were at their height, you may observe Poetry to have been most famous, embraced by Emperors, admired by all who laboured to have their names amongst the Learned. But for Logicians, alas, (I must speak the truth) as their names were unknown, so were their endeavours buried in obscurity: Indeed those times were thrifty, and active: but these, out of a wanton softness of a dainty sloth, doe only spin out these Spy∣der-webs of curiosity; and it hath been often my meditati∣on, to have an amputation of such Excrescences, and to cause that our youth which is to bee instructed for future use, should not consume the strength of their wits, in an injurious labour of fruitless vanities. I doe not deny a just knowledge of your faculty, to be most necessary, and our selves there∣into have an advantage of former times: but yet, alas! how many thousand famous Orators have there been without Logic? how many eternal Poets without Logic? whose divine eloquence could speak beyond all Logic; without all Logic. 
Reverend Polites, necessity has imposed a bad mes∣sage upon me, though unfit: Astronomy is in a trance, and only the Heavens know whether or no she will again reason∣for. (I knew it boded no good luck, that all my Lute∣strings cracked last night of their own accord.)
All the gods forbid; ah dear Astronomy, grief upon grief still: Indeed Musica, thou wast an unfit Mizzen∣ger for such sad news: for this contention, it must rest vnde∣cided till another occasion. Causidicus, I warn you to bee in a readiness to appear, when you are sent for.
Pardon, good Polites, honoured Polites, good Poli∣tes, pardon. 
Grammaticus what think thou of this departure? is it not pretty?
By my faith, I could make a bad Construction of it: this may bee but a trick; well, Poet, I perceive you have some Invention.
You abuse the integrity of our Honourable Judge.
Thou talk of integrity? go, go, thou art a cracked Pitcher, a broken Pisse-pot, Polites talks against Logicians; when as your Logicians are the only Scholars in the world: but the best is he does but talk against them.
The only Scholars? the only Dunces.
Sirrah, Dunces?
Yes Logger-head, Dunces: doest thou murmur? thou know not the Letters of thy Alphabet yet.
How you Slave?
Nay, never make a Vizard of thy scurvy face: I say thou know not the Letters of thy Alphabet: have not I heard thee say? Omne A. est B. Omne B•st C. Ergo Omne A. est C. and indeed I think there is a like reason, for A. may as well bee C. as B. but fare you well Blockhead, fare you well. 
And my Choler were here, he would have him by the ears: come let's begone, here's nothing to be done: are these your Law-cases? a murren on them, they are Datiue cases to the Lawyers; but Ablatiue to the Clients.
Come, come; I'm sure our case is in a fine Predica∣meant: I think we have been put off long enough: i'saith all Law-cases shall hereafter be no more put in the Predicament of Action; but of Quando, of Quando; a plague of these Lawyers. 
WHy so; this is good: I have brought my self into a fine case: I must be a Poisoner, I: and to get my Li∣uing must lose my Life; blessing on my wise pate in the mean while. And to observe the witty revenge of the gods; that this intended Murder should come forth by mine own man Sanguis, from whom in Policy I concealed it: well, I per∣ceiue Blood is Open-mouth'd and will tell all: but since it is not much known, and that I am not as yet accused to Polites, and now requested to help Astronomy, Isle take the happy occasion, and use my best art to cure her, and so if she scope, I may peradventure scope too; obtaining pardon for my re∣compence— let me see—by this water I doe find the state of her body much altered, and her disease changed. There was an Astronomy that I once had in cure before now, and she was of the very same constitution, had the like disease, and the like turning in her head; now she dyed, and afterword we made a dissection in her head, to see what was the disaffecti∣on of her brain, which when we had done, we found all her brains turned to a matter much like clear Jolly, or a Crystal∣line Orb: but I hope all such suspicions of this Astronomy are Fables—but stay—what's the relish of her urine? (hee tastes it)—Pah, nought, nought: oh, who would be a Physi∣cian to taste these things? it is worse then to be a Salt-peeter∣man, and dig in a Priuie-house—but what smell has it? (he smells to it.) Foh, worse, worse, I cānot endure it, [he throwes away the Vrinall, and breakes it.] Astronomia's of a fair com∣plexion her self, I wonder that her Urine should be so dark; it is of the colour of a Cloud. Well, I see shoe's very corrupt within, and I fear it is this Astrology has powdered her; to give her a Potion at the mouth will not doe much good; for twill be so long in descending, that the power of it will bee much debilitated; I conclude then, it must bee a Clyster, a Clyster; and so Isle in, to administer it: well, if I scope this Scouring cleanly; Isle never come in the like Pickle again, whilst I breathe. 
POLITES, in a black gown, a black satin suit, a black be∣for with a gold hat-band, with a white staff, &amp;c.
YOu see, I have in part described the worthy parts of Goo∣graphus; and doubtless it is pity any cowardly young∣man should spend the strength of his best age in the murmu∣rings of discontent. I can say no more, and you may—
Nay, I must needs approve of such commendable parts in him; but I have ever thought your Travellers like un∣to Meteors which wander in the Air, and their love in parti∣cular like the shooting star, which only lasts till the fire is spent, and then false down again with a swift precipitation: but I'm sure my Astronomy is of a more Fixed desire.
I, but I'm persuaded he will be so regular, hee will never go beyond the prescribed bounds of her will; come, you shall see, she will so encompass him, that he shall never get out.
Hee must, and shall then turn away his man Phone∣tastes, that has incited him to entertain all his uncertain courses.
Will you be willing, on that condition, to yield your consent, that he shall have her?
I will.
Well then, Isle hasten a speedy celebration of this marriage: for Isle make him discard his Fantastic immediate∣lie; it was somewhat tolerable to entertain such a giddy Counsellour, whilst be was unmarried; but hereafter assure your self he will be more stayed: and consider, Physica, that though he have been a Travailer, yet hee is now come home, and I hope not only to his Country, but to himself.
Well, your wishes and my counsels will work up∣on him, I trust; and Isle be sure, he shall never stir abroad, but Astronomy still shall have an eye to him.
Come then, let's in.
FAirest Rhetorica, will the pride of your beauty still tyrant∣nize? will it be still in the Imperatiue Mood? and shall my languishing desire be always in the unhappy Optatiue? let me go a little further, and come at last to the Potential.
Yes, faith, you shall go further if you will, to the Infinitiue: I am not in the Mood to be wooed now.
Ah, dearest Rhetorica, I cannot choose.
Omnia vincit Amor, &amp; nos cedamus Amori.
I wonder at this, Grammaticus: that you having brought Love under a Rule, cannot notwithstanding rule it.
Hei mihi quote nullie Amor est medicabilis herbs.
But why should you torture yourself so with love?
Torture? O but it is a sweet, a sweet torture.
—In Genitiuo
Id tibi dulcedo factions dulcedinis, illud
Demonstrate{que} propago, propaginis: adijce virgo
-we learn this in the very School.
I think they are happy that never marry.
Oh, it is the right of nature: Funus just petit, petit &amp; sponsalia virgo.
If then women desire so much to marry, why is A∣more of the Masculine gender?
Because women are not so much love it self, as the cause of love in men.
I, but me thinks, they should be afraid of Actaeons fortune.
Indeed—Est cornus cura sinistra: but that's not al∣ways: it is but a Redundans, and therefore wee put it among the Heteroclites.
Well, Sir, my necessary departure must cut off the End of your discourse by an Apocope. 
I, but it is a Prothesis to my discontent: O, see the scorn of love: she flies away.—Nec vult Panthera de∣mari—well if I were rich enough, I durst lay the loss of her, I'd gain her: but it is money must go first; and therefore,
now I think on it, it runs so in the rule.—Diuitiae{que} Nuptiae item—for riches must be the Usher,—Oh! but who would fall in love? before, I had a little Understanding; then I fell mad in Love, and now I doe nothing but waste my self with a fruitless Sloth; why this it is—Intelligo, diligo, Nag∣ligo tantum—and yet I can scarce hope, &amp; yet I must love. Naturam expellas furcâ licit, vs{que} recurret. 
MY great gods protect me; but the last night was a-dreadfull night unto me.
Why? had you any terrible dreams?
Worse, worse: my spirit Glassialabolas appeared unto me, and being skilful in the knowledge of future things, most lovingly has foretold me of great danger coming to∣wards me; and hee said it would happen when I did least su∣spect it, and amongst my acquaintance too; hee appeared in his wonted shape like a Dog with the wings of a Griffin, but he looked most horridly, most horridly: and me thought when hee went out, there followed him four, just like to vs four for all the world.
Like to vs four? alas!
Just like to vs four; and they cried exceedingly as they went: and I ventured to call him back again, but he would not come.
I wonder I vvakt not; why did you not tell me of it before?
I protest I was in a doubt whether I should tel thee at all or no, it was so terrible.
Why you're of my mind just: for I had an unto∣ward dream, and was verily resolved not to tell you, but now I will: me thought I and Astronomy fell out exceedingly a∣bout Geographus, because she kissed him, and me thought shee-forbade
forbade me her house, and that her mother Physica did sore∣joyce at it, which angered me most of all. Indeed I doe not like the effect which I see the heavens likely to produce ere long, against some-body, but I hope twill not be to vs.
In good faith, I had the prettiest dream that ever you heard, me thought as I was about to pick a fellows pocket, hee struck me quite thorough the hand with a knife, and leaving the knife in my hand, thrust his hand into my pocket and picked it, and so punished me, as I have punished o∣theirs many a time.
Troth, and as I was going to bed last night, there stood in the chamber window a looking-glasse; and as I came by, chance to lay my hand down there, the candle not stan∣ding far off, I saw my face in the glass, but in good faith me thought I looked so wanly and so scurvily—and indeed I have heard them often say, it is ill luck to see ones face in a glass by candle-light.
Well, let then all our ill luck come together, if it will: indeed Astronomia's perfectly recovered, and I saw but now Geographus and her with Polites; which can bode no good: and afterwards I met with Geometric, and he passed by, without saluting me, but looked sullenly towards me: I know not what's the matter; but I fear me, hee has scarce learned the Rule of friendship, to keep secrets. Well; come what will, we will not accuse our selves by a foolish retiredness or fear; and if we should chance to be convented, wee must be very obedient, and that will argue an innocence: and let them prove what they can, it may be they can prove nothing, and then we are free; if they prove the worst they can, and con∣damn vs to death, we'll patiently hear our sentence of con∣damnation; but when they are about to carry vs to prison, then you shall see my art:  See, here are four rings, there's each of you one, and here's a fourth for my self: put them in your pockets, and when your condemnation is pronounced, and they think to carry vs a∣way, privily slip those rings on your little-fingers, and then cry aloud Glassialabolas three times, and we shall all four im∣mediately become invisible.
Hay brave! we stand aboue fate, and the heavens.
Come, now let's go securely.
Long may great Magus live: long may great Magus live. 
I Protest, Fantastic, I'm sorry for thee; but thou know I have a man already, and one that loves me very well, Melancholico.
Yet, dearest Poet, if you will vouchsafe another also entertainment, Fantastic shall be ready at your com∣mand.
How far hast thou travailed with Geographus?
Too far, Sir, to be cast off now: why, about the world, Sir; or to speak the truth, I have gone further then he.
Say thou so?
Yes, Isle assure you, Sir: and I can acquaint you, Sir, if you please, with one particular attempt of mine, where∣by I out-ventur'd him.
What's that?
Why, Sir, in our North-voyage being come to the utmost part in all Finmarchia, to the North-cape (the Lunge∣tude thereof is well-nigh fifty degrees, and the Latitude al∣most 73.) being then past the Articke-circle about six de∣grees, and so by consequent being in a parallel Sphere, Geographus durst not venture any further; and there was, Sir, at that time in our company, a great Magician (I have forgot of what University) which Magician and I, leaving Geogra∣phus upon the Land, vnder-tooke (being so near) to disco∣for the parts directly under the Pole.
But what was your device against the cold?
Why, Sir, besides excellent furs we had, we had also hot waters to preserve our heate within: but at last wee were come so far, that wee were fine to come out of our
ship upon the ice, and then the Magician being also an exqui∣site Geometrician, got the ship upon the Ice, and then made wheels for it, and an artificial Engine to make it go of it self; you may see proportionally the like device in your Puppets that will go and turn of themselves. The ice then being smooth, the ship went forward of its own accord, till wee found our selves to have past the Artic circle twenty three degrees full. Then were we half a degree just from the Pole: there we met with a most furious sea, that scorns to yield to the usurping cold; when the Geometrician takes me off the wheels, and forth we launched, and so sailed till wee came to have the Pole it self for our Zenith; and then we beheld a dreadful rock.
How did ye then?
Why thus, Sir: when the Magician saw this, he im∣mediately draws a book out of his Pocket, and falls to reading; when straight-way all the sea about vs was as calm as a fresh water river amongst vs: and the ship went no faster then we would have it our selves; and so without a∣ny danger we came to the rock; unto which making a shift to fasten our ship, we ascended: it seemed as black as any Pitch: upon the top of which (for we went to the top) there ascended an huge Pillar: which on the lower parts seemed as black as the rock; but still in the Ascent it grew whiter, and whiter; and indeed the whole pillar seemed to vs very Ice, but that it was at the lower part blacker, and it was as big as ordinarily any tower among vs; and at the bottom of it there was a passage to go in. We went in, and being entered, there were two pair of stairs, the one descending, the other ascending: for we found the pillar to be hollow, and our sight could not discover without-side how high it was: wee went down wards some dozen or twenty stairs, where wee heard a most hideous noise, that our hearts failing vs we came up again.
And what did you come away then?
No, Sir, we then went upwards, and in our ascent we still found open places to give vs light and Air; as big commonly as a door; and we ascended so far, that at last the
Sun shined upon vs, as it does here, &amp; then it grieved vs to think we were to go back such an uncouth way again; well, we went still higher, &amp; at last looking out at these doors, and seeing that part of the world that lay towards vs, (being a fine Sun-shine day,) we saw a very terrible battle, fought between the Turk and the Persian, wherein the Turk was put to the worst: but now the Magician growing weary, and desirous to know how far this Pillar ascended, he held by the side of the door, and looked upwards, but with the fear suddenly fell down: and there was the unhappy end of my companion. This pillar doubtless we conjectured to be the Pole, and the way to heaven; and the stairs that descended, the way to hell, and to the other Pole. With this accident I being half affrighted, with a trembling at the wonders of the gods, humbly descended.
Alas! what did you doe in that case being alone?
Why, Sir, when I was come down, the sea was still calm; and so I vnfastening the ship, sailed the Ice, and accor∣ding to the instruction I had learned of the Magician, I got it over the Ice; &amp; without any danger returned to Geographus.
Me thinks you should have had but Cold Com∣fort to be in that place alone.
I protest unto you, Sir, simple as I stand here now, I did it then. Now, Sir, wheresoever Geographus comes, he equally brags of this attempt as his also; but I vow by my former dangers and present griefs, the discovery was made only by Magus, and Fantastic; and the relation by Phone∣tastes only.
And is this the reward which Geographus having now gotten enough gives unto you? especially you having saved his credit hitherto in not discovering also his lying are∣rogancie? it is inhumane ingratitude.
Ethicus (to Fantastic) How now weather-cocke? what wind blew you this way? (to Poet) Why, wise man, have you never a fitter Companion then this travailing gallant? [to Phantastes] Pray be so mannerly as to travail a little aside; I must speak with Poet.
Alas sir, I'll not disturb you; when a man's once down, I perceive he shall be trod upon. 
How now? what would this fellow have with you?
A service.
Yes faith, you should entertain every mans cast∣off. Come, are you ready with your Mask you promised Polites at the Celebration of Astronomia's marriage? all the chief of the Common-vvealth will bee there.
Yes I will attend upon their joy and mine own grief: I have made a mask aforehand; for I foresavv long ago Geographus should have her; I have kept my promise; but it is but short, as my discontent would give me leave: and the boys that are to act it, have learned it at once reading over, and Melancholico has dressed them by this time I think.
Come, let's in: I hope ere long to come to your wedding and Historia's.
Mine? alas! I'll resolve now to live and die a maid: History shall register me up among her examples of virginity.
I, and thy verse make her immortal: come, let's go, but thou make me laugh, a Poet die a maid? I never knew any of the brood yet, so chaste. 
NAy Causidicus, your state cannot be worse then mine; for I'm in a terrible quandary, more shaking then an Ague: 't had bin better I had taken the poi∣son my self, for so I might have took a Vomit, and perad∣venture got it up again; but I shall never be able to Purge my self of this infamy.
Faith Medicus, and I think no mans case can be likely worse then mine own: for it had been better for me if I had pleaded ne'er a cause, rather then two. Well, I fear by this double fee, I shall purchase the fee-simple of a knave, as long as I live.
Indeed I doe not well see how you will be ever able to plead again now your tongue's cloven; and yet I re∣member there was a famous Lawyer, that riding to plead two or three causes (just as you would have done now) unhap∣pily fell off his horse, and falling on his chin, his tongue by chance doubling in his mouth, he bit it quite thorough, and yet by good luck I cured him.
Nay, for my tongue, that will doe well enough: but it is my ears that I fear: I would I had but a Lease of mine own life for them.
Faith, witty great crimes are like a consumption, they are easily to be cured when they begin, but hardly dis∣covered; and easily discovered when they are ripe, but hard∣lie cured: and therefore I fear we shall be both cut off as des∣pirate Members.
Well, yet let's keep possession of our states as long as we can; and that must be by this means. If we be called to our accounts, not presently to confess, for the veriest thief will at the first plead, Not Guilty: and yet wee will not too-stiffely stand in our innocence, that so there may be a way left for our pardon.
Well, let's hasten in to the celebration of the mar∣riage; for wee're expected before this time; my heart's almost at my mouth with fear, and Dances, me thinks, as if it were at the wedding already.
This Polites is a subtle fellow, and he'll take vs when we little think on it; but we'll go voluntarily, and so hee shall not need to send out a Capias ad respondendum, for vs.
Well, I think when all comes to all, our best means to wash away these faults, will be our Distillation of tears. 
[The Musike playing, these enter.]
POLITES, in a scarlet gown, hood, and cap with Ermines.
POLITES
GEOGRAPH.
ASTRONOM.
PHYSICA
ETHICVS
OECONOM.
POET,
GEOMETRIC,
GRAMMATICVS,
LOGI∣CVS,
MAGVS,
MEDICVS,
HISTORY,
ARITH∣METICA,
RHETORICA,
ASTROLOGY,
MVSICA,
MELANCHOLICO,
SAN∣GVIS,
CHOLER,
PHLEG∣MATICO.
ALl happiness attend the Nuptials.
All happiness attend the Nuptials.
Physica, you now behold the blessed union of your dearest child.
And with joy, thanks to the gods and most honoured Polites.
How now, sirrah? what doe you here? you serve no body here, get you our again.
I won't, Sir: they say here's a mask to be seen.
Won't you, Sir? Isle try that.
What's the matter there?
Why, and't please you, Sir, Fantastic is shifted in here to see a mask, which he says, he heard should be here, but he is deceived, and I'd have him out again.
Come, let him alone, let him alone, this once; he will sooner shift to see such a toy then a better thing: but wise∣men's marriages nowadays can be thriftily celebrated with∣out Fiddlers.
Sirrah, now I will stand here in spite of your teeth.
You may thank Polites, or else i'faith I'd have trounced you.
Silence: Since the gods have afforded vs the hap∣pines of so frequent an Assembly, I think it the next hap∣pines
to use a preuenient discretion, upon this offred occasi∣on, for the reformation of some dangerous abuses, which most stealingly have crept into the common-wealth: and therefore are the more dangerous, by how much they are the more secret. Magus and Astrology, depart the Bench.
Wee?
Wee?
Obey, or justice shall be violent to enforce you. Choler, are the two rogues, Physiognomus, and Cheiromantes apprehended, as I gave command?
Yes, Sir, and at hand.
Let them be brought in then; and with them Cau∣sidicus. 
I? who's my accuser?
Thine own actions, and thy man Sanguis shall cry loud against thee.
O the gods! and't please you, Polites, this little rogue Cheiromantes being unwilling to come, as I was draw∣ing him, picked my pocket. 'Sbones, these Varlets are worse then witches, for they say when they are in hold, they must leave their devil, but a man had as leife have the devil in hold as these, for they'll have his money in hold, or it shall scope 'hem hardly.
Physiognomus, and Cheiromantes, doe you know this Gentleman?
Yes, Sir.
Yes, Sir.
And did you never know a purse of his?
I protest unto your Honour, there was nothing but a few idle papers in it, but not a penny of money.
Oh the impudence of villainy! by the reputation of a Gentleman, I put five pounds of gold into it the morning before I came forth; or else Poeta's a Feigner.
Sure then, Sir, you put it forth again before you came forth.
Well, your own confession proclaims your guilt;
Justice, therefore awards you this sentence. Thou Physiogue∣mus, that thou moist never look any man in the Face more, shalt be burnt in the fore-head for a Rogue, that so every one may know thee by thy Physiognomy—Cheiromantes, since thou hast had a Hand in this matter too, thou shalt bee burnt in the hand, and then both of you shall be banished the Com∣mon-wealth of the Sciences.—Choler, take them away.
Tush, Isle but paint my Face afterwards.
And Isle quickly bite it out of my hand again.
Wee scorn to scope this punishment. 
Wee scorn to scope this punishment. 
Geometric, did not Magus offer by Magic and loue-cups to procure you the love of Astronomy?
Yes, Sir, he did.
And Geometric, did not you see Astrology at the Banquet at Ethicus his house, cast a powder into Astronomia's drink?
I did Sir.
Why then, justice must proceed upon you.
We yield our selves to your Honours mercy.
We yield our selves to your Honours mercy.
Melancholico and Sanguis lay •ands upon them presently, search their pockets, and take out certain Rings if they have any.
Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas. Oh violence! Oh violence!
Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas, Glassialabolas. Oh violence! Oh violence!
Here's one Sir.
And here's another.
I, these are they. Magus himself acquainted me with this device: for, these Rings put on their little-fingers, and those words repeated thrice, would have made them envy∣sible immediately.
O strange!
Now honoured Polites, you may proceed.
Magus, because thy profoundest villainy was wrought by a Circle; in stead of an endless punishment like
thy Circle, here thou shalt bee broken upon a wheel, and af∣terwards the gods no doubt will adjudge thee for ever to sup∣ply Ixions room, by turning his wheel. Thou Astrology, shalt not as yet be determined on, but cast into a close Prison, that thou moist never more behold the Heavens, but bee tor∣tur'd continually with a perpetual anxiety, and expectati∣on of thy fate.
Nay, honoured Polites, let me beg Magus his life.
I; and I, that Astrology may enjoy the benefit of the Heavens, liberty.
I may not without a danger to the Common-wealth.
Then let Geographus obtain the request on this con∣dition, that they undertake a voluntary travail, in stead of an enforced banishment.
Depart then the Common-wealth for ever.
Wee go. Heaven and Hell conspite Magus and Astrologia's ruin; and yet they will not ruin vs.
Wee go. Heaven and Hell conspite Magus and Astrologia's ruin; and yet they will not ruin vs.
Medicus, did not you send Poison in stead of Physic to Poet being sick?
And't please you, I know not whether it were Poi∣son or not: I sent Historia's own servant with a Recipe, to Galli-pot mine Apothecary: and if it were bad, it was his vile∣lane.
Well, as if he had any reason to have done so, with∣out vnder-hand notice from you? doe not deprive your self of an hope of pardon by an unjust pretence of innocence.
Good Polites. 
What can thou say for thy self, that judgment should not proceed against thee?
Honoured Polites, vouchsafe to hear me speak: with grief I acknowledge mine offence, but it was need first made me bad: I was at the first an Apothecaries man, and keeping a note of Recipe's that came to my Master, and inqui∣ring of the bearers the disease of the Patient, I afterword turned Physician, but I never administered any Physic but
such as I found in my Papers: and then, for fashion, I fell to reading some Physick-bookes: and though I could not judge of them, and make use of them, yet I by them did learn to talk with my Patients in their sickness.
Oh, the confident ignorance of beggarly Empe∣rickes! Well, stand aside a little: Causidicus, can thy two tongues, make one honest defence for the iustifying of thy self? what can thou allege that judgment should not pro∣ceed against thee?
My Book, honoured Polites.
Thou can not have it.
H•nour'd Polites—
Thou can not have it.
Then vouchsafe, I beseech you, to hear me speak. I likewise must accuse Poverty of my first guilt; it was need also that first made me bad: I was at the first a Sumner, then got to be a Scrivener, then a Lawyers Clarke; and these were the first steps of my fortune: and since I have been a Lawyer, (alas!) such have been my wants, that having no Clients to save my credit, I have pretended business, and gone up and down with a Pen and Inke-horne by my side, as earnestly as if I had a dozen Causes to plead: when (alas!) I had scarce bread to live on, that, I protest unto your honour, Fortune had quite out-law'd my estate.
Well then, I award thee this merciful judgment: because, Causidicus, after seven years practice of the Law (for so long thou hast, I know not how justly, gone under that title) thou hast deserved to hold up thy hand at the Bar, when thou should have been the defender of Justice, thou shalt hence-forth be called a Barrister; till by thy honest plea∣ding you redeem your self from that name; and hereafter when any of thy Profession plead Causes, they shall, in the admonishing remembrance of thy crime, plead at a Bar—; and that thy pleading of two Causes may bee remembered, thou shalt wear, &amp;c.—For you, Medicus, because you did happily recover Astronomy—
Indeed he gave me a very good Clyster, Heaven knows.
Wee pardon your offence: and thus upon your Good-behauiour wee will suffer you both in the Common-wealth; but with this caution, that if ever you come by your Learning to any degrees in the University of our Common-wealth, (that you may for ever bee distinguished from other men) because you have not been found Viri quadrati, Square and upright men; you shall bee enjoined to wear Round Caps.
A like mercy still attend Polites.
A like mercy still attend Polites.
But, Medicus, see you love your man Sanguis, though this your crime was detected by him: I say, Sanguis is an honest servant, and more faithful to the whole Body of the Common-wealth, then any one Corrupt Member. Depart, and hence-forth abuse not our mercy.
Long may Polites live most honoured; long may Polites live most honoured. 
Long may Polites live most honoured; long may Polites live most honoured. 
Thus, as in a natural body, the first way to health, is by remoouing all more dangerous corruptions; and the second, by reducing the humours to a composed temperature: the first is already performed, and now it remains that wee temper our selves. Most honoured Citizens, I am not ignorant either of your contentions or loves: the first of which, as I would labour to dissolve: so to unite the last; if your selves will be pleased but to refer the composing of your different∣ces to my unpartial censure.
We are pleased, Reverend Polites.
The gods add the happiness of success to my determinations. First, then Poet, Logicus, and Grammaticus, you shall bury all former contentions in a perpetual 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, or oblivion, and then I thus proceed: For you Geometric, I am sorry that that Villain Magus did so far seduce you; but we all rejoice at your recovery: and since Geographus has obtained Astronomy, embrace you courteously the love of A∣rithmitica. I'm sure ever since you have both been of years of discretion, you have been acquainted: and besides, Goo∣metres, there is not any man in the World, whom she makes
more account of then your self: and therefore I will not say, vt ameris ama, love her, that she may love you; but Queen ama∣ris ama. Love because you are first loved; nay, it is a just gre∣titude, which also is a love, and so you shall double it. Briefly, if there be any point, Geometric, which you stand upon, know you remain still at Odds; but if you embrace the love of A∣rithmetica, you'll be at a perfect unity.
Well, Polites, Geometric shall bee Ruled by you this once; come, Wench, sure I must love thee, I even long to take thine Altitude.
And I trust we two shall be always Even.
Poet, you have partly yielded to me in private a consent to the embracing of Historia's love, which if you shall publicly confess, and so confirm, you shall not only get a Wife, but a friend; and what honour Polites may doe, to Poet, love and opportunity shall vnitedly perform.
I; consent, wild-head, consent: she'll make thee more stayed.
I yield: History, my love shall more inseparably follow thee, then the Hexameter the Pentameter; or the Ado∣nick, the Sapphicke.
Why, thus did Xenophon and his Love join to∣gether.
As for you, Grammaticus, I understand of your great affection to Rhetorica; who though she loves Logicus, yet because hee loves not her mutually (which must be requi∣red between such pairs) and that Rhetorica had showed some kind of affection toward Grammaticus, with my best desires I will join you two; and the rather to induce a willingness in you, Rhetorica, I would have you not forget, how Gramme∣ticus and you have been brought up from Children together, and Schoole-fellowes, and take this for a rule: Change not an old friend. Yield Rhetorica, yield, let Physica entreat thee.
Why then, Grammaticus, at this double request, without any Circumlocutions or Figures, I plainly offer un∣to thee my love.
Why then, dearest Rhetorica, Qua nostros vidisti flan∣tic ocallos. Thou doest not only gratify Polites, but also Phy∣sica,
and Nature her self: for, Commune omnium animantium est coniunctionis appetitus procreandi causâ.
You Logicus, if you'll leave your contentions, ha∣uing no desire, as I perceive, to marry—
I care not for marrying; I see no good Foundation, for any such Relation.
Wee will assume you for your approved under∣standing—
I, I should be sorry if I had not a good under∣standing—
As an assistant to our self. For your man Phlegm∣tico, if he will win Polites his love, let him leave his Tobacco.
I, and learn more, manners, for I am sure he wants them.
And Grammaticus, for your man, let him bridle his Choler. Now my counsel shall be, that you, Ethicus, and O∣conoma, would vouchsafe to give good advice to Poet and History: and you, honoured Physica, to your happy children Geographus and Astronomy: for Grammaticus and Rhetorica their Tongues will always agree, and then I think they can hardly fall out: and for Geometric and Arithmetica, I likewise know they will be very Regular, and now ell's composed; and yet, now I think on it, it is not, for yonder Melancholico stands sad, and alone, amongst all these matches: and yet it is better thought on; yonder's Musica too: now surely a sit match; but they shall be henceforth for their ingenuity, both exempt from servitude, and made joint fellows with our selves.
Thanks to Polites: come, my little Minikin, thou and I will be play-fellowes.
Faith Isle have Dancing at my wedding, what ere comes on it.
I beseech you, Polites, suffer not a servant through want to be lost, and come to an ignominious death.
I (alas!) Polites, let Poet obtain so much for Fantastic: that hee may be servant to Melancholico and Musica.
I yield unto it.
And I trust I shall please my Master, and Mistress, beyond imagination.
And now most honoured Citizens, when our aged and retired Prince Metaphysicus (whose Deputy only I am, and from whom, as from our Sovereign, wee hold all wee have) when, I say, he shall hear of these happy combinations, what a content may we conceive he will conceit at the report? and for your selves, you may more easily enjoy your felicity, then I express it; and my endeavours also shall not receive a small encouragement, when the Royal bounty of his May∣sty shall take notice, that these things were done by me. Poet, you shall give me leave, for con∣clusion of my speech, to usurp two Verses, which I have heard you often speak.
All Subjects labours fail, if Princes frown:
The Princes favour is the Subjects Crown.
IVdicious Hearers, you  that apprehend
What task it is to make the Arts descend
To Popular cares; you whose pure judgment knows,
How to distinguish between Art and Shows;
Our Author now salutes. And does compare
His Comedy unto his Theater;
Where some play Arts, some Humours; and thus fits
Himself, to all variety of wits.
If any yet shall ask why he does bring
A Hobby-horse, or such a nimble thing
To raise an Ignorant laugh: It was his Art
That said, This will express Fantastic part;
And thus he Scorned and Ʋs'd it. He did fear
Indeed, there was a People too, even Here.
Therefore his Courteous Comedy did speak
And act Some things to satisfy the Weak
She Academickes; and to make Them smile,
Brought in Impostors, Gypsies, and such vile
Peddlers of Arts: yet does he not from These
Hope for a Tin-foil'd glory: or so please
Himself, by a Reflection. Here to stay,
And in a Looking glass behold his play;
Nor does he promise to himself, in high
Conceit, a Saucy Immortality.
Yet This he says: Let no man judge his Aarts,
But he that first can judge of All the Arts.
But I forget one message; Fate of life▪
Poor Melancholico has lost his wife.
For whilst, within, he on the Humours tended,
Pure Music with the Arts to Heaven ascended.
Which makes the poor man sad, that now hoe's grown
Into a Dump, thus to be left Alone.
Yet since he cannot call Her back again,
He does entreat this grace he may obtain;
That You would, to repair his Marriage bands,
Create Another Musica with Your Hands.

EXpect not here a stately Tragedy,
Nor Comedy set out, with graceful shows,
Of divers kinds, to please men's greedy eyes:
Yet what we have, we give, accept it then
With patience, kindness, and with thankfulness.
The Author's no Mechanic, writes not for gain;
Nor with this dish, thinks to fill all your tastes,
Only, for the learned, and iuditious sort;
Yet would please all, and no man here offend.
Here is no gall, nor any bitter stuff
To quip men's vices in particular,
Such snarling tricks, are free from him and his:
Then wrest not sense, to what was never meant;
If ought be wanting, it is want of skill,
Not want of willing minds to give content
To high and lowe, to all of each degree;
Then give me leave, kind friends, to beg this boon,
That you'll be silent, if we doe amiss;
And if ought please you, though we dare not crave
An open plaudit, in our ears to ring:
Yet doe vs right, commend it afterwards;
And though some few of vs, doe take this pains,
Yet one mans head did only ache for this:
He makes me speak for him, and he for vs;
And altogether join in this request,
That you will hear and see, and say the best.
YOunker, I come, your Father sends me forth,
To sell his corn, and bring him money in,
Each day he walks, and pries, and looks about
With watchful eyes, and ever in mistrust,
Least that my Dame,or I his trusty man,
Should nimme from him, or put up more then right;
I by my Dame am watched, and she by him,
And twixt them both in equal balance hangs
Poor Hans their man, their wakeful Argos eyes,
Doe seldom wink, yet must I have a trick
To make large measure, fill the bushel full,
And jog it soft unseen, while they look on,
And still cry out for more, the measures scant;
And then the overplus.
What Hans, Come here.
My Master calls, and I must needs be gone. 
As God doth bless the earth with great increase,
And in great measure sends vs ten for one:
So must those blessings carefully be kept,
And not with wretchlesse heed, let run at large,
For so huge heaps of wealth consume to nought,
And like fair buildings vnrepayrde, decay.
Yet must not beastly meshing niggardize,
Cause vs forget our selves, and those that want,
But give relief from our abundant store:
We have enough, our charge it is not great,
One daughter shoe's bestowed richly, and
Her portion paid, no penny more in debt,
Two sons besides, and they provided for;
The yongst at School, the other trails a Pike,
And for preferment looks each day, each hour:
What friendship fails, his fathers purse supplies;
He doth not want, nor shall, nor have too much
To please the fancies of unbridled youth:
Mine husband bids him use his means, no doyt
That he will send him, but alas poor I,
Must like my cream-pots, shake my winnow sheet
And all for coin, and often send him some.
Mine husband sees and knows, yet nothing says,
But is content with what he thinks I doe;
My man plays fast and loose, I see it too,
And nothing say, for why, the knave is true,
And wrongs vs not one cross, but what he gets
Is for my sons, not for himself, I am sure.
I see, but see not, give him oft a shilling,
Because to doe for mine, he is so willing.
What Hans?
Your servant at command,
To run, to ride, to go by day or night.
How now sir sauce, your tong so early glib;
What though the days be short, theres time enough
Ere night to make your pate ring noon.
Indeed,
Madame, you never saw me drunk as yet,
So much as to forget that due respect
I owe your service.
Well sir, then be gone,
Make haste, dispatch, and get you to the town;
Look to your business, what you buy and sell;
But ere you go, take that and give my son.
The heavens bless you mistress, that sayre hand,
Once more for the Se•joint.
Away you Knave,
Take that Dutch shilling, drink amongst your Comrades.
Shees gone, the best that ever trod on shoe:
I would not change my life to be Lord Mayor
Of the thy crown of London: my service
〈◊〉 freedom, labour but a pleasure,
〈…〉 what I ask, but half a word,
Tic done, she knew my mind, I would I have said,
That with the Sergeant I must crack a pot,
But 〈◊〉 I could bringt out, she stopped my mouth
With Knave and shilling too: well let her doot
As often as she will, See who gets most
Of she or I. 
As I went to Walsingham,
To that holy Land,
Met I with an old bald Mare,
By the way as I came.
Indeed you doe full little think, how I
Am taken up amongst Soldiers in the town;
Hans Beer pot is a man of note, well known
To all under the degree of Officers.
But Sergeant Goodfellow, I love him best;
And why? because he loves my masters son▪
My Master loves him too, for his honesty
And never sees him, but he gives him gold,
And sends him much provision for his house;
Heel drink his cup, swears not &amp; hates a whore,
Which if he used, I am sure my master
Brookes not the company of any such
To haunt his son: but with an angry frown,
Would look upon him: for he and Beeremonde
Are the only lads of all the Garrison;
I come my lads, my markets once ore-past,
At Flutterkins weal have one brideling cast.
Come wife, help me on with my band: indeed
This fair morning invites me take the pains
To walk on foot, and see the town, visit
My friends, &amp; children, drink some Spanish wine:
And why, that wine? I am not yet grown old,
I can bestride, a bouncing Gannet still,
And with mine arm to frush a sturdy lance.
Talk you no more of martial exercise,
Good Sir, but take you to your Country Farm,
Keep you at home, leave that to younger bloods,
Your son is young enough, let him go forth,
And prove his fortune amongst those armed troupes,
I am contented, God his will be done.
I think dear wife thou speak more then thou think.
Thou would be loath to adventure him so much.
Not I sweet Sir, for God is God at sea,
And land, a God always omnipotent;
He can defend him from the gaping jaws
Of roaring Canons mouth, that dreadful flash
Cannot come near him, if it be his will;
Yet if he die, ti's honours lofty bed
That shall entomb him, then I care the less.
Well spoke, brave Lass, I think fair Pallas shine,
Begirt thy temples with her glorious rays,
At thy days birth, the wonder of thy sex.
How now my Love, what do you Court me still?
This Phrase befits not, twixt a man and wife,
Tic time for you to leave such courting terms,
What courting call thou them, thou rubst me up,
To think upon the times forepast, I saw
In Englands Court so famous and renowmde
Of great Elizaes blessed memory.
That aided so these troubled Netherlands
With men and money; still oh, oh still me thinks
I see those Worthies marching on earths stage;
The famous Essex, Norreis, Sidney too,
And wisest Ʋere, that held Ostend so long,
Against hells foul mouth, and Spanish tyranny,
As yet his accomplices can testify.
That saw his works beyond the bounds of wit,
That now doe live in noble fame and name;
Whom Isle ore-passe, for fear I should offend.
Offend not then (my Spouse) I counsel you,
But leave the mighty to their best contents,
And pass in silence, what they have to doe;
Let vs not meddle with the Magistrate,
But see, unseen, and hope for whats the best.
What hath Apollos sacred Oracle
Infused thy Soul with high Divinity,
Or deeper judgements, of I know not what,
Made thee know more then thy frail sex should do
I wonder: lets along, weal to the town,
Where I not doubt but I shall find your son
A drinking, not it's book.
What if you doe?
The elder Priest forgets that he was Clerk,
When you were young, you did as he now does.
Tic true indeed, but yet Isle tell thee what,
It was strange to see a younker once but drunk
In Englands Kingdom, when I lived there,
For to be drunk, was beggar like they said,
Now Beggars say they are drunk like Gentlemen,
As since I have heard an old fantastic rime,
That thus imports if I be not deceiude.
Gentlemen are sick, and Parsons ill at ease,
But Serving men are drunk, and all have one disease.
God bless my son from such base foolery,
As to delight in drink, a beastly sin,
Yet with a friend, to drink a cup or more,
Isle not find fault, the times are now grown such.
Well wife, give but an inch, hee takes an elue.
What then? his nature, education,
Composde him otherwise, you did your part
To give him learning, which will make him know
The good from evil: but his blooming youth
May be corrupted by bad company;
But that he seeks not, loves not, flies as much
As in him lies, I heard't with comfort too,
Else would I not.
My dear, what would you doe,
Or not doe, Women's witless wilful will,
Is strange sometimes, with reason limitless.
I will not tell you.
Why?
Because I will not.
A reason reasonless, Women,
Have oft such reason, for their wilfulness,
When as they ouerth wart their too kind husbands
In things not mere indifferent, else
What else?
Sometimes we know more then our husbands think,
And give advise worthy to be followed,
Not to be scorned, or to be contemnde
In weighty matters, matters of estate,
As 〈…〉 wife to great
〈◊〉; and Neroes mother too,
Another Agrippina, less virtuous,
But wise and politic, one that knew much,
And that great Queen, the Queen of Carry,
Nausolus wife, the wonder of her time.
And she whom former times ne'er paralleled,
She whom you named but now.
O stay, my wife,
Your mouth runs ore, she makes all women proud;
Are you so read in Roman Histories?
And I not know it: Welcome to the town;
Weal to your daughter straight, sheele be at home,
I hope, where ere her thriving husband be.
My back thin cloathde, my belly thinner lined,
Keeps out no cold, I like not I these planks,
But when my belly is full of double Beer;
Oh then I sleep like to mine Hostess Pigs,
And feel no cold, nor hardness; Feather-beds,
Stand further off, three stiuers and a half,
The canne of English Beer: my money's spent;
Pay days to morrow: tut, hangt, to day, Isle shift,
But yet were younker Harmants here; one can,
My mornings draught were good; or if to day
Hans Beere-pot come to town: Oh furious Mars,
Hes come, his Waggons yonder, now cock-sure,
For this whole day I am provided for.
Good morrow Pasquill, whore's my brother, whore's
That Younker? and the Sergeant Goodfellow.
You are welcome sir, what M. Garland?
I'st you, you know my mind; one tooth is dry,
Since yesternight I have not had one drink;
I am so cold.
Why dost not answer me?
What did you say? sure I remember not;
My wits want freshing.
I will thrash them straight
With good strong Beer, one cup will do no harm.
Will drive cold out, and keep my belly warm.
What riming so early, and thine eyes not
Washed yet: but where is Younger Harmants?
Whore's his Companion, Sergeant Goodfellow?
Fast a sleep, his troubled head is so vexed
With this worlds cares.
What both.
The Sergeant, him
Lonely mean, lies sleeping yet within;
Isle call him to you, if you will go drink.
Not else.
Yes that I will, and more then that;
Isle doe for you, or for your Brothers sake;
Like burning Drakes isle split the empty ayre,
And run through thick or thin, at noon or night:
If you command, poor Pasquill will obey.
Where did thou learn such high stilt complements?
Out from the smoking of my Muskets mouth
Fetched from the fragments of some Poetry:
My nimble Muse comes from the Aquilone,
And flaps her wings against Austers frothy beard;
While Eurus blasts doe pinch my tender sides.
And gentle Zephir, glads the Seamans heart;
Driving his ship, cross Neptunes foaming front.
How now turned Poet, or turned Conjurer;
Stares not mine hair: shall I be scarred hence:
Isle make a circle least Hobgoblin come,
You are disposed to jest M. Ganland.
I have many such conceits without book.
Of thine own making sure, they doe so well
Concur in sweetest Diapason.
Die a pace on sir: whats that?
That's quite past
The reach or Center of my shallow brain:
But since with terms you think to put me down:
Once more have at you, isle not yield it so.
Then did he make Heavens vault to rebound,
With rounce, robble hobble,
With riff raffe, roaring, thwick, thwack,
Thurlerie bouncing.
O Heavens! why made you night to cover sin?
Had it been day, such things had never been.
Once more with patience, silence, &amp; be still:
You shall have Rhetoric against your will.
Mount thee my Phlegon Muse, and testify
How Saturn sitting on an Ebon cloud,
Disrobed his Podex, white as Ivory,
And through the Welkin thundered all aloud.
Read thou my riddle, &amp; take thou my fiddle••
I met a man that wept and wailde,
I grieved to see him how he ailed;
He fared strangely, in such taking;
He said he was not of Gods making.
The Cuckoo sings not worth a great,
Because she never changes note:
The man you speak of, young or old,
Indeed he is a plain Cucquolde.
O brains of a Burbate, wool of an Owl:
Where had thou so much wit? now tell me thine.
My Grandam taught me, &amp; I learnt by heart
This riddle of Saturnes far-fetcht sigh,
But here me Sir, you know that honest man
M. Flutterkin our Jovial Host.
Go seek my brother out, and then I will,
Show thee the way, and give thee thy desire.
I must not stir without my Corporal
Gives his consent, I must not so offend
For fear the varuels catch me by the feet.
Go to the Sergeant, I dare warrant thee,
And tell him that I stay to speak with him.
Swifter then thought, your errand shall be done
Good morrow M. Garland, what abroad
So early, can you leave so sweet a Fro;
By gisse I swear, were I so fairly wed,
This hour yet would I have kept my bed.
Good morrow Sergeant, dreaming, yet not waked
You are mistaken man, you see not well,
Such ware's not dainty, though you think it dear,
Where is enough, and market all the year.
I am glad to see you in so pleasant vain;
I hope we shall have a merry day on it.
Deed, Pasquill and I have been riming.
What?
That pretty Stripling, that mad Pastie-crust,
He rimeth best with lug or Pewter-can,
And oft doth quarrel with our honest Host
For spiced Ale, that hisseth with a toste:
But let these matters pass, Isle tell you news;
Last night your brother and I fell flat out
About an Argument we stiffly held
Which service was best on horseback, or on foot:
But what say you?
For Horsemen tooth and nail.
He called me ass, but since one predicament
Contains vs both, I care not Isle not yield;
You know hes learned, had I but so much,
Id make him fret, and stamp, and scratch his head;
Doe you but second me, isle vex him yet.
While you do talk, then I am sure of drink.
Let Pasquill seek him.
Sir, make haste, run;
My Captain called him, when I went to sleep.
I go, I run, I haste, I skip, I fly;
With nimbler heals then ere did Mercury.
Ah pot may sitis, how fast he
Runs for the liquors sake; now thinks he,
To stuff his guts with Huffcappe English Beer;
But hear me Sir, lets walk in the Church-yard
Until he comes again; for I must think
My self of pro and con, whats to be done
Against this lusty Younker; Oh hoe's here.
Good morrow brother Garland, why did you
Send Pasquill for me posting in such haste;
What is my Sister sick, or your young son,
Or some misfortune happened, that I know
Not of as yet, unto your house or goods,
Or ships at Sea: Speak, I am in suspense.
What? doe you fool me, flout me to my face;
Is that for my good will? why then farewell.
Be not so angry brother, I protest,
I laugh not at you, but at Pasquill, what
Said he to you, what message did he bring?
The fool comes gaping, sets up such a throat,
Staring so madly, as if foul Cerberus
From pitchy Acheron, were come to affright
Poor men on earth: or else some accident
Of wonder strange, worse then a blazing star,
Had made men gaze, I know not what to think:
You sent him for me, and I must come straight:
I must not stay; my Captain asked him, what
The matter was: if the town were on fire:
Theres fire in the town, quoth he, quite out
Of breath and wit, forgets to move his cap,
Cries out on's throat, that it was almost burnt
With soot and smoke, and dust I know not what:
My Captain gave him twelve pence, bad him go
And wash his face, he looked so reechilie,
Like Bacon hanging on the Chimneys roof;
Faring so ghastly, that we both did think,
Him worse then mad.
But whether is he gone?
Isle tell you, as we crossed the market place,
He spies my Fathers man, and then from me,
He flings as fast, as erst did Hercules,
Send that his fastest shafts to Nessus side;
When he from him stole Deianira fair
For whom he lost his life: I saw my youth,
And looked behind, to see what they would doe;
In at next Tap-house, round as Jugglers box,
Went they two first, and then two Soldiers more.
Why then your Captains piece is half consumed
By this; if he have got such company.
Twill not belong, I am sure, befort be drowned,
Four men four Cans, whats that, but four fair draughts.
Yea for a Brewers horse, not for his man:
Oh my rumbling guts doe ache to think ont;
A Canne a draught, I never sawe't but once,
And then I thought that man had burst his guts;
His eye-balls started, as the strings were cracked;
And though sometimes I love to drink my pot,
Strong drink should never more go down with me,
Before i'd swill so much at such huge draughts;
One civil glass or two, that warms my blood,
It is enough, me thinks.
Why? now I know,
Thou art not tong-tyde Sergeant, else I thought
It had been pawndith Lumbard for two doytes:
Isle buy a Calves tongue for four, thats good meat
For them that love it.
Why? theres none but Calves
Refuse good meat, or offered courtesies,
Why? how now Sergeant, do you cal me calfe?
No sir, not I, but by chance speak of them,
As by the way you light upon their tongues.
So now the game begins: fly to him, give
Him not one inch, let him wear gold that wins
It first: shrink back, I will never own thee
For a Sergeant.
Now we are two to one,
I care not.
What say, thou speak Hebrew, Greek,
Or English, Welsh, I know not what thou meanst.
Sauf vostre grace, vous acts bien venus.
Hangs the French Ideon at thy tongs end too
Speak two words more, isle make thee Port-enseigne
Si ce iemais aduient, en ma puissance.
Perform your words, and then I swear, I will.
I will.
Swear first, isle not believe you else.
Without an oath I will.
Why, hear you then;
Admiranda canunt, sed non credenda Poet.
Thats Latin Sergeant, wiseman, thats not French.
You named no language, bid me speak two words,
And you would do it, isle be judged by all
Here present, if the wager be not won.
Isle get a staff, the colours they are mine.
Tic well said Sergeant, I am on thy side,
Isle bear thee witness they are thine by right.
Though I meant French, yet will I yield, I lost;
Take thou the colours, I bestow them free,
In my conceit, as ere did Emperor,
I thank your greatness in conceit,
I doe enjoy them, and I rest content.
A good conceit, for now me thinks I see,
The Sergeant Enseigne, only in conceit
Stepped up in place, and office of command;
I see, but see not, what I hope to see;
That once performed which now is but conceit.
I thank you M. Garland, your good word,
Is ever pressed to doe an honest man good,
For my preferment think you would disburse
A score of pounds; or so, were come to that,
Rather then I should fail.
Sure that I would;
Thou should not want to furnish thy conceits;
If I have gold and silver at command,
Tic ready: Sergeant I would doe thee good;
Get thou a place, try thy friends, thou shalt see
What I will doe.
I thank God and friends, tic done;
I have bethought me, you shall see ere long
A Metamorphosis of me reformde.
Transformed, thou would say.
Call you it transformed;
Transformed, reformde; or call it how you will:
I doe remember what I learned at School
In Ouid: Oh these verses made me whipped;
In nova fert animus, mutates decor forms
Corpora Dij caeptis, name vos mutastis &amp; illas,
Aspirate maize.
Let thee alone Sergeant, thou wilt be like
To Pasquill, wilde as a Buck, or Liueret
Bred in March: this or be it not contains thee
When thy brains flow with skilful Poesy;
Hast thou forgot what we came hither for.
I like thee Sergeant, when thou bring out pairs
Of Verses; one and singles alone is not
So good; as when by two and two in ranks,
They march in order: then they please mine ears.
You want a fellow to my tother verse,
Doe you not.
Yes marry doe I, make but one
To wipe my mouth, like to the first, I swear,
Isle give thee a pair of good stags leather gloves.
A match tic done, isle fit you presently;
M. Garland will you see it performed?
Upon mine honest word, I will.
Why then,
I have it by this time: since your mouth is clean;
My noble Younker, wipe your nose with this;
Sic faciunt stulti, quos gloria vexat inanis.
You have hit me home with your Rhinoceros
Did near make that, that famous learned Knight,
Sir Philip Sidney, Scholars, soldiers pride
Was his, not yours.
What, though he made that verse,
Those words were made before, he made them not;
It was well I hoped on his inventions.
Good wits doe jump, good witty, witless sir:
You hatch those eggs that other birds have laid:
I bid you make me one, by your own wit.
Why so I did, that which sir Philip made,
Is now grown old, and like my Fathers gown,
Spun, weaude, and made, above fourscore years ago;
But this I made is new: as fresh as May
Or flowers in June, or eggs, but this day sprung,
A plain case Younker: sir the gloves are mine
Upon your honest word: forestoe you dat,
A merchants word, no price set down, isle have
Them richly made, with gold and silken fringe.
I think the Sergeant is grown Mountebank
To cling by shifts, hey pass, pass,
Italian grown; a sharking Charlatan.
Italian, Spanish, English, Dutch, or French;
Shark what you will, you shall not shark me out
Of my stags leather gloves with Charlatan:
Your Glover knows my hand M. Garland,
To morrow morning early, Charlatan
Goes for his gloves, look to the payment sir,
Your honest words at stake; tic good I know,
You'll keep it sure, a merchant break his word,
His credits gone, no not for twice so much.
Go fetch thy gloves, isle see the Glover paid:
Brother, tic lost, you shall pay me again.
Upon condition I will be content,
So he will make me but one true French verse.
I will and if I can.
Yea, thats well said;
That can was well.
I can and will; not for nought;
My learning cost me something; and my wit
Works quick and nimbly, if ought be to be got,
The Roman Consuls after victories,
Did crown with Baize triumphant Conquerors.
Set but a prize, afar gloriam
Infuses spirit to a working brain,
It shall be done, what first?
Why what you will.
A pair of Garters.
Garters? yea content.
I want a pair; What gloves and garters too,
I rose on the right side to day I am sure.
What time, a bargain wisely made's half won.
Ere you can go to Flutterkins mine Host,
And come again, or else isle leese two fauns,
Or Beer, or Claret wine, or Spanish wine.
Beer, what Beer, Scar-Beere?
No of English Beer.
Isle not go thither, I was there too late,
Ere I can tell threescore distinctly: say
A match; Isle tell them plainly, one by one.
Agreed, begin.
Isle tell then, shall I?
Yes.
One, two, three, four.
Iesuis.
Seven, eight.
Nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen.
Soft, you are too hasty for a parish Priest,
I am sure of your good word; five and six
Are lost, are they nothing: tell rightly, tell on,
And do your worst: some honest French man lend
Me but one handsome word or two.
Thirty.
I.
Gods me, half out, but two words yet, Vostre.
Thou make a verse, then isle bake in a well.
There,s one word more, humble, nay treshumble
Fifty.
Servitor, life of my life, tic out:
Be it what it will, stand on thine even feet;
Then gloves and garters both are quickly won.
Brother, you have lost.
Then know I who must win.
Isle not believe you, I will have it scande,
Let them that know speak true: is it good French.
Ie suis vostre treshumble servitor.
The verse is true, consisting of five feet;
The case is plain in common law: no book
Can save you: Sergeant thou hast won; the garters
They are thine.
Younker, tic well; and your gloves too;
Both gloves and garters, they are fairly won;
Scratch not your head, its but a Iacobin
At most; Come let vs in to Flutterkins,
A cup and toste will doe me now no hurt.
Why then farewell, I care not I for Beer,
My Captain gave me some Canary wine:
The Churl he shall not ride the Gentleman.
You shall not flinch, if that your cap be wool,
You shall along; What, would you leave vs so;
Turned Micher, that were not tolerable.
I will go with thee, doe but promise me,
Rightly to construe those lines of Ouids,
Which thou readst but now.
I will, then let vs hence;
I thank great Jove that blessed me so this day;
How others speed, I bear the prize away.
This way he went, and here they were ere while,
But now they are fled like birds that cut the ayre,
With clipping wings, and leave no trace behind.
But Hans my nose is quick and sharpe of sent,
Like those great Bears in nova Zembla found,
Whose smelling sense was better then their sight.
I cannot see, but smell where they are gone.
Whether dost thou think? straight to Flutterkins,
My jovial Host that longs to see my face,
My beauteous face, my proper physiognomy;
I soon despatcht, sold all my corn at once,
And bought my meat.
As straight as Circes vvande,
Not looking back, as oft Meander doth,
What of Meander? now my things be done,
I care not, isle go where thou wilt; lets on;
But whats Meander? man, or maid, or wife.
A river fool, did never see a play,
Or hear these verses which I have by heart.
Whats he that talks of the banks of Poe,
And of the milk-white swans that in Meander swam
Isle down from hence and scour the Stygian lake:
To raise a fiend shall make his soul to quake.
O terrible, my Mistress sent you that,
And bid you drink it, not to hoard it up.
An English shilling: hey; did she indeed?
Why Widgin, think thou I would give thee't else?
Isle drink her health upon my bended knees,
Until the Welkin roar, and ground looks blew;
Two shillings have I, not one penny spent;
I bless my stars, good fortune set me free;
This days mine own.
Take heed, your supple joints
Are tender, Bones are soon thrust out: a vvrinch
Comes quickly.
I am free from pox, good face.
If they be free from thee, it skils the less:
Doe you remember, how you served me once,
When to the Leaguer I was sent from home
With some provision to my masters son;
You brought me to a vvhore, a Leaguer vvhore;
Such stuff blind Polipheme would loath to touch:
An wholesome piece, I near loud Mutton since.
Near blush for shame.
It was for thine honesty;
Now its on record, tic prooud, tic past the tutch.
Can you accuse me? no, and speak but true.
I saw no hurt, isle said, and swear it too:
But good cause why; thou could nor go, nor stand
Thou were so drunk: unfit for Venus game,
A cart became thee better then a Coach.
Why thou telst all, thou might have hid some part,
And no I have shamde me so fore company,
But isle requite you, if I live ten days.
It was no marvel, I will tell thee rest.
As through the camp I past in strange amaze,
Driving mine Ass before me with his load;
I thought to be devoured Ass and all
By hungry soldiers, they did look so thin:
My heals they were flung up, and headlong I,
Fell on a Sutlers hut a fortnights space,
I had no legs, nor could I quit that place.
What were thou shot?
And lamde: you know too well,
The grievous moan our Alips made for me,
Alas, poor girl, she thought I had been slain,
But had the Bullet hit me, as the wind,
Poor Beere-pot had been squasht, these hansom limbs
Had flown in pieces, nor splinter left vnbroke.
That had been pity, which way went the shot
To Calais as I think, or further off,
I escaped I am sure, that dreadful malling knock.
O hold my head my thumb begins to ache,
From hence to France if this be not a lye.
Is that good manners for to take my tale,
Out of my mouth, before I make an end.
I have no manners: had I such an one
As Amptill is, to which seven Parks belong,
I would keep thee to be my worships fool.
Why? where is Amptill.
In the Fayery land.
Where men eat mutton, pig, and goose, and beef,
Rabbits and chickens, partridge, pheasants, quails,
And drink rich wine, that France or Spain sends in,
And strong March Beer, of five or six years old,
But on with thy tale.
Isle hang thee first,
The Fayery land, wheres that? I am with child,
Good Pasquill tell me quickly, else I die;
My mind is ravished from this lower Orb,
Tic not far of, weal go to Flutterkins,
And talk more on it.
Why then thou winced my heart,
I long to feet, to taste such wine, such cheer,
But more, I long for such unheard of Beer.
If that I speak my language natural,
I think theres few that understands it here:
Its Hebers tongue left with the Abderites;
Hestron, pangaeon, cacobomboton, Aphnes halenon,
Mydras, myphrasman, tyltura, pantha, teman,
Hogdon, camthompos, parathasta pidarda laronta,
Clastriae campharides, bulgida bartra bela.
I am a Moore borne in Numedia,
Parcht with the suns extreme and scorching heate;
My mothers name Abdela Sydan hight,
My Father was Don Ian de Ʋechia,
A noble Spaniard, brave Castilian:
I served the King of answered Numidia,
And did command ten thousand barbarous horse
For two whole years; and then my fathers love
Drew me from thence to seek mount Atlas out;
And so to Spain: my Merchant played the jade,
And hoisted sails for great Byzantiums town;
From whence I ran, and so through Germanie,
With weary steps I posted to this place.
If that you ask my name, and fine would know,
It is Don Abendaraes Quixote,
A Spaniard, Moore, half Turk, half Christian,
How ere my flesh escaped the whizzing shot,
My tattered doublet sure, escaped not.
Good Wine, good Beer, they say, it needs no bush;
Yet have I looked abroad, and no man comes;
I have ore-peerde the market hill quite round,
My goodly front, mine eyes, my neatest beard.
My well fed corps: why, these are Adamants
To draw men's minds to lend me many a look,
But yet (none hears) all pass, none steps aside,
The soaring Falcon stoops not at my lure,
But clippes her wings, flees on, heeds not her prey,
I see no Younker, nor no Sergeant yet;
But Hans is busy with his masters corn,
His Markets done, I am sure he will be here,
O theres a man lives bravely, keeps an house,
Relieves the poor, his gates be never shut;
His tables free, theres meat for honest men:
He lived in England, learnt that countries guise,
For Hospitality, few such be here:
Yet frugal too, was never prodigal,
Spends nothing more, but what he well may spare,
He borrows nought, nor lends on usury:
Yet hath enough.
Mine Host, what all alone?
And market day, why this is wondrous strange.
My noble Younker: Welcome Gentlemen,
I want such guests, hears beer was never drunk,
Fresh set a broach: puts down the Diamont
For lively sparkling: of transparent view,
More clear then amber, or fair orient pearl,
Fetched from the farthest Inde,
How now mine Host?
Spare so much courtesy, lest we suspect
Some hidden craft.
In me? you know me well,
Plain Flutterkin, a down, right dealing man,
I have no guards to set me bravely out;
But what I think I speak, and freely too,
Without deceit or simulation.
Why then two cans of your best English beer
It shall be done with much celerity.
Come Sergeant, I must have construction
Of Ouids verses, isle not bate an ace
Before you drink, I will not stay so long.
You are too hasty, spare me yet a while,
And then isle fit you.
Pray thee quick, dispatch,
I have some business calls me soon from hence.
Think you I cannot, am I such a fool?
I know not truly, but I love to learn,
Why then give ear, take heed, &amp; mark me well,
You often watch to take me at the worst;
But Isle bar that, Isle have no cunning trick.
Fert animus; my mind provokes me: Dij
Coeptis aspirate maize: Ye gods
Bless my proceedings: decor, to speak
Of: Corpora mutates: Bodies changed,
In nova forms: to new shapes: name vos
Mutastis &amp; illas: for you transformed
Those bodies strangely; yea and altered sore
Their shapes to that they never had before.
That same addition, adds life to the rest,
And wipes poor Priscians head, thats foully broke:
Why, first not right?
Yes, there's none can mend it.
And now sir, for our other argument,
Isle not give of, before I am satisfied.
Fly to him Sergeant, I will take thy part,
To serve on horseback, is best service still,
I will maintain it, while I live one day.
Against him and you, but give me leave to speak,
Isle show my reasons what I think are fit.
They are here before vs.
We come in time,
Here comes mine host propped up between two cans.
Tha'ts well, all good.
A pair of pretty youths;
Show me but one six pence Pasquill, then Isle say,
Thoul't quickly thrive.
Why, that I can, see there.
There's four, and all vnspent. believe your eyes.
God bless mine eyes, but Hans what news at home.
How fares my Parents, are they both in health?
They send their blessing, but your mothers, it
Is to be felt: tic leaquer on de tangde,
It cleaves fast to your palms: nay sir, tic gold,
The purest mettle that the earth affords.
Fill out some Beer mine Host.
Hears to that hand;
That blessed you so with crosses of that kind.
It shall be pledged.
Hang him says nay.
Not I.
Nor I, nor hee, but with as good a will,
As ere I came from School, with leave to play.
Then give me leave I will begin this round;
This swelling cup I will drink lively out,
Not one word more, before I feet about.
In this isle please you, but isle drink no more.
The question which I prosecute is this,
If horse or foot should have pre-eminence:
They are needful both, to make an army up:
Yet those great Armies which the Tartars used,
Were all of horse; so were the Persians
Till later times the English Shirleis taught
The use of foot, and how to entrench a Camp.
What can they doe but in such huge, vast plains,
As are Tyrauna, and that Cossoua
So oft made red with Turks &amp; Christians blood,
And great Pharsalia famous for the fight
Twixt Pompey and Caesar worthy Warriors both,
Both which did strive for Romes sole Monarchy.
On mountains, bogs or woods, or broken rocks:
Where are your horse, ore-turnde and swallowed up
What can they doe against a stand of Pikes,
Well lined with shot in such vantageous place.
But what say you unto that Persian Prince
That beat the Turk with thirty thousand horse,
Solemn the first, the bloudiest Ottoman
Of all his race; who brought into the field
Two hundred thousand strong of horse and foot.
Indeed you touch me now, that history,
Makes much for you, that Sophie Ismael,
Did meet the tyrant in the open field,
Whose multitudes did think to swallow him
With open jaws, like to a mighty whale:
But as an anchor he stuck in his throat;
And made him kick and shrink, to quit himself.
As how good brother, I desire to hear:
This likes me well: mine host I drink to you.
I thank you sir, you shall not go vnpledgde:
Here Pasquill, Hans, you two shall have your shares:
We thank you both, we mean not to refuse.
Yea, toot and spare not, it will be your own,
Good drink breeds blood, &amp; blood makes able men
This warlike Prince divides his troops in two
The right hand battle he himself did lead,
The left, his vassal named Vstan Oghlie,
When Turks divided they did doe the like,
And so escaped the thundering Ordinance.
Unhappy Vstan could not get so clear
As did his Master, for the Canon shot
Fell amongst his troupes, and did him greater harm.
This dreadlesse Prince with valour bravely armed,
False on amain, with Turkish routes enclosed
On every side, and from each side he sends
Such fiery balls, as made them know his force.
They forwards ride, and backewards send their shot
On either hand, no place from them was free,
He onward flings, amongst the •anizars,
The chiefest guard that this grand Seigneur hath,
And drives them back within their strongest hold,
Amongst their packs, and Camels bound with chains,
No words, nor blows, nor fairest promises
Could make them budge, or move, or stir one foot.
The wounded Prince, that fainted bleeding sore,
Unable scarce to keep his Coursers back,
Perceiving this, with slow paced steps retired,
And wheelde about, leaving his richest tents
Unto their spoils, that durst not stir to see,
For three days space, what was become of him.
In this I yield, the worlds best service known
That ever Horsemen did, themselves alone.
Well Younker, have I caught you. I am glad
Of any thing, wherewith to stop your mouth.
Nay soft, good Sergeant, what can Horsemen doe,
Before a town, when we beleaguer it.
They'll scale the walls, pass trenches, give assaults,
Or enter breaches, yes I warrant you.
They scour the Country, bring rich booties in,
While we lye starving here, they live at ease,
Eat, drink and sleep.
The more they answer for:
When they ride struggling forth for lawless spoil,
Wee keep our works in danger night and day,
No spoiled peasant cries on vs for's goods,
Nor ravished maid, for lost Virginity,
Nor wronged wife for forced dishonesty.
What? would you have no Horsemen then,
Not so.
Mistake me not, but isle not yield them chief,
Each body well composde, it doth consist
Of divers members, framed by art, yet natural;
The body where are lodged the chiefest parts,
I liken it unto the Infanterie;
The exterior parts to the Cauallerie.
The heart commands, the members execute;
So they to vs, not we to them give way.
But where they are alone, all absolute:
What they can doe, against your self you proud.
Why thats Barbarian, and not Christian-like,
Where multitude prevails, not discipline,
And in such places, as I named before;
As witness are those three days cruel fight
Huniades maintained against mighty Amurath
The second: in Cosso•as fatal plains.
He kept an hill with thirty thousand men;
Ten thousand horse, the rest were all on foot
Against the Turks that lay like Grasshoppers,
Filling those plains, eight miles in compass round:
This little handful, roulde and turned about,
On that hills top in strong and close array,
Flamde like a Candle amongst a world of flies,
That burnt themselves, ere they could put it out:
At length with travel tired, with blows &amp; wounds
All rent and torn, choked up with smoke &amp; stench
Of bodies dead: match, poulder, bullets spent
This light did glimmer, flashed, and so went out▪
What did the horsemen there, did none escape?
They quit their horse, and made them as a wall
For their defence, and fought it out on foot,
Almost to the last man, some few escaped;
And swam the river, got into a wood
Among the which, Huniades was one
The half beat conquering Turks had all enough,
Stood still and gazed, and glad to see him gone.
Was not the Seigneur proud, once victory,
Rejoicing much at his Hungarian spoils.
So proud, he mournd: was sick with grief and hate,
Of this his Conquest, at so dear a rate.
This likes me well, but ere you doe proceed,
Isle drink to you: now am I for the foot,
Hears to you all, my noble Fantassines.
Sir, one health more, your Fathers health, I mean,
That good old man, he must not be forgot.
Drink't out I pray thee, I will have no more.
Were you a Younker, made of beaten gold,
You should have this; What nor your Fathers health?
No, not his health▪ to drink away mine own▪
But drink to Hans, I see by his lips hoe's dry;
He wants it, I doe not, heel drink for me,
Or to the Sergeant, he can get no drink.
Nor him, nor he, isle drink to none but you,
Isle keep my man, I learned that trick at School.
Am I your man, god Bacchus, tossepot Knight,
Would glass and drink were both besides thy guts;
I tell thee, isle no more.
Come Pasquill, I
Will pledge thee, I can yet hold out, two cups,
Two slashes on the legs will not be felt.
I am as strong as Hercules near out.
Why how now Hans? what Planet struck? quite mute,
Or Bagge-pype-like, not speak before thou art full,
Not one wise word; why, where is all thy mirth.
Nor so, nor so, I can speak yet, if need,
I hear, I see, yet nothing say at all:
Mine Host hath learned, to play at Fox mine host;
He will grow kind, we shall have drink enough.
Enough my Lad, wilt drink an Ocean?
Me thinks a Whirle-poole cannot ore drink me.
Yet am I still for horse a Kingly fight.
Oh finely mounted, what a pleasure tic
A troupe of brave Lancers, a stately show,
More show then service, for our good Dragons,
Doe wheel about untouched, and gall their sides,
Nor doe our Pykemen care a straw for them:
Those troupes are good for execution,
To spoil a Kingdom, waste or havoc all:
Wheres no resistance, or at least small head,
Or else to run, when as a battles lost,
But for a strength, a brave battalion
Of Pikes and shot, impaled two hundred square,
And flanckt with carts and packs on either side:
Your horsemen may go whistle, where are they,
This iron wall is impenetrable.
Witness that battle was at Varna fought,
A shame to Christians for their breach of truce.
Why? what was that? twixt whom, what was there don•
He pays you Sergeant now, you're well most gone.
Come Isle go home, Isle stay no longer here.
This Beer hath pepper, it begins to bite.
Yet stay a while, and Isle waite on you home,
I must needs hear an end of this discourse.
The Cardinal Iulian mooude this luckless War,
Causing the King and States of Hungarie
To break their truce; which they had solemn sworn;
The Pope dispensed with them, so would not God,
If he be witness: he wills faith be kept
Without exception, be it with Infidels,
As this was here; the sequel proud it true,
In manner thus: Huniades that mannadgde all,
Dislikte this war: yet Vladislaus
This youthful King, eggde on by Iulian,
Would needs break faith with mighty Amurath,
And near to Varna both their armies met,
Where he so placed his battles as a Lake,
Flanckt the left side; a wood was on the rear:
And on the right hand all their waggons went:
Had they kept so, Byzantium had been ours:
And Greece once more it had been Christendom;
The battles joined, and after furious charge,
The Turks turned back, like birds with scarlions scared;
So dreadful were those well known colours which
Huniades did bear: he gives them chase,
Heeds not the meaner troupes; but at hard heals,
Follows the fearful Amurath: mean while
The warlike Priest, more happy at his book
Doth quit his strength, falls on, thinks all is won,
Some chase the Turks, while others seek for prey,
And spoil their tents: they rued this greediness.
This when the Turks perceyude, they soon relied,
And chac't them now, by whom they erst were chased.
Here dyes the periurde King, the luckless Priest
Falls in a ditch, and there was choked with mud.
Where was the General? what did he this while?
His warlike troupes, stood firm both horse and foot:
Held on his chase, none durst against him make head:
But when he saw all lost, with watered eyes,
True signals of his grief, all safe retired,
And watched the Seigneur till he left those bounds.
Why, this was strange, Oh fie on perjury,
Isle not believe spensations of the Pope,
Had that foul Cardinal, choked in's mothers womb,
This shameful loss had scoped Christendom.
Thats true sir, pray drink one cup to me,
Deed I am dry.
I care not, soes not I.
Filt up, drinkte out, you are an honest man.
How dost Pasquill, perceiu'st thou nothing yet.
All well sit; nothing: I am prettily well,
And soes mine host, I think his brains doe crow.
But leaving these to come near to our times,
And nearer home, Isle give you one for al.
When Henry th'eight of famous memory,
Wan Bolleigue from the French: near Ardres town
A great Commander lighted from his horse,
When against the English they were to make head,
And served on foot, using such friendly speech:
You are the men I love, this like I best;
With you isle live and dye: Let me ask this;
What service ever did the horse alone,
In these our Belgic wars, without the foot?
Can they endure hunger, thirst or want,
Or march in cold, or heate, like to the foot:
Theyle dye like dogs, and you must eat them up;
Or theyle eat you.
Why whats the matter there?
Well Younker well, I will with you dispense,
Isle yield the foot the chief pre-eminence.
Your Worships welcome, you do grace mine house.
Thanks, good mine Host, is Phoebus past his height,
Or be times changed, first Noon beforte be night?
Your house is altered, its grown a School
Of good discourse; of martial discipline.
Wilt please you sir to drink?
Some Claret Wine;
No Beer, I seldom use to drink twixt meals,
Observe good diet, to preserve mine health.
Drink fasting in the morning strong March Beer,
Small Beer at Meals, and when my stomachs raw,
A Cup of Spanish Wine: Eat light Suppers,
Near sit up late at night: and rise betimes;
Oft walk abroad, and use much exercise:
These midnight Revels, Surfeits, Wine, and Whores,
And private quarrels, have deuourde more men
Then have the wars of late.
Sir, hears a Chair,
Please you to sit and take Tobaccho with vs.
Not I good Sergeant, Isle no Trinidad,
My nose shall not be reeyde, nor guts died black,
That dainty likes me not, that wholesome Weed,
Makes fulsome smell: a dying hound would choke
With Belgic fire, and with Spanish smoke.
You can endure the smell sir?
Wondrous well,
But not to take it; It doth purge mine head,
And makes me sneeze, as though I tookt my self.
Its well done Sergeant, you have held him up
With good discourse: All times not lost, I see,
Nor yet ill spent: place makes not men or good
Or bad, its lewdness, ill condition,
As vice or virtue doth in men abound;
Virtue from Heaven, Vice it comes from Hell,
And drags men's souls where monstrous Furies dwell.
Please you sir, I will drink one hearty draught
Unto your Worships welcome to the town;
In generous Claret, sparkling; this for me,
The only drink.
Drinkt out. — I thank you kindly.
To drink one hearty draught, will doe me good.
Yea twenty, if you will, hears Wine enough.
The town is full, good liquor wais it round,
The Moat thou meanest; thou speak in Metaphors:
You have been busy, I perceive the cup
Works his revenge, for ioaling it so oft.
A little sir, one civil cup or two.
That civil cup breeds incivility.
When wine sometimes makes men be not themselves
How dost thou Pasquill, I am glad thou art well?
I thank you sir, I want but Holidays.
What dost thou work so hard?
Pay-dayes I mean,
To make one meet another, and shake hands,
On even terms, is all that I care for.
Tic well thou lead a merry life.
Thank God.
My Mistress, and you sir: you are my friends
You make me drink, when others will not doot.
What news mine host, I like your humour well
Tic merry harmless, free without offence:
But wheres my man, was not he here to day.
He was indeed, but went before you came
About his business.
Since you might have said;
I saw him when he slinkte behind mine host
Gods blessing on your hart, what ere you think
You find no fault.
What news sir? did you ask?
Here is small news: our Church-men disagree
About opinions, which ne'er troubles me:
I am a man, I hope, believes the right,
Theres but one God, one true religion;
One way to heaven, two or three to hell,
If they teach right, according to Gods word.
I will believe them, otherwise isle choose.
Why thats well said, indeed those deep disputes
Are fitter for the Universities
To be discussed within the College walls
Amongst the learned, not to come abroad
In open Pulpits amongst the meaner sort,
Whose faith is weak, whose judgment cannot reach
Unto the depth of things: the Magistrate,
Whose sword I dare not touch, should look to this:
T'will breed combustions, hazard many souls;
Besides this place befits not this discourse;
Therefore isle break it off, Come lets away;
Isle to my wife, I left her at your house:
Son Garland, there I mean to dine;
To morrow I enuite you to my house
To eat some venison, here tic novelty;
It came from England, baked in Rye paste,
Look that you come, mine host this recknings mine:
Let not my son score high: for if you doe
Tic lost for me, Isle not pay one penny.
No sir, he does not, needs not, will not sir;
I will not miss you, if it shall please God
Nothing shall stay me, nought shall keep me back.
And Isle come too, and though I go on foot.
Why come &amp; welcome, thats your chiefest cheer
I keep no feast, but what lasts all the year.
If I escaped unseen, why so it is:
If not I care not much: it is but so;
Perhaps a chiding, sour look, or rap,
Its but a storm, it will be soon ore-past;
May be, just nothing: but isle haste me home;
Set up mine horses, dress my stable up,
And do such things, as I doe use to doe,
So I be doing, tic no matter what:
If it be not ill, and may bring profit in,
Or otherwise, prevent a wilful waste.
Things must be handsome, idleness is nought,
My Mistress loves me for my cleanliness.
Our yard lies handsome, theres no scattered straw
Nor sticks, nor chippes, but all things be as neat,
As some mans house, not rooted hog-stye like;
Or else poor Hans his iacquet hums: my coat
Is sure to pay for it: ere my master comes
Isle be at home; if Pasquill ere come there
Isle sit on's skirts, fear't not, for out of doubt,
Isle use him so, the boys shall find him out.
I told you wife where I should find your son;
Your sons I might have said: for they were both
Fast at the pot, some talked, some drunk as fast;
The cups flew high, &amp; brains waxed something light
I doe perceive wise men sometimes lash out,
And thrifty too: would you have thought my son
The Merchant M. Garland would have stepped
Into a tappe-house, there to spend his time,
And money both.
Why not? tic recreation,
Sometimes for company, always at home;
It makes it loathsome, dulls the brain and sense:
We must not think on profit always, win,
Spend now and then, though not to please our selves
For others sakes.
Well: you will still excuse,
Your son, this gives too much encouragement
To his amiss.
I speak not fore his face,
Nor doe I like in him, what you dislike:
My will is yours; but should I say as you
We should not reason, so to pass the time;
For when I speak, and speak the same you doe;
You'll not reply, then both our tongues are still;
But if I cross you, though it be not much,
I hear more of you, sometimes learn more wit▪
Your answers sharpe, it cutteth razor like,
A women's wit is quick, as quick her tongue,
As Aspen leaves, some say it is the last
Part of a woman dyes.
Alas poor souls, we women must bear all
We weaker vessels must abide your frumps:
But tic no matter, while they break no skin,
Our backs were made to bear.
Your bellyesfull,
Our children do you mean? thats Gyptiā like:
For so they bear them, in their slats or sheets;
If otherwise, my modest cheeks would blush
To answer you.
Better and better still;
Your apprehension takes like tutch; its hard
To find a woman quick of wit, so mild,
So modest, shamefaced, and so debonair.
It joys me much, a women's modesty,
And grieves my soul to hear a scolding queen,
That sets her husbands night-cap on with horns.
Be there such women?
No, there should not be,
I doe not say there are; I know none such;
All women are alike to me, Isle swear,
If my skill fail not, thoult not cuckold me,
Nor bring more children, so thy planet says,
I found it, casting thy Nativity.
Oh sir, those studies are but fopperies,
They are conjectures, theres no certainty,
Scarce warrantable, by the word of God,
Yet Scholars use them, if not good, the more,
Their fault, my fancy tells me so.
Tic true:
The art is lawful, tic Astrology,
But th'arts abuse in those predictions
Stretching a string too far, mars all;
We must not attribute to creatures that
Which the Creator wills; its he alone,
That guides our bodies, not the influence
Of stars or Planets, without him their power
Is nothing; nor doth he reveal his will
In them; yet wonders strange they oft foreshew,
Which men may guess at, none knows till tic past;
Therefore I hold them idle vanity.
Now sir, you are welcome home, this idle chat
Hath shortened our way: Isle to my Dayerie;
I must spare time to see my house wifery.
Shall I not have a pleasant journey on it
Think you, that must take such provision
With me: a Tankard full of Spanish Wine
Like those in London Water-bearers use;
The which the Merchant sends to his Father
A baked Swan, and two huge Turky-cockes;
Two bottles of French Wine, the Sergeant sends
And M. Flutterkin. I am their man
Must doe their business, must haste on a fore,
While they take leisure: Nay Isle get two more
To wait on me, and row me in a boat
With this my luggage: when I am dry, Isle drink,
And taste a bit: but that the Pies are whole;
O theres the grief: but yet Isle have a trick
Shall serve my turn, ere I will starve for meat.
Three English miles, and neither drink nor eat?
It is too great a journey, I shall scarce hold out
Without refreshing, something by the way,
Will doe me good, but for mine honest men;
Isle keep them sober, give them never a drop
Till they come there, unto the Younkers house,
Where they shall have enough; too much I doubt
Without more heed; yet none will force them drink;
But if they'll takte, their Buttery is so free.
A drunkard will be caught, before hoe's ware;
There's Hans his man, that rascal Beere-pot,
He will be doing, though he gets the worst;
And when his head flies light, why then hee runs
To look to his horse, and there he false a sleep
Ore th'eares in litter; but Isle watch him now.
Isle keep him from the Stable; then I am sure
To nogge him soundly; Isle eorroborate
My Peare-pot bravely; Isle buffticulate,
And counter-ieere him with my terms of Art;
Ribrost his downs, fling up my Gallants heals;
Make him take heed hereafter: be he wise
To deal with Soldiers in a drinking prize.
But time hastes on, and I must hence with speed;
What's left with me in trust, Isle do it indeed.
Burston dantmarden, calaminthay pindara toekson,
Marnuta maltalton, tintima marra tolon.
I brought with me great store of Barbary gold;
But all is gone, my parrell quite worn out;
And in this fashion am ashamed to go,
For fear my father would not look on me;
But if good fortune furnish me again.
With your free wills Isle run from hence to Spain.
Here may you see how fortune turns her wheel:
I that before did many men command;
Am now constrained to serve my Masters man;
For Fortune I care not, that fickle Whore;
I will be merry still, though near so poor.
I thank you both, for you have made me fine;
These gloves and garters they were quickly won:
Each day so set on work, I should be rich.
Blessed be my Grandam brought me up at School
Where I learned wit, more then you thought I had.
He hath drild vs both, &amp; mocks vs to our teeth
What shall we do with him? weel' canuase him.
I am too big.
VVee'l fling him in the graffe,
T'wil cool him sweetly; oh t'will doe him good.
Were I an Anabaptist, you might do it,
And witness for me that I were baptist;
But that I had in the town where I was borne,
Ere eight days old, I doe remember't yet.
O monstrous, fie, thy mouth is foully torn,
Art not ashamed?
As well I swear,
As the first smock that ere my Father vveare.
Let him alone &amp; he will maintain't with oths.
See, see how you are deceived, you thought I lyde,
There's no such matter, altered is the case,
As surely as I live, and walking in this place.
Riming again, Isle deal no more with you;
I had enough of late, I paid too dear
For your conceits, Isle have no more of them.
As often as you will, you know the price;
And for my skill I pass not, am not nice.
Well to him Sergeant, now isle take thy part
Against him, as he did thine before against me;
Isle be revenged for his discourtesy.
I marvel much whore's Master Flutterkin?
He stays so long I think he hath forgot himself.
O here he is, his guts they are so stuffed,
With his fat liquor he can scarcely run.
Scarce run, scarce go, this barreld Sturgeon
Is out of breath, his grease begins to melt.
Mock on my Gallants, see what will come on it,
A shame on Lurchers, you have kilde me up.
I ran so fast, ere I could oretake you.
A child of two year old would run as fast.
Then Isle be hanged, good sir, how can that run?
That doth but dade, can hardly go or stand.
Wheres Pasquill is he gone?
Hoe's there by this?
I saw him at the Ports, that Gentleman
Is ats two men; takes boat, sits down at ease,
And takes Tobacco, while they row him on,
He keeps a bottle just betwixt his legs,
Drinks when he list, and so he sets it down.
Would I were with him in such aequipage;
Or he were here, for I am almost choak't.
Why, how Flutterkin, at your Brande-wine?
I pray thee give me some.
Not the least drop.
Were you a thousand Merchants; 
Or Younkers not a drop,
Think you Isle dye
For want of wholesome drink? al's out, see there:
So now I am well, can walk a mile or two,
As lustique as a Boor, and near complain.
My fathers yonder, he comes here to meat's.
So nigh already; Oh, I see the house;
I smell the Kitchen, see the Chimneys smoke.
Come Sergeant; put the better leg before;
You shall speak first, if well, Isle second you.
Thanks good mine Host, your wit would help me much
For good conceits your wholesome guts have hatched,
When sod in sack, your brains begin to flow.
Out from the horror of infernal deeps;
Pass forwards on; for I must stay behind:
Some small occasion bids me stand aside.
Its well your come, for I did think you long:
And that you had forgot to keep your words.
I bid you welcome to my Country farm;
Take that for all, Isle use no ceremony.
Isle warrant you sir, we did not mean to fail,
To stay at home, and miss so good a feast,
Ti's Christmas now, It comes but once a year;
And when it comes, men say, it brings good cheer.
Here's Flutterkin takes leisure, comes behind;
Good man he sweates, his guts keep him so warm.
But fear of fainting by the high way side,
He hath provided to preserve his health;
Brande-Wine a creuse, which he drinks out himself.
I hear you Sergeant, I can bear your mocks:
You never knew fat men but honest yet;
A good companion, full of mirth and wit;
Lean jade cast off, lye starving in a ditch;
When plumper steeds are steemde among the rich.
Are you so nigh, I thought you had been lost:
By your leave sir; Isle welcome here mine Host.
Ha Sergeant I have known thee to serve long,
And yet thou stick, belike thou lik'st thy game:
Try friends and fortune, may be it will hit
To make thee higher on preferments steppe;
Stand not on thorns: adventure, draw a card.
So may I draw, and draw my self quite out:
And striving to get more, loose that I have.
Times are not now as they were erst, when you
Did haunt the fields, and led a Soldiers life:
Men had respect, and then were looked upon
For their deserts; but now tic nothing so.
Reward goes backward, honour on his head,
And due deserts are slight regarded now:
He that wants gold, seeks place, may stand aloof;
Stand fast he that would rise, or else he falls;
That now is sold, which then was but free gift;
Promotions fall not, but are bought before;
He that mounts now, he doth not as of old;
Rise by his virtues, but helped up with gold.
With leave and reverence may I speak my mind;
What though my friends be rich? it grieves me much
To see poor Soldiers walk in mean attire;
And less respect that have deserved well,
Grown old in wars, and got nothing but blows,
Wide gaping wounds, lost limbs and broken bones,
And just preferment, which another gets,
And they deserved, and perhaps a man
That never saw the field, nor chimneys smoke;
But those at home within his native soil.
Each man would up, there's none I am sure would down;
And they may use their talents as their own
To their own good and glory; not the hurt
Of poor or rich, of Kingdoms, Commonwealths;
I blame not those that seek to increase their wealth,
Or better their estates by honest means;
I wrong not Princes, touch not their affairs.
Carpe not at men, but times corruptions;
Some climb too fast, and climbing catch a fall;
If please God he can help it, he helps all.
The Romans used to make their Worthies known,
By honoured titles, and with ornaments,
As rings and chains, gilt swords, and spurs of gold,
Which none might wear but such as were allowde.
But now Jack Sauce will be in's gilded spurs,
Whose father brewde good Ale for honest men:
Lodged Peddlers, Tinkers, Bearewards such a crew,
The scum of men, the plain rascality,
Such was Auratus Aquas miles called;
The French men now, call him Vncheualier;
We call them Rydders, the English name them Knights;
T'was strange to see, what Knighthood once would doe;
Stir great men up, to lead a martial life,
Such as were nobly borne, of great estates
To gain this honour, and this dignity;
So noble a mark to their posterity.
But now alas, it's grown ridiculous,
Since bought with money, sold for basest prize;
That some refuse it, which are counted wise.
But heere's the difference; for we use to say,
Is such one Knighted? he deserved it well;
Hoe's learned, wise, an hopeful Gentleman;
Hath been abroad, hath seen and knows the wars:
He speaks more language then his mothers tongue,
He can doe's country service, or his Prince
At home, abroad by Sea, or else by land,
Maintain the sword of civil government:
But such ones made a Knight: What that Arch-Clowne!
His wit is like his mothers milking pail:
Brought up at home, or at Hogsnorton School:
His Father near gave arms, writ good-man Cluneh,
And he kept sheep, or beasts, drove plough or cart:
The first on's name, first Knight, then Gentleman.
God give him joy; his honour cost him dear:
A sotte in Crimson, grown a golden Knight;
Well may it become him, he becomes not it:
More then an Ass, a rich caparison.
You are two bitter son, you speak too townsman like,
As one that envies Country Gentlemen:
He that doth raise his house, although a Clown,
Is happier far, then he that pulls it down.
Indeed thats true, for he may have a Son,
Whose better breeding may help those defects,
That beins father; may be fit to rule,
The Sword of Justice in a common-wealth,
Raises his house and name, sets it higher,
Writes second Knight, a Justice, or Esquier.
When I was in my flower of youth, and lived
In Englands Court, that swarmde with Martialists,
Seamen and Soldiers, there had great respect,
Were set by; honoured more then other men,
As Drake and Candish. Hawkins, Frobisher,
Williams, and Baskernile two valiant Knights,
Those worthy brothers known by Norreis name:
The Ʋeres, the Shirleis, and the Constables,
Sir Thomas Morgan, brave Lord Willoughbie,
Whom Spaniards termed the fierce, the devil of hell;
Renowned Essex, famous Cumberland,
And both the Howards prooude so oft at Sea
With tempests, roaring billows, Canon shot;
George Somers Knight, Carlisle and Lancaster,
Were not the least; these lived in my time;
And divers more whose names I have forgot,
That served in Ireland, whom those bloody wars▪
Made famous unto all posterity,
Some living yet, some folded up in lead,
That died in honours lap; sleep in her bed.
Then was a time that soldiers were esteemed,
And if they lived they had preferment sure,
And those that died were well provided for;
Then did men rise from meanest parentage
By their deserts, to places of account,
As some you named, not borne to any thing;
Did raise their fortunes to a great estate,
And gave no bribes, did not one penny pay,
To any cogging Claw-backe Sycophant,
And for deserts had freely what they had;
For happy was that man, though near so great,
That could doe honour to a man of war,
As those that served in France amongst those broils,
And civil discords yet can testify,
When that rich kingdom piteously torn
All stained with gore, half mared with fire &amp; sword
What there was got, how much account was had
Of them: when back they made their home return:
When happy Bourbon got those lilies three;
Began their peace: did end that misery.
I saw those wars, and saw that nauall fight
In eighty eight twixt Spain and English fleet.
With Norreis went I unto Portugal,
And was with Essex at the sack of Cales,
From thence to Ireland where I was a while,
But Newport battle that made up my mouth,
The last great service that I ere was at,
Where being sore hurt, was weak, and sick long time,
Ere I was well, and had my former health
Before that time, if ought were to be done.
Each summer was I wandering still abroad,
And what I got, increased my livelihood,
Each year a little, till I had enough,
I thank my God, he tossed me to and fro,
And sent me home at last to live in peace;
Per mare, per terrace, per tot discrimenarerum
Tendimus in Latium: this Aeneas said.
In Latin land when Trojan wars were past,
To live in peace we are arrived at last.
Blessed be that hand which brought this blessed peace;
And blessed be those that pray it never cease.
O happy you, that so did spend your time,
In dangers great abroad, by sea and land,
While lazy Lurdaines lay and slept at home,
You raised your fortunes, got a brave estate,
And after all, now lead a Country life,
Amongst your neighbours with a virtuous wife.
Why thats a comfort, far beyond compare▪
This happy life cannot be paragonde,
My own conceit hath rapt me from my self,
Me thinks I am such one, my state is such,
And how I sit by mine own fire side
With my sweet wife, the life of my dear life,
And tell my children, what I erst have seen
To encourage them, to tread their Fathers steps;
To make them bold to banish servile fear.
Tic heaven on earth; the minds and hearts content,
A Kingdoms riches: can a man have more?
Then Gods sweet peace: the love of Common-wealth;
His minds desires and bodies perfect health.
Here comes my wife, and Pasquill with my man,
Think Dinners ready, we will leave discourse.
Please you come in, your meat is taking up,
And you may talk as well by th'fire side.
We come sweet wife, come give me thy fair hand;
Weal walk in couples one turn round about.
Tic Temple fashion, there observed yet.
By th'ancient Seniors, dancing in a ring,
Their stately measures, hand in hand by two
And two; upon their solemn revel nights,
And then weal in, and drink full Nectar cups,
And taste such meat, as God hath given vs,
Yet midst of mirth remember them that want,
To comfort them, with some part of our store
In harmless mirth; thus have we done our parts;
If you be pleased, how joyful are our hearts.
Revenge, revenge for Pasquils ugly whore,
Isle make him drunk, was never creature more.
You would but cannot, thank you good Sir Hans,
If I be drunk, your self shall lead the dance.
What? did he hear me? now this bargains made;
Once warned, half armed, so doth the Proverb say.
Now if I would, I cannot, he will none,
He not adventure, least I first be gone;
He saw me not, yet sees what I would doe;
Him isle requite, see not, and yet see too▪
Isle give him what he wants, or drink or meat,
And all you too, if that you please to eat,
At your own costs, for my store will not do it,
My means are short, they will not reach vntoo't.
In such excess, I will not doe amiss;
My mind is altered, you may see by this:
And for what's past: if it have moude delight,
I take my leave rejoice, and so good night.

IS the Law firm Sir?
The Law, what more firm Sir,
More powerful, forcible, or more permanent?
By my troth Sir,
I partly doe b•leeve it; conceive Sir
Y•u have indirectly answered my question.
I did not doubt the fundamental grounds
Of Law in general, for the most solid,
But this particular Law that me concerns
Now at the present, if that be firm and strong,
And powe•full, and forcible, and permanent.
I am • young man that has an old father.
Nothing more strong Sir,
It is Secundum statutum Principis
Confirmatum cum voce senatum,
Et voce republicae, nay consummatum
Et exemplificatum, is it not in force
When divers have already tasted it
And paid their lives for penalty?
Tic true.
My father must be next, this day completes
Full fourscore years upon him.
Hes heer then
Sub poena statute, hence I can tell him.
T•for then all the Physicians in the world,
He cannot live out to morrow; this is
The most certain Climactericall year,
Tic past all danger, for ther's no scoping it:
What age is your mother Sir?
Faith near her days to,
Wants some two of three•score.
So, sh•el drop away
One of th•se day•s to; hee•s a good age now
For those that h•ve old p•rents, and rich inheritance.
And Sir tic profitable for others too:
Are there not fellows tha• lie bed-rid in their offices
That younger men would wa•k lustily in:
Churchmen, •hat ev•n •he s•cond infancy
Hath silenced, yet hath spun out their lives so long
That many pregnant and ingenious spirits
Have langu•shd in their hoped r•versio•s,
A•d died upon the thought, and by your leave Sir,
Have you not pl•ces filled up in th• L•w
By some grave Senators, that you imagine
Have held them long enough, and such sp•r•ts as you.
Were they removed, w•u•d leap into the•• d•gniti••?
Dic q• bus in terris &amp; eri• mihi magnus Apollo.
Bu• tell me faith y•u f•ir opinion:
First not a sound and n•cease•y Law
This (by the Duke) enact•d •
Nev•• d•d Gr••ce
(Our 〈…〉 of brave• P•il•sophers)
Amongst all her N•m• the•• •nd Lawgiv•rs,
No• when she floe•each•d in her seven fold sages,
(Whose living m•mori can ••v•r die)
Produce a Law more grave and necessary.
I'm of that mind to.
I w•ll maintain Sir,
Draco's Oliga•chy• that the government
Of Comm•nity reduced into few
Framed a fair state; Solons Crecopedi
That cut off poor men's debts to their rich creditors
Was good and charitable (but not full allowed.)
His Sisaith•e did refo•m that error,
His honourable Senate of Are•pagitae,
Licurgus was more loose, and gave too free
And licentious reyns unto his discipline,
As that a young woman in her husbands weakness
Might choose her able friend to propogate;
That so the Commonwealth might be supplied,
With hope of lusty spirits, Plato did err,
And so did Aristotle, allowing
Lewd and lu•u•ious limits to their Laws;
But now our Epir•, our Epires Evander,
Our noble and wi•e Prince• has hit the Law
That all our predecessive students
Have mist unto their shame.
Forbear the praise Sir.
Tic in it self most pleasing, Cleanthes
Oh lad heers a spring for young plants to flourish,
The old trees must down kept the sun from us,
We shall rise now boy.
Whether Sir I pray?
To the ble•k air of storms, among those trees,
Which w• had shelter from.
Yes from our growth,
Our sap and livelihood and from our fruit,
W••t tic not Jubilee with thee yet, I think,
Thou look so sad o•t, how old's thy father?
Jubilee, no indeed, tic a bad year with me.
Prithee how old's thy father, then I can tell thee?
I know not how to answer you Simonides,
Hes is too old being now exposed
Unto the rigour of a cruel Edict,
And yet not old enough by many years,
Cause I'd not see him go an hour before me.
These ve•• p•scions I speak to my father,
Come, come, heers none but friends heer, we may speak
Our insides freely, these are Lawyers man,
And shall be Counsellors shortly.
They shall be now Sir,
And sh•ll have la•ge fees if thei'le undertake
To help a good cause (for it wants assistance)
Bad ones (I know) they can insist upon.
Oh Sir. we must undertake of both parts,
But the good we have most good in.
Pray you say,
How doe you allow of this strange Edict?
Secundum Iustitiam, by my faith Sir,
The happiest Edict that ever was in Epire.
What• to kill innocents Sir, it cannot be,
It is no rule in justice there to punish.
Oh Sir,
You unde•stand a conscience, but not law.
Why sir, is there so main a difference•?
You'll never be good Law•er if you not•rstand not that.
I think then tic the b•st to be a bad one.
Why sir, the very letter and the sense both
Doe both orethrow you in this statute,
Which that speaks, that every man living to
Fourscore years, and women to threescore, shall then
Be cut off as fruitless to the Republike,
And Law shall finish what nature lingerd at.
And this suit shall soon be dispatcht in Law.
It is so plain it can have no Demur,
The Church-Booke overthrows it.
And so it does
The Church Book overthrows it if you read it well.
Still you run from the Law into error:
You say it takes the lives of Innocents,
I say no, and so says common reason:
What man lives to fourscore and women to three
That can die innocent?
A fine lawful evasion:
Good sir rehearse the full statute to me•
Fie thats too tedious, you have already
The full sum in the brief relation.
Sir, amongst many words may be found contradictions,
And these men dare sue and wrangle with a Statute,
If they can pick a quarrel with some error:
Listen sir, isle gather it as brief as I can for you, Anno Primo Evandri, bee it (for the care and good of the Com∣mon wealth for divers necessary reasons that wee shall urge) thus peremptorily enacted•
A fair pretence if the reasons foul it not.
That all men living in our Dominions of Epire in their decayed nature, to the age of four score, or women to the age of three score, shall on the same day bee instantly put to death, by those means and instruments that a former Proclamation had (to this purpose) through our said territories dispersed.
There was no women in this Senate certain.
That these men being past their bearing Arms, to aide and defend their Country, past their manhood and livelihood, to propogate any further issue to their posterity, and as well past their counsels (which overgrown gravity is now run into dotage) to assist their Country, to whom in common reason, nothing should be so wearisome as their own lives, as it may be supposed is tedious to their successive heirs, whose times are spent in the good of their Country, yet wanting the means to maintain it; and are like to grow old before their inheritance (borne to them) come to their necessary use, for the which are the women, for that they never were defence to their Country, never by Counsel ad∣meted to the assist of government of their Country, only noses∣sary to the propagation of posterity, and now at the age of three∣score to be past that good, and all their goodness: it is thought f•t then a quarter abated from the more worthy member to be put to death as is before recited: provided that for the just and impartial execution of this our Statute the exa•ple shall first begin in and a∣bout our Court, which our self will see carefully performed, and not for a full Month following extend any further into our Do∣minions: Dated the sixth of the second month at our Palace•Roy∣all in Epire.
A fine edict, and very fairly gilded
And is there no scruple in all these words,
To demurr the Law upon occasion?
Pox tic an unnecessary inquisition,
Prithee set him not about it.
Troth none sir,
It is so evident and plain a case
There is no succour for the Defendant.
Possible, can nothing help in a good case?
Faith sir I doe think there may be a hole
Which would protract delay if not remedy.
Why theres some comfort in that good sir? speak it•
Nay you must pardon me for that sir.
Prithee doe not,
It may op a wound to many Sons and Heirs
That may die after it.
Come sir, I know how to make you speak, will this doo•?
I will afford you my opinion sir.
Pray you repeat the literal words expressly
The time of Death.
Tic an unnecessary question, prithee let it alone.
Hear his opinion, twill be fruitless sir.
That man at the age of four •core, and women at threescore
Sh•ll the same day be pu• to death.
Thus I help the man to twenty one years more,
That were a fair addition.
Mark it, sir wee s•y man is not at age
Till he be one and twenty before his infancy
And idol•censie, nor by that addition,
Foe•score he cannot be till a hundred and one.
Oh poor evasion!
Hes fourscore years old sir,
That help• more sir
He begins to be old at fifty, so at fourscore,
Hes but thirty years old, so believe it sir,
He may be twenty years in declination
And so long may a man linger and live bit
The worst hope of safety that ere I heard,
G•v• h•m his fee again, tic not worth two de•ears.
T•eres no L•w for rest••u•ion of •ees sir.
N• no sir, I meant it lost when it was given.
No more good sir
Here are ears unnecessary for your doctrine.
I have spo•• out my fee and I have done sir.
Oh my dear father!
Tush meet me not in exclaims
I understand the worst and hope no better:
A fine L•w, if this hold, white heads will be cheap
And many watch men's places will be vacant
Forty of em I know my seniors,
That did due deeds of darkness to their Country,
H•s watched em a good turn fort, and tan em
N•pping now, the fewer Hospitals will serve to,
Many may be used for stews and brothels
And those people will never trouble em to fourscore.
Can you play and sport with sorrow sir?
Sorrow, for what Antigona? for my life,
My sorrows I have kept it so long well
With bringing it up unto so ill an end:
I might have gently lost it in my Cradle,
Before my Nerves and Ligaments grew strong
To •inde it faster to me.
For mine own sake
I should have be•no sorry •or that.
In my •outh
I was a Son d••r• no Coward in my age,
I never •u•nd my back upon my foe,
I •av• felt n•tu••s win•••s sickn•sses,
Y•t •v•r k•pt a •iv•lie s•p in me
To greet the ch•er•full• sp•ing of health again:
D•ngers on Ho•s•back, on Foot by W•la,
I have escaped to this day, and yet this day
Without all help of casual ass•dents
Is only deadly to me, c••se it numbers
Foe•score years to me, where•s the •au•t now?
I cannot blame Time, Natu•e, nor my Stars
Nor ought but Tyranny, ev•n Kings thems•lv•s
Have some times tasted an even f•te with me,
He that has been a Soldier all his day•s
And stood in pe•sonall opposition, against D•rts and Arrows, the Extremes o• heat,
And pinch•ng cold• has treacherously at home
In his secure•d quiet by a vi•lain•s hand
Am basely lost in my star•s ignorance
And so must I die by a Tyrants sword.
Oh say not •o sir, it is by the Law!
And whats that sir •ut the sword of •yranny
When it is brandished against inno•ent lives?
I'm now upon my death bed sir, and tic •i•
I should unbosom my free conscience
And show the faith I die in, I doe believe
Tic tyranny that ta••es my life.
Would it were gone
By one means or other, what a long day
Will this be ere night?
Simonides.
Heer sit — w•aping.
Wherefore dost •thou 〈◊〉?
Cause you make no more haste to your end.
How can you qu•stion nature so unjustly?
I had a grandfather, and then had not you
True fili•ll tears for him?
Hypocrite•
A disease of drought dry up all pity from him
That c•n diss•mble pity with w•t eyes
Be good unto your mother Simonides,
She must be now your care.
To what end sir?
The bell of this sharp edict towls for me
As it rings out for you, Isle be as ready
With one hours stay to go along with you.
Thou must not women•n, there are years behind
Before thou can set forward in this voyage,
And nature sure will now, be kind to all:
She has a quarrel int, a cruel Law
Seeks to prevent her, sheel therefore fight int
And draw out life even to her longest thread
Thou art scarce fifty five.
So many morrows,
Those five remaining years isle turn to days
To hours or minutes for thy company,
Tic fit that you and I being man and wife
Should walk together arm in arm.
I hope they'll go together, I would they would i faith,
Then would her thirds be saved to, the day goes away sir.
Why would thou have me gone Simonides?
O my hart, would you have me gone before you sir?
You give me such a de•dly wound.
fine rascal.
Blemish my duty so with such a qu•stion,
Sir I would hast me to the Duke foe• mercy,
He thats above the Law may mitigate
The rigour of the Law• how a good meaning
May be corrupted by misconstruction?
Thou cor•upt'st mine, I did not think thou meanest so.
You were in the more error.
The words wounded me.
It was pity thou died not ont.
I have been ransaking the helps of Law
Conferring with these learned advocates,
If any scruple cause or wrested sense
Could have been found out to preserve your life,
It had been bought though with your full estate,
Your lifes so precious to me, but there is none.
Sir we have c•nva•'d it •rome top to toe,
Turned it upside down, thr•w her on her side
Nay opend and dissected all her in• •oils
Y•t can find none, theres nothing to be hopd
But t•e Dukes mercy.
I know the hope of that,
He did not make the Law for that purpose.
Then to his hopeless mercy la•t I go,
I have so many presidents b•fore me.
I must c•ll it hopeless Antigona,
See me d•liverd up unto my deaths man
And then weell p••t five years hence isle look for thee.
I hope sheel not stay so long behind you.
Do not bate him an hour by grief and sor•ow
Since theres a day prefixed, haste it not,
Suppose me sick Antigona, dying now
Any Disease thou 〈◊〉 may be my end
Or when D•ath• slow to come, say Tyrants send
Cleanthes if you want money, to morrow use me,
Isle trust you while your fathers dead.
Why here is a villain,
Able to corrupt a thousand by example,
Do•s the kind root bleed out his livelihood
In parent distribution to his branches,
Adorning 〈◊〉 with •ll his glorious fruits,
Proud that his pride is s••n when hes unseen,
And must not gratitude dis•end again
To comfort his old limbs in fruitless winter
Improvident, at le•st partial n•ture
Weak woman in this kind, who in thy last
Te•ming still forgets •he former, ever m•king
The burden of thy last throws the dear•st
D•rling; oh yet in noble man reform it,
And make us better then those v•get ves,
Whose souls die within 〈◊〉; nature as thou art old,
If love and justice be not dead in thee,
Make some the pattern of thy piety,
Lest all doe turn un•turally against thee,
And thou be blamed for our oblivions
And bru•sh •eluctations; I• heers the ground
Whereon my filial faculty•s mu•• build
A• edifice of honour or of •home
To all mankind.
You must avoid it sir:
If there be any love within your self,
This is far more then fate of a •oct game
That another venture may r•store •gen;
It is your life which you should not subj•ct
To any cruelty if you can preserve it.
O dearest woman, thou hast now doubled
A thousand times thy nuptial dowry to me;
Why she whose love is but derived from me
Is go• before me in my d•bted •uty.
Are you thinking such a resolution sir?
Sweetest Hippolita what love taught •hee
To be so forward in so good a cause?
Mine own pity sir, did first inst•used me
And then your love and power did both command me.
They were all blessed angels to direct thee,
And take their counsel; how doe you fare sir?
Never better Cleanthes, I have conceived
Such a new joy within this old bosom,
As I did never think would there have entered.
Joy call you it, alas tic sorrow sir,
The worst of sorrows, sorrow unto death.
Death, whats that Cleanthes, I thought not ont?
I was in contemplation of this woman.
Tic all thy comfort son, thou hast in her
A treasure unvaluable, keep her safe;
When I die, sure twilbe a gentle death;
For I will die with wonder of her virtues,
Nothing else shall disco•ve me.
It were much better sir,
Could you prevent their malice.
Isle prevent •m,
And die the way I told thee, in the wonder
Of this good woman. I tell thee there few men
Have such a child (I must thank thee for her)
That the stronger tie of wedlock should doe more
Then nature in her nearest ligaments
Of blood and prop•gation, I should near
Have begot such a daughter of my own:
A daughter in law, law were above n•ture
Were there more such children.
This admiration
Helps nothing to yeur safety, think of that sir.
Had you heard her Cleanthes but l•bore
In the search of means to save my forfe• life,
And knew the wise and sound preservation•
Th•t she foe•d out, you would redouble all
My wonder in your love to her.
The thought,
The very thought claims all that from m•,
And shees now possessed of it, but good sir,
If you have ought r•ceiv'd from her advice,
Lets follow it, or else lets better thy•k,
And take the surest course.
Isle tell thee one,
She counsels me to fly my severe Country,
Turn all into treasure, and there build up
My decaying fortunes in a safer soil,
Where Epires law cannot claim 〈◊〉
And sir, I apprehend it as safest course
And may be easily accomplished;
Let us be all most expeditious
Every Country where we breath will be our own,
O• better soil; heaven is the roof of •ll,
And now as Epires situ•te by this law,
There is twixt us and heaven a dark eclipse.
Oh then avoid it sir, these s•d events
Follow those black predictions.
I prithee peace,
I doe allow thy love Hippolita,
But m•st not follow it as counsel, child;
I must not shame my Country for the law:
Th•s Country heer hath bred me, brought me up,
And shall I now refuse a grave in her?
In•e in my second infancy• and children
Ne'er sleep so sweetly in their nurses c•adle.
As in their natural mothers.
I but sir,
She is unnatural, then the stepmother
Is to be preferred before her.
Tush, she shall
Allow it me despite of her entrails;
W•y doe you think how far from judgement tic
That I should travel forth to seek a grave
That is already digd for me at home,
Nay perhaps find it in my way to seek it?
How have I then sought a repentant sorrow?
For your dear loves how have I banished you
From your Country ever with my base attempt
How have I beggerd you in wasting that
Which only for you• sakes I b••d together,
Buried my name in Epire which I built
Upon this frame to live for ever in.
What a base coward shall I be to fly
From that enemy which every minute meets me?
And thousand odds he had not long vanquished me
Before this hour of battle, sly my death
I will not be so false unto your stat•s,
Nor fainting to the man thats yet in me,
Isle meet him b•avely, I cannot (this knowing) fear
That when I am gone hence I shall be there,
Come, I have d•yes of preparation left.
Good sir, hear me•
I have a Genius that has prompted me,
And I have almost formed it into words,
Tic done, pray you observe em, I can conceal you
And yet not leave your Country.
Tush, it cannot be
With•ut a certain peril once all.
D•nger must be hazarded rather then accept
A sure destruction• you have a Lodge sir,
So far remote from way of passengers,
Th•t seldom•e any mortal eye does greet with it,
And yes so sweetly situate with thickets
Built with such cunning L•borinths within,
As if the provident heavens foreseeing cruelty
Had bid you frame it to this purpose only.
Fie, fie, tic dangerous, and treason to,
To abuse the law,
Tic holy care sir,
Of your dear life, which is your own to keep,
But not your own to lose, either in will
O• negligence.
Call you it treason sir,
I had been then a traitor unto you,
Had I forgot this, beseech you accept of it,
It is secu•e• •nd a duty to your self.
What a co••rd will you make me?
You mist•ke•
Tic noble courage, now you fight with death,
And yield not to him till you stoop under him.
This must needs open to d•scovery,
And then what tortor follows?
By what means sir?
Why theres but one body in all this •ounsell,
Which cannot betray it self, we two are one,
One soul, one body, one heart, that think all one though•,
And yet we two are not completely one,
But as have derived my self from you,
Who shall betray us where there is no second?
You must not mistrust my faith though my sex•
Plead weak and frailty for me.
Oh I dare not!
But wheres the means that must make answer for me
I cannot be lost without a full account,
And what must pay that reckoning?
Oh sir, we will
Keep solemn obits for your funeral;
Weell seem to weep, and seem to joy withal
That death so gently has prevented you
The L•was sharp rigour, and this no mortal ear
Shall participate the knowledge of.
Ha, ha, ha,
This will be a sportive fine Demur•
If the Error be not found.
Pray doubt of none
Your company and best provision
Must be no further furnished then by us,
And in the interim your solitude
M•y converse with heaven, and fairly prepare
Which was too violent and raging
Th•own headlong on you.
Still there are some doubts
Of the discovery, yet I doe allow't.
Will you not mention now the cost and charge
Which will be in your keeping?
That will be somewhat
Which you might save to.
With his will against him;
What foe is more to man then m•n hims•lf•?
Are you resolved sir?
I am Cleanth•s:
If by this means I doe get a reprieve•
And cozen de•th a while, when he shall come
Armed in his own power to give the blow,
Isle smile upon him •hen, and laughing go.
EXecutioner.
My Lord.
How did old Diocles take his death?
As weeping Brides receive their joys at night my Lord,
With trembling yet with patience.
Why it was well.
Nay I knew my Father would d•e well my Lord.
When ere •e came to die, i'd that opinion of him.
Which made me the more willing to part from him;
He was not fit to live •'th world indeed any time these
Ten years my Lord.
But I would not say so much.
No, you did not well in•,
For he thats all spent is ripe for death at all hovers,
And does but trifle time out,
Troth my Lord,
I would I had known your mind nine years ago,
O•r Law is fourscore years, because we judge
Do•age complete then, as unfruitfullnesse
In Women at threescore, marry if the son
Can within compass bring good solid proofs
Of his own fath•rs weakness and unfitness
To live or sway the living though he want five
Or ten years of his number, thats not it,
His defect makes him fourscore, and tic fit
He dies when he deserves, for every •ct
Is in •ff•ct then when the cause is ripe.
An admirable Prince how rarely he talks?
Oh that w'eed known th•s Lads, what a time did we endure
In two penny Com•once? and in boots twice vamped.
Now we h•ve •wo p•ire a week, &amp; yet not thankful,
Twill be a fine world for them sirs that come after as.
I and they knew. 2. Cou. Pe•ce let them never knew.
A Pox the•e be young heirs will soon smelt out.
Twill come to em by instinct man, may your grace
N•v•r be old, you stand so well for youth.
Why now me thinks our Court looks like a Spring,
Sweet, fresh, and fashionable, now •he old weeds are gon.
Tic as a Court should be: Gloss and good Clothes,
My Lord no matter for merit and herein your Law p•ooves a provid•ned act my Lord, when men pass not the palsy of their Tongues, no• co•our in their Cheeks.
But women by that Law should live long,
For they are no•r past it.
It will have heats though when they see the painting
Go an inch deep ith wrincle, and take up
A box more then their Gossips, but for men my Lord
That should be the sole bravery of a Palace,
To walk with hollow eyes and long white beards,
(As if a P•irce dwelt in a Land of Goats)
With Clo•hes as if they sat upon their backs on purpose
To arraign a fashion and condemn't to exile
Their pockets in their sleeves, as if they laid
Their ear to avarice, and heard the Devil whisper;
Now ours lie downward here close to the flank,
Right spending pockets as a sons should be
T•at lives i•h fashion, where our diseased fathers
Would with the Sciatica and Aches
B•ought up y•ur p•end hose first, which Ladies laughed at,
Giving no reverence to the place, (lies •uind,)
They love a doublet thats three hours a buttoning,
And sits so close makes a man groan again,
And his Soul m•tter half a day; yet these are those
That carry sway and worth, pricked up in Clothes,
Why should we fear our rising?
You but wrong
Our kindness, and your own deserts to doubt ont,
Has no• our Law made you rich before your time?
Our countenance then c•n make you honourable.
Weel spare for no cost sir to appear worthy.
Why you're in the noble way then, for the most
Are but appearers, worth it self it is lost
And bravery st•nds fort.
Look, look, who comes here
I smell Death •nd another Courtier,
Simonides.
Simon.
Push, I'm not for you yet,
You• companies too costly, •fter the old mans
D•spatch'd I shall have time to talk with you,
I •hall come into the fashion ye shall see too
After a day or two, in the mean time
I am not for your company.
Old Cr•on you have been expected long.
Sure you're above fourscore.
Upon my life
Not four and twenty hours my Lord, I searched
The Chu•ch Book yesterday, does your Grace think
I'd let my Father wrong the Law my Lord?
It were pity a'my life then, no your Act
Shall not receive a minutes wrong by him
While I live sir, and hoe's so just himself too
I know he would no offer't, here he stands.
Tic just I die indeed my Lord, for I confess
I'm troublesome to life now, and the State
Can hope for nothing worthy from me now,
Either in force or counsel, I've alate
Employed my self quite from the World, and he that once
Begins to serve his maker faithfully
Can never serve a worldly Prince well after,
Tic clean another way.
Oh give not confidence
To all he speaks my Lord in his own injury!
His preparation only for the next world
Makes him talk wildly to his wrong of this,
He is not lo•t in judgement.
She spo•ls all again.
Des•rving •ny way for st•te employment.
Mother.
His v•rye household laws press•ib'd at home by him
A•e able to confo•m 7. Christian kingdoms,
Th•y are so wise and virtue•us.
Mother, I say.
I know your laws extend not to desert sir,
But to un•cessary years, and my Lord
His are no• such, though th•y show white, they are worthy,
Jud•t••us, able, and religious.
Isle help you to a Courtier of nineteen, Moth•r.
Awa• unnatural.
Then I am no fool I'm sure,
Foe• t• be natural at such a time
W•re a fool •s part end•ed.
You• G•aces pity sir,
An t•s but fit and just.
•h• law m• Lord,
And thats the j•st•st way.
W••l said •ather •faith.
Thou were ever juster then my mother still.
Come hither sir.
My Lord.
What are those orders?
Worth obse•vation sir,
So please you hear them read.
The woman speaks she knows not what my Lord:
He make a L•w, poor man he bought a Table indeed,
Only to learn to d•e by it; ther's •he business now
W•erein there •re some precepts for a son to,
How he should l•earn to live, but I near looked upont:
For when hes dead I shall live well enough,
And keep a better Table then •hat I trow•
And is that a•l sir?
All I vow my Lord,
Save a few •unning admonitions
Upon Cheese Trenchers, as Take heed of whoring, shun it;
Tic like a cheese too strong of the Run•t,
And such calves maws of wit and admonition
Good to catch mice with, but not sons and heirs,
They are not so easily caught.
Agent for death.
Your will my Lord.
Take hence that pile of years
Before surfeit with unprofitable age
And with the rest from the high promontory,
Cast him into the sea.
Tic noble justice.
Tic cursed tyranny.
Peace, take heed mother, you have but a short time to bee cast down your self, and let a young Courtier do it, and you bee wise, in the mean time.
Hence sl•ve.
Well seven and fife•y,
Yave but three years to sco'd, then comes your payment,
Simonides.
Push, I am not b•ave enough to hold you talk yet,
Give a m•n time. I have a su•t a m•king.
We love thy form fi•st, brave cloths will come man.
Isle make em come else with a mischief to em•
As other gallants doe, that have less left em.
Hark whence those sounds, whats that?
Some funeral
It seems my Lord, and young Cleanthes follows.
Cleanthes.
Tic my Lord, and i• the place
Of a chi•fe mourner to, but strangely habitat.
Yet su•table to his b•haviour, mark it,
He comes all the way smiling, do you observ't?
I •ever saw • Co•rs so joyfully follow•,
L•light co•ou•s and light cheeks, who should this be?
Tic • thy•g worth resolving.
One belike that doth participate
In this our present joy.
Cleanthes,
Oh my Lord.
He laughed outright now,
Was ever such a contrariety seen
In natural courses yet, nay professed openly?
I ha known a widow laugh closely my Lord
Under her handkercher, when tother part of her old face has w••
Like• rain in sunshine, but all the face to laugh apparently
Was never seen yet.
Yes mine did once.
Tic of a heavy time the joyfullst day
That ever son was born to.
How can that be•
I joy to make it plain, my father's dead.
Dead!
Old L•onides.
In his last month dead,
He beguiled cruel L•w the sweetliest
Tha• ever age was blessed to,
It g•eaves me that a tear should fall upont,
Being a thing so joyful; but his memory
Will work it out I see; when his poor heart b•ok
I did not so much but leapt for joy,
So mountingly I touched the stars me thought,
I would not hear of blacks I was so light•
But chose a colour Orient, like my mind,
For bla•ks are often such dissembling mourners,
There is no credit given toot, it has lost
All repute•tion by false sons and widows;
Now I would have m•n know what I resemble,
A truth indeed, tic joy clad like a joy,
Which is more honest then a cunning grief
Th•t's only faced with s•bless for a show,
But gaudy hearted; when I saw death come
So ready to deceive you, sir forgive me,
I could not choose but be entirely merry,
And yet to see now of a sudden
Naming but Death, I show my self a mortal,
Thats never constant to one passion long;
I wonder whence that tear came when I smiled,
In the production on it, sorrows a thief,
That can when joy looks on steal forth a grief,
But gracious leave my Lord, when I have performed
My last poor duty to my fathers bon•s,
I shall return your servant.
Well perform it,
The Law is satisfied, they can but die,
And by his death Cleanthes you gain well,
A rich and fair revenue.
I would I had even another father, condition he did the like
I have past it bravely, now how blessed was I
To have the dim sight, now tic confirmed
Past fear or doubts confirmed, on on I say,
He that brought me to man I bring to clay.
I'm wrapped now in a contemplation,
Even at the very sight of yonder Hearse,
I doe but think what a fine thing tic now
To live and follow some seven uncles thus,
As many Cozen Germans, and such people
That will leave Legacies, a pox Id see em hanged else ere Id follow
One of them, and they could find the way now Iv enough to be∣gin to be horrible covetous.
We come to know your Worships pleasure sir,
Having long served your father, how your good will
Stands towards our entertainment.
Not a jot i faith:
My father wore cheap garments, he might doot, I shall have all my Clothes come home to morrow, they will eat up all you, and there were more of you sirs; to keep you six at Livery and still mun∣ching.
Why I'm a Taylor, you've most need of me sir.
Thou mad•st my fathers clothes that I confess,
But what son and heir will have his fathers Taylor
Unless he have a mind to be well laughed at? Thast been so used to wide long side things, that when I come to truss I shall have the waste of my Doublet lie upon my buttocks, a sweet sight.
I a Butler.
Theres Jest need of thee fellow, I shall ne'er drink at Home, I shall be so drunk abroad.
But a cup of small beer will do well next morning sir
I grant you, but what need I keep so big a knave for a Cup of sm•ll Beer?
Butler you have your answer, marry sir a Cooke,
I know your mastership cannot be without.
The more ass art thou to think so, for what should I doe With a Mountebank, no drink in my house, the banishing the Butler might have been a warning for thee, unless thou meanst to Choke me.
Ith mean time you have choked me, me thinks.
These are superfluous vanities indeed,
And so accounted of in these days sir,
But then your B•yliff to receive your rents.
I prithee hold thy tongue fellow, I shall take a course to sp•nd em faster then thou can reckon em, tic not the rents must se•ve my turn, unless I mean to be laughed at, if a man should be seen out of slash me, let him ne'er look to be a right gallant: But •irrah with whom is y•ur business?
Your good mastership.
You have stood silent all this while, like men
That know their strengths i'these days, none of you
Can want employment, you can win me wagers
Footman in running races.
I dare boast it sir.
And when my bets are all come in and store
Then Coachman you can hurry me to my whore.
Isle •i•ke em into foam else.
Speaks brave matter,
And isle firk some to, or't shall cost hot water.
Why hears an age to make a Cooke a Ruffin, and scald the D•vell indeed, doe strange mad things, make mutton pasties of Dogs flesh, back Snal•es for Lamprie Pies, and Cats for Cunnies:
Come will you bee ruled by a Butlers advice once? for wee must m•ke up our fortunes some where now as the case stands, le•s •en therefo•e go seek out widows of nine and fifty and we can, thats within a year of their deaths, and so we shall bee sure to bee quickly rid of em, for • years enough of conscience to bee
troubled with a wife for any man living.
Oracle Butler, Oracle Butler, hee puts down all the Doctors a'th name.
Parthenia.
Mother.
I shall be troubled
This six months with an old Clog, would the Law
Had been cut one year shorter.
Did you call forsooth.
Yes, you m•st make some spoon meat for your father,
And warm three night caps for him, out apont
The mere conceit turns a young women's stomach,
His slippers must be warmd in August too,
And his gown girt to him in the very dogdaies
When every Mastiff lo•s ou•s tongue for heat,
Would not this vex a beauty of 19. now?
Alas I shall be tumbling in cold Bathes now
Under each arm pit a fi•e bean flower bag
To screw out whiteness when I list,
And some seven of the proprest men ith Dukedom,
M•king a B•nquet ready ith next room for me,
Where he that gets the first kiss is envied
And stands upon his guard a fortnight after;
This is a life for nineteen, but tic ju••ice
For old men, whose great acts stand in their minds
And nothing in their bodies, doe ne'er think
A woman young enough for their desire,
And we young wenches that have mother wits
A•d love to marry muck first, and man after,
Doe n•ver •think old men are old enough
That we may soon be rid on em theres ou• quittance;
I have wasted for the happy hour this two year
And if D•a•h be so unkind st•ll to let him live
All that time I am lost.
Young Lady.
O •weet p••cious bu• of beauty!
Troth she smells over all the house me thinks.
The Sweet Briers but a counterfeit to her•
It does exceed you only in the prickle,
But that it shall not long if you'll be ruled Lady•
What means this sudden visitation Gentlemen?
So passing well performed too, whose your Milliner?
Love and thy Beauty Widow.
Widow sir.
Tic sure and thats as good, in troth w'are suitors
We come a wooing wench, plain dealings best.
A wooing, what before my Husbands dead?
Lets lose no time, 6. months will have an end you know,
I know it by all the Bonds that ere I made yet.
Thats a sure knowledge, but it holds not here sir.
Do not you know the craft of your young Tumblers? That you wed an old man, you think upon another husband as yo• are marrying of him, wee knowing your thoughts made bold to see you.
How wondrous right he speaks it was my thought indeed.
By your leave sweet Widow, do you lack any gallants?
Widow again, tic a comfort to be called so.
Whose this Simonides.
Brave Simon I faith.
Coachman.
Sir.
Have an especial care of my new mares,
They say sweet Widow he that loves a horse well
Must needs love a Widow well, when dies thy Husband?
I'st not July next.
Oh you're to hot sir!
Pray cool your self and take September with you.
September oh I was but two Bows wide.
Mr. Simonides.
I can entreat you gallants, I'm in fashion too.
Ha, whence this heard of folly, what are you?
Well willers to your wife, pray tend your book sir,
We have nothing to say to you, you may go die,
For here be those in place that can supply.
Whats thy wild business here?
Old man, i'll tell thee,
I come •o beg the reversion of thy Wife,
I think these gallants be of my mind too, but thou art but • dead
Man, therefore what should a man doe talking with thee,
Come Widow stand to your t•ckling.
Impious blood hounds.
Let the Ghost talk, ne'er mind him.
Shames of nature.
Alas poor Ghost, consider what the man is.
Monsters unnatural, you that have been covetous
Of your own fathers deaths, gape ye for mine now?
Cannot a poor old man that now can reckon
Even all the hours he has to live, live quiet
For such wild beasts as these, that neither hold
A certainty of good within themselves,
But scatter others comforts that are ripened
For holy uses? is hot youth so hasty
It will not give an old man leave to die?
And leave a Widow first, but will make one
The Husband looking on, may your destructions
Come all in hasty figures to your Souls,
Your wealth depart in hast, to overtake
Your honesties, that died when you were infants.
May your male seed be hasty spend thrifts too?
Your daughters hasty sinners and diseased
Ere they be thought at years to welcome misery,
And may you never know what leisure is
But at repentance: I am too uncharitable
Too foul, I must go cleanse my self with prayers;
These are the Plagues of fondness to old men
Wee'r punished home with what we dote upon.
So so, the Ghost is vanished now, your answer Lady.
Exc•se me gentlemen, it were as much impudence
In me to give you a kind answer yet.
As madness to produce a churlish one.
I could say now, come a month hence sweet gentlemen,
Or two or three, or when you will indeed,
But I say no such thing. I set no time
Nor is it mannerly to deny any,
Isle car•y an even hand to all the world,
Let other women m•ke what hast they w•ll,
Whats that to me, but I profess unfeignedly•
Isle have my husband dead before I marry,
Ner• look for other answer at my hands Gentlemen.
Would he were hanged for my part look for other.
Ime at a word
And Ime at a blow then,
Isle lay you of the lips and leave you.
Well struck Simon.
He that dares say heell m•nd it, Isle strike him.
He would betray himself to be a brother
That goes about to m•nd it.
Gentlemen, you know my mind, I bar you not my house,
But if you choose out hours more seasonably
You may have entertainment.
What will she doe heerafter when sh is a widow,
Keeps open house already?
How now Girl?
Those featherd fools that hither took their flight,
Have grieved my father much.
Speak well of youth Wench
While th••st a day to live; tic youth must make thee,
And when youth fails, wise women will make it;
But always take age first to make thee rich:
That was my counsel ever, and then youth
Will make thee sport enough all thy life after.
Tic Times policy Wench• wh•t first to bide
A little hardness for a pair of years or so,
A man whose only strength lies in his breath,
Weakness in all parts else, thy bedfellow
A cough oath Lungs, or say a wheening matter,
Then shake off chains, and dance all thy life after.
Eve•y •n• to their liking• but I say
An honest man's worth all, be he young or gray,
Yonders my Cos•n.
A•t I must use thee now,
Dissembling is the b•st help for a virtue
That ever woman had, it saves their credit often.
How now Cozen,
What weeping?
Can you blame me when the time
Of my dear Love and Husband now draws on;
I study funeral rears against the day
I must be a sad widow.
In troth Eugenia I have cause to weep to,
But when I visit, I come comfortably,
And look to be so quited, yet more sobbing.
Oh the greatest part of your affliction's past,
The worst of mine's to come, I have one to die,
Your husbands father is dead, and fixed
In his eternal pe•ce, past the sharp tyrannous blow.
You must use patience Cos.
Tell me of patience.
You have example fort in me and many.
Yours was a father in law, but mine a husband•
On for a woman that could love and live
Wi•h an old man, mine is a jewel Cozen,
So quietly he lies by one, so still.
Alas! I have a secret lodged within me
Which now will out, in pity I can't hold.
One that will not disturb me in my sleep
After a whole month together, less it be
With those diseases age is subject to,
As aches, coughs, and pains, and these heaven knows
Against his will too, hes the quietest man,
Especially in bed.
Be comforted.
How can I Lady?
None knows the terror of an husbands loss•
But they that fear to lose him.
Fain would I keep it in, but twill not be,
She is my kinswoman, and i'm pitiful,
I must impart a good if I knew once,
To them that stand in need ont, Ime like one
L•v•s not to banquet with a joy alone,
My friends must partake too, prithee cease Cozen
If your love be so boundless, which is rare
•n a young woman in these days, I tell you,
To one so much past service as your husband,
There is a way to beguile law, and help you,
My husband •and it out first.
Oh sweet Cozen!
You may conceal him, and give out his death
Within the time, order his funeral too;
We had it so for ours, I praise heaven fort,
And hes alive and safe.
O blessed Cos,
How thou reviv'st me?
We daily see
The good old man, and fe•d him twice a day,
Me thinks it is the sweetest joy to cherish him,
That ever life yet showed me.
So should I think
A dainty thing to nurse an old man well.
And then we have his prayers and daily blessing.
And we two live so lovingly upont,
His son and I, and so contentedly,
You cannot think unless you tasted ont.
No I warrant you, Oh loving Cozen,
What a great sorrow hast thou eased me of?
A thousand thanks go with thee.
I have a suite to you, I must not have you weep when I am gone.
No, if I doe near trust me: Easy fool,
Thou hast put thy self into my power for ever:
Take heed of angring of me; I conceal,
I fain a Funeral, I keep my husband,
Lass I have been thinking any time these two years
I have kept him too long already.
Isle go count ore my Suitors, thats my business,
And prick the man down, I ha six months to doot,
But could d•spatch him in one, were I p•t toot.
YOu have searched o•e the Parish Chronicle• sir?
Yes sir, I have found out the true age and date of the party you wot on.
Pray you be covered sir.
When you have showed me the way sir.
Oh sir remember your self, you are a Clark.
A small Clark sir.
Likely to be the wiser man si•, for your greatest Clerks are not always so, as tic reported.
You are a great man in the Parish sir.
I understand my self so much the better •ir, for all the best in the Parish pay duties to the Clark, and I would ow you none sir.
Since you'll have it so, i'll be the first to hide my head.
Mine is a capcass now to our business in your hand, good luck I hope, I long to be resolved.
Look you sir, this is that cannot deceive you.
This is the Dial that goes ever true;
You may say Ipse dixit upon this witness,
And tic good in Law too.
Pray you lets bear what it speaks.
Mark sir, Agatha the daughter of •ollux, this is your Wives name, and the name of her father, born.
Whose daughter s•y you.
The daughter of Poll•x
I take it his name was Bollux.
Pollux the Orthography I assure you sir, the word is cor∣•upted else•.
Well on sir of Pollux, now come on ••stor.
Born in an. 1540. and now tic 99. by 〈◊〉 i•••llib•e record sir (let me see) she is now just 59. and 〈◊〉 but on.
I am sorry 〈…〉.
Why sir? alas tic nothing, tic but so many months, so ma∣ny weeks, so many—
Do not deduct it to days• twill be the more tediou•, and to measure it by hour glasses were intolerable.
Doe not think on it sir, half the time goes away in sleep, tic half the year in nights.
Oh you mistake me neighbour, I am loath to leave the good old woman. if she were gone now it would not grieve me, for what is a year alas but a lingering torment? and were it not bet∣la she were out of her pain, t•must needs bee a grief to us both.
I would I knew how to ease you neighbour?
You speak kindly truly, and if you say but Amen to it, (which is a word that I know you are perfect in) it might be don, Cla•ks are the most end•fferent honest men, for to the marriage of your enemy, or the burial of your friend, the Curses or the Bless∣sings •o you are all one, you say Amen to all.
With a better will to the one then the other neighbour, but I shall be glad to say Amen to any thing might doe you a plea∣sure.
There is first something above your duty, now I would have you set forward the Clock a little, in to help the old woman out of her pain.
I will speak to the Sexton for that, but the day will go ne'er the faster for that.
Oh neighbour you d•e not conceit me, not the Jack of the Clock-house the hand of the Dial I mean, come, I know you be∣ing a great Clark, cannot choose but have the art to cast a figure.
Never indeed neighbour, I never had the judgement to c•st a figure.
I'll show you on the back side of your book, look you, what figures this.
Four with a Cipher thats forty.
So forty, whats this now?
The Cipher is turned into 9. by adding the tail which m•k•s forty nine.
Very well understood, what i'st now?
The 4. is turned into 3. tic now thirty nine.
Very well understood, and can you do this again?
Oh easily sir.
A wager of that, let me see the place of my wives age again.
Look you sir tic here 1540.
Forty drachmas, you do• not turn that forty into thirty nine.
A match with you.
Done, and you shall keep stakes your self there they are.
A firm match, but stay sir now I consider it, I shall add a year to your wives age, let me see Scirophon the 17. and now tic H•catomcaon the 11. if I alter this your wife will have but a month to live by the Law.
Thats all one sir, either doe it or pay me my wager.
Will you lose your wife before you lose your wager?
A man may get two wives before half so much money by em, will you doot?
I hope you will conceal me for tic flat corruption.
Nay sir I would have you keep counsel, for I lose my money by it and should be laughed at for my labour, if it should bee known.
Well sir, there tic done, is perfect 39. as can be f•not in black and white but mum sir, theirs danger in this figure casting.
I sir, I know that better men then you have been thrown over the barr for as little, the best is, you can be but thrown out of the Belfry.
Lock close here comes company, Asses have ears as well as Pitchers.
Oh Gnoth•s, how i'st? heir's a tri•k of discarded Cards of us, wee were ranked with Coats as long as our old master li∣ved.
And is this then the end of Serving men?
Yes faith, this is the end of serving men, a wise man were better serve one God then all the men in the world.
It was well! spak of a Cook, and are all fallen into fasting days and ember we•ks, that Cooks are out of use?
And all Taylors will bee cut into L•sts and Shreds, if this world hold, we shall grow both out of requ•st.
And why not Butler• as well as Taylors, if they can go naked, let em neither eat nor drink.
Thats strange me thinks, a Lord should turn away h•s
Taylor of all men, and how dost thou Taylor?
I do so so, but indeed all our wants are long of this Pub∣lican my Lords Bailiff, •or had he been rent gatherer still, our ply∣ces had held together still, that are now seam rent, nay cracked in the whole piece.
Sir, if my Lord had not sold his Lands that claim hi• Rents, I should still have been the rent gatherer.
The truth is, except the Co•thman, and the Footman, all •irving men are out of requ•st.
Nay say not so, for you were never in more request then now; for requ•sting is but a kind of a begging, for when you say I b•seech your Worships Charity, tic all one if you say I requ•st i•• and in that kind of r•questing, I am sure serving men were no∣ver in more req•est.
Troth hee says true, well let that pass, wee are upon a better a•venture. I see Gnothos you have been before us, we came to deal with this Merchant for some commodities.
With me sir any thing that I can.
Nay we have looked out our Wives already, marry to you we come to know the prices, that is to know their ages for so much reverence we bear to age, that the more aged, they shall be the more dear to us.
The true•h is every man has laid by his Widow, so they be lame enough, blind enough, and old, tic good enough.
I ke•pe the town stock, if you can but name em, I can tell their ages today.
We can tell their fortunes to an hour then.
Only you must pay for turning of the leaves.
Oh bountifully, come mine first!
The Butler before the Cooke while you live, theirs few tha• eat before they drink in a morning.
Nay then the Taylor puts in his needle of priority, for m•n do cloth themselves before they either drink or eat.
I will strive for no place, the lo•ger ere I ma•rye my wife, the older she will be, and nearer her end and my ends.
I will serve you all gentlemen if you will h•ve patience.
I commend your modesty sir, you are a Bailiff whose place is to come behind other men, as it were in the bum of all the rest.
So sir, and you were about this business too, seeking out
for a Widow.
Alack no sir, I am a married man, and have those cares up∣on me that you would fine run into.
What an old rich wife, any man in this age desires such a care.
Troth sir I'll put a venture with you if you will, I have a lusty old qu•an to my wife, sound of wind and limb, yet I'll give out to take three for one• at the marriage of my second wife.
I sir, but how near is she to the Law?
Take that at hazard sir, there must bee time you know to get a new: Unsigh•, unseen, I take 3. to one.
Two to one I'll give if she have but two teeth in her head.
A ma•ch, theres five drachmas for ten at my next wife.
A match.
I shall be fitted bravely, fifty eight and upwards, tic but a year and a half, and I may chance make friends, and beg a year of the Duke.
Hey boys I am made sir Butler, my wife that shall bee wants but two months of her time, it shall bee one ere I marry her, and then •h• next will be a honey moon.
I out st•ip you all, I shall have but six weeks of Lent, if I get my Widow, and then comes eating tide plump and gorgeous.
This Taylor will be a man if ever there were any.
Now comes my turn, I hope goodman Finis, you that are still at the end of all with a so be it, well now sirs, doe you venture there as I have done? and isle venture hereafter you, good luck I be∣seech thee.
Amen sir.
That deserves a fee already, there tic, please me and have a better.
Amen sir.
How two for one at your next wife, is the old one li∣avenge?
You have a fair Match, I offer you no foul one, if Death make not hast to call her, she'll make none to go to him.
I know her, shees a lusty woman, I'll take the venture.
Theres five drachma•es for ten at my next wife.
A bargain.
Nay then weel be all Merchants give me.
And me.
What has the Bailiff sped?
I am con•ent, but n•no of you shall know my happiness.
As well as any of you all believe it sir.
Oh Clarke you are to speak last always.
I'll remember't h•reafter sir• you have done with me Gentlemen?
For this time honest Register.
Fare you well then, if you do, I'll cry Amen toot.
Look you sir is not this your Wife?
My first wife sir.
Nay then we have made a good match ont, if she have no froward Disease, the Woman may live this dozen years by her age.
I'm afraid shees broken winded, she holds silence so long.
We•l now leave our venture to the ev•ned, I must a woo∣ing.
Isle but buy me a new dagger, and overtake you.
So we must all, for he that goes a wooing to a Widow without a weapon will never get her.
Oh Wife, Wife!
What •yle you man you speak so passionately.
Tic for thy sake sweet wife, who would think so lusty an old •omen, with reasonable good teeth, and her tongue in as per∣fact use as ever it was, should bee so near her time, but the Fates will have it so?
Whats the matter man, you doe amaze me?
Thou art not sick neither I warrant thee.
Not that I know of sure.
What pity tic a woman should bee so near her end, and yet not sick•
Near her end man, tush I can guess at that,
I have years good yet of life in the remainder,
I want two yet at least of the full number,
Then the Law I know craves impotent and useless
And not the •ble women.
I alas I see thou hast been repairing time •s well as thou
could, the old wrinkles are well filled up, but the Vermilion is seen too thick, too thick, and I read whats written in thy fore∣head, it agrees with the Church Book.
Have you sought my age man, and I prithee how is it?
I shall but discomfort thee.
Not at all man, when there's no remedy, I will go though unwillingly.
1539. Just it agrees with the Book, you have about a year to prepare your self.
Out al•s, I hope theres more then so, but doe you not think a repreeve might be gotten for half a score, and it were but five year, I wo•lt not care, an able woman (me thinks) •ere to be pitied.
I to be pitied, but not helped, no hope of that, for indeed women have so blemished their own reputations now a days, that it is thought the L•w will meet them at fifty very shortly.
Marry the H•avens forbid.
Theres so many of you that when you are old become Witches, some profess Physic, and kill good subjects faster then a bu•ning Fever; and then Schoolemistresses of the sweet sin, which commonly we call Bawds innumerable of that sort: for these and such causes tic thought they shall not live above fifty.
I man but this hurts not the good old women.
I faith you are so like one another, that a man cannot distinguish 'em now; were I an old woman I would desire to go before my time, and •ff•r my self willingly, 2. or 3. years before; oh those are brave women and worthy to bee commended of all men in the world that when their Husbands die they run to bee burnt to death with em, theres honour and credit, give me half a dozen such wives.
I if her Husband were dead before, it were a reasonable re∣qu•st, if you were dead I could be content to be so.
Fie, thats not likely, for thou had two husbands before me.
Thou would not have me die, would thou husband?
No I do not speak to that purpose, but I say what credit it were for me and thee, if thou would, then thou should never bee suspected for a Witch, a Physician, a Bawd, or any of those things, and then how daintily should I morn for thee, how brave∣lie
should I see thee buried, when alas if hee goes before it cannot choose but bee a great grief to him to think hee has not seen his wife well buried, there be such virtuous women in the world, but too few, too few who desire to die 7. years before their time with all their hearts.
I have not the heart to be of that mind, but indeed Hus∣band I think you would have me gone.
No alas I speak but for your good and your credit, for when a woman may die quickly, why should she go to Law for her Death, al••k I need not wish thee gone, for thou hast but a short time to stay with me, you do not know how near tic, it must out, you have but a month to live by the Law.
Out alas.
Nay scarce so much.
Oh, oh, oh, my heart!
I so, if thou would go away quietly it were sweetly done, and like a kind wife, lie but a little longer and the bell shall towel for thee.
Oh my hart, but a month to live.
Alas why would thou come back again for a month, i'll throw her down again, oh woman tic not three weeks, I think a fortnigh• is the most.
Nay then I am gone already.
I would make hast to the Sexton now, but I'm afraid the towling of the Bell will wake her again; if she be so wise as to go now, she stirs again, ther's two lives of the nine gone.
Oh would not thou help to recover me husband?
Alas, I could not find in my heart to hold thee by thy nose, or box thy cheeks, it goes against my conscience.
I will not be thus frighted to my Death,
I'll search the Church Record a fortnight
Tic too little of conscience, I cannot be so near,
Oh time if thou bee•t kind lend me but a year.
What a spites this, that a man cannot persuade his wife to dye in any time with her good will, I have another bespoke al∣ready, though a piece of old beef will serve to breakfast, yet a man would be glad of a Chicken to supp•r; the Clarke I hope un∣derstands no Hebrew, and cannot write backward •hat hee hath writ forward already, and then I am well enough: tic but a month
at most, if that were gon My venture comes in with her two for one, Tic use enough a con•c•ēce for a brother if he had a consc•ēce.
Gentlemen Courtiers.
All your s•rvants vowed Lady.
Oh I shall kill my self with infinite laughter!
Will no body take my part?
An't be a laughing business
Put it to me, ••me one of the best in Europe.
My father died last 〈◊〉, I h•ve the most cause.
Y•u ha pickd ou• such a time sweet Gentlemen
To m•ke y•u• spleen a ba•q•et.
Oh the jest Lady!
I have a jaw stands ready fort, •l'e gape,
Half way and m•et it.
My old Husband
Th•t cannot s•y his pra•ers out for Jealosie
And madn•sse, at your coming fi•st to woe me.
Well s•yd.
Go on.
On, on.
Takes Counsel with the secrets of all art
To make himself youthful •gen.
How you•hfull, ha, ha, ha.
A man of forty five he woul• fine seem to be
O• scarce so much if he might have his will indeed.
I but his white hairs theyl betray his hoarin•sse.
Why there you •re wide, hes not th• man you take him for,
N•y will y•u know h•• when you see him again,
There will be five to one laid upon that.
How?
Nay you did well to laugh faintly there,
I pro•ise you I think he•l out live me now,
And deceive Law and all.
M•rry gout foe•bid.
You little think he was at Fencing School
At four a Clock this Morning.
How at Fenc•ng School•?
Else give no trust to woman.
By this light
I doe not like him then, hes like to live
Longer then I, for he may kill me first now.
His dancer now came in as I met you.
His dancer too.
They observe turns and hours with him•
The great French rider will be here at ten
With his Curveting Horse.
These notwithstanding.
His hair and wrinkles will betray his age.
I'm sure his Head and B•art as he has ordered it
Looks not p•st fife•y now heel bringt to forty
Withi• these four days for 9 times an hour at least
He takes • Black Lead Comb and kembs it over•
Three q•arters of his Beard is under fifty,
Theirs but a little tuft of fourscore left
All of one side which will be black by Monday,
And to approve my truth ••e where he coms?
Laugh softly gentlemen, and look upon him.
Now by this hand hes almost black ith mouth indeed.
He should die shortly then.
Marry me thinks he dies too fast already,
For he was all white but a week ago.
Oh this same cunny white takes an excellent black,
Too soon a mischief ont.
He will beguiled us all
If that little tuft Northward turn black too.
Nay sir I wonder tic so long a turning.
May be some Fairies child held forth at midnight
Has pissed upon that side.
Is this the Beard?
Ah sirrah my young boys I shall be for you,
This little m•ngle tuft takes up more time
Then all the Beard beside, come you a wooing
And I alive and lusty? you shall find
An alteration, Jack boys I have a Spirit yet,
And I could match my hair too't, theres the fault,
A•d c•n doe offices of youth yet lightly.
At least I will doe though it pain me a little
Shall not a man for a little foolish age
Enjoy his Wife to himself, must young Court ti•s
Play tomboys tricks with her, and he live, ha?
I have blood that will not beart, yet I confess
I should be at my prayers, but wheres the Dancer there.
Here sir.
Come, come, come, one trick a day,
And I shall soon recover all again.
Slight and you laugh too loud, we are all discovered Gen∣tlemen
And I have a scurvy ginny laugh a mine own.
Will spoil all i'm afraid.
Marry take heed sir.
Nay and I should bee hanged I can't leave it, pup. there tic.
Peace oh peace!
Come I am ready sir.
I hear the Church Books lost where I was borne to,
And that shall set me back one and twenty years
There is no little comfort left in that,
And my three Court Codlings that look parboyld,
As •if they c•me from Cupids scalding house.
He means me specially I hold my life.
What trick will your old Worship learn this morning sir?
Marry a trick if thou could teach a man
To keep his Wife to himself, i'd fine learn that.
Thats a hard trick for an old man specially
The Horse trick comes the nearest.
Thou say true, I faith
They must be horsed indeed, else theres no keeping on em
And horse play at fourscore is not so ready.
Look you heers your Worships horse trick sir.
Nay say not so,
Tic none of mine I fall down horse and man,
If I but off•r at it.
My life for yours sir.
Say thou me so.
Well offered by my Viol sir.
A Pox of this horse trick, it is played the jade with me
And given me a wrench ith back.
Now hears your i•turn, and your trick above ground.
P•ithee no more, unless thou hast a mind
•o lay me underground, one of these tricks
•nough in a morning.
For your G•lli•rd sir
••u are comple•t enough, I and may ch•llenge
••e proudest Coxcomb of em all, i'll stand too•.
Faith and I've other weapons for the rest too,
••ve p•ep•rd for em, if ere I take
〈◊〉 Gregories here again.
Oh I shall burst, I can hold out no longer.
Hee spoils all.
The Devil and his grinners are you come.
Bring forth the weapons we shall find you play,
All feats of youth to Jack Boys, feats of youth.
And these the w•pons, drinking, fencing, dancing,
Your own road ways you Glisterpipes, Ime old you say
Yes parlo•s old Kidds and you mark me well,
This Beard cannot get Children, yon lank •u•• eggs,
Unless such Weasels come from Court to help us
We will get our own brats, you lecherous dogbolts
W•l said down with 'em now we shall see your spirits
What dwindle you already?
I have no quality.
Nor I, unless drinking may be reckned
For one.
Why Simon it sh•ll.
Come dare you choose• your weapon now.
I dancing sir and you will be so h•sty.
We're for you sir.
Fencing I.
Weel answer you to.
I'm for drinking your wet weapon there.
That wet one has cost m•ny a p•incox life
And I will send it through you with a powder.
Let come with a Pox• I care no• so't be drink.
I hope my go•s will hold, and •hat's •even all
A Gentleman can look for of such trillibubs.
P••y the first weep•n, come strike, strike I say
Yes, yes, you shall be first, Isle observe Court Rules
Always the worst goes foremost, so twill prove I hope
So sir, you've spit your poison, now come I,
Now forty years ago backward and assist me
Fall from me half my age but for three minutes,
That I may feel no crick, I will put fair fort
Although I hazard twenty Sciaticaes
So I have hit you.
You've done well I faith sir,
If you confess it well tic excellent
And I have hit you soundly, I am warm now,
The second weapon instantly.
What so quick sir, will you not allow your self a breathing time?
Iv breath enough at all times, Lucifers Musk cod•
To give your perfumd worship 3. Vennies,
A sound old man puts his thrust better home
Then a spiced young man, there I.
Then have at you fourscore.
You l•e twenty I hope, and you shall find it.
I'm glad I mist this weapon, I had an eye
Popped out ere this time, or my two butter teeth
Thrust down my throat instead of a flap draggon.
Theres two, peptwizle.
Excellently touched sir.
Had ever man such luck, speak your opinion gentlemen•
Me thinks your lucks good that your eyes are in still,
Mine would have dropped out like a pigs half toasted.
There wants a third and there tic again.
The Devil has steeld him.
What a strong fiend is Jealousy?
Your disp•tchd bear whelp.
Now comes my weapon in.
Here toad stool, here.
Tic with you and I must play these 3. wet Vennies.
Vennis in Venice Glasses, let em come
Theyl bruise no flesh Ime sure, nor break no bones.
Yet you may drink your eyes out sir.
I but th•ts nothing then they go voluntarily, I doe not
Love to have em thrust out whether they will or •••
Hears your first weapon du•k• meat.
How, a dutch what you call em.
St••d of a German falchion, a shrewd weapon•
And of all things, hard to be taken down,
Yet down it must, I have a nose goes in toot
I shall drink double I think.
The sooner off Simon.
Isle pay you speedily — with a trick.
I learnt once amongst drunkards, hears half pike.
Half pike comes well after Dutch what you c•ll em,
They'd never be a sunder by their good will.
Well pulled of an old fellow.
Oh but your fellows
Pull better at a rope.
Theres a hair Simon.
In that Glass.
Ant be as long as a halter down it go•
No hair shall cross me.
I make you stink worse then your Pol•cats doe.
•ears long sword your last weapon.
No more weapons.
Why how now Simon bear up, thou •hamst us all else.
Light I shall shame you worse and I stay longer.
I ha got the Scotony in my head already•
The whimsy, you all turn round, do no• you dance gallants.
Pish whats all this? why Simon look the last Venue
No more Vennies goes down here, for these 2. are coming up again.
Out The disgrace of drinkers.
Yes twill out,
Doe you smell nothing yet?
Smell.
Farewell quickly then it will do if I stay.
A Foil go with thee.
What shall we put down youth at her own virtues?
Beat folly in her own ground wondrous much
Why m•y not we be held as full sufficient
To love o•r own wives, then get our own children
And live in free peace till we be dissolved?
For such spring Butterflies that ••e gaudy winged,
But no more substance then th•se Shamble •lies
Which Butchers boys snap between sleep and waking,
Come but to crush you once you are all but maggot•,
For all your beamy out sides.
Hears Cleanthes,
He comes to chide let him alone a little,
Our cause will be revenged, look, look his face
Is set for stormy weather, do but mark
How the Clouds gather in it, 'twil power down straight.
Me thinks I partly know you, thats my grief
Could you not all be lost that had been handsome,
But to be known at all tic more then shameful,
Why was not yeur name wont to be Lisand•r?
Tic so still cos.
Judgement d•fer thy coming, else this mans miserable.
I told you there would be a shower anon.
Weel in and hide our noddles.
What Devil brought this colour to your mind.
Which since y•ur childhood I near saw you wear•
You were ever of an innocent gloss
Since I was ripe for knowledge, and would you lose it
And change the Live•rye of Saints and Angels
For this mixed monstrousness, to force a ground
That has been so long hallowed like a Temple,
To bring forth fruits of earth now, and turn black
To the wild cries of lust, and the complexion
Of Sin in act, lost and long since repented;
Would you begin a work ne'er yet attempted;
To pull time ba•kward?
See what your wife will do, are your wits perfect?
My wits.
I like it ten times worse for t'ad been safer
Now to be mad, and more excusable.
I hear you dan•e •gen and do strange folly•.
I must confess I have been put to some co•••
And yet you are not mad, pray say not so
Give me that comfort of you that you are mad
That I may think you are at worst, for if
You are not m•d, I then must guess you have
The first of some D•seas wa• never heard •f,
Which may be worse then madness, and more fearful,
Your weep to see your self else•, and your care
To pray would quickly turn you white again.
I had a father had he livd his month out
B•t to h• seen this most prodigious folly,
There n•eded not the Law to have cut him off:
The sight of this had proved his executioner, and broke his heart,
He would have held it equal
Done to a S•nct•ary, for what is age
B•t the holy place of life, Chapel of ease
For all men's wearied miseries, and to rob•
That of her Ornament, it is accu•st,
As f•om a Priest to steal a holy Vestment,
• and convert it to a sinful covering.
I s•e ta's done him good, blessi•g go with it,
Such as may make him pure again.
It was bravely touched I faith sir.
O• you're welcome.
Exc•edingly well handled.
Tic to you I come, he fell but i'my way.
You m••kd his beard Cousin.
M••k me.
Did you •ver see a hair so changed?
I must be forced to wake her loudly to,
The Devil has rocked her so fast asleep, S••umpet.
D• you call sir?
Whore.
H•w doe you sir?
Be I ne'er so well
I must be sick of thee, you are a Disease
That stick t'oth heart, as all such women are.
What ails our kindred?
Bless me she sleeps still, what a dead modesty is i'this women•n?
Will never blush again, look on thy work,
But with a Christian eye, it would turn thy heart
Into a shower of blood to be the cause
Of that old m•ns destruction, think upont
Ruin eternally, for through thy loose follies
Heaven has found him a faint servant lately,
His goodness has gone backward, and engendered
With his old sins again, has lost his prayers
And all th• tears that were companions with em
And like a blind fold man, giddy and blinded
Thinking he goes right on still, swerves but one foot
And turns to the same place where he set out•
So he that took his farewell of the world
And c•st the joys behind him out of sight,
Summed up his hours, made even with time and men
Is now in heart arrived at youth again;
All by thy wildness thy too hasty lust
Has driven him to this strong apostasy,
Immodesty like thine was never equ•lt
Iv heard of women, (shall I call em so)
Have welcomed suitors ere the Co•ps were cold,
But thou thy Husband living, thou art too bold.
Well have you done now si•?
Look, look she smiles yet.
All this is nothing to a mind resolved,
Ask any woman that, sh••l ••ll you so much
You have only shown a pretty saucy wit,
Which I shall not forget nor to r•quite it,
You shall hear from me shortly:
Shameless woman,
I take my counsel from thee tic too honest
And leave thee wholly to thy stronger master,
B•esse the sex of thee from thee, thats my Prayer
Were al like thee so impudently common,
No man would be found to wed a woman.
Isle fit you gloriously hee that attempts to take away my pleasure,
Isle take away his joy, and I can sure
His concealed father pays •ort, isle even tel.
Him that I mean to make my husband next
And he shall t•l the Duke, — Mass here he comes.
H•s had about with me too.
What no? since sir.
A •lured, a little flourish, he called me strange names
But I near minded him.
You shall quit him sir when he as little mind• you.
I like that well.
I love to b• rev•ng'd when no one thinks of me.
Theres little danger that way,
This is it then
H• you •hall strike your •troke shall be profound.
And yet your foe not go•sle who gave the wound.
A my troth I love to give• such wounds.
WE•come G•ntlmen, will you not draw •ere, will you drink at Do•e Gen∣tlem•n?
O• the Summer Airs b•st!
What Wine will ple•s• you drink Gentlemen?
Declare sirrah.
What you're all sped already bullies?
My W•d lowes a•h spit and half ready lad, a turn or too more and I have done with her.
Then Cooke I hope you have basted her b•fore this time.
And stuck her with Rosem•rye too, to sue•eten h•, she was t•i••ed •er• she came to my h•nds what an old pe•ce of fl•sh of fifty nine eleven moods and upwards, she must needs be fl••blown.
Put her off put her off, tho you lose by her• the weathers hot.
Why D•awe•r?
By and by, h•e•e gentlemen, hears the quintessence of Greece, the Sages never drunk better Grape.
Sir the mad Greeks of this age •a• taste their Palermo
as well as the sage Greeks did before em, fill lick splggot.
Ad imum sir.
My friends I must doubly invite you all the fifth of the next month, to the funeral of my first wife, and to the marriage of my second. my two to one this is she.
I hope some of us will bee ready for the funeral of our Wives by that time, to go with thee, but shall they bee both of a day?
Oh best of al sir, where sorrow and joy meet together, one will help away with another the better• besides there• will bee cha•ges s•v'd too• the same Rosemary that serves for the Funeral, will serve for the Wedding.
How long do you make account to be a Widower sir?
Some half an hour, long enough a conscience.
Come, come, lets have some agility, is there no Music in the house?
Yes sir, •eere are sweet wire drawers in the hows.
Oh tha• makes them and you seldom part, you are wine drawers, and they wire drawers.
And both govern by the peg• too.
And •ou h•ve pip•s in your consort too.
And S•ck-b•ts too sir.
But the Heads of your Instruments diff•r, yours are Hogs-heads their Cittern and Gittern Heads.
All wooden heads there they meet again.
Bid em strike up, weel have a Dance, Gnothoes come •thou shalt fool it too.
No dancing with me, we have Siren here.
Siren, it was Heron the fair Greek man.
Five Drachmas of that, I say Siren the fair Greek, and so are all fair Greeks.
A match, five Drachmas her name was Heron.
Sirens name was Siren for 5. Drachmas.
Tic done.
Take heed what you do Gnoth•es.
Doe not I know our own Country women Siren and Nil of Greece, two of the fairest greeks that ever were.
That Nel was Helen of Greece too.
As long as she tarried with her Husband she was Ellen, but after she came to Troy she was Nel of Troy, or Bonny Nil
Whether you will or no.
Why did she grow shorer when she came to Troy?
S•e gr•w longer if you mark the story, when sh•e grew to be an ell sh•• was de•p•• then any yard of Troy could reach by a quarter: there was Crossed was Troy weigh•, and N•ll was ha∣berdepoyse, she held more by four ounces then Cresida.
They say sh• c•used m•ny wounds to be given in Troy•
True, she was wounded there her self, and cured again by Pl•aster of Paris, and •ver since that has been used to stop holes with.
Gentlemen if you be disposed to bee merry, the Music is ready to strike up, and hears a con•ort of mad Greeks, I know not •hither they bee men or women, or between both, they have wh•t y•u call em vizards on their faces.
Vizards goodman licksp••got.
If they be wise women they ••y be wizards too.
They desire to enter amongst any merry company of Gentlemen good fel'owes for a •train or too.
Weel strain our s•lves with em say, let em come Gnothoes: now for the honou• of Epire.
I so kind t•en every one his W••ch to his seve•all room• Gn•thoes we are all provided now as you are
I shall have two it seems away I have Siren here already
What a Mermaid?
No but a maid horse face, oh o'd women•n is it you?
Yes tic I, all the rest h•ve go•d themselves, and taken their own w•v•s, and shall know that they have done more then they c•n well answer, but I pray you, Husb•n• what are yo• doing?
F•ith thus sh•uld I do if thou weart dead• old Ag. and thou hast not long to live •me sure, we have Siren 'heere.
Art •thou so shameless whilst I am living to keep one un∣der my nose.
No Ag I doe prize her far above thy nose, if tho• would lay me both •hen eyes in my hand to boot, isle not l•ave her, are•
not ashamed to bee seen in a Tavern, and hast scarce a fortnight to live, oh old woman what art thou, must thou find no time to think of thy end?
Oh unkind villain.
And then sweet heart thou shalt have two new gowns, and the best of this old old women's shall make thee rayments for the working •ay•s.
Oh rascal dost thou quarter my clothes already too.
Her •usfs will serve thee for nothing but to wash dishes, for thou shalt have nine of the new fashion.
Impudent villain, shameless harlot.
You may hear she never wore any but rails al herlife time
Let me come i'll tear the strumpet from him.
Dare thou call my wife strumpet, thou preterpluper∣fact tence of a woman, i'll make thee do penance in the sheet thou shalt be buried in, abuse my choice, my two to one.
No unkind villain i'll deceive thee yet,
I have a repreeve for five years of life,
I am with child.
Cud so Gnothoes• isle not tarry so long, five years, I may bury two husbands by that time.
Alas give the poor woman leave to talk, she with child, I with a puppy, as long as I have thee by me, she shall not bee with child I warrant thee.
The Law and thou and all shall find I am with child.
i'll take my corporal oath I begat it not, and then thou die for adultery.
No matter that will ask some time in the proof.
Oh you'd bee stoned to death would you, all old women would die a that fashion with all their hearts, but the Law shall overthrow you, the tother way first.
Indeed if it be so, I will not linger so long Gnotho••.
Away, away, some botcher has got it, tic but a chushion I warrant thee, the old woman is loath to depart, she never sung o∣there tune in her life.
Wee will not have our noses board with a chushion if it be so.
Go, go thy ways thou old Almanac, at the 28. day of December even almost out of date, down on thy knees, and make
th•e rea• 〈…〉 •e of thy clothes to buy thee a Deaths head, and p•• upon thy m•ddle finger, your least considering Bawds doe so much; be not thou worse though thou art an old woman as she is, I am cloyed with whole stock fish, heers a young perch is sweeter meat by half, prithee die before thy day if thou can, that thou moist not be counted a witch.
No, thou art a witch and i'll prove it, I said I was with child, thou knew no other but by sorcery, thou said it was a cushion and so it is, thou art a witch fort, i'll be sworn too't.
Ha, ha, ha, I told thee it was a chushion, go get thy sheet rea∣die, we'll see thee buried as we go to Churc• to be married.
Nay i'll follow thee, and show my self a wife, i'll plague thee as long as I live with thee, and i'll bury some money before I die that my ghost may hant thee afterword.
Whats that? oh nothing but the whispering wind,
Breaths through you churlish hathorne that grew rude
As if it chid the gentle breath that kissed it,
I cannot be too circumspect, too careful
For in these woods lies hid all my lives treasure,
Which is too much ever to fear to lose.
Though it be never lost, and if our watchfulness
Ought to be wise and serious against a thief
That comes to steal our goods, things all without us,
That proves v•x•tion often more then comfort,
How mighty ought our providence to be
To prevent those? if any such there were
That come to rob our bosom of our joys,
That only makes poor man delight to live:
•sh•, i'm too fearful fie, fie, who can hurt me?
•ut tic a general cowardice that shakes,
•he nerves of confidence, he that hides treasure
•magins every one thinks of that place
•hen tic a thing le•st minded, nay let him change
•he place continually where ere it keeps,
There will the fear keep still, yonders the store house
Of all my comfort now, and see it sends forth
A dear one, to me, pre•ious chief of women,
How does the good old soul, has he fed we•?
Be ••few me sir he made the heartiest meal to day
Much good may• do •i• health.
A blessing on the•,
Both for thy n•was and wish.
His stomach sir
Is bettered wondrously since his concealment.
Heaven has a blessed work int, come wee'r safe here
I prithee c•ll him forth, the airs much wholesomer.
Father,
How sweetly sounds the voice of a good woman?
It is so seldom heard that when it speaks
It ravishes all fences.
Lifts of honour,
Iv• a joy weeps to see you, tic so full
So fairly fruitful,
I hope to see you often and return•
Laden with blessings, st•ll to power on some•
I find em all in my contented peace,
A•d lose not one in thousands, they are dispersed
So gloriously I know not which are brightest•
I find em as Angels are found by legions;
First in the love and honesty of a wife,
Which is the first and chiefest of all temporal blessings,
Next in your self, which is the hope and joy
Of all any actions, my aff•ires, my wishes,
And lastly which crowns all, I find my soul
Crowned with the peace of em, th'eternall riches
Mans only portion, for his heavenly marriage.
Rise thou art all obedience, love and goodness,
I dare say that which thousand fathers cannot.
And thats my precious comfort, never son
Was in the way more of celestial rising,
Thou art so made of such ascending virtue
That all the pours of hell cannot sink thee.
Ha.
What wast disturbed my joy?
Clean Did you not hear,
As a far off?
What my excellent consort.
I heard a —
Hark again.
Bless my joy•
What a•les it on a sudden?
Now since lately.
Tic nothing but a symptom of thy care man.
Alas you do not hear well.
What wast daughter?
I heard a sound twice.
Hark, louder and nearer:
In for the precious good of virtue, qu•ck sir.
Louder and nearer yet, at hand at hand;
A hunting here tic strange, I never
Knew game followed in these woods before.
Now let em come and spare not.
Ha, tic, first not the Duke, look sparingly?
Tic he• but what of that, alas take heed sir,
You• care will over•hrow us.
Come. it shall not,
Lets set a pleasant f•ce upon our fears,
Though our he•r•s shake with horror, ha, ha, ha.
Hark.
P•ithee proceed,
Ime taken with these light things infinitely,
Si•ce the old mans decea•e; ha so they parted, ha, ha. ha.
Wh• •ow should I believe this, look, hes merry
As if h• had no such ch•rge? one with that care
Could never be so still, he holds his temper,
And tic the same still with no difference
He brought his fathers Corps to•h grave with,
He laughed thus then you know.
I, he may laugh my Lord;
That s•over but how he glories in his cunning,
And perhaps done more to advance his wit,
Then to express affection to his father,
That only he h•s over reached the Law.
He tells you right, my Lord, his own Cousin germen
R•veald it first to me, a free tongued woman,
And very excellent at telling secrets.
If a contempt can be so neatly carried,
It gives me cause of wonder.
Troth my Lord,
Twill prove a delicate cosoning, I believe:
I'd have no Scrivener offer to come near it.
Cleanthes.
My loved Lord.
Not moved a whit,
Co•stant to lightning still, tic strange to meet you
Upon a ground so unfrequented sir:
This do•s not fit your p•ssion, your for mirth
Or I m•st•k you much.
But finding it
Grow to a noted imperfection in me,
For any thing too much is vicious;
I come to these• disconsolate walks, of purpose
Only to dull and take away the edge ont.
I ever had a greater z•ale to sadness,
A natural proportion, I co•f•ffe my Lord
B•fore that cheerful accident fell out•
If I may call a fathers funeral cheerful
Wi•hout wrong done to duty or my love.
〈◊〉 seems then you take pleasure •'these walks sir.
Contemplative content I do my Lord
They bring into my mind oft meditations
•o sweetly precious, that in the parting
• find• shower of grace upon my cheeks,
They take their leave so feelingly.
So sir.
Which is a kind of grave delight my Lord.
And •'ve small cause Clothes t'afford you •he least delight that has • name.
My Lord.
Now it begins to fadge.
Peace thou art so greedy Simon.
In your excess of joy you have expressed
•our rancor and contempt aga•nst my Law:
•our smiles deserve fining, you've professed
Derision openly even to my face,
Wh•ch might be death a little• more incensed
You do not come for any freedom here
But •or a project of your own,
But •ll th•t• known to be contentfull to thee,
Shall in th• use prove deadly, you• li•es min•
If ever thy presumption do but le•d thee
Into the•e walks again, •or that women•n•
I'll have em watched a purpose.
Now now, his colour ebbs and flow•.
Mark hers too.
Oh who shall bring food to the poor old man now,
Speak somewhat good sir or wee'r lost for ever?
Oh you did wondro•s ill to call me again•
There are not words to help us if I entreat
Tic found, that will betray us worse then silence
Prithee let Heaven alone, and le•s say nothing.
You've• struck em dumb my Lord.
Look how guilt looks.
I would not have that fear upon my flesh
To save ten fathers.
He is safe still, is he not?
Oh you do ill to doubt it.
Thou'art all goodness.
Now does your grace believe?
Tic too apparent
Search, make a speedy search, for the impose•ur
Cannot be far off by the fear it sends.
Ha.
H•s the Lapwings cunning, i'm afraid my Lore•
That cries most when shees farthest from the nest.
Oh wee'r betrayed.
Betrayed sir.
See my Lord,
It comes out more and more still.
Bloody thief,
Come from that ply•e, tic sacred-homicide,
Tic not for thy adulterate hands to touch it.
Oh miserable virtue, what distress art thou in at this mi∣nut?
Help me thunder
〈◊〉 my powers lost, Angels shoot plagues and help me:
Why are these men in health and I so hear• sick?
Or why should nature have that power in me
To levy up a thousand bleeding sorrows
And not one comfort, only makes me lie
Like the poor mockery of an Earthquake here?
Panting with horror, and have not so much force in all my avenge∣ance.
To shake a villain off a me.
Use him gen•lie and Heaven will love you fort.
Father, oh Father now I see thee full
In thy aff•ction, you're a man of sorrow
Bu• rever•ntly becomst it, that'• my comfort.
Extremity was never better graced
Then with that look of thine, oh let me look still
For I sh•ll lose it, all my joy and strength
Is even Eclipsed together, I transgressed
Your Law my Lord, let me receive the sting on•
Be once just sir, a•d let the off•nder die
Hes innocent in all, and I am guilty.
Your grace knows when aff•ction only spe•ks
Truth is not always there, his love would dr•w
An undeservd misery on his youth,
And wrong a peace resolved, on both parts sinful;
Tic, I am guilty of my own concealment
And like a worldly coward injurd heaven
Wi•h fea•e to go toot, now I see my fault,
And am prepared with joy to suffer fort.
Go give him q•ec dispatch, let him see death
And your presumption sir shall come to judgement.
Hes going, oh hes gon sir.
Let me rise.
Why doe you not then, and follow?
I strive fort
Is •heir no hand of pity that will ease me
And take this will•in from my heart a while?
Alas hes gone.
A worse supplies his place then,
• weight more ponderous, I cannot follow.
Oh misery of afflic•ion.
They will stay
Till I can come, they must be so good ever
Though they be ne'er so cruel,
My l•st le•v• must 〈◊〉 t•ken think a that,
And this l•st blessing given, I will not lose
That for a tho•sand consorts.
That hopes wretched.
The inutterable stings of fortune,
All griefs are to be borne, save this alone;
This like a headlong torrent over turns the frame of nature,
For he that gives us life first, as a father,
Locks all his natural sufferings in our blood, to
The sorrows that he feels, are our heads,
They are incorporate to us.
Noble sir.
Let me behold him well.
Sir.
Thou should be good,
Or tho'urt a dangerous substance to be lodged
So near the heart of man.
What means this, dear sir?
To thy trust only was this blessed secret
Kindly committed, tic d•stroy'd, thou see
What follows to be thought ont.
M•serable;
Why heers th'unhappinesse of woman still,
That having forfeited in old times their trust
Now makes their faiths susp•cted that are just.
What shall I say to all my sorrows then,
That look for satisfaction?
Ha, ha, ha, Cozen
How ill dost thou become this time?
Ha. ha, ha.
Why thats but your opinion, a young wench
Becomes the time at all times.
Now cos wee'r even, and you be remembered
You left a Strumpet and a whore at home with me,
And such fine field bed words, which could• not cost you
Less then a f•there.
Is it come that way?
Had you an Uncle
He should go the same way too.
Oh eternity
What monster is this fiend in labour with?
An ass Coult with two heads, thats she and you:
I will not lose so glorious a revenge.
Not to be understood int: I betray him,
And now wee'r even, y'ad best keep you so.
Is there not poison yet enough to kill me?
Oh sir, forgive me, it was I betrayed him.
How?
I.
The fellow of my heart twill speed me then.
Her tears that never wept, and mine own pity
Even consent me together; and stole from me
This secret, which fierce death should not have purchased.
Nay then wee'r at an end, all we are false ones,
And ought to suffer, I was false to wisdom
In trusting woman, thou were false to faith
In uttering of the secret, and thou false
To goodness in deceiving such a pity:
We are all tainted some way but thou worst,
And for thy infectious spots ought to die first.
Pray turn your weapon sir upon your Mistress,
I come not so ill friended; rescue servants.
Are you so whorishly provided?
Yes sir she has more weapons at command then one.
Put forward man, thou art most sure to have me.
I shall be surer if I keep behind though.
Now servants show your loves.
I'll show my love too a far off.
I love to be so courted, woe me there.
I love to keep good weapons though ne'er fought•
I'm sharper set within then I am without.
Oh Gentlemen Cleanthes.
Fight, upon him.
Thy thirst of blood proclaims thee now a Strumpet.
Tic dainty, next to procreation fiting,
•de either be d•stroying men or getting.
Forbear on your allegiance gentlemen
Hes the Dukes Prisoner, and we ceise upon him
To answer this contempt against the Law.
I obey Fate in •ll things.
Happy rescue.
I would y'ad seized upon him a minute sooner, •tad saved me a cut finger, I wonder how I came be it, for I never put my hand forth i'm sure, I think my own sword did cut it if truth were known; may be the wier in the handle, I have lived these five and twenty years and never knew what colour my blood was before I n•v•r durst eat Oysters, nor cut peck lo•ves.
You have shown your spirits gentlemen, but you
Have cut your finger.
I the wedding finger too, • pox ont.
You'll prove a bawdy bachelor Simon, to have a cut up∣on your finger, before you are married.
I'll never draw sword again to have such
A jest put upon me.
BE ready with your Prisoner, weel ••t •nst•ntly •n rise before leaven, or when we pl••se: Shall we not •o low •udges?
Tic committed
All to our power, censure and pleasure, now
The Duk• hath made us chief Lords of this Sessions,
And we may speak by fits, or sleep by turns.
Leave that to us, but what so •re we do
The Prisoner shall be sure to be condemned,
Sleeping or waking we are resolved on that
Before we set upon him.
Make you question
If not Cleanthes and one enemy
N•y a concealor of his father too.
A wild example in these days of youth.
If they were given to follow such examples
But sure I think they are not, how so ere
It was wickedly attempted, tha•s my judgement•
And it sh•ll pass whilst I am in power to sit,
Never by P•ince were such young judges m•de,
But now the cause r•q•ires it, if you mark it
He must make young or none• for all the old ones
Her father he hath sent a fishing, and my fathers one•
I humbly thank his Highness.
Widows?
You almost hit my name, no Gentlemen
You come so wondrous near it I admire you
For your Judgement.
My wife that must be she.
My husband goes upon his last hour now.
On his last legs I am sure.
September the seventeenth
I will not bate an hour ont, and to morrow
His latest hours expired.
Bring him to judgement,
The juries panneld and the verdict given
Ever he appears we have tan course for that.
And Officers to attach the gray young man,
The yo•th of fourscore be of comfort 〈◊〉:
We shall no longer bosom January:
For that I will take order, and provide
For you a lusty April.
The month that ought indeed
To go before May.
Doe as we have said,
Take a strong guard and bring him into Court,
L•die Eugenia see this charge performed
That having his life forfeit•d by the Law
Hee may relieve his soul.
Willingly
From shaven chinns never came better Justice
Then these new tushed by r•ason.
What you doe
Doe suddenly wee charge you, for we purpose to make but a short
S•scions, a new business
The fair Hippoli•a, now whats your suits?
Alas I know not how to stile you yet,
To call you judges doth not suit your years
Nor heads and brains show more antiquity,
Yet sway your selves with •quity and t•uth
And i'll p•ocl•ime you r•warrant, and repeat
Once in my life •ime I have seen gr•ve heads
Placed upon young men's shoulders.
Hark she sl•u•s us,
And thinks to make us monstrous.
Prove not so,
For yet me thinks you bear the shapes of men.
Though nothing more then merely beautifeaus
To make you appear Angels, but if Crimson
Your name and power with blood and crew•lty,
Supp•ess fair virtue and enlarge of old vice,
Both against Heaven and N•ture, draw your sword
M•ke either will or humour turn the soul
Of your created greatn•sse, and in that
Oppose all goodness. I must tell you there
Y'•re more then monstrous, in the very act,
You change your self to D•vils.
She• a witch
Ha•ke she begins to conjure•
Time you see
Is short much business now on foot, shall I
Give her her answer?
None upon the Bench
More learnedly can do it.
He, he, hem, then list
I wonder at thine impudence young huswife
That thou da•st plead for such a base offender,
Conceal a father past his time to die:
What son and heir would have done this but he?
I vow not I.
Because ye are paricides
And how can comfort be derived from such
That pity not their fathe•s?
You are fresh and fair, practise young women's ends when husbands are distressed provide them friends.
I'll s•t him forward fee thee
Some wives would pay for such a courtesy.
Times of am•zement what duty goodness dwell,
I soaught for charity but knock at Hell.
Eugenia com•.
Command a s•cond guard
To bring Cleanthes in weel not sit long.
My stomach strives to dinner.
Now servants may a Lady be so bold
To call your power so low?
A M•stress• may,
She can make all things low, then in that langu•ge
There can be no off•nce.
The times now come
Of manumissions take him into bonds,
And I am then at freedom.
This the m•n,
He• hath left of l•te to feed on snakes,
His be•rds turned white again
First possible these gouty legs danced lately,
And shatterd in a G•lliard?
Jealousy,
And fear of death can work strange prodigies.
The nimble Fencer this that made me tear
And traverse bout the Chamber.
I and gave me
Those elbow H•alths the hangman take him fort:
They had almost fetched my heart out, the Dutch Venue
I swallowed pretty well, but the half pike
Had almost prepared me but had I took
Being swollen I had cast my Lungs out.
A flemish
Peace the Duke.
Nay ba••e y•ur seats, whose that?
May it ple•se y•ur Highness•
Tic old Lisander.
And brought in by his wife a worthy president
Of one th•t no way would offend the Law.
And should• not pass away without remark,
You h•v• b•en looked for long.
But never fit
To die till now my Lord, my sins and I
H•ve been but newly parted, much a do
I had to get them leave me, or be taught
That difficult lesson how to learn to die.
I never thought there had been such an act
And tic the only discipline we are borne for
All studdies as are, are but as circular lines
And dea•h the center where they must all meet.
I now can look upon thee erring woman
And not be vexed with jealousy, on young men,
And no way envy their delicious heal•h,
•leisure and strength, all which were once mine own
And mine must be theirs one day.
You have tamd him
And know how to dispose him that my Liege
Hath been before det•rmined, you confess
Your self of full age.
Yes and prepared to inhe•it
Your place above—Duke—away to death with him
Of which the hangmans strength
Shall put him in possession, tic still guard
To take me willing and in mind to die.
And such are when the earth grows weary of them
Most fit for heaven, the Court shall make his Mittimus
And send him thither presently ith mean time.
So see another person brought to the Barr.
The arch Malefactor.
The grand offenders the most refractory
To call good orders, tic Cleanthes,
Hee.
That would have sons grave fathers ere their fathers
Be sent unto their graves.
There will be expectation
In your severe pooceedings against him;
His act being so Capital.
Fearful and bloody,
Therefore we charge these women leave the Court
Lest they should stand to hear it.
I in expectation
Of a most happy freedom.
I with the apprehension
Of a most sad and desolate widow hood.
We bring him to the Bar.
Hold up your hand sir.
More reverence to the place then to the person•
To the one I off•r up a palm
Of duty and obedience shout us to heaven,
Imploring justice which was never wanting
Upon that Bench whilst their own fathers sat:
But unto you, my hands contracted thus,
As threatening vengeance against murderers,
For they that kill in thought shed innocent blood
With pardon to your highness too much passion
Made me forget your presence and the place,
I now am called too•
All one Majesty
And Power we have to pardon or condemn
Is now conferd on them.
And these weel use
Little to thine advantage.
I expect it
And as to these I look no mercy from
And much less shown to entreat it, I thus now
Submit me the Emblems of your power I mean
The Sword and Bench but my most reverend judges
Ere you proceed to sentence, for I know
You have given me lost, will you resolve me one thing?
So it be briefly questioned.
Show •our honour,
D•y spends it self a pace.
My Lords it sh•ll
Resolve• me then where are your filial tears
Your m•u•ning habits and sad he•rts become.
Th•t ••old •ttend your fathers funeral
Though the st•ec L•w which I will not accuse
B•cause a su•j•ct snatched away their lives
It doth not ba•r them to lament their deaths
O• if you cannot sp•re one s•d suspire
It doth not bid you laugh them to their graves
L•y subtle trains to antidate their years,
To be the sooner ceased of their estates.
Oh time of age wheres that Ones now
Who letting all his Jewels to the fl•mes.
Forgetting country kindred treasure friends
Foe•tunes and all things save the name of son
Which you so much forget, go like Ones
Who took his bedrid father on his back
And with that sacred load (to him no bu•den)
Hewd out his way through blood, through fire, through
Even all the armed streets of bright burning Troy,
Only to sa•e a father.
We have no leisure now
To hear lessons read from Virgil, wee are past school,
And all this time thy judges.
Tic fit,
That we proceed to sentence.
You a•e the mouth
And now tic fit to open.
Justice indeed
Should ever be close eared, and open mouthed
That is to hear him little, and speak much
Low then Cleanthes there is none can be
A good son and a bad subject, for if Princes
Be called the peoples fathers then the subjects
Are all his sons, and he that flouts the Prince
Doth disobey his father, there year gone.
And not to be recovered.
And again.
If he be gone once call him not again.
I say again this act of thine expr•s•es
A double disobedience, as our Princes
Are fathers, so they are our sovereigns too,
And he that doth rebel against sovereignty
Doth commit treason in the height of degree
And now thou art quite gone.
Our brother in comm•ssion
Hath spoke his mind both learnedly and neatly,
And I can add but little, howsoever
It shall send him packing.
He that begins a f•ult that wants example
Ought to be made example for the fault.
A foul• no longer can I hold my self
To hear vice upheld and virtue thrown down•
A f•ult judge then, I desire where it lies
In those •hat are my judges or in me
Heaven st•nd on my side pity love and duty.
Where are they sir who •ees them but your s•lfe.
Not you, and I am •ur,
You never had •he gracious eyes to see them,
You think you arraign me, but I h•pe
To sentence you at the Bar.
That would show brave.
This were the judgement seat, we now
The heavi•st crimes that ever made up
U•na•urallness in humanity,
You are found foul and guilty by a Jury
M•de of your fathers curses, which have brought
Vengeance impending on you, and I now
Am forced to pronounce judgement on my judges.
The common Laws of reason and of nature
Condemn you ipso facto, you are paricides,
And if you marry will beget the liar
Who when you're grown to full maturity
Will hurry you their fathers to their graves;
Like Traitors you take counsel from the living
Of upright judgement, you would rob the Bench:
Experience and di•creation snatched away
From the earth• face, turn all into disorder,
Imprison virtue, and enfranchise vice,
And put the Sword of justice into the hands of
Boys and mad men.
Well, well have you done sir?
I have spoke my •houghts.
Then •'le begin and end.
Tic time I now begin,
Where your commissi•n •nds,
Cleant•es you come from the B•r
B•ca•se I know you're save•rally disposed;
I here invite you to an obj•ct will no doubt
Work in you country•y •ff•cts.
Music.
Pray Heaven I dream not, sure he moves, talks comfort∣bly, as joy can wish a man, if he be changed
F•r above from me, he is not ill entreated•
His face doth promise fullness of content
A•d glory hath a par•int.
Oh my son.
You tha• can claim acqu•intance with these lads
Talk freely.
I can see none there thats worth one hand to you from me.
These are thy judges and by their grave Law
I find thee clear•, but th•se Delinquents guilty:
You must change plac•s for tic so decree•d
Such just pre-eminence hath thy goodness gained
Thou art the ju•ge now, they the men arraignd.
H•ers fine dancing Gentlemen.
Is •hy father amongst them?
Oh a Pox I saw him the first thing I looked on
A live again, fl•light I believe now a father
H•th as m•ny lives as a mother.
Tic full as blessed as tic wonderful
Oh bring me back to the same law again
I am fowler then all these, cease on me Officers
And b•ing me to new sentence.
Whats all this?
A fault not to be pardoned
Unnaturalness is but suns shadow to it.
I am glad of that, I hope the case may alter
And I turn judge again.
N•me your off•nce.
That I should be so wild
As once to think you cruel.
Is that all?
It was p•rdond ere confessed, you that have sons
If they be worthy hear my challenge then.
I should h•ve one amongst them had he had grace
To have retained that name.
I pray you Father.
That name I know
H•th been long since forgot.
I find but small comfort in remembering it now.
Cleanthes take your places with these grave father
And read what in that table is inscribed
N•w set these at the B•r.
And read Cl•anthes to the dread and terror
Of disobedience and unnatural blood.
It is decreed by the grave and learned
Counsel of Epire, that no son and heir
Shall be held c•p•ble of his inheritance
A• •h• age of one and twenty, unless he be at that time
As natu•e in obedience, manners and goodness.
Sure I shall never be at full age then,
•hough I l•ve to an hundred years, and thats nearer by twenty,
•hen the la•t Statute allowed.
A terrible act.
Moreover is en•cted that all sons aforesaid, whom either this Law •or their o•no grac•, whom it sh•ll reduce into the true method of •uty, virtue• and aff•ction; and relate their trial and approbation from Cleant•es the Son of Leonides— from m• my Lord.
F••m none but you as fullest, proceed sir.
Whom for his manifest virtues, we m•ke such
judge and censure of youth and the absolute reff•renc• of life and manners.
This is a brave world, when a man should be
Selling Land he must be learning manners,
First not my M•sters?
Wh•ts here to do, my suitors at the B•rr
The old baud shines again, oh miserable!
Read the Law over to her twill awake her
Tic one this•ves sm•ll pity.
L•stly it is ord•ended that all such wives now wh•tsoe∣ver that shall design the husbands death to bee soon rid of them and entertain suitors in their husbands life time.
You had best read that a little louder.
For if any thy•g that will bri•g her to her self again, and find her tongue.
Sh•ll not presume on the penalty of our heavy displea∣sure to m••rye within ten years •fter.
Tha• L•was too long by nine years and a half.
I'll take m• death upont, so shall m•st women•n.
And those i•cont•nent women so •ff•nding
To be judge and censured by Hippolita,
Wife to Cleanthes.
Of all the rest i'll not be judge by her.
Ah here she comes, let me prevent thy joys, prevent them but in part and hide the rest, thou hast not strength enough to bear them else.
Leonides.
I feared it all this while.
I knew ••was past thy power Hi•polita,
What contrariety is in women's blood?
One faints for spleen and anger, she for g•ace.
Of Sons and Wives we see the worst and b•st,
My future ages yield Hippolitas
M•ny, but few like thee Eugenia.
Let no Simonides henceforth have a fame
But all bl•st sons live in Cleant•es name
Ha what strange kind of melody was that?
Yet give it entrance whatsoere it be.
This day is all de•out to liberty.
Fiddlers crowd on, crowd on, let no man lay a block in your way, crowd on I say.
Stay the crowd a while, lets know the •eason
Of this jollity.
Sirrah doe you know where you are•?
Yes sir, I am here, now h•ere, and now here again sir.
Your hats too high crowned the Duke in pres•nce.
The Duke (as hee is my Sovereign) I doe give him two Crowns for it, and thats •quall change all the wo•lt over, 〈◊〉 am Lord of the day (being my marriage day the second) I doe ad∣vance-bonnet crowd on a fore.
Good sir a few words if you'll vouchsafe em
Or will •ou be forced?
Forced, I w•ul• t•e Duke himself would say so.
I think he dares sir, and does, if you stay not
You sh•ll be forced.
I think so my Lord, and good reason too, shall not I stay when your g•ace says I shall, I were unworthy to bee a Bride∣groom in any part of your Highness Dominions then, will it please you to taste of •he wedlock curtsy?
Oh by no m•anes sir, you shall not deface
So fair an o•nament for me.
If your grace please to be cac•ted say so.
And which might be your fair Bride sir?
This is m• two for one that must be uxor uxoris,
The remedy doloris, and the very syceum Amoris.
And hast •thou any else?
I have •n older my Lord for other uses.
My Lord I doe observe a strange decorum here
These that do lead this day of jollity
Doe march wi•h Music and most mirthful cheeks
Those that doe follow sad, and woefully
Nearer the havior of a funeral
Then a wedding.
Tic tree•e, pray expound that sir.
As the d•stiny of the day falls out my Lord, one goes out to wedding• another goes to hanging; and your Grace, in the due consideration shall find em much alike, the one hath the ring upon her finger, the other a halter about her neck.
I take thee Beatrice says the Bridegroom, I take thee Agatha says the hangman, and both say together to have and to hold till death do p•rt us.
•his is not yet plain enough to my understanding.
If further your Grace examine it, you shall find I show my self a dutiful subject and obedient •o the L•w, my self (with these my good friends, and your good subjects) our old wives wh•se days are ripe, and their lives forfeit to the Law only my self more forward then the rest, am already provided of my se∣cond choice.
Oh take heed sir, you'll run your self into danger,
If the Law •ends yo• with two wives at once
T•eres a sh•ewd premun•re.
I have taken leave of the whole• my Lo•d. I have nothing to s•y to her, she•s going to S••, you• G•ace knows whether better th•n I doe, she h•s a strong wind with her, it stands full in her poop when you please let her disemboge.
And the r•st of her neighbours with her whom wee pre∣sent to th• satisfaction of your Highness Law.
A•d so w•e take our leaves and leave them to your High∣nos, crowd on.
Stay. stay, you are too forward, will you marry?
And your wife ye• l•avenge.
Alas She•l bee dead b•fore wee can get to Church, if your G•ace w•uld set her in the way, I would dispatch her, I have a v•nter on•, which wou•d return me, if your Highness would m•ke a little• mo•e h•st two for one.
Com• my Lo•ds we must sit again, heers a Case
C•ves a moss• s•rios censu•e.
N•w t••y shall be dispatcht out of the way.
• w•uld they were gone once, the time goes away.
W•each is the wife unto the forward B•idegroome?
I am and it please your grace.
T•used me a lusty woman, able bodied
And well blooded cheeks.
Oh she paints my Lord, she was a Chamber Maid once, and learnt it of he• Lady.
Sure I think she cannot be so old.
Truly I think so too, and please your grace.
Two to one with your grace of that, shees threescore by th• Book.
Peace sir you're to loud.
Take heed Gn••hoes if you move the Dukes patience, tic an edge tool but a word and a blow, he cut• off your head.
Cu• •ff my head, away ignorant, hee knows it cost more in the hair, he does not use to cut off many such heads as mine, I will talk to him to, it he cut off my head, •le give him my ears, I say my wife is at full age for the Law, the Clark shall take his oath and the Church Book shall be sworn too.
My Lords, I leave this s•nsu•e to y•u
Then fi•st this fellow does deserve punishment
For off•ring up a lusty able woman
Which may do s•rv•ce to the commonwealth,
Where the Law craves one impot•ned and useless.
Therefore to be severely punished
For thus attempting a second marriage
His wife yet living.
Nay to have it trebled
That even the day and instant when he should morn
As a kind husband to her funeral,
Hee le•ds a triumph to the scorn of it
Which unseasonable joy ought to bee punished
With all s•verity.
The fiddles will be in a foul case too by and by.
Nay further it se•mes hee has a venture
Of two for one at his second marriage
Which cannot be but a conspiracy
Against the former.
A mess of wise old men.
Sirrah what can you answer to all these?
Ye'are good old men and talk as age will give you leave; I would speak with the youthful Duke himself, hee and I may
speak of things that shall be 30 or 40 years after you are dead and rotten, a•as you a•e here to day and gone to S•a to morrow.
Introath sir then I must be p•aine with you
The Law tha• should take away your old wife from you
The which I do• p••ceive wa• your d•sire,
Is void a•d frust•ate• so for the r•st,
There •as been since another •arliament
Has cut it off.
I see your g•ace is disposed to be pl•assent.
Yes you might perceive that, I had not else
Thus dallied with your follies.
Isle talk further with your grace when I come
Bacl• from Church, in the mean time you know what to doe
With the old women•n.
S•ay sir unless in the m•an time you mean
I c•use a ••bber to be set up in your way
••d h•ng y•u at your re•urn.
Oh g•atious P•i•ce.
Your old wives cannot die to d•y by any
••w of mine, for ought I can say too em
•••y may by a new edict bu•y you,
•nd then perhaps you pay a new fine too.
This is fine indeed.
Oh G•acious •rince m•y he live a hue•dred years more.
Your v•ntu•e i• not like to come in to day Gnot•os.
G•v• me the princip•ll back.
Nay by my •roath weel venture still, and i'm sure wee have as ill a venture of it as you, for wee have taken old wives of pu•pos•, where that we had th•ught to have put away at this mar∣ket, 〈◊〉 now we cannot utter a pen•yworth.
W•ll sirrah you were b•st to discharge
Your new cha•ge and take you• o•d one to you.
Oh Mu•ec, no music, but prove most doleful Trumpets,
Oh Bride no Bride, but thou m•st prove a Strumpet,
Oh venture, no venture, I have for one now none,
Oh wife, thy life is s•v'd when I hope it had been gone,
Case up your fruitl•ss strings. no p•nny no wedding,
Case up thy Maiden head, no Priest no bedding,
Avaunt my venture it can ne'er be restored,
Till Egg my old wife be thrown over board,
Then come again old Egg since it must be so,
Let Bride, and venture with woeful Music go.
What for the Bride cake Gnothoes?
Let it be mouldy now tic out of season,
Let it grow out of date currant and reason,
Let it be chip'd and chopped and given to chickens•
No more is got by that, then William Di•kins
Got by his wooden dishes.
Put up your plums as fiddlers put up pipes,
The Wedding dashed the Bridegroom
Weeps and wipes.
Fiddlers farewell and now without perhaps,
Put up your Fiddles as you put up scraps.
This passion has given some satisfaction yet,
My Lord I think you'll pardon him n•w,
Withal the r•st so they live honestly
With the wives they have.
Oh m•st freely, free pardon to all.
I wee have deserved our pardons if wee can live hon•stly with such reverent wives that have no motion in em but their tongues.
Heaven bless your Grace, you're a just Prince.
All hopes dashed, the Clerks duties lost, Venture gon, my second wife divorced, and which is worst the old one come back again.
Such Voyages are made now adays, I will weep too salt
Of our nose, besides these two fountains of fresh water,
Your grace had been more kind to your young subjects.
Heaven bl•sse, and mend your L•was, that they do
Not gull your poor Country men: fashion, but I am n•t
The fi•st by forty that h•s been undone by •he L•w,
Tic but a folly to stand upon Terms,
I take my leave of your Grace, as well as mine eyes will give me l•ave, I would they had been a sleep in their beds when they opend em to see this day: come Egg, come Egg.
Were not you all my servants?
D•ring your life as we thought sir, but our young Master turned us •way.
How headlong villain were thou in thy ruin?
I followed the fashion sir as other young men did,
If you have as we thought you had been
We should ne'er have co•e for this I warrant you,
We did not feed after the old fashion on Beef
And Mutton and such like.
Well what damage or charge you have run
Your selves into by marriage, I cannot help
Nor deliver you from your w•ves, them you must keep
Your selves •hall again retain to me.
We thank your Lordship for your love, and must thank our selves for our bad bargains.
Cleanthes You delay the power of Law,
To be inslicted on these misgovernd men,
That filial duty have so far transgressed.
My Lord I see a satisfaction
Meeting the sentence, even preventing it
Beating my words back in their utterance
See sir theres salt sorrow bringing forth fresh
And new dutles (as the sea prop•gat•)
The Eleph•nts have found their joints too, why
H•res humility able to bind up
The pu•ishing hands of the severest masters
Much more the gentle fathers.
I had ne'er thought to have been brought so low as my knees again, but since theirs no remedy, fathers, reverent fathers, as you ever hope to have good sons and •airs, a handful of pity wee confess wee have deserved more then wee are willing to receive at your hands, though sons can never deserve too much of their fa∣theirs as shall appear afterwards.
And what way can you decline your feeding now?
You cannot retire to Beeves and Muttons sure.
Alas sir you see a good pattern for that, now we have laid by our high and lusty meats, and are down to our ma•y bones allrea∣die.
Well sir rise to virtues weel bound you now,
You that were too weak your selves to govern,
By others shall be governed.
Cleanth••,
I meet your Justice with reconcilement
If there be tears of faith in women's breast
I have received a mirriade which confirms me
To find a happy renovation.
Heers Virtues Throne
Which i'll embellish with my dearest Jewels
Of Love and Faith, Peace and Aff•ction,
This is the Altar of my Sacrifice,
Where daily my devoted knees shall bend
Age honoured shrine, time still so love you,
That I so long may have you in mine eye
Until my m•mori lose your beginning.
For you great Prince, long may your fame survive,
Your justice and your wisdom never die,
Crown of your Crown, the blessing of your Land
Which you reach to her from your regents hand.
Oh Cleanthes had you with us tasted
The entertainment of our retirement
Feared and exclaimed on in your ignorance,
You might have sooner died upon the wonder
Then any rage or passion for our loss.
A place at hand we were all strangers in
So sphea•d about with Music, such delights
Viands and attendance, and once a day
So cheered with a royal visitant
That oft times (waking) our unsteady fantasies
Would question whether we yet livd or no
Or had poss•ssion of that Paradise
Where Ange•ls be the guard.
Enough Leonides
You go beyond the pra•se, we have our end
And all is ended well, we have now seen
The flowers and weeds that grew about our Court.
If these be weeds i'm afraid I shall wear none so good a∣gen as long as my father lives.
Only this Gentleman we did abuse
With our ow•e bosom• we seemed a Tyrant
And he our instrument• look tic Cratilus.
The man that you supposed had now been travelled,
Which wee gave leave to learn to sp•ak
And bring us foreign langu•ges to Greece
Alls joyed I see, let Music be the •to••no,
And set it high, the good needs fear no Law,
It is his safety, and the bad mans awe.

WHat Raynulph Monk of Chester can
Raise from his Polycranicon
That raises him as works do men
To see long parted light again,
That best may please this round fair ring
With sparkling Diamonds circled in,
I shall produce: If all my powers
Can win the grace of two poor hours,
Well apaid I go to rest;
Ancient stories have been best,
Fashions that are now called new
Have been worn by more then you;
Elder times have used the same,
Though these new ones get the name:
So in story what now told
That takes not part with days of old?
Then to approve times mutual glory
Join new times love to old times story.
Will that wide throated Beast, the multitude,
Never leave bellowing? Courtiers are ill
Advised when they first make such Monsters.
How near was I to a Sceptre and a Crown?
Fair Power was even upon me, my desires
Were casting glory, till this forked Rabble
With their infectious Acclamations
Poisoned my Fortunes for Constantines sons.
Well, though I rise not King, I'll seek the means
To grow as near to one as policy can,
And choke their expectations. Now, good Lords, 
In whose kind loves and wishes I am built
As high as humane dignity can aspire,
Are yet those Trunks that have no other souls
But noise and ignorance, something more quiet?
Nor are they like to be for ought we gather,
Their wills are up still; nothing can appease them,
Good speeches are but cast away upon them.
Then, since necessity and fate withstand me,
I'll strive to enter at a straighter passage;
Your sudden aid and counsels, good my Lords.
They are ours no longer then they do you service.
Vessels of sanctity, be pleased a while
To give attention to the general peace,
Wherein Heaven is served too, though not so purely.
Constantius, eldest son of Constantine,
We here seize on thee for the general good,
And in thy right of Birth.
On me! for what Lords?
The Kingdom Government.
Oh powers of Blessedness!
Keep me from growing downwards into earth again.
I hope I am further on my way then so; set forwards.
You must not.
How!
I know your wisdom
Will light upon a way to pardon us
When you shall read in every Britains brow
The urged necessity of the times.
What necessity can there be in the world
But prayer and repentance? and that business
I am about now.
Hark afar off still,
We lose and hazard much; holy Germanus,
And Reverend Lupus, with all expedition
Set the Crown on him.
No such mark of Fortune
Comes near my head.
My Lord, we are forced to rule you.
Dare you receive Heavens light in at your Eye-lids
And offer violence to Religion?
Take heed, the very Beam let in to comfort you
May be the fire to burn you; On these knees,
Hardened with zealous Prayers, I entreat you
Bring not my cares into the world again.
Think with how much unwillingness and anguish
A glorified Soul parted from the Body
Would to that loathsome Gaol again return,
With such great pain a well subdued affection
Re-enters wordly business.
Good my Lord,
I know you cannot lodge so many Virtues,
But Patience must be one. As low as earth
We beg the freeness of your own consent
Which else must be constrained; and time it were
Either agreed or forced. Speak good my Lord,
For you bind up more sins in this delay
Then thousand Prayers can absolve again.
Were it but my death, you should not kneel so long for it.
Twill be the death of Millions if you rise not,
And that betimes too: Lend your help my Lords,
For fear all come too late.
This is a Cruelty
That peaceful man did never suffer yet
To make me dye again, that once was dead,
And begin all that ended long before.
Hold Lupus and Germanus, you are lights
Of Holiness and Religion, can you offer
The thing that is not lawful? stand not I
Clear from all temporal charge by my profession?
Not when a time so violent calls upon you,
Who is born a Prince, is born a general peace,
Not his own only; Heaven will look for him
In others actions, and will require him there.
What is in you religious must be shown
In saving many more Souls then your own.
Did not great Constantine, our Noble Father,
Deem me unfit for Government and Rule,
And therefore praised me into this profession?
Which I have held strict, and love it above glory.
Nor is there want of me, your selves can witness
Heaven hath provided largely for your peace,
And blessed you with the lives of my two Brothers,
Fix your obedience there, leave me a Servant.
Long live Constantius, Son of Constantine,
King of Great Britain.
I do feel a want
And extreme poverty of Joy within;
The peace I had is parted amongst rude men,
To keep them quiet I have lost it all.
What can the Kingdom gain by my undoing?
That riches is not best, though it be mighty,
That's purchased by the ruin of another;
Nor can the peace so filched ever thrive with them:
And if it be worthily held Sacrilege
To rob a Temple, it is no less offence
To ravish meditations from the Soul
(The consecrated Altar in a man:)
And all their hopes will be beguiled in me,
I know no more the way to temporal Rule
Then he that's born and has his years come to him
In a rough desert; well may the weight kill me,
And that's the fairest good I look for from it.
Not so, great King, here stoops a faithful servant
Would sooner perish under it with cheerfulness
Then your meek Soul should feel oppression
Of ruder cares; such common coarse employments
Cast upon me your servant, upon Vortiger;
I see you are not made for noise and pains,
Clamours of Suitors, Injuries and Redresses,
Millions of Actions, rising with the Sun,
Like Laws still ending and yet never done,
Of power to turn a great man to the state
Of his marble Monument: with over-watching,
To be oppressed is not required of you, my Lord,
But only to be King: the broken sleeps
Let me take from you, Sir; the toils and troubles,
All that is burdenous in Authority
Please you lay it on me, and what is glorious
Receive it to your own brightness.
Worthy Vortiger,
If'twere not sin to grieve another patience
With what we cannot tolerate our self,
How happy were I in thee and thy love?
There's nothing makes man feel his miseries
But knowledge only; reason, that is placed
For mans director is his chief afflictor;
For though I cannot bear the weight my self,
I cannot have that barrenness of remorse
To see another groan under my burden.
I am quite blown up a conscionable way,
There's even a trick of murdering in some pity;
The death of all my hopes I see already:
There was no other likelihood, for Religion
Was never friend of mine yet.
Holy Partners in strictest abstinence
Cruel necessity hath forced me from you,
We part, I fear for ever, but in mind
I will be always here, here let me stay.
My Lord you know the times.
Farewell blessed Souls, I fear I shall offend, 
He that draws tears from you takes your best friend.
Can the great motion of Ambition stand
Like wheels false wrought by an unskilful hand?
Then time stand thou too, let no hopes arrive
At their sweet wishfulness, till mine set forwards:
Would I could stay the existence, as I can
Thy glassy counterfeit in hours of sand,
I'd keep thee turned down till my wishes rose,
Then wee'ld both rise together.
What several Inclinations are in nature?
How much is he disquieted, and wears Royalty
Disdainfully upon him, like a Curse,
Calls a fair Crown the weight of his afflictions!
When here's a Soul would sink under the burden.
Yet well recovered, I will use all means
To vex authority from him, and in all
Study what most may discontent his blood,
Making my Masque my Zeal to the public good.
Not possible a richer policy
Can have conception in the thought of man.
An honourable life enclose your Lordship.
Now, what are you?
Graziers if it like your Lordship.
So it should seem by your Enclosures;
What's your affair with me?
We are your Petitioners,
My Lord.
For what? depart, Petitioners to me!
You have well deserved my grace and favour, have you not a Ruler
After your own Election? hye you to Court,
Get near and close, be loud and bold enough,
You cannot choose but speed.
If that will do it
We have throats wide enough, we'll put them to it.
When Germany was over-grown
With Sons of peace too thickly sown,
Several guides were chosen then
By destined Lots to lead out men,
And they whom Fortune here withstands
Must prove their Fates in other Lands.
On these two Captains fell the Lot;
But that which must not be forgot,
Was Roxena's cunning grief,
Who from her Father like a thief,
Hid her best and truest tears
Which her lustful Lover wears,
In many a stolen and wary kiss
Unseen of Father: Maids do this
Yet highly scorn to be called Strumpets too,
But what they lack of't I'll be judged by you.
This way his Majesty comes.
Thank your good Lordship:
When you hear you door open.
Very good my Lord.
Be ready with your several suits, put forward.
That's a thing every man does naturally, Sir,
That is a Suitor, and dothmean to speed.
It is well you are so deep learned, take no denials.
No my good Lord.
Not any, if you love
The prosperity of your Suits; you mar all utterly
And overthrow your fruitful hopes for ever,
If either fifth or sixth, nay tenth repulse
Fasten upon your bashfulness.
Say you so, my Lord?
We can be troublesome if we list.
I know it,
I felt it but too late in the general sum
Of your rank Brother-hood, which now I thank you for.
While this vexation is in play, I'll study
For a second, then a third to that, one still
To vex another, that he shall be glad
To yield up power, if not, it shall be had.
Hark, I protest my heart was coming upwards,
I thought the door had opened.
Marry would it had Sir.
I have such a treacherous heart of my own, twill throb
At the very fall of a Farthingale.
Not if it fall on the rushes.
Yes truly if there be no light in the room I shall throb presently:
The first time it took me my wife was in the company,
I remember the room was not half so light as this,
But I'll be sworn I was a whole hour in finding her.
Byr'lady you'd a long time of throbbing of it then.
Still I felt men, but I could feel no women,
I thought they had been all sunk, I have made a Vox for it,
I'll never have meeting while I live by Candle-light again.
Yes, Sir, in Lanterns.
Yes, Sir, in Lanterns.
But I'll never trust candle naked again.
Hark, hark, stand close, it opens now indeed.
Oh Majesty, what art thou! I'd give any man
Half my Suit to deliver my petition; It is in the behalf
Of Button-makers, and so it seems by my flesh.
Pray do not follow me, unless you do it
To wonder at my garments, there's no cause
I give you why you should, 'cis shame enough
Methinks to look upon my self;
It grieves me that more should, the other weeds
Became me better, but the Lords are pleased
To force me to wear these, I would not else:
I pray be satisfied, I called you not.
Wonder of madness, can you stand so idle
And know that you must dye!
We are all commanded, Sir,
Besides it is our duties to your grace
To give attendance.
What a wild thing is this?
No marvel though you tremble at deaths name
When you'll not see the cause why you are fools:
For Charities sake desist here I pray you,
Make not my presence guilty of your sloth,
Withdraw, young men, and find you honest business.
What hopes have we to rise by following him?
I'll give him over shortly.
He's too nice,
Too holy for young Gentlemen to follow
That have good faces, and sweet running fortunes.
Eight hours a day in serious contemplation
Is but a bare allowance, no higher food
To the Soul then bread and water to the body,
And that's but needful, then more would do better.
Let us all kneel together, twill move pity,
I have been at the begging of a hundred Suits.
How happy am I in the sight of you?
Here are religious souls that lose not time,
With what devotion do they point at Heaven,
And seem to check me, that am too remiss!
I bring my zeal among you, holy men,
If I see any kneel, and I sit out,
That hour is not well spent; methinks, strict souls,
You have been of some Order in your times?
Graziers and Braziers some, and this a Felt-maker.
Here's his Petition and mine, if it like your Grace.
Look upon mine, I am the longest Suitor,
I was undone seven years ago.
You have mocked my good hopes, call you these Petitions?
Why there's no form of Prayer among them all.
Yes in the bottom there's half a line prays for your Ma???jesty,
If you look on mine.
Make your requests to Heaven, not to me.
Alas mine's a supplication for brass buttons, Sir.
There's a great enormity in wool,
I beseech your Grace consider it.
Pastures rise 2d an acre, what will this world come to?
I do beseech your Grace.
Good your Grace.
Oh this is one of my afflictions
That with the Crown enclosed me, I must bear it.
Your Graces answer to my supplication.
Mine my Lord.
No violent storm lasts ever, that's the comfort of it.
Your Highness answer.
We are almost all undone, the Country beggared.
See, see, he points at Heaven, as who should say
There's enough there; but it is a great way thither,
There's no good to be done, I see that already,
We may all spend our mouths like a company of Hounds
In chase of a Royal Deer, and then go home
And fall to cold mutton bones, when we have done.
My wife will hang me, that's my currish destiny.
Thanks Heaven, it is over now, we should never know right???lie
The sweetness of a calm, but for a storm.
Here's a wished hour for contemplation now,
Ell's still and silent, here is a true Kingdom.
My Lord.
Again?
Alas this is but early
And gentle to the troops of businesses
That flock about Authority: You must forthwith
Settle your mind to marry.
How, to marry?
And suddenly, there's no pause to be given,
The peoples wills are violent, and covetous
Of a succession from your Loins.
From me there can come none, a professed abstinence
Hath set a Virgin Seal upon my blood,
And altered all the Course; the heat I have
Is all enclosed within a zeal to virtue,
And that's not fit for earthly propagation;
Alas, I shall but forfeit all their hopes,
I'm a man made without desires, tell them.
I proved them with such words, but all were fruitless,
A Virgin of the highest Subjects blood
They have picked out for your embrace, and send her
Blessed with their general wishes into fruitfulness. 
Lo, where she comes, my Lord.
I never felt
The unhappy hand of misery till this touch;
A patience I could find for all but this.
My Lord, your vowed love ventures me but dangerously.
It is but to strengthen a vexation politic.
That's an uncharitable practice, trust me Sir.
No more of that.
But say he should affect me, Sir,
How should I scope him then? I have but one faith, my Lord,
And that you have already, our late contract is a divine witness to it.
I am not void of shifting rooms and helps
For all projects that I commit with you.
This is an ungodly way to come to honour,
I do not like it, I love Lord Vortiger,
But not these practices, they are too uncharitable.
Are you a Virgin?
Never yet, my Lord,
Known to the will of man.
Oh blessed Creature!
And does too much felicity make you surfeit?
Are you in soul assured there is a state
Prepared for you, for you, a glorious one,
In midst of Heaven, now in the state you standin;
And had you rather, after much known misery,
Cares and hard labours, mingled with a curse,
Throng but to the door, and hardly get a place there?
Think, hath the world a folly like this madness?
Keep still that holy and immaculate fire,
You chaste lump of eternity, it is a treasure
Too precious for deaths moment to partake,
This twinkling of short life; disdain as much
To let mortality know you, as stars to kiss the pavements, you've a substance
As excellent as theirs, holding your pureness,
They look upon corruption, as you do,
But are stars still, be you a Virgin too.
I'll never marry, what though my truth be engaged
To Vortiger? forsaking all the world
I save it well, and do my faith no wrong.
You've mightily prevailed, great virtuous Sir,
I am bound eternally to praise your goodness,
My thoughts henceforth shall be as pure from man
As ever made a Virgins name immortal.
I will do that for joy I never did 
Nor ever will again.
My Lord, he's taken.
I am sorry for it, I like not that so well,
They are something too familiar for their time methinks,
This way of kissing is no way to vex him;
Why I, that have a weaker faith and patience,
Could endure more then that, coming from a woman.
Dispatch, and bring his answer speedily.
My Lord, my gracious Lord.
Beshrew thy heart.
They all attend your Grace.
I would not have them,
It would please me better if they'ld all depart
And leave me to my self, or put me out
And take it to themselves.
The Noon is past,
Meat's on the table:
Meat! away, get from me,
Thy memory is diseased, what Saints Eeve's this?
Saint Agatha's I take it.
Is it so?
I am not worthy to be served before her,
And so return I pray.
He'll starve the Guard
If this be suffered; If we set Court bellies
By a Monastery Clock, he that breaks a fellows pate now
Will not be able to crack a louse within this twelve months.
It is sure forgetfulness and not mans will
That leads him forth into licentious ways;
He cannot certainly commit such errors,
And think upon them truly as they are acting.
Why's abstinence ordained, but for such seasons?
My Lord, you've pleased to put us to much pains,
But we confess it is portion of our duty:
Will your Grace please to walk? dinner stays for you.
I have answered that already.
But, my Lord,
We must not so yield to you, pardon me,
It is for the general good, you must be ruled, Sir,
Your health and life is dearer to us now,
Think where you are, at Court, this is no Monastery.
But Sir, my Conscience keeps still where it was,
I may not eat this day.
We have sworn you shall,
And plentifully too, we must preserve you, Sir,
Though you be wilful; it is no slight condition
To be a King.
Would I were less then man.
Will you make the people rise, my Lord,
In great despair of your continuance,
If you neglect the means that must sustain you???
I never eat on Eaves.
But now you must,
It concerns others healths that you take food,
I have changed your life, you well may change your mood.
This is beyond all cruelty.
It is our care my Lord.
MY Lord, I am resolved, tempt me no farther,
It is all to fruitless purpose.
Are you well?
Never so perfect in the truth of health
As at this instant.
Then I doubt my own,
Or that I am not waking.
Would you were then,
Youl'd praise my resolution.
This is wondrous,
Are you not mine by contract?
It is most true, my Lord,
And I am better blessed in it then I looked for,
In that I am confined in faith so strictly;
I am bound my Lord, to marry none but you,
You'll grant me that; and you I'll never marry.
It draws me into violence and hazard,
I saw you kiss the King.
I grant you so Sir,
Where could I take my leave of the world better?
I wronged not you in that, you will acknowledge
A King is the best part of it.
Oh my passion!
I see you something yielding to Infirmity; Sir,
I take my leave.
Why, it is not possible!
The fault is in your faith, time I were gone
To give it better strengthening:
Hark you, Lady.
Send your intent to the next Monastery,
There you shall find my answer ever after,
And so with my last duty to your Lordship,
For whose prosperity I will pray as heartily
As for my own.
How am I served in this? I offer a vexation to the King,
He sends it home into my blood with vantage.
I'll put off time no longer, I have brought him
Into most men's neglects, calling his zeal
A deep pride hallowed over, love of ease
More then devotion, or the public benefit;
Which catches many men's beliefs. I am stronger too
In peoples wishes, their affections point at me.
I lose much time and glory, that redeemed,
She that now flies returns with joy and wonder,
Greatness and women's wish ne'er keep asunder.
When nothing could prevail to tire
The good Kings patience, they did hire
Two wicked Rogues to take his life,
In whom a while there fell a strife
Of pity and fury, but the gold
Made pity faint, and fury bold:
Then to Vortiger they bring
The head of that religious King,
Who feigning grief, to clear his guilt,
Makes the slaughterers blood be spilt.
Then crown they him, and force the Maid,
That vowed a Virgin-life, to wed.
Such a strength great power extends,
It conquers Fathers, Kindred, Friends.
And since Fates pleased to change her life
She proves as holy in a Wife.
More to tell, were to betray
What deeds in their own tongues must say;
Only this, the good King dead
The Brothers poor in safety sled.
My Lord.
I fear thy News will fetch a Curse,
It comes with such a violence.
The people are up
In Arms against you.
Oh this dream of glory!
Sweet power, before I can have time to taste thee
Must I for ever lose thee? what's the Impostume
That swells them now?
The Murder of Constantius.
Ulcers of Realms! they hated him alive,
Grew weary of the minute of his Reign,
Called him an evil of their own electing,
And is their ignorant zeal so fiery now
When all their thanks are cold? the mutable hearts
That move in their false breasts! provide me safety,
Hark, I hear ruin threaten me with a voice 
That imitates thunder.
Whore's the King?
Who takes him?
Send peace to all your Royal thoughts, my Lord,
A Fleet of valiant Saxons newly landed
Offer the truth of all their Service to you.
Saxons! my wishes, let them have free entrance,
And plenteous welcomes from all hearts that love us;
They never could come happier.
Health, power, and victory to Vortiger.
There can be no more pleasure to a King
If all the Languages earth spake were ransacked.
Your names I know not, but so much good fortune
And warranted worth lightens your fair aspects,
I cannot but in arms of love enfold you.
The Mistress of our births hope, fruitful Germany,
Calls me Hengistus, and this Captain Horsus,
A man low built, but yet in deeds of Arms
Flame is not swifter: we are all, my Lord,
The Sons of Fortune, she has sent us forth
To thrive by the red sweat of our own merits:
And since after the rage of many a tempest
Our Fates have cast us upon Britains bounds,
We offer you the first fruits of our wounds.
Which we shall dearly prize, the mean blood spent
Shall at welds fountain make its own content:
You double vigour in us then, my Lord,
Pay is the soul of such as thrive by the Sword.
My Lord, these Saxons bring a Fortune with them
Stay any Roman success.
On, speak forwards,
I will not take one minute from thy tidings.
The main supporters of this Insurrection
They have taken Prisoners, and the rest so came
They stoop to the least grace that slows from mercy.
Never came power guided by better stars
Then these men's fortitudes, yet they are mis-believers,
Which to my reason is wondrous. 
You've given me such a first taste of your worth
Twill never from my love, when life is gone
The memory sure will follow, my soul still
Participating immortality with it.
But here's the misery of earths limited glory,
There's not a way revealed to any honour
Above the same which your own merits give you.
Indeed, my Lord, we hold, when ell's summed up,
That can be made for worth to be expressed,
The fame that a man wins himself is best,
That he may call his own; honours put to him
Make him no more a man than his clothes do,
And are as soon taken off; for in the warmth
The heat comes from the body, not the weeds;
So mans true fame must strike from his own deeds.
And since by this event which fortune speaks us
This Land appears the fair predestined soil
Ordained for our good hap, we crave, my Lord,
A little earth to thrive on, what you please,
Where we'll but keep a Nursery of good spirits
To fight for you and yours.
Sir, for our Treasure
It is open to your merits, as our love;
But for you're strangers in Religion chiefly,
(Which is the greatest Alienation can be 
And breeds most factions in the bloods of men)
I must not yield to that.
S'precious, my Lord,
I see a pattern, be it but so little
As yon poor Hide will compass.
How, the Hide!
Rather then nothing, Sir.
Since you're so reasonable,
Take so much in the best part of our Kingdom.
We thank your Grace. Rivers from bubbling springs
Have rise at first, and great from abject things.
Stay yonder fellow, he came luckily,
And he shall fare well for it, what ever he be,
Wee'??? thank our fortune in rewarding him.
Stay, fellow.
How, fellow! it is more then you know
Whether I be your fellow or no, I am sure you see me not.
Come, what's the price of your Hide?
Oh unreasonable Villain!
He would buy the house over a mans head; I'll be sure now
To make my bargain wisely, they may buy me out of my skin else;
Whose Hide would you buy, mine or the Beasts?
There is little difference in their complexions, I think mine
Is the blacker of the two; you shall see for your love, and buy for your money.
A pestilence on you all, how have you deceived me?
You buy an Ox hide? you buy a Calves Gather: they are all
Hungry Soldiers, and I took them for honest Shoemakers.
Hold fellow, prithee hold; right a fool wordling
That kicks at all good fortune. Whose man art thou?
I am a Servant, yet a masterless man, Sir.
Prithee how can that be?
Very nimbly, Sir,
My Master is dead, and now I serve my Mistress,
Ergo, I am ?? masterless man, she is now a widow,
And I am the Foreman of her Tan-pit.
Hold you, and thank your Fortune, not your wit.
Faith, and I thank your bounty and not your wisdom,
You are not troubled with wit neither greatly, it seems:
Now by this light a nest of Yellow Hammers!
What will become of me? If I can keep all these without hanging
My self, I am happier then a hundred of my Neighbours.
You shall have my skin into the bargain,
Then if I chance to dye like a Dog
The labour will be saved of fleeing me;
Isle undertake, Sir, you shall have
All the skins in our Parish at this price, men's and women's.
Sirrah, give good ear to me; now take the Hide
And cut it all into the slendrest thongs
That can bear strength to hold.
That were a jest y'faith,
Spoil all the Leather? sin and pity,
Why it would shoe half your Army.
Do it I bid you.
What, cut it all in thongs? hum,
This is like the vanity of your Roman Ga lants, that cannot wear
Good Suits but they must have them cut and slashed in giggets,
That the very crimson Taffaties sit blushing at their follies;
I would I might persuade you from this humour of cutting,
It is but a swaggering condition and nothing profitable: what if it
Were but well pinckt? it would last longer for a summer suit.
What a cross lump of ignorance have I lighted on?
I must be fore'd to beat my drift into him;
Look you, to make you wiser then your Parents,
I have so much ground given me as this Hide will compass,
Which, as it is, is nothing???
Nothing quoth a,
Why twill not keep a Hog.
Now with the vantage
Cut into several pieces twill stretch far
And make a liberal Circuit.
A shame on your crafty Hide
Is this your cunning? I have learnt more knavery now
Then ever I shall claw off while I live.
I'll go purchase land by Cow-tails and undo the Parish,
Three good Bulls pizzels would set up a man for ever,
This is like a pin a day to set up a Haberdasher of small wares.
Thus men that mean to thrive, as we must learn,
Set in a foot at first.
A foot do you call it?
The Devil is in that foot that takes up all this Leather.
Dispatch, and cut it carefully with all the advantage, Sir.
You could never have lighted upon such a fellow
To serve your turn, Captain; I have such a trick of stretching too,
I learned it of a Tanners man that was hanged
Last Sessions at Maidstone,
I'll warrant you I'll get you a mile and a half
More then you're aware of.
Pray serve me so as oft as you will, Sir.
I am casting about for 9 acres to make a garden plot,
Out of one of the Buttocks.
Twill be a good soil for Nose-gayes.
Twill be a good soil for Cabbages to stuff out the guts
Of your Followers there:
Go see it carefully performed,
It is the first foundation of our fortunes
On Britains earth, and ought to be embraced
With a respect near linked to adoration.
Methinks it sounds to me a fair assurance
Of large honours and hopes, does it not, Captain?
How many have begun with less at first
That have had Emperors from their bodies sprung,
And left their Carcasses as much in monument
As would erect a College?
There's the fruits
Of their religious show too, to lye rotting
Under a million spent in gold and marble.
But where shall we make choice of our ground, Captain?
About the fruitful flanks of uberous Kent,
A fat and olive soil, there we came in;
Oh Captain, he has given he knows not what.
Long may he give so.
I tell thee, Sirrah, he that begged a field
Of fourscore Acres for a Garden-plot,
It was pretty well, but he came short of this.
Send over for more Saxons.
With all speed, Captain.
Especially for Roxena.
Who, my Daughter?
That Star of Germany, forget not her, Sir,
She is a fair fortunate Maid,
Fair she is, and fortunate may she be,
But in Maid lost for ever, my desire
Has been the close confusion of that name.
A treasure it is, able to make more Thieves
Then Cabinets set open to entice,
Which learn them theft that never knew the vice.
Come, I'll dispatch with speed.
Do, forget none.
Marry pray help my memory.
Roxena you remember?
What more dear Sir?
I see your memory's clear, Sir.
Those shouts leaped from our Army.
They were too cheerful
To voice a bad event.
Now, Sir, your News?
Roxena the fair.
True, she shall be sent for.
She's here, Sir.
What say?
She's come, Sir.
A new youth begins me o'er again.
Followed you close, Sir,
With such a zeal as daughter never equali'd,
Exposed her self to all the merciless dangers
Set in mankind or fortune, not regarding
Ought but your sight.
Her love is infinite to me.
Most charitably censured, it is her cunning,
The love of her own lust, which makes a woman
Gallop down hill as fearless as a Drunkard,
There's no true Loadstone in the world but that,
It draws them through all storms by Sea or shame,
Life's loss is thought too small to pay that game???
What follows more of her will you take strongly,
How!
Nay it is worth your wonder.
Her heart joy ravished with your late success
Being the early morning of your fortunes,
So prosperously new opening at her coming,
She takes a Cup of Gold, and midst the Army,
Teaching her knee a reverend cheerfulness,
Which well became her, drank a liberal health
To the Kings joys and yours, the King in presence,
Who with her sight, but her behaviour chiefly,
Or chief but one or both, I know not which,
But he's so far 'bove my expression caught,
It were art enough for one mans time and portion
To speak him and miss nothing.
This is astonishing!
Oh this ends bitter now, our close hid flame
Will break out of my heart, I cannot keep it.
Gave you attention, Captain? how now man?
A kind of grief about these times of the Moon still,
I feel a pain like a Convulsion,
A Cramp at heart, I know not what name fits it.
Nor never seek one for it, let it go
Without a name, would all griefs were served so.
A Love knot already, arm in arm!
What's he lays claim to her?
In right of Father-hood
I challenge an obedient part.
Take it, and send back the rest.
What means your Grace?
You'll keep no more then what
Belongs to you?
That's all, my Lord, it all belongs to me,
I keep the husbands Interest till he come,
Yet out of duty and respect to Majesty
I send her back your Servant
My Mistress, Sir, or nothing.
Come again, I never thought to hear so ill of thee.
How, Sir, so ill?
So beyond detestable,
To be an honest Vassal is some Calling,
Poor is the worst of that, shame comes not to it;
But Mistress that the only common bait
Fortune sets at all hours, catching Whore with it,
And plucks them up by Clusters. There's my sword, my Lord,
And if your strong desires aim at my blood
Which runs too purely there, a nobler way
Quench it in mine.
I ne'er took sword in vain,
Hengist, we here create thee Earl of Kent.
Oh that will do it.
What ails our friend? look to him.
Oh it is his Epilepsy, I know it well,
I helped him once in Germany, comes it again?
A Virgins right hand stroked upon his heart
Gives him ease straight, but it must be a pure Virgin,
Or else it brings no comfort.
What a task
She puts upon her self, unurged purity!
The truth of this will bring loves rage into me.
Oh this would mad a woman, there's no proof
In love to indiscretion.
Pish, this cures not.
Dost think I'll ever wrong thee?
Oh most feelingly,
But I'll prevent it now and break thy neck
With thy own cunning; thou hast undertaken
To give me help, to bring in Royal credit
Thy cracked Virginity, but I'll spoil all,
I will not stand on purpose, though I could,
But fall still, to disgrace thee.
What, you will not?
I have no other way to help my self,
For when you are known to be a whore imposterous
I shall be sure to keep thee.
Oh, Sir, shame me not,
You've had what is most precious, try my faith,
Undo me not at first in chaste opinion.
All this art shall not make me feel my Legs.
I prithee do not wilfully confound me?
Well I am content for this time to recover
To save thy credit, and bite in my pain;
But if thou ever fail me, I will fall,
And thou shalt never get me up again.
Agreed twixt you and I, Sir, see, my Lord,
A poor maids work, the man may pass for health now,
Among the clearest bloods, and those are nicest:
I have heard of women brought men on their knees,
But few that ever restored them, how now Captain?
My Lord, methinks I could do things past man
I'm so renewed in vigour, I long most
For violent exercise to take me down,
My joy's so high in blood I'm above frailty.
My Lord of Kent?
Your loves unworthy Creature.
See thou this fair Chain? think upon the means
To keep it linked for ever.
Oh my Lord,
It is many degrees sundried from my hope,
Besides Your Grace has a young virtuous Queen.
I say think on it.
If this wind hold I fall to my old disease:
There's no fault in thee but to come so late,
All else is excellent, I chide none but fate.
I Have no conceit now that you ever loved me,
But as lust led you for the time.
See, see.
Do you pine at my advancement, Sir?
Oh barrenness
Of understanding! what a right love is this?
It is you that fall, I that am reprehended;
What height of honours, eminence of fortune
Should ravish me from you?
Who can tell that, Sir?
What's he can judge of a mans appetite
Before he sees him eat? who knows the strength of any's constancy
That never yet was tempted? we can call
Nothing our own, if they be deeds to come,
They are only ours, when they are passed and done.
How blessed are you above your apprehension,
If your desire would lend you so much patience
T'examine the adventurous condition
Of our affections, which are full of hazard,
And draw in the times goodness to defend us!
First, this bold course of ours cannot last long,
Nor ever does in any without shame,
And that, you know, brings danger; and the greater
My Father is in blood, as he is well risen,
The greater will the storm of his rage be
Against his bloods wronging: I have cast for this,
It is not advancement that I love alone,
It is love of shelter, to keep shame unknown.
Oh were I sure of thee, as it is impossible
There to be ever sure where there's no hold,
Your pregnant hopes should not be long in rising.
By what assurance have you held me thus far
Which you found firm, despair you not in that.
True, that was good security for the time,
But in a change of state, when you're advanced
You women have a French toy in your pride,
You make your friend come crouching; or perhaps,
To bow in th'hams the better, he is put
To complement three hours with your chief woman,
Then perhaps not admitted, no nor ever,
That's the more noble fashion: forgetfulness
Is the most pleasing virtue they can have
That do spring up from nothing, for by the same
Forgetting all they forget whence they came;
An excellent property of oblivion.
I pity all the fortunes of poor women
In my own unhappiness, when we have given
All that we have to men, what's our requital?
An ill??? faced jealousy, that resembles much
The mistrustfulness of an insatiate thief
That scarce believes he has all, though he has stripped
The true man naked, and left nothing on him
But the hard cord that binds him: so are we
First robbed, and then left bound by jealousy.
Take reasons advice, and you'll find it impossible
For you to lose me in this Kings advancement
Who's an Usurper here, and as the Kingdom
So shall he have my love by usurpation,
The right shall be in thee still; my ascension
To dignity is but to waft thee higher,
And all Usurpers have the falling-sickness,
They cannot keep up long.
May credulous man
Put all his confidence in so weak a Bottom
And make a saving Voyage?
Nay as gainful
As ever man yet made.
Go, take thy fortunes,
Aspire with my consent, so thy ambition will be sure to prosper.
Speak the fair certainties of Britains Queen
Home to thy wishes.
Speak in hope I may
But not in certainty.
I say in both,
Hope and be sure I'll soon remove the Let that stands
Between thee and thy Glory.
Life of Love!
If lost Virginity can win such a day
I'll have no daughter but shall learn my way.
Twill be good work for him that first instructs them,
May be some Son of mine, got by this woman too,
May match with their own Sisters. Peace, it is he, 
Invention fail me not, it is a gallant credit
To marry ones Whore bravely.
Have I power
Of life and death, and cannot command ease
In my own blood? After I was a King
I thought I never should have felt pain more,
That there had been a ceasing of all passions
And common stings, which Subjects use to feel,
That were created with a patience fit
For all extremities: But such as we
Know not the way to suffer, then to do it
How most prepost???rous it is? tush, riddles, riddles.
I'll break through custom, why should not the mind,
The nobler part that's of us, be allowed
Change of affections, as our Bodies are
Change of food and raiment? I'll have it so.
All fashions appear strange at first production,
But this would be well followed: Oh Captain!
My Lord I grieve for you, I scarce fetch breath
But a sigh hangs at the end of it, but this
Is not the way, if youl'd give way to counsel.
Set me right then, or I shall heavily curse thee
For lifting up my understanding to me
To show that I was wrong; Ignorance is safe,
I then slept happily; If knowledge mend me not
Thou hast committed a most cruel sin,
To wake me into judgement and then leave me.
I will not leave you, Sir, that were rudely done,
First you've a flame too open and too violent,
Which like bloud-guiltiness in an Offender
Betrays him, when nought else can: out with it, Sir,
Or let some cunning coverture be made
Before your practice enters, twill spoil all else.
Why, look you, Sir, I can be as calm as silence
All the while music plays, strike on, sweet friend,
As mild and merry as the heart of Innocence;
I prithee take my temper; has a Virgin
A heat more modest?
He does well to ask me,
I could have told him once; why here's a government,
There's not a sweeter amity in friendship
Then in this League twixt you and health.
Then since
Thou find me capable of happiness
Instruct me with the practice.
What will you say, my Lord,
If I ensnare her in an action of lust?
Oh there were art to the life, but it is impossible,
I prithee flatter me no farther with it;
Fie, so much sin as goes to make up that
Will never prevail with her: why I'll tell you, Sir,
She's so sin-killing modest, that if only
To move the question were enough Adultery
To cause a separation, there's no Gallant
So brassy impudent durst undertake
The words that shall belong to it.
Say you so, Sir?
There's nothing made in the world, but has a way to it,
Though some be harder then the rest to find,
Yet one there is, that's certain; and I think
I have took the course to light on it.
Oh I pray for it.
I heard you lately say (from whence, my Lord,
My practice received life first) that your Queen
Still consecrates her time to Contemplation,
Takes solitary walks.
Nay late and early
Commands her weak Guard from her, which are but
Women at strongest.
I like all this, my Lord,
And now, Sir, you shall know what net is used
In many places to catch modest women,
Such as will never yield by prayers or gifts???
Now there be some will catch up men as fast,
But those She-Fowlers nothing concern us,
Their Birding is at Windows, ours abroad,
Where Ring-doves should be caught, that's married wives,
Or chaste Maids, what the appetite has a mind to.
Make no pause then.
The honest Gentlewoman,
When nothing will prevail (I pity her now)
Poor Soul, she's enticed forth by her own Sex
To be betrayed to man, who in some Garden-house
Or remote walk, taking his lustful time,
Binds darkness on her eye-lids, surprises her,
And having a Coach ready, turns her in,
Hurrying her where he list for the sins safety,
Making a rape of honour without words,
And at the low ebb of his lust, perhaps
Some three days after, sends her coached again
To the same place, and, which would make most mad,
She's robbed of all, yet knows not where she's robbed,
There's the dear precious mischief.
Is this practised?
Too much, my Lord, to be so little known,
A Sprindge to catch a Maiden??? head after Sun-set,
Clip it, and send it home again to the City,
There twill ne'er be perceived.
My raptures want expression,
I conceit enough to make me fortunate, and thee great.
I praise it then, my Lord, I knew it would take.
MEthinks you live strange lives! When I see it not
It grieves me less, you know how to ease me then;
If you but knew how well I loved your absence
You would bestow it upon me without asking.
Faith, for my part, were it no more for
Ceremony then for Love,
You should walk long enough without my attendance,
And so think all my Fellows, though they say nothing;
Books in women's hands are as much against the hair, methinks,
As to see men wear stomachers, or night rails;
She that has the Green-sickness and should follow her counsel,
Would dye like an Ass, and go to the worms like a salad;
Not I, so long as such a Creature as man is made,
She is a fool that knows not what he is good for.
Though among lives elections, that of Virgin
I did speak noblest of; yet it has pleased the King
To send me a contented blessedness
In that of marriage, which I ever doubted; 
I see the Kings affection was a true one,
It lasts and holds out long, that's no mean virtue
In a commanding man, though in great fear
At first I was enforced to venture on it.
Ell's happy, clear and safe.
The rest comes gently on.
Be sure you seize on her full sight at first,
For fear of my discovery.
Now fortune, and I am sped.
Treason, treason!
Sirrah, how stand you? prevent noise and clamour,
Or death shall end thy Service.
A sure Cunning.
Oh rescue, rescue.
Dead her voice, away, make speed.
No help, no succour?
Louder yet, extend
Your voice to the last rack, you shall have leave now,
You're far from any pity.
What's my sin?
Contempt of man, and he's a noble Creature,
And takes it in ill part to be despised.
I never despised any.
No? you hold us
Unworthy to be loved, what call you that?
I have a Lord disproves you.
Pish, your Lord?
You're bound to love your Lord, that is no thanks to you;
You should love those you are not tied to love,
That's the right trial of a women's Charity:
I know not what you are, nor what my fault is,
If it be life you seek, what ere you be,
Use no immodest words, and take it from me,
You kill me more in talking sinfully
Then acting Cruelty; be so far pitiful
To end me without words.
Long may you live,
It is the wish of a good Subject, it is not life
That I thirst after, Loyalty forbid
I should commit such Treason; you mistake me,
I have no such bloody thought, only your love
Shall content me.
What said you, Sir?
Thus plainly,
To strip my words as naked as my purpose,
I must and will enjoy thee: gone already?
Look to her, bear her up, she goes apace,
I feared this still, and therefore came provided,
There's that will fetch life from a dying spark
And make it spread a Furnace, she's well straight,
Pish, let her go, she stands upon my knowledge,
Or else she counterfeits, I know the virtue.
Never did sorrows in afflicted woman
Meet with such cruelties, such hard hearted ways
Humane invention never found before.
To call back life to live is but ill taken
By some departing Soul; then to force mine back
To an eternal act of death in lust,
What is it, but most execrable?
So, so;
But this is from my business, list to me,
Here you are now far from all hope of friendship,
Save what you make in me, scope me you cannot,
Send your Soul that assurance; that resolved on,
You know not who I am, nor ever shall,
I need not fear you then; but give consent,
Then with the faithfulness of a true friend
I'll open my self to you, fall your servant,
As I do now in hope, proud of submission,
And seal the deed up with eternal secrecy,
Not death shall pluck it from me, much less the Kings
Authority or torture.
I admire him.
Oh, Sir, what ever you are, I teach my knee
Thus to requite you, be content to take
Only my sight, as ransom for my honour,
And where you have but mocked my eyes with darkness
Pluck them quite out; all outward lights of body
I'll spare most willingly, hut take not from me
That which must guide me to another world,
And leave me dark for ever, fast without
That cursed pleasure which will make two souls
Endure a famine everlastingly.
This almost moves.
By this light he'll be taken.
I'll wrestle down all pity, what, will you consent?
I'll never be so guilty.
Farewell words then,
You hear no more of me, but thus I seize you.
Oh if a power above be reverenced by thee,
I bind thee by that name, by manhood, nobleness, 
And all the charms of honour.
Ah ha, here's one caught
For an example, never was poor Lady
So mocked into false terror, with what anguish
She lies with her own Lord? now she could curse
All into barrenness, and beguile her self by it:
Conceit's a powerful thing, and is indeed
Placed as a palate to taste grief, or love,
And as that relishes so we approve:
Hence comes it that our taste is so beguiled,
Changing pure blood for some that's mixed and soiled.
A Fair and fortunate Constellation reigned
When we set foot here, for from his first gift
(Which to a Kings unbounded eyes seemed nothing)
The Compass of a Hide, I have erected
A strong and spacious Castle, yet contained my self
Within my limits, without check or censure.
Thither, with all th'observance of a Subject,
The liveliest witness of a grateful mind,
I purpose to invite him and his Queen
And feast them nobly.
We wi???l enter, Sir,
It is a state business, of a twelve month long,
The choosing of a Mayor.
What noise is that?
Sir, we must speak with the good Earl of Kent,
Though we were never brought up to keep a door,
We are as honest, Sir, as some that do.
Now, Sir, what's the occasion of their clamours?
Please you, my Lord, a company of Townsmen
Are bent against all denials and resistance
To have speech with your Lordship, and that you
Must end a difference, which none else can do.
Why then there's reason in their violence,
Which I ne'er looked for: first let in but one, 
And as we relish him the rest come on.
It is no safe wisdom in a rising man
To slight off such as these, nay rather these
Are the foundations of a lofty work,
We cannot build without them, and stand sure.
He that first ascends to a Mountains top
Must begin at the foot. Now, Sir, who comes?
They cannot yet agree, my Lord, of that;
They say 'cis worse now then it was before,
For where the difference was but between two,
Upon this coming first they are all at odds;
One says he shall lose his place in the Church by it,
Another will not do his wife that wrong,
And by their good wills they would all come first.
The strife continues in most heat, my Lord,
Between a Country Barber and a Taylor
Of the same Town, and which your Lordship names
It is yielded by consent that he shall enter.
Here's no sweet quoyl, I am glad they are so reasonable,
Call in the Barber, if the Tale be long
He'll cut it short I trust, that's all the hope; 
Now, Sir, are you the Barber?
Oh most barbarous!
A Corrector of enormities in hair, my Lord,
A promooter of upper lips, or what your Lordship,
In the neatness of your discretion, shall think fit to call me.
Very good, I see you have this without book,
But what's your business?
Your Lordship comes to a very high point indeed,
The business, Sir, lies about the head.
That's work for you.
No, my good Lord, there is a Corporation,
A Body, a kind of Body.
The Barber is out at the Body, let in the Taylor;
This it is to reach beyond your own profession,
When you let go your head, you lose your memory:
You have no business with the Body.
Yes, Sir,
I am a Barber-Chirurgeon, I have had something to do with it
In my time, my Lord, and I was never so out of the body
As I have been of late, send me good luck, I'll marry some whore
But I'll get in again.
Now, Sir, a good discovery come from you.
I will rip up the Linings to your Lordship,
And show what stuff it is made of; for the Body
Or Corporation???
There the Barber left indeed.
It is pieced up of two fashions.
A patched Town the whilst.
Nor can we go through stitch, my noble Lord,
The choler is so great in the one party.
And as in linsey-woolsey wove together,
One piece makes several suits, so, upright Earl,
Our linsey-woolsey hearts make all this coil.
What's all this now? I am ne'er the wiser yet, call in the (rest:
Now, Sirs, what are you?
Sir, reverence on your Lordship,
I am a Glover.
What needs that then?
Sometimes I deal in dogs leather, Sir, reverence the while.
Well, to the purpose, if there be any towards.
I were an Ass else, saving your Lordships presence;
We have a Body, but our Town wants a hand,
A hand of Justice, a worshipful Master Mayor:
This is well handled yet, a man may take some hold
On it. You want a Mayor?
Right, but there's two at fifty cuffs about it, Sir, as I may say
At daggers drawing, but that I cannot say, because they have none;
And you being Earl of Kent, our Town does say
Your Lordships voice shall part and end the fray.
This is strange work for me, well Sir, what be they?
The one is a Tanner.
Fie, I shall be too partial,
I owe too much affection to that Trade
To put it to my voice; what is his name?
Symon.
How Symon too?
Nay it is but Symon one, Sir,
The very same Symon that sold your Lordship a Hide.
What say thou?
That's all his glory, Sir, he got his Masters
Widow by it presently, a rich Tanners wife, she has set him up???
He was her Fore-man a long time in her other husbands days.
Now let me perish in my first aspiring
If the pretty simplicity of his fortune
Do not most highly take me, it is a presage, methinks,
Of bright succeeding happiness to mine
When my Fates Gloworm casts forth such a shine.
And what are those that do contend with him?
Marry, my noble Lord, a Fustian Weaver.
How, he offer
To compare with Symon! he a fit match for him!
Hark, hark, my Lord, here they come both in a pelting chafe
From the Town-house.
How, before me? I scorn thee,
Thou wattle-fac'd singed Pig.
Pig? I defy thee,
My Uncle was a Jew, and scorned the motion.
I list not brook thy vaunts, compare with me?
Thou Spindle of Concupiscence, it is well known
Thy first wife was a Flax-wench.
But such a Flax-wench
Would I might never want at my need, nor any friend of mine,
My Neighbours knew her, thy wife was but a hempen halter to her.
Use better words, I'll hang thee in my year else,
Let who will choose thee afterwards.
Peace for shame,
Quench your great spirit, do not you see his Lordship?
What, Master Symonides?
Symo ides?
What a fair name hath he made of Symon!
Then he's an Ass that calls me Symon again,
I am quite out of love with it.
Give me thy hand,
I love thy fortunes, and like a man that thrives.
I took a widow, my Lord,
To be the best piece of ground to thrive on,
And by my faith, my Lord, there's a young Symonides,
Like a green Onion, peeping up already.
Th'hast a good lucky hand.
I have somewhat, Sir.
But why to me is this election offered?
The choosing of a Mayor goes by most voices.
True, Sir, but most of our Towns-men are so hoarse
With drinking, there's not a good voice among them all.
Are you content to put it to all these then?
To whom I liberally resign my Interest
To prevent censures.
I speak first, my Lord.
Though I speak last, my Lord, I am not least,
If they will cast away a Town-born Child, they may,
It is but dying some forty years before my time.
I leave you to your choice awhile.
Your good Lordship.
Look you Neighbours, before you be too hasty, let Oliver
The Fustian-Weaver, stand as fair as I do, and the Devil
Do him good on it.
I do, thou upstart Callymoocher, I do,
It is well known to the Parish I have been twice Ale-Cunner,
Thou mushrom, that shot'st up in a night,
By lying with thy Mistress.
Faith thou art such a spiny Baldrib,
All the Mistresses in the Town will never get thee up.
I scorn to rise by a woman, as thou did,
My Wife shall rise by me.
I pray leave your Communication,
We can do nothing else.
I gave that Barber a Fustian-Suit,
And twice redeemed his Cittern, he may remember me.
I fear no false measure but in that Taylor,
The Glover and the Button-maker are both cock-sure;
That Colliers eye I like not:
Now they consult, the matter is in brewing,
Poor Gill wy wife lies longing for the news,
Twill make her'a glad Mother.
A Symon, a Symon.
Good people I thank you all.
Wretch that I am,
Tanner, thou hast curried savour.
I curry, I defy thy Fustian sum.
But I will prove a Rebel all thy year
And raise up the seven deadly sins against thee.
The deadly sins will scorn to rise by thee,
If they have any breeding,
As commonly they are well brought up, it is not for every scab
To be acquainted with them; but leaving the scab, to you good
Neighbours now I bend my speech. First, to say more then a man
Can say, I hold it not fit to be spoken; but to say what a man
Ought to say, there I leave you also. I must confess your loves
Have chosen a weak and unlearned man; that I can neither write
Nor read you all can witness; yet not altogether so unlearned, but I
Can set my mark to a Bond, if I would be so simple; an excellent
Token of Government. Cheer you then, my hearts, you have done
You know not what, there's a full point. There you must all
Cough and hem. 
Now touching our common adversary the Fustian-Weaver,
Who threatens he will raise the deadly sins among us,
Let them come, our Town is big enough to hold them,
We will not so much disgrace it; besides you know
A deadly sin will lye in a narrow hole; but when they think
Themselves safest, and the web of their iniquity best woven,
With the horse-strength of my Justice I will break through the
Loom of their concupiscence, and make the Weaver go seek his
Shuttle. Here you may cough and hem again, if you'll do me the
Favour. 
Why I thank you all, and it shall not go unrewarded.
Now for the deadly sins, Pride, Sloth, Envy, Wrath; as for
Covetousness and Gluttony, I'll tell you more when I come
Out of my Office; I shall have time to try what they are,
I will prove them soundly, and if I find Gluttony and Covetousness
To be directly sins, I'll bury the one in the bottom of a Chest,
And the other in the end of my Garden. But Sirs, for Lechery,
I'll tickle that home my self, I'll not leave a Whore in the Town.
Some of your Neighbours must seek their
Wives in the Country then.
Barber, be silent, I will
Cut thy Comb else. To conclude, I will learn the villainy of
All Trades, my own I know already; if there be any knavery
In the Baker, I will bolt it out; if in the Brewer, I will taste him
Thoroughly, and piss out his iniquity at his own suck-hole:
In a word, I will knock down all enormities like a Butcher,
And send the Hide to my fellow Tanners.
A Symonides, a true Symonides indeed.
How now, how goes your choice?
This is he, my Lord.
To prove I am the man, I am bold to take
The upper hand of your Lordship:
I'll not lose an inch of my honour.
Hold Sirs, there's some few Crowns to mend your feast,
Because I like your choice.
Joy bless you, Sir,
We will drink your health with Trumpets.
I with Sack-butts,
That's the more solemn drinking for my state,
No malt this year shall fume into my pate.
Continue still that favour in his love.
Nay with increase, my Lord, the flame grows greater,
Though he has learned a better art of late
To set a screen before it.
Speak lower.
Heard every word, my Lord.
Plainly?
Distinctly;
The course I took was dangerous, but not failing,
For I conveyed my self behind the Hangings
Eveh just before his entrance.
It was well ventured.
I had such a women's first and second longing in me
To hear her how she would bear her mocked abuse
After she was returned to privacy,
I could have fasted out an Ember-week,
And never thought of hunger, to have heard her;
Then came your holy Lupus and Germanus.
Two holy Confessors.
At whose first sight
I could perceive her fall upon her breast
And cruelly afflict her self with sorrow;
I never heard a sigh till I heard hers,
Who after her Confession pitying her,
Put her into a way of patience,
Which now she holds, to keep it hid from you,
There's all the pleasure that I took in it now,
When I heard that my pains was well remembered.
So with applying comforts and relief,
They have brought it lower, to an easy grief.
But yet the taste is not quite gone.
Still fortune
Sits bettering our Inventions.
Here she comes.
Yonder's my Lord, oh I'll return again,
Methinks I should not dare to look on him.
She's gone again.
It works the kindlier, Sir.
Go now and call her back, she winds her self
Into the snare so prettily, it is a pleasure
To set toils for her.
He may read my shame
Now in my blush.
Come you're so linked to holiness,
So taken with contemplative desires,
That the world has you, yet enjoys you not;
You have been weeping too.
Not I, my Lord.
Trust me I fear you have, you're much to blame
To yield so much to passion without cause.
Is not some time enough formeditation?
Must it lay title to your health and beauty,
And draw them into times consumption too?
It is too exacting for a holy faculty.
My Lord of Kent? I prithee wake him, Captain,
He reads himself asleep sure.
My Lord?
Nay,
I'll take away your Book and bestow it here.
Your pardon, Sir.
Lady, you that delight in Virgins stories,
And all chaste works, here's excellent reading for you;
Make of that Book as made men do of favours,
Which they grow sick to part from. And now, my Lord,
You that have so conceitedly gone beyond me,
And made so large use of a slender gift,
Which we ne'er minded; I commend your thrift.
And that your Building may to all Ages
Carry the stamp and impress of your wit,
It shall be called Thong-Castle.
How? my Lord,
Thong-Castle! there your Grace quits me kindly.
It is fit Art should be known by its right name,
You that can spread my gift, I'll spread your fame.
I thank your Grace for that.
And loved Lord,
So well we do accept your Invitation,
With all speed we will set forwards.
Your Honour loves me.
LO???, the Mayor of Quinborough by name,
With all my Brethren, saving one that's lame,
Are come as fast as fiery Mill-horse gallops
To greet thy Grace, thy Queen and her fair Trollops.
For reason of our coming do not look,
It must be done, I find it in the Town-book;
And yet not I my self, I cannot read,
I keep a Clark to do those jobs for need.
And now expect a rare conceit before Thong-Castle see thee;
Reach me the thing to give the King, the other too I prithee:
Now here they be for Queen and thee, the gift all steel &amp; leather;
But the conceit of mickle weight, and here they come together:
To show two Loves must join in one, our Town presents by me
This gilded Scabbard to the Queen, this Dagger unto thee.
Forbear your tedious and ridiculous duties,
I hate them, as I do the roots of your
Inconstant Rabble, I have felt your fits,
Sheath up your Bounties with your Iron wits.
Look Sirs, is his back turned?
It is, it is.
Then bless the good Earl of Kent, say I,
I'll have this Dagger turned into a Pie,
And eaten up for anger every bit on it.
And when this pie shall be cut up by some rare cunning Pye-man,
They shall full lamentably sing, Put up thy Dagger Symon.
A Welcome (mighty Lord) may appear costlier,
More full of toil and talk, show and conceit,
But one more stored with thankful love and truth
I forbid all the sons of men to boast of.
Why there's a Fabric that implies eternity,
The building plain, but most substantial;
Methinks it looks as if it mocked all ruin,
Saving that Master-piece of Consummation,
The end of time, which must consume even ruin,
And eat that into Cinders.
There's no brass
Would pass your praise, my Lord, it would last beyond it,
And shame our durablest metal.
Horsus!
My Lord!
This is the time I have chosen; here's a full meeting,
And here will I disgrace her.
Twill be sharp, my Lord.
Oh twill be best.
Why here's the Earl her Father.
I and the Lord her Uncle, that's the height of it,
Invited both on purpose, to rise sick
Full of shames surfeit.
And that's shrewd b'er lady,
It ever sticks close to the ribs of honour;
Great men are never sound men after it,
It leaves some ache or other in their names still,
Which their posterity feels at every weather.
Mark but the least presentment of occasion,
As these times yield enough, and then mark me???
My observance is all yours, you know it, my Lord;
What careful ways some take to abuse themselves!
But as there be Assurers of men's Goods
Against storms or Pirates, which gives Adventurers Courage,
So such there must be to make up mans theft,
Or there would be no woman Venturer left.
See, now they find their seats, what a false knot
Of Amity he ties about her Arm,
Which rage must part? in marriage it is no wonder,
Knots knit with kisses oft are broke wit??? thunder
Music? then I have done, I always learn
To give my betters place.
Whore's Captain Horsus?
Sit, sit, we will have a health anon to all good services.
They are poor in these days, th'had rather have the Carp
Then the health; he hears me not,
And most great men are deaf on that side.
My Lord of Kent, I thank you for this welcome,
It came unthought of in the sweetest Language
That ever my soul relished.
You are pleased, my Lord,
To raise my happiness for slight deservings,
To show what power's in Princes; not in us
Ought worthy, it is in you that makes us thus.
I am chiefly sad, my Lord, your Queen's not merry.
So honour bless me, he has found the way
To my grief strangely. Is there no delight??????
My Lord, I wish not any, nor is it needful,
I am as I was ever.
That's not so.
How? oh my fears!
When she writ Maid, my Lord,
You knew her otherwise.
To speak but truth,
I never knew her a great friend to mirth,
Nor taken much with any one delight,
Though there be many seemly and honourable
To give content to Ladies without taxing.
My Lord of Kent, this to thy full deserts,
Which intimates thy higher flow to honour.
Which, like a river, shall return in service
To the great Master-Fountain.
Whore's your Lord?
I missed him not till now; Lady, and yours?
No marvel then we were so out of the way
Of all pleasant discourse; they are the keys
Of humane Music, sure at their Nativities
Great Nature signed a general Patent to them
To take up all the mirth in a whole Kingdom.
What's their employment now?
May it please your Grace,
We never are so far acquainted with them,
Nothing we know but what they cannot keep,
That's even the fashion of them all, my Lord.
It seems you've great thought in their constancies,
And they in yours, you dare so trust each other.
Hope well we do, my Lord, we have reason for it,
Because they say brown men are honestest,
But she's a fool will swear for any colour.
They would for yours.
Truth it is a doubtful question,
And l'???d be loath to put mine to it my Lord.
F???ith dare you swear for your selves? that's a plain question.
My Lord?
You cannot deny that with honour,
And since it is urged, I'll put you to it in troth.
May it please your Grace?
It would please me very well,
And here's a Book, mine never goes without one,
She's an example to you all for purity;
Come swear (I have sworn you shall) that you ne'er knew
The will of any man, besides your husbands.
I'll swear, my Lord, as far as my remembrance.
How? your remembrance! that were strange.
Your Grace
Hearing our just excuse, will not say so.
Well, what's your just excuse? you're ne'er without some.
I am often taken with a sleep, my Lord,
The loudest thunder cannot waken me,
Not if a Cannons burden be discharged
Close by my ear; the more may be my wrong,
There can be no infirmity, my Lord, more excusable in any woman.
And I am so troubled with the Mother too,
I have often called in help, I know not whom,
Three at once have been too weak to keep me down.
I perceive there's no fastening: well fare one then
That never deceives faiths Anchor of her hold,
Come at all seasons. Here, be thou the Star
To guide those erring women, show the way
Which I will make them follow: why dost start,
Draw back, and look so pale?
My Lord?
Come hither,
Nothing but take that Oath; thou'st take a thousand,
A thousand! Nay a Million, or as many
As there be Angels Registers of Oaths.
Why look thee, over-fearful Chastity,
(That sinn'st in nothing but in too much niceness)
I'll begin first, and swear for thee my self,
I know thee a perfection so unstained,
So sure, so absolute, I will not pant on it,
But catch time greedily. By all those blessings
That blow truth into fruitfulness, and those curses
That with their barren breaths blast perjury,
Thou art as pure as Sanctities best shrine
From all mans mixture, save what's lawful mine.
Oh Heaven forgive him, he has forsworn himself.
Come, it is but going now my way:
That's bad enough.
I have cleared all doubts you see.
Good my Lord spare me.
How? it grows later then so, for modesties sake
Make more speed this way.
Pardon me, my Lord,
I cannot.
What?
I dare not.
Fail all confidence in thy weak kind for ever.
Here's a storm
Able to make all of our name inhumid,
And raise them from their sleeps of peace and fame
To set the honours of their bloods right here
Hundred years after; a perpetual motion
Has their true glory been from seed to seed,
And cannot be choked now with a poor grain
Of dust and earth, her Uncle and my self
Wild in this tempest, as ever robbed mans peace,
Will undertake upon lifes deprivation
She shall accept this oath.
You do but call me then
Into a world of more despair and horror;
Yet since so wilfully you stand engaged
In high scorn to be touched, with expedition
Perfect your undertakings with your fems,
Or by the Issues of abused belief
I'll take the forfeit of Lives, Lands, and Honours,
And make one ruin serve our joys and yours.
Why here's a height of miseries never reached yet,
I lose my self and others.
You may see
How much we lay in Balance with your goodness,
And had we more, it went; for we presume
You cannot be religious and so vile.
As to sorswear my self, it is truth, great Sir,
The honour of your Bed hath been abused.
Oh beyond patience!
But give me hearing, Sir,
It was far from my consent, I was surprised
By Villains, and so roughed.
Hear you that, Sirs?
Oh cunning texture to enclose Adultery!
Mark but what subtle veil her sin puts on,
Religion brings her to confession first,
Then steps in Art to sanctify that lust.
It is likely you could be surprised.
My Lord!
I'll hear no more, our Guard, seize on those Lords:
We cannot perish now too fast, make speed
To swift destruction; he breathes most accursed
That lives so long to see his name dye first.
Here's no dear villainy!
Let him entreat, Sir,
That falls in saddest grief for this event,
Which ill begins the fortune of this Building, my Lord.
What if he should cause me to swear too, Captain?
You know I am as far to seek in honesty
As the worst here can be; I should be shamed too.
Why, fool, they swear by that we worship not,
So you may swear your heart out, and ne'er hurt your self.
That was well thought on, I had quite lost my self else.
You shall prevail in noble suits, my Lord,
But this does shame the speaker.
I'll step in now,
Though it shall be to no purpose; good my Lord
Think on your noble and most hopeful Issue
Lord Vortimer, the Prince.
A Bastard, Sir,
I would his life were in my fury now.
That injury stirs my Soul to speak the truth
Of his conception; here I take the Book, my Lord:
By all the glorified rewards of Virtue
And prepared punishments for consents in sin,
A Queen s hard sorrow ne'er supplied a Kingdom
With Issue more legitimate then Vortimer.
This takes not out the stain of present shame,
Continuance crowns desert, she ne'er can go
For perfect honest that's not always so.
Beshrew thy heart for urging this excuse,
Th'hast justified her somewhat.
To small purpose.
Among so many women not one here
Dare swear a simple Chastity! here's an Age
To propagate virtue in: since I have begun,
I'll shame you all together, and so leave you.
My Lord of Kent!
Your Highness?
That's your Daughter?
Yes my good Lord.
Though I am your Guest to day,
And should be less austere to you or yours,
In this case pardon me, I may not spare her.
Then her own goodness friend her; she comes my Lord.
The tender reputation of a Maid
Makes your honour, or else nothing can;
The oath you take is not for truth to man,
But to your own white soul, a mighty Task;
What dare you do in this?
My Lord, as much
As Chastity can put a woman to,
I ask no favour; and t'approve the purity
Of what my habit and my time professes;
As likewise to requite all courteous censure,
Here I take oath I am as free from man
As truth from falsehood, or sanctity from flain.
Oh thou treasure that ravishes the possessor!
I know not where to speed so well again,
I'll keep thee while I have thee; here's a Fountain
To spring forth Princes, and the seeds of Kingdoms.
Away with that infection of black honour, and those her leprous pledges,
Here will we store succession with true peace, 
And of pure Virgins grace the poor increase.
Ha ha, he's well provided now, here struck my fortunes.
With what an impudent confidence she swore honest,
Having th'advantage of the Oath! Precious Whore.
Methinks I should not hear from fortune next
Under an Earldom now; she cannot spend
A night so idly, but to make a Lord
With ease methinks and play: the Earl of Kent
Is calm and smooth, like a deep dangerous water;
He has some secret way, I know his blood,
The grave's not greedier, nor Hells Lord more proud.
Something will hap; for this astonishing choice
Strikes pale the Kingdom, at which I rejoice.
Of Pagan blood a Queen being chose,
Roxena hight, the Britains rose
For Vortimer, and crowned him King,
But she soon poisoned that sweet Spring.
Then unto Rule they did restore
Vortiger, and him they swore
Against the Saxons; they (constrained)
Begged Peace, Treaty, and obtained;
And now in numbers equally
Upon the Plain near Salisbury,
A peaceful meeting they decreen
Like men of love, no Weapon seen.
But Hengist, that ambitious Lord,
Full of guile, corrupts his word,
As the sequel too well proves;
On that your eyes, on us your loves.
If we let slip this opportuneful hour,
Take leave of fortune, certainty, or thought
Of ever fixing; we are loose at root,
And the least storm may rend us from the bosom
Of this Lands hopes for ever. But, dear Saxons,
Fasten we now, and our unshaken firmness
Will endure after Ages.
We are resolved, my Lord.
Observe you not how Vortiger the King,
Base in submission, threatened our expulsion,
His arm held up against us? Is it not time
To make our best prevention? what should check me?
He has perfected that great work in our Daughter,
And made her Queen, she can ascend no higher,
Therefore be quick, dispatch; here, every man
Receive into the service of his Vengeance
An instrument of Steel, which will unseen
Lurk like a snake under the innocent shade
Of a spread Summer-leaf, there fly you on,
Take heart, the Commons love us, those removed
That are the nerves, our greatness stands improved.
Give us the word, my Lord, and we are perfect.
That's true, the word, I lose my self. Nemp your Sexes.
It shall be that.
Enough Sir, then we strike.
But the King's mine, take heed you touch him not.
We shall not be at leisure, never fear it,
We shall have work enough of our own, my Lord.
Calm looks but stormy souls possess you all.
We see you keep your words in all points firm.
No longer may we beast of so much breath
As goes to a words making, then of care
In the preserving of it, when it is made.
You're in a virtuous way, my Lord of Kent,
And since both sides are met like Sons of peace,
All other arms laid by in signs of favour
If our conditions be embraced.
They are:
We will use no other but these only here.
Nempe your Sexes:
Treason, treason!
Follow it to the heart, my trusty Saxons,
It is your liberty, your wealth and honour. Soft, you are mine, my Lord.
Take me not basely, when all sense &amp; strength
Lies bound up in amazement at this treachery.
What Devil hath breathed this everlasting part
Of falsehood into thee?
Let it suffice,
I have you, and will hold you Prisoner,
As fast as death holds your best props in silence:
We know the hard conditions of our peace,
Slavery or diminution, which we hate
With a joint loathing: may all perish thus
That seek to subjugate or lessen us.
Oh the strange nooks of guile or subtlety,
When man so cunningly lies hid from man!
Who could expect such treason from thy breast,
Such thunder from thy voice? or take thou pride
To imitate the fair uncertainty
Of a bright day, that teemes a sudden storm,
When the world least expects one? but of all
I'll ne'er trust fair sky in a man again,
There's the deceitful weather; will you heap
More guilt upon you, by detaining me,
Like a Cup taken after a sore surfeit
Even in contempt of health and heaven together?
What seek you?
Ransom for your Liberty
As I shall like of, or you ne'er obtain it.
Here's a most headlong dangerous ambition,
Sow you the seeds of your aspiring hopes
In blood and treason, and must I pay for them?
Have not I raised you to this height of pride?
A work of my own merry, since you enforce it.
There's even the general thanks of all Aspirers,
When they have a l a Kingdom can impart,
They write above it still their own desert.
I have writ mine true, my Lord.
That's all their sayings.
Have not I raised thy daughter to a Queen?
You have the harmony of your pleasure for it,
You Crown your own desires, what's that to me?
And what will Crown yours, Sir?
Faith things of reason,
I demand Kent.
Why y'nave the Earldom of it.
The Kingdom of't I mean, without control,
In full possession.
This is strange in you.
It seems you're not acquainted with my blood
To call this strange.
Never was King of Kent
But who was general King.
I'll be the first then,
Every thing has beginning.
No less Title?
Not if you hope for liberty, my Lord.
So dear a happiness would not be wronged with slighting.
Very well, take it, I resign it.
Why I thank your Grace.
Is your great thirst yet satisfied?
Faith, my Lord,
There's yet behind a pair of teeming Sisters,
Norfolk and Suffolk, and I have done with you.
You've got a dangerous thirst of late, my Lord,
How ever you came by it.
It behoves me then
For my bloods health to seek all means to quench it.
Them too?
There will nothing be abated, I assure you.
You have me at advantage, he whom fate
Does captivate must yield to all; take them.
And you your liberty and peace, my Lord,
With our best love and wishes. Here's an hour
Begins us Saxons in wealth, fame, and power.
Are these the noblest fruits and fairest requitals
From works of our own raising?
Methinks the murder of Constantius
Speaks to me in the voice of it, and the wrongs
Of our late Queen, slipped both into one Organ. 
Ambition, hell, my own undoing, lust,
And all the brood of Plagues conspire against me.
I have not a friend left me.
My Lord, he dyes
That says it but your self, were it that Thief-King
That has so boldly stolen his honours from you,
A treason rat wrings tears from honest Man-hood.
So rich am I now in thy love and pity
I feel no loss at all; but we must part,
My Queen and I to Cambria.
My Lord, and I not named,
That have vowed lasting service to my lives extremest minute?
Is my sick fate blessed with so pure a friend!
My Lord, no space of Earth, nor breadth of Sea
Shall divide me from you.
Oh faithful treasure!
All my lost happiness is made up in thee.
I'll follow you through the world, to cuckold you,
That's my way now; every one has his Toy
While he lives here; some men delight in Building,
A trick of Babel, which will ne'er be left;
Some in consuming what was raised with toiling,
Hengist in getting honour, I in spoiling.
IS not that Rebel Oliver, that Traitor to my year,
Prehended yet?
Not yet, so please your Worship.
Not yet say thou? how durst thou say, not yet,
And see me present? thou malapert, that art good for nothing
But to write and read. Is his Loom seized upon?
Yes, if it like your Worship, and 16 yards of Fustian.
Good, let a yard be saved to mend me between the Legs,
The rest cut in pieces and given to the poor,
It is Heretic Fustian, and should be burnt indeed,
But being worn thred-bare the shame will be as great,
How think you Neighbours?
Greater methinks the longer it is wore,
Where being once burnt it can be burnt no more.
True, wise and most senseless. How now, Sir, 
What's he approaching here in dusty pumps?
A Footman, Sir, to the great King of Kent.
The King of Kent? shake him by the hand for me,
They are welcome, Footman, lo, my Deputy shakes thee,
Come when my year is out, I'll do it my self.
If it were a Dog that came from the King of Kent,
I keep those Officers would shake him, I trow.
And what's the News with thee, thou well stewed Footman?
The King my Master???
Ha?
With a few Saxons,
Intends this night to make merry with you.
Merry with me? I shouldbe sorry else, fellow,
And take it in ill part, so tell Kents King.
Why was I chosen, but that great men should make
Merry with me? there is a jest indeed;
Tell him, I looked fort't, and me much he wrongs,
If he forget Simon that cutout his thongs.
I'll run with your Worships answer.
Do I prithee;
That fellow will be roasted against supper,
He's half enough already, his Brows baste him.
The King of Kent! the King of Kirsendome
Shall not be better welcome; for you must imagine now, Neigh???bours,
This is the time when Kent stands out of Kirsendome,
For he that's King here now was never kirsen'd;
This for your more Instruction I thought fit,
That when you are dead you may teach your Children wit.
C???erk!
At your. Worships elbow.
I must turn you
From the Hall to the Kitchen to night. Give order that 12 Pigs be
Roasted yellow; 9 Geese, and some 3 Larks for piddling meat;
And twenty Woodcocks, I'll bid all my Neighbours;
Give charge the mutton come in all bloud-raw, that is Infidels meat,
The King of Kent is a Pagan, and must be served so.
And let those Officers that seldom, or never go to Church
Bring it in, twill be the better taken. Run, run, come you hither
Now, take all my Cushions down and thwack them soundly,
After my Feast of Millers; for their Buttocks
Have left a peck of flower in them, beat them carefully
Over a bolting hutch, there will be enough
For a Pan-pudding, as your Dame will handle it.
Then put fresh water into both the Bough-pots,
And burn a little Juniper in the Hall-Chimney,
Like a beast as I was, I pissed out the fire last night,
And never dreamt of the Kings coming. How now,
Returned so quickly?
Please your Worship here are
A certain Company of Players.
Ha, Players!
Country Comedians, Interluders, Sir,
Desire your Worships favour
And leave to enact in the Town-Hall.
In the Town-Hall?
It is ten to one I never grant them that;
Call them before my Worship. 
If my house will not serve their turn, I would fain see
The proudest he lend them a barn:
Now, Sirs, are you Comedians?
We are Sir, Comedians, Tragedians,
Tragi-Comedians, Comi-Tragedians, Pastorists,
Humorists, Clownists, Satirists; we have them Sir,
From the hug to the smile, from the smile to the laugh,
From the laugh to the handkerchief.
You're very strong in the wrist methinks;
And must all these good parts be cast away
Upon Peddlers, and Malt-men, ha?
For want of better company, if it please your Worship.
What think you of me my Masters?
Hum; have you audacity enough
To play before so high a person as my self? will not
My countenance daunt you? for if you play before me
I shall often look on you, I give you that warning before hand,
Take it not ill my Masters, I shall laugh at you,
And truly when I am least offended with you;
It is my humour, but be not you abashed.
Sir, we have plaid before a Lord ever now,
Though we be Country Actors.
A Lord? ha, ha,
Thou'lt find it a harder thing to please a Mayor.
We have a Play wherein we use a horse.
Fellows, you use no horse-play in my house,
My rooms are rubbed, keep it for Hackney-men.
We will not offer it to your Worship.
Give me a Play without a Beast, I charge you.
That's hard, without a Cuckold or a Drunkard?
Oh those Beasts are often the best men in a Parish,
And must not be kept out. But which is your merriest play?
That I would hearken after.
Your Worship shall hear
Their names, and take your Choice.
And that's plain dealing. Come begin, Sir.
The Whirligig, the Whibble, the Carwidgen.
Hey day, what names are these!
New names of late.
The Wild goose Chase.
I understand thee now.
Gull upon Gull.
Why this is somewhat yet.
Woodcock of our side.
Get thee further off then.
The Cheater and the Clown.
Is that come up again?
That was a Play when I was Prentice first.
I, but the Cheater has learned more tricks of late,
And gulls the Clown with new additions.
Then is your Clown a Coxcomb, which is he?
This is our Clown, Sir.
Fie, fie, your Company
Must fall upon him and beat him, he's too fair y'faith
To make the people laugh???
Not as he may be dressed, Sir.
Faith dress him how you will, I'll give him that gift
He will never look half scurvily enough???
Oh the Clowns that I have seen in my time!
The very peeping out of one of them would have made
A young heir laugh, though his Father lay a dying;
A man undone in Law the day before (the saddest case that can be)
Might for his 2d have burst himself with laughing,
And ended all his miseries. Here was a merry world, my Masters!
Some talk of things of State, of puling stuff;
There's nothing in a Play to a Clown,
If he have the grace to hit on it, that's the thing indeed,
The King shows well, but he sets off the King;
But not the King of Kent, I mean not so,
The King is one, I mean, I do not know.
Your Worship speaks with safety, like a rich man,
And for your finding fault, our hopes are greater,
Neither with him the Clown, nor me the Cheater.
Away then, shift, Clown, to thy motley Crupper,
We will see them first, the King shall after supper.
I commend your Worships wisdom in that, Mr. Mayor.
Nay it is a point of Justice, if it be well examined,
Not to offer the King worse then I'll see my self;
For a Play may be dangerous, I have known
A Great man poisoned in a Play.
What have you, Mr. Mayor?
But to what purpose many times I know not.
Methinks they should destroy one another so.
Oh no no, he that's poisoned is always made privy to it,
That's one good order they have among them. What joyful throat
Is that, Aminadab? what is the meaning of this cry?
The Rebel is taken.
Oliver the Puritan?
Oliver Puritan and Fustian-Weaver altogether.
Fates I thank you for this victorious day,
Bonfires of pease-straw burn, let the Bells ring.
There's two in mending, and you know they cannot.
Alas the Tenor's broken, ring out the Treble, 
I am overcloy'd with joy; welcome thou Rebel???
I scorn thy welcome, I.
Art thou yet so stout?
Wilt thou not stoop for grace? then get thee out.
I was not born to stoop but to my Loom,
That seized upon, my stooping days are done;
In plain terms, if thou hast any thing to say to me,
Send me away quickly, this is no biding place,
I understand there are Players in thy house,
Dispatch me, I charge thee, in the name of all the Brethren.
Nay now proud Rebel, I will make thee stay,
And to thy greater torment see a Play.
Oh Devil, I conjure thee by Amsterdam.
Our word is past,
Justice may wink a while, but see at last???
The Play begins, hold, stop him, stop him.
Oh that profane trumper! oh, oh.
Set him down there I charge you Officers.
I'll hide my ears and stop my eyes.
Down with his golls I charge you.
Oh tyranny, tyranny, revenge it tribulation!
For Rebels there are many deaths, but sure the only way
To execute a Puritan is seeing of a Play.
Oh I shall swooned!
Which if thou dost, to spite thee,
A Players Boy shall bring thee Aqua-vitae.
Oh I'll not swooned at all for it, though I dye.
Peace, here's a Rascal, lift and edify.
I say still he's an Ass that cannot live by his wits.
What a bold Rascal's this? he calls us all Asses at first dash,
Sure none of us live by our wits, unless it be Oliver the Puritan.
I scorn as much to live by my wits as the proudest of you all.
Why then you're an Ass for company, so hold your prating.
Fellow in arms, welcome, 
The News, the News?
Fellow in arms, quoth he?
He may well call him fellow in arms.
I am sure they are both out at the Elbows.
Be lively, my heart, be lively, the Booty is at hand,
He's but a fool of a Yeomans eldest Son,
He's balanced on both sides, Bully; he's going to buy household-stuff
With one pocket, and to pay rent with the other.
And if this be his last day, my Chuck,
He shall forfeit his Lease, quoth the one pocket,
And eat his meat in wooden Platters, quoth the other.
Faith then he's not so wise as he ought to be, to let
Such Tatt???rdemallians get the upper hand of him.
He comes.
I, but smelly to our comfort, with both his hands in
His pockets; how is it possible to pick a Lock, when the Key
Is on the inside of the Door?
Oh neighbours here's the part now
That carries away the Play, if the Clown miscarry,
Farewell my hopes for ever, the Ploy's spoiled.
They say there is a foolish kind of thing called a Cheater
Abroad, that will gull any Yeomans Son of his purse,
And laugh in his face like an Irishman.
I would fain meet with some of these Creatures,
I am in as good state to be gulled now as ever I was in my life,
For I have two purses at this time about me, and I would fain be
Acquainted with that Rascal that would take one of them now.
Faith thou may be acquainted with two or three
That will do their good wills I warrant thee.
That way's too plain, too easy I am afraid.
Come, Sir, your most familiar Cheats take best,
They show like natural things and least suspected,
Give me a round shilling quickly.
It will fetch
But one of his hands neither, if it take.
Thou art too covetous, let's have one out first, prithee,
There's time enough to fetch out the other after.
Thou least, it is lawful currant money.
I say it is Copper in some Countries.
Here is a fray towards,
But I will hold my hands, let who will part them.
Copper? I defy thee, and now I shall disprove thee,
Look you, here's an honest Yeomans son of the Country,
A man of Judgement.
Pray you be covered, Sir,
I have Eggs in my Cap, and cannot put it off.
Will you be tried by him?
I am content, Sir.
They look rather as if they would be tried next Sessions.
Pray give your judgement of this piece of Coin, Sir.
Nay if it be Coin you strive about,
Let me see it, I love money.
Look on it well, Sir.
Let him do his worst, Sir.
You'd both need wear cut clothes, you're so choleric.
Nay rub it and spare not, Sir.
Now by this silver, Gentlemen,
It is good money, would I had a hundred of them.
We hope well, Sir; the other pocket
And we are made men.
Oh neighbours, I begin to be sick of this fool,
To see him thus cozened, I would make his case my own.
Still would I meet with these things called Cheaters.
A whoreson Coxcomb, they have met with thee,
I can no longer endure him with patience.
Oh my rent, my whole years rent!
A murrain on you,
This makes us Landlords stay??? so long for our money.
The Cheaters have been here.
A scurvy hobby-horse,
That could not leave his money with me, having such a Charge
About him; a pox on thee for an Ass, thou play a Clown?
I will commit thee for offering it; Officers, away with him.
What means your Worship? why you'll spoil the Play, Sir.
Before the King of Kent shall be thus served,
I'll play the Clown my self, away with him.
With me? if it please your Worship, it was my part.
But it was a foolish part as ever thou plaid'st in thy life,
I'll make thee smoke for it, I'll teach thee to understand
To play a Clown, thou shalt know, every man
Is not born to it, away with him quickly, 
He'll have the other Pocket picked else, I heard them say it
With my own ears; see he's come in another disguise
To cheat thee again.
Pish, whither goes he now?
Come on, Sir, let us see what your 
Knaveship can do at me now,
You must not think you have a Clown in hand,
The fool I have committed too, for playing the part.
What's here to do?
Fie, good Sir come away,
Will your Worship base your self to play a Clown?
I beseech your Worship let us have our own Clown,
I know not how to go forwards else.
Knave, play out thy part with me,
Or I'll lay thee by the heels all the days of thy life.
Why how now, my Masters, who is that laughed at me?
Cannot a man of Worship play the Clown a little for his pleasure
But he must be laughed at? do you know who I am?
Is the Kings Deputy of no better account among you?
Was I chosen to be laughed at? whore's my Clerk?
Here, if it please your Worship.
Take a Note of all those
That laugh at me, that when I have done I may commit them.
Let me see who dare do it now. And now to you once again
Sir Cheater, look you, here are my purse-strings, I do defy thee.
Good Sir, tempt me not, my part is so written
That I should cheat your Worship if you were my Father.
I should have much joy to have such a Rascal to my Son.
Therefore I beseech your Worship pardon me, the part
Has more Knavery in it then when your Worship saw it at first,
I assure you you'll be deceived in it, Sir, the new Additions
Will take any mans purse in Kent or Kirsendome.
If thou can take my purse, I'll give it thee freely,
And do thy worst, I charge thee; as thou'lt answer it.
I shall offend your Worship.
Knave, do it quickly.
Say you so? then there's for you, and here is for me:
Oh bless me, Neighbours, I am in a Fog, 
A Cheaters Fog, I can see no body.
Run, follow him, Officers.
Away, let him go,
He will have all your purses, if he come back,
A pox on your new Additions, they spoil all the plays
That ever they come in, the old way had no such roguery in it;
Calls you this a merry Comedy, when a mans eyes are put out in it?
Brother Honey-suckle.
What says your sweet Worship.
I make you Deputy to rule the Town till I can see again,
Which will be within these nine days at farthest.
Nothing grieves me now, but that I hear Oliver the Rebel
Laugh at me; a pox on your Puritan face, this will make you in
Love with Plays as long as you live,
We shall not keep you from them now.
In sincerity,
I was never better pleased at an exercise. Ha, ha, ha.
Neighbours, what colour was the dust
The Rascal threw in my face?
It was meal, if it please your Worship.
Meal? I am glad of it,
I'll hang the Miller for selling it.
Nay ten to one
The Cheater never bought it, he stole it certainly.
Why then I'll hang the Cheater for stealing it,
And the Miller for being out of the way when he did it.
I but your Worship was in the fault your self,
You bid him do his worst.
His worst? that's true,
But the Rascal hath done his best; for I know not how a Villain
Could put out a mans eyes better, and leave them in his head,
As he has done mine.
Where is my Masters Worship?
How now Aminadab? I hear thee though I see thee not.
You are sure cozened, Sir, they are all professed Cheaters,
They have stolen two silver spoons, and the Clown took his heels
With all celerity; they only take the name of Country-Comedians
To abuse simple people with a printed play or two,
Which they bought at Canterbury for six pence,
And what is worse, they speak but
What they list of it, and fribble out the rest.
Here's no abuse to the Common-wealth,
If a man could see to look into it, 
But mark the Cunning of these cheating slaves,
First they make Justice blind, then play the Knaves.
Whore's Mr. Mayor?
Od's precious Brother, the King of Kent is newly alighted???
The King of Kent? where is he,
That I should live to this day,
And yet not live to see to bid him welcome?
Where is Symonides, our friendly Host?
Ah blind as one that had been foxed a seven-night???
Why how now man?
Faith practising a Clowns part for your Grace
I have practised both my eyes out.
What need you practise that?
A man is never too old to learn, your Grace will say so,
When you hear the jest of it; the truth is, my Lord, I meant
To have been merry, and now it is my luck to weep
Water and Oatmeal; I shall see again at Supper,
I make no doubt of it.
This is strange to me, Sirs.
Arm, arm, my Lord!
What's that?
With swiftest speed, if ever you'll behold
The Queen your Daughter alive again.
Roxena?
They are besieged, Aurelius,
Ambrose, and his Brother Uther,
With numbers infinite of British Forces,
Beset their Castle, and they cannot scope
Without your speedy succour.
For her safety I'll forget food and rest: away.
I hope your Worship will hear the jest ever you go.
The jest! torment me not.
I'll follow you to Wales with a Dog and a Bell
But I will tell it you.
Unseasonable Folly!
It is sign of war when great men disagree;
Look to the Rebel well, till I can see,
And when my sight is recovered, I will have
His eyes pulled out for a fortnight.
My eyes? hang thee,
A deadly sin or two shall pluck them out first,
That is my resolution. Ha, ha, ha.
MY Lord, the Castle is so fortified.
Let wild-fire ruin it,
That his destruction may appear to him
In the figure of Heavens wrath at the last day,
That Murderer of our Brother. Hence away,
I'll send my heart no peace till it be consumed.
There he appears again, behold, my Lord.
Oh that the zealous fire on my Souls Altar,
To the high Birth of Virtue consecrated,
Would fit me with a lightning now to blast him,
Even as I look upon him.
Good my Lord,
Your anger is too noble and too precious
To waste it self on guilt so foul as his;
Let ruin work her will.
Begirt all round?
All, all, my Lord, it is folly to make doubt of it,
You question things that horror long ago
Resolved us on.
Give me leave, Horsus, though???
Do what you will, Sir, question them again,
I'll tell them to you.
Not so, Sir,
I will not have them told again???
It rests then.
That's an ill word put in, when thy heart knows
There is no rest at all, but torment making.
True, my heart finds it; that sits weeping blood now
For poor Roxena's safety. You'll confess, my Lord,
My love to you has brought me to this danger?
I could have lived like Hengist, King of Kent,
London, York, Lincoln, and Winchester,
Under the power of my Command, the portion
Of my most just desert, enjoyed now
By pettier, Deservers.
Say you so, Sir,
And you'll confess? since you began Confession
(A thing I should have died ever I had thought on)
You've married the fashion of your affection utterly,
In your own wicked counsel, there you paid me,
You were bound in conscience to love me after,
You were bound to it, as men in honesty,
That vitiate Virgins, to give Dowries to them;
My faith was pure before to a faithful woman.
My Lord, my Counsel???
Why I'll be judged by these
That knit death in their Brows, and hold me now
Not worth the acception of a flattery,
Most of whose faces smiled when I smiled once; my Lords:
Reply not, Brother.
Seeds of scorn, I mind you not,
I speak to them alone whose force makes yours a power,
Which else were none. Show me the main food of your hate,
Which cannot be the Murder of Constantius
That crawls in your Revenges; for your loves
Were violent long since that.
And had been still,
If from that Pagan wound th'hadst kept thee free,
But when thou fledd'st from Heaven, we fled from thee.
This was your Counsel now.
Mine? it was the Counsel
Of your own lust and blood, your appetite knows it.
May thunder strike me from these walls, my Lords,
And leave me many Leagues off from your eyes,
If this be not the man, whose Stygian Soul
Breathed forth that counsel to me, and sole Plotter
Of all those false injurious disgraces
That have abused the virtuous patience
Of our Religious Queen.
A Devil in madness!
Upon whose life, I swear, there sticks no stain
But what's most wrongful, and where now she thinks
A rape dwe???ls on her honour, only I
Her Ravisher was, and his the Policy.
Inhumane practice!
Now you know the truth,
Will his death serve your fury?
My death?
Say, will it do it?
Say they should say it would do it?
Why then it must.
It must?
It shall, speak but the word, it shall be yielded up.
Believe him not, he cannot do it.
Cannot?
It is but a false and base Insinuation
For his own life, and like his late submission.
Oh sting to honour, alive or dead thou goosed 
For that words rudeness only.
See, sin needs
No other destruction then it breeds in its own bosom.
Such another brings him.
What, has thy vile rage stamped a wound upon me?
In???e send one to thy soul shall never heal for it.
How, to my soul?
It shall be thy master-torment
Both for the pain and the everlastingness.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dost laugh? take leave of it, all eternity
Shall never see thee do so much again:
Know you are a Cuckold.
What!
You change too soon, Sir.
Roxena, whom th'hast raised to thy own ruin,
She was my Whore in Germany.
Burst me open the violence of whirl-winds:
Hear me out first,
For her embrace, which my flesh yet sits warm in,
I was thy friend and follower.
Deafen me
Thou most imperious noise that starts the world!
And to serve both our lusts I practised with thee
Against thy virtuous Queen.
Bane to all Comforts!
Whose faithful sweetness, too precious for thy blood,
I made thee change for loves Hypocrisy.
Insufferable!
Only to make my way to pleasure fearless, free &amp; fluent.
Hells Trump is in that throat.
It shall sound shriller.
I'll damme it up with death first.
Oh for succour!
Who's near me? help me, save me, the flame follows me,
It is in the figure of young Vortimer, the Prince,
Whose life I took by poison.
Hold out breath and I shall find thee quickly.
I'll tug thy soul out here.
Do Monster:
Vortiger!
Monster!
My Lord!
Toad, Pagan.
Viper, Christian.
Oh hear me,
Oh help me, my Love, my Lord, it is here,
Horsus look up, if not to succour me,
To see me yet consumed; oh what is love
When life is not regarded?
What strength's left I'll fix upon thy throat.
I have some force yet.
No way to scope? is this the end of glory?
Doubly beset with enemies wrath and fire:
It comes nearer, rivers and fountains fall,
It sucks away my breath, I cannot give
A curse to sin, and hear't out while I live. Help, help.
Burn, burn, now I can t???nd thee,
Take time with her in torment, call her life
A far off to thee, dry up her strumpet-bloud,
And hard y parch the skin, let one heat strangle her,
Another fetch her to her sense again,
And the worst pain be only her reviving,
Follow her eternally; oh mystical Harlot,
Thou hast thy full due, whom lust crowned Queen before
Flames crown her now a most triumphant Whore.
And that end crowns them all.
Our peace is full,
In you Usurpers fall, nor have I known
A Judgement meet more fearfully.
Here, take this Ring, deliver the good Queen,
And those grave pledges of her murdered honour,
(Her worthy Father, and her noble Uncle.)
How now ??? the meaning of these sounds?
The Consumer has been here, she's gone, she's lost,
In glowing Cinders now lye all my joys,
The headlong Fortune of my rash Captivity
Strikes not so deep a wound into my hopes
As thy dear loss.
Her Father and her Uncle!
They are indeed, my Lord.
Part of my wishes,
What fortunate power has prevented me,
And ever my love came, brought them victory?
My wonder sticks in Hengist King of Kent.
My Lord, to make that plain which now I see
Fixed in astonishment; the only name
Of your Return and Being brought such gladness
To this distracted Kingdom, that, to express
A thankfulness to Heaven, it grew great
In charitable Actions, from which goodness
We taste our liberty, who lived engaged
Upon the Innocence of women's honour,
(A kindness that even threatened to undo us)
And having newly but enjoyed the benefit
And fruits of our enlargement, it was our happiness
To intercept this Monster of Ambition,
Bred in these times of Usurpation,
The ranckness of whose Insolence and Treason
Grew to such height, it was armed to bid you Battle.
Whom, as our fems Redemption, on our knees
We present Captive.
Had it needed reason
You richly came provided, I understood
Not your deserts till now; my honoured Lords,
Is this that German Saxon, whose least thirst
Could not be satisfied under a Province?
Had but my fate directed this bold arm
To thy life, the whole Kingdom had been mine,
That was my hopes great aim; I have a thirst
Could never have been full quenched under all,
The whole must do it or nothing.
A strange draught!
And what a little ground shall death now teach you
To be content withal?
Why let it then,
For none else can, you've named the only way
To limit my Ambition, a full cure
For all my fading hopes and sickly fears;
Nor shall it be less we come to me now
Then a fresh acquisition would have been
Unto my new built Kingdoms; Life to me,
('Less it be glorious) is a misery.
That pleasure we will do you; Lead him out,
And when we have inflicted ??????r just doom
On his usurping head, it will become
Our pious care to see this Realm secured
From the Convulsions it hath long endured.

