W•…re not our present subject mix•… with sear,
It would much aff•…ight us to see all y•…u here.
One would suffice us, or no Auditor.
Each to hi•…self an amp•…e Theater,
Let rude Pl•…bejans think so, b•…t we know
All judgments here from the same Spring doe flow.
All here have but one c•…nsure, all one breast▪
All sons of the same Mother; but the rest
We pre•…ccupate their Censure, and 〈◊〉,
What after may be said not to be well,
As in most decent Garments you may see▪
Some gracious Ornaments inweav•…d bee:
Which serve for lit•…le use▪ but on some day
Destined to please himself, the wearer may
Without a blush put on, when his best friends
Intend to visit him, so our hope intends
The sacred Muses Progeny to greet,
Which under our Roo•…e, now the t•…ird time meet,
We will not op the book to you, and show
A story word by word, as it doth go,
But give invention leave to undertake,
Of it's own strains, some ben•…fit to make:
For though a Tragic P•…n may be confined,
Within a studies private Walls, the mind
Must be unbounded, and with inventions steel,
Strike fir•… from ali•…ned Flints —
So free we are from set•…ing any price,
On these our studied Vanities, that advice
Almost d•…deigned the whispers of those •…ngues
Which private fi•…t, though vented public wrongs▪
To the Patient Patient oft▪ We'il here begin
To be alitlle perempto•…y, oh that sin
Of wilful indiscretion, it is no baize
To make us Garlands of our own mouths prai•…e,
Which who aff•…ct, may they so Laurel lack,
That slanders Thunder may behi•…d their back•…▪
Blast them with C•…lumny, for we vow th•…y dear
Pay for their pains, that give attention here.
And since it's suffered with kind indulgence
We hope that Kingly Parent's our d•…fence,
Who would not have his d•…dling love be known,
But unto tho•…e had off spring of 〈◊〉 own,
And for we are assured that here be
No br•…ins so cursed with black sterility.
But of 〈◊〉 nature they can freely call,
Bi•…ths more mature, and Celestial,
Their stud•…es •…ssue, they like kindest Mothers,
With tend•…r hands will swath the limb•… of others.
BE dumb those now harsh notes, our 〈◊◊〉
Shall never be acquainted with such 〈◊〉,
Peace (our grand) Captai•…, se•… h•… 〈◊〉,
That would have once confronted 〈◊〉 hi•…∣self,
(Acknowledged for a better Deity)
Puts off ambitious burdens, and doth ha•…e
Through bloody Rivers to make passages,
Whereby his Soul might flote to A•…heron,
Wrin•…kle your brows no more (sterne fates) for we
Scorn to be made the serve•…e Ministers
To cut those threads, at which your selves have trembled▪
•…ming us the fiercer Destiny.
Yet m•…st great Amurath thank those sacred powers,
They have enriched our souls with such a price,
As ha•… those Heroes whose revengeful Arms,
S•…v'd Mars a ten years Prentiship at Troy,
•…re d•…aimed succeeding times should b•… possessed,
With such an unparalleled unprized beauty as my Saint:
They would not have prevented so their bliss,
But been most humble Suitors to the Gods,
To have protra•…ted their then fond spent life,
But to behold this object. Which out-shines
Their 〈◊〉. as much as doth the eye
O•… all the World, dazzle the lesser fires.
•…ova Isle outbrave thee! melt thy self in Lust
Embrace at once a•…l starre-made Concubines,
Isle not envy thee, know I have to spare
Beauty enough, to make another Uenus;
And for fond Gods, that have no reward in store
To make me happier, here Isle place my Heaven.
And for thy sake, this shall my Motto be,
I conquered Greece, one Grecian conquered me.
But (gracious Lord) those streams (we see) soon ebb,
Which with outragio•…s swelling flow to fast,
Forbid (•…ucina) this soon kindled fire,
Should ere burn out itself it is a true Theme,
That ne'er last•…long, that seems most extreme.
Can this rich price of nature, precious jem
Give entertainment to suspecting guests?
Come, come, these arms are curious chains of love,
With which thou link'st my heart aeternally,
Thy cheeks the royal Paper interlined,
With Natures Rhetoric, and love persuasion,
Stands there attracting still my gazing eye:
This then •…le read, and here I now will fine,
That these all Antique fables of the Gods,
Are writ in flowing numbers; first thy lip,
Was fair Euro•…aes which they say made Jove,
Turn a wild Heifer: next, this sparkling eye
Was the Aemonian Io's; then, this hand
Ladies, fair Mother to those Stare made Twins,
Thus, thus, Isle Comment on this golden Book:
Nature nor Art, have taught how to fine:
Fairest, it was you first brought me to this vain:
In loving Combats now I valiant prove,
Let others war, great •…murath shall love.
Brave resolution, O the fond thoughts of man,
Awake Enuo! Isle find stratagems:
There shall be Physic, to purge this disease,
Light sores are gently used, but such a part,
Must be cut off, least it infect the hart.
Schahi•…, Our Tutor, we command this nigh•…
Be solemnised with all delightful sports,
Thy learned invention best can think upon.
Prepare a Mask, which lively represents,
How once the Gods did love: that shall not teach
Vs by examples, but we'll smile to think:
How poor and weak their idle faining was
To our affection. Scahin, be free in wit▪
And sudden: now come my Kingdoms Pride▪
Hymen would wed himself to such a Bride.
Nature, and all those universed powers,
Which showed such Admirable Godlike skill,
Inframing this true model of our selves,
This Man, this thing called man, why doe you thus,
Make him a spectacle of such laughter for you,
When in each man we see a Monarchy?
For, as in states, all fortunes still attend:
So with a Kingdom, with a complete state
Well governed, and well managed in himself,
Both each man bears, when that best part of man,
(Reason) doth swayand rule each Passion.
Affections are good Servants: but if will
Make them once Master, theyle prove Tyrants still.
No more King now: poor Subject AMVRATH,
Whom I have seen break through a Troop of Men,
Like lightning from a Cloud: and done those Act•…,
Which 'ene the Furies would have trembled a•…:
Treading down Armies, as if by them he meant
Of d•…ad men's backs to build up stairs to Heaven:
A•…d now lies lurking in a women's arms
〈◊〉 in the Le•…he of Ignoble lust,
〈◊〉 its me for the wanton Enginere
•…o ke•…pe his so loose thoughts in smoothing tune▪
〈◊◊〉 woman: golden hook
To 〈◊◊〉 thoughts: and when we once are caught▪
•…o 〈◊〉 i•…to the public view of shame:
A•…d 〈◊〉 we lye b•…thed in incestuous pleasure
〈◊〉 •…od 〈◊〉 to laugh and scorn at once.
〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 s•…ses! •… could either wish
〈◊◊◊〉 like tho•…e Creatures, which we say
A•… 〈◊〉 fr•…m Put•…id and corrupted matter;
〈◊◊〉 we should acknowledge our dear being
〈◊〉 grass and flowers: for what else is our •…tate?
V•… to the top but then the weight sh•…ll fall
Upon t•…eir head that cause it. Work (my brain)
Tush, blood, not wat•…r must wash off this stain.
Shine here (my 〈◊〉) and expel the night
More than a thousand stars that grace the Heavens:
Me thinks, I see the Gods inventing shapes
In which they mean to court thee. Jove he frowns
And is far more jealous, more suspicious
Of thee, then all the painted Truls, whose eyes
Bedeck the all ennameld Firmament.
Beauty (my Lord) it is the worst part of woman.
A weak poor thing, assaulted every hour
By creeping minutes of defacing time:
Asuperfici•… which each breath of care.
Blasts off: and every hum•…rous 〈◊〉 of gre•…e,
Which flows from forth these Fountains of our eyes▪
Wash•…th away, as rain•… doth Winters snow.
But those bless•… guitars of all Nuptial rites,
Have wrought a better sement to make•… fa•…t,
The hearts of Lovers; the tree•…e name of Wife
Guilds o'er our th•…ones, with a more constant shape▪
Than can be subj•…ct or to time, or c•…re:
And in our self•…; yea in our own true•… brea•…ts▪
We have 〈◊〉, d•…tie, careful Love;
And last and 〈◊〉 of all, we may have Children▪
Children are Him•…ns pl•…dges, these shall be
Perpetual chains, to link my Lord a•…d me.
Art thou a W•…man? Godd•…sse, we adore•…▪
And Idolise; what we but loved before;
What Devils have men 〈◊〉, whose furious brain•…
Have oft abused that Deity called Woman:
Dipping their Ravens quill in Stygian Ink,
To blast such heavenly pap•…r as your faces.
Were all the enticing lusts, damned polici•…s,
Prodigious fas•…inations, u•…searched thoughts,
Dissembled tears, broke•… vows, loathed app•…tites,
Luxurious •…nd 〈◊〉 desires.
Were all these of Women •…qually weighed,
That virtue in thy breast, twill out-ballance all
And r•…compence th•… •…vine of all thy Sex.
So please •…our Majesty, L. 〈◊〉 ready
For entrance with 〈◊〉 M•…sque.
Tell him we're wholly •…ent for •…xpectation. 
Sit, sit (my Queen) Muse•…ke exceed your Spheres,
Thy•…ke I am I•…ve, and Godlike please our ears.
Gaze you mortals, gaze you •…till,
On the Gods now look your fill.
Jove and Iuno are descending,
Ye•… her lealou•…ie's not ending,
Mars, sterne Mars, •…e will not fight,
But with Venus when it is Night.
Daphne•… crowns Apolloes 〈◊〉,
Whom she would •…mbrace in •…ed,
Nipped•…e swells his frothy cheek,
Cause Diana is not me•…ke.
Gaze you mortals, &amp;c.
Come now my (Sister and Wife) we'll begin
To court afr•…sh! Nay, lore•… not (Heavens Queen)
Here on this greene we'll a Lava•…to dan•…e,
What if our hairs grow silver, yet our strength,
Is young, and vigorous! Say (fellow Gods)
(Since we are full of Nectar, and our cares,
Lye drenched in our Nepenth•…) take your Queen•…, and be all
Ioviall, Mars for our Daughter Ve•…s!
Apollo join•… with Pallas! Brother of Floods
•…mbrace Diana! Gods sometimes merry be:
But in the night, when mortals m•… not see.
How now (wanton?) Can I no wh•…e go,
For recr•…ation but you f•…llow me?
Is this your Recreation? Fie! My Lord
Will you be wanton still? For here you came 
For some new Harlot, some new Queen for you.
Jun•…, Wife.
Your Sister, (thunderer,) and not your Wife!
Banished from Heav•…n I am; and your Bed,
Resign them both to Strumpets, Concubines, 
And now you com•… to see a fresh new lass
In which Pole now or in what part of h•…aven,
Shall she be stellified?
Shall still sinister thoughts wrong our intent,
Well (I•…o) well, you'll ever be a woman,
A very, very woman! But •…ince she scolds,
Let's hence (ye Gods) lest her infectious breath
Blast the s•…cceeding day: and mortals curse
Her hel-bred jeal•…use: Calumnious woman
Come scold in heaven! For if Gods lived on Earth
S•…spitious tongues would blame most innocent mirth.
Well! love looked pale! I touched him to the quick!
It is some new Mini•…n he came down to see!
Hark (jealousy) know Jun•… is a woman!
Am I not mad yet? Mistress Bride, adieu:
Jove shall not steal a kiss? My curse is past,
When thou sleep first a Bride, may•…t sleep thy last.
Fair Bride I sang thy •…pithalamy,
And left 〈◊〉 for thy Nuptials:
Iuno here thundered against the Thunderer,
Knowing how thy beauty dazzles hers,
She durst not let heavens King once glance a look,
But threatened with her helbred incantations,
To metamorphic thine unparalleled
And most celestial shape into worse forms;
And more prodigiou•… than ever poisoned charms.
Wrought on the fabled Concubines of love:
But kn•…w great Queen▪ my Mother Venus vows
Her everlasting guard to save such beauty,
Lest if thou perish, Nature 〈◊〉 self
Loose he•… o•…ely pattern of •…erenity,
But I must ha•…t, Love which the Gods protect,
Can never 〈◊◊〉 by neglect.
•…cohen, thine Art is excellent; but say,
Doe Gods fall out for love amongst themselves?
My Lord, these are but fables: yet to make
The show more p•…rtinent, and to grace your Queen,
Co•…ceipt took leave to put the frown on In•…o.
My Lords and friends, we shall be ever thankful
And rest a Debtor to your courtesy.
Not so fair Queen, but durst •… now •…ntreat
The Kings detaining from th•… sweets of Bed▪
There yet remains one thought upon conceit,
Which you would doubly grace me to behold.
Our worthy Tutor shall obtain a Night,
A night ofus, in any case we can!
But then let me inform your Majesty,
That it is a warrior•… show, which once you loved,
But now are free from.
It is best of all, with greediness we will see it,
O how the soul doth gratulate it self
When saf•…lie it beholds the dangerous state
Of others, and it self securely free!
Glad are we still to stand upon the shore,
And see a far off ot•…ers tossed in the Sea,
Or in a Gallery at a Fencers stage,
We laugh when mutually each one takes wound•…;
Sit still (〈◊〉) Sc•…hen, thy show in hast;
It is best delight, to think•… on troubles past.
Stay you most worthy fhades▪ brave Hector stay▪
And proud Achilles, know your massi•… Tombs,
Which have so long orewhelm'd your valiant bones
Yawns wide to let the imprisoned coerces forth.
I must afresh embalm your sacred Trunks,
And swe•…t your memory with most happy oil,
Of just report, the Gods awaked me Fame
From out the oblivious Sepulch•…r of sleep,
To drop that Ink into old Homer•… pen,
Werewith he curiously hath lined your names,
Enfolding them in Everlasting Cedar,
And made them live to all posterity.
Virtue to valour hath his gift assigned▪
Great men may dye, yet deeds still rest in mind.
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
Most fortunate young man, whose worth is crowned
With everlasting Trophies of renown,
How hath he set thee on the wings of Fame
Which soar in the middle region of high glory
Proposed to all, a never dying story.
May it please the (Son of Iupiter) to accept
A Present, which our fight enriched us with?
Is it a Band of stubborn Souldi•…rs Captain?
O no (my Liege•…) of exquisite formed Ladies▪
Darius his wife, the wonder of her Sex,
Besides a Troop of such shaped Ganim•…des,
That love •…ot equals.
Philoxenus▪ We thank thee! Yet hark!
There is a secr•…t we would know of thee,
And you must tell Vs: on your faith you must.
My L•…ige —
Nay, no Court oil (by your leave) no flattery▪
We are but man, this very trun•…ke of ours,
Is but a Vessel filled with human•… blue•…
And we trust not that Parasite like 〈◊〉▪
I 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉.
All the destroying vices of frail man,
I may be subject to, but what base looseness,
Or supple Luxury, did thou ere obscure
So to benumne our sense, that thou should think
We could be pleased with such effaeminate Presents,
* Know sir our eyes shall have that abstinence
That will not look on them, on boys, of women, 
Hence then, and present some coward with them,
Give me a spectacle would please the Gods,
And make them bend their Ivory brows to the Earth,
A man, a Soldier, •…trong with his wounds,
Amongst fate and ruin, upright and unshap't,
His mind •…eing all his guard, his wall, and armour,
And if he fall, •…till noble wrath remains,
In his amassed Trunk: not •…ll the darts
Stuck in his sides, making him a•… one wound,
A•…right his courage, but wrath lending weapons,
Himself doth seem a new and horrid War,
Nor are those Milke-sops which beguile the time,
With •…tealing minutes from their Ladies lips
Such as the Gods doe love; fores the Wind
Loses it's force, if it be not opposed
With woods of strong and stubborn planted trees▪
So virtue, if it wa•…ke in trodden paths
That breaks up honours gap, and makes the way
Through paths of death, that flame burns strong
Which is resisted: valour •…hens in wrong:
Of Alexanders Soldiers be this sed,
War was a•… peace, when he the army led.
Brave Macedon, how truly hast thou weighed,
The reason of mans birth, who is equal borne,
For all the world, as well as for himself.
The world's a field t•…o narrow for thy worth!
And although Nature, hath her enacted bounds
For Sea and Earth, nay for the Heavens themselves,
Nor Sea nor Earth, shall coop thy valour up:
Valour of Nature ever this attains
That it breaks forth, far, and beyond her chains,
And this Isle trumpet out. the whole worlds Ball
In which thou art so great, to thee is small;
When men want worlds to •…hew their virtue in,
That is the crime of the •…odds, and not their sins:
* It is a decree of a true Soul•…iers mind,
To think nought done, when ought is left behind,
On (valiant youth) for, know I will appoint;
A Grecian Prince who so shall steep his quill
To paint out thy name in W•…ls of eloquence,
That this thy soorne of Lust shall be
Proposed to all Kings example to posterity,
Know mortals that the men the Gods most love
In hard and da•…gerous Arts, they always prove,
When men live brave at first, then fall to crimes,
Their bad I Chronicle to future times:
For, who begins good Arts, and not proceeds
He but goes backward in all noble deeds.
Death consecrates those men whose awful end,
Though most men fear, yet all men must commend.
Scahin, the Macedo•…s beholding to the•…,
And history shall pay you thanks for this▪
Which we rest Debtors for.
Great Prince, such kindness of ass•…ptance pays:
For things which are but for a Kings delight,
In •…eeing them, he amply doth requite.
Eumorphe, Love, Queen, Wife, let's haste to Bed!
And may we wish this night aeternall time,
Scahin, good night: good night (kind Gentlemen!)
Thus when we are dead shall we revive oath stage:
One hour can present a Kings whole age.
Observed you not the Kings looks? Grew th•… not pale?
O yes (Lord Scahin) you mu•…t be his Parent?
And snatch him out'h the Gulf he's falling in,
That feigned speech of Alexanders wrought
Like to most purging Physic, nights then black
When it is compared with day: Boldness is clear,
When it is presented before bastard fear.
Isle tell thee (Eurenoses) thou art a Soldier:
And I am both a Soldier, and a Scholar,
And for these two Professions, am both most glorious:
And most meritorious, Pall•…s is for both:
O what Tysiphon, what snaked scourge
Ca•… make a Scholar, that should never sleep,
But twixt th•… Pillows of Pernassus Hills,
And dip his lips in springs of Helicon,
Make him by snoring on a wanton breast,
And suck the adulterate and spiced breath
Of a lewd fained woman?
And for a Soldier (Scahin,) let me speak!
We that doe know the use of swords, and fire,
We that doe know, halters can throatle us,
Shall we ere venture on a Women's cruelty?
We that endure•… no Lords, shall we endure:
A woman to overcome us? Most true Demophoon!
I reverence thy memory, no pewling phrase
Could so euchaine thee to thy Thrice•…n Dame,
But thou would r•…her perish than she save thee.
Isle not declaim long on that common Theme•…,
But they have lust lies in their fingers ends,
And whilst their sweet-hearts breath sticks in their sheets,
They will admit another. Lucrec•… in the day
To be a Thais, if the night will not gain-say.
Why (Euren•…ses) why should we endure•…
A new Queen now? this Kingdom wants not heirs?
We know (should we have more) it were dangerous,
But hark! The Queens for Bed, enticing sleep 
With charms of Music: well, even such a Night▪
May yet prove dismal ere the following Light!
Scahi•…, let's in:
The first degree to purge such else as these▪
Is to instruct the patient his disease:
That you have done.
Yea, and will yet once more
Adventure a new stratagem, just when the King
He has rid his Chamber, and with covetous hast
Thinks for to clip Elizium, and drink deep
Of his long wished delight, I having skill
And uncontrolled ass•…se, will in disgu•…se
Seem his deceased Fathers apparition:
And by all ties of children to their Parents,
Bid him forsake that vile bewitching woman.
An easy Medicine doth and sure will work,
To rub shrewd wounds, make them but fester more,
Foul Medicines we worse brook, than a foul sore.
Madam make hast •… The King will be impatient
If h•… be from you long. O Happiness.
Why Menthe, then thou deem us happy no•…
Thus to command a world of services,
To have a King my subject; and attended
With these harmonious sounds t'affect our ears?
Yes (truly Madam) it is a happiness.
It is, were it Eternal: but I fear a pow•…r
A women's power, doth but make •…port with us;
Why, were we not once Menthe, a Captive (Wretch?)
Yes Lady▪ now your happiness the more:
Riches please best, when there w•…ned want before.
That power which raised us from so base, so high,
Can throw us down again as suddenly:
Me thy•…ks my life is but a Players Scene,
In the last Act my part was then to play,
A Captive 〈◊〉, •…nd a •…ueene to day.
Your Morals (Madam) are too serious▪
Me thinks the•…e Ornaments should elevate
Your dumpish spy•…its. Think this Bed a place
In which no •…cie slipping chance hath power;
A Ki•…gs safe Bed is like a guarded Tower.
No (•…enthe) no, it is not the Bed of state,
Nor the free smile of a well pleased King:
It is not the embracing Arms of Emperors,
N•… all the Gems that so enwreathe the brows
Can so allure Fortune unto their gaze,
As she should still be constant; O she's blind,
Nor doth she know her self where she is kind;
Close, those are Kings, and Queens whose brest's secure
Like brazen walls, Lust's entrance not endure!
Where impotent ambition not intrudes,
Nor the unstable talk of multitudes;
Foe•…tune sernes such, they happiness command
More than all 〈◊〉 gold, all Tongue•… sand;
As Heaven hath given us no more conspicuous thing
Than form or beauty: so like a forward spring.
Nothing more short.
Madam, divine 〈◊〉 of a change; Belief
 Is too too pro•…e, in entertaining grief!
Our Lord attends to enter in,
And surely sleep envyeth his delig•…t,
For he sits heavy on my drowsy lids,
Draw all our Curtai•…es; sleep beguiles our ear•…s.
(Madam) good night; time helps suspicious fears!
Drop golden showers, gentle •…up,
And all the Angels of the Night,
Which doe us in pr•…tection keep,
Make•… this Queen dream of delight
Morpheus be kind •… little, an•… be
Deaths now true Image, for twill prove•…
To this poor Queen, that then thou art hee▪
Her grave is made •…'th Bed of love:
Th•…s with sweet sweets can Heave•… mix ga•…,
And marriage turn to 〈◊〉.
Turk, Amurath, slave nay something baser▪
King! For all aerie titles which the Gods
Have blasted man withal▪ to make them swell
With puffed up honour, and ambitious wind,
This name of King holds greatest antipathy
With manly government▪ for if we weigh▪
It is subjects, and not Kings bear all the sway.
Each whispered mur mur from their idle breath,
Condemns a King to Infamy, to death;
Were there a Metempsucocosis of souls,
And nature should a free Election grant
What things they afterwards would reinforme
The vain and haughty•…st minds the Sun ere saw,
Would choose it's Cottage in some Shepherds flesh,
Nay, be confined within some Dog or Cat,
Than Antique like prank in a Kings gay-clothes▪
Were I no King, and had no Majesty,
I had more than all Kings, blessed liberty;
And without rumour might enjoy my choice,
Not f•…aring Censure of each popular vo•…ce;
Poor men may love, and none their wills correct:
But all turn Satyrs of a Kings affect!
O my base greatness! What disasterovs star,
Professed it self a Midwife at my birth,
To shape me into such prodigious States,
But hence regard of tongues! Were we a Saint,
Some envious tongue would dare our names to taint:
And he from slander is at securest rest,
Not that hath none, but that regards it least.
Open you envious Curtains here's a sight, 
That might commend the act of Love so Chaste;
Were now the chariot-guider of the Sun
Weary on's task, and would entreat a day
Of Heaven to rest in, here's a radiant Look,
That might be fixed in the midst of the Axle-tree;
And in despite of dark conspiring Clouds,
She would out-shine Sun, Moon, and all the Stars,
O, I could court thee now (my sweet) a fresh,
Mixing a kiss•…e with every period:
Telling the Lilies how they are but wanne,
Earth in the vernant spring is dull, and dark,
Compared with this aspect! the Aeasterne ayre,
Famed with the wings of Mercury and •…ova,
Infectious, but compared with this perfume!
Hence then th'ambition of that furious  youth,
Who knew not what a crime his rashness was!
I might overcome more Kingdoms; have more dominion
Enthrone my self an Emperor! of the world,
I might! I might! Amurath thou might!
The Christians now will scoff at Mahomet;
Perchance they sent this wretch thus to enchant me!
O my perplexed thoughts! tush Isle to bed
Should the commanding Thunder of the Gods
Prohibit me, or strike me in the act!
Talk on (vain rumour) fame I dare thy worst!
Call me a Lusty, Lazy, wanton, Coward!
Should I win all the world, my breath once fled,
My bad would still survive, all good be dead.
Eum•…rphe, sweet, I come! you sacred powers,
Who have bestowed some happiness on man,
To help to pass away this sinful •…ife,
Grant me a youthful vigour yet a while,
Full veins, free strength, complete and manly fence
To know, and taste a beauty most immense!
Amurath, Amurath?
Devil, Devil? What?
Dare thou appear before an Angel (Fiend?)
O Amurath, why doth intemperate Lust
Raging within thy furious youthful veins,
Burst through thy fathers Tomb? Disturb his soul?
Know, all the torments that the fabulous age
Dream't, did afflict deceased impious Ghosts,
Hartbiting-hunger, and soule-searching thirst,
The ne'er consumed, yet ever eaten prey
That the devouring Vulture feeds upon,
Are not such tortures as our off-springs crimes!
They, they sit heavy on us, and no date
Makes our compassionate affection cease.
O thou hereditary Ulcer, hark
By the name of Father, and by all those cares,
Which brought me to my grave, to make thee great▪
Thou that hast nothing of me but my crown:
My enterprise surpassed the boundless Sea,
Cutting the churlish Waves of Hellespont,
When the flood stood which wind for to obey!
Euxinum groaned beneath my burdenous Ships;
I was the first of all the Turkish Kings
That Europe knew, and the fond Christians plague•…
What coward blood ran flowing in my veins,
When thou were first begot: who merest all
Thy Fathers acts, by thy untamed desires,
Wherefore with Stygian curses I will lade thee
First, may she prove a Strumpet to thy Bed
Be her lips poison, and let her loose embrace,
Be venomous as Sco•…peons! If •…he conceived,
A Generation from thee, let it be
As ominous as thou hast been to me!
Rebellious to thy Praecepts, printing care•…,
Upon thy aged brows, O may they prove,
As Fairies for to lash thee in thy rest!
But Amurath, if thou can quench this flame,
If thou wilt cut this Gordian thread, and rend hence,
That putrid When which cleaves unto thy flesh,
Be all thine actions prosperous! Mahomet,
Sha•…l be auspicious unto each design;
Fortune to show thee favour shall be proud,
Farewell! if that men doe speak last, before
They dye, take root, then dead men's should take more. 
What art thou vanished? Know (thou careful spright)
Thou shalt no sooner pierce the wandering Clouds
With unperceived flight, than my resolve
Shall expiate my former Vanity!
Look on thy son thou (aerie intellect)
And see him sacrifice to thy command!
Now Titan turn thy breathing curses back!
Start hence bright day, a sable Cloud invade
This Universal Globe, break every prop,
And every h•…ndge that doth sustain the Heavens:
For straight must dye a woman, I have named
A crime, that may accuse all Nature guilty.
The Sex wisely considered, deserves a death;
For think this (Amurath) this woman may,
Prostrate he•… delicate and Ivory limbs,
To some base Page, or Skull, or shrunk up Dwarf:
Or let some Groom lye feeding on her lips,
She may devise some misshapen trick,
To satiate her goatish Amurath,
And from her bended knees at Meditation,
Be taken by some slave to the deep of Hell!
You are a brave Creature, were thou not a woman:
〈◊〉! Come! thou shalt see my well-kept vow,
And know my hate, which saw me dote but now:
Schahin! 〈◊〉! Captains ho!
Our Tutor, Eurenoses, Captains, welcome!
Gallants, I call you to a spectacle:
My breast too narrow to hoard up any joy:
Nay, gaze here (Gentlemen!) give Nature thanks,
For framing such an excellent sense as (Sight)
Whereby such objects are enjoyed as this!
Which of you now imprison not your thought
In envio•…s and silent policy.
My Lord to whatsoever you shall propose,
My sentence shall be free.
And mine. Chase-Il. And mine.
Which of you then dare challenge to himself,
Such a pathetic a Prerogative,
So stoically •…averred from affection,
That had he su•…h a Creature as lies here,
One, at whom Nature her self stood amazed:
One, whom th•…se lofty exta•…ies of Poets,
Should they decay, here't must not barely dump
Their dull inventions with similitudes,
Taken from Sun, Moon, V•…olets▪ Roses,
And, when their raptures at a period stand;
A silent admiration must supply
Only name her, and she is all described.
Hyperbole of women, Colour it self
Is not more pure, and incontaminate!
Sleep dotes on her: and grasps her eye-lids close▪
The sky it self hath only so much blew
As the azure in her vei•…es, bends by reflex.
Here's breath that would those vapors purify,
Which from Avernus chokes the flying Birds!
Here's heat would tempt the numbed Atkenian,
Though all his blood with age were conjealed ice!
Now, which of you all is so temperate;
That, did he find this Jewel in his Bed
(Unless an Eunuch) could refrain to grapple,
And dally with her? Come! Speak freely all.
Truly (my Lord) I came of mortal Parents
And much confess me subject to desires;
Freely enjoy your Love!
That were she mine, I surely would doe no less.
What saith Euren•…ses?
My Lord, I •…ay;
That they may rail at light, that ne'er saw day;
But, had I such a Creature by my side
Were the world twice enlarged, and all that world
Overcome by me, all volumes writ,
Made clean and filled up by Rhetoric strains:
Of my great deeds, Historians should spend
Their Ink and Paper in my sole Chronicle,
A thousand such alluring idle charms,
Could not conjure me from betwixt her arms.
Your sentence Chase 〈◊〉 Beg?
What need your Grace depend upon our breath?
I vow (my Lord,) if all those scrupulous things
Which burden us with praecepts so praecise,
Those Parents which when they are married once
And past their strength of years, think their sons •…traight,
Should be as old in every thing as they,
I say my Lord, did my head wear a Crown
That Queen should be the chiefest jem to adorn it,
Spite of all hate, that's an unhappy state
When Kings must fear to love, least subjects hate.
Well spoke three Milk-sops, S•…hahin! Your Sword!
Now, now be valour in this manly arm 
To cut off troupes of thoughts that would invade me!
Think you my mind is waxy to be wrought,
By any fashion, Orch•…nes thy strength,
Here doe I wish as did that Emperor,
That all the heads of that enticing Sex,
Were upon hers, thus then should one full stroke
Mow them all off. 
There, kiss now (Captains) doe! and clap her cheek;
This is the face that did so captive me:
These were the looks that so bewitched mine eyes▪
Here be the lips, that I but for to touch,
Gave over Fortune, Victory, Fame, and all;
These were two lying mirrors where I looked
And thought I saw a world of happen•…e.
Now Tutor, shall our swords be exercised,
In ripping up the breasts of Christians.
Say Generals! Whether is first?
For Thracia!
On then for Thracia, for he surely shall
That conquers first himself, soon conquer all.
Thou sacred guitar of the arched Heavens,
Who can collect the scattering stars, and fix
The Erratique Planet in the constant Pole,
O why should thou take such solicitous care
To keep the ayre, and Elements in course?
That Winter should unclothe our Mother Earth,
And wrap her in a winding sheet of snow;
That then the spring duly revives her still,
Vnlinds her sinews, fills her clung up veins,
With living dew, and makes her young again;
Next that, the Nemean terror breathes her flames,
To parch her flax hairs with furious heat;
Which to allay too, thou op'st the Chataracts,
And watered the worlds Gardens with blessed drops;
Can thou▪ which can sustain the ponderous world,
And keepst in true poise, securely sleep,
Letting a Tyrant (which with a Philip, thus;
Thou might sink to Earth) to baffle thee?
A warrior in thy Fields, I long have been
To see if in thy sacred providence,
Thou meanst to arm me with thy thunder-bolt,
Yet, yet, it strikes not now, he Gyant-wise,
He dares thee again; pardon our earnest zeal
What ere's decreed for man by thy behost,
He must perform: and in obedience rest.
Thou, like Spectators when they doe behold
An hardy youth encountering with a Bear▪
Or something terrible; then they give a shout,
So dost thou even applaud thy self to see,
Religion striving with Calamity.
Which while it often bears, and still rests true,
It's fence against all that after shall ensue.
Turk, isle oppose thee still! Heaven has decreed:
That this weak hand, shall make that tyrant bleed.
A man religious, firm, and strongly good
Cannot of the sudden be, nor understood.
Rise (Soul!) enjoy the prize of thy brave worth!
Scahin! the Present that thou so professed,
Should from the City of Orestias,
Make proud our eyes! then tell me. hast thou slain
A thousand superstitious Christian souls;
Make them stoop to us; O, I would bath my hands
In their warm blood to make them supple. (Schahin;)
That they may wield more Spears! our hands are dull,
Our furie's patient! now will I be a Turk,
And to our Prophets altars doe I vow,
That to his yoke I will all necks subdue,
Or in their throats my bloody sword imbrew.
Then King, to add fresh oil unto thy hate,
And make it raise it self a greater flame,
See here these Christians heads; thus still shall fall
Before thy fatal hand, these impio•…s slaves;
So long as number's wanting to the sand,
So long as day shall come with Sun, and night
Be spangled with the twilight dawning stars,
Whilst floods shall fall into the Ocean
Shall Christians tremble at Turks thundering strokes.
Soam I Amurath the great King of Turks,
O how it glads me thus to posh they•… brains,
To rend their lockes, to tear these Infidels!
Who thundered when these heads were smitten off?
Stars I could reach you with my lofty hand,
It is well enough, enough, (great Amurath)
For now I sit in Orchanes great throne,
And sacrifice due rites to Mahomet;
Yet why enough? Isle on and dung the Earth,
With Christians rotted trunks, that frō that soil,
May spring more Cadmean Monsters to overcome thē.
Captains, what Conntries next shall we make flow,
With Channels of their blood?
To Servia (my Lord) there are troupes of arms,
Gathered to resist Mahometans.
At Bulgaria, there they set on fire,
The Countries as they pass, it were good we haste.
Why they doe well! we like of their desire
To make the flame in which themselves must fry!
Ruin, destruction, famine, and the sword,
Shall all invade them, Sun stay thou thy flight,
And see the snakes in their own River drenched,
While•…t with their blood our furious thirst is que•…cht!
Whether (Bulgaria) whether must we fly?
The Butcherous Tur•…e's at hand. Blessed Sanctity▪
If thou did ere guard goodness, wall our towers?
Bring strength into our Nerves! For in thy cause
Our Breasts upon their Rapiers we will run;
We'll with just hope 〈◊〉 the tyrants rage,
Meet him in the face, fury will •…de us arms:
There is a power can guard us from a•…l harms.
Let's be su•…dain: for with•… not find scope,
To see our haps. Who most doth fear, may hope.
Governor, Captains, hast unto your arms:
The dangers imminent, and the Turke's at hand
(Cobelitz) must we still wade thus deep
In blood and terror.
Yes (Servia) we must, we should, we ought,
Ease and success keeps baseness company,
Shall we not blush to see the register
Of those great Romans, and Heroic Greeks,
Which did those acts (at which our hearts are struck
Beneath all credence) only to win fame:
And shall not we for that Eternal name?
To live without all credence even to win fame,
Is not to know life's chief, and better parts:
To us of future hopes; calamity
Must help to purchase immortality.
Well spoke (true Ch•…istian) they who still live high,
And snoare in praised applause ne'er know to bear,
A contu•…ely, or check a fate,
Wisely to steer a Ship, or guide an Army,
Undaunted hardiness is requisite;
(O) then lets to our weapo•…s! make him yield▪
They which deny all right, of•…give it in the Field.
Why (Gentlemen) we want no foes to fight,
Nor need we turn our weapons on our selves!
You lazy rogue, what! come in my Cabinet?
Conspiring slave you murmured gin's th'allowance,
And would•…t persuade upon a larger pay, 
To betray all Garrisons, and turn Tur•….
Thou half Can-carousing rascal, Isle tear thee,
And those treacherous veins of thine, will you see.
Will you see your Corporal wronged?
Well, since I fight for victuals for company,
Use now your swords and Bucklers.
Treason the next man that speaks or strikes a blow▪
Then shall our Laundresses fight for us.
Why, Amazo•…s! Baudicans, come help to scratch!
O Cobelitz, what way shall we appease them?
Out thy Corporal (huswife) hath the itch,
You now will have foul washing, Drab isle tear your mouth;
An inch or two yet wider.
What, soldiers think you each distasteful word,
Given ▪mo•…gst your selves so strong an obloquy 
That revenge spurs you to each others death?
And will not seek to wash those blasphemies,
In Seas of their foul blood, which they belched out.
By our approaching foes, against the Essence
Of the Eternal.
Leave, leave, these factions; cease these Mutinies▪
Hark their Drums take advantage of these stir•…▪
Let us oppose our strength against our foe!
And in our Camp let not one soldier be,
Who will not find and strike his Enemies.
Now (blessed guitar and great strength of arms)
If in thy secret and hid decree,
Thou hast not yet appointed the full time,
Wherein thou meanest to tame this tiger,
Who dare murmur against thine hidden will?
Be we slain now, there's victory in store,
Which when thou please thou't give, &amp; not before.
Give us still strength of patience, not to wish,
A funeral honour unto all the world,
When we are perishing we will still believe,
Those dangers worth our death we undergo.
Whilst who is ours, is all alike thy foe;
Should fortune loose this day when we are slain,
Thou can give hands, and strength, and men again•…;
On thee we trust then, and on thee bear,
Scorning for Heavens sake to shed a tear.
Bassa! we thank thy valour and discretion▪
In finding fit occasion to invade
The mutinons Christians! these Captives here
Shall be good presents to our worthy Master.
General now trust me these young slaves,
To be full of Valour, they have mettle in them.
Yes; and to his Highness shall perform
A service which I long have thought upon,
And which his Turks•… Majesty requires;
They'll fit to be a near attendant guard,
On all occasions to the Emperor;
Therefore they shall be called 〈◊〉▪
By me first instituted, for our Princes safeties sake.
Their vigour and strong hearts becomes such service,
For to overcome them made our soldiers sweat,
Much Turkish blood: the Servians kept the Fight,
With stubborn hard resistance, The Bulgarians
Left the right wing; there set I forward first,
And like a torrent rolled destruction on,
Raising huge storms of blood, as doth the Whale,
Puff up the Waves against a mighty Ship;
Me thinks I see the Rivers of their gore:
Their Leaders trampled on by Turkish Horse,
The body of their army quite dispersed;
Themselves all floating in Vermilion pools,
With their own weapons hasting to their death.
And such a slaughter did we make of them,
As Nature scarce can ere repair again.
One hasting to others death, pulling to ground,
Him that held up, so they each other drowned.
Still are they confident upon a power,
They know not what, who (as they think) can snatch
Their praecise souls from out the jaws of death.
Yes, such a superstition doth possess them,
For when they looked for nothing but their fate,
And danger stood in sweat upon their brows?
They yet scorned Mahom•…t, and profaned his rites,
And nought but horror made them to believe him;
So many men were fighting on his side:
As might have changed my seat, and part in the world,
(Though Nature stood against) to a new place:
Or carry Sestos whereby Abydos stands,
Or pull down Atlas with so many hands▪
How like our Captains the last Victory?
(If any can prophecy of future things)
Me thought I did dream of this blessed hap,
How Fortune did involve them in their ruin,
And slight from danger, brought them into danger,
Each one astonished with a sudden fear,
Knew not the danger that was then most near.
To add more triumph, I present my Liege, 
With these young Rebels, which you may bring up,
In all the praecepts of our Mahomet:
And for great Emperor, your person wants,
A thing which much ore-Clouds your light of state,
Attendant Ianizarie•… to a Prince:
These may be so trained up, as to supply
The duty fit for such a Majesty:
Bassa we thank thy strength: Schahin your counsel,
And to that end, let them have safe protection.
But we must treat now of a marriage (Lords)
The German Og•…y, he who Scept•…r sways
The 〈◊〉 confines in strong Asia,
By Embassy entreats that he may join
His Daughter H•…tam to our 〈◊〉!
Ambassador here to our Council speak,
Your Masters Message.
Please then your Maj. and these reverend heads
To be informed my Masters will by me,
In Wedlock; if your Prince may be combined
To the fair Princess his sole Daughter:
He freely gives the Phr•…gain territories,
And B•…thinia to you for your Dowry;
Cata•…, Simon, Egreg•…os, Sansale,
Abbettin•…on, the Ottomans estate,
Which Ottomans, because he not endures,
The Noble Zelzucciom family protests,
To join with you in quelling their ambition.
May it please your Majesty to like mine advice
It's good to have alliance with such friends;
Kings that combine themselves are like to shafts,
The ancient Sage proposed unto his son!
Which whilst together they were close compact:
Arms, knees, and his wh•…le strength▪ could never break;
Take one by one, they with a touch were tract,
So Kings may be overcome that stand alone;
But two such Princes, knit thus hand in hand,
Should Nations totter, they would firmly stand.
Yes Schahin we'll approve what thou say;
Then from us carry the great Asians Monarch,
This his kindest greeting:
Tell him the gates of Prusa shall stand op,
And the glad ayre shall Echo notes of joy,
To ent•…rtaine her who shall bless our Land,
With hopeful issue; gre•…die thoughts expect
Her soon arrival; and so (Emba•…sador)
Inform thy Priucesse, when she shall appear,
A lasting Star shall shi•…e within our Sphere!
O Servia, our Cities are turned flames;
Each stays to hast his own and others death:
And as though Heaven conspired destruction too,
That reigns down scalding Sulphur on our heads,
Here one that lies thick gasping for his breath,
Is choked with blood that runs from his fellows wounds,
Whilst others for the dead are making Graves,
Themselves are made the coerces that doe fill them!
Nobles, and base, together perish all:
And a drawn sword sticks fast in every rib;
Our stones are dyed Vermilion with our blood!
Old creatures that are creeping to the grave,
Are thrust on fast•…r!
Infants but in the 〈◊〉 of their lives,
And thus kicked off, O most disastrous times,
To love our deaths, and make our life our crimes.
See, see, the ruins of our goodly Walls,
Our Cities smoke hinders the sight of heaven:
The conqueror yet amazed measures ou•… our Towns▪
With eyes of terror, and doth scarce believe
He hath overcome us; yet among these fires,
Our dead men are denied their funeral flames:
And those infectious Cark•…ses doe perform,
A second murder on the rest that live!
And all the hope of safety that we have,
Is now to fix our flattering lips it's feet:
Mercy (perhaps) may wearied slaughter meet.
Will you doe so? speak for I am determi'nd —
No (worthy General) Heaven avert
And •…rme you with the proof of better thoughts!
What though a Tyrant strives to terrify
All Christendom, and would not be beloved?
Let not your fears give impious rage such scope!
As for to bring Religion to profaneness:
Fortune and Heaven will scorn to try a man,
That hurls his weapons hence and runs away!
How is he worthy of heavens victory;
That, when it frowns, dares not look u•… and see?
Me thinks w•… three are now environed round,
With hosts of Angels, and our powerful Mars.
Is putting bows of steel into our hands:
He doth suggest our wrath, and bids us, on!
O what an army it is to have a cause
Holy and just; there, there's our strength indeed.
— Tu mente Labantes,
Dirige nos, dubios: Certo Robore firmâ.
If we must dye, the narrow way to bliss,
Shall be made wide for us, the gate wide op,
And the spread Palace entertains with joy.
Mean time, let's look like men upon our g•…iefe.
Out frown fate, Despot, Bulgaria, come!
Turk! once more at thee (Tyrant) mortals must,
Command Heavens favour in a cause so just.
Sends our proud father in Law this greeting to us?
Was our sword sheathed so soon to hear this answer?
My Lord, he bad me tell you that it was you
〈◊◊〉 him leave off this great Prophets Wars,
When he was hewing down the Christians;
Therefore submission •…hold not now appease him,
Mo▪ though your Wife, his Daughter, •…hold her self,
Upon her penitent knees be suppliant!
No sooner shall the Tycian splendent Sol,
Open Heavens Casements, and enlarge the day,
But his horse hooves shall beat your treacherous Earth;
And that you may be warned of his approach,
Murder and flames shall be his Prodromo's!
Confederate Princes and my kind allies,
Shall his proud nostrils breath those threats on us?
Moreover, my Lord will or win, or raz•…,
I•…ouium and Larenda.
Iconium and Larenda? I? No more?
Had best look first, how safe his Prusa stands!
Lords, I am moved, and will forget my Queen
Was ere the issue of his hated blood!
My spline is tossed within; mine entrails pant,
As, wen the Sea is raised with Southern gusts,
The wind allayed, yet still the Waves will tremble,
Princes, now bind your selves with such strong chains,
Your faith and breaths can make; swear to me all,
To be as firm to me against Amurath,
As is the skin and •…lesh unto the Nerves;
We all swear we will.
Then all here kiss my Sword,
Which shall be steeped within the head-mans thr•…at▪
We will make him know those will not •…lye in War,
Which may in policy in treat a peace!
Hast thy course (time) and soon reduce the year!
Ensigns may Ensigns meet, 〈◊〉 King,
Great 〈◊〉, scorns to avoid a Turk:
Princes, and Neighbours, muster up your strength,
That we may meet him on his full Career!
And let it be Car•…nia's pride to say,
To overcome him we asked no second day.
Th•…e O Hymen, thine: O she,
Whose Beauties verse Calliope,
Sing to M•…rriage rites an Io,
Io to Hymen.
Thorus. To thee Apollo is my suit,
Lend me a while thy silver Lute•…,
O what a woe it is to bring,
A Bride to Bed and never sing.
Io to Hymen.
When she's old, still seems she young,
When she's w•…ke, to her be •…trong!
•…e Cyprus, both, and Paphos here,
Love, sing with merry che•…re.
Io to Him•….
You Gods of Marriage: sacred Protectoresse
Of lawful propagations, and blessed Love
Be most propitious to these grafted stemmes!
Drop dewing showers of gen•…ration on them!
Think (Son) this day too prodigal of blessing
As, that had •…uno taskt thee (like Alcides)
To grapple with St•…mphallides, or cleanse
Angelas stables: or like the Trojan Boy,
Sit like a Shephe•…rd on Dardadias Hills,
Such a reward as this fair Queen repairs,
O thou hoped future off-spring spare thy Parent!
Hurt not this tender womb, these Ivory worlds,
When you are borne; O be within your limbs,
The Grandsire Amurath, and fathers strength!
Line their faces (Nature) •…ith their Mothers dye!
And let the Destinies mark the ensuring night
In their Eternal Books, with notes most white.
Grant it great Ma•…omit!
Most awful father and my honoured P•…inee,
Although it be enacted by the Heavens,
That in these bonds of marriage such curse
Attends on Princes above private men,
That nor affection, nor home-nourisht Love
But •…tate and policy must elect their Wives.
Which must be fetched from Countries far remote!
Yet the protecting Powers have such a care,
Both of their off-springs and their Kingdoms state,
That to what they ordain, they work in us
A sudden willingness to make us obey;
For, in this breast, I doe already feel
That there's a kindling a Diviner heat:
Which disobedience never shall extinguish.
And, if there be any felicity
From these u•…ited Loves to be derived
From the weak sex into the husbands soul,
Then may my Lord make his affection sure,
To be repayd with unattainted Love,
In which a pretty people•… ye shall live,
Wi•… soft and yielding courtesy in all
He shall command, my willing arms shall still,
Be op t'enfold within a Wives embrace,
If any comfort else there be in store,
(Which modesty keeps silent to it self)
Cause only husbands and the night must know it,
My Loyalty shall ever all perform▪
And (though my) Lord should frown, Isle be the •…am▪
Greene wood will burn with a continued flame:
Princess our ardor is already fired,
Yet with no violent temerity;
Such as might fear it's short and soon decaying▪
Thy virtue seems so to exceed thy Sex,
And wisdom so far to out-pace thy years,
That, surely (Ptincesse) soon maturity,
Argues in them, hidden Divinity.
Expected (Hymen) here hath bound our hands,
And hearts, with everlasting ligaments▪
Fortunate both we are, and have one bliss
The want of which for ever doth infect,
With anxious cares the sweets of marriage Beds:
Our Parents benediction and consent,
They are the truest Hymens, and should be
To children the best marriage Deity.
Thus then attended with •…uch sacred charms
Our last day of content shall never come;
Till we must part by th'unresisted doom,
With a pleased error we will age beguile,
All stars on us, an aequall yoke must smile.
Now (Lords) who'le dance
A Turkish measure? Ladies our nerves are shrunk;
And you now fix the sign of age on me,
You who have blood still flowing in your veins,
Be nimble as an Hart: Caper to the •…phaeres!
O you are light, that wrnt the weight of years!
And health to our Bride and her father!
O (Nobles) would this wine were Christians blood,
But that it would Phrenetique humours breed,
And so infect our b•…aines with Superstition!
Auspicious fortunes to great Amurath!
To op more springs unto this full tide of joy,
Know (potent Emperor) I from Europe bring
Six daughters of six several Kings,
Whose Cities we have equalled to the ground;
And of their Palaces did torches make,
To light their souls through the black Cave of death (Acherō)
Describe (good Captain) how the dogs were wearied.
So weary were they to endure to endure our swords,
That by impetuous mutiny themselves,
Turned on each other; slew their Masters;
Childrens own hands, tore out their fathers throats.
And each one strove who should be •…laughtered first;
Here did a brother posh out a Brothers brains,
Some in stinking Quagmires, and deep Lakes
(Which they had made t'avoyd their excrements)
Ran quick, and in the lake lay buried.
(Goon Executioner of our most just wrath!)
Nor did it leave till death it self was weary▪
Murder grew faint, and each succeeding day,
Showed us the slaughter of the day before.
Amongst carcasses and funerals we stood,
Denying those that lived such Ceremonies
As i•… their Temples to the Indian Gods,
With prayers and vows they daily offred:
Nor destiny, nor cruelty ere left,
Till they had nothing to work upon;
For, of so many souls that breathed
These six are all remained: which as a Pledge
Of my best service to your Majesty.
I here am bold to yield an offer.
Nor shall this present b•… unrecompenced;
For thy true service, on thee •…e bestow
All the rich gifts, which all these Asian Lords
B•…ought to adore these happy Nuptials,
On you fair Bride great Princess and our Daughter
Doe we bestow the•…e Virgins (daughters to Kings)
For your attend•…nce.
We are too much bound unto our Princely Father▪
No (Daughter) no! we hope thou art the spring,
From whence shall flow to all the world a King▪
•…Captains and Lords▪ to morrow we must meet,
To think of our rebelliious son in Law)
Be this time all for comfort and delight,
Short wedding days make it seem long to night.
Here set we down our miserable load,
O 〈◊〉 with whom is it that we fight?
With Lydia•… Lyons, and Hyrcania•… Bears;
Which grind us daily in their ravenous te•…th?
The Tyrant (as it were dest•…uctions Enginere)
Help Nature to destroy the worlds frame quickly,
Alas my Lord that needs not, every day
Is a sufficient he•…per to decay:
Great workman, who art sparing in thy strength
To bring things to perfection•…, a•… to orate•…rne
All thy best wo•…kes, thou use sudden force,
When mans a•… E•…rio! and first con•…eived
How long it is ere he see his native light?
Then borne, with expectation for his growth!
Tenderly nourished, carefully brought up,
Grown to p•…rfection, what a little thing,
Serves to call on his sudden ruining?
Come Cobelitz, ▪amongst those demolished ston•…s
We'll sit as Hecub•…, at those Troy•…n Walls:
Our tears shall be false glasses to our eyes:
Through these we will look, and think we yet may see
Our stately Pinnacles, and strong founded holds;
That which one hour can delapidate,
One age can scarce repair.
No sir, for nothing's hard
To Nature, when she means t'consume
A thousand Oaks (which time hath fixed in the earth,
As Monuments of lasting memory)
Are in a moment turned to ashes all;
Things that rise •…lowly, take a sudden fall.
What course now Cobelitz, must we still be yoke▪
To misery, and murder? We scarce have room,
Upon our bodies to receive more wounds,
And must we still oppose our selves to more?
Yes! We are ready still; a solid mind
Must not be shook with every blast of Wind!
Pollux, nor Hercules, had none other art,
To get them Mansions in the spangled Heavens
Then a true firm resolve; the A•…riatike Sea,
Shall from his currents with tempestuous blasts,
Be sooner heard, than virtue from it's aim,
Let us but think (when we so many see,
Enjoying greater quiet than our selves.)
How many have endured more misery;
Ilion, Ilion, what a fate had thou?
How fruitful were thou in matter for thy foe?
Thus we'll delude our grief, make our self glad,
To think of miseries that others had.
I (Captain) I! they that furnished thee
With sentences of comfort, never saw,
Their Cities burnt, their C•…untries desolate!
It is easy for Physicians for to tell
Advice to others, when themselves are well!
Tush, tush (my Lord) there's on our side we know,
One that can both, and will our weak hands g•…id,
One that will strike and thunder; Giant then,
Look for a dart! we must not appoint when;
Mean while help for to convey this burden henc•…
Turk, though thy tyranny deny us graves,
Corruption will give them spite of thee!
Nor doe our corps, such Tombs and Caverns need:
For our own flesh, still our own graves to breed:
And, when the Earth receives not, when they die;
Heavens Vault overwhelms them, so their tombe's in the sky.
Besieged on every side? Iconi•…m taken?
Entrenched within my foes my self must lye
Wrapped in my Cities ruin! Turks come on!
Nay but my Lord, mean you to meet your death?
Let's hast our flight, and trust more to our feet
Then words, or hands —
Why, so much of our blood
Is already spilt▪ as should the glittering Sun
Exhale it upward, it would obnubulate
It's luster, else to fiery Meteors turn.
Some council (Lords) he that's amidst the Sea,
When every curled wave doth threat his death
Yet trusts upon the oars of his own arms,
And sometime the salt some doth pity him,
A Wolf, or Lyon, that hath filled his gorge
With bloody prey, at last will lye to sleep,
And the unnaturalst creatures not forget
Their love to those whom they do know their own!
My wife's his Daughter; si•…ce we can•…ot stand
His •…ury longer▪ she sh•…ll s•…age his wrath.
The boisterous One•… wh•… •… no 〈◊〉 oppose,
Growth's 〈◊〉 is lo•…t, when•…'t hath no foes.
Why then (my Lord) array your self in weeds▪
Of a Petitioner: take the Queen along,
And your two children; they may move his eyes;
For, desperate sores ask desperate remedies.
Go (Lords) go: fetch some straight. O Heavens!
O fortune they that lean on thy cracked wheel,
And trust a Kingdoms power, and domineer
In a walled Palace, let them look on me,
And thee (Carmania) greater instances
The world affords not to demonstrate
The frail estate of proudest Potentates,
Of sturdiest Monarchies: high Pinnacles
Are still invaded with the prouder winds;
They must endure the threats of every blast;
The tops of Caucasus and Pindus shake,
With every crack of thunder; humble Vaults
Are ne'er touched with a bolt, ambiguous wings
Hath all the state, that hovers over Kings.
I, I, this vesture fits my misery!
This badge of poverty must now prevail,
Where all my Kingdoms power &amp; strength doth fail,
Why should not a prophetic soul attend
On great men's persons, and forewarn their else?
Raging Boots doth not so turmoil
The Lybian ford, as Fortune doth great hearts.
Be•…tona and Erynnis scourge us on▪
Should wars and treasons cease, why our own weight
Would send us to the Earth; as spreading arms
Make the huge trees in tempest for to split.
For as the slaughter-man to pasture goes,
And drags that Ox home first, whose Bulk is greatest,
The lean he still lets feed: disease takes hold
On bodies that are pampered with best fare;
So doth all ruin choose the fairest marks:
At which it bends, and strikes it full of shafts,
Ambition made me now that eminent but:
And I that fell by mine own strength, mu•…t rise
By professed weakness; Buckets full sink down:
Whilst empty ones danceith' air•…, and cannot drown.
Come (•…ords) he out o•…▪s way can never range,
Who is at f•…thest! worst ne'er finds ill change.
Our hate must not part thus, Isle tell thee (Prince)
That thou hast kindled violent Aetna in our breast,
And such a flame is quenched with nought but blood:
His blood whose hasty and rebellious blast,
Gave life unto the fire; should Heaven threat us;
Knows we dare not menace it; are we not Amurat•…?
(Whose awful name is even trembled at)
So often dared by Pygmy Christians;
Which we will crush to ayre; what haughty thought
Buzzed thy praesumptuous ears with such vain blasts,
To puff thee into such impetuous acts?
Or what, durst prompt thee with a thought so frail,
As made thee covetous of so brave a death?
As this known hand should cause it? know that throat
Shall feel it strangled with some slave brought up
To no•…light but an Hangman: thy last breath,
Torn from thee by a hand that's worse than death
Why then, Isle (like the Roman Pompey) hide
My dying sight, scorning Imperious looks
Should grace so base a stroke with sad aspect;
Thus will I muffle up and choke my groans,
Least a grieved tear should quite put out the name,
Of lasting courage in Carmanias fame.
What? still sty•…e necked? Is this the true•…e you b•…g?
•…prinkled before thy face those Reb•…ll Brats,
Shall have their brains, and their dissected limb•…es,
Hurled for a prey to Kites; for (Lords) it is fit
No spark of such a Mountain threatening fire,
Be left as unextinct, least it devour,
And prove more hot unto the 〈◊〉 Empery,
Then the 〈◊〉 blaze did trouble Jove•…!
First sacrifice those Brats —
(Dear father) let thy fury rush on me!
Within these entrails sheath thine unsatiate sword,
And let this ominous, and too fruitful womb,
Be torn in sunder? For from thence those Babes,
Took all their crimes; error made them guilty,
It was Natures fault, not theirs; O if affection
Can work then; now show a true Fathers Love,
If not, appease those murdering thoughts with me▪
For as 〈◊〉 pleaded with her sons
For their dear Father, so to a Father I
For my dear Babes and husband; husband, father▪
Which shall I first embrace? Victorious father,
Be bl•…t those now sharpe thoughtsllay down those threats,
Un•…lisp that impious Helmet! fix to earth
That monumental Sphere look on thy child
With pardoning looks, not with a Warriors eye:
Else shall my breast cover my husbands breast,
And serve as Buckler to receive thy wounds,
Why dost thou doubt? Fairest thou thy Daughters faith?
I fear, for after Daughters perjury
All Laws of Natures shall di•…tactful be;
Nor will I trust thy children or thy self.
No Father it is I, fear you him, he you,
I both, but for you both, for both you war;
So that it is best with him that's overcome.
O let me kiss (kind father) first the Earth
On which you tread, then kiss mine husbands cheek.
Great King embrace these Babes! you are the stock
On which these Grafts were planted —
True, and when sprouts do•… rob th•… tree of sap,
They must be pruned,
Dear Father, leave such harsh similitudes▪
By my deceased Mother, (to whose womb
I was a ten months burden:) By your self,
(To whom I was a pleasing In•…ant on•…e)
Pity my husband, and these tender Infants!
Yes to have them collect a manly strength,
And their first lesson that their Dad •…hall teach them
Shall be to read my misery.
Sterne Conqueror: but that thy daughter shows,
There •…nce dw•…lt good in that obe•…urate breast,
I would not •…pend a tear to soften thee!
Thou see my Countries turned into a Grave:
My Cities •…carre the Sun with fierier flames,
Which turn them into ashes! all my self
So slickt and carved, that my amazed blood
Knows not through which wound first to take it's way;
If not on me, have mercy on my Babes! —
Which, with thy mercy thou may turn to Love.
No sir, we must root out malicious seed:
Nothing sprouts faster, then an envious weed!
We see a little Bullock, amongst an heard
(Whose whore•…es are yet scarce crept from out his front)
Grows on a sudden tall, and in the Fields,
Frolics so much, he makes his Father yield.
A little twig left budding on an •…lme
(Ungratefully) bars his mother •…ight from Heaven!
I love not 〈◊〉 Aladins.
Threat all a Conqueror can, can threat but death,
And I can die, but if thou would have mercy! —
O see you feet we're proved with this hands kiss!
The higher those great powers have raised you,
Press that which lies below with gentler weigh•…▪
To pardon miseries is Fortunes height:
Alas, these Infants, these weak sinewed hands
Can be no terror to these Hectors arms!
Beg (Infants) beg, and teach these tender joints
To ask for mercy; learn your lisping tongues
To give due accent to each syllable:
Nothing that Fortune urges too, is base;
Put from your thoughts all memory of descent:
Forget the Princely titles of your fathers:
If your own misery you can feel,
Learn thus of me to weep, of me to kneel▪
Doe (boys) and imitate your Parents tea•…es▪
Which I (like 〈◊〉) shed, when he beheld,
H•…ctor thrice dragged about the •…rojan Walls.
He that burst op the gates of Erebus,
And roused the yelling Monster from his Den,
Was conquered with a tear! great Monarch learn,
To know how dear a King doth weeping earn.
Good Grandsire see, see how my father cries!
Good mother take my napkin for your eyes!
(Good father) hear, hear how thy daughter pr•…yes:
Thou that know how to use sterne Warriors arms,
Learn how to use mild Warriors pity too!
Alas? can er•… these ungrowne strengths repair
Their Fathers batter•…d Cities? Or can these
These orethrowne Turrets? (Jconium) what small hopes
Hast thou to lean upon? If these be all?
Not half so mild hath our misfortune been
That any can ere fear us: Be pleased —
Rise (my dear child) as Marble against rain,
So I at these obedient showers, melt!
Thus I doe raise thy husba•…d: thus thy Babes:
Freely admitting you to former state.
But A lot•…, wake not our w•…ath ago•…e!
"Patience grows fury that is ofter stirred;
When Conquerors wax calm, and cease to •…ate,
The conquered should not dare to reite•…ate.
Be thou our son and friend.
By all the rites of Mahomet I vow it!
Then for to seal u•…o our love,
Your self shall lead a wi•…g in •…ervia,
In our immediate Wa•…res, we are to meet
The Christians in Cassanoe's Plains with speed:
Great Amurath ne'er had time to breath himself:
So much, as to have warring with new foes;
No day securely to •…is Sceptre shone,
But one Wars end, still brought another on.
Let now victorious wreathes ingirt our •…rows,
Let Angels 'stead of Soldiers wield our arms,
Against him, who that our Citti•…s might be his
Strives to depopulate, and make them none!
But look, look in the ayre (me thinks) I se•…
An host of Soldiers brandishing their swords;
Each corner of the Heaven shoots thunderbolts,
To nail these impious forces to the Earth.
Soldiers stand to 't! though fortune bandy it's
Let's stand her shocks, like sturdy Rockesith' Sea.
On which the angry foaming Billows beat,
With frivolous rush: and break themselves, not th•…m;
Stand like the untainted countenance of the sky,
Or, like the Sun, which when the foolish King▪
Thought to obscure with a Cloud of Darts,
Out looked them all, our lives are all enchanted,
And more i•…vulnerate than Thetis son.
We shall have hands snd weapons, if the stone,
Of fortune glide from under our weak feet,
And we must fall: yet, let all Christians say,
It is she, and not the cause, that wins the day.
We must believe Heaven hath a greater care
Of them, whom fortune doth so oft out dare!
Gentlemen, brothers, friends Soldiers, Christians,
We have no reason to command of Heaven
A thing denied to all mortality.
Nor should we be so impute•…tly proud,
As in this weak condition to repute
Our selves above the stroke of Lady Chance,
A caution must divine it ever fixed,
That while•…t her checks, equally fall out,
Community should ease their bitterness.
I could afresh now shed those Princely tears
To think su•…h sudden rain should attend
Heroic spirits glittering in bright arms▪
But if the Grecian (when he heard the dreams
Dispute•…d subtly by Philosophers,
To prove innumerable extant worlds)
Was •…truck with pensive•…, and wept to think
He had not yet obtained •…no for himself;
What terror can affright a Christians thoughts
Who knows there is a world, at liberty
To breath in, when this glass of life is broke?
Our foes with cir•…ling fury are entrenched;
Pelions of earth and darkness shall orelade them,
Whilst we shall mount, and these our spirits light,
Shall be yet ponderous to depress them lower.
Nay, my •…nthesiasticke soul divines,
That some weak hand shall from the blazing Zone
Snatch Lightning, which shall strike th•… snarling C•…r
With horror and amazement to the Earth!
Which Hell cannot oppose! Turk, Tyrannise!
Stand, yet at le•…gth to fall my sacrifice.
Super-Olympicke vigour will (no doubt)
Squeeze all thy supercilious rancor out!
Who set the world on fire? How now (ye Heavens)
Grow you so proud that you must needs put on curled lockes▪
And cloth your selves in Peri•…eggs of fire?
Mahomet (say not but I invoke thee now!)
Command the puny-Christians demi-God
Put out those flashing sparks, those Ignes 〈◊〉,
Or isle unseate him, or with my Looks so shake
The •…taggring props of his weak seated Throne,
That he shall find he shall have mo•…e to doe
To quell one Amurath, then the whole Giant brood
Of those same sons of Earth then ten Lycaons!
Doe the poor snakes so love their misery
That they would see it by these threatening lights?
Dar•… ye blaze still? Isle toss up Buckets full
Of Christians blood to quench you: by those hairs
Drag you beneath the Center: there put out
All your praesaging flames in 〈◊〉!
Can you outbrave me with your piddling Lights?
Yawn earth with Casements as wide as hell it self▪
Burn Heaven as ardent as the Lemnian flames!
Wake (pale Tysiphon) spend all thy snakes!
Be Oecus, and Minos as severe
As if the Gaol delivery of us all
Were the next Sessions! Isle pull Radamant
By his flaming furs from out his Iron Chair.
Horror dismal cries, and yells
Of these thy Grandsires thee 〈◊〉-tells,
F•…ries sent of thee to learn
Crimes, which they could ne'er discern.
All. Furies sent, &amp;c.
•… Amurathl thy Father's come,
To warn the•… of a sudden d•…me,
Which in Cassanoe's fields attends
T•… bring thee t•… thy He•… friends.
All. 〈◊〉 i•… Ca•…anoes, &amp;c.
Megaera and Ennio •…oath doe stand,
Trembling, least when tho•… art dam•…'d
Chief of Furies thou should•…t bee,
A•…d they their snakes re•…igne to th•…e.
▪All▪ Chief of Furies, &amp;c.
Terror we a •…hile will leave thee,
Till Cocytus Lake receive the•….
Cerberus will quake for fear
Where he a new Turks fate shall hear.
All. Cerberus •…ill, &amp;c.
Now who the Devil sent my Grandsires hither?
Had Pluto no task •…ls to set them too?
He should have bound them to •…xions wheel,
Or bid them roll the stone of Sysiphu•…:
Beshrew me, but their singing did not ple•…se me!
Have they not been so drunk with Lethe yet
As to forget me? Then can portend no ill
For, should the fates be twining my last thread;
Yet none durst come from Hell to tell me so!
Shall I be scared with a Night-walking Ghost;
Or what my working fancy shall present?
Why, I can look more t•…rrible, then Night,
And command darkness in the unwilling day:
Make Hecate start: and draw back her head,
To wrap it in a swarthy veil of Clouds.
Drop sheets of Sulphur, you prodigious skies!
Cyclops, run all thy Bullets into Ae•…,
Then vomit them at once! should Christians
Couch to the bottomless abyss of 〈◊〉,
Or hide themselves under Avernaes shade,
This mine arm should fetch them out! Day must perform
What I intend, wrath rains a bloody storm:
And now gins rise the Sun, which yet not knows
The misery it shall see on Amuraths Foes,
Lords, Leaders, Captains:
Your Highness up so soon?
He small rest takes,
That dreams on nought but bloody broils and death.
Your Grace seems much distempered: Beds of sweat
Bedew your brows with never wonted paleness.
Why; see you not? The heavens are turned Court Ladies,
And put on other Hair besides their own:
Can guess (learned Schahin) what these flames portend?
My Lord, such things as these we 〈◊〉 mu•…t 〈◊〉,
And wonder at, and yet not search the reason,
Perchance unwholesome fogs exhailed 〈◊〉 th'Sunne
Are set a blazing by his too near heate:
But it is not lawful that a mortal eye:
Should dare to penetrate Heavens secrecy.
Doth it not bode a Conquest?
Yes, against the Christians:
For, unto them it bends sinister looks,
And frowns upon their army more then ours.
So, so! •…ome on, ere Phosphorus appear
Let's too't, and so prevent that sluggard Sol!
If we want light, we'll from our Winnards▪
Strike fire enough to scorch the Universe▪
Mine armour there!
Now (Mahomet) I implore
Thy promised aid for this auspicious day!
To•…e me aloft, and make me ride on Clouds!
If my horse fail me, those fire breathing jades,
(Which the boy Phaethon k•…ew not how to guide)
Will I pluck out from out the flaming team,
And hurl my self against those condense Spheres,
On which isle sit, and stay their turning Orbs;
The whole vertigious Circle shall stand still,
But to behold me:
So help on here, now like Alcides do I girt my self, 
With well knit sinews, able to stagger Earth,
And threaten Nature with a second Chaos:
If one impetuous broil remain to come
In future ages, set on foot this hour!
How well this weight of steel befits my strength?
Me thinks the Gods stand quivering, and doe fear
(When I am armed) another Ph•…egrae's near!
Chiron shall see his Pindus at my feet!
And, isle climb to Heaven, and pull it down,
And kick the weighty b•…rden of the world,
From off the Babies shoulders that supports it!
For I am safer Buckled against my foe.
Then st•…die Iason who by the enchanted charms
Medea gave, encountered Unicorns,
Quilt Lyons, struggeld with fiery belching Bulls:
Obtained a glorious prize, a Fleece, a Fleece
Dipped deep in tincture of the Christians blood.
Shall be my spoil, nay should they hide their heads
In their Gods bosom, here's a sword shall reach thē •…
Come they shall know no place is free from wrath,
When boiling blood is stirred in Amurath.
Here (mighty Prin•…) take view of Victory,
And see the field too narrow for thy spoils!
Erynnus hides her head as if afraid,
To see a slaughter. She durst never hope for,
Earth hath the Carcasses, and denies them Graves,
And lets them be and rot, and fat her womb,
Scorning to be unto slaves a Tomb.
Where are b•…come those ominous Comets now?
What? are•… those pissing Candles quit•… extinct?
Leave their disastrous snuffs no stench behind them?
It is something yet, that their God sees their slaughter.
•…ending sulphurous Meteors to behold
The blessed destruction of these Parasites▪
I knew the Elements would first untie
The Nerves of the Universe, then l•…t me dye!
See (King) here's one worm yet that dare confess
He breaths and lives, which once this hand crushed down.
Ha, ha, by Mahomet and we are weary now:
Some Mercy shall lay Victory asleep.
It will a Laureate prove to this great strife,
Amongst all these murdered to give one his life,
So we'll descend.
From what a dismal grave am I awaked,
Entombed within a Golgotha of men;
Have all these Souls prevented me in bliss,
And left me in a dream of happiness?
But soft! m•… thoughts he said he would descend!
Then, Heavens one minutes breath, that's all I ask,
And then I shall perform my lifes true task.
Poor slave, would live?
Yes Turk to see thee dye!
Howl, howl▪ (grim •…artery) yell (thou gristly Wol•…e)
Force the blood from out thy gaping Wound!
Dij tibi non mortem, quae c•…ctis p•…na paratur,
Sed sensum post fata, tu•… dent (imp•…e) morti.
My spirit makes me not to f•…eel thy weapon!
Hold you (cracked Organs) of my shottered life,
I am not touched yet! can •… not mock my death,
And thy•…ke it is but a dream t•…lls me I am hurt?
Dare thou then leave me (blood?) Can be so bold
As to forsake these veins to flow on Earth?
And must, I like th'unhappy Rome•…, dye
By a slaves hand?
Tyrant, it is known
He's Lord of others lifes that scorns his own!
I that could sca•…ce ere sleep, can I ere die?
And will none •…ear my life when I am dead
Tortures and torments for the murderer!
Ha, ha, ha!
I thank the (great omnipotent) tha•… I
Shall ere laugh out the lag end of my life!
Villain, thy laugh wounds worse then did thy Dagger!
Are you Lethargic (Lords) in cruelty?
Nay, hear me (Turk) now will I prompt their rage
Locke me in the Bull of Phalaris,
Cut off these eye-lids, bid me then out-gaze
The parching Sun-beames; flea this tender ski•…,
Set nests of Hornets on my rawest flesh,
Let the Siconian Clouds d•…op brimstone on me,
Power boiling Lemnos on my greenest wounds,
Put on my shoulder No•…us poisoned shirt, 
Bind all these bloody faces to my face
Rock me Procra•…tes like —
Hell, oh! I cannot brooke your smallest touch,
Ha, ha, each groan is Balsam to my wounds:
I am perfect well!
Rascal dare deride us?
Yea? and while your witty furies shall invent
For me, some never heard of punishment;
I see a guard of Saints ready to take me hence.
Take then fro flight, my new rewarded soul,
And seat thee on the winged Seraphims,
Hast to the Empyreum, where thy welcome
Shall be an Haleluia, anthem'd forth
By the Chorus of the Angell-Hierarchy.
Pierce with (swift plumes) the concave paths of the Moon
Where the black ayre enlightened is with stars.
Stay not to wonder (there) of wandering Signs
At the inhorn'd Gemin•…, or Amph•…s Harp,
At Arctos, or Boots, or the Bear,
(Which are to pl•…se wizard Astrologers)
Soar higher with the pitch and then look down
To la•…gh at the hard trifles of the world!
Perchance some oft have known a better life,
Never did none ere leave it more willingly.
Fear your deaths (Gods) for I have lost my life,
And what I most (complain) my tyranny!
Soul to detain thee from thy wished rest
Were but an envious part •… arise, farewell:
To stay thee to accuse or fate or man
Would show I were unwilling yet to leave thee
But dear companion hence: cut through the ayre:
Let not the grosen•…sse of my Earth ore-lime
Thy speedy wings, fly without weight of crime.
O now have I and Fortune tried it out.
With all her best of favours was I crowned
And suffered her worst threats, whē most she frowned.
Stay (Soulel) a King, a Turk, commands thee stay!
Sure •… am but an actor, and must strive
To personate the Tragic ends of Kings.
And so (•…o win applause unto the Scene)
With fained passion thus must grasp at death!
O but I see pale Nemesis at hand:
Art thou dull fate, and dost not overspread
Gimmerion wings of death throughout the world;
What? Not one Earthquake? One blazing Comet
T'accompany my soul t'his Funeral?
•…s not this hour the general period
To ne'er returning time? Last breath command
A new Dewcalions deluge, that with me
The world may swim to his Eternal Grave,
Crack hindge that holds this globe, and welcome death,
Wilt thou not stay Soul? Friend not stay with Kings?
Sink th•…n, and sink beneath the Thracian Mou•….
Sink beneath Ethos, be the B•…sh Waves
Of Acheron thy Tomb, isle want a Grave;
So all parts fear, which first my Corps shall have•…;
For in my Grave, isle be the Christians foe.
Here like a Massy Pyramid isle fall,
Isle strive to sink all the whole fabric with me,
Quake Pluto, for it is I that come
A Turk, a Tyrant, and a Conqueror,
And with this groan, like thunder will I cleave,
The timorous earth, whilst thus my last I breath.
O eafie powers, to give's all at first,
But in their loss they make us most accursed.
The Taper of your Fathers life is spent
We must have light still and adore a Sun
That next is rising, therefore mighty Prince,
Upon your shoulders must the load
Of Empire rest.
Why (Lords) we have a Brother
Who, as in the same blood he tocke a share,
So let him bear his part in Government:
My Lord! within the selfsame Hemisphere
It's most prodigious when two Suns appear!
One body by one soul must be informed.
Kingdoms like (marriage beds) must not endure
Any corrival! 〈◊〉 was ne'er secure
Whilst she contain'da Pompey, and a Caesar.
Like as one Prophet we acknowledge now
So of one King in state we must allow.
You know the Turkish Laws, Prince be not nice
To purchase Kingdoms, whatsoever the price.
He must be lopped, send for him he must dye.
O happy Baiazet that he was borne
To be a King when thou was Counsellor.
Call in our Brother •…cup,
Why (Lords!) is Am•…rath so light a weight?
Is this the Trunk of the T•…rkish Emperor?
Oh what a heap of thoughts are come to nought
What a light weight is he unto six men
Who durst stand under Ossa, and sustain it:
My Lord, these Meditations fit not you:
You are to take the honour he hath left,
And think you of his rising, not his fall!
Let your decree be sudden, heere's your Brother.
B•…other, I could have wished we might have met
At tim•…s of better greeting! Our father hath
Bequeathed to the Grave these ashes, to us his State.
No•… have we leisure (yet) to morn for him
Broth•…, you k•…ow our state hath made a Law,
That, he that sits in a Majestic Chair,
Must not endure the next succeeding heir.
Yes, we doe:
And (Brother) doe you think it is crime enough
To dye, because I am son to an Emperor?
My Lord, we know their breathes in him that ay•…
Of true affection, that he doth much desire
You should be equal in his Kingdom with him:
But still when two great evils are proposed:
The less is to be chosen.
My Lord, your life's but one:
Kings are the threads whereto there are inweaved
Millions of lives, and he that must rule all
Must still be one that is select from all.
Although we speak, yet think them not our words,
But what the Land speaks in us! Kings are free▪
And must be impatient of equality.
And is it en so?
How have th•…se Dogs fawned on me licked my feet
When A•…th yet lived? Felt all my thoughts,
And soothed them to the sight of Empire▪
And now the first would set their politic hands
To strangle up that breath, a blast of which
Their nostrils have sucked up like perfumed ayre
Well brother well by all men this is spoke,
That heart that cannot bow, may yet be broke•….
Brother you must not now stand to upbraid;
They which doe fear the vulgars murmuring tongue,
Must also fear th'authority of a King;
For rulers mu•…t esteem it happiness
That with their government they can hate suppress:
They with too faint a hand the Scepters sway,
Who regard love, or what the people say:
To Kindred we must quite put off respect,
When it is so near it may our Crown affect.
Then name of Brother doe I thus shake off,
For it is in vain, their mercy to implore
When impio•…s Scatists have decreed before.
Yet King although thou take my life away
See how •…le dye in better state then thou!
Who like (my Father) after his greatest glor•…
May fall by some base hand: The Minister
To take my breath, shall be to thy self, a King.
Yet give me leave a while▪ to Prophecy,
You that so Puppet-like delude your hopes,
And Miser-draw th•… ancestry from Kings,
Thinking, that fates dare not app•…oach your blood
Till they doe seize you, then you leave this Earth
Not as you went, but by compulsion dragged;
Still begging for a morrow from your Grave,
And with such shifts you doe deceive your selves:
As if you could deceive mortality,
No (Brother King) nor all the Glowworm state,
Which makes thee be a Horse-leach for thy blood,
Not all the Parasites Minions thou maintains▪
Nor the restorative Dishes that are found out.
Nor all thy shifts a•…d tricks can cheat mortality,
Or keep thee from a▪ death that's worse then mine.
Should•… all this fail, age would profess it self
A slow, but a sure Executioner.
O it is a hard thing well to temperate
Decaying happiness in great estate
But this example by me may you gain:
That at my death I not of Heaven complain
P•…ll then, and with my fall pull on thy self
Mountains of burdenous honour which shall curse thee
Death l•…ades the willing by the hand
But spurs them headlong on, that dares command.
Take up this Trunk; and let us first appoin•…
O•… Fathers and our Brothers Funerals,
The senseless body of that Ca•…fe slave,
Hurl to a Ditch, Posterity shall hear
Our less ill Chronicled, but time shall hear
These minutes rather, then repeat their woe.
Now Primacy, on thee isle medi•…,
Which who enjoy thee, are in blessed estate.
Whose age in secure silence fleets away,
Without disturbance to his funeral day;
Nor ponderous nor unquiet honours can
Vex him but dyes a primate ancient man,
What greater powers threaten inferior men
A greater power threatens him again:
And like to wasted Tapers Ki•…gs must spend
Their lives to light up others: So a•…l end.

BEssus, the KING has made a fair hand on it, has ended the wars at a blow, would my sword had a close basket hilt to hold wine, and the blade would make knives, for we shall have nothing but eating and drinking.
We that are commanders shall doe well enough.
Faith Bes. such cōmanders as thou may, I had as live set thee Perdue for a pudding yth dark, as Alexander the great.
I love these jests exceedingly.
I think thou love them better then quarrelling Bess•s, He say so much ythy behalf, and yet thou art valiant enough upon a retreat, I think thou would kill any man that stopped thee, and thou could.
But was not this a brave combat Mardonius?
Why, did thou see it?
You stood with me.
I did so, but me thought thou wi•kst every blow they struck.
Well, I believe there are better Soldiers then I, that no•er saw two Princes fight in lists.
By my troth I think so too Bessus, many a thousand, but c•rtenly all that are worse then thou •aue •even as much.
T was brauel• done of our King.
Yes, if he had not ended the wars, I am glad thou dare talk of such dangerous businesses.
To take a Prince prisoner in the heart of his own Country in single combat.
See how thy blood cruddles at this, I think thou would be contented to be beaten in this passion.
Shall I tell you truly.
I.
I could willingly venture for it.
Um, no venture neither good Bessus.
Let me not li•e, if I doe not think it is a braver piece of service, then that •me so famed for.
Why art thou famd for any valour?
I famed, I, I warrant you.
I am very heartily glad on it. I have been with thee ever since thou came ath' wars, and this is the first word that ever I heard on it, prithee who fems thee?
The Christian world.
Tic heathenishly done of them, in my conscience thou deferu'st it not.
Yes, I ha done good service.
I doe not know how thou moist waite of a man in's Chamber, or thy agility in shifting a trencher, but otherwise no service good Bessus.
You saw me doe the service your self.
Not so hasty sweet Bessus, where was it, is the place vanished.
At Bessus desperate redemption.
Bessus desperate redemption, wher's that.
There where I redeemd the day, the place bears my name.
Prithee who christened it.
The Soldier:
If I were not a very merely disposed man, what would become of thee: one that had but a grain of collar in the whole composition of his body would send thee of an arrand to the worms, for putting thy name upon that field: did not I beat thee there yth head, a'th troupes with a trun∣chion, because thou would needs run away with thy com∣pany,
when we should charge the enemy.
True, but I did not run.
Right Bessus, I beat thee out on it.
But came not I up when the day was gone, and re∣deemed all?
Thou know, and so doe I, thou mean to fly, and thy fear making thee mistake, thou rinsed upon the enemy, and a hot charge thou gau'st, as Isle doe thee right, thou art surious in running away, and I think we owe thy fear for our victory. If I were the King, and were sure thou would mistake always, and run away upon the enemy, thou should be General by this light.
You'll never leave this till I fall foul.
No more such words dear Bessus: for though I have ever known thee a coward, and therefore durst never strike thee; yet if thou proceedst, I will allow thee valiant, and beat thee.
Come, come, our King's a brave fellow.
He is so Bessus, I wonder how thou come to know it: But if thou were a man of understanding, I would tell thee he is vain-glorious, and humble, and angry, and patient, and merry, and dull, and joyful, and sorrowful, in extremities in an hour: Doe not think me thy friend for this, for if I cared who knew it, thou should not hear it Bessus: here hee is with the prey in his foot.
Thy sadness  takes away
From my fall victory; am I become
Of so small fame, that any man should grieve
When I overcome him: They that placed me here,
Intended it an honour large enough
For the most valiant living; but to dare
Oppose me single, though he lost the day,
What should afflict you, you are free as I,
To be my prisoner, is to be more free,
Then you were formerly; and never think
The man I held worthy to combat me,
Shall be used seruilly: Thy ransom is
To take my only sister to thy wife;
A heavy one Tigranes: for she is
A Lady that the neighbour Princes send
Blanks to fetch home: I have been too unkind
To her Tigranes, she but nine year old,
I left her, and ne'er saw her since: your wars
Have held m• long, and taught me, though a youth,
The way to victory: she was a pretty child
Then, I was little better; but now fame
Cries loudly on her, and my Messengers
Make me believe she is a miracle;
Sheele make you shrink as I did, with a stroke
But of her eye Tigranes.
Is it the course of
Iberia, to use their prisoners thus?
Had Fortune thrown my name aboue Arbaces,
I should not thus have talked: for in Armenia
we hold it base; you should have kept your temper,
Till you saw home again; where tic the fashion
Perhaps to brag.
Bee you my witness Earth:
Need I to brag, doth not this captive Prince
Speak me sufficiently, and all the Acts
That I have wrought upon his suffering Land?
Should I then boast? Where lies that foot of ground
Within his whole Realm, that I have not past
Fighting, and Conquering? Far then from me
Be oftentation: I could tell the World
How I have laid his Kingdom desolate
With this sole arm, propped by Divinity,
Stripped him out of his glories, and have sent
The pride of all his youth to people graves,
And made his Virgins languish for their loves;
If I would brag, Should I that have the power
To teach the Neighbour world humility,
Mix with vain glory.
In deed this is none?
Tigranes, no; did I but take delight
To stretch my deeds as others doe on words,
I could amaze my hearers▪
So you doe:
But he shall wrong his, and my modesty
That thinks me apt to boast: After an Act
Fit for a God to doe upon his foe,
A little glory in a Soldiers mouth,
Is well becoming, bee it far from vain.
Its pity that valour should be thus drunk.
I offer you my Sister, and you answer,
I doe insult: A Lady that no suit
Nor treasure, nor thy Crown could purchase thee,
But that thou faughst with me.
Though this bee worse
Then that you spoke before, it strikes not me
But that you think to ouer-grace me with
The marriage of your Sister, troubles me,
I would give worlds for ransoms were they mine,
Rather then have her.
See if I insult
That am the Conqueror, and for a ransom
Offer rich treasure to the conquered,
Which he refuses, and I bea•e his scorn.
It cannot be self flattery to say,
The daughters of your Country set by her
Would see their shame; run home, and blush to death
At their own foulness, yet she is not fair,
Nor beautiful, those words express her not,
They say her looks are something excellent,
That wants a name yet: were she odious
Her birth deferues the Empire of the world.
Sister to such a Brother, that hath tan
Victory prisoner, and throughout the Earth
Carries her bound; and should hee let her loose,
She durst not leave him. Nature did her wrong
To print continual conquest on her cheeks,
And make no man worthy for her to take,
But me that am too near her; and as strangely
She did for me: But you will think I brag.
I doe Isle be sworn. Thy Valour and thy passions severed, would have made two excellent fellows in their kinds: I know not whether I should be sorry thou art so va∣liant, or so passionate▪ would one of um were away.
Doe I refuse her that I doubt her worth▪
Were she as virtuous as she would be thought,
So perfect, that no own of her own sex
Would find a want, had she so tempting fair,
That she could wish it off her damning souls,
I would pay any Ransom, twentytimes,
Rather then meet her married in my bed:
Perhaps I have a Love, where I have fixed
Mine eyes, not to bee moved, and she on me▪
I am not fickle:
Is that all the cause?
Think you, you can so knit your self in love
To any other, that her searching sight
Cannot dissolve it? So before you tried
You th ught your self a match for me in fight:
Trust me Tigranes she can doe as much
In peace, as I in War; sheele conquer too
You shall see, if you have the power to stand
The force of her swift looks, if you dislike,
Isle send you home with love, &amp; name your ransom
some other way: but if she bee your choice
She frees you: to Ileria you must.
Sir, I have learnt a Prisoners sufferance,
And will obey, but give me leave to talk
In private with some friends before I go.
Some two await him forth, and see him safe,
But let him freely send for whom he please,
And none dare to disturb his conference:
I will not have him know what bondage is 
Till he be freefrom me. This Prince Mardonius
Is full of wisdom, Valour, all the graces
Man can receive.
And yet you Conquered him?
And yet I conquered him, &amp; could have don
Had thou joined with him, though thy name in Arms
Bee great; Must all men that are virtuous
Think suddenly to match themselves with me:
I conquered him, and bravely; did I not?
And please your Majesty I was afraid at first.
When were thou other?
Of what?
That you would not have spied your best advantages, for your Majesty in my opinion lay too high me thinks, un∣der favour, you should have lain thus.
Like a Taylor at a vvake.
And then, left please your Majesty to remember, at one time, by my Troth, I wished my self with you.
By my Troth thou would have sunk um both out oath lifts.
what to doe?
To put your Majesty in mind of an occasion; you lay thus, and Tigranes falsified a blow at your leg, which you by doing thus avoided; but if you had whipped up your leg thus, and reached him on th'eare, you had made the blood run abouts head.
what contry-fence-schoole did thou learn that at?
Puffed, did I not take him nobly?
Why you did, and you have talked enough on it.
Talk enough,
while you confine my words, by Heaven and Earth,
I weremuch better bee a King of Beasts
Then such a people: If I had not patience
Aboue a god, I should be called a Tyrant
Throughout the World. They will offend to death
Each minute: Let me hear thee speak again
Andthou art earth again: why this is like
Tigranes speech▪ that needs would say, I bragged.
Bessus hee said I bragged.
Ha ha ha.
Why dost thou laugh?
By all the world I me grown ridiculous
To my own subjects: Tie me to a chair
And jest at me, but I shall make a start
And punish some, that other will take heed
How they are haughty; who will answer me?
He said I boasted, speak Mardonius,
Did I? He will not answer: O my Temper!
I give you thanks aboue, that taught my heart
Patience, I can endure his silence; what will none
Vouchsafe to give me audience, am I grown
To such a poor respect or doe you mean
To break my wind, speak, speak soon one of you▪
Or else by Heaven,
So please your,
Monstrous,
I cannot bee heard out, they cut me off
As if I were too saucy; I will live
In woods, and talk to Trees they will allow me
To end what I begin. The meanest Subject
Can find a freedom to dis harge his soul,
And not I, now it is a time to speak,
I harken.
May it please,
I mean not you,
Did not I stop you once? but I am grown
To balke, but I desire, let another speak.
I hope your Majesty,
Thou draw thy words
That I must waite an hour, where other men
Can hear in instants; throw your words away
Quick, and to purpose, I have told you this.
An't please your Majesty:
Wilt thou devour me? this is such a rudeness
As yet you never showed me, and I want
Power to command me, else Mardonius
Would speak at my request; were you my King,
I would have answered at your word Mardonius,
I pray you speak, and true y, did I boast?
Truth will offend you.
You take all great care what will offend me,
When you dare to utter such things as these.
You told Tigranes, you had won his Land
With that sole arm propped by Divinity:
Was not that bragging, and a wrong to vs
That daily venturoe lives?
O that thy name
Were great as mine, would I had paid my wealth,
It were as great, that I might combat th•e;
I would through all the Regions habitable
Search thee, and having found thee, with my Sword
Drive thee about the world, till I had met
Some place that yet mans curiosity
Hath mist of; there, there would I strike thee dead:
Forgotten of Man•end, such Funeral Rites
As Beasts would give thee thou should have
The King
Rage▪ extra•mely, shall wee flinke away;
Heel strike vs:
Content.
There I would make you know t'was this sole arm,
I grant you were my Instruments, and did
As I commanded you, but t'was this Arm
Moved you like wheels, it moved you as it pleased:
whither slip you now? what are you too good
To waite on me? I had need have temper
That rule such people; I have nothing left
At my own choice, I would I might be private:
Mean men enjoy themselves, but tic our curse,
To have a tumult that out of their loves
will waite on vs whether we will or no;
will you be gone? why here they stand like death,
My word moos nothing.
Must we go?
I know not.
I pray you leave me Sirs, I'm proud of this,
That they will be entreated from my sight:
why now they leave me all: Mardonius,
Sir.
will you leave me quite alone? me thinks
Civility should teach you more then this,
If I were but your friend: stay here, and waite.
Sir, shall I speak?
why you would now think much
To bee deni•e, but I can scarce entreat
what I would have: doe, speak.
But will you hear me out?
with me you article to talk thus: well
I will hear you out.
Sir, that I have ever loved you, my sword hath spo∣ken for me, that I doe, if it bee doubted, I dare call an oath a∣great one to my witness: and were you not my King, from amongst men, I should have chose you out to love aboue the rest:nor can this challenge thanks: for my own sake I should have doted, because I would have loved the most deserving man, for so you are.
Alas Mardonius, rise, you shall not kneel;
we all are Soldiers, and all venture lives:
And where there is no difference in men's words,
Titles are jests: who can out value thee?
Mardonius thou hast loved me, and hast wrong,
Thy love is not rewarded, but believe
It shall be better, more then friend in arms,
My Father, and my Tutor, good Mardonius.
Sir, you did promise you would hear me out.
And so I will, speak freely, for from thee
Nothing can come but worthy things and true.
Though you have al this worth, you hold some qualities that doe eclipse your virtues.
Eclipse my virtue•?
Yes your passions, which are so manifold, that they appear even in this: when I commend you, you hug me for that truth: when I speak of your faults, you make a start, and fly the hearing: but,
when you commend me? O that I should live
To need such commendations: If my deeds
Blew not my praise themselves aboue the earth,
I were most wretched: spare your idle praise:
If thou did mean to flatter, and should utter
words in my praise, that thou thoughtst impudence,
My deeds should make um modest: when you praise,
I hug you; it is so false, that were thou worthy
Thou should receive a death, a glorious death
From me: but thou shalt understand thy lies,
For should thou praise me into Heaven, and there
Leave me enthroned, I would despise thee though
As much as now, which is as much as dust,
Because I see thy envy.
How ever you will use me after, yet for your own promise sake hear me the rest.
I will, and after call unto the winds,
For they shall lend as large an ear as I
To what you utter: speak.
would you but leave these hasty tempers, which I doe not say take from you all your worth, but darken um, then you would shine indeed.
Well.
Yet I would have you keep some passions, least men should take you for a god, your virtues are such.
Why now you flatter.
I never understood the word, were you no King, &amp; free from these wilde moods, should I choose a companion for wit and pleasure, it should bee you, or for honest▪ to en∣terchange my boss•me with, it would be you; or wisdom to to give me counsel, I would pick out you: or valour to defend my reputation, still I would find out you, for you are fit to fight for all the world, if it could come in question: Now I have spoke, consider to your self, find out a use? if so, then what shall fall to me is not material.
Is not material: more then ten such lives
As mine Mardonius: it was Nobly said,
Thou hast spoke truth, and boldly, such a truth
As might offend another. I have bin
Too passionate, and idle, thou shalt see
A swift amendment: But I want those parts
You praise me for: I fight for all the world:
Give thee a Sword, and thou wilt go as far
Beyond me, as thou art beyond in years,
I know thou dare, and wilt; It troubles me
That I should use so rough a phrase to thee,
Impute it to my folly, what thou wilt,
So thou wilt pardon me; that thou and I
Should differ thus.
why it is no matter Sir:
Faith but tic, but thou dost ever take
All things I doe thus patiently, for which
I never can requite thee but with love,
And that thou shalt bee sure of. •thou and I
Have not bin merry lately: pray thee tell me
where had thou that same jewel in thine care?
why at the taking of a Town.
A wench upon my life, a wench Mardonius
Gave thee that Iewe•l.
wench, they res•ect not me, Ime old and rough, and every limb about me, but that which should grows stiffer: lth those businesses I may swear I am t•uely honest: for I pay justly for what I take, and would bee glad to be at a certainty.
why doe the wenches incroch upon thee?
I by this light doe they.
Did thou sit at an old rent with um?
Ye• faith.
And doe they im•rooue themselves?
I, ten shillings to me, every new young fellow they come aequainted with.
How can live on it?
Why I think I must petition to you.
Thou shalt take um up at my price.
Your price?
I at the Kings price.
That may be more then I am worth.
Is he not merry now?
I think not.
He is, he is, weal show our selves.
Bessus I thought you had been in Iberia by this, bad you• ha•te▪ Gobrias will want entertainment for me.
An't please your Majesty•e I have a suit.
First not lousy Bessus, what i•t?
I am to carry a Lady with me.
Then thou hast two suits.
And if I can prefer her to the Lady Panthan your Majesties sister, to learn fashions as her friends term it, it will be worth something to me.
So many nights lodgings as tic thither, will not?
I know not that, but gold I shall be sure of.
Why thou shalt bid her entertain her from me, so thou wilt resolve me one thing.
If I can.
Faith tic a very disputable question, yet I think thou can decide it▪
Your Majesty has a good opinion of my vnderstan∣ding.
I have so good an opinion of it: it is whether thou be valiant.
Some body has traduced me to you: doe you see this sword Sir?
Yes.
If I doe not make my back-biters eat it to a knife within this week, say I am not valiant.
Health to your Majesty.
From Gobrias?
Yes Sir.
How does he, is he well?
In perfect health.
Thank thee for thy good news,
A trustier servant to his Prince there lives not
Then is good Gobrias.
The King starts back.
His blood goes back as fast:
And now it comes again.
He alters strangely.
The hand of Heaven is on me, be it far
From me to struggle; if my secret sins
Have pulled this curse upon me, lend me tears.
Enough to wash me white, that I may feel
A childlike innocence within my breast;
Which once performed, O give me leave to stand
As fixed as constancy her self, my eyes
Set here vnmou'd, regardless of the World,
Though thousand miseries encompass me.
This is strange, Sir, how doe you?
Mardonius my mother:
Is she dead?
Alas, shees not so happy; thou dost know
How she hath laboured since my Father died
To take by treason hence this loathed life,
That would but be to serve her, I have pardoned
And pardoned, and by that have made her fit
To practise new sins, not repent the old;
She now has hired a slave to come from thence
And strike me here, whom Gobrias sifting ̇out,
Took, and condemned, and executed there
The carefulst servant: Heaven let me but live
To pay that man; Nature is poor to me,
That will not let me have as many deaths
As are the times that he hath saved my life,
That I might die um over all for him.
Sir let her bear her sins on her own head,
Vex not your self.
What will the world
Conceive of me? with what unnatural sins
Will they suppose me laden, when my life
Is sought by her that gave it to the world?
But yet he writes me comfort here, my sister
He says is grown in beauty, and in grace,
In all the innocent virtues that become
A tender spotless maid: she staines her cheeks
With mourning tears to purge her Mothers ill,
And amongst her sacred dew she mingles prayers,
Her pure oblations for my safe return:
If I have lost the duty of a son,
If any pomp or vanity of state
Made me forget my natural offices;
Nay farther, if I have not every night
Expostulated with my wandering thoughts,
If ought unto my Parent they have erred,
And called um back: doe you direct her arm
Unto this foul dissembling heart of mine:
But if I have been just to her, send out
Your power to compass me, and hold me safe
From searching treason; I will use no means
But prayers: for rather suffer me to see
From mine own veins issue a deadly flood,
Then wash my dangers off with Mothers blood:
I ne'er saw such sudden extremities.
Why, wilt thou have me die Spaconia,
What should I doe?
Nay, let me stay alone,
And when you see Armenia again,
You shall behold a Tomb more worth then I,
Some friend that either loves me, or my cause,
Will build me something to distinguish me
From other women: Many a weeping verse
He will lay on, and much lament those maids
That place their loves unfortunately 〈◊〉 hight,
As I have done, where they can never reach:
But why should you go to Iberia?
Alas, that thou wilt ask me; Ask the man
That rages in a fever, why hee lies
Distempered there, when all the other youths
Are coursing ore the Meadows with their loves?
Can I resist it? am I not a slave
To him that conquered me?
That conquered thee, Tigranes he has won but half of
Thy body; but thy mind may be as free
As his, his will did never combat thine,
And take it prisoner:
But if hee by force
Convey my body hence, what helps it me
Or thee to be unwilling?
O Tigranes,
I know you are to see a Lady there,
To see, and like I fear: perhaps the hope
Of her makes you forget me ere we part,
Be happier then you know to wish: farewell.
Spaconia stay, and hear me what I say:
In short destruction meet me, that I may
See it, and not avoid it when I leave
To be thy faithful Lover: part with me
Thou shalt not, there are none that know our love;
And I have given gold to a Captain
That goes unto Iberia from the King,
That he would place a Lady of our Land
With the Kings sister that is offered me;
Thither shall you, and being once got in,
Persuade her by what subtle means you can
To be as backward in her love as I.
Can you imagine that a longing maid
When she beholds you, can be pulled away
With words from loving you?
Dispraise my health,
My honesty, and tell her I am jealous:
Why, I had rather loose you: Can my heart
Consent to let my tongue throw out such words,
And I that ever yet spoke what I thought,
Shall find it such a thing at first to lie:
Yet doe thy best.
What is your Majesty ready?
There is the Lady Captain.
Sweet Lady by your leave, I could wish my self more full of Courtship for your fair sake.
Sir I shall find no want of that.
Lady, you must haste, I have received new letters from the King, that requires more speed then I expected he
will follow me suddenly himself, and begins to call for your Majesty already.
He shall not doe so long.
Sweet Lady shall I call you my charge hereafter?
I will not take upon me to govern your tongue Sir, you shall call me what you please:
MY Lord Bacurius, you must have regard
Unto the Queen, she is your prisoner,
Tic at your peril if she make escape.
My Lord I know it, she is my prisoner
From you committed; yet she is a woman,
And so I keep her safe: you will not urge me
To keep her close, I shall not shame to say
I sorrow for her.
So doe I my Lord.
I sorrow for her that so little grace
Doth govern her, that she should stretch her arm
Against her King, so little womanhood
And natural goodness, as to think the death
Of her own Son.
Thou know the reason why,
Dissembling as thou art, and wilt not speak.
There is a Lady takes not after you,
Her Father is within her, that good man
Whose tears paid down his sins, mark how she weeps,
How well it does become her; and if you
Can find no disposition in your self
To sorrow, yet by gracefulness in her
Find out the way, and by your reason weep:
All this she does for you, and more she needs,
When for your self you will not lose a tear,
Think how this want of grief discredits you,
And you will weep, because you cannot weep:
You talk to me as having got a time
Fit for your purpose; but you know I know
You speak not what you think.
I would my heart
Were stone, before my softness should be urged
Against my Mother, a more troubled thought
No Virgin bears about her; should I excuse
My Mothers fault, I should let light a life,
In loosing which, a brother and a King
Were taken from me; If I seek to save
That life so loved, I loose another life
That gave me being, I shall loose a Mother,
A word of such a sound in a childes ear,
That it strikes reverence through it: May the will
Of Heaven be done, and if one needs must fall,
Take a poor Virgins life to answer all.
But Gobrias let vs talk; you know this fault
Is not in me as in another woman▪
I know it is not:
Yet you make it so.
Why, is not all that's past beyond your help?
I know it is.
Nay, should you publish it
Before the world, think you twill be belieu'd?
I know it would not.
Nay, should I join with you,
Should we not both be torn? and yet both die
Vncredited?
I think we should.
Why then
Take you such violent courses? as for me,
I doe but right in saving of the King
From all your plots.
The King?
I bad you rest with patience, and a time
Would come for me
To reconcile all to your own content:
But by this way you take away my power,
And what was done unknown, was not by me,
But you, your urging, being done,
I must preserve mine own; but time may bring
All this to light, and happily for all.
Accursed be this ouercurious brain,
That gave that plot a birth; accursed this womb,
That after did conceive to my disgrace.
My Lo d Protector, they say there are divers Letters come from Armenia that Bessus has done good service, and brought again a day by his particular valour: received you any to that effect?
Yes, tic most certain.
Ime sorry fort, not that the day was won, but that it was won by him; wee held him here a coward, hee did me wrong once, at which I laughed, and so did all the world: for, nor I, nor any other held time worth my Sword.
Health to my Lord Protector, from the King these Letters, and to your grace Madam these:
How does his Majesty?
As well as conquest by his own means, and his va∣liant commanders can make him▪ your letters will tel you all.
I will not open mine till• doe know
My brothers health; good Captain is he well?
As the rest of vs that fought are:
But howes that, is he hurt?
Hes a strange Soldier that gets not a knock,
I doe not ask how strange that Soldier is That gets no hurt; but whether he have one?
He had divers.
And is he well again?
Well again, ant please your grace; why I was run twice through the body, and shot ith head with a cross are∣row, and yet am well again.
I doe not care how thou dost, is he well?
Not care how I doe, let a man out of the mightiness
of his spirit fructify foreign Countries with his blood for the good of his own, and thus he shall be answered: why, I may live to relieve with spear and shield such a Lady di∣stressed.
Why, I will care, I am glad that thou art well; I prithee is he so?
The King is well, and will be here to morrow.
My prayers are heard; now I will open mine.
Bacurius, I must ease you of your charge:
Madam, the wonted mercy of the King
That overtakes your faults, has met with this,
And struck it out; he has forgiven you freely,
Your own will is your Law, be where you please▪
I thank him
You will be ready
To waite upon his Majesty to morrow?
I will.
Madam, be wise hereafter:
I am glad I have lost this Office.
Good Captain Bessus, tell vs the discourse
Between Tigranes and our King, and how
We got the victory.
I prithee doe,
And if my brother were in any danger,
Let not thy tale make him abide there long,
Before thou bring him off; for all that while
My heart will beat.
Madam, let what will beat, I must tell truth, and thus it was: They fought single in lists but one to one, as for my own part I was dangerously hurt but three days before, else perhaps wee had been two to two; I cannot tell, some thought wee had; and the occasion of my hurt was this, the enemy had made trenches.
Captain, without the manner of your hurt be much material to this business, weal hear it some other time.
I, I prithee leave it, and go on with my brother.
I will, but it would be worth your hearing: To the lists they came, and single sword and gauntlet was their fight.
Alas.
Without the lists there stood some dozen Captains of either side mingled, all which were sworn, and one of those was I: and it was my chance to stand no•e a Captain of the Enemies side, called Tiribasus; valiant they said he was: whilst these two Kings were stretching themselves, this Tire∣basus cast something a scornful look on me, and asked me whom I thought would overcome: I smiled, and told him, if hee would fight with me, he should perceive by the event of that whose King would win; something hee answered, and a scuffle was like to grow, when one Zipetus offered to help him: I—
All this is of thy self, I prithee Bessus
Tell something of my brother, did he nothing?
Why yes, Isle tell your Grace; they were not to fight till the word given, which for my own part by my troth I was not to give.
See, for his own part.
I fear yet this fellowe's abused with a good report.
I, but I:
Still of himself.
Cried, give the word, when as some of them said Ti∣granes was stooping, but the word was not given then: when one Cosro•s of the enemy•s part held up his finger to me, which is as much with vs Marshallists, as I will fight with you: I said not a word, nor made sign during the combat; but that once done.
He slips ore all the fight.
I called him to me, Cosros said I:
I will hear no more.
No, no, Ilie.
I dare be sworn thou dost.
Captain said I, it was so.
I tell thee, I will hear no further.
No, your Grace will wish you had.
I will not wish it: what is this the Lady
My Brother writes to me to take?
An't please your Grace this is she: Charge will
you come nearer the Princes?
You're welcome from your Country, and this Land
Shall show unto you all the kindnesses
That I can make it; what's your name?
Thalestris.
Y are very welcome, you have got a letter
To put you to me, that has power enough
To place mine Enemy here; then much more you,
That are so far from being so to me,
That you ne'er saw me.
Madam, I dare pass my word for her truth.
My truth.
Why Captain, doe you think I am afraid sheele steal?
I cannot tell, servants are slippery; but I dare give my word for her, and for her honesty: she came along with me, and many favours she did me by the way; but by this light none but what she might doe with modesty, to a man of my rank.
Why Captain, here is no body thinks otherwise.
Nay, if you should, your Grace may think your plea∣sure; but I am sure I brought her from Armenia, and in all that way if ever I touched any bare on her aboue her knee, I pray God I may sink where I stand.
Aboue my knee?
No▪ you know I did not, and if any man will say I did, this Sword shall answer: Nay, Isle defend the reputation of my charge whilst I live; your Grace shall understand I am se∣cret in these businesses, and know how to defend a Ladies honour.
I hope your Grace knows him so well already,
I shall not need to tell you hoe's vain and foolish:
I, you may call me what you please, but Isle defend your good name against the World; and so I take my leave of your Grace, and of you my Lord Protector, I am likewise glad to see your Lordship well.
O Captain Bessus, I thank you, I would speak with you anon.
When you please, I will attend your Lordship:
Madam, Isle take my leave too:
Good Bacurius:
Madam, what writes his Majesty to you?
O my Lord,
The kindest words, Isle keep um whilst I live
Here in my bosom; theres no art in um,
They lie disordered in this paper, Just
As hearty Nature speaks um.
And to me
He writes, what tears of joy he shed to hear
How you were grown in every virtuous way,
And yields all thanks to me, for that dear care
Which I was bound to have in training you:
There is no Princes living that enjoys
A Brother of that worth.
My Lord, no Maid longs more for any thing, or feels more heate and cold within her breast, then I doe now, In hope to see him.
Yet I wonder much at this, hee writes he brings a∣long with him a husband for you, that same Captive Prince;
And if he love you as he makes a show,
He will allow you freedom in your choice.
And so he will my Lord, I warrant you
He will but offer, and give me the power
To take▪ or leave.
Trust me, were I a Lady I could not like
That man were bargained with before I choose him.
But I am not built on such wild humours,
If I find time worthy, he is not less,
Because hee▪s offered.
Tic true, he is not, would he would seem less:
I think there is no Lady can affect
Another Prince, your Brother standing by;
He does eclipse men's virtues so with this.
I know a Lady may, and more I fear
Another Lady will.
Would I might see him:
Why so you shall: my businesses are great,
I will attend you when it is his pleasure
To see you Madam.
I thank you good my Lord.
You will be ready Madam:
Yes.
I doe beseech you Madam send away
Your other women, and receive from me
A few sad words, which set against your joys,
May make um shine the more.
Sirs leave me all.
I kneel a stranger here to beg a thing
Unfit for me to ask, and you to grant,
Tic such another strange ill laid request,
As if a beggar should entreat a King
To leave his Sceptre and his Throne to him,
And take his rags to wander ore the World
Hungry and cold.
That were a strange request.
As ill is mine.
Then doe not utter it.
Alas, tic of that nature, that it must
Be vtterd, I, and granted, or I die:
I am ashamed to speak it; but where life
Lies at the stake, I cannot think her woman,
That will not take something unreasonably
To hazard saving of it: I shall seem
A strange petitioner, that wish all ill
To them I beg of, ere they give me ought,
Yet so I must: I would you were not fair,
Nor wise, for in your ill consists my good:
If you were foolish, you would hear my prayer;
If foul, you had not power to hinder me:
He would not love you.
VVhats the meaning of it?
Nay, my request is more without the bounds
Of reason yet; for tic not in the power
Of you to doe what I would have you grant.
Why then tic idle, prithee speak it out.
Your brother brings a Prince into this Land
Of such a noble shape, so sweet a grace,
So full of worth withal, that every maid
That looks upon him, gives away her self
To him for ever; and for you to have
He brings him: and so mad is my demand,
That I desire you not to have this man,
This excellent man, for whom you needs must die,
If you should miss him. I doe now expect
You should laugh at me.
Trust me, I could weep
Rather, for I have found in all thy words
A strange disiointed sorrow.
Tic by me,
His own desire too, that you would not love him.
His own desire, why credit me Thalestris
I am no common wooer: If he shall woo me,
His worth may be such, that I dare not swear
I will not love him; but if he will stay
To have me woo him, I will promise thee
He may keep all his graces to himself,
And fear no ravishing from me.
Tic yet
His own desire, but when he sees your face,
I fear it will not be; therefore I charge you
As you have pity, stop those tender ears
From his enchanting voice, close up those eyes,
That you may neither catch a dart from him,
Nor he from you: I charge you as you hope
To live in quiet, for when I am dead
For certain I shall walk to visit him,
If he break promise with me: for as fast
As oaths without a formal ceremony
Can make me, I am to him:
Then be fearless,
For if he were a thing twixt God and man,
I could gaze on him; (if I knew it sin,
To love him) without passion: Dry your eyes,
I swear you shall enjoy him still for me,
I will not hinder you; but I perceive
You are not what you seem: Rise, rise, Thalestris.
If your right name be so.
Indeed it is not
Spaconia is name; but I desire
Not to be known to others:
Why, by me
You shall not, I will never doe you wrong,
What good I can, I will; think not my birth,
Or education such, that I should injure
A stranger Virgin: you are welcome hither.
In company you wish to be commanded,
But when we are alone, I shall be ready
To be your servant.
Come, come, run, run, run:
We shall out-goe her.
One were better be hanged, then carry women out fid∣ling to these shows.
Is the King hard by?
You heard hee with the bottles say, hee thought wee should come too late, what abundance of people here is.
But what had he in those bottles?
I know not.
Why, Ink good man fool:
Ink, what to doe?
Why, the King look you, will many times call for those bottles, and break his mind to his friends.
Lets take our places quickly, we shall have no room else.
The man told vs hee would walk a foot through the people.
I marry did he.
Our shops are well look to now:
S'life yonders my Master I think.
No, tic not he.
Lord, how fine the fields be, what sweet living tic in the Country.
I, poor souls, God help um; they live as conten∣tedly as one of vs.
My Husbands cousin would have had me gone in∣to the Country last year, were thou ever there?
I, poor souls, I was amongst um once.
And what kind of creatures are they for love of God?
Very good people, God help um:
Wilt thou go with me down this summer, when I am brought abed?
Alas, tic no place for vs.
Why prithee?
Why, you can have nothing there; theres no body cries brooms.
No?
No truly, nor milk.
Nor milk, how doe they?
They are fine to milk themselves ith Country.
Good Lord: but the people there I think will bee very dutiful to one of vs?
I, God knows will they, and yet they doe not great∣lie care for our Husbands.
Doe they not, alas? In good faith I cannot blame them: for we doe not greatly care for them our selves. Philip I pray choose vs a place.
Theres the best forsooth.
By your leave good people a little:
VVhats the matter?
I pray my friend doe not thrust my Mistress so, shees with child.
Let her look to her self then, has she not had thrusting enough yet; if she stay shouldring here, she may hap to go home with a Cake in her belly.
How now goodman squitterbreech, why doe you lean so on me?
Because I will.
Will you sir sawce-box?
Look if one have not struck Philip, come hither Philip, why did he strike thee?
For leaning on him.
Why did thou lean on him?
I did not think he would have struck me.
As God save me law, thou art as wilde as a Buck, there is no quarrel, but thou art at one end or other of it.
Its at the first end then; for he will never stay the last.
Well stripling, I shall meet with you.
when you will.
Isle give a crown to meet with you▪
At a bawdy house.
I, you are full of your rogery; but if I doe meet you it shall cost me a fall.
The King, the King, the King, the King:
Now, now, now, now.
God preserve your Majesty.
I thank you all: Now are my joys at full,
when I behold you safe my loving Subjects;
By you I grow, tic your united love
That lifts me to this height:
All the account that I can render you
For all the love you have bestowed on me,
All your expenses to maintain my war,
Is but a little word: you will imagine
Tic slender payment; yet tic such a word
As is not to be bought without our bloods;
Tic peace.
God preserve your Majesty.
Now you may live securely in your Towns,
Your Children round about you; you may sit
Under your vines, and make the miseries
Of other Kingdoms a discourse for you,
And lend them sorrows: For your selves you may
Safely forget there are such things as tears;
And may you all whose good thoughts I have gained,
Hold me unworthy, when I think my life
A sacrifice too great to keep you thus
In such a calm estate:
God bless your Majesty.
See all good people, I have brought the man,
Whose very name you feared, a captive home:
Behold him, tic Tigranes; in your hearts
Sing songs of gladness, and deliverance.
Out upon him.
How he looks.
Hang him, hang him, hang him.
These are sweet people.
Sir, you doe me wrong,
To render me a scorned spectacle
To common people.
It was far from me
To mean it so: if I have ought deserved,
My loving Subjects let me beg of you
Not to revile this Prince, in whom their dwells
All worth of which the nature of a man
Is capable; valour beyond compare,
The terror of his name has stretched it self
Where ever there is sun: and yet for you,
I fought with him single, and won him too;
I made his valour stoop, and made that name
Soared to so unbelieved a height, to fall
Beneath mine: This inspired with all your loves,
I did perform, and will for your content
Be ever ready for a greater work.
The Lord bless your Majesty.
So, hee has made me amends now, with a speech in commendations of himself: I would not be so vaine-glo∣rios.
If there be any thing in which I may
Doe good to any creature, here speak out;
For I must leave you: and it troubles me,
Thus my occasions for the good of you,
Are suchas ca lles me from you; else my joy
Would be to spend my days amongst you all.
You show your loves in these large multitudes
That come to meet me: I will pray for you,
Heaven prosper you, that you may know old years,
And live to see your Childrens Children
Fate at your boards with plenty: when there is
A want of any thing, let it be known
To me, and I will be a Father to you:
God keep you all.
God bless your Majesty.
Come, shall we go, ell's done.
I for Gods sake, I have not made a fire yet:
Away, away, ell's done.
Content: Farewell Philip.
Away, you haltersack you:
Philip will not fight hoe's afraid on's face.
I marry am I afraid of my face.
Thou would be Philip, if thou saw it in a glass; it looks like a visor.
You'll be hanged sir: Come Philip, walk before vs homeward; did not his Majesty say, he had brought vs home Peaes for our money?
Yes marry did he.
They are the first I heard on this year by my troth, I longed for some of um; did he not say we should have some?
Yes, and so we shall anon I warrant you, have every one a peck brought home to our houses.
MY Sister take it ill?
Not very ill,
Something unkindly she doth take it Sir,
To have her Husband chosen to her hands.
Why Gobrius te• her; I must have her know
My will, and not her own must govern her:
What, will she marry with some slave at home?
O she is far from any stubbornness,
You much mistake her, and no doubt will like
Where you will have her; but when you behold her,
You will be loath to part with such a Jewel.
To part with her, why Gobrius art thou mad? she is my sister▪
Sir, I know she is:
But it were pity to make poor our Land
With such a beauty, to enrich another.
Pish, will she have him?
I think she will Sir.
Were she my Father, and my Mother too;
And all the names for which we think folks friends,
She should be force to have him, when I know
Tic fit: I will not hear her say shoe's loath.
Heaven bring my purpose luckily to pass,
You know tic just: Sir, sheele not need constraint,
She loves you so.
How does she love me, speak?
She loves you more then people love their health
That live by labour; more then I could love
A man that died for me, if he could live again.
She is not like her Mother then?
O no, when you were in Armenia,
I durst not let her know when you were hurt:
For at the first on every little scratch,
She kept her chamber, wept, and would not eat,
Till you were well; and many times the news
was so long coming, that before we heard,
She was as near her death, as you your health.
Alas poor soul, but yet she must be ruled;
J know not how I shall requite her well,
I long to see her; have you sent for her,
To tell her I am ready?
Sir, I have.
Sir, here's the Armenian King.
Hes welcome.
And the Queen Mother, and the Princes waite with∣out:
Good Gobrius bring them in,
Tigranes you will think you are arrived
In a strange Land, where Mothers cast to poison
Their only sons; think you you shall be safe?
Too safe I am 〈◊〉▪
As low as this I bow to you, and would
As low as to my grave, to show a mind
Thankful for all your mercies.
O stand up,
And let me kneel, the light will be ashamed
To see observance done to me by you.
You are my King.
You are my Mother rise;
As far be all your faults from your own soul,
As from my memory; then you shall be
As white as innocence her self.
I came
Only to s•ew my duty, and acknowledge
My sorrow for my sins; longer to stay
We•e but to draw eyes more attentively
upon my shame: That power that kept you safe
From me preserve you still.
Your own desires shall be your guard.
Now let me die,
Since I have seen my Lord the King return
In safety, I have seen all good that life▪
Can show me; I have ne'er another wish▪
For Heaven to grant, nor were it fit I should:
For I am bound to spend my age to come
In give•g than kes that this was granted me.
why does not your Majesty speak?
To whom?
To the Princess.
Alas Sir, I am fearful, you doe look
On me, as if I were some loathed thing
That you were finding out a way to shun.
Sir, you should speak to her.
Ha?
I know I am unworthy, yet not ill,
Armed▪ with which innocence here I will kneel,
Till I am one with earth: but I will gain
Some words, and kindness from you.
will you, speak Sir?
Speak, am I what I was?
what art thou that dost creep into my breast,
And dare not see my face show forth thy self▪
I feel a pair of fiery wings displayed
Hither, from thence; you shall not tarry there,
up, and be gone, if thou be love, be gone,
Or I will tear thee from my wounded flesh,
Pull thy loved down away, and with a quill
By this right arm drawn from thy wanton wing,
write to thy laughing Mother in thy blood,
That you are Powers belied, and all your darts
Are to be blown away by men resolved
Like dust; I know thou fear my words, away.
O misery, why should he be so slow▪
There can no falsehood come of loving her,
Though I have given my faith; she is a thing
Both to be loved and served beyond my faith:
I would he would present me to her quickly.
will you not speak at all, are you so far
From kind words? yet to save my modesty
That must talk till you answer: doe not stand
As you were dumb, say something, though it be
Poisoned with anger that may strike me dead:
Have you no life at all? for manhood sake
Let her not kneel, and talk neglected thus;
A tree would find a tongue to answer her,
Did she but give it such a loved respect.
You mean this Lady, lift her from the earth;
Why doe you let her kneel so long? alas,
Madam your beauty uses to command,
And not to beg; what is your suit to me?
It shall be granted, yet the time is short,
And my affairs are great: but wheres my sister?
I bad she should be brought.
What is he mad?
Gobrius, where is she?
Sir.
Where is she man?
Who Sir?
Who, hast thou forgot? my Sister.
Your Sister Sir?
Your Sister Sir?
Some one that has a wit, answer; where is she?
Doe you not see her there?
Where?
There.
There, where?
S'light there, are you blind?
Which doe you mean, that little one?
No Sir.
No Sir, why doe you mock me? I can see.
No other here, but that petitioning Lady:
Thats she.
Away.
Sir it is she:
Tic false.
Is it?
As hell, by Heaven as false as hell,
My sister: Is she dead? if it be so,
Speak boldly to me: for I am a man,
And dare not quarrel with divinity;
But doe not think to cousin me with this:
I see you all are mute, and stand amazed,
Fearful to answer me; it is too true
A decreed instant cuts off every life,
For which to morn, is to rapine; she died
A Virgin though, more innocent then sleeps,
As clear as her own eyes, and blessedness
Eternal waits upon her where she is:
I know she could not make a wish to change
Her state for new, and you shall see me bear
My crosses like a man; we all must die,
And she hath taught vs how.
Doe not mistake,
And vex your self for nothing; for her death
Is a long life of 〈◊〉 I hope: Tic she,
And if my speech deserve not faith, lay death
Upon me, and my latest words shall force
A credit from you.
Which good Gobrius,
That Lady dost thou mean?
That Lady Sir.
It cannot be.
Pish, this is tedious,
I cannot hold, I must present my self;
And yet the sight of my Spaconia,
Touches me, as a sudden thunderclap
Does one that is about to sin.
Away,
No more of this; here I pronounce him Traitor,
The direct plotter of my death that names,
Or thinks her for my Sister: Tic a lie,
The most malicious of the World, invented
To mad your King; he that will say so next,
Let him draw out his Sword, and sheath it here,
It is a sin fully as pardonable:
She is no kin to me, nor shall she be;
If she were any, I create her none,
And which of you can question this, my power
Is like the Sea, that is to be obeyed,
And not disputed with: I have decreed her
As far from having part of blood with me,
As the naked Indians: Come, and answer me,
He that is boldest now; Is that my Sister?
O this is fine.
No marry is she not an't please your Majesty:
I never thought she was, shees nothing like you.
No, tic true, she is not:
Thou should be hanged.
Sir, I will speak but once: By the same power
You make my blood a stranger unto yours;
You may command me dead, and so much love
A stranger may importune, pray you doe;
If this request appear too much to grant,
Adopt me of some other Family
By your unquestioned word; else I shall live
Like sinful issues that are left in streets
By their regardless Mothers, and no name
Will be found for me.
I will hear no more;
Why should there be such music in a voice,
And sin for me to hear it: All the world
May take delight in this, and tic damnation
For me to doe so; you are fair, and wise,
And virtuous I think, and he is blessed
That is so near you as your brother is:
But you are nought to me but a disease,
Continual torment without hope of ease;
Such an ungodly sickness I have got,
That he that undertakes my cure, must first
Orethrow Divinity, all moral Laws,
And leave mankind as vnconfinde as beasts,
Allowing them to doe all actions
As freely as they drink, when they desire.
Let me not hear you speak again; yet so
I shall but languish for the want of that,
The having which would kill me: No man here
Offer to speak for her; for I consider
As much as you can say: I will not toil
My body, and my mind too, rest thou there,
Here is one within will labour for you both.
I would I were past speaking.
Fear not Madam,
The King will alter, tic some sudden change,
And you shall see it end some other way.
Pray God it doe.
Though she to whom I swore be here, I cannot
Stifle my passion longer: If my Father
Should rise again disquieted with this,
And charge me to forbear, yet it would out:
Madam, a stranger, and a prisoner begs
To be bid welcome.
You are welcome Sir
I think, but if you be not, tic past me
To make you so: for I am here a stranger,
Greater then you: we know from whence you come,
But I appear a lost thing, and by whom
Is yet uncertain; found here in the Court,
And only suffered to walk up and down,
As one not worth the owning.
O, I fear
Tigranes will be caught, he looks me thinks
As he would change his eyes with her; some help
There is aboue for me I hope.
Why doe you turn away, and weep so fast,
And utter things that misbecome your looks,
Can you want owning?
O, tic certain so.
Acknowledge your self mine.
How now?
And then see if you want an owner,
They are talking.
Nations shall own you for their Queen.
Tigranes, art not thou my prisoner?
I am.
And who is this?
She is your Sister.
She is so.
Is she so again, thats well:
And how dare you then offer to change words with her?
Dare doe it, why you brought me hither Sir
To that intent.
Perhaps I told you so,
If I had sworn it, had you so much folly
To credit it: The least word that she speaks
Is worth a life: rule your disordered tongue,
Or I will temper it.
Blessed be that breath.
Temper my tongue; such inciuilities
As these, no barbarous people ever knew:
You break the law of Nature, and of Nations;
You talk to me, as if I were a prisoner
For theft: my tongue be tempered? I must speak
If thunder check me▪ and I will.
You will.
Alas my Fortune.
Doe not fear his frown, dear Madam hear me.
Fear not my frown: but that it were base in me
To fight with one I know I can overcome,
Again thou should be conquered by me.
He has one ransom with him already, me thinks it were good to fight double, or quit.
Away with him to prison; Now Sir see
If my frown be regardless: why delay you?
Seize him Bacurius, you shall know my word
Sweeps like a wind, and all it grapples with▪
Are as the chafe before it.
Touch me not.
Help there.
Away.
It is in vain to struggle.
You must be forced.
Sir, you must pardon vs, we must obey.
Why doe you dally there? Drag him away
By any thing.
Come Sir.
Justice, thou oughtst to give me strength enough
To shake all these off: This is tyrant•ie
Arbaces, subtler then the burning Bulls,
Or that famed Tyrants bed. Thou might as well
Search in the depth of winter through the Snow
For half starved people, to bring home with thee
To show um fire, and send um back again,
As use me thus.
Let him be close Bacurius.
I ne'er rejoiced at any ill to him,
But this imprisonment: what shall become
Of me forsaken?
You will not let your sister
Depart thus discontented from you Sir?
By no means Gobrius, I have done her wrong,
And made my self believe much of my self,
That is not in me: you did kneel to me,
Whilst I stood stubborn and regardless by;
And like a god incensed, gave no ear
To all your prayers: behold, I kneel to you,
Show a contempt as large as was my own,
And I will suffer it; yet at the last forgive me.
O you wrong me more in this,
Then in your rage you did: you mock me now.
Never forgive me then, which is the worst
Can happen to me.
If you be in earnest,
Stand up, and give me but a gentle look,
And two kind words, and I shall be in Heaven.
Rise you then to; here I acknowledge thee
My hope, the only Jewel of my life,
The best of sisters, dearer then my breath,
A happiness as high as I could think;
And when my actions call thee otherwise,
Perdition light upon me.
This is better
Then if you had not frowned, it comes to me
Like mercy at the block; and when I leave
To serve you with my life, your curse be with me.
Then thus I doe salute thee, and again
To make this knot the stronger; Paradise
Is there: It may be you are still in doubt,
This, this third kiss▪ blots it out. I wade in sin,
And foolishly entice my self along:
Take her away, see her a prisoner
In her own chamber▪ closely Gobrius.
Alas Sir, why?
I must not stay the answer, doe it.
Good Sir.
No more, doe it I say.
This is better and better.
Yet hear me speak.
I will not hear you speak;
Away with her, let no man think to speak
For such a creature: for she is a witch,
A poisoner, and a •raytor.
Madam, this Office grieves me.
Nay, tic well the King is pleased with it.
Bessus, go you along too with her; I will prove
All this that I have said, if I may live
So long: but I am desperately sick,
For she has given me poison in a kiss;
She had it twixt her lips, and with her eyes
She witches people: go without a word. 
Why should you that have made me stand in war 
Like fate it self, cutting what threads I pleased,
Decree such an unworthy end of me,
And all my glories? what am I alas,
That you oppose me? If my secret thoughts
Have ever harboured swellings against you,
They could not hurt you, and it is in you
To give me sorrow, that will render me
Apt to re•eiue your mercy; rather so,
Let it be rather so, then punish me
With such unmanly sins: Incest is in me
Dwelling already, and it must be holy
That pulls it thence; where art Mardonius?
Here Sir.
I prithee bear me, if thou can;
Am I not grown a strange weight?
As you were.
No heavier?
No Sir.
Why, my legs
Refuse to bear mybodie; O Mardonius,
Thou hast in field beheld me, when thou know
I could have gone, though I could never run.
And so I shall again.
O no, tic past.
Pray ye go, rest your self.
Wilt thou hereafter when they talk of me,
As thou shalt hear nothing but infamy;
Remember some of those things.
Yes, I will.
I prithee doe: for thou shalt never see me so again.
I warrant ye.
They talk of fame, I have gotten it in the wars, and will afford any man a reasonable penny-worth: some will say they could be content to have it, but that it is to be achieved with danger; but my opinion is otherwise: for if I might stand still in Canon proof, and have fame fall upon me, I would refuse it: My reputation came principally by thinking to run away, which no body knows but Mar∣donius▪ and I think he conceals it to anger me. Before I went to the wars, I came to the Town a young fellow without means, or parts, to this•ue friends; and my empty guts per∣swaded me to lie, and abuse people for my meat, which I did, and they beat me: then would I fast two days, till my hunger cried out on me, rail still; then me thought I had a monstrous stomach to abuse them again, and did it. In this state I continued till they hung me up by th'heeles and beat me with hasle sticks, as if they would have baked me, and have cozened some body with me for Venison: After this I railed, and •ate quietly: for the whole Kingdom took notice of me for a baffel'd whipped fellow, and what I said, was remembered in mirth, but never in anger; of which I was glad,
I would it were at that pass again: After this, God called an Ant of mine, that left two hundred pounds in a Cousins hand for me, who taking me to be a gallant young spirit, raised a company for me with the money, and sent me into Armenia with um: Away I would have run from them, but that I could get no company, and alone I durst not run. I was never at battle but once, and there I was running, but Mardonius cudgeled me; yet I got loose at last, but was so afraid, that I saw no more then my shoulders doe, but fled with my whole company amongst my enemies, and overthrew um: Now the report of my valour is come over before me, and they say I was a raw young fellow, but now I am improu'd. A plague of their eloquence, twill cost me many a beating: And Mar∣donius might help this to if he would; for now they think to get honour of me, and all the men I have abused, call me freshly to account, worthily as they call it, by the way of challenge.
Good morrow Captain Bessus.
Good morrow Sir.
I come to speak with you.
You are very welcome.
From one that holds himself wronged by you some three years since: your worth he says is famed, &amp; he nothing doubts but you will doe him right, as beseems a Soldier.
A pox on um, so they cry all.
And a slight note I have about me for you, for the delivery of which, you must excuse me; it is an office that friendship calls upon me to doe, and no way offensive to you, since I desire but right on both sides.
Tic a challenge Sir, is it not?
Tic an inviting to the field.
An inviting? O cry you mercy, what a complement he delivers it with? he might as agreeablie to my nature pre∣sent me poison with such a speech: um reputation, um call you to an account, um forced to this, um with my sword, um like a gentleman, um dear to me, um satisfaction: Tic very well Sir, I doe accept it, but he must await an answer this thirteen weeks.
Why Sir, he would be glad to wipe off his stain as soon as hee can, Sir upon my credit I am already engaged to two hundred and twelve, all which must have their staines wiped off, if that be the word before him.
Sir, if you be truly engaged but to one, he shall stay a competent time.
Upon my faith Sir to two hundred and twelve, and I have a spent body too much bruised in battle, so that I can∣not fight, I must be plain with you, aboue three combats a day: All the kindness I can doe him, is to set him resolutely in my roll the two hundred and thirteenth man, which is something: for I tell you, I think there will be more after him, then before him, I 〈◊〉 so pray ye commend me to him, and tell him this.
I will Sir, good morrow to you.
Good morrow good Sir. Certainly my safest way were to print my self a coward, with a discovery how I came by my credit, and clap it upon every post: I have recei∣ued aboue thirty challenges within this two hours, marry all but the first • put off with engagement, and by good for∣tune the first is no madder of fighting then I, so that that's re∣feru'd. The place where it must be ended, is four days jour∣ney of, and our arbitrators are there: He has chosen a gen∣tleman in travel, and I have a special friend, with a quar∣terne ague likely to hold him this time here, for mine; and when his man comes home, wee are to expect my friends health: If they would send me challenges thus thick, as long as I lived I would have no other living; I can make seven shillings a day o th paper to the Grocers: yet I learn nothing by all these but a little skill in comparing of stiles. I doe find evidently that there is some one Scrivener in this Town, that has a great hand in writing of challenges, for they are all of a cut, and six of um in a hand; and they all end, my reputation is dear to me, and I must require satisfaction: whose there? more paper I hope; no, tic my Lord Bacurius, I fear all is not well betwixt vs.
Now Captain Bessus, I come about a friuilous mat∣la, cause by as idle a report: you know you were a coward.
Very right.
And wronged me.
True my Lord.
But now people will call you valiant, desertlesly I think yet for their satisfaction, I will have you fight with me.
O my good Lord, my deep engagements.
Tell not me of your engagements, Captain Bessus; it is not to be put off with an excuse: for my own part, I am none of the multitude that believe your conversion from coward.
My Lord, I seek not quarrels, and this belongs not to me, I am not to maintain it.
Who then pray?
Bessus the coward wronged you.
Right.
And shall Bessus the valiant, maintain what Bessus the coward did?
I prithee leave these cheating tricks, I swear thou shalt fight with me, or thou shalt be beat extremely, and kicked.
Since you provoke me thus far my Lord, I will fight with you; and by my Sword it shall cost me twenty pounds, but I will have my leg a week sooner purposely.
Your leg, why what ails your leg? Isle doe a cure on you, stand up.
My Lord, this is not noble in you:
What dost thou with such a phrase in thy mouth?
I will kick thee out of all good words before I leave thee.
My Lord, I take this as a punishment for the offence
I did when I was a coward.
When thou were? confess thy self a coward still, or by this light, Isle beat thee into sponge.
Why I am one:
Are you so Sir, and why doe you wear a sword then? Come, unbuckle, quick.
My Lord.
Unbuckle I say, and give it me, or as I live, thy head will ache extremely.
It is a pretty hilt, and if your Lordship take an affecti∣on to it, with all my heart, I present it to you for a new-yeers gift.
I thank you very heartily, sweet Captain farewell.
One word more, I beseech your Lordship to render me my knife again.
Marry by all means Captain, cherish your self with it, and eat hard good Captain; we cannot tell when∣there we shall have any more such: A due dear Captain.
I will make better use of this, then of my sword: A base spirit has this vantage of a brave one; it keeps always at a stay, nothing brings it down, not beating. I remember I promised the King in a great audience, that I would make my back-byters eat my sword to a knife, how to get another sword I know not, nor know any means left for me to main∣taine my credit but impudence: Therefore will I outsweare him and all his followers, that this is all is left uneaten of my sword.
Isle moan the King, hee is most strangely altered; I guess the cause I fear too right, Heaven has some secret end in it, and tic a securge no question justly laid upon him: Hee has followed me through twenty rooms, and ever when I stay to await his command, he blushes like a girl, and looks upon me, as if modesty kept in his business: so turns away from me, but if I go on, hee follows me again. See, here he is, I doe not use this, yet I know not how, I cannot choose but weep to see him: his very enemies I think, whose wounds have bred his fame, if they should see him now, would find tears in their eyes.
I cannot utter it, why should I keep
A breast to harbour thoughts? I dare not speak:
Darkness is in my bosom, and there lies
A thousand thoughts that cannot brooke the light;
How wilt thou vex me when this deed is done
Conscience? that art afraid to let me name it.
How doe you Sir?
Why very well Mardonius; how dost thou?
Better then you I fear.
I hope thou art; for to be plain• with thee,
Thou art in hell else: secret scorching flame•s
That far transcend earthly material fierce,
Art crept into me, and there is no cure;
Is not that strange Mardonius, theres no cure?
Sir, either I mistake, or there is something hid
That you would utter to me.
So there is, but yet I cannot doe it.
Out with it Sir, i• it be dangerous I shall not shrink to doe you service, I shall no• est•e• • my life a weightier mat∣la then indeed it is, I •n•w tic subi•ct to more chances then it hath thou•es, and I were better loose it in my King• cause, then with an •go. or fall, or sleepin• to a thy••e; as all these are •to•able eno•g•: let me •ut know • ha• I shall do foryou.
It will not out: were you with Gobrius,
And bad him give my sister all content
The place affords, and give her leave to send
And speak to whom she please?
Yes Sir▪ I was.
And did you to Bacurius say as much
About Tigranes?
Yes.
Thats all my business.
O say not so,
You had an answer of all this before,
Besides, I th n•e this business might be vtterd
More carelessly.
Come, thou shalt have it out; I doe beseech thee
By all the love thou hast professed to me,
To see my Sister from me.
Well, and what?
Thats all.
That's strange, shall I say nothing to her?
Not a word;
But if thou love me, find some subtle way
To make her vnsterstand by signs.
But what▪ what s• o•lt I make her understand?
O Mardonius, for that I must be pardoned.
You may, but I can only see her then.
Tic true;
Bear her this ring then, and on more advice
Thou shalt speak to her: Tell her I doe love
My kindred all; wilt thou?
Is there no more?
O yes, and her the best;
Better then any brother loves his sister: That's all.
Me thinks this
Need not have been delivered with such caution;
Isle doe it.
There is more yet,
Wilt thou be faithful to me?
Sir▪ if I take upon me to deliver it,
After I hear it, He pass through fire to doe it▪
I love her better then a brother ought;
Dost thou cons•ue me?
I hope I doe not Sir.
No, thou art dull, kneel down before her▪
And ne'er rise again, till she will love me.
Why, I think she does.
But better then she does, another way;
As wives love Husbands.
Why, I think there are few wives that love their
Husbands better then she does you.
Thou wilt not understand me: is it fit
This should bee vtterd plainl•e; take it then
Naked as it is: I would desire her love
Lasciviously, leudlie, incestuouslie,
To doe a sin that needs must damn vs both;
And thee to▪ Dost thou understand me now?
Yes, there's your Ring again; what have I done
Dishonestly in my whole life, name it▪
That you should put so base a business to me?
Did thou not tell me thou would doe it?
Yes▪ if I undertook it; but if all
My heirs were lives, I would not be engaged
In such a cause •o save my last life.
O guilt, how poor, and weak a thing art thou?
This man that is my servant, whom my breath
Might blow about the world, might beat me here
Having his cause, whilst I pressed down with sin
Could not resist him, dear Mardonius
It was a motion misbeseeming man.
And I am sorry for it.
Pray God you may be so: you must understand, no∣thing that you can utter, can remove my love and service from my Prince. But otherwise, I think I shall not love you more. For you are sinful, and if you doe this crime, you ought to have no laws. For after this it will bee great iniu∣stice in you to punish any offender for any crime: For my self I find my heart too big, I feel I have not patience to look on whilst you run these forbidden courses: Means I have none but your Favour, and I am •ather glad, that I shall loose um both together▪ then keep um with such con∣ditions, I shall find a dwelling amongst some people, where though our garments perhaps be courser, we shall be richer •are within, and harbour no such vices in um. God preserve you, and mend you.
Mardonius, stay Mardonius, For though
My pres•ned state require nothing but knave•s
To be about me, such as are prepared
For every wicked act▪ yet who does know
But that my loathed Fate may turn about,
And I have use of honest men again:
I hope I may, I prethy leave me not.
Where is the King?
There.
An't please your Majesty, ther's the knife.
What knife:
The Sword is eaten.
Away you Fool▪ the King is serious,
And cannot now admit your vanities.
Vanities, I am no honest man if my enemies have not brought it to this, what, doe you think I lie?
No, no, tic well Bessus, tic very well,
I am glad ont'.
If your enemies brought it to that, your enemies are cutlers,
Come, leave the King.
No, let him stay Mardonius, let him stay,
I have occasions with him very weighty,
And I can spare you now.
Sir.
Why I can spare you now.
Mardonius give way to the state affairs
Indeed you are fitter for his present purpose.
Bessus I should employ thee; wilt thou do it
Doe for you, by this ayre I will doe any thing with∣out exception, be it a good, bad, or indifferent thing▪
Do not swear.
By this light but I will,
Any thing whatsoever.
But I shall name a thing
Thy conscience will not suffer thee to doe.
I would fine hear that thing.
Why I would have thee get my Sister for me:
Thou understands me in a wicked manner.
O you would have about with her?
Isle do it, Isle do it In faith.
Wilt thou, dost make no more ant?
More, no, why is there any thing else, if there be tell me, it shall be done.
Hast thou no greater sense of such a sin?
Thou art too wicked for my company
Though I have hell within me, and may yet
Corrupt me further: pray thee answer me
How doe I show to thee after this motion?
Why your Majesty looks as well in my opinion as ever you did since you were borne:
But thou appear to me after thy grant
The ugliest, loathed, detestable thing
That I have ever met with. Thou hast eyes
Like flames of Sulphur, which me thinks doe dart
Infection on me, and thou hast a mouth
Enough to take me in, where there doe stand
Four rows of Iron teeth.
I feel no such thing, but tic no matter how I look, Jle doe your business as well as they that look better, and
when this is dispatcht, if you have a mind to your Mother tell me, and you shall see Isle set it hard:
My Mother, Heaven forgive me to hear this,
I am inspired with horror: I hate thee
Worse then my sin, which if I could come by,
Should suffer death eternal, ne'er to rise
In any breast again. Know I will die
Languishing mad, as I resolve I shall,
Ere I will deal by such an Instrument:
Thou art too sinful to employ in this;
Out of the world, away.
What doe you mean Sir?
Hung round with curses, take thy fearful flight in∣to the deserts, where amongst all the monsters,
If thou findst one foe beastly as thy self,
Thou shalt be held as innocent.
Good Sir.
If there were no such Instruments as thou,
We Kings could never act such wicked deeds:
Seek out a man that mocks Divinity,
That breaks each precept both of Gods and Mans,
And Natures too, and does it without lust;
Me•rely because it is a law, and good,
And live with him: for him thou can not spoil.
Away I say; I will not doe this sin.
Isle press it here till it doe break my breast;
It heaves to get out: but thou art a sin
And spite of torture, I will keep thee in.
Have you written Madam?
Yes, good Gobrias.
And with a kindness, and su•h winning words
As may provoke him at one instant fee e
His double fault, your wrong, and his own rashness.
I have sent words enough, if words may win him
From his displeasure, and such words I hope
As shall gain much upon his goodness, Gobrius:
Yet fearing since they are many, and a women's,
A poor belief may follow; I have woven
As many truths within um to speak for me,
That if he be but gracious, and receive um.
Good Lady, be not fearful; if he should not
Go•e vou your present end in this believe it
You sha l feel (if your virtue can induce you
To labour out this tem•est, which I know
Is but a poor proof •against your patience▪)
All those contents your spirit will arrive at
Newer and sweeter to you; your royal brother
(When he shall once collect himself, and see
How far •e 〈◊〉 been asunder from himself,
What a mere stranger to his golden temper)
M•st from those roots of virtue, (never dying
Though somewhat stopped with humour) shoot again
Into a thousand glories bearing his fa re branches
Hie as our hopes can look at straight as Justice,
Laden with ri e contents: he loves you dearly,
I know it, and I hope I need not further
Win you to understand it.
I believe it,
Howsoever I am sure I love him dearly,
So dearly, that if any thing I write
For my enlarging, should bege• hi anger;
Heaven •e a •itnesse with me, and my faith
I had rather live in•omb'd here.
You shall not feel a vorse stroke then your grief, I am sorr• tic so sharpe: I kiss your hand, and this night will deliver this true story with this hand to your bro∣there.
Peace go with you,
You are a good man; my •paconia
Why are you ever sad thus?
O dear Lady.
〈2 pages missing〉
Many, and strange ones,
I feel my old fire flame again, and burn
So strong and violent, that should I see her
Again, the grief, and that would kill me 〈◊〉.
Your token I acknowledge, you may pass;
There is the King.
I thank your Lordship for it.
She comes, she comes, shame hide me ever from her; would I were buried, or so far removed
Light might not find me out: I dare not see her.
Nay, never hide your self; for were you hid
where earth hides all her riches, ne'er her center;
My wrongs without more day would light me to you:
I must speak ere I die; were all your greatness
Doubled upon you, you're a perjured man,
And only mighty in the wickedness
Of wronging women. Thou art salfe, false Prince,
I live to see it: poor Spaconia lives
To tell thee thou art false; and then no more:
She lives to tell thee thou art more inconstant
Then all ill women ever were together;
Thy faith as firm as raging overflows,
That no bank can command; and as lasting
As boys gay bubbles blown in the air, and broken:
The wind is fixed to thee, and sooner shall
The beaten Mariner with his shrill whistle,
Calm the loud murmurs of the troubled maine,
And strike it smooth again; then thy soul fall
To have peace in love with any: Thou art all
That all good men must hate, and if thy story
Shall tell succeeding ages what thou were,
O let it spare me in it, lest true Lovers
In pity of my wrongs burn thy black legend,
And with their curses shake thy sleeping ashes.
Oh, oh:
The destinies I hope have pointed out
Our ends alike, that thou moist die for love,
Though not for me: for this assure thy self,
The Princess hates thee deadly, and will sooner
Be won to marry with a Bull, and safer,
Then such a beast as thou art: I have struck
I fear too deep; beshrow me fort: Sir,
This sorrow works me like a cunning friendship,
Into the same piece with it; hoe's ashamed,
Alas▪ I have been too rugged: Dear my Lord,
I am sorry I have spoken any thing,
Indeed I am, that may add more restraint
To that too much you have: Good Sir be pleased
To think it was a fault of love, not malice;
And doe as I will doe: forgive it Prince,
I doe, and can forgive the greatest sins
To me you can repent of; pray believe▪me.
O my Spaconia! O thou virtuous woman!
No more, the King Sir.
Have you been careful of our noble Prisoner
That he want nothing fitting for his greatness?
I hope his grace will quit me, for my care Sir.
Tic well, royal Tigranes health.
More then the stricktnesse of this place can give Sir I offer back again to great Arbaces.
We thank you worthy Prince, and pray excuse vs,
We have not seen you since your being here,
I hope your noble usage has been equal
With your own Person: your imprisonment
If it be any, I dare say is eafie,
And shall not outlast two days.
I thank you:
My usage here has been the same it was
Worthy a royal Conqueror. For my restraint
It came unkindly, because much unlooked for;
But I must bear it:
What Lady is that Bacurius?
One of the Princess women Sir.
I feared it: why comes she hither!
To speak with the Prince Tigranes.
From whom Bacurius?
From the Princess Sir.
I know I had seen her.
His fit begins to take him now again
Tic a strange Fever, and twill shake vs all
Anon I fear; would he were well cured of this raging folly: Give me the wars, where men are mad, and may talk what they list, and held the bravest Fellows; This pelting prat∣ling peace is good for nothing: drinking's a virtue to it:
I see theres truth in no man, nor obedience,
But for his own ends, why did you let her in?
It was your own command to bar none from him,
Beside the Princess sent her Ring Sir
For my warrant.
A token to Tigranes, did she not:
Sir tell truth.
I doe not use to lye Sir,
Tic no way I eat or live by, and I think
This is no token Sir.
This combat has undone him: If he had been well beaten, he had been temperate: I shall never see him handsome again, till he have a Horse-mans staff poked through his shoulders, or an arm broke with a Bullet.
I am trifled with.
Sir.
I know it, as I know thee to be false.
Now the clap comes.
You never knew me so Sir, I dare speak it,
And durst a worse man tell me though my better.
Tic well said by my Soul.
Sir you answer as you had no life.
That I fear Sir to loose nobly.
I say Sir once again
You may say Sir what you please.
would I might doe so.
I will Sir, and say openly this woman carries letters, by my life I know she carries letters, this woman does it:
Would Bessus were here to take her aside and search
her, he would quickly tell you what she carried Sir.
I have found it out, this woman carries letters.
If this hold twill be an ill world for Bawds, Cham∣ber-maids, and post-boyes, I thank God I have none but his letters patents, things of his own indicting.
Prince this cunning cannot doe it.
What Sir, I reach you not.
It shall not serve your turn Prince.
Serve my turn Sir.
• Sir it shall not serve your turn.
Be plainer good Sir.
This woman shall carry no more letters back to your love Panthaea, by heaven she shall not, I sa she shall not.
This would make a Saint swear like a Soldier, and a Soldier like termogant.
This beats me more King then the blows you gave me.
Take um away both, and together let um be prison∣ners, strictly and closely kept, or Sir your life shall answer it; and let no body speak with um hereafter.
Well I am subject to you, and must endure these pas∣sions.
This is the imprisonment I have looked for always, and the dear place I would choose.
Sir, have you done well now?
Dare you reprove it?
No.
You must be crossing me.
I have no letters Sir to anger you,
But a dry sonnet of my Corporals
To an old Sadlers wife, and that Isle burn Sir:
Tic like to prove a fine age for the Ignorant.
How dare thou so often forfeit thy life,
Thou know tic in my power to take it.
Yes, and I know you wonnot, or if you doe, you'll miss it quickly.
Why?
Who shall then tell you of these childish follies
When I am dead? Who shall put to his power
To draw those virtues out of a flood of humours
Where they are drowned, and make um shine again?
No cut my head off: doe, kill me:
Then you may talk, and be beleeud, and grow,
And have your too selfe-glorious temper rot••
Into a dead sleep, and the kingdom with you,
Like foreign swords be in your throats, and slaughter
Be every where about you like your flatterers.
Doe, kill me.
Prithee be tamer good Mardonius,
Thou know I love thee, nay I honour thee:
Believe it good old Soldier I am all thine:
But I am racked clean from my self, bear with me,
Wooed thou bear with me good Mardonius.
There comes a good man, love him too, hes tempe∣rate,
You may live to have need of such a virtue,
Rage is not still in fashion.
Welcome good Gobrius.
My service, and this letter to your grace.
From whom?
From the rich mine of virtue, and all beauty,
Your mournful Sister.
She is in prison Gobrius, is she not?
She is Sir till your pleasure doe enlarge her,
Which on my knees I beg; O tic not fit
That all the sweetness of the world in one;
The youth, and virtue, that would have wilde Tigers
And wilder people, that have known no manners
Should live thus Cloysterd up, For your loves sake
(If there be any in that Noble heart)
To her a wretched Lady, and forlorn,
Or for her love to you, (which is as much
As Nature, and obedience ever gave)
Have pity on her beauties.
Prithee stand up, tic true she is too Fair,
And all these commendations but her own:
Would thou had never so commended her,
Or I ne'er lived to have heard it, Gobrius;
If thou but knew of the wrong her beauty does her,
Thou would in pity of her be a liar:
Thy ignorance has drawn me wretched man
Whether my self nor thou can well tell, O my Fate,
I think she loves me; but I fear another
Is deeper in her heart: how think thou Gobrius?
I doe beseech your Grace believe it not,
For let me perish if it be not false:
Good Sir read her letter.
This love, or what a devil is it, I know not, be∣gets more mischief then a wake. I had rather be we I beaten starved, or lousy, then live within the air ont. He that had seen this brave fellow charge through a grove of pikes but tother day, and look upon him now, will ne'er believe his eyes again; If he continue thus but two days more, a Taylor may beat him with one hand tied behind him.
Alas she would be at liberty,
And there be thousand reasons Gobrius
That will deny it:
Which if she knew, she would contentedly
Be where she is and bless her virtue for it,
And me though she were closer, She would Gobrius,
Good man indeed she would.
Then good Sir for her satisfaction
Send for her, and with reason make her know
Why she must live thus from you.
I will go bring her to me.
Y' are very welcome both, some stools there boy,
And reach a Table; Gentlemen of the Sword,
Pray sit without more complement: be gone child,
I have been curious in the searching of you,
Because I understood you wise, and valiant persons.
we understand our selves Sir.
Nay Gentlemen, and my dear friends of the Sword,
No complement I pray; but to the cause
I hang upon, which in few, is my honour.
You cannot hang too much Sir for your honour,
But to your cause, be wise, and speak truth.
My first doubt is my beating by my Prince.
Stay there a little Sir, doe you doubt a beating,
Or have you had a beating by your Prince.
Gentlemen ath'sword, my Prince has beaten me.
Brother what think you of this case
If he have beaten him, the case is clear.
If he have beaten him I grant the case;
But how? We cannot be too subtle in this business
I say, but how?
Even with his royal hand.
Was it a blow of love or indignation.
T was twenty blows of indignation gentlemen,
Besides two blows ath'face.
Those blows ath'face have made a new case ont',
The rest were but an honourable rud•ness▪
Two blows oth'face, and given by a worse man, I must confess as we Sword-men say, had turned the business: Mark me brother, by a worse man; but being by his Prince, had they been ten, and those ten drawn ten teeth, beside the hazard of his nose for ever; all these had been but favours: This is my flat opinion, which Isle die in.
The King may doe much Captain beieeue it, for had hee cracked your skull through like a bottle, or broke a rib or two with crossing of you, yet you had lost no honour: This is strange you may imagine; but this is truth now Captain.
I will be glad to embrace it gentleman;
But how far may he strike me?
Theres another,
A new cause rising from the time, and distance,
In which I will deliver my opinion:
He may strike, beat, or cause to be beaten; for these are natu∣rall to man: your Prince I say may beat you so far forth as his dominion reaches; that's for the distance, the time, ten mile a day▪ I take it.
Brother you err, tic fifteen mile a day,
His stage is ten, his beatings are fifteen.
Tic a the longest, but we subjects must
Be subject to it: you are wise, and virtuous.
Obedience ever makes that noble use ont,
To which I dedicate my beaten body;
I must trouble you a little further Gentlemen of the Sword.
No trouble at all to vs Sir, if we may
Profit your understanding; we are bound
By virtue of ou• calling, to utter our opinions
Shortly, and dis•reetly.
My sorest business is, I have been kicked.
How far Sir?
Not to slatter my self in it all over, my sword forced, but not lost; for dis•reetely I rendered it to save that impu∣tation.
It showed discretion the best part of valour.
Brother, this is a pretty case, pray ponder on it,
Our friend here has been kicked.
He has so brother.
Sorely he says: Now had he sit down here
Upon the mere kick, it had been cowardly.
I think it had been cowardly indeed.
But our friend has r•d••med it, in delivering
His sword without compulsion; and that man
That took it of him, I pronounce a weak one,
And his kicks nullities.
He should have kicked him after the delivery,
Which is the confirmation of a coward.
Brother, I take it you mistake the question:
For say that I were kicked.
I must not say so;
Nor I must not hear it spoke byth' tongue of man
You kicked dear brother; you are merry.
But put the case I were kicked?
Lot them put it that are things weary of their lives, &amp; know not honour: put case you were kicked?
I doe not say I was kicked.
Nor no silly creature, that wears his head without a case, his soul in a skin-coate: you kicked dear brother.
Nay Gentlemen, let vs doe what we shall doe
Truly and honestly; good Sit to the question.
Why then I say, suppose your boy kicked Captain?
The boy may be supposed, hoe's liable; but kick my brother?
A foolish forward zeal Sir in my friend;
But to the boy, suppose the boy were kicked?
I doe suppose it.
Has your boy a sword?
Surely no: I pray suppose a sword too.
I doe suppose it: you grant your boy was kicked then.
By no means Captain, let it be supposed still; this word grant, makes not for vs.
I say this must be granted.
This must be granted brother?
I, this must be granted.
Still the must:
I say this must be granted.
Give me the must again, ag•in; brother you palter.
I will not hear you wasp.
Brother, I say you palter, the must three times toge∣there; I wear as sharpe steel as another man,
And my Fox bites as deep, must•• my dear brother:
But to the cause again:
Nay, look you Gentlemen.
In a word I ha done.
A tall man, but intemperate; tic great pity:
Once more suppose the boy kicked.
Forward.
And being thoroughly kicked, laughs at the kicker▪
So much for vs; proceed.
And in this beaten scorn, as I may call it,
Delivers up his weapon: where lies the error?
It lies ith beating Sir,
I found it four days since.
The error, and a sore one, as I take it;
Lies in the thing kicking.
I understand that well, tic sore indeed Sir.
That is according to the man that did it.
There springs a new branch: whose was the foo•e?
Ah Lords.
The cause is mighty, but had it been two Lords,
And both had kicked you, if you laughed, tic clear.
I did laugh,
But how will that help me Gentlemen?
Yes, it shall help you, if you laughed aloud.
As loud as a kicked man could laugh, I laughed Sir:
My reason now; the valiant man is known
By suffering and contemning, you have
Enough of both, and you are valiant.
If he be sure he has been kicked enough:
For that brave sufferance you speak of brother,
Consists not in a beating, and away,
But in a cudgeld body, from eighteen
To eight and thirty: in a head rebuk't
With pots of all Size, daggers, stools, and bedstaues,
This shows a valiant man.
Then I am valiant, as valiant, as the proudest,
For these are all familiar things to me:
Familiar as my sleep, or want of money.
All my whole bodi's but one bruise with beating,
I think I have been cudgeld with all nations,
And almost all Religions.
Embrace him brother, this man is valiant,
I know it by my self hes valiant.
Captain thou art a valiant Gentleman
To abide upon it, a very valiant man.
My equal friends ath'sword, I must request your hands to this.
Tic fit it should be.
Boy get some wine, and pen and ink within:
Am I clear Gentlemen?
Sir when the world has taken notice what we have done,
Make much of your body, for Isle pawn my steel,
Men will be coyer of their legs hereafter.
I must request you go along, and testify to the Lord Bacurius, whose foot has struck me, how you find my cause.
We will, and tell that Lord he must be ruled,
Or there be those abroad will rule his Lordship.
Sir her's the Princess.
Leave vs then alone.
For the maine cause of her imprisonment
Must not be heard by any but her self:
You are welcome Sister, and I would to God
I could so bid you by another name,
If you aboue love not such sins as these▪
Circle my heart with thoughts as cold as snow
To quench these rising flames that harbour here.
Sir, does it please you, I should speak.
Please me,
I more then all the art of Music can;
Thy speech does please me, for it ever sounds
As thou broughts joyful unexpected news:
And yet it is not fit thou should•t be heard,
I prithee think so.
Be it so, I will.
I am the first that ever had a wrong
So far from being fit to have redress,
That it was unfit to hear it; I will back
To prison rather, then disquiet you,
And waite till it be fit.
No, doe not go,
For I will hear thee with a serious thought:
I have collected all thats man about me
Together strongly, and I am resolved
To hear the• largely, but I doe beseech thee
Doe not come nearer to me, for there is
Something in that that will undo• vs both.
Alas Sir, am I venom?
Yes to me.
Though of thy self I think thee to be in
As equal a degree of heate, •r cold
As Nature can make, yet as ••sound men
Convert the sweetest, and the nourishingst meates
Into diseases, so shall I distempered,
Doe thee, I prethe• draw no •eerer to me.
Sir this is that I would, I am of late,
Shut from the world, and why it should be thus
Is all I wish to know.
Why credit me
Panthaea, credit me that am thy brother,
Thy loving brother, that there is a cause
Sufficient, vet unfit for thee to know,
That might undo thee eu•rlastingly
Only to hear•, wilt thou b•• credit this;
By heaven •is true, b•leeu• it if thou can•t.
Children a•• •oo••s are e•e• credulous;
And I am both I thy•ke, for I b•l•eve:
If you dissemble be it on your head,
Isle back unto my•rison▪ yet me thinks
I might be kept in some place where you are:
For in my self • find, I know not what
To call it, but it is a great desire
To see you often.
Fie, you come in a step, what doc you mean
Dear Sister▪ doe not so: Alas Pa•thaea,
Where I am, would you be, why thats the cause
You are imprisoned, that you may not be
Where I am.
Then I must endure it Sir, God keep you.
Nay, you shall hear the cause in short Panthaea;
And when thou hearst it, thou wilt blush for me,
And hang thy head down like a Violet
Full of the mornings dew: There is a way
To gain thy freedom, but tic such a one
As puts thee in worse bondage, and I know,
Thou would encounter fire, and make a proof
Whether the Gods have care of innocents,
Rather then follow it; know I have lo•t
The only difference betwixt man, and beast,
My reason.
Heaven forbid.
Nay it is gone,
And I am left as far without a bound,
As the wild Ocean that obeys the winds;
Each suddai•e pass•on throws me as it lifts,
And ouerwhelmes all that oppose my will:
I have beheld thee with a lustful eye:
My heart is set on wickedness, to act
Such sins with thee, as I have been afraid
To think off: If thou dare consent to this,
(Which I beseech thee doe not) thou moist gain
Thy liberty, and yield me a content:
If not thy dwelling must be dark, and close
Where I may never see thee; For God knows
That laid this punishment upon my pride,
Thy sight at some time will enforce my madness
To make a start eye to thy ravishing:
Now spit upon me, and call all reproaches
Thou can devise together; and at once
Hurl um against me: for I am a sickness
As killing as the plague, ready to seize thee.
Far be it from me to r•uile the King:
But it is true, that I should rather choose
To search out death, that else would search out me,
And in a grave sleep with my innocence,
Then welcome such a sin: It is my fate,
To these cross accidents I was ordained,
And must have patience; and but that my eyes
Have more of woman in um then my heart,
I would not weep: peace enter you again.
Farewell, and good Panthaea pray for me;
Thy prayers are pure, that I may find a death,
How ever soon before my passions grow,
That they forget, what I desire, is sin;
For thither they are tending: If that happen,
Then I shall force thee, though thou were a Virgin
By vow to Heaven, and shall pull a heap
Of strange▪ yet vninuented sins upon me.
Sir, I will pray for you▪ yet you shall know
It is a sullen •ate that governs vs.
For I could wish as heartily as you
I were no sister to you▪ I should then
Embrace your lawful love sooner then health.
Could •thou affect me then?
So perfectly
That as it is, I ne'er shall sway my heart
To like another.
Then I curse my birth,
Must this be added to my miseries
That thou art willing too, Is there no steppe
To our full happen•se, but these mere sounds
Brother and Sister.
There is nothing else
But these alas will separate vs more
Then twenty worlds betwixt vs.
I have lived
To conquer men, and now am overthrown
Only by words, Brother and Sister: where
Have those words dwelling? I will find um out
And utterly destroy them, but they are
Not to be grasp't▪ let um be men or beasts,
And I will cut um from the earth, or towns,
And I will rase um, and then blow um up:
Let um be Seas, and I will drink them off,
And yet have unquenched fire left in my breast:
Let um be any thing but merely voice▪
But tic not in the power of any Force
Or policy to conquer them.
Panthaea,
What shall wee doe? shall we stand firmly here, and gaze our eyes out?
Would I could doe so;
But I shall weep out mine.
Accursed man,
Thou boughtst thy reason at too dear a rate;
For thou haft all thy actions bounded in
With curious rules, when cuerie Beast is free:
What is there that acknowledges a kindred
But wretched Man? Who ever saw the Bull
Fearfully leave the Heifer that he liked,
Because they had one Dam?
Sir, I disturb you,
And my self too; it were better I were gone:
I will not be so foolish as I was.
Stay, we will love just as becomes our births,
No otherwise: Brothers and Sisters may
VValke hand in hand together; so will we
Come nearer: Is there any hurt in this?
I hope not.
Faith theres none at all:
And tell me truly now, is there not one
You love aboue me?
No by Heaven.
Yet you sent unto Tigranes Sister.
True, but for another: for the truth—
No more,
Isle credit thee; I know thou can not lie,
Thou art all truth.
But is there nothing else
That we may doe, but only walk; me thinks
Brothers and sisters lawfully may kiss.
And so they may Panthaea, so will we,
And kiss again too; we were scrupulous
And foolish, but we will be so no more.
If you have any mercy, let me go
To prison, to my death, to any thing:
I feel a sin growing upon my blood,
Worse then all these, hotter I fear then yours.
That is impossible, what should we doe?
Fly •it for Gods sake.
So we must, away;
Sin grows upon vs more by this delay.
SIR, the King has seen your Commission, and •eleeu•s it, and freely by this warrant gives you leave to visit Prince Tigranes your noble Master.
I thank his Grace, and kiss his hanes.
But is the maine of all your business Ended in this?
I have another, but a worse; I am ashamed, it is a business.—
You serve a worthy person, and a stranger I am sure you are; you may employ me if you please, without your purse, such Office should ever be their own rewards.
I am bound to your nobleness.
I may have need of you, and then this courtesy,
If it be any, is not ill bestowed:
But may I civilly desire the rest?
I shall not be a hurter, if no helper.
Sir, you shall know I have lost a foolish daughter,
And with her all my patience; pilferd away,
By a mean Captain of your Kings.
Stay there Sir:
If he have reached the noble worth of Captain,
He may well claim a worthy gentlewoman,
Though she were yours, and noble.
I grant all that too: but this wretched fellow
Reaches no further then the empty name,
That serves to feed him; were he valiant,
Or had but in him any noble nature,
That might hereafter promise him a good man;
My carcs were something lighter, and my grave
A span yet from me.
I confess such fellows
Be in all royal Camps, and have, and must be
To make the 〈◊〉 of coward more detested
In the mean Soldier, that with such a foil
Sets of much valour: By description
I should now guess him to you. It was Bessus,
I dare almost with confidence pronounce it.
Tic such a scurvy name as Bessus, and now I think tic hee.
Captain, doe you call him?
Believe me Sir, you have a misery
Too mighty for your age: A pox upon him,
〈2 pages missing〉
You a valiant fellow for all this.
My daughter is a Whore,
I feel it now too sensible; yet I will see her,
Discharge my self of being Father to her,
And then back to my Country, and there die;
Farewell Captain.
Farewell Sir, farewell, commend me to the Gentle∣woman I pr•in.
How now Captain, bear up man.
Gentlemen ath'sword your hands once more, I have Been kicked again, but the foolish fellow is penitent,
Has asked me mercy, and my honor's safe.
We knew that, or the foolish fellow had better a kick't His Grandsire.
Confirm, confirm I pray.
There be our hands again.
Now let him come, and say he was not sorry,
And he sleeps for it.
Alas good ignorant old man, let him go,
Let him go, these courses will undo him.
My Lord your authority is good, and I am glad it is so, for my confined would never hinder you from seeing your own King. I am a Minister, but not a governor of this state; yonder is your King, Isle leave you.
There he is indeed,
And with him my disloyal child.
I doe perceive my fault so much, that yet
Me thinks thou should not have forgiven me.
Health to your Majesty.
What? good Ligones, welcome; what business brought thee hither?
Several Businesses.
My public business will appear by this:
I have a message to deliver, which
If it please you so to authorise, is
An embassage from the Armenian state;
Unto Arbaces for your liberty▪
The offer's there set down, please you to read it.
There is no alteration happened
Since I came thence?
None Sir, all is as it was.
And all our friends are well.
All very well.
Though I have done nothing but what was good,
I dare not see my Father: It was fault
Enough not to acquaint him with that good.
Madam I should have seen you.
O good Sir forgive me.
Forgive you, why I am no kin to you, am I?
Should it be measured by my mean deserts,
Indeed you are not.
Thou could prate unhappily
Ere thou could go, would thou could doe as well.
And how does your custom hold out here.
Sir.
Are you in private still, or how?
What doe you mean?
Doe you take money? are you come to sell sin yet? perhaps I can help you to liberal Clients: or has not the King cast you off yet? O thou wild creature, whose best com∣mendation is, that thou art a young VVhore. I would thy Mother had lived to see this: or rather would I had dyed ere I had seen it: why did not make me acquainted when thou were first resolved to be a Who•e? I would have seen thy hot lust satisfied more privately. I would have kept a dancer, and a whole consort of Musicians in mine own house, only to fiddle thee.
Sir I was never whore.
If thou could not say so much for thy self thou should be Carted.
Ligones I have read it, and like it,
You shall deliver it.
Well Sir I will: but I have private business with you.
Speak, what first?
How has my age deserved so ill of you,
That you can pick no strumpets in the Land,
But out of my breed.
Strumpets good Ligones?
Yes, and I wish to have you know, I scorn
To get a Whore for any Prince alive,
And yet scorn will not help me thinks: My daughter
Might have been spared, there were enough beside.
May I not prosper, but Shoe's innocent
As morning light for me, and I dare swear
For all the world.
Why is she with you then?
Can she waite on you better then your men,
Has she a gift in plucking off your stockings,
Can she make Cawdles well, or cut your Corns,
Why doe you keep her with you? For your Queen
I know you doe contemn her, so should I
And every Subject else think much at it.
• et um think much, but tic more firm then earth
Thou see thy Queen there.
Then have I made a fair hand, I called her Whore,
If I shall speak now as her Father, I cannot of use
But greatly rejoice that she shall be a Queen: but if
I should speak to you as a Statesman she were more fit
To be your VVhore.
Get you about your business to Arbaces,
Now you talk idly.
Yes Sir, I will go.
And shall she be a Queeue, she had more wit
Then her old Father when she ran away:
Shall she be a Queen, now by my troth tic fine,
He dance out of all measure at her wedding:
Shall I not Sir?
Yes marry shalt thou.
In make these witherd Kexes bear my body
Two h••rest gether aboue ground.
Nay, go▪ my business requires haste.
Good God preserve you, you are an excellent King.
Farewell good Father.
Farewell sweet virtuous Daughter;
Ineuer was so Joyful in my life,
That I remember: shall she be a Queen?
Now I perceive a man may weep for joy,
I had thought they had lied that said so.
Come my dear love.
But you may see another
May alter that again.
Urge it no more;
I have made up a new strong constancy,
Not to be shook with eyes; I know I have
The passions of a man, but if I meet
With any subject that shall hold my eyes
More firmly then is fit; Isle think of thee,
And run away from it: let that suffice.
Three gentlemen without to speak with me?
Yes Sir. Bac. Let them come in.
They are entered Sir already.
Now fellows, your business, are these the Gentlemen.
My Lord I have made bold to bring these Gentlemen my Friends ath'sword along with me.
I am afraid you'll fight then.
My good Lord I will not, your Lordship is mistaken,
Fear not Lord.
Sir I am sorry fort.
I can ask no more in honour, Gentlemen you hear my Lord is sorry:
Not that I have beaten you, but beaten one that will be beaten: one whose dull body will require lancing: As surfeits doe the diet, spring and full. Stock-fish? Now to your swordmen, what come they for good Captain
It seems your Lordship has forgot my name.
No nor your nature neither, though they are things fitter I confess for any thing, then my remembrance, or any honest mans, what shall these billets doe, be piled up in my VVood-yard?
Your Lordship holds your mirth still, God continue it: but for these Gentlemen they come.
To swear you are a Coward, spare your Book, I doe believe it.
Your Lordship still draws wide, they come to vouch under their valiant hands, I am no Coward.
That would be a show indeed worth seeing: sir be wise and take money for this motion, travel with it, and where the name of Bessus has been known, or a good Cow∣art stirring, twill yield more then a tilting. This will prove more beneficial to you, if you be thrifty, then your Captaineship, and more natural; Men of most valiant hands is this true?
It is so most renowned,
Tic somewhat strange.
Lord, it is strange, yet true; wee have examined from your Lordships foot there to this mans head, the nature of the beatings; and we doe find his honour is come off clean, and sufficient: This as our swords shall help vs.
You are much bound to your bilbow-men, I am glad you are straight again Captain▪ it were good you would think some way to gratify them, they have undergone a la∣bore for you Bessus, would have puzzeld Hercules, with all his valour.
Your Lordship must understand we are no men ath' Law, that take pay for our opinions: it is sufficient wee have cleared our friend.
Yet here is something due, which I as touched in con∣science will discharge Captain; Isle pay this rent for you.
Spare your self my good Lord; my brave friends aim at nothing but the virtue.
Thats but a cold discharge Sir for their pains.
O Lord▪ my good Lord.
Be not so modest, I will give you something.
They shall dine with your Lordship, that's sufficient.
Something in hand the while; ye rogues, ye apple∣squires: doe you come hither with your bottled valour, your windle froth, to limit out my beatings.
I doe beseech your Lordship.
O good Lord.
Sfoote, what a many of beaten slaves are here? get me a cudgel sir, and a tough one.
More of your foot, I doe beseech your Lordship.
You shall, you shall dog, and your fellow beagle.
A this side good my Lord.
Off with your swords, for if you hurt my foot, Isle have you fleade you rascals.
Mines off my Lord.
I beseech your Lordship stay a little, my strap's tied to my codpiece point: Now when you please.
Captain, these are your valiant friends, you long for a little too?
I am very well, I humbly thank your Lordship.
Whats that in your pocket slave, my key you mung∣rell? thy buttocks cannot be so hard, out with it quickly.
Here tic Sir, a small piece of Artillery, that a gentle∣man a dear friend of your Lordships sent me with to get it mended Sir; for if you mark, the nose is somewhat loose.
A friend of mine you rascal, I was never wearier of doing nothing, then kicking these two foote-bals.
Here is a good cudgel Sir.
It comes too late; I am weary, prithee doe thou beat um.
My Lord this is foul play in faith, to put a fresh man v∣pone vs; Men are but men.
That i••t shall save your bones, up with your rotten regiment, and be gone; I had rather thresh, then be bound to kick these raskals, till they cried hold: Bessus you may put your hand to them now, and then you are quit. Farewell, as you like this, pray visit me again, twill keep me in good breath.
Has a devilish hard foot, I never felt the like.
Nor I, and yet Ime sure I ha felt a hundred.
If he kick thus ith dog-daies, he will be dry founderd: what cure now Captain, besides oil of baize?
Why well enough I warrant you, you can go.
Yes, God be thanked; but I feel a shrewd ach, sure he has sprang my huckle bone.
I ha loft a haunch.
A little butter friend, a little butter▪ butter and parse∣lie is a sovereign matter: probatum est.
Captain, we must request your hands now to our ho∣nurse.
Yes marry shall ye, and then let all the world come, we are valiant to our selves, and theres an end:
Nay, then we must be valiant; O my ribs.
O my small guts, a plague upon these sharpe toe'd shoes, they are murderers.
It is resolved, I bore it whilst I could,
I can no more, Hell open all thy gates,
And I will thorough them; if they be shut,
Isle batter um, but I will find the place
Where the most damned have dwelling; ere I end,
Amongst them all they shall not have a sin,
But I may call it mine: I must begin
With murder of my friend, and so go on
To an incestuous ravishing, and end
My life and sins with a forbidden blow
Upon my self.
What Tragedy is ne'er?
That hand was never wont to draw a Sword,
But it cried dead to something:
have you bid Gobrius come?
How doe you Sir?
well, is he coming?
why Sir are you thus?
why does your hand proclaim a lawless war
Against your self?
Thou answer me one question with another,
Is Gobrius coming?
Sir he is.
Tic well.
I can forbear your questions then, be gone Sir, I have marked.
Mark less, it troubles you and me.
You are more variable then you were.
It may be so.
To day no Hermit could be humblier
Then you were to vs all.
And what of this?
And now you take new rage into your eyes,
As you would look vs all out of the Land.
I doe confess it, will that satisfy,
I prithee get thee gone.
Sir I will speak.
Will ye?
It is my duty,
I fear you will kill your self: I am a subject,
And you shall doe me wrong in it: tic my cause,
And I may speak.
Thou art not trained in sin,
It seems Mardonius: kill my self, by heaven
I will not doe it yet; and when I will,
Isle tell thee then: I shall be such a creature,
That thou wilt give me leave without a word.
There is a method in mans wickedness,
It grows up by degrees; I am not come
So high as killing of my self, there are
A hundred thousand sins twixt me and it,
Which I must doe, I shall come toot at last;
But take my oath not now, be satisfied,
And get thee hence.
I am sorry tic so ill.
Be sorry then,
True sorrow is alone, grieve by thy self.
I pray you let me see your sword put up
Before I go; Isle leave you then.
Why so?
What folly is this in thee? is it not
As apt to mischief as it was before?
Can I not reach it think thou? these are toys
For children to be pleased with, and not men;
Now I am safe you think: I would the book
Of Fate were here, my sword is not so sure,
But I should get it out, and mangle that
That all the destinies should quite forget
Their fixed decrees, and hast to make vs new
Far other Fortunes, mine could not be worse,
Wilt thou now leave me?
God put into your bosom temperate thoughts,
Isle leave you though I fear.
Go, thou art honest,
Why should the hasty errors of my youth
Be so unpardonable, to draw a sin
Helpless upon me?
There is the King, now it is ripe.
Draw near thou guilty man,
That art the author of the loathedst crime
Five ages have brought forth, and hear me speak
Curses incurable, and all the evils
Mans b•die or his spirit can receive
Be with thee.
Why Sir doe you curse me thus?
Why doe I curse thee, if there be a man
Subtle in curses, that exceeds the rest,
His worst wish on thee. Thou hast broke my hart.
How Sir? Have I preserved you from a child,
From all the arrows, malice or ambition
Could shoot at you, and have I this for pay?
Tic true thou did preserve me, and in that
VVert crueiler then hardened murderers
Of Infants and their mothers; thou did save me
Only till thou had studied out a way
How to destroy me cunningly thy self:
This was a curious way of torturing.
What doe you mean?
Thou know the evils thou hast done to me,
Dost thou remember all those witching letters
Thou sentst unto me to Armenia,
Filled with the praise of my beloved Sister,
Where thou extolst her beauty; what had I
To doe with that, what could her beauty be
To me, and thou did write how well she loved me,
Doest thou remember this: so that I doted
Something before I saw her.
This is true.
Is it, and • when I was returned thou know
Thou did pursue it, till thou woundst me into
Such a strange, and unbelieved affection,
As good men cannot think on.
This I grant, I think I was the cause.
VVert thou▪ Nay more, I think thou meantst it.
Sir I have a lie
As I love God and honesty, I did:
It was my meaning.
Be thine own sad Judge,
A further condemnation will not need:
Prepare thy self to die.
Why Sir to die?
Why would thou live, was ever yet offender
So impudent, that had a thought of mercy
After confession of a crime like this?
Get out I cannot, where thou hurlst me in,
But I can take revenge, that's all the sweetness
Left for me.
Now is the time, hear me but speak.
No, yet I will be far more merciful
Then thou were to me; thou did steal into me,
And never gave me warning: so much time
As I give thee now, had prevented thee
For ever. Notwithstanding all thy sins,
If thou hast hope, that there is yet a prayer
To save thee, turn, and speak it to your self.
Sir, you shall know your sins before you doe um If you kill me.
I will not stay then.
Know you kill your Father.
How?
You kill your Father.
My Father? though I know it for a lie
Made out of fear to save thy stained life:
The very reverence of the word comes cross me,
And ties mine arm down.
I will tell you that shall heighten you again, I am thy
Father, I charge thee hear me.
If it should be so,
As tic most false, and that I should be sound
A bastard issue, the despised fruit
Of lawless lust, I should no more admire
All my wilde passions: but another truth
Shall be wrung from thee: If I could come by
The spirit of pain, it should be powered on thee,
Till thou allowest thy self more full of lies
Then he that teaches thee.
Turn thee about,
I come to speak to thee thou wicked man,
Hear me thou Tyrant.
I will turn to thee,
Hear me thou Strumpet: I have blotted out
The name of mother, as thou hast thy shame.
My shame, thou hast less shame then any thing:
Why dost thou keep my daughter in a prison?
Why dost thou call her Sister, and doe this?
Cease thou strange impudence, and answer quickly,
If thou contemn'st me, this will ask an answer,
And have it.
Help me gentle Gobrius.
Guilt dare not help guilt, though they grow together
In doing ill, yet at the punishment
They sever, and each flies the noise of other,
Think not of help, answer.
I will, to what?
To such a thing as if it be a truth,
Think what a creature thou hast made thy self,
That did not shame to doe, what I must blush
Only to ask thee: tell me who I am,
Whose son I am, without all circumstance;
Be thou as hasty, as my Sword will be
If thou refuse.
Why you are his son.
His son?
Swear, swear, thou worse then woman damned.
By all thats good you are.
Then art thou all that ever was known bad. Now is
The cause of all my strange misfortunes come to light:
What reverence expects thou from a child
To bring forth which thou hast offended Heaven,
Thy husband and the Land: Adulterous witch
I know now why thou would have poisoned me,
I was thy lust which thou would have forgot:
Thou wicked mother of my sins, and me,
Show me the way to the inheritance
I have by thee: which is a spacious world
Of impious acts, that I may soon possess it:
Plagues rot thee, as thou liu'st, and such diseases
As use to pay lust, recompense thy deed.
You doe not know why you curse thus.
Too well:
You are a pair of Vipers, and behold
The Serpent you have got; there is no beast
But if he knew, it has a pedigree
As brave as mine, for they have more descents,
And I am every way as beastly got,
As far without the compass of a law,
As they.
You spend your rage, and words in vain,
And rail upon a guess: hear vs a little.
No I will never hear, but talk away
My breath, and die.
Why but you are no Baftard.
Howe's that?
Nor child of mine.
Still you go on in wonders to me.
Pray be more patient, I may bring comfort to you.
I will kneel,
And hear with the obedience of a child;
Good Father speak, I doe acknowledge you,
So you bring comfort.
First know our last King your supposed Father
Was old and feeble when he married her,
And almost all the Land as she past hope
Of issue from him.
Therefore she took leave
To play the whore, because the King was old:
Is this the comfort?
what will you find out
To give me satisfaction, when you find
How you have injured me: let fire consume me,
If ever I were whore.
Forbear these starts,
Or I will leave you wedded to despair,
As you are now: if you can find a temper,
My breath shall be a pleasant western wind,
That cools, and blasts not.
Bring it out good Father,
Isle lie, and listen here as reverently
As to an Angel: If I breathe too loud,
Tell me; for I would be as still as night.
Our King I say was old, and this our Queen
Desired to bring an heir; but yet her husband
She thought was past it, and to be dishonest
I think she would not; if she would have been,
The truth is, she was watched so narrowly,
And had so slender opportunity,
She hardly could have been: But yet her cunning
Found out this way; she feigned her self with child,
And posts were sent in haste throughout the Land,
And God was humbly thanked in every Church,
That so had blessed the Queen, and prayers were made
For her safe going, and delivery:
She feigned now to grow bigger, and perceived
This hope of issue made her feared, and brought
A far more large respect from every man,
And saw her power increase, and was resolved,
Since she belieu'd she could not have it indeed;
At least she would be thought to have a child.
Doe I not hear it well; nay, I will make
No noise at all; but pray you to the point,
Quick as you can.
Now when the time was full,
She should be brought abed; I had a son
Borne, which was you: This the Queen hearing of,
Moved me to let her have you, and such reasons
She showed me as she knew would tie
My secrecy: she swear you should be King;
And o be short, • did deliue• you
Unto her, and pretended you we e dead;
And in mine own house kept a Funeral,
And had an emprie coffin put in earth:
That night the Queen feigned hastily to labour,
And by a pair of women of her own.
Which she had charmed, she made the world believe
She was delivered of you: you grew up
As the Kings son▪ till you were six year old;
Then did the King die, and did leave to me
Protection of the Realm; and contrary
To his own expectation, left this Queen
Truly with child indeed of the fair Princess
Panthaea: Then she could have torn her heir,
And did alone to me yet durst not speak
In publi•e; for she knew she should be found
A Traitor, and her talk would have been thought
Madness or any thing rather then truth:
This was the only cause why she did seek
To poison you, and I to keep you safe:
And this the reason why I sought to kindle
Some spark of love in you to fair Panthaea,
That she might get part of her right again.
And have you made an end now, is this all?
If not, I will be still till I am aged,
Till all my heirs are silver.
This is all.
And is it true say you Madam?
Yes God knows it is most true.
Panthaea t• en is not my Sister. Gob No.
But can you prove this?
If you will give consent: else who dare go about it.
Give consent?
Why I will have them all that know it racked
To get this from um: All that waits without
Come in, what ere you be come in, and be
Partakers of my Joy: O you are welcome.
Mardonius the best news, nay, draw no nearer
They all shall hear it: I am found no King.
Is that so good news?
Yes, the happiest news that ere was heard.
Indeed it were well for you,
If you might be a little less obeyed.
On, call the Queen.
Why she is there.
The Queen Mardonius, Panthaea is the Queen,
And I am plain Arbaces, go some one,
She is in Gobrius house; since I saw you
There are a thousand things delivered to me
You little dream of.
So it should seem: My Lord,
What furi's this.
Believe me tic no fury,
All that he says is truth.
Tic very strange.
Why doe you keep your hats off Gentlemen,
Is it to me? 〈◊〉 good faith it must not be:
I cannot now command you, but I pray you
For the respect you bare me, when you took
Me for your King, each man clap on his hat at my desire.
We will: but you are not found
So mean a man, but that you may be covered
As well as we, may you not?
O not here,
You may but not I, for here is my Father in presence,
Where?
Why there O the whole story
Would be a wilderness to loose thy self
For ever; O pardon me dear Father,
For all the idle, and irreverent words
That I have spoke in idle moods to you:
I am Arbaces, we all fellow subjects,
Nor is the Queen Panthaa now my Sister.
Why if you remember fellow subject Arbaces, I told you once she was not your sister, I say she looked nothing like you.
I think you did good Captain Bessus.
Here will arise another question now amongst the Swordmen, whether I be to call him to account for beating me, now he's proved no King.
Sir, here is Ligones
The Agent for the Armenian King.
Where is he, I know your business good Ligones,
We must have our King again, and will.
I knew that was your business, you shall have
Your King again, and have him so again
As never King was had. Go one of you
And bid Bacurius bring Tigranes hither,
And bring the Lady with him, that Panthaea
The Queen Panthaa sent me word this morning
Was brave Tigranes mistress.
Tic Spaconia.
I, I, Spaconia.
She is my daughter.
She is so, I could now tell any thing
I never heard; your King shall go so home
As never man went.
Shall he go on's head?
He shall have Chariots easier then ayre
That I will have invented; and ne'er think
He shall pay any ransom; and thy self
That art the Messenger shall ride before him
On a Horse cut out of an entire Diamond,
That shall be made to go with golden wheels,
I know not how yet.
Why I shall be made
For ever, they belied this King with vs
And savd he was unkind.
And then thy daughter,
She shall have some strange think, wele have the kingdom
Sold utterly, and put into a toy.
Which she shall wear about her carelessly
Some where or other.
See the virtuous Queen.
Behold the humblest subject that you have
Kneel here before you.
Why kneel you
To me that am your vassal?
Grant me one request.
Alas, what can I grant you?
What I can I will.
That you will please to marry me,
If I can prove it lawful.
Is that all?
More willingly, then I would draw this ayre.
Isle kiss this hand in earnest.
Sir, Tigranes is coming though he made it strange
To see the Princess any more.
The Queen,
Thou meanest: O my Tigranes pardon me,
Tread on my neck I freely offer it,
And if thou be so given; take revenge,
For I have injured thee.
No, I forgive,
And rejoice more that you have found repentance,
Then I my liberty.
Moist thou be happy
In thy fair choice; for thou art temperate:
You owe no ransom to the state, know that;
I have a thousand joys to tell you of,
which yet I dare not v•la, till I pay
My thanks to Heaven for um: will you go
with me, and ••l e me; pray you doe.
I will.
Take then your fair one with you, and your Queen
Of goodness, and of vs; O give me leave
To take your arm in mine: Come every one
That takes delight in goodness, help to sing
Loud thanks for me, that I am proved no King.

SIR, I may move the Court to serve your will•
But therein shall both wrong you and my self.
Why think you so sir?
Because I am familiar
With what will be their answer: they will say,
Tic against law, and argue me of Ignorance
For offering them the motion.
You know not, Sir•
How in this cause they may dispense with Law,
And therefore frame not you their answer for them,
But doe your parts.
I love the cause so well,
As I could run, the hazard of a check for it.
From whom?
Some of the bench, that watch to give it,
More then to doe the office that they sit for:
But give me (sir) my fee.
Now you are Noble.
I shall deserve this better yet, in giving
My Lord some counsel, (if he please to hear it)
Then I shall doe with pleading.
What may it be, sir?
That it would please his Lordship, as the Presi∣dents,
And Counsaylors of Court come by, to stand
Here, and but show your self, and to some one
Or two, make his request: there is a minute
When a mans presence speaks in his own cause,
More then the tongues of twenty advocates.
I have urged that.
Their Lordships here are coming,
I must go get me a place, you'll find me in Court,
And at your service.
Now put on your Spirits.
The ease that you prepare your self, my Lord,
In giving up the place you hold in Court,
Will prove (I fear) a trouble in the State,
And that no slight one.
Pray you sir, no more.
Now sir, lose not this offered means: their looks
Fixed on you, with a pitying earnestness,
Inuit you to demand their furtherance
To your good purpose.—This such a du•ness
So foolish and untimely as—
You know him.
I doe, and much lament the sudden fall
Of his brave house, It is young Charloyes.
Son to the Ma•shall, from whom he inherits
His •am and virtues only.
Ha, hey name you.
His father died in prison two days since.
Yes, to the shame of this ungrateful State•
That such a Master in the art of war,
So noble, and so highly meriting,
From this forgetful Country, •hold, for want
Of means to satisfy his creditors,
The sums he took up for the general good,
Meet with an end so infamous.
Dare you ever hope for like opportunity?
My good Lord!
My wish bring comfort to you.
The time calls vs.
Good morrow Colonel.
This obstinate spleen,
You think becomes your sorrow, and sorts well
With your black suits: but grant me wit, or judgment,
And by the freedom of an honest man,
And a true friend to boot, I swear it is shameful.
And therefore flatter not your self with hope,
Your sable habit, with the hat and cloak,
No though the ribons help, have power to worke'em
To what you would: for those that had no eyes,
To see the great acts of your father, will not,
From any fashion sorrow can put on,
Bee taught to know their duties.
If they will not,
They are too old to learn, and I too young
To give them counsel, since if they partake
The understanding, and the hearts of men,
They will prevent my words and tears: if n•t,
What can persuasion, though made eloquent
With grief, work upon such as have changed natures
With the most savage beast? Blessed, blessed be ever
The memory of that happy age, when justice
Had no guards to keep off wronged innocence,
From flying to her succours, and in that
Assurance of redress: where now (Roment)
The damned, with more ease may as•end from Hell,
Th•n we arrive at her. One Cerberus there
Forbids the passage, in our Courts a thousand,
As loud, and fertile headed, and the Client
That wants the sops, to fill their ravenous throats,
Must hope for no access: why should I then
Attempt impossibilities: you friend, being
Too well acquainted with my dearth of means
To make my entrance that way?
Would I were not.
But Sir, you have a cause, a cause so just,
Of such necessity, not to be deferd,
As would compel a maid, whose foot was never
Set ore her fathers threshold, nor within
The house where she was borne, ever spake word,
Which was not ushered with pure virgin blushes,
To drown the tempest of a pleaders tongue,
And force corruption to give back the hire
It took against her: let examples move you.
You see great men in birth, esteem and fortune,
Rather then lose a scruple of their right,
Fawn basely upon such, whose gowns put off,
They would disdain for Servants.
And to these can I become a suitor?
Without loss,
Would you consider, that to gain their favours,
O•r chaste•st dames put off their modesties,
Soldiers forget their hono•s, usurers
Make sacrifice of Gold, poets of wit,
And men religious, part with fame, and goodness?
Be therefore won to use the means, that may
Adieu•ce your pious ends.
You shall overcome.
And you receive the glory, pray you now practise.
It is well.
No• look on me!
You •used have patience—Offer't again.
And be again contemned?
I know whats to be done.
And that your Lordship
Will please to do your knowledge, we offer, first
Our thankful hearts here, as a bounteous earnest
To what we will add
One word more of this
I am your enemy. Am I a man
Your bribes can work on? ha?
Friends, you mistake
The way to win my Lord, he must not hear this,
But I, as one in favour, in his sigh•,
May harken to you for my profit. Sir,
I pray hear em.
Tic well.
Observe him now.
Your cause being good, and your proceedings so,
Without corruption; I am your friend,
Speak your desires.
Oh, they are charitable,
The Ma•shall stood engaged unto vs three,
Two hundred thousand crowns, which by his death
We are defeated of. For which great loss
We aim at nothing but his rotten flesh,
Nor is that cruelty.
I have a son,
That talks of nothing but of Guns and Armours,
And swears he will be a soldier, tic an humour
I would divert him from, and I am told
That if I minister to him in his drink
Powder, made of this banquerou• Marshalls bones,
Provided that the carcase rot aboue ground,
'T will cure his foolish frenzy.
You show in it
A fathers care. I have a son my self,
A fashionable Gentleman and a peaceful:
And but I am assured he's not so given,
He should take of it too. Sir, what are you?
A Gentleman.
So are many that rake dunghills.
If you have any suit, move it in Court.
I take no papers in corners.
Yes as the matter may be carried, and h•reby
To manage the conveyance—Follow him.
You are rude. I say, he shall not pass.
You say so.
O• what assurance?
For the well cutting of his Lordships corns,
Picking his toes, or any office else
Nearer to baseness!
Look upon me better,
Are these the ensigns of so coorse a fellow?
Be well advised.
Out, rogue, do not I know,
These glorious weeds spring from the sordid dunghill
Of thy os•icious baseness? were thou worthy
Of any thing from me, but my contempt,
I would do more then this, more, you Court-spider.
But that this man is lawless; he should find that I am valiant.
If your ears are fast,
Tic nothing. Whats a blow or two? as much—
These chastisements, as useful are as frequent
To such as would grow rich.
Are they so Rascals? I will be-friend you then.
Bear witness, Sirs.
Truth, I have borne my part already, friends.
In the Court you shall have more.
I know you for
The worst of spirits, that st•iue to rob the tombs
Of what is they• inheritance, •rome the dead.
For vs•re•s, bred by a ••otous peace:
That hold the Charter o• you• we•l•h &amp; freedom,
By being Knaves and Cuckolds that no•re prayed,
But when you fear the rich heirs will grow wise,
To keep their Lands out of your parchment toils;
And then, the Devil your fathe•'s cal• upon,
To invent some ways of Luxury ne'er thought on.
Be gone, and quickly, or Isle leave no room
Upon your forehead for your horns to sprout on,
Without a murmur, or I will undo you;
For I will beat you honest.
Thrift forbid.
We will bear this, rather then hazard that.
I am some-what eased in this yet.
(Only friend)
To what vain purpose do I make my sorrow,
Wait on the triumph of their cruelty?
Or teach their pride from my humility,
To think it has •recome? They are determined
What they will do: and it may well become me,
To rob them of the glory they expect
From my submiss entreaties.
Think not so, Sir,
The di•ficulties that you encounter with,
Will crown the undertaking — Heaven! you weep:
And I could do so too, but that I know,
Theres more expected from the son and friend
Of him, whose fatal loss now shakes our natures.
Then sighs, or tears, (in which a village nurse
Or cunning strumpet, when her knave is hanged,
May overcome vs.) We are men (young Lord)
Let vs not do like women. To the Co••t,
And there speak• like your birth: wake sleeping justice,
Or dare the A•e. This is a way will sort
With what you are. I call you not to that
I will• shrink from my self, I will decern
Your thanks, or suffer with you—O how bravely
That sudden fire of anger shows in you•
〈1 line〉
〈1 line〉
〈…〉 ••••ship's seated. May this meeting prove
〈…〉 vs, and to the general good of Burgundy.
〈…〉 to the poyn•.
〈◊〉 is,
〈◊〉 hon••ur to disp•se the place and power
Or primier President, which this reverent ma•
Grave Rochsort, (whom for honours sake I name)
Is purposed to resign a place, my Lords,
In which he hath with such integrity,
Performed the first and best parts of a Judge,
That as his life transcends all fair examples
Of such as were before him in Dijon,
So it remains to those• that shall succeed him,
A President they may imitate, but not equal.
I may not sit to hear this.
Let the love
And •hankfulnes we are bound to pay to goodness,
In this overcome your modesty.
My thanks
For this great favour shall prevent your trouble.
The honourable trust that was imposed
Upon my weakness, since you witness for me,
It was not ill discharged, I will not mention,
N•r now, if age had not deprived me of
The little strength I had to gouer•e well,
The Province that I under took, forsake it.
Th•t we could lend you of our years.
Or strength.
O• as you are, persuade you to continue
The noble• exercise of your knowing judgment.
That may not be, nor can your Lordships goodness,
Since your employments have conse•'d upon me
Su••icient wealth, deny the use of it,
And though old age, when one •oot's in the grave.
In many, when all humo•s else are spent
Feeds no affection in them, but desire
To add height to the mount•in of their riches:
In me it is not so, I rest content
With the honours, and estate I now possess,
And that I may have liberty to use,
What Heaven still bl•ssing my poor industry,
Hath made me Master of: I pray the Court
To ease me of my burden, that I may
Employ the small remainder of my life,
In living well, and learning how to dye so,
See sir, our Advocate.
The Court entreats,
Your Lordship will be pleased to name the man,
Which you would have your successor, and in me,
All promise to confirm it.
I embrace it,
As an assurance of their favour to me,
And name my Lord Novel.
The Court allows it.
But there are suitors waite here, and their ••uses
May be of more necessity to be heard,
And therefore wish that mine may be deferred,
And theirs have hearing.
If your Lordship please
To take the place, we will proceed.
The cause
We come to offer to your Lordships censure,
Is in it •el•e so noble, that it needs not
Or Rhetor•que in me that plead, or favour
F•om your grave Lordsh•ps, to determine of it•
Since to •he praise of your impartial justice
(Which guilty, nay condemned men, dare not scandal)
•t will erect a trophy of your mercy
With married to that Justice.
Speak to the cause.
I will, my Lord: to say, the late dead Marshall
The father of this young Lord here, my Client,
Hath done his Country great and faithful service,
Might task me of impertinence to repeat,
What your grave Lordships cannot but remember,
He in his life, become indebted to
These thrifty men, I will not wrong their credits,
By giving them the attributes they now merit,
And failing by the fortune of the wars,
Of means to free himself, from his engagements,
He was arrested, and for want of bail
Imprisoned at their suite, and not long after
With loss of liberty ended his life.
And though it be a Maxim in our Laws,
All suites dye with the person, these men's malice
In death find matter for their hate to work on,
Denying him the decent Rytes of burial,
Which the sworn enemies of the Christian faith
Grant freely to their slaves: may it therefore please
Your Lordships, so to fashion your decree,
That what their cruelty doth forbid, your pity
May give allowance to.
How long have you Sir practised in Court?
Some twenty years, my Lord.
By your gross ignorance it should appear,
Not twenty days.
I hope I have given no cause in this, my Lord—
How dare you move the Court,
To the dispensing with an Act confirmed
By Parl•meant, to the terror of all banquerouts?
Go home, and with more care peruse the Statutes:
Or the next motion savouring of this by•ldnesse,
May force you to leap (against your will)
Over the place you plead at.
I foresaw this.
Why does your Lordship think, the moving of
A cause more honest then this Court had ever
The honour to determine, can deserve
A check like this?
Strange boldness!
Tic fit freedom:
Or do you conclude, an advocate cannot hold
His credit with the Judge, vnl•sse he study
His face more then the cause for which he pleads?
Forbear.
Or cannot you, that have the power
To qualify the rigour of the Laws
When you are pleased, take a little from
The strictness of your sour decrees, enacted
In favour of the greedy creditors
Against the orethrowne debt•r?
Sir, you that prate
Thus saucily, what are you?
Why Isle tell you,
Thou purple-colour'd man, I am one to whom
Thou owe the means thou hast of sitting there
A corrupt Elder.
Forbear.
The nose thou wear•st, is my gift, and those eyes,
That meet no object so base as their Master,
Had bin, long since• torn from that guilty head,
And thou thy self slave to some needy Swiss,
Had I not worn a sword, and used it better
Then in thy pray•s thou ere did thy tongue.
Shall such an Insolence pass unpunished?
Hear me.
Yet I, that in my service done my Country,
Disdain to bee put in the scale with thee,
Confess my self unworthy to bee valued
With the least part, nay hair of the dead Marshall,
Of whose so many glorious undertakings,
Make choice of any one, and that the meanest
Performed against the subtle Fox of France,
The politic Lewis, or the more desperate Sue•se,
And 'twyl• outweigh all the good purpose,
Though put in act, that •for Gowneman practiced.
Away with him to prison.
•f •hat curses,
Urged •us•lie, and breathed forth so, ever fell
On those that did deserve them; let not mine
Be spent in vain now, that thou from this instant
May in thy fear that they will fall upon thee,
Be sensible of the plagues they shall bring with them.
And for denying of a little earth,
To cover what remains of our great soldier:
May all your wives prove whores, your factors thieves,
And while you live, your •yotous heirs undo you•
And thou, the patron of their cruelty,
Of all thy Lordships live not to be owner
Of so much dung as will conceal a Dog,
Or what is worse, thy self in. And thy years,
To th'end thou may be wretched, I wish many,
And as thou hast denied the dead a grave,
May misery in thy life make thee desire one,
Which men and all the Elements keep from thee:
I have begun well, imitate, exceed.
Good counsel were it, a praise worthy deed.
Remember what we are.
Thus low my duty
Answers your Lordships counsel. I will use
In the f•w words (with which I am to trouble
Your Lordships ears) the temper that you wish me,
Not that I fear to speak my thoughts as loud,
And with a liberty beyond Romont:
But that I know, for me that am made up
Of all that's wretched, so to ••ste my end,
Would seem to most, rather a willing•esse
To q•it the burden of a hopeless life,
Then scorn of death, or duty to the dead.
I therefore bring the tribute of my praise
To your severity, and commend the Justice,
That will not for the many services
That any man hath done the Common wealth,
Wink at his least of ills: what though my father
Writ man before he was so, and confirmed it,
By n•mbring that day, no part of his life,
In which he did not service to his Country;
Was he to be free therefore from the Laws,
And ceremonious form in your decrees?
Or else because he did as much as man
In those three memorable overthrows
A• Granson, Morat, Nancy, where his Master,
The warlike Charloyes (with whose misfortunes
I bear his name) lost treasure, men and life,
To be excused, from paym•ned of those sums
Which (his own patrimony spent) his zeal,
To serve his Country, forced him to take up?
The president were ill.
And yet, my Lord, this much
I know you'll grant; After those great defeatures,
Which in their dreadfu•l ruin•s buried quick,
Courage and hope, in all men but himself,
He forced the proud foe, in his height of conquest,
To yield unto an honourable peace.
And in it saved an hundred thousand lives,
To end his own, that was sure proof against
The scalding Summers heate, and Winters frost,
Ill airs, the Cannon, and the enemies sword,
In a most loathsome prison.
It was his fault to be so prodigal.
He had frō the state sufficient entertainment for the Army.
Su•ficent? My Lord, you sit at home,
And though your fees are boundless at the bar:
Are thrifty i• the charges of the war,
But your wills be obeyed. To these I turn,
To th•se soft-hearted men, that wisely know
They are only good men, that pay what they owe•
And so they are.
It is the City Doctrine,
We stand bound to maintain it.
Be constant in it,
And since you are as merciless in your natures,
As base, and mercenary in your means
By which you get your wealth, I will not urge
The Court to take away one scruple from
The right of their laws, or one good thought
In you to mend your disposition with.
I know there is no musique to your ears
So pleasing as the groans of men in prison,
A•d that the tears of widows, and the cries
Of famished Orphants, are the feasts that take you.
That to be in your danger, with more care
Should be •uoyded, then infectious ayre,
The loathed embraces of diseased women,
A flatterers poison, or the loss of honour.
Yet rather then my fathers reverent dust
Shall want a place in that fair monument,
In which our noble Ancestors lye entombed,
Before the Court I offer up my self
A prison•er for it; load me with those irons
That have worn out his life, in my best strength
•e run to the encounter of cold hunger,
And choose my dwelling where no Sun dares enter,
So •e may be released.
What mean you sir?
Only your fee again•ther's so much said
Already in this cause, and said so well,
That should I only offer to speak in it,
I should not bee heard, or laughed at for it.
It is the fi•st money advocate ere gave back,
Though hee said nothing.
Be advised, young Lord,
And well con•iterate, you throw away
Your liberty, and joys of life together:
Your bounty is employed upon a subject
That is not sensible of it, with which, wise man
Never abused his goodness; the great virtues
Of your dead father vindicate themselves,
From these men's malice, and break op the prison,
Though it contain his body.
Let him alone,
If he love Lords, a Gods name let him wear 'em,
Provided these consent.
I hope they are not
So ignorant in any way of profit,
As to neglect • possibility
To get their own, by seeking it from that
Which can return them nothing, but ill fame,
And curses for their barbarous cruelties.
What think you of the offer?
Very well.
Accept it by all m•••es: let's shut him up,
He is well-shaped and has a villainous to•go,
And should he study that way of renenge,
As I dare almost swear he loves a wench,
We have no wives, nor never shall get daughter•
That will hold out against him.
What's your answer?
Speak you for all.
Why, let our executions
That lye upon the father, bee returned
Upon the son, and we release the body.
The Court must grant you that.
I thank your Lordships,
They ha•e in it confirmed on me such glory,
As no time can take from me: I am ready,
Come lead me where you please: captivity
That comes with honour, is true liberty.
Strange rashness.
A brave resolution rather,
Worthy a better fortune, but however
It is not now to be disputed, therefore
To my own cause. Already I have found
Your Lordships bountiful in your favours to me,
And that should teach my modesty to end here
And press your loves no further.
There is nothing
The Court can grant, but with assurance you
May ask it, and obtain it.
You encourage a bold Petitioner, and it is not fit
Your favours should be lost. Beside•, ••as been
A custom many years, at the surrendering
The place I now give up, to grant the President
One boon, that parted with it. And to confirm
Your grace towards me, against all such as may
Detract my actions, and life hereafter,
I now prefer it to you.
Speak it f•eely.
I then desire the liberty of R•mont,
And that my Lord Novel whose private wrong
Was equal to the injury that was done
To the dignity of the Court, will pardon it,
And now sign his enlargement.
Pray you demand
The moiety of my estate, or any thing
Within my power, but this.
Am I denied then—my first and last request•
It must not be.
I have a voice to give in it.
And I.
And if persuasion will not work him to it,
We will make known our power.
You are too violent,
You shall have my consent—But wo•lt you had
Made trial of my love in any thing
But this, you should have found then—But it skills not•
You have what you desire.
I thank your Lordships.
The court is up, make way.
I follow you—Baumont.
My Lord.
You are a scholar, Baumont,
And can search deeper into the intents of men,
Then those that are less knowing—How appeared
The piety and brave behaviour of
Young Charloyes to you?
It is my wonder,
Since I want language to express it fully;
And sure the Colonel—
Fie! he was faulty—what present money have I?
There is no want
Of any sum a private man has use for.
It is well•
I am strangely taken with this Charaloyes;
Methinkes, from his example, the whole age
Should learn to be good, and continue so.
Virtue works strangely with vs: and his goodness
Rising aboue his fortune, seems to me
Princelike, to will, not ask a curtsy.
Tic strange.
Me thinks so,
In a man, but young,
Yet old in judgment, theoric, and practicke,
In all humanity (and to increase the wonder)
Religious, yet a Soldier, that he should
Yield his free living youth a captive, for
The •reedome of his aged fathers Corpse,
And rather choose to want life• necessaries,
Liberty, hope of fortune, then it should
In death be kept from Christian ceremony.
Come, It is a gold•n president in a Son,
To let strong nature have the better hand,
(In such a case) of all affected reason.
What years sits on this Char•lois?
Twenty eight, for •ince the clock did strike him 17 old
Under his fathers wing, this Son hath fought,
Served and commanded, and so aptly both,
That sometimes he appeared his fathers father,
And never less then's son; the old mans virtues
So recent in him, as the world may swear,
Nought but a fair tree, could such fair fruit bear.
But wherefore lets he such a barbarous law,
And men more barbarous to execute it,
Prevail on his soft disposition,
That he had rather dye alive for debt
Of the old man in prison, then he should
Rob him of Sepulture, considering
These monies borrowed bought the lenders peace,
And all their means they enjoy, nor was diffused
In any impious or licentious path?
True: for my part, were it my fathers trunk,
The tyrannous Ram-heads, with their horns should gore it,
Or, cast it to their cures (than they) le•se cur•sh,
Ere prey on me so, with their Lion-law,
B•ing in my free will (as in his) to shun it.
Alas! he knows himself (in poverty) lost:
For in this partial avaricious age
What price bears Honour? Virtue? Long ago
It was but praised, and friezed, but now a days
It is colder far, and has, nor love, nor praise,
Very praise now freezes too: for nature
Did make the heathen, f•r •ore Christian then,
Then knowledge vs (less he•thenish) Christian.
This morning is the funeral.
Certainly!
And from this prison it was the sons request
That his dear father might in•erment have.
See, the young son• i••erd• lively gr••e.
They come, observe their order.
How like a silent stream shaded with night,
And gliding softly with our windy sigh•;
Moves the whole frame of this solemnity!
Tears, sighs and blacks, filling the fimily,
Whilst I the only murmur in this grove
Of death, thus hollowly break forth• Vouchsafe
To stay a while, rest, rest in peace, dear earth,
Thou that brought'st rest to their unthankful lives•
Whose cruelty denied thee rest in death:
Here stands thy poor Executor thy son,
That makes his life prisoner, to bale thy death;
Who gladlier puts on this captivity,
Then Virgins long in love, their wedding weeds:
Of all that ever thou hast done good to,
These only have good memories, for they
Remember best, forget not gratitude.
I thank you for this last and friendly love.
And tho this Country, like a viperous mother,
Not only hath eat up vngrate•ully
All means of thee her son, but last thy self,
Leaving thy heir so bare and indigent,
He c•nnot raise thee a poor Monument,
Such as a flatterer, or a usurer hath.
Thy worth, in every honest br•st builder one,
Making their friendly hearts •hy funeral stone.
Sir.
Peace, O peace, this scene is wholly mine.
What weep ye, soldiers? Blanch not, Romont weeps.
Ha. let me see, my miracle is eased,
The jailers and the creditors do weep;
Even they that make vs weep, do weep themselves.
Be these thy bodies balm: these and thy virtue
Keep thy fame ever odoriferous,
Whilst the great, proud, rich, undeserving man,
Alive stinks in his vices, and bein• vanished,
The golden calfe that was an Idol dect
With Marble pillars Jet, and Porphyry,
Shall quickly both in bone and name consume,
Though wrapped in lead, spice, Searecloth and perfume
Sir.
What! Away for shame: you profane rogues
Must not be mingled with these holy relics:
This is a Sacrifice, our shower shall crown
His sepulchre with Olive, Myrrh and Baize
The plants of peace, of sorrow, victory,
Your tears would spring but weeds.
Would they not so?
VVee'll keep them to stop bottles then:
No; keep 'em for your own sins, you Rogues,
Till you repent: you'll dye else and be damned.
Damned, ha! ha, ha.
Laugh ye?
Yes faith. Sir, weel'd be very glad
To please you •yther way.
You're ne'er content,
Crying not laughing.
Both with a birth she rogues.
Our wives, Sir, taught vs.
Look, look you slau•s, your thankless c•uelty
And sau•ge manners, of unkind Dijon,
Exhaust these floods, and not his fathers death.
Slid, Sir, what would ye, ye'are so choleric?
Most soldiers are so y faith, let him alone:
They have little else to live on, we have not had
A penny of him, have wee?
Slight, wo'd you have our hearts?
We have nothing but his body here in durance
For all our money.
On.
One moment more,
But to bestow a few poor legacies,
All I have left in my dead fathers rights,
And I have done. Captain, wear thou these spurs
That yet ne'er made his horse run from a foe.
Lieutenant, thou, this Scarf, and may it tie
Thy valour, and thy honesty together:
For so it did in him. Ensign, this Curace
Your Generals necklace once. You gentle Bearers,
Divide this purse of gold, this other, strew
Among the poor: tic all I have. Romont,
(Wear thou this medall of himself) that like
A hearty Oak, grow close to this tall Pine,
Even in the wildest wilderness of war,
Whereon foes broke their swords, and tired themselves;
Wounded and hacked ye were, but never felled.
For me, my portion provide in Heaven:
My root is carded, and I a desolate branch
Left scattered in the high way of the world,
Trod under foot, that might have bin a Column,
Mainly supporting our demolished house,
This would I wear as my inheritance.
And what hope can arise to me from it,
When I and it are both here prisoners?
Only may this, if ever we be free,
Keep, or redeem me from all infamy.
No farther, look to 'em at your own peril.
No, as they please: their Master's a good man.
I would they were the Burmudas.
You must no further.
The prison limits you, and the Creditors
Exact the strictness.
Out you wooluish mungrells!
Whose brains should be knocked out, like dogs in July,
Lest your infection poison a whole town.
They grudge our sorrow: your ill wills perforce
Turns now to Charity: they would not have vs
Walk too far mourning, usurers relief
Grieves, if the Debtors have too much of grief.
I prithee tell me, Florimell, why do women marry?
Why truly Madam, I think, to lye with their hus∣bands.
You are a fool; She lies, Madam, women marry husbands,
To lye with other men.
Faith, even such a woman wilt thou make. By thy• light, Madam, this wagtail will spoil you, if you take delight in her licence.
Tic true, Florimell: and thou wilt make me too good for a young Lady. What an electuary found my fa•her out for his daughter, when hee compounded you two my women? for thou, Florimell, art e•no a grain too heavy, simply for a waiting Gentlewoman.
And thou Bellapert, a grain too light.
Well, go thy ways goodly wisdom, whom no body regards. I wonder, whether be elder thou or thy hood• you think, because you serve my Ladies mother, are 32 years old which is a peep cut, you know.
Well said, whirligig.
You are deceived: I want a peg in the middle. Out of these Prerogatives! you think to be mother of the maids here, &amp; mortify em with proverbs: go, go, govern the sweet meates, and weigh the Sugar, that the wenches steal none: say your prayers twice a day, and as I take it, you
have performed your function.
I may bee even with you.
Hark, the Court's broke up. Go help my old Lord out of his Caroch, and scratch his head till dinner time•
Well.
Fie Madam, how you walk! By my mayden-head you look 7 years older then you did this morning: why, there can be nothing under the Sun valuable, to make you thus a minute.
Ah my sweet Bellapert thou Cabinet
To all my counsels, thou dost know the cause
That makes thy Lady wither thus in youth.
Vd'd-light, enjoy your wishes: whilst I live,
One way or other you shall crown your will.
Would you have him your husband that you love,
And can't not bee? he is your servant though,
And may perform the office of a husband.
But there is honour, wench.
Such a disease
There is in deed, for which ere I would die. —
Prithee, distinguish me a maid &amp; wife.
Faith, Madam, one may bear any mans children,
Tother must bear no mans.
What is a husband?
Physic, that tumbling in your belly, will make you sick in the stomach: the only distinction betwixt a husband and a servant is: the first will lye with you, when hee please; the last shall lye with you when you please. Pray tell me, Lady, do you love, to marry after, or would you marry, to love after?
I would meet love and marriage both at once.
Why then you are out of the fashion, and will be con∣temn'd: for (Isle issue•e you) there are few women in the world, but either they have married first, and love after, or love first, and married after: you must do as you may, not as you would: your fathers will is the Goal you must fly to• if a husband approach you, you would have further off, is he your
love? the less near you. A husband in these days is but a cloak to bee oftner laid upon your bed, then in your bed.
Hump.
Sometimes you may wear him on your shoulder, now and then under your arm: but seldom or never let him cover you: for it is not the fashion.
Best day to natures curiosity,
Star of Dijum, the lustre of all France,
Perpetual •pring dwell on thy rosy cheeks,
Whose breath is perfume to our Continent,
See Flora turned in her varieties.
Oh di•in Lord!
No autumn, nor no age ever approach
This heavenly piece, which nature having wrought,
She lost her needle and did then despair,
Ever to work so lively and so fair.
Vds light, my Lord, one of the purls of your band is (without all discipline fallen) out of his rank.
How? I would not for a 1000 crowns she had seen't.
Dear Liladam, reform it.
Oh Lord: Per se, Lord, quintessence of honour, she walks not under a weed that could deny thee any thing.
Prethy peace, wench, thou dost but blow the fire, that flames too much already.
By gad, my Lord, you have the dive∣nest Taylor of Christendom; he hath made you look like an Angel in your cloth of Tissue doublet.
This is a three-leg'd Lord, ther's a fresh assault, oh that men should spend time thus!
See see, how her blood drives to her heart, and straight vaults to her cheeks again.
What are these?
One of 'em there the lower is a good, foolish, kn•∣uish, sociable gallimaufry of a man, and has much taught
my Lord with singing, hee is master of a music house: the other is his dressing block, upon whom my Lord lays all his clothes, and fashions, ere he vouchsafes 'em his own person; you shall see him in the morning in the Gally-foyst, at noon in the Bullion, in the evening in Cuerpo, and all night in —
A Bawdy-house.
If my Lord deny, they deny, if hee affirm, they af∣firm: they skip into my Lords cast skins some twice a year, and thus they live to eat, eat to live, and live to praise my Lord.
Good sir, tell me one thing.
What's that?
Dare th•se men ever fight, on any cause?
Oh no, 't would spoil their clothes, and put their bands out of order.
Mrs, you hear the news: your father has resigned his Presidentship to my Lord my father.
And Lord Charolois undone forever.
T•oath, it is pity, sir.
A braver hope of so assured a father
Did never comfort France.
A good dumb mourner.
A silent black.
O• fi• upon him, how he wears his clothes!
As i• he had come this Christmas from St. Omers,
To see his friends, and returned after Twelfetyde.
His Colonel looks fienely like a drouer,
That had a winter ly'n perdieu in the rain.
What, he that wears a clout about his neck,
His cuffs in's pocket, and his heart in's mouth?
Now out upon him!
S•r•ant, tie my hand.
How your lips blush, in scorn that they should pay
Tri••t• to hands, when lips are in the way!
I thus recant, yet now your hand looks white,
Because your lips robbed it of such a right.
I prethy sing the song
Devoted to my M••.
Rome•ned will come, sir, straight.
It is well.
My Father.
My honourable Lord.
My Lord Novel, this is a virtue in you,
So early up and ready before noon,
That are the map of dressing through all France.
I rise to say my prayers, sir, he•re's my Saint.
Tic well and courtly; you must give me leave,
I have some private conference with my daughter,
Pray use my garden, you shall dine with me.
We'll waite on you.
Good morn unto your Lordship,
Remember what you have vowed—to his Mrs.
Perform I must.
Why how now Beaumelle, thou look not well.
You are sad of late, come cheer thee, I have found
A wholesome remedy for these maiden fits,
A goodly Oak whereon to twist my vine,
Till her fair branches grow up to the stars.
Be near at hand, success crown my intent,
My business fills my little time so full,
I canoe• stand to talk: I know, thy duty
Is handmaid to my will, especially
When it presents nothing but good and fit.
Sir, I am yours. Oh if my tears prove true,
Fate hath wronged lo•e, and will destroy me too.
Sent you for me, sir?
Yes.
Your Lordships pleasure?
Keeper, this prisoner I will see forth coming
Upon my word— Sit down good Colonel.
Why I did wish you hither, noble sir,
Is to advise you from this iron carriage,
Which, so affected, Romont, you wear,
To pity and to c•un•ell ye submit
With expedition to the great Novel:
Recant your sterne contempt, and slight neglect
Of the whole Court, and him, and opportunity,
Or you will undergo a heavy censure
In public very shortly.
Hum hum: reverend sir,
I have observed you, and doe know you well,
And am now more afraid you know not me,
By wishing my submission to Novel,
Then I can be of all the bellowing mouths
That waite upon him to pronounce the censure•
Could it determine me torments, and shame.
Submit, and crave forgiveness of a beast•
Tic true, this bile of state wears purple Tissue,
Is high fed, proud• so is his Lordships horse,
And bears as rich Caparisons. I know,
This Elephant carries on his back not only
Towers, Castles, but the ponderous republique,
And never stoops for it, with h•s strong breath trunk
S•uffes others titles, Lordships, Offices,
Wealth, bribes and lives, under his ravenous jaws,
Whats this unto my freedom? I dare dye;
And therefore ask this Cammell, if these blessings
(For so they would be understood by a man)
But mollify one rudeness in his nature,
Sweet•n the eager relish of the law,
At whose great helm he sits: helps he the poor
In a just business? nay, does he not cross
Every deserved soldier and scholar,
As if when nature made him, she had made
The general Antipathy of all virtue?
How savagely, and blasphemo•fly hee spake
Touching the General, the grave General dead,
I must weep when I think on it.
Sir.
My Lord, I am not stubborn, I can melt, you see,
A•d prize a virtue better then my life•
For though I be not learned, I ever loved
That ho•y Mother of all issues, good,
Whose white hand (for a Sceptre) holds a File
To polish roughest customs, and in you
She has her right: see, I am calm as sleep,
But when I think of the gross injuries,
The godless wrong done, to my General dead,
I rave indeed, and could eat this Novel
A soulless Dromodary.
Oh bee temperate,
Sir, though I would persuade, I'll not constrain•
Each mans opinion freely is his own,
Concerning any thing or any body,
Be it right or wrong, tic at the Judges peril.
These men, Sir, waite without, my Lord is come too.
Pay'em those sums upon the table, take
Their full releases: stay, I want a witness:
Let me entreat you Colonel, to walk in,
And stand but by, to see this money paid,
It does concern you and your friends, it was
The better cause you were sen• for, though said otherwise.
The deed shall make this my request more plain.
I shall obey your pleasure Sir, though ignorant
To what is tends?
Worthiest Sir,
You are most welcome: fie, no more of this:
You have o•t-wept a woman, noble C•arolois.
No man but has, or must bury a father.
Grave Sir, I buried sorrow, for his death,
In the grave with him. I did never think
Hee was immoral, though I vow I grieve,
And see no reason why the vicious,
Virtuous, valiant and unworthy men
Should dye alike.
They do not.
In the manner
Of dying, Sir, they do not, but all dye,
And therein d•ffer not: but I have done.
I spied th• lively picture of my father,
Passing your gallery, and that cast this water
I•to mi•e eyes: see, foolish that I am,
To let it doe so.
Sweet and gentle nature,
How silk•n is this well comparatiuely
To other men! I have a suite to you Sir,
Take it, tic granted.
What?
Nothing, my Lord.
Nothing is q•ickly granted.
Faith, my Lord,
That nothing granted, is eu•n all I have,
For (al• know) I have nothing left to grant.
Sir, have you any suite to me? Ill grant
You some thing, any thing.
Nay surely, I that can
Give nothing, will but sue for that again.
No man will grant me any thing I •ue for.
But begging nothing, every man will giue't.
Sir, the love I bore your father, and the worth
I see in you, so much resembling his,
Made me t•u• send for you. And tender here
What •for you will take, gold, Jewels, both,
All, to supply your wants, and free your self.
Where heavenly virtue in high blotted veins
Is lodged, and ca• agree, men should kne•le down,
Adore, and sacrifice all that they hau•;
And well they may, it is so seldom seen.
Put off your wonder, and here freely take
Or send your servants. Nor, Sir, shall you use
In ought of this, a poor mans fee, or bribe,
Unjustly taken of the rich, but what's
Directly go•ten, and yet by the Law.
How ill, Sir, it becomes those hairs to mock?
Mock? thunder strike me then.
You doe amaze me:
But you shall wonder too, I will not take
One single piece of this great heap: why should I
Borrow, that have not means to pay, nay am
A very bankerupt, even in flattering hope
Of ever raising any. All my begging,
Is Romonts liberty.
Here is your friend,
Enfranchised ere you spake. I give him you,
And Charalois. I give you to your friend
As free a man as hee; your fathers debts
Are taken off.
How?
Sir, it is most true.
I am the witness.
Yes faith, wee are paid.
Heaven bless his Lordship, I did think him wiser
He a states-man, he an ass Pay other men's debts?
That hee was never bound for.
One more such would save the rest of pleaders
Honoured Rochfort.
Lye still my tongue and bushes, called my cheeks,
That offter thanks in words, for such great deeds.
Call in my daughter: still I have a suit to you.
Would you requite me.
With his life, assure you.
Nay, would you make me now your debtor, Sir.
This is my only child: what she appears,
Your Lordship well may see her education, Beau.
Foe•lowes not any: for her mind, I know it
To be far fairer then her shape, and hope
It will continue so: if now her birth
Be not too mean for Charolois, take her
This virgin by the hand, and call her wife,
Indowd with all my fortunes: bless me so.
Requite me thus, and make me happier,
In joining my poor empty name to yours,
Then if my state were multiplied ten fold.
Is this the payment, Sir, that you expect?
Why, you participate me more in debt•
That nothing but my life can ever pay,
This beauty being your daughter, in which yours
I must conceive necessity of her virtue
Without •ll dowry is a Princes aim,
Then, as she is, for poor and worthless I,
How much too worthy! Waken me, Romont,
That I may know I dream't, and find this vanished
Sure, I sleep not.
Your sentence life or death.
Fair Beaumeile, can you love me?
Yes, my Lord.
You need not question me, if I can you.
You are the fairest virgin in Dig•m•
And Rochfort is your father.
What's this change?
You met my wishes, Gentlemen.
What make
These dogs in doublets he ere!
A Visitation, Sir.
Then t•us, Fair B•aumell•, I write my saith
Thus seal it in the sight of Heaven and men.
Your fingers tie my heart-strings with this touch
In true-loue knots, which nought but death shall loose.
And yet these ears (an Emblem of our loves)
Like Crystal rivers indiuidu•lly
Flow into one another, make one source,
Which never man distinguish, less divide:
Breath, marry, breath, and kisses, mingle souls
Two hearts, and bodies, here incorporate:
And though with little wooing I have won,
My future life shall bee a wooing time.
And •very day, new as the bridal one,
Oh Sir, I groan under your courtesies,
More then my fathers bones under his wrongs,
You Curtius-like, have thrown into the gulf,
Of this his Countries foul ingratitude,
Your life and fortunes, to redeem their shames.
No more, my glory, come, let's in and hasten
This celebration.
All fair bliss upon it.
Mistress.
Oh servant, virtue strengthen me.
Thy presence• blows round my affections vane:
You will undo me, if you speak again.
Here will be sport for you. This works.
Peace, peace.
One word, my Lord Novel.
What, thou would money; there.
No, Isle none, Isle not be bought a slave,
A Pander, or a Parasite, for all
Your fathers worth, though you have saved my life,
Rescued me of•en from my wants, I must not
Wink at your follies: that will ruin you.
You know my blunt way, and my lo•e to truth:
Force•ke the p•rsuit of this Ladies honour,
Now you doe see her made another mans,
And such a mans, so good, so popular,
Or you will pluck a thousand mischiefs on you,
The benefits you have done me, are not lost,
Nor cast away, they are pursed here in my heart,
But let me pay you, sir, a fairer way
Then to defend •our vices, or to sooth'em.
Ha, ha, ha, what are my courses unto thee?
Good Cou•in Pontalier, meddle with that
That shall concern thy self.
No more but scorn?
Move on then, stars, work your pernicious will.
Only the wise rule, and prevent your ill.
Fly not to these excuses: thou hast bin
False in thy promise, and when I have said
Ungrateful, all is spoke.
Good my Lord, but hear me only.
To what purpose, trif•er?
Can any thing that thou can say, make void
The marriage? or those pleasures but a dream,
Which Charaloyes (oh Venus) hath enjoyed?
I yet could say that you receive advantage,
In what you think a loss, would you vouchsafe me
That you were never in the way till now
With safety to arrive at your desires,
That pleasure makes love to you unattended
By danger or repentance?
That I could.
But apprehend one reason how this might be,
Hope would not then forsake me.
The enjoying
Of what you most desire, I say the enjoying
Shall, in the full possession of your wishes,
Confirm• that I am faithful.
Give some relish
How this may appear possible.
I will
Relish, and taste, and make the banquet easy:
You say my Laddie's married. I confess it,
That C•aralois hath enjoyed her, it is most true
Th•t with her, hoe's already Master of
The best p•rt of my old Lords state. Still better,
But that the first, or last, should be your hindrance,
I utterly deny; for but observe me:
While she went for, and was, I swear, a Virgin,
What curtsy could she with her honour give
Or you receive with safety—take me with you,
When I say curtsy, doe not think I mean
A kiss, the tying of her shoo or garter,
An hour of private conference: those are trifles.
In this word courtesy, we that are gamesters point at
The sport direct, where not alone the lover
Brings his Artillery, but uses it.
Which word expounded to you, such a curtsy
Doe you expect, and sudden.
But he tasted the first sweets, Bellapert.
He wronged you shrewdly,
He toiled to climb up to the Pheonix nest,
And in his prints leaves your ascent more easy.
I doe not know, you that are perfect Critiques
In women's books, may talk of may denheads.
But for her marriage.
It is a fair protection
Against all arrests of fear, or shame for ever.
Such as are fair, and yet not foolish, study
To have one at thirteen; but they are mad
That stay till twenty. Then sir, for the pleasure,
To say Adieu•terie's sweeter, that is stale.
This o•ely is not the contentment more,
To say, This is my Cuckold, then my Rival.
More I could say—but briefly, she dotes on you,
I• it prou• oath•rwise, spare not, poison me
With next gold you give me.
Hows this servant, courting my woman?
As an e•trance to
The favour of the mistress: you are together
And I am perfect in my qu.
Stay Bellapert.
In this, I must not with your leave obey you.
Y•u• Taylor and your Tire-woman waite without
A•• stay my counsel, and direction for
Your next days dressing. I have much to doe,
Nor will your Ladyship know, time is precious,
Continue idle: this choice Lord will find
So fit employment for you.
I shall grow angry.
Not so, you h•ue a jewel in her, Madam.
I had forgot to tell your Ladyship
The clo•et is p•iua•e and yo•• couch ready;
And if you please that I shall loose the key,
But say so, and tic done.
You come to chide me, se•uant, and bring with yo•
Su•ficient warrant, you will say and t•uely,
My father found too much obedience in me,
By being won too soon: yet if you please
B•t to remember, all my hopes and fortunes
Had re•erence to this likening: you will grant
That though I did not well towards you, I yet
Did wisely for my self.
Wi•h too much fervor
I have so long l•u'd and still love you, Mistress,
To esteem that an injury to me
Which was to you convenient: that is past
My help, is past my cure. You yet may, Lady,
In recompense of all my duteous service,
(Provided that your will answer your power)
Become my Creditresse.
I understand you,
And •or assurance, the request you make
Shall not he long unanswered. Pray you sit,
And by what you shall hear, you'll easily find,
My passions are much fitter to desire,
Th•n to be sued to.
Sir, tic not envy
At the start my fellow has got of me in
My L•dies good opinion, thats the motive
Of •his di•couery; but due payment
O• what I owe her Honour.
So I conceive it.
I have observed too much, nor shall my silence
Prevent the remedy — yonder they are,
I dare not bee seen with you. You may doe
What you think fit, which will be, I presume,
The o•fice of a faithful and tried friend
To my young Lord.
This is no vision: ha!
With the next opportunity.
By this kiss, and this, and this.
That you would ever swear thus.
If I seem rude, your pardon, Lady; yours
I do not ask: come, do not dare to show me
A face of anger, or the least dislike,
Put on, and suddaily a milder look,
I shall grow rough else.
What have I done, Sir,
To draw this har•h unsavoury language from you?
Done, Popinjay? why, dost thou think that if
I ere had dreamt that thou had done me wrong,
Thou shouldest outlive it?
This is something more
Then my Lords friendship gives commission for.
Your presence and the place, makes him presume•
Upon my patience.
As if thou ere were it angry
But with thy Taylor, and yet that poor shred
Can bring more to the making up of a man,
Then can be hoped from thee: thou art his cry•ur,
And did hee not each morning new create
Thou would stink and be forgotten. Isle not change
On syllable more with thee, until thou bring
Some testimony under good men's hands,
Thou art a Christian. I suspect thee strongly,
And will be satisfied: till which time, keep from me.
The entertaiment of your visitation
Has made what I intended on a business.
So wee shall meet —Madam.
Use that leg again, and Isle cut off the other.
Very good.
What a perfume the Muske-cat lea•es behind him!
Do you admit him for a property,
To save you charges, Lady.
Tic not useless,
Now you are to succeed him.
So I respect you,
Not for your self, but in remembrance of,
Who is your father, and whose wife you now are,
That I choose rather not to understand
Your nasty scoff then,—
What, you will not beat me,
If I expound it to you. Heir's a Tyrant
Spares neither man nor woman.
My intents
Madam, deserve not this; nor do I stay
To bee the whetstone of your wit: preserve it
To spend on such, as know how to admire
Such coloured stuff. In me there is now speaks to yo•
As true a friend and servant to your Honour,
And one that will with as much hazard guard it,
As ever man did goodness. — But then Lady,
You must endeavour not alone to bee,
But to appear worthy such love and service.
To what tends this?
Why, to this purpose, Lady,
I do desire you should prove such a wife
To Charaloys (and such a one hee merits)
A• Caesar, did hee live, could not except at,
Not only innocent from crime, but free
From all taint and suspicion.
They are base that judge me otherwise.
But yet bee careful.
Detraction's a bold monster, and fears not
To wound the •am of Princes, if it find
But any blemish in their lives to work on.
But Isle bee plainer with you• had the people
Bin learned to speak, but what even now I saw,
Their malice out of that would raise an engine
To overthrow your honour. In my sight
(With yonder pointed fool I frighted from you)
You used familiarity beyond
A modest entertainment: you embraced him
With too much ardor for a stranger, and
Met him with kisses neyth•r chaste nor comely•
But learn you to forget him, as I will
Your bounties to him, you will find it saf•r
Rather to bee vncourtly, then immodest.
This p•ety rag about your neck shows well,
And being coorse and little worth, it speaks you,
As terrible as thrifty.
Madam.
Yes.
And this strong belt in which you hang your honour
Will out-last twenty scarfs.
What mean you, Lady?
And all else about you Cap a pe,
So uniform in spite of handsomeness,
Shows such a bold contempt of comeliness,
That tic not strange your Laundress in the League,
Grew mad with love of you.
Is my free counsel.
Answered with this ridiculous scorn?
These objects
Stole very much of my attention from me,
Yet something I remember, to speak t•uth,
Deceived gravely, but to little purpose,
That almost would have made me swear, some Curate
Had stolen into the person of Romont,
And in the praise of good wife honesty,
Had read an homely.
By thy hand.
And sword,
I will make up your oath, twill want weight else.
You are angry with me, and poor I laugh at it.
Do you come from the Camp, which affords only
The conversation of cast suburb whores,
To set down to a Lady of my rank,
Limits of entertainmmen•?
Sure a Legion has possessed this woman.
One stamp more would do well: yet I desire not
You should grow horne-mad, till you have a wife.
You are come to warm meat, and perhaps clean linen•
Feed, wear it, and bee thankful. For me, know,
That though a thousand watches were set on me,
And you the Master-spy, I yet would use,
The liberty that best likes me. I will revel,
Feast, kiss, imbreace, perhaps grant larger favours:
Yet such as live upon my means, shall know
They must not murmur at it. If my Lord
Bee now grown yellow, and has chose out you
To serve his Jealousy that way, tell him this,
You have something to inform him.
And I will.
Believe it wicked one I will. Hear, Heaven,
But hearing pardon me: if these fruts grow
Upon the tree of marriage, let m• shun it,
As a forbidden sweet. An heir and rich,
Young, beautiful, yet add to this a wife,
And I wi•l rather choose a Spittle sinner
Car•ed an age before, though three parts rotten,
And take it for a blessing, rather then
Be fettered to the hellish slavery
Of such an impudence.
Colon••l, good foe•t•no
To meet you thus: you look sad, but Isle tell you
Something that shall remove it. Oh how happy
Is my Lord Charaloys in his fair bride!
A happy man indeed!—pray you in what?
I dare swear, you would think so good a Lady,
A dower suf•icient.
No doubt. But on.
So fair, so chaste, so virtuous: so indeed
All that is excellent.
Women have no cunning to gull the world.
Yet to all these, my Lord
Her father gives the full addition of
All he does now possess in Burgundy:
These writings to confirm it, are new sealed
And I most fortunate to present him with them,
I must go seek him out, can you direct me?
You'll find him breaking a young horse.
I thank you.
I must do something worthy Charaloys friendship.
If she were well inclined to keep her so,
Deserved not thanks: and yet to stay a woman
Spurred headlong by hot lust, to her own ruin,
Is harder then to prop a falling tower
With a deceiving reed.
Some one seek for me,
As soon as he returns.
Her father! ha?
How if I break this to him? sure it cannot
Meet with an ill construction. His wisdom
Made powerful by the authority of a father,
Will warrant and give privilege to his counsels.
It shall be so— my Lord.
Your friend Romont: would you ought with me?
I stand so engaged
To your so many favours, that I hold it
A breach in thankfulness, should I not discover,
Though with some imputation to my self,
All doubts tha• may concern you.
The performance
Will make this protestation worth my thanks.
Then with your patience lend me your attention
For what I must deliver, whispered only
You will with too much grief receive.
See wench!
Upon my life as I forespake, hoe's now
Preferring his complaint: but be thou perfect,
And we will fit him.
Fear not me, pox on him:
A Captain turn Informer against kissing?
Would he were hanged up in his rusty Armour:
But if our fresh wits cannot turn the plots
Of such a mouldy murrion on it self;
Rich clothes, choice fare, and a true friend at a call,
With all the pleasures the night yields, forsake vs.
This in my daughter? doe not wrong her.
Now begin.
The games afoor, and wee in distance.
T•s thy fault, fool•sh girl, pin on my veil,
I will not wear tho•e jewels. Am I not
Already matched beyond my hopes? yet still
You prune and set me forth, as if I were
Again to please a suitor.
Tic the course
That our great Ladies take.
A weak excuse.
Those that are better seen, in what concern••
A Ladies honour and fair fame, condemn it.
You waite well, in your absence, my Lords friend
The understanding, grave and wise Romont.
Must I be still her sport•
Reprove me for it.
And he has travelled to bring home a judgment
Not to be contradicted. You will say
My father, that owes more to years then he,
Has brought me up to musique, language, Courtship,
And I must use them. True, but not t'offend,
O• render me suspected.
Does your fine story begin from this?
I thought a parting kiss
From young Novel, would have displeased no more
Then heretofore it hath done; but I find
I must restrain such favours now; look therefore
As you are careful to continue mine,
That I no more be visi•ed. Isle endure
The strictest course of life that jealousy
Can think secure enough, ere my behaviour
Shall call my fame in question.
Ten dissemblers
Are in this subtle devil. You believe this?
So far that if you trouble me again
With a report like this, I shall not only
Judge you malicious in your disposition,
But study to repent what I have done
To such a nature.
Why, it is exceeding well.
And for you, daughter, off with this, off with it:
I have that confidence in your goodness, I,
That I will not consent to have you live
Like to a Recluse in a cloister: go
Call in the gallants, let them make you merry,
Use all fit liberty.
Blessing on you.
If this new preacher with the sword and feather
Could prove his doctrine for Canonical,
We should have a fine world.
Sir, if you please
To bear your self as fits a Gentleman,
The house is at your service: but i• not,
Though you seek company else where, your absence•
Will not be much lamented—
If this be
The recompense of striving to preserve
A wanton giglet honest, very shortly
Twill make all mankind Panders—Do you smile,
Good Lady Looseness? your whole sex is like you•
And that man's mad that seeks to better any:
What new change have you next?
Oh, fear not you, sir,
Isle shift into a thousand, but I will
Convert your heresy.
What heresy? Speak.
Of keeping a Lady that is married,
From entertaining servants. —
O, you are welcome.
Use any means to vex him,
And then with welcome follow me.
You are tired
With your grave exhortations, Colonel.
How is it? Faith, your Lordship may doe well,
To help him to some Church-preferment•it is
Now the fashion, for men of all conditions,
How ever they have lived, to end that way.
That face would doe well in a surplice.
Rogues, be silent—or—
S' death will you suffer this?
And you, the master Rogue, the coward rascal,
I shall be with you suddenly.
Pontallier,
If I should strike him, I know I shall kill him:
And therefore I would have thee beat him, for
Hoe's good for nothing else.
His back
Appears to me, as it would tire a B•adl•,
And then he has a knotted brow, would bruise
A court like hand to touch it.
Hee looks like
A Curryer when his hides grown dear.
Take heed he curry not some of you.
Gods me, hoe's angry.
I break no Ie•ts, but I can break my sword
About your pates.
Here is more.
Come let's bee gone.
VVee are beleaguerd.
Look they bring up their troops.
Will you sit down with this disgrace?
You are abused most grossly.
I grant you, Sir, we are, and you would have vs
Stay and be more abused.
My Lord, I am sorry,
Your house is so inhospitable, we must quit it.
Prithee Romont, what cause this uproar?
Nothing.
They laughed and used their scurvy wits upon me.
Come, tic thy Jealous nature: but I wonder
That you which are an honest man and worthy,
Should foster this suspicion: no man laughs;
No one can whisper, but thou apprehend
His conference and his scorn reflects on thee:
For my part they should scoff their thin wits out,
So I not heard 'em, beat me, not being there.
Leave, leave these fits, to conscious men, to such
As are obnoxious, to those foolish things
As they can gibe at.
Well, Sir.
Thou art know'n
Valiant without detect, right defined,
Which is (as fearing to doe injury,
As tender to endure it) not a brabbler,
A swearer.
Pish, pish, what needs this my Lord?
If I bee known none such, how vainly, you
Do cast away good counsel? I have loved you,
And yet must freely speak: so young a •utor,
Fits not so old a Soldier as I am.
And I must tell you, t'was in your behalf
I grew enraged thus, yet had rather dye,
Then open the great cause a syllable further.
In my behalf? wherein hath Charalois
Vnfitly so deem•n'd himself, to give
The least occasion to the loosest tongue,
To throw aspersions on him, or so weakly
Protected his own honour, as it should
Need a defence from any but himself?
They are fools that judge me by my outward seeming,
Why should my gentleness beget abuse?
The Lion is not angry that does sleep,
Nor every man a Coward that can weep.
For Gods sake speak the cause.
Not for the world.
Oh it will strike disease into your bones
Beyond the cure of physic, drink your blood,
Rob you of all your rest, contract your sight,
Leave you no eyes but to see misery,
And of your own, nor speech but to wish thus
Would I had perished in the prisons jaws:
From whence I was redeemed• twill wear you old,
Before you have experience in that Art,
That causes your affliction.
Thou dost strike
A deathful coldness to my harts high heate,
And shrinkst my liver like the Cal•nture.
Declare this foe of mine, and lifes, that like
A man I may encounter and subdue it,
It shall not have one such effect in me,
As thou denouncest: with a Soldiers arm•
If it be strength• Isle meet it: if a fault
Belonging to my mind, Isle cut it off
With mine own reason, as a Scholar •hold
Speak, though it make me monstrous.
Isle dye first.
Farewell, continue merry, and high Heaven
Keep your wife chaste.
Hump, stay and take this wolf
Out of my bre•t, that thou hast lodged there, or
For ever lose me.
Lose not, Sir, your self.
And I will venture—So the door is fast.
Now noble Charaloys, collect your self,
Summon your spirits, muster all you strength
That can belong to man, sift passion,
From every vein, and whatsoever ensues,
Upbraid not me hereafter, as the cause of
Jealousy, discontent, slaughter and ruin:
Make me not parent to sin: you will know
This secret that I burn with.
Devil on it,
What should it be? Romont, I hear• you wish
My wives continuance of Chastity.
There was no hurt in that.
Why? do you know a likelihood or possibility
Unto the contrary?
I know it not, but doubt it, these the ground•
The servant of your wife now young Novel,
The son unto yo•r fathers Enemy
(Which aggrauates my presumption the more)
I have bin war•d of, touching her, nay, seen them
Tie heart to heart, one in another arm•,
Multiplying kisses, as if they meant
To pose Arithmetic, or whose eyes would
Be• first burnt out, with gazing on the others•
I saw their mouths engender, and their palms
Glued, a• if Love had locked them, their words flow
And melt each others, like two circling flames,
Where chastity, like a Phoenix (me thought) burned,
But left the world nor ashes, nor an heir.
Why stand you silent thus? what cold dull phlegm,
As if you had no drop of choler mixed
In your whole constitution, thus prevails,
To fix you now, thus •tupid hearing thy•?
You did •ot see 'em on my Couch within,
Like George a horse-backe, on her, nor a bed?
No.
Ha, ha.
Laugh ye? •en so did your wife,
And ••r indulgent father.
They were wise.
Would ha me be a fool?
No, but a man.
There is no dram of manhood to suspect,
On such thy• airy circumstance as this
Mere complement and courtship. Was this tale
The hideous monster which you so concealed?
Away, thou curious impertinent
And idle searcher of such lean nice toys.
Go, thou sedicious sower of debate:
Fly to such matches, where the bridegroom doubts:
He holds not worth enough to countervail
The virtue and the beauty of his wi•e.
Thou buzzing drone that about my ears dost hum,
To strike thy rankling sting into my heart,
Whose venom, time, nor medicine could assuage.
Thus doe I put thee off, and confident
In mine own innocence, and desert,
Dare not conceive her so unreasonable,
To put Novel in balance against me,
An upstart craned up to the height he has.
Hence busiebody, thou 'rt no friend to me•
That must be kept to a wives injury,
First possible? farewell, fine, honest man,
Sweet tempered Lord eddie•• what Apopl•xi
Hath knit sense up? Is this Romonts reward?
Bear witness the great spirit of my father,
With what a healthful hope I administer
This potion that hath wrought so virulently.
I not accuse thy wife of act, but would
Prevent her Praecipuce, to thy dishonour,
Which now thy tardy sluggishness will admit.
Would I had seen thee graved with thy great Sire,
Ere live to have men's marginal fingers point
At Charaloys, as a lamented story.
An Emperor put away his wife for touching
Another man, but thou would have thine tasted
And keep her (I think.) Puff. I am a fire
To warm a dead man, that waste out my self.
Bleed—what a plague, a vengeance •'st to me,
If you will be a Cuckold? here I show
A swords point to thee, this side you may shun,
Or that• the peril, if you will run on,
I cannot help it.
Did thou n•for see me
Angry, Romont?
Yes, and pursue • foe
Like lightening.
Prithee see me so no more.
I can be so again. Put up thy sword,
And take thy self away, lest I draw mine•
Come fright your foes with this: sir, I am your friend,
And dare stand by you thus.
Thou art not my friend,
Or being so, thou art mad, I must not buy
Thy friendship at this rate; had I just cause,
Thou know I durst pursue such injury
Through fire, ayre, water, earth, nay, were they all
Shuffled again to Chaos, but ther's none.
Thy skill, Romont, consists in camps, not courts.
Farewell, uncivil man, let's meet no more.
Here our long web of friendship I vntwist.
Shall I go whine, walk pale, and locke my wife
For nothing, from her births free liberty,
That opened mine to me? yes; if I doe
The name of cuckold then, dog me with scorn.
I am a Frenchman, no Italian borne.
A dull Dutch rather: fall and cool (my blood)
Boyle not in zeal of thy friends hurt, so high,
That is so low, and cold himself in it. Woman,
How strong art thou, how easily beguiled?
How thou dost rack vs by the very horns?
Now wealth I see change manners and the man:
Something I must do mine own wrath to assuage,
And note my friendship to an after-age.
MEnd this a little• pox! thou hast burnt me. oh fie upon it, O Lard, hee has made me smell (for all the world) like a flax, or a red headed women's chamber: powder, powder, powder.
Oh sweet Lord!
That's his Perfumer.
Oh dear Lord,
That's his Taylor.
Monsieur Liladam, Aymour, how allow you the model of these clothes?
Admirably, admirably, oh sweet Lord! assuredly it's pity the worms should eat thee.
Here's a fine Cell; a Lord, a Taylor, a Perfumer, a Barber, and a pair of Mounsieurs: 3 to 3, as little will in the one, as honesty in the other. S'foote isle into the country a∣g••no, learn to speak truth, drink Ale, and converse with
my fathers Tenants; here I hear nothing all day, but upon my soul as I am a Gentleman, and an honest man.
I vow and affirm, your Taylor must needs be an ex∣pert Geometrician, he has the Longitude, Latitude, Alti∣tude, Profundity, every Dimension of your body, so ex∣quisitely, here's a lace laid as directly, as if truth were a Taylor.
That were a miracle.
With a hair breadth's error, ther's a shoulder piece cut, and the base of a pick•dille in puncto.
You are right, Monsieur his vestaments sit: as if they grew upon him, or art had wrought 'em on the same loom, as nature framed his Lordship as if your Taylor were deeply read in Astrology, and had taken measure of your honourable body, with a Iacobs staff, an Ephimeri∣des.
I am bound t'ee Gentlemen.
You are deceived, they'll be bound to you, you must remember to trust 'em none.
Nay, faith, thou art a reasonable near Artificer, give the devil his due.
I, if hee would but cut the coat according to the cloth still.
I now want only my misters approbation, who is indeed, the most polite punctual Queen of dressing in all Burgundy• Pah, and makes all other young Ladies appear, as if they came from board last week out of the country, Is it not t•ue, Liladam?
True my Lord, as if any thing your Lordship could say, could be otherwise then true.
Nay, • my soul, it is so, what fouler object in the world, then to see a young fair, handsome beauty, vnhand∣somely dighted a•d incongruently accou•red; or a hopeful Chevalier, vnmethodically appointed, in the external orna∣mints of nature? For even as the Index tells vs the contents of stories, and directs to the particular Chapters, even s•
does the outward habit and superficial order of garments (in man 〈◊〉 •omen) give vs a taste of the spirit, and demon∣stratiuely point (as it were a manual note from the margin) all the intern•ll quality, and habiliment of the soul, and there cannot be a more evident, palpable, gross•e manifesta∣tion of poor degenerate dunghilly blood, and breeding, then rude, unpolished, disordered and sloe•enly outside.
An admirable lecture. Oh all you gallants, that hope to be saved by your clothes, edify, edify.
By the Lard, sweet Lard, thou deserve a pension of the St•te.
Of the Taylors, two such Lords were able to spree•d Taylors ore the face of a whole kingdom.
Pox a this gla•se lit flatters, I could find in my heart to break it.
O save the gla•se my Lord, and break their heads, they are the greater flatterers I assure you.
Flatters, detracts, impairs, yet put it by,
Lest thou dear Lord (Narcissus-like) should dote
Upon thy self, and dye• and rob the world
Of natures copy, that she works form by.
Oh that I were the Infant Queen of Europe,
Who (but thy self sweet Lord) should marry me.
I marry? we•e there a Q•even of the world, not I.
Wedlock? no padlooke, horslocke, I wear spurs
To keep it off my heals; yet my Aymour,
Like a free wanton jennet in the meddows,
I look about, and neigh, take hedge and ditch,
Feed in my no•ghbours pastures, pick my choice
Of all their faire-maind mares: but married once,
A man i• staked, or pown'd, and cannot graze
Beyond his own hedge.
I have waited, sir,
Three hours to speak w'ee, and not take it well,
Such magpies, are admitted, whilst I d•uncle
Attendance.
Magpies? what do ye take me for?
A long thing with a most vnpromising face.
I'll ne'er ask him, what he takes me for•
Doe not, sir,
For he will go near to tell you.
Art not thou a Barber Surgeon?
Yes sira why?
My Lord is sorely troubled with two scabs•
Aim. Humph—
I prithee cure him of 'em.
Pish: no more,
Thy gall sure's overthrown; these are my Council,
And we were now in serious discourse.
Of perfume and apparel, can you rise
And spend 5 hours in dr•ssing talk, with these?
Thou would have me be a dog: up, stretch and shake,
And ready for all day.
Sir, would you be
More curious in preserving of your honour.
Trim, it were more manly. I am come to wake
Your reputation, from this lethargy
You let it sleep in, to persuade, importune,
Nay, to provoke you, sir, to call to account
This Colonel Romont, for the foul wrong
Which like a bu•then, he hath laid on you,
And like a d•unken porter, you sleep under.
It is all the town t•lkes, and believe, sir,
If your tough sense persist thus, you are undone,
Utterly lost, you will be scorned and ba•fled
By every Lackey; season now your youth,
With one brave thing, and it shall keep the odour
Even to your death, beyond, and on your Tomb,
Sent like sweet oils and Frankincense; sir, this life
Which once you saved, I ne'er since counted mine,
I borrowed it of you; and now will pay it;
I tender you the ser•ice of my sword
To bear your challenge, if you'll write, your fate:
Isle make mine own: what ere betide you, I
That have lived by you, by your side will dye.
Ha, ha, would have me challenge poor Romont?
Fight with close breeches, thou may think I dare not.
Doe not mistake me (cousin) I am very valiant,
But valour shall not make me such an Ass.
What use is there of valour (now a days?)
It is sure, or to be killed, or to be hanged.
Fight thou as thy mind moves thee, it is thy trade,
Thou hast nothing else to doe; fight with Romont?
No, i'll not fight under a Lord.
Farewell, sir, I pity you.
Such loving Lords walk their dead honours graves,
For no companions fit, but fools and knaves.
Come Malotin.
'Sfoot, Colbran, the low giant.
He has brought a battle in his face, let's go.
Colbran do ye call him? he will make some of you smoke, I believe.
By your leave, sirs.
Are you a Consort?
Do ye take me for
A fiddler? ya're deceived: look. Isle pay you.
It seems he knows you one, he bumfiddles you so•
Was there ever so base a fellow?
A rascal?
A most uncivil Groom?
Offer to kick a Gentleman, in a Nobleman's cham∣ber? A pox of your manners•
Let him alone, let him alone, thou shalt lose t•y arm, fellow: if wee stir ago•st thee, hang vs.
S'foote, I think they have the better on him• though they be kicked, they talk so.
Let's leave the mad Ape.
Gentlemen.
Nay, my Lord, we will not offer to dishonour you
so much as to stay by you, since hoe's alone.
Hark you.
We doubt the cause, and will not disparage you, so much as to take your Lordships quarrel in hand. Plague on him, how he has crumpled our band•.
•le even away with 'em, for this soldier beats man, woman, and child.
What mean you, sir? My people.
You• boye's gone,
And doore's locked, yet for no hurt to you,
But privacy: call up your blood again, sir• be not afraid, I do
B•seech you, sir, (and therefore come) without• more cir∣cumstance
Tell me how far the passages have gone
Twixt you, and your fair Mistress Beaumelle.
Tell me the truth, and by my hope of Heaven
It never shall go further.
Tell you why sir?
Are you my confessor?
I will be your confounder, if you doe not.
Stir not, nor spend your voice.
What will you doe?
Nothing but lyne your brayne-pan, sir, with lead,
If you not satisfy me suddenly,
I am desperate of my life, and command yours.
Hold, hold, isle speak. I vow to heaven and you,
Shoe's yet vntouch't, more then her face and hands:
• cannot call her innocent; for I yield
On my solicitous wrongs she consented
Where time and place met opportunity
To grant me all requests.
But may I build on this assurance?
As upon your faith.
Write this, sir, nay you must.
Pox of this Gun.
Withal, sir, you must swear, and put your oath
Under your hand, (shake not) ne'er to frequent
This Ladies company, nor ever send
Token, or message, or letter, to incline
This (too much prone already) yielding Lady.
It is done, sir.
Let me see, this first is right,
And h•re you wish a sudden death m•y light
Upon your body, and hell take your soul,
If ever more you see her, but by chance,
Much less allure her. Now, my Lord, your hand.
My hand to this?
Your heart else I assure you.
Nay, there it is.
So keep this last article
Of your faith given, and stead of threatenings sir,
The service of my sword and life is yours:
But not a word of it, it is Fairies treasure;
Which but reueal'd, brings on the blab•rs, ruin.
Use your youth better, and this excellent form
Heaven hath bestowed upon you. So good morrow to your Lordship.
Good devil to your rogueship. No man's safe•
Isle have a Cannon planted in my chamber,
Against such roaring rogues.
My Lord away
The Coach stays: now have your wish, and judge,
If I have b•en forgetful.
Ha?
Do ye stand
Humming and hawing now?
Sweet wench, I come.
Hence fear,
I swore, that's all one, my next oath 'ile keep
That I did mean to break, and then it is quit.
No pain is due to lovers perjury.
If love himself l•ugh at it, so will I.
I grieve for the distaste, though I have manners,
No• •o inquire the cause, f•l•e out between
Your Lordship and Romont.
I love a friend,
So •ong as he continues in the bounds
Pr•scrib'd by friendship, but when he usurps
Too •are on what is proper to my self,
And puts th• habit of a Governor on,
I must and will pres•rue my liberty.
But sp•ache of something, else this is a theme
I take no pleasure in: what's this Aim•ire,
Whose voice for Song, and exc•ll•ned knowledge in
The chiefest parts of Musiqu•, you bestow
Such praises on?
He is a Gentleman,
(For so his quality speaks him) well received
Among our greatest Gallants; but yet holds
His maine dependence from the young Lord Novel:
Some tricks and crotchets he has in his head,
As all Musicians have, and more of him
I dare not author: but when you have heard him,
I may presume, your Lordship so will like him,
That you'll hereafter be a friend to Musique.
I never was an enemy to it, Baumont,
Nor yet doe I subscribe to the opinion
Of those old Captains, that thought nothing musical,
But cries of yielding enemies, neighing of horses,
Clashing of armour, loud shouts, drums, and trumpets:
Nor on the other side in favour of it,
Affirm the world was made by musical discord,
Or that the happiness of our life consists
In a well varied note upon the Lute:
I love it to the worth of it, and no further.
But le• vs see this wonder.
He prevents my calling of him.
Let the Coach be brought
To the back gate, and serve the banquet up:
My good Lord Charalo•s, I think my house
Much honoured in your presence.
To have means,
To know you better, sir, has brought me hi•her
A willing vilitant, and you'll crown my welcome
In making me a witness to your skill,
Which crediting from others I admire.
Had I been one hour sooner made acquainted
With your intent my Lord, you should have found me
Better provided: now such as it is,
Pray you grace with your acceptance.
You are modest.
Begin the last new ayre.•
Shall we not see them?
This little distance from the instruments
Will to your ears convey the harmony
With more delight.
Isle not consent.
You're tedious,
By this means shall I with one banquet please
Two companies, those within and these Gulls here.
How's this? It is my Ladies laugh • most certain
When I first pleased her, in this merry language,
She gave me thanks.
How like you this?
It is rare,
Yet I may be deceived, and should be sorry
Upon uncertain suppositions, rashly
To write my self in the black list of those
I have declaimed against, and to Romont.
I would he were well of—perhaps your Lordship
Likes not these sad tunes, I have a new Song
Set to a lighter note, may please you better;
It is called The happy husband.
Pray sing it.
Ha, ha, it is such a groom.
Doe I hear this, and yet stand doubtful?
Stay him I am undone,
And they discovered.
Whats the matter?
Ah!
That wo•en, when they are well pleased, cannot hold,
But must laugh out.
Help, •aue me, murder, murder.
Undone forever.
Oh, my heart!
Hold yet a little—doe not hope to scope
By flight, it is impossible: though I might
On all advantage take thy life, and justly;
This sword, my fathers sword, that ne'er was drawn,
But to a noble purpose, shall not now
Doe the office of a hangman, I reserve it
To right mine honour, not for a revenge
So poor, that though with thee, it should cut off
Thy family, with all that are allied
To thee in lust, or baseness, it were still short of
All terms of satisfaction. Draw.
I dare not,
I have already done you too much wrong,
To fight in such a cause.
Why, dare thou neither
Be honest, coward, nor yet valiant, knave?
In such a cause come doe not shame thy self•
Such whose bloods wrongs, or wrong done to themselves
Could never heate, are yet in the defence
Of their whores, daring look on her again.
You thought her worth the hazard of your soul,
And yet stand doubtful in her quarrel, to
Venture your body.
No, he fears his clothes, more then his flesh
Keep from me• guard thy life,
Or as thou hast lived like a goat, thou shalt
Dye like a sheep.
Since ther's no remedy
Despair o• safety now in me prove courage.
How soon weak wrong's or•th• own• lend me your hand,
Bear this to the Carriage—come, you have taught me
To say you must and shall: I wrong you not,
You're but to keep him company you love.
Is it don•? it is well. Raise officers, and take care,
All you can apprehend within the house
May be forth coming. Do I appear much moved?
No• sir.
My griefs are now, Thus to be borne
Hereafter i•e find time and place to morn.
I was bound to seek you, sir.
And had you found me
In any place, but in the street, I should
Have done,—not talked to you. A•e you the Captain?
The hopeful Pontalier? whom I have seen
Doe in the fi•lo such se•uic•, as then made you
Their envy that commanded, here at home
To play the parasite to a gilded knave,
And it may be the Pander.
Without this
I come to call y•u to account, for what
Is past already. I by y•ur example
Of thankfulness to the dead General
By whom you were raised, have practised to be so•
To my good Lord Novel, by whom I live;
Whose least disgrace that is, or may be offred,
With all the hazard of my life and fortunes,
I will make good on you, or any man,
That has a hand in it; and since you allow me
A Gentle•man and a soldier, there's no doubt
You will except against me. You shall meet
With a fair enemy, you understand
The right I look for, and must have.
I doe,
And with the next days sun you shall hear from me.
Pray bear this to my fath•r, at his leisure
He may pe•use it: but with your best language
Entreat his instant presence: you have sworn
Not to reveal what I have done.
Nor will I—but —
Doubt me not, by Heaven, I will doe nothing
But what may stand with honour: Pray you leave me
To my own thoughts. If this be to me, rise;
I am not worthy the looking on, but only
To feed contempt and scorn, and that from you
Who with the loss of your fair name have cause it,
Were too much cruelty.
I dare not move you
To hear me speak• I know my fault is far
Beyond qualification, or excuse•
That it is not fit for me to hope, or you
To think of mercy; only I presume
To entreat, you would be pleased to look upon
My sorrow for it, and believe, these tears
Are the true children of my grief and not
A women's cunning.
Can you Beaumelle,
Having deceived so great a trust as mine,
Though I were all credulity, hope again
To get belief? no, no, if you look on me
With pity or dare practise any means
To make my sufferings less, or give just cause
To all the world, to think what I must doe,
Was called upon by you, use other ways,
Deny what I have seen, or justify
What you have done, and as you desperately
Made shipwreck of your faith to be a whore,
Use the arms of such a one, and such defence,
And multiply the sin, with impudence,
Stand boldly up, and tell me to my teeth,
You have done but what's warranted,
By great examples, in all places, where
Women inhabit, urge your own deserts,
Or want of me in merit; tell me how,
Your dowre from the low gulf of poverty,
Weight up my fortunes, to what now they are•
That I was purchased by your choice, and practise
To shelter you from shame: that you might sin
As boldly as securely, that poor men
Are married to those wives that bring them wealth,
One day their husbands, but observers ever:
That when by this proved usage you have blown
The fire of my just vengeance to the height.
I then may kill you: and yet say it was done
In heate of blood, and after die my self,
To witness my repentance.
O my fate,
That never would consent that I should see,
How worthy thou were both of love and duty
Before I lost you; and my misery made
The glass, in which I now behold your virtue:
While I was good, I was a part of you,
And of two• by the virtuous harmony
Of our fair minds, made one: but since I wandered
In the forbidden Labyrinth of lust,
What was inseparable, is by me divided.
With justice therefore you may cut me off,
And from your memory, wash the remembrance
That ere I was like to some vicious purpose
Within your better judgment, you repent of
And study to forget.
O Beaumelle,
That yo• can speak so well, and doe so ill!
But you had bin too great a blessing, if
You had continued chaste: see how you force me
To this, because mine honour will not yield
That I again should love you.
In this life
It is not fit you shou•d: yet you shall find,
Though I was bold enough to be a strumpet,
I dare not yet live one: let those famed matrons
That are canonised worthy of our sex,
Transcend me in their sanctity of life,
I yet will •quall them in dying nobly,
Ambitious of no honour after life,
B•• that when I am dead, you will forgive me.
How pity steals upon me! should I hear her
•••en words more, I were lost—one knocks, go in.
〈◊〉 to be merciful sh•uld be a sin.
〈◊〉, sir, most welcome. L•t me take your cloak,
〈◊〉 not be denied —here are your robes,
〈◊〉 you love justice once more put them on:
••ere is a cause to be determind of
That doe's requi•e such an integrity,
As you have ever used—isle put you to
The •real of your constancy, and goodness:
And look that you that have been Eagle-eyd
In other men's affairs, prove not a Mole
In what concerns your self. T•ke you your seat•
I wi•l be for you presently.
Angels guard me,
To what strange Tragedy does this destruction
Serve for a Prologue?
So, set it down before
The •udgement seat, and stand you at the bar:
For me? I am the accuser.
And Beaumelle my daughter in the place
O• one to be arraig'd.
O, are you touched?
•find that I must take an other course,
•ear nothing. I will only blind your eyes,
•or Justice should do so, when it is to meet
•n object that may sway her equal doom
From what it should be aimed at.— Good my Lord,
A day of hearing.
It is granted, speak—you shall have justice.
I then here accuse,
Most equal Judge, the prisoner your fair Daughter.
For whom I owed so much to you: your daughter,
So worthy in her own parts: and that worth
S•t forth by yours, to whose so rare perfections,
Truth witness with me, in the place of service
I ••most paid Idolatrous sacrifice
To be a •alse advltresse.
With whom?
With this Novel here dead.
Be well advised
And ere you say adulteress again,
Her fame depending on it, be most sure
That she is one.
I took them in the act.
I know no proof beyond it.
O my heart.
A Judge should feel no passions.
Yet remember
He is a man, and cannot put off nature.
What answer makes the prisoner?
I confess
The fact I am charged with, and yield my self
Most miserably guilty.
Heaven take mercy
Upon your soul them it must leave your body.
Now free mine eyes, I dare vnmou'd look on her.
And fortify my sentence, with strong reasons.
Since that the politic law provides that servants,
To whose care we commit our goods shall die,
If they abuse o•r trust: what can you look for,
To whose charge this most hopeful Lord gave up
All hee received from his brave Ancestors,
Or he could leave to his posterity?
His Honour, wicked woman, in whose safety
All this lifes joys, and comforts were locked up,
With thy lust, a thief hath now stolen from him,
And therefore—
Stay, just Judge, may not what's lost
By her own fault, (for I am charitable,
And charge her not with many) be forgotten
In her fair life hereafter?
Never, Sir.
The wrong that's done to the chaste married bed,
Repentant tears can never expiate,
And be assured, to pardon such a sin,
•s an offence as great as to commit it.
I may not then forgive her.
Nor she hope it.
Nor can she wish to live no sun shall rise,
But ere it set, shall show her ugly lust
In a new shape, and every on more horrid:
Nay, even those prayers, which with such humble fervor
She seems to send up yonder, are beat back,
And all suites, which her penitence can proffer,
As soon as made, are with contempt thrown
Off all the courts of mercy.
Let her die then.
Better prepared I am. Sure I could not take her,
Nor she accuse her father, as a Judge
Partial against her.
I approve his sentence,
And kiss the executioner: my lust
Is now run from me in that blood in which
It was begot and nourished.
Is she dead then?
Yes, sir, this is her heart blood, is it not?
I think it be.
And you have kilt her?
True, and did it by your doom
But I pronounced it
As a Judge only, and friend to justice,
And z•alous in defence of your wronged honour,
Broke all the ties of nature• and cast off
The love and soft affection of a father.
I in your cause, put on a Sca•let robe
Of red died cruelty, but in return,
You have advanced for me no flag of mercy:
I looked on you, as a wronged husband, but
You closed your eyes against me, as a father.
O Beaumelle, my daughter.
This is madness.
Keep from me—could not one good thought rise up,
To tell you that she was my ages comfort,
Begot by a weak man, and borne a woman,
And could not therefore, but partake of frailety?
Or wherefore did not thankfulness step forth,
To urge my many merits, which I may
Object unto you, since you prove ungrateful,
Flinty-hearted Charaloys?
Nature does prevail aboue your virtue.
No: it gives me eyes,
To pierce the heart of design against me.
• find it now, it was may state was aimed at,
A nobler match was sought for, and the hours
I lived, grew tedious to you: my compassion
Towards you hath rendered me most miserable,
And foolish charity undone my self:
But ther's a Heaven aboue, from whose just wreak
No mists of policy can hide offenders.
Force op the doors—O monster, caniball,
Lay hold on him, my son, my son.—O Rochfort,
It was you gave liberty to this bloody wolf
To worry all our comforts,—But this is
No time to quarrel; now give your assistance
For the revenge.
Call it• a fitter name—Justice for innocent blood.
Though all conspire
Against that life which I am weary of,
A little longer yet isle strive to keep it,
To show in spit• of malice, and their laws,
His pl•a must speed that hath an honest cause.
why it is both most unconscionable, and untimely
To arrest a gallant for his clothes, before
He has worn them out: besides you said you asked
My name in my Lords bond but for me only,
And now you'll lay me up for it. Do not think
The taking measure of a customer
By a brace of varlets• though I rather wait
Never so patiently, will prove a fashion
Which any Courtier or ••nes of court man
Would follow willingly.
There I believe you.
But sir, I must have present moneys, or
Assurance to secure me, when I shall. —
Or I will see to your coming forth.
Plague on'•,
You have provided for my entrance in:
That coming forth you talk of, concerns me.
What shall I doe? you have done me a disgrace
In the arrest, but more in go•ing cause
To all the street, to think I cannot stand
Without these two supporters for my arms:
Pray you let them loose me: for their satisfaction
I will not run away.
For theirs you will not,
But for your own you would; look to them f•llows.
Why doe you call them fellows? doe not wrong
Yo•r reputation so, as you are merely
A Taylor, faithful, apt to believe in Gallants
You are a companion at a ten crown supper
For cloth of bodkin, and may with one Lark
Eat up three manchets, and no man observe you,
Or call your trade in question for it. But when
You study your debt-booke, and hold correspondence
With officers of the hanger, and leave swordmen,
The learned conclude, the Taylor and Sergeant
In the expression of a knave are these
To be Synonima. Look therefore to it,
And let vs part in peace, I would be loath
You should undo y••r •e••e.
To let you go
Were the next way.
But see! hears your old Lord,
Let him bu• give his word I shall be paid,
And you are free.
S' lid, I will put him to it:
I can be but denied: or what say you?
His Lordship owing me three times your debt,
If you arrest him at my suite, and let me
Go run before to see the action entered.
It would be a witty jest.
I must have ernest:
I cannot pay my debts so.
Can your Lordship
Imagine, while I live and wear a sword,
Your sons death shall be revenged?
I know not
One reason why you should not doe like others:
I am sure, of all the herd that fed upon him,
I cannot see in any, now hoe's gone,
In pity or in thankfulness one true sign
Of sorrow for him.
All his bounties yet
Fell not in such unthankful ground: it is true
He had weaknesses, but such as few are free from,
And though none soothed them less then I: for now
To say that I foresaw the dangers that
Would rise from cherishing them, were but untimely.
I yet could wish the justice that you seek for
In the revenge, had bin trusted to me,
And not the uncertain issue of the laws:
'Tas robed me of a noble testimony
Of what I durst doe for him: but however,
My forfeit life redeemed by him though dead,
Shall doe him service.
As far as my grief
Will give me leave, I thank you.
Oh my Lord,
Oh my good Lord, deliver me from these furies.
Arrested? This is one of them whose base
And object flattery helped to dig his grave:
He is not worth your pity, nor my anger.
Go to the basket and repent.
Away I only know now to hate thee deadly:
I will doe nothing for thee.
Nor you, Captain.
No, to your trade again, put off this case,
It may be the discovering what you were,
When your unfortunate master took you up,
May move compassion in your creditor.
Confess•e the truth.
And now I think on it better,
I will, brother, your hand, your hand, sweet brother.
I am of your sect, and my gallantry but a dream,
Out of which these two fearful apparitions
Against my will have waked me. This rich sword
Grew suddenly out of a taylors bodkin;
•hese hangers from my veils and fees in Hell:
And where as now this beaver sits, full often
A thrifty cape composed of broad cloth lists,
Here kin unto the cushion where I sate
Crosse-leg'd, and yet vngartred, hath been seen,
Our breakefasts famous for the buttred loaves,
I have with joy bin oft acquainted with,
And therefore use a conscience, though it be
Forbidden in our hall towards other men,
To me that as I have been, will again
Be of the brotherhood.
I know him now:
He was a prentice to Le Robe at Orleans.
And from thence brought by my young Lord, now dead,
Unto Dijon, and with him till this hour
Hath bin received here for a complete Monsieur.
Nor wonder at it: for but tithe our gallants,
Even those of the first rank, and you will find
In every ten, one: peradventure two,
That smell rank of the dancing school, or fiddle,
The pantofle or pressing yro•: but hereafter
Weal talk of this. I will surrender up
My suites again: there cannot be much loss,
It is but the t•rning of the lace, with ones
Additions more you know of, and what want•
I will work out.
Then here our quarrel ends.
The gallant is turned Taylor, and all friends.
You have them ready.
Yes, and they will sp•ache
Their knowledge in this cause, when thou think fit
To have them called upon.
It is well, and something
I can add to their evidence, to prove
This brave revenge, which they would have called murder,
A noble Justice.
In this you express
(The breach by my Lords want of you, new made up)
A faithful friend.
That friendship's raised on sand,
Which every sudden gust of discontent,
Or flowing of our passions can change,
As if it ne'er had bin: but doe you know
Who are to sit on him?
Monsieur Du Croy
Assisted by Charm.
The Advocate
That pleaded for the Marshalls •un•rall,
And was checked for it by Novel.
The same.
How fortunes that?
Why, sir, my Lord Novel
Being the accuser, cannot be the Judge,
Nor would grieve Roshfort, but Lord Charaloys
(How-euer he might wrong him by his power,)
Should have an equal hearing.
By my hopes.
Of Charaloys acquittal, I lament
That reverent old mans fortune.
Had you seen him,
As to my grief I have now promised patience,
And ere it was believed, though spake by him
That never brake his word, enraged again
So far as to make war upon those heirs,
Which not a barbarous Scythian durst presume
To touch, but with a superstitious fear,
As something sacred, and then curse his daughter,
But with more frequent violence himself,
As if he had bin guilty of her fault,
By being incredulous of your report,
You would not only judge him worrhy pity,
But suffer with him.
But here comes the prisoner,
I dare not stay to doe my duty to him,
Yet rest assured, all possible means in me
To doe him service, keeps you company.
It is not doubted.
Why, yet as I came hither,
The people apt to mock calamity,
And tread on the oppressed, made no hormes at me,
Though they are too familiar: I deserve them.
And knowing what blood my sword hath drunk
In wreak of that disgrace, they yet forbore
To shake their heads, or to revile me for
A murderer, they rather all put on
(As for great losses the old Romans used)
A general face of sorrow, weighted on
By a sad murmur breaking through their silence,
And no eye but was readier with a tear
To witness it was shed for me, then I could
Discern a f•ce made up with scorn against me.
Why should I then, though for unusual wrongs
I chose unusual means to right those wrongs,
Condemn my self, as overpartial
In my own cause Romont?
Best friend, well met,
By my hearts lou• to you, and join to that,
My thankfulness that still lives to the dead,
I look upon you now with more true joy,
Then when I saw you married.
You have reason
To give you warrant for it; my falling off
From such a friendship with the scorn that answered
Your too prophetic counsel, may well move you
To think, your meeting me going to my death,
A fit encounter for that hate which justly
I have deser•'d from you.
Shall I still then
Speak truth, and be ill understood?
You are not.
I am conscious, I have wronged you, and allow me
Only a moral man to look on you,
Whom foolishly I have abused and injured,
Must of necessity be more terrible to me,
•hen any death the Judges can pronounce
From the tribunal which I am to plead at.
Passion transports you.
For what I have done
To my false Lady, or Novel, I can
Give some apparent cause: but touching you,
In my defence, childlike, I can say nothing,
But I am sorry for it, a poor satisfaction:
And yet mistake me not: for it is more
Then I will speak, to have my pardon signed
For all I stand accused of.
You much weaken the strength of your good cause,
Should you but think
A man for doing well could entertain
A pardon, were it offred, you have given
To blind and slow-pac'd justice, wings, and eyes
To see and overtake impieties,
Which from a cold proceeding had received
I•dulgence or protection.
Think you so?
Upon my soul nor should the blood you challenge
And took to cure your honour, breed more scruple
In your soft conscience, then if your sword
Had bin sheathed in a Tiger, or she Bear,
That in their bowels would have made your tomb
To injure innocence is more then murder:
But when inhumane lusts transform vs, then
As beasts we are to suffer, not like men
To be lamented. Nor did Charalois ever
Perform• an act so worthy the applause•
Of a full theater of perfect men,
As he hath done in this: the glory got
By overthrowing outward enemies,
Since strength and fortune are maine sharers in it,
We cannot but by pieces call our own•:
But when we conquer our intestine foes,
Our passions breed within vs, and of those
The most reb•llious tyrant powerful love,
Our reason s•ffering vs to like no longer
T•en the fair object being good deserves it,
T•a•'s true victory, which, were great men
Ambitious to a•chi•ue, by your example
Setting no price upon the breach of faith,
B•t l•ss• of •ife, it would fright adultery
Ou• of their families, and make lust appear
As loathsome to vs in the first cousin•,
As when it is waited on by punishment.
You have confirmed me. Who would love a woman
That might enjoy in such a man, a friend?
You have made me know the justice of my cause,
An• marked me out the way, how to defend it.
Continue to that resolution constant,
And you shall, in contempt of their worst malice,
Come off with honour. Here they come.
I am ready.
See, equal Judges, with what confidence
The cruel murderer stands, as if he would
Outface the Court and •ustic•l
But look on him,
And you shall find, for still methinks I doe,
Though guilt hath did him black, something good in him,
That may perhaps work with a wiser man
Then I have been, again to set him free
And give him all he has.
This is not well.
I would you had lived so, my Lord that I,
Might rather have continued your poor servant.
Then sit here as your Judge.
I am sorry for you.
In no act of my life I have de•earned
This injury from the court, that any here
Should •hus uncivilly usurp on what
Is proper to me only.
What di•taste
R•cei•es my Lord?
You say you are sorry for him:
A grief in which I must not have a partner•
It is I alone am sorry, that I raised
The building of my life for seventy years
Upon so sure a ground, that all the vices
P•actis'd to ruin man, though brought against me,
Could n•u•r undermine, and no way left
To send these gray hairs to the grave with sorrow.
Virtue tha• was my patronise, betrayed me:
For entering, nay, possessing this young man,
It lent him such a powerful Majesty
To grace what ere he undertook, that freely
I gave my self up with my liberty,
To be at his disposing; had his pe•son,
Lo•ely I must confess, or far feigned valour,
Or any other seeming good, that yet
Holds a near neyghbour-hood, with ill wrought on me,
I might have borne it better: but when goodness
And piety it self in her best figure
Were bribed to my destruction, can you blame me,
Though I forget to suffer like a man,
Or rather act a woman?
Good my Lord.
You hinder our proceeding.
And forget
The parts of an accuser.
Pray you remember
To use the temper which to me you promised;
Angels themselves must break Baumont, that pro∣mise
Beyond the strength and patience of Angels.
But I have done, my good Lord, pardon me
A weak old man, and pray add to that
A miserable father, yet be careful
That your compassion of my age, nor his,
Move you to any thing, that may dis-become
The pl•ce on which you fit
Read the Indictment.
It shall be needless, I my self, my Lords,
Will be my own accuser, and confess
All they can charge me with, or will I spare
To aggravate that guilt with circumstance
They seek to load me with: only I pray,
That as for them you will vouchsafe me hearing:
I may not be denied it for my self,
When I shall urge by what vnanswerable reasons
I was compelled to what I did, which yet
Till you have taught me better, I repent not.
The motion honest.
And it is freely granted.
Then I confess my Lords, that I stood bound,
When with my friends, even hope it self had left me
To this mans charity for my liberty,
Nor did his bounty end there, but began:
For after my enlargement, cherishing
The good he did, he made me master of
His only daughter, and his whole estate:
Great ties of thankfulness I must acknowledge,
Could any one freed by you, press this furthe•?
But yet consider, my most honoured Lords,
If to receive a favour, make a servant,
And benefits are bonds to tie the taker
To the imperious will of him that gives,
Ther's none but slaves will receive curtsy.
Since they must fetter vs to our dishonours.
Can it be called magnificence in a Prince,
To power down riches, with a liberal hand,
Upon a poor mans wants, if that must bind him
To play the soothing parasite to his vices?
Or any man, because he saved my hand,
Pr•sum my head and heart are at his service?
Or did • stand engaged to buy my freedom
(When my captivity was honourable)
By making my self here and fame hereafter,
〈…〉 to men's scorn and calumnious tongues?
H•• hi• fair da•ghters mind bin like her feature,
Or for some little blame•sh I had sought
For my content elsewhe••, wasting on others
My bod• and her dowry; my forh•ad then
Deserved the brand of base ingratitude:
But if obsequ•ou• usage, and fair warning
To keep her worth my love, could preserve her
From being a whore, and yet no cunning one,
So to offend, and yet the fault kept from me?
What shou•d I doe? let any freeborne spirit
Determine truly, if that thankfulness,
Choice form with the whole world given for a dowry•
Could streng•hen so an honest man with patience,
As with a willing neck to undergo
The insupportable yoke of slave or wit toll.
What proof have you she did play false, besides your oath?
Her own confession to her father.
I ask him for a witness.
It is most true.
I would not willing•y blend my last words
With an untruth.
And then •o clear my self,
That his great wealth was not the mark I shot at,
But that I h•lt it, when fair Beaumelle
Fell from her virtue, like the fatal gold
Which Brennu• took from Delphos, whose possession
B•o•light with it ruin to himself and Army.
H•er's one in Cou•r, Baumont, by whom I sent
All grants and writings back, which made it mine,
Before his daughter died by his own sentence,
As freely a• unasked he gave i• to me.
They are here to be seen•
Open the casket.
Peruse •hat deed of gift.
Half of the danger
Already is discharged: the other part
As bravely, and you are not only free,
But crowned with praise for ever.
It is apparent.
Your state, my Lord, again is yours.
Not mine,
I am not of the world, if it can prosper,
(And yet being justly got, Isle not examine
Why it should be so fatal) doe you bestow it
On pious uses. Isle go seek a grave.
And yet for proof, I die in peace, your pardon
I ask, and as you grant it me, may Heaven
Your conscience, and these Judges free you from
What you are charged with. So farewell for ever.—
Isle be mine own guide. Passion, nor example
Shall be my leaders. I have lost a son,
A son, grave Judges, I require his blood
From his accursed homicide.
What reply you
In your defence for this?
I but attended
Your Lordships pleasure. For the fact, as of
The former, I confess it, but with what
Base wrongs I was unwillingly drawn to it,
To my few words there are some other proofs
To witness this for truth, when I was married:
For there I must begin. The slain Novel
Was to my wife, in way of our French courtship,
A most devoted servant, but yet aimed at
Nothing but means to quench his wanton heate,
His heart being n•for warmed by lawful fires
As mine was (Lords:) and though on these presumptions,
Joined to the hate between his house and mine,
I might with opportunity and ease
Ha•e found a way for my revenge, I did not;
But still he had the freedom as before
Wh•n all was mine, and told that he abused it
With some unseemly licence, by my friend
My appou'd friend Romont. I gave no credit
To the reporter, but reproved him for it,
As one vncourtly and malicious to him.
What could I more, my Lords? yet after this
He did continue in his first pursue•e
Hotter then ever, and at length obt•end it;
But how it came to my most certain kowledge,
For the dignity of the court and my own honour
I dare not say.
If all may be believed
A passionate prisoner speaks, who is so foolish
That durst be wicked, that will appear guilty?
No, my grave Lords: in his impunity
But give example unto jealous men
To cut the throats they hate, and they will never
Want matter or pretence for their bad ends.
You must find other proofs to strengthen these
But mere presumptions.
Or we shall hardly
Allow your innocence.
All your attempts
Shall fall on me, like brittle sha•ts on armour,
That break themselves; or like waives against a rock•,
That leave no sign of their ridiculous fury
But foam and splinters, my innocence like these
Shall stand triumphant, and your malice serve
But for a trumpet to proclaim my conquest;
Nor shall you, though you doe the worst fate can,
How ere condemn, affright an honest man.
May it please the Court, I may be heard.
You come not
To rail again? but doe, you shall not find
Anode•r Rochfort.
In Novel I cannot.
But I come furnished with what will stop
The mouth of his conspiracy against the life
O• innocen• Charaloys. Doe you know this Character?
Yes, it is my sons.
May it please your Lordships, read it,
And you shall find there, with what vehemence
He did solicit Beaumelle, how he had got
A promise from her to enjoy his wishes,
How after he abjured her company,
And yet, but that it is fit I spare the dead,
Like a damned villain, as soon as recorded,
He brake that oath, to make this manifest.
Produce his bands and hers.
Have they took their o•hes?
They have• and rather then endure the rack,
Confess the time, the meeting, nay the act;
What would you more? only this matron made
A free discovery to a good end;
And therefore • sue to the Court, she may not
Be placed in the black list of the delinquents.
I see by this, Nouals revenge needs me,
And I shall doe.
It is evident.
That I
Till now was never wretched, here's no place
To curse him or my stars.
Lord Charalois,
The injuries you have sustained, appear
So worthy of the mercy of the Court,
That notwithstanding you have gone beyond
The letter of the Law, they yet acquit you.
But in Novel, I doe condemn him thus•
I am slain.
Can I look on? Oh murderous wretch,
Thy challenge now I answer•• •o die with him,
A guard: disarm him.
I ye•l• up my sword
Unforced. Oh Ch•raloys.
For shame R•mont,
Mourn• not for him that dies as he hath lived,
Still constant and vnmou'd: what's fallen upon me,
Is by Heavens will, because I made my self
A •judge in my own cause without their warrant:
But he that lets me know thus much in death,
With all good men forgive me.
I receive the ve•geance, which my love
Not built on virtue, ha• made me worthy, worthy of.
We are taught
By this sad president, how just soever
Our reasons are to remedy our wrongs,
W• are yet to leave them to their will and power,
That to that purpose have •u•hority.
For you, Romont, although in your excuse
You may plead, what you did, was in revenge
Of the dishonour done unto the Court:
Yet since from vs you had not warrant for it,
We banish you the State: for these, they shall,
As they are found guilty, or innocent,
Be set free, or suffer punishment.

I Have seen the old year fairly buried,
Good Gentleman he was, but toward his end
Full of Diseases, he kept no good Diet,
He Loved a wench in June, (which with count Wild,
And got the latter end of May with child;
That was his fault, and many an old year smells on it.
How now? who's it is? oh, one ath' Fasting-dayes
That followed him to his grave;
I know him by his gauntness, his thin chitterlings,
He would undo a Tripe-wise; Fasting-day!
Why art so heavy?
Oh, sweet Doctor Almanac,
I have lost a dear old Master, beside Sir,
I have been out of service, all this Kersmas;
No-body minds Fasting day, I have scarce bin thought
upon a' Friday nights;
And because Kersmas this year fell upon it,
The Fridays have been ever since so proud
They scorn my company, the Butchers boys
At Temple-Barre, set their great Dogs upon me,
I dare not walk abroad, nor be seen yet,
The very Poulters Girls throw rotten Eggs at me,
Nay Fishstreete loves me, even but frō teeth outward,
(The nearest Kin I have) looks shy upon me,
As if t'ad forgot me, I met Plumporridge now,
My big-swolne Enemy, hoe's plump and lusty,
The only man in place, sweet Master Doctor,
Prefer me to the New-Yeere, you can do it.
When can I do it sir? you must stay till Lent.
Till Lent, you kill my heart, sweet M. Doctor,
Thrust me into Candlemas Eve, I doe beseech you.
Away, Candlemas Eve will never bear
thee in these days, it is so frampole, the Puritans will
never yield to it.
Why they are fat enough.
Here comes Plumporridge.
I, hoe's sure of wel-come; me thinks hee
moves like one of the great Porridge Tubs, going to
the Counter.
Oh killing cruel sight, yonder's a Fasting day:
A lean spinie Rascal with a Dog in's belly, his
very Bowels bark with hunger; avaunt, thy Breath
stinks, I doe not love to meet thee fasting, thou art
nothing but wind, thy Stomack's full of Farts, as if
they had lost their way, and thou made with the
wrong end upward, like a Dutch Maw, that dischar∣ges
still into 'th Mouth!
Why thou whoreson Breakfast, Dinner,
Nuntions, Supper and Beaver, Cellar, Hall, Kitchen,
and Wet-larder.
Sweet Master Doctor, look quickly upon
his Water, that I may break the Urinal about his
pate.
Nay friendship, friendship.
Never Master Doctor, with any Fastingday,
persuade me not.
Nor any thing belongs to Ember-weeke.
And if I take against a thing, I'm stomachful,
I was borne an Anabaptist, a fell foe,
To fish and Fridays, Pig's my absolute Sweetheart.
And shall I wrong my Love, and cleave to Saltfish!
Commit adultery with an Egg and Butter?
Well setting this apart, whose water's this sir?
On, thereby hangs a tale, my M. Kersmasses.
It is his water, sir, hoe's drawing on.
Kersmas? why let me see,
I saw him very lusty a Twelfe-night.
I, that's true, sir, but then he took his bane,
With choosing King and Queen;
He's made his Will already, here's the Copy.
And what he's he given away, let me see,
Plumbroth.
He could not give away much, sir, his i will∣drone
have so consumed him before hand.
IN primis I give and bequeath to my second Son
In, and In; his perpetual Lodging in the Kings∣bench,
and his Ordinary out of the Basket.
A sweet allowance for a second brother.
Item, I give to my youngest Sons Gleek and Pri∣ministe,
the full consuming of Nights and Days, and
Wives and Children, together with one secret gift,
that is, never to give over, while they have a penny.
And if ever they doe, Isle be hanged.
For the possession of all my Lands, Manors,
Mannor-houses, I leave them full and wholly to
my eldest Son, Noddy, whom during his mino∣rite,
I commit to the custody of a pair of Knaves
and one and thirty?
There's Knaves enough a conscience to coo∣zen
one Fool.
Item, I give to my eldest Daughter, Tickle me
quickly, and to her sister my Ladies Hole, free leave to
shift for themselves, either in Court, City, or Country.
We thank him heartily.
Item, I leave to their old Aunt, my Sow he has Pigd,
a Litter of Courtesans to breed up for Shroue-tide.
They will be good ware in Lent, when flesh
is forbid by Proclamation.
Item, I give to my Nephew Gambols, commonly
called by the name of Kersmas Gambols, all my Cattle,
Horse and Mare, but let him shoe 'em himself.
I have seen him shoe the Mare forty times
over.
Also, I bequeath to my Coozen-Germane Wassel-Bowle,
borne of Dutch Parents, the Privilege of a
free Denizen, that is, to be drunk with Scotch-Ale, or
English-Beere: and lastly, I have given by word of
mouth, to poor Blind man Buff, a flap with a Fox∣tail.
I, so he has given 'em all for ought I see.
But now what think you of his Water, sir?
Well he may linger out till Candlemas:
But ne'er recover it.
Would he were gone once,
I should be more respected.
Here's New-yeere?
I have ne'er a gift to give him, Isle be gone.
Mirth &amp; a healthful time fill all your days.
Look freshly, Sir.
I cannot, Master Doctor.
My fathers death sets the Spring backward i'm.
For joy and comfort yet, I'm now between
Sorrow and joy, the Winter and the Spring.
And as Time gathers freshness in it's season,
No doubt Affects will be subdued with reason.
You've a brave mind to work on, use my rules,
And you shall cut a Caper in November,
When other years your Grandfathers lay bedrid.
What's he, that looks so piteously, and
shakes so?
A Fasting-day?
How's that?
A foolish Fasting-day,
An unseasonable cock scomb, seeks now for a service,
He's hunted up and down, he's been at Court,
And the Long-Porter broke his head a'crosse there,
He had rather see the Devil, for this he says,
He ne'er grew up so tall with Fasting-dayes,
I would not for the price of all my Almanacs;
The Guard had took him there, they would ha beat
out his brains with Bombards.
I bade him stay till Lent, and now he whimpers;
He would to Rome forsooth, that's his last refuge,
But would try awhile,
How well he should be used in Lancashire.
He was my Fathers servant,
That he was, sir.
Tic here upon Record.
I served him honestly, and cost him little.
I, Isle besworn for that.
Those were the Times, sir,
That made your Predecessors rich, and able
To lay up more for you, and since poor Fasting-daies
Were not made reckoning on, the pampered flesh
He has plaide the knave, Maids have had fuller bellies,
Those meals that once were saved, have stirred, &amp; leapt,
And bègot Bastards, and they must be kept,
Better keep Fasting-dayes, your self may tell you,
And for the profit of purse, back and belly?
I never yet heard Truth better whin'de out.
Thou shalt not al be lost, not for vainglory
Greedily welcomed, we'll begin with Virtue,
As we may hold with it, that do's Virtue right,
Set him down, Sir, for Candlemas Eve at night.
Well, better late then never.
This is my comfort, I shall come to make
All the Fat Rogues go to bed supperless,
Get dinners where they can.
How now? what's he?
Tic old Time, Sir, that belongd
To all your Predecessors.
Oh I honour
That Reverend Figure, may I ever think
How precious thou 'rt in youth, how rarely
Redeemed in Age.
Time Observe, you have Times service.
There's all in brief.
Ho? Doctor? What are these?
Time The Rabble that I pity, these I have served too,
But few or none have ever observed me,
Amongst this dissolute Route, Candlemas day!
I'm sorry to see him so ill associated?
Why that's his cause of cōming to cōplaine,
Because Shrouetuesday this year dwells so near him.
But ti's his place he cannot be removed.
You must be patient, Candlemas, and brooke it.
This Rabble, Sir, Shrouetuesday, hungry Lent,
Ill May-day, Midsummer Eve, and the first Dogge-day,
Come to receive their places due by custom,
And that they build upon.
Giu'em their charge, and then admit'em.
I will do it in Cone.
Stand forth Shrouetuesday, one'a the silenc'st Bricke-Layers,
Tic in your charge to pull down Bawdyhouses,
To set your Tribe aworke, cause spoil in Shorditch,
And make a Dangerous Leake there, deface Turnbul,
And tickle Codpiece Row, ruin the Cockpit, the
Poor Players ne'er thriud in it, a my Cōscience some
Queen pissed upon the first Brick;
For you, lean Lent, be sure you utter first
Your rotten Herrings and keep up your best
Till they be rotten, then ther's no deceit
When they be all alike. You Ill-Mayday,
Be as unruly a Rascal as you may,
To stir up Deputy Double Diligence,
That comes perking forth with Halberds:
And for you Midsomer Eve, that watches warmest,
Be but sufficiently drunk, and you're well harnessed,
You Dogday!
Woh.
A churlish maundring Rogue,
You must both beg and rob, curse and cologne,
In cooler Nights the Barn with Doxies fill,
In Harvest lye in Haycock with your Eel.
They have all their charge.
You have gin't at the wrong end,
To bid'em sin's the way to make i'm mend,
For what they are forbid, they run to head-long.
I have cast their Inclinations, now your service,
To draw fresh blood into your Mrs. cheeks, slaves!
What scornful looks the Abusiue Vile∣loins
threw,
Upon the reverend form and face of Time!
Me thought it appeared sorry, and went angry.
It is still your servant.
How now? what are these?
These are your Good Days, and your Bad
Days, Sir,
Those your Indifferent days, nor good, nor bad.
But is here all?
A wonder there's so many.
How these broke loose, every one stops their passage,
And makes inquiry after 'em.
This Farmer will not cast his seed in the ground
Before he look in Bretnor, there he finds
Some word which hee hugs happily, as, Ply the Box,
Make Hay betimes, It falls into thy Mouth.
A punctual Lady will not paint forsooth
Upon his Critical days, twill not hold well,
Nor a nice Citie-Wedlocke eat fresh Herring,
Nor Periwinkles;
Although she long for both, if the word be that day,
Gape after Gudgins, or some fishing phrase.
A Scriveners Wife will not entreat the Mony-master
That lies in the house, and gets her Husbands children
To furnish a poor Gentleman's Extremes,
If she find, Nihil in a Bag, that morning,
And so of thousand follies, these suffice
To show you Good, Bad, and Indifferent Days,
And all have their Inscriptions, here's, Cock a Hoop,
This the Gear cottons, and this, Faint Heart, never▪
These, noted Black for Badness, Rods in peace.
This, Post for Puddings, this Put up thy Pipes,
These black and white indifferently inclining
To both their natures, neither Full nor Fasting,
In Dock, out Nettle,—Now to your motion,
Black Knaves, and white Knaves, and you parcel Rascals,
Two hypocritical party-colord Varlets,
That play o'both hands.
I see these pleasures of low Births and Na∣tures,
Add little freshness to your cheeks, I pity you,
And can no longer now conceal from you,
Your happy Omen, Sir, Blessings draw near you,
I will disclose a Secret in Astrology,
By the sweet Industry of Harmony,
Your white and glorious friend;
Even very Deities have conspired, to grace
Your fair Inauguration, here I find it,
Tic clear in Art,
The minute, nay, the point of Time's arrived,
Me thinks the blessings touch you, now they're felt,
Sir.

NEw-yeere, New-yeere! hark, harken to me,
I am sent down
To crown,
Thy wishes, with me,
Thy fair desires in Virtues Court are filled,
The goodness of thy thought,
This blessed work hath wrought,
Time shall be reconcilde:
Thy Spring shall in all sweets abound,
Thy Summer shall be clear and sound,
Thy Autumn swell the Barn and Loft,
With Corn and fruits, ripe, sweet and soft,
And in thy Winter, when all go,
Thou shalt depart as white as Snow.
Behold, behold, hark, harken to me,
Glories come down,
To crown
Thy wishes, with me,
Bright Heroes in lasting Honour sphered
Virtues eternal Spring,
(By making Time their King.)
See, they're beyond Time reared.
Yet in their love to humane good,
In which estate themselves once stood,
They all descend to have their worth
Shine, to Imitation, forth:
And by their Motion, Light and Love,
To Show how after Times should move!

Move on, Move on, be still the same,
You Beauteous Sons of Brightness,
You add to Honour Spirit and Flame,
To Virtue, Grace, and Vhitenesse;
You, whose every little motion
May learn Strictness more Devotion,
Every Pace, of that high worth,
It treads a fair Example forth;
Quickens a Virtue, makes a Story,
To your own Heroic Glory.
May your three times thrice Blessed Number
Raise Merit from his Ancient S'umber;
Move on, Move on, &amp;c.

SEe, whether Fate hath lead you, (Lamps of Honour)
(Fog Goodness brings her own reward upon her)
Look, turn your Eyes, &amp; then conclude, commending,
And say, you have lost no Worth by your Descending,
Behold a Heaven about you, Spheres more plenty,
There, for one Luna, here shines Ten,
And for one Venus, Twenty;
Then Heroes, double both your Fame and Light,
Each choose his Star, and full adorn this Night.

The Morning gray,
Bids, come away,
Every Lady should begin
To take her Chamber, for the Stars are in:
Live Long the Miracles of Times and Years,
Till with those Heroes, You sit fixed in Spheres.

THus from the Poet am I bid to say,
He knows what Judges sit to doom each Play,
(The over-curious Critic, or the wise)
The one with squint, t'other with sunne-like eyes,
Shoots through each Scene: the one cries all things down,
T'other hides strangers faults close as his own.
Las! Those who out of custom come to gear,
(S•ng the full quire of the nine Muses here)
So carping, not from wit, but apish spite,
And fetherdignorance, thus our Poet does slight.
It is not a gay suit, or distorted face,
Can beat his merit off, which has won grace
In the full Theater, nor can now fear
The teeth of any snaky whisperer:
But to the white, and sweet unclouded brow,
(The heaven where true worth moves) our Poet does bow;
Patrons of Arts, and Pilots to the Stage,
Who guide it (through all tempests) from the rage
Of envious whirl winds. O doe you but steer
His Muse this day, and bring her tot'h wished shore,
You are those Delphic powers, whom she'll adore.
GIve leave: Lothario.
My Sovereign.
The news in brief: how replies Iacinta?
Will she be woman? will she meet our Arms
With an alternate roundure? will she doe?
Nothing to the purpose my Liege, cold as Aquarius,
There she was borne, and there she still remains;
I cannot move her to enter into Pisces, I
Laid the flesh to her too, and the delights thereof, she leanes
Another way, and talks all of the spirit, I
Frighted her with spirits too, but all would not doe:
She drew her knife, pointed it to her breast, swore
She would doe something, but women's tongues are
Sometimes longer then their arms.
Enough, we have bethought another way.
This wooing application is too mild:
It is better trust the mercy of a storm.
To hast our way, then to be calmed for ever,
Short of the wished haven:
Now draw near, you told us of a hot invasion▪
The barbarous and tawny Affricans,
Intend upon our confines.
True, my Liege.
Full threescore thousand are descried in Arms,
Ready to pass the Straights of Gibraltar,
Whose watery divisions, their Africa bounds
〈…〉om our Christian Europe in Granado,
And Audalusia; they spread and flourish
Their silver moons, led as it is supposed,
By some blind guide, some Saintish Infidel,
That prophesies subjection of our Spain,
Unto the Moors.
They would deter us with their swarthy looks:
Were they the same to their similitude,
Sooty as the inhabitants of hell,
Whom they nearest figure; cold fear should fly
From us as distant as they are from beauty:
They come to sacrifice their bloods to us,
If that be red, a m•re rubrum,
We'll make so high to quench their silver moons;
And on their carcasses an Is•mus make
To pass their straits again, and forage there.
Your forward valour speaks you majestic,
But my dread Liege, does not your treasury
Grow thin and empty? so long have you held
A champion resolution against the Turk▪
That Spain is wasted in her noble strength,
On which presuming, tic to be supp〈…〉
The Moore is thus encouraged.
And yet we undaunted Iulianus, our treasury is
A mine unscarcht, wee have a Castle
Supposed enchanted, we'll break the magic,
If spells there be, opethe forbidden doors
Which twenty of our predecessors have refuse•e,
But added each a locke to guard it more,
Rather then our Soldiers shall want pay
To fight our battles nobly.
O my Lord, that's a dangerous secret, only known
To such as can divine futurities,
And they with fearful prophesies predict
Fatallevents to Spain, when that shall be
Broke up by violence: till fate hath run
Her own wasting period; which out staide
Auspitiously they promise, that wreathes are kept
In the fore-dooming Court of destiny,
To bind us ever in a happy conquest.
Tut. fear frights us not, nor shall hope fool us
If need provoke, we'll dig supply through hell
And her enchantments. Who c•n prefix us
A time to see these incantations loosde?
Perhaps twill stay ten generations more,
When our blood royal may want succession,
If not; what boots it us (lost in our dust
And memory 500. years) that then this hidden
Work shall be; tush, the weakness of our predecessors
Shall not fright us, all is not deadly,
That looks dangerous.
I wish no life to see that day.
Nor I, so many Kings have feared that destiny.
Lord Iulianus, we commit to you
The charge of this great work against the Moors,
With title of Lord General, as you please,
Order this high affair; call to the field
An equal Army against those Affricans,
The bold and hardiest soldiers of our kingdom▪
Scourge back again th•se halfe-nak'• Infide•s
Into their sun-burnt Climate; in thy heart
Be loyalty and courage, strength in thine arm:
With christian vaiour strike the heathens dead,
And for thy triumph, bring the Mulyes head.
This honour which your Majesty has given me,
Tho better it might fit another wearing,
Of abler limbs, wheretime has not defaced,
Nor half so many winters quenched his blood,
As a new spring it hath revivde ag••
This Autumn of my years; there's but one care
I leave behind me within the Court of Spain,
My poor Iacinta, mine, and only mine;
May she here thrive in honour, and in favours,
And I shall meet her with a victory,
(Heaven put before) as shall endow us both
In your high esteem.
That shall be our care noble Iulianus, to see her safe,
We love I•cinta more then you must know,
And for her sake we doe remove you hence;
You may thank your daughter for this honour Sir,
If you knew our purpose.
I understand all this, whilst he wars abroad, his
Daughter must skirmish at home; Venus is in conjunction
With Mercury, wit and lechery are both in labour
At once alas poor mayden-head, you are cast i'faith,
And must to execution; virginity had thou bin
Moulded in my compass, thou had escaped this pitfall.
On, to thy charge, prosper in thy high deeds;
Who aims at honour nobly, nobly speeds.
My heart and tongue, thus sentence to my fate,
In honour thrive, in baseness ruinate.
All help him on his speed: Lothario.
Have we not finely moulded our design?
Times ancient bawd, opportunity attends us now,
And yet our flaming blood will scarce give leave
To opportunity.
I told your highness of a second bawd to time, &amp; yet
Not times second neither, for time ne'er patterned her
A thing real, not a dumb moral, as time it self
Is, but a speaking thing, and one that speaks
Effectually; one that has wrecked more mayden-heads
In Spain, then she has years upon her reverent brows,
And yet she writes odd of threescore, an odd wench it is.
Thou nam'st her to me.
Malena.
And hast instructed her?
I have prepared her fit for instruction my Liege; she
Waits her further confirmation from your Highness:
Oh every soldier has a double heart, when the King's in field.
Call her
By her right name; bawd, where art thou bawd?
If Words will serve, if not, by ripens force;
We'll pluck this apple from th'Hesperides.
This is the thing I told your Highness of.
A reverent one it is, &amp; may be called schoolemistresse of her sex; if Apelles had ever pictured forth experience, here might he take his pattern.
Indeed my Liege, I have bin the pattern that a great
Many has taken out pictures by, I confess I have
Bin a greater friend to the Hospitals, then the Nunneries,
And I think it was the greater ch••ity, because
They are the poorer, and more wretched places.
The very ipsissima of her sex, my Liege, as old as
She is, I will undertake she shall wrestle a fall
With the strongest Virgin in Spain, &amp; throw her down too.
Thou must be my Lawyer (I'll fee thee well,)
And at the Bar of beauty plead a cause,
Which whether right or wrong, must needs be mine.
Indeed in rightful causes, weak Lawyers will
Serve turn, but the wrong had need have
The best Orators; I'm but a weak vessel, you
Know my Liege.
She'll hold out I warrant, hark you my Liege,
This vessel is not hollow yet, it does not sound,
There's mettle in her, there's sack in this Tun,
That has eaten up a great deal of dead
Flesh in her time, lights, longs and bad livers.
Come, come, you must not plead an insufficiency.
I'll doe my best my Lord.
Tush, in malo consilio foeminae vincunt viros.
Does he not abuse me my Liege?
Not at all, he says women overcome men in
Giving counsel.
Is there not a faulty word amongst them?
Thou art able to corrupt any good sense, with bad construction:
I say foeminae vincunt, that is, quasi vincere cunctos,
Ouercomes all men.
Go to, go to, there is a broad word amongst'm, vincunt
Quoth, is it spoke with a K, or a C? but in plain
Language I will doe my best, if she be of my sex, I
Will show her the end of her function, men follow
The traditions of their forefathers, so should
Women follow the trades of their fore-mothers.
I see thou hast persuasive oratory.
Here's juice of liquorish, good for thy voice,
Speak freely, and effectually.
I will speak the words that have o'rethrowne a
Hundred in my time.
I was within compass then.
Let me have access to her, if she be flesh &amp; blood,
I'll move her, I will not leave her till I turn her to a stone.
Unite your forces both, conquer in love,
I will reward as for a victory
Purchased with blood from my worst enemy:
Effect, for ill things have their effects we see
Prosper, we'll call it a prosperity.
You'll bring me to the place and party?
Prepared with all advantage. I will assist thee, thou
Destroyer of mayden-heads.
Your passions err my Lord, did you foresee
What may ensue; folly begets danger,
Nay oft, their full effects, destruction;
You would not clothe the nobleness of your blood
In such base weeds, shoe's a beggar you dote on.
You have spoke the worst thy malice can invent,
A beggar say? and better being so,
If a small Star could overshine the Sun,
And show his brightness in the solstice,
Should it be blamed or praised? the feeble Vine
Brings forth sweet fruits, whilst the Cedars's barren;
Beggar is she, I'll poise her graces with it,
And see how many infinites she'll pull
The balance down, and yet that poverty
A goodness disesteemed, shoe's fair,
Modest, lovely, wise, virtuous.
Nay, if you dote, I'll waste no more good counsel,
And what's her dower Sir?
Infinites, I named them to thee.
O shoe's fair, a fair dowry.
Chaste and virtuous.
Those are jewels indeed, but they'll yield little.
They are not things of prise, they are far off,
And dear, yet Ladies send not for'em.
May not a league be taken for a time?
Defer this hasty match, you have employment
As a Soldier, the King has given you charge,
Approve your champion valour in the field,
If that remove not this domestic trouble,
Retire upon your Uenus.
I'll prevent that venom,
This night I will be married to my sweet,
And then her memory enjoyed, shall strengthen
Mine arm against my foe, which else would droop,
Suspecting of her loss, I fear it now;
What eye can look upon her, but is captived
In the enchanted prison of her eyes.
Why you'll be jealous in your absence then?
Away, away, thou dost forget her virtues
Faster then I can name 'em; shoe's chastity
It self, and when a Shrine shall be set up
Unto that Saint, it shall be built upon
The marble that shall cover her.
Here comes the General.
No more, no more, thy fears are all follies, my Iacinta
I must not leave you thus.
Antonio? what unplumed? you are a Soldier Sir,
And Soldiers should be forward; look ye
I have bright steel for the black Affricans;
I tell you Sir, I went not with more joy
Unto my maiden Bride, that Hymen night,
From whence I fetched this jewel of my heart,
Then now I doe unto my second nuptials.
Oh it is a gallant Mistress, an old man
Is young again at sight of her.
Worthy Sir, your leading valour will centuple the harts
Of all your followers; when set you forward?
Tush, we limit time to her best haste,
Three days will be the most, the longer stay
Looses the more advantage.
We shall be ready to attend your honour,
Hymen, this night I vow to thee, Mars be my
Morrows Saint.
Here were a Saint fitting your orisons.
Blasphemy, speak that no more, the beggar,
(If you will so profane to speak her so)
Is gold refined, compared unto this rubbish,
Diamond to Marble; my noble Lord
We'll leave you to hasten our attendance on you.
Farewell Antonio,
I'm in haste too, my preparations call me.
I call too, I beseech you hear me.
You are a clog to me,
Me thinks thou should be reading o'er new fashions,
Conferring with your Tire-woman for fair dressings,
Your Jeweller has new devices for ye,
Fine labels for your ears, bracelets for wrists,
Such as will illustrate your white hand;
These are all Peddlers ware to me, Iacinta;
I am for Corslets, Helmets, Bills, Bows, and Pikes,
The thundering Guns, Trumpets tan tara,
The rattling sheepeskin, and the whistling Fife:
What Musicke's this to your ears? ha, farewell,
Farewell, and heaven bless thee.
Good heaven, how slightly
You o're-run my fears, you go to meet
With a full power, an armed foe abroad,
And leave me single to an enemy
That hath both power and will to ruin me.
It is treason that thou speak, and by the Saint
Of Spain, mend it, or I'll discover thee:
Wrong my dread Liege, my King, my Sovereign,
To say that he should dote upon your face,
Away, away, it is but your beauties pride,
So to belie it self thou art not fair,
Thou hast no eye to attract Majesty,
To look upon it; say he speak love to thee,
It was but to try thee, perhaps it was my consent,
Will you enquire the hidden hearts of Kings?
He would not wrong thee for his kingdoms wealth,
Even for my sake, away you wanton fool.
There has bin ravishers, remember Tarquin.
There has bin chaste Ladies, remember Lucres:
I'll hear no more, my time and haste hath bard me,
My blessing take, heaven and that shall guard thee.
You leave me in a tempest, heaven guide my fate,
Oh let me sink ere I be captivate.
I doe not like this match, this gay out-side
Is cloth of gold, within a ragged lining.
O poor comparison father, doe they use to line cloth of gold with cloth of gold; no, but with fine, gentle, and easy linings, and such my sister may be, for tho I say it that should not say it, my sister has a good face, a white neck, and a dainty hand, and that may serve for lining for the best cloth of gold in all Spain.
Cedars and shrubs cannot grow up together.
Away, away, speak not so like a Wood monger, I'll
Put you down with a caparison now, doe we not use
To graft sweet apples upon crab-tree stocks, doe we
Not use to inoculate your Malicatoon upon a Gooseberry?
Such is my sisters case now, say that the noble man
Would inoculate his Lordship upon my sisters yeomandry,
What hurt were in this? would it grieve you to be a
Lords brother, or this old woman to have her Lady
Daughter to ask, Grauam, how doe you, will you ride
Abroad in your Croarch, or your embroderd side-saddle?
I, thou talk wildly boy, yet err'st not much
In my conceit, be content man, and add as meet it is,
Joy to content, your daughter shall be made a happy woman
By a noble marriage.
Happy say thou? oh it is as distant as the Moon from earth,
And has the like effects, it changes oft,
So with a silver brow, greatness looks on us
Promising and lovely, but once grown full,
It brings swelling billows to o'rewhelme us.
Pray father talk no more of the moon, but of your son,
Not my self that am your son and heir, but of your
Son in law that shall be, my noble L. Antonio, Lord of
Barcelona, and his noble Lady my sister, that shall be.
Twill well become her, what arms shall I give to make her gentle by?
Those we can buy of the Heralds, you know she
Has cried Oranges the most of her time here in Civil,
Now a fine Orange for her crest, with Civility
Written round aboud it would speaks wondrous well,
Then a Capon in a Scutchen with a gizzard
Under his left arm, with his spurs upon his heals
Riding upon a Lemon.
Away, away
Thy talks impertinent, what should a Capon
Do with a Lemon?
I, you say well Father there indeed,
A Capon desires no Lemon, and therefore
Wele hope of both that neither the Lord
Prove himself a Capon, nor my Sister a Lemon.
I, this thou touch by a forced figure,
The perfect sense of all, thence grows my fear:
This love was first 〈◊〉, and borne in lust
How long has he laid an unlawful liege
Against her Virgin honour, which had she yielded,
And been so lamont, she ne'er had bin proffered
The stile of wife.
Peace, see they come.
I marry, here is a Lady now will wear her own hair.
Nay now no further protestations,
You have said enough to make me new, or ruin me,
And this my spirit, bids me prophesye
If you repent, as love might be ore sated
In its best desires; and any croffe event
Should fall upon this your unequal choice,
Yours is the crime, your handmaid must be blameless,
Since you have sought what I have not desired,
And yet, you may avoid the fatal doom
(If any such there be) by throwing back
Your achieved vassal.
Teach me no error.
I will not learn it, sweetest, if you do.
Speak nothing now but of those holy rytes
Whose sacred hands must guide vs to the path
Of your desired joys.
Here is all the bar;
When these have given consent I am your own.
It shall be done in this acknowledgement.
Father and mother let me but call you so.
And brother eke also.
Yes brother too,
By this I claim them all, your daughter makes
Me your son, and yours.
And my brother.
Isle not forget that neither.
If you do, I will forget to call your Lady Sister.
Sir, I have questioned all the will in me,
And find it now resolved unto your wish.
You have my good will too brother.
Mine is wrought out through rocks of doubt and scare,
She is your own, I send her pilots like
Into an Argosy beyond her storage.
Isle hand the helm with her, and there abide
Safety, or drowning.
She will be hated when the disdainful brows
Of noble greatness shall be shot against her,
The scorns and flouts she shall endure, will be
Fa〈…〉 less content, then is the humble quiet she enjoys.
All those I will rebuke, and if she blush,
The beauty then will check their painted cheeks
With a rebounding shame upon themselves,
Let not more obstacles be mentioned,
Only let privacy protect vs yet
Although we scant the full solemnity
Due to thy wishes; Hymen which afterword.
Shall dare the largest blazon.
Call it mine Sir,
And then the smallest ceremony may serve.
All wants, are only wanting unto you
To give your greatness the due ornaments.
Shall your kind pains provide vs of a Priest,
Whom my instructions shall direct you to.
Shall I? why who am I pray?
Yes, good brother do.
O you teach me sweet; yes good brother do.
O as a brother I will, I perceive these great men
Are some what forgetful of their poor kindred.
A Fryer in Saint Austins Monastery
Ask for one Benedict, my commands to him
Will bring him with thee, hes prepared for it.
Isle be the Clarke my self for the great sake,
Which you know will arise out of the two and twenty.
Tush, Isle treble that wages.
Nothing grieves me but this wedding will be so still borne
We shall have no dancing at it, but Isle foot it
To the Priest howsoever, Feel, la, la, la:
How ere the kings employment in the wars
Calls on my person, I shall leave behind
My self in thee, and bear my self along
In thy sweet memory.
O Sir, you speak of swift divorce.
Relish to joy, a breathing from our pleasures,
Come, come, true love shall tie two hearts in one.
O happy prove.
COme old reverence, if ever thou had musique in thee,
To enchant a maidenhead, now strike up.
You play well
On the Pandora, Sir I wonder your skill.
Fails to make her dance after it.
Tush, I give thee
The precedence, wire strings will not doote, it must be
A wind instrument thats governed with stopping of holes,
Which thou playact well on, my old Viol de gamb,
Come, thou shalt have reward.
And what pay have you for pandership,
Little or nothing, it comes short of the ••with always.
A bawd, why whats a •old, pander?
Why bawd, Isle tell thee what a bawd i•.
Then pander I will tell thee what a pander is.
A bawd• a thing that when the devil plays at 〈◊〉, bawd
He turns up trump, because shees a help.
But the pandet playing with the devil robs the
To make his hand the stronger, and the cards being
The devils, he makes out a little heart (and thats all
He has) into the stock.
The devil vies it with the bawd.
The pander being drunk sees the devil.
The devil plays on, and looses the bawd.
And takes away the knave (which is the pander)
With his five finger.
And fearing he has not tricks enough
Gives up his dealing to the bawd, so they shuffle again.
Enough of this game.
Well, the maidenhead is
In this enchanted Castle, thou must blow up,
Give fire old Linstocke, I confess I am repulsed ith van;
If thou failst too the king comes with a murdering piece
In the rear, oh tic a royal service.
Well, leave it to me Sir.
She, she sallies upon thee, As〈…〉beus, Corothus, and all the fiends of the flesh
Stand at thine elbow.
Bless ye fair Virgin:
From your age with a virgin Epitaph, if you
No better be then I esteem you.
T were pity
Indeed you should be a virgin to my age
Sweet beauty, you would be like a garment long laid by,
And out of fashion, which tho new, would not be worth a wearing:
Is that your companion
Parted with you?
No companion Lady,
But a friend of mine, as I hope he is of yours.
You're both nought then, and neither friends of mine.
But here you have me prisoner in your power
If you have ought to speak to me out with it.
Ya're beloved Lady, and which is more,
Yea most,
Of a king beloude.
A good induction;
And all this I may deserve being a loyal subject.
Your loyalty may be mixed with his royalty,
If you'll be ruled, understand, kings are not common things,
Nor are their actions common; all things are
Proper, and peculiar unto them, so Ladies
Whom they love, are commonly proper Ladies, who being
Proper, cannot be counted common.
Tic all
My pride, I'll be accounted proper.
Only to a king.
And common to all the world besides,
That were gross.
You wrest my meaning virgin, I would not have you be
A virgin, is not that your meaning?
Now you come to me;
Tic true: For what is a virgin? knew you as much
As I your ne'er be a virgin.
I dare swear I shoud not.
A virgin? why tic as much as to say because
You were borne a child you shoud ever be so;
This were ridiculous. Virginity,
Why tic a Jewel kept in a Casket,
Which never opened, as good you never had it;
Shall musk be always kept in the Cod, how shall
The sweetness be tasted then? Virginity is
Like a false friend to you, which indeed is better lost then kept,
Out shame of women, thou the falsest art,
Be lost for ever looking on my face,
Or loose those instruments thou look withal,
Immodestyes in men are venial,
When women rebel against their weaker selves.
Out hag, turn thee into some other shape,
Or I shall curse my self for being one
Of thy bad sex.
Nay, I have done with you Lady,
If Flags of truce will not serve, you must look
For defiance, and here he comes that brings it with him.
All powers of goodness guard me.
Speak, is she pliant?
Stubborn as an Elephants leg, no bending in her,
You know what you have to do my Liege, trees that
Will not yield their fruit by gentle shaking, must
Be climbed, and have it pulled by violence.
Give leave.
I would she would give leave as soon
As I, you shoud not be troubled to ••ke a duty
From me, I would fall at your feet my Liege.
Why turn you from us Lady?
O my Liege,
I turn not from your face, but from your power,
You bring a frown, I dare not look upon.
Your thought• instruct you ill, I do not frown, 〈◊〉
But smile upon you.
I crave your pardon, and bobbed
My kbee, your true obedient servant, my life
I'll lay an offering at your feet, what more
Would you from your humble 〈◊〉
Nothing so much,
But for less them either, thy love ••ire virgin.
Keeping that name, you have it ever.
What name?
A virgin, you have my prayers d•yly to heaven
For your long sovereignties, your honours health and vi∣ctoryes.
It is good, and will you deny your self, what you wish
From others? I would achieve a victory from you.
Sir, I am not your foe.
Concluded well;
Approve your self a friend, the war is love,
Wherein we two must strive make it no war,
But yield it freely.
It is not love you seek;
But an Antipathy as dissonant
As heaven and hell, the musique of the spheres.
Compared with 〈◊〉, and the 〈◊〉 below.
Can lust be called ••ve, then let men seek h•••,
For there that 〈◊〉 deity doth dwell.
We come not to dispute of good, and bad,
Do as your sex has done, taste what's forbid,
And then distinguish of the difference,
I come not now to war with eloquence,
Those treaties are all past, if you embrace
Our proffered love, wele pray; or call it lust,
If not, we speak a king to you, you must
Will you be a Ravisher?
Call it as you please,
We have a burning fever, and the disease
You must lay balsum to.
Poison be it,
A serpentine, and deadly aconite,
Never survive to know what you have done,
But perish in the deed, or ere begun.
These blasts are Zephires breath, a gentle galt
When it blows high.
Then let my 〈◊〉 prevail.
The sacrifice of fools, the proverbs s•••no,
None pities women's •••res, but Idiots borne.
Remember what my Father does for you,
Hes gone to brandish against your enemies,
Hes fetching you honour home; while at home
You will dishonour him.
My purpose it was,
To send him forth the better to achieve
My conquest here.
Tyrannous unkingly.
Tush, I have no ears.
Heal be revenged.
Pity, not future fears.
Help, help, some good hand help:
Theirs none within thy call.
Heaven hears.
Tush, tic far of.
See heaven, a wicked king, lust stains his Crown,
Or strike me dead, or throw a vengeance down.
Tush heaven is deaf, and hell laughs at thy cry.
Be cursed in the act, and cursed dye.
Isle stop the rest within thee.
Not the messenger returned from the Castle
With answer from Al••z•?
See my Lord, they come together.
Noble Iuli••us, the dignity of general
You wear, be with your valour individual,
Till we have made it triple by our conquests,
Then let that threefold one, imp•le your brows,
And bear it to king Rod〈…〉 in triumph.
Worthy Al••za you must help your wishes
Ere they can take effect, your approved arm
Will be a good assistant, but I pray Sir,
How have you kept your Castle so unbruis'd?
Th• foe not far distant, have you not tan
Nor given? no sallying forth, no buffeting?
My Lord, we have been yet as quiet as in league,
Which makes me guess their number is not full,
They have not yet, unless with grim aspects
So much as frighted this my tender daughter.
Tender father, I pray let not your pity disparadge me,
I have seen a sword whipped out stark naked in my time,
And never squeaked; Do you think a Sarazi•s head,
Or a Blackamoores face can affright me, let me then
Be afraid of every chimney sweeper.
Good spirit yffaith;
Even such a soldier have I left behind,
I had much ado to keep her from the field,
Poor Ease••a, had I known such a sworn sister for her
I shoud almost have given her leave.
I'll tell you Sir,
Were there a band of buskind Amazons
That would tucke up their skirts, and strike indeed
My girl shoud wear bright Menalipp••s belt
She shoud be foremost; and I'll venture her.
Is she such a striker, my Lord?
All at head,
No where else, believe me Sir, we hold it base.
To strike below the wast.
You fight high Lady.
So she does at heart I think,
So, so, to her bachelor,
Antonio, L•zarelle, M•di••, Come Al••z•,
You and I must 〈◊〉 more seriously upon our war intend∣munts.
The general wrongs you to call you bachelor, Antonio.
Would he did not wrong me.
Have not you a Cord••ke
A heart fever now, 〈◊〉 Do you think there is
A Phoenix now, is there but one good face
In the world?
I see nothing in her face,
Prithee attempt to make her speak again.
Her tongue? nay if you like her tongue, you must needs
Like her tail, for the one utter• the other• Lady
What would you give now for Moors heads by the dozen?
I would buy by the score Sir.
And what a score then?
Chalk best for the score, every alewife knows that.
You talk of chalk, and I o•chief.
Hes in the last dish, pray take him away here.
I have not done yet, will you buy any ware of me?
What? proffered ware••oh.
Give o'er, thou wilt be foiled else.
Why, here is a wench now, I had rather Isle with her
Wit, then with the best piece of flesh in Christendom,
I could beget young Mercuries on her, with
The very conceit: would you had had a good pair
Of eyes in your head.
They are false glasses, and will
Deceive me.
My Lords to arms, the foe discovered,
Marching amain upon you.
We are in readiness, our Councels broke,
Advice must be all blows, Lady to your hold,
And at advantage, see what these youths will do;
To gain your love, nobly for Spain speak dru•,
And if they call, answer for us, they come.
Descend thy sphere, thou burning Deity,
Haste from our shame, go blushing to thy bed,
Thy sons we are, thou ouerlasting b•ll,
Yet never shamde these our impressive brows
Till now; we that are stamped with thine own seal,
Which the whole ocean cannot wash away•
Shall those cold •go cheeks that nature moulds
Within her winter shop, those smooth white •kins,
That with a p•lsey hand she paint• the li••bes,
Make us recoil.
Great Mully〈…〉 haste,
Either give heart to our retiring troupe
By a fresh onset, or haste to safety by
Flight and baseness: B〈…〉 slain,
Whore's our brother Mahu Mahomet?
Rounded with danger,
Where he behaves himself nobly Haldi〈…〉ay,
E••ser, and five Alchaides more are gone
Up to his rescue, and if not more he dies.
Or is captived.
Wele partake either or both with him,
They are both noble, but too ••sly fli•
Is to preserve life, and let honour die.
Fall then my flesh, so there survive my name,
Who flies from honour, follows after shame.
Antonio, now by the Saint of Spain
You have made your self remarkable to day,
Valour, exceeding valour, was not looked for
Which you have shown to day.
So nobly Sir, that I could wish my daughter
Were in love with you, and your virtues; would you
Requite it, her dowry should be 50 thousand crowns,
More then I ever meant it.
O heart, thou speak too late.
My Lords your praises, and your noble wishes
Makes me esteem my self behind hand with same
Here is yet more work to do.
One Mully we have tan,
If Mumen fly not, hes his fellow-captive.
There my new fortunes shall their honour prove,
Then fare well war, next wele war fair with love.
Medina, post to king Roderiqus, do thus and thus,
Tell our royal Master what work we have done him:
You see and know, and it need no relation,
Here are royal prisoners.
How will you use us?
As in captivity we wish our selves.
May we not be ransomde?
As from the king
We shall receive: as his pleasure returns us,
Mean time you shall have cause to blame
Your fortunes, not your conq〈…〉ours, whore's 〈◊〉
The best deserver of this days honour.
Retired to his tent.
Not wounded, is her
No my Lord, but weary.
So we are all,
Now we have time to rest, and get new breath,
We conquer to the life, and not to death.
Now Antonio, whore's Margarita now?
Here.
Whose that in your hand then?
I know not, look, tic gone.
Fie, you'll take it up again, come, come, sl•op,
This is Dio〈…〉 character•: a hand worth your heart,
Peruse it better, so, so, tic well.
Ladies fair hands must not be rejected so,
I did foresee this dangerous relapse,
You are in love.
With Merge〈…〉.
With Di〈…〉
Nor do you shame it, rather cherish it.
It is a choice 〈…〉ing your high blood;
What you have done, make 〈◊〉 as a say
Unto your best desires.
O Lazarello!
Thou give me poison to recur a wound
Already mortal.
Why this is speedlesse haste,
I know your sated pleasures would throw up
Their over-cloyde receipt, you have been noble
In your brave deeds of arms; who shall 〈◊〉 it,
Your beggars issue? they are Antipathies,
How would it sound to hear poor Margaret say
Her Lord hath brought home honour from the wars:
T'woud stain your worth to be so vainly boasted.
No, this Lady would multiply your praises with her phrase,
Lest Dionisa say that her Antonio
Won the palm of victory, then you're thronde,
And musique gracing the solemnity.
One word confutes thee, ever into silence,
I am married.
A mistake in private, who knows that?
Margarita,
And my self, besides a thousand witnesses within
Quit you those, and who dares speak it else?
Who dares not speak a truth.
Dares not, who dares?
What danger is more great then to speak truth?
If poor ones durst speak plain of great men's faults,
There needed no libelling.
I'll ch••ke freedom;
Oh what a bed of 〈◊〉 struggle within me.
Tush, they are but worms, and I'll give thee seed and reasons
To destroy'em; yo'are married.
A good physician;
Thou kill me quickly to haste me out of pain.
Tush, I must first draw the corruption forth,
And then apply the healing medi〈…〉.
Persuade me to turn Turk, or Mo••• Mohammedan,
For by the lustful laws of M〈…〉
I may have three wives more.
And concubines besides; turn Moore?
Do you expect such counsel from your friend?
Wrong me not so, I'll show you a Christian way
At least a way dispensed with Christians,
Say you distaste your 〈◊〉. as well you may,
When truth shall be 〈…〉▪ and shame walk by,
Bearing a blushing 〈◊〉 to light them both,
Mend then the cause before it take effect,
Annihilate your 〈◊〉 that 〈◊〉 cause,
Tic private yet, let it 〈…〉:
Allow your 〈◊〉 〈◊〉,
She may be 〈◊〉 to 〈…〉
To embrace• you, say she be called your whore
For some thing that may breed from what is done,
Better her shame then yours; a common thing:
Poor beauti•• are proud of noble bas•arty.
Fearful counsel.
Does your Margaret love you?
Beyond her life.
Good, marry Di〈…〉, grief kills her, then are you a widower.
Horrible murder, it were less 〈◊〉
To kill at once, then by a ling•ing po•son.
Ha? poison? what white devil pr••pted that?
Poison, brave, the very change of friendship, the trial
Of a friend• love to death, would you 〈◊〉 sure
Of a friends constancy, a swift poison will strike it dead.
And 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 way and 〈◊〉 be 〈◊〉
Even in the 〈◊〉 of love, 〈◊◊〉, I dri〈…〉 to you,
Or accept these gloves, the 〈◊〉, the touch, the sight,
Tush, any sense will take it kindly.
I'll hear nomore from thee thou studiest to make worse
A positive bad, by a wild perfor〈…〉.
Ha?
Look yonder, there's an eye speaker 〈◊◊〉
In very silence, whore's poor Merge〈…〉 now.
Oh my 〈◊〉.
Look upon that face; well, you're my friend,
And by that 〈◊〉 loves •not, had I that face
But in reversion after your decease,
I think I should give you physic fort.
Worthy Sir,
My noble father entreats some words with you.
A happy messenges in 〈◊◊〉 to him,
How shall I quit your 〈◊〉
I'll take my travel sort Sir.
Tic too little.
I 〈◊〉 it too much Sir,
For I was loath to have travelled thus far, had not
Obedience tide me toot.
You're too quick.
Too quick Sir, why what occasion have I given you
To wish me dead?
I cannot keep this pace with you, Lady,
I'll go speak with your father.
I pray stay Sir, I'll speak with you my self.
Before your father.
No, here in private by your self.
I'll stop my ears, Madam.
Why, are they running away from your head Sir?
I mean I'll seal them up from hearing, Lady.
You may, no doubt they have w•x •their own.
Venture thy 〈◊〉 no f••there good 〈◊〉,
She will endanger 'em, but Lady now I think on
Speak, is not this your hand?
I have three then it should seem,
For I have two of my own fingering.
This is your letter?
You know my mind then by this time.
If I may be your expositor, Lady, I think I do.
And how do you expound me Sir?
Kind and loving.
Kind and loving▪ it were a good commendations
For a sow and her pigs.
You ask me the reason why I enquired your age of your •••her.
Tic true Sir, for what have you to do •ith my age?
I'd rather have to do with your youth Lady.
Who, my page?
Fie Madam, you're too apprehensive, too dexterious,
Your wit has two edges I pr〈…〉st.
What a cut would that give to a 〈◊〉 crown.
My crown itches not 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉.
Yet you may scratch it though.
Come, come, your wits a good one, do not 〈◊〉 it.
Unless it remove 〈◊〉 of my 〈◊◊〉,
For I must tire that.
I think you love me.
You and I may be of two opinion•,
I think not so now.
Come, your hand has betrayed you,
Do not you plainly say here, we two should be well matched?
•O strange, he steals half a text to uphold
His heresy; but what follows, we should be well matched
At a game of shuttlecock, the meaning i•,
For a couple of light headed things we could not be over matched;
He might have conceited that that could have but said
B to a battleder: but come Sir, you have said
Enough to me, will you go speak with my father?
This I'll add first, which I'll avouch unto
Your fathers face, I love you.
This I'll confirm to you,
And to my fathers face, but I'll not promise you,
Whether I blush or no, I do not hate you.
I'll follow you, yet give me leave ere you go
To give a gratitude unto your lip.
My lips do not stand in the high way to beg
A charity, as open as they appear to you.
You'll follow me Sir.
I cannot stay long after.
Soft I'm in your debt Sir, did you bestow a kiss on me?
I did so far presume.
Take it again—
So now I am out of your debt, hereafter never fear
To lend freely to one that pays so willingly.
Now Sir, what do you do?
I am dissolving an Enigma.
Let me help you, what first.
I would sane know
What kind of thing a mans heart is.
Were you never
At Barber Surgeons hall to see 〈◊〉 dissection?
I'll report it to you, tic a thing framed
With diver• corners, and into every corner
A man may entertain a friend, there came
The proverb, a man may love one well, and yet
Retain a friend in a corner.
Tush, tic not
The real heart, but the unseen faculties.
Those I'll decipher unto you, for surely
The most part are but ciphers; the heart indeed.
For the most part doth keep a better guest
Then himself in him, that is the soul: now the soul
Being a tree, there are divers branches spreading out of it,
As loving affection, suffering sorrows, and the like,
Then Sir, these affections, or sorrows, being but branches,
Are sometimes lopped off, or of themselves wither,
And new s•oot in their rooms. As for example;
Your friend dies, there appears sorrow, but it quickly
Withers, then is that branch gone, Again you love a friend,
There affection springs forth, at last you distaste,
Then that branch withers again, and another bud•
In his room, shall I give you history to this moral?
No, I can doot my self, oh M•rg••att•.
So shees in the vocative case already, if she slide.
Into the ablative, shees thrush quite out of the numbers
I am lost Lazarell•.
I shall find you again
In D••is•es arms.
Must I back slide.
If you can find in your heart, you must.
My hearts
A rebel to me.
Faith all your body
Will be accessory toot, I'm a friend.
Come, come, league with your thoughts, you are too nice.
How ill thou speak of good, how good of 〈◊〉?
Tic now concluded in me, I will on,
I must, although I meet destruction.
Down hill we run, 〈◊◊〉 a •low 〈◊〉
Easy descents to hell, 〈…〉.
QViet your tongue, or I'll take away your liberty,
Know you're under me, and my command.
Quiet my tongue? •rt officer of hell!
Thou Jailer to the devil, fleshly fiend,
I'll waken heaven and earth with my exclaims,
Astonish hell for fear, the fire be doubled
In the due vengeance of my heinous wrong,
My heavy heinous wrong.
Forbear I say: you are a crack virgin,
And I'll bestow the widow alms on you
In charity, if you not hold your tongue.
Worst of humanity, hold thou thy tongue,
Shame thou to speak, my shame enforces me.
Come, come, my li•le (what shall I call thee)
For it is now doubtful what thou art; being neither
Maid, wife, nor (saving your reverence) widow.
Ha? Doest spit at me? I'll have you spitted for this trick,
And I will turn you as you see, and moreover
I will hast you.
O that I could spit out the spiders bladder,
Or the roads entrails into thee, to take part
And mix with the diseases that thou hearst,
And altogether choke thee, or that my tongue
Were pointed with a 〈…〉y Pyramid
To strike thee through, thou bundle of diseases,
This store-house of some shaggy meteor,
Some bl••ing fire shone o'er thy 〈◊〉 birth,
And laid up all her sad effects in that,
Gout•, aches, dropsies, and a hundred more,
For were not 〈◊〉 to 〈◊◊〉,
Thy own soul 〈◊〉 would strangle thee.
Thou art a looser, and I do consider it,
Thou hast lost a maidenhead, a shrewd crack:
A flaw that will hardly be soaderd again;
Some there be that can pass away these counterseits.
For currant, as brass money may be taken
For silver, yet it can never be the same,
Nor restored to his first purity, this I consider.
And bear, (but presume not too much to trouble
The poole of my patience, it may rise soul) it may.
O that thine eyes were worth the plucking out,
Or thy base heart, the labour I should take
In rending up thy bosom, I should but op
A vaule to poison me (detested wretch)
The hangmans man, basest degree of baseness,
Thou liv'st upon the lees and dregs of lust,
Thy soul is a hired hackney towards hell.
O Iulianus, my much honoured father,
How is thy simple faith deluded now!
Thou had not so much thought of ill in thee,
To breed a bad opinion of a villain,
Tyrant, and ravisher; whilst thou art winning
Renown and honour from Spaines enemies,
Spain has dishonoured and imprisoned me:
Thou understandst not this, unless the winds
Upon their fleeting convey hear it thee,
Some gentle vision tell thee in thy sleeps,
And heaven instruct thee with a waking faith,
True to believe thy slumbers; boyle out my blood,
And at the briny limbecke of mine eyes
Distill my faculties; alone I'll tell
My sorrows unto heaven, my curse to hell.
And there 〈◊〉 mix that wretch, from thence they rise,
Oh whilst I look on him, I loath mine eyes.
But that I have some kinder purpose, I would not
Be thus baited: I am given to the 〈◊〉 as well
As the king my Master, I have some hope to ••fte
This dish after him; but tic yet too hot for me,
It will cool, and then I will draw my 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 have
A flash at it: this women's two edged tongue,
And this burden of flesh that I bear about me,
Hath made me so heavy, I must take a ••p.
Cob, boy, Cob, page.
Here Sir.
There is some thing gone
Into my ears, that troubles my brain, blow in
Some musique to fetch it out again.
The best I can, my Lord.
And hark you, having done, ascend the Turret
And see if you can discover his Majesty
Coming to the Castle: this house he appointed
For his recreation, if you do, descend,
And give me 〈…〉rning.
I will.
So I have luld my Lord asleep,
I see he takes my musique hearily,
Therefore I'll sing no more: now to my Turret
To see if the king come, now he may take him napping.
There is no resting place within a prison
To make my sorrows less by recounting.
I throw um forth, but empty none 〈◊〉 all;
Ha, asleep? I, security can sleep,
Griefs a true watchman: how the d〈…〉
Th〈…〉 •ell within hi〈…〉, and what a 〈◊〉 noise
Th〈…〉
I could with h•• office 〈…〉
But I have better tho〈…〉 may give me
My release 〈…〉
Of better release, no, I will not delay it,
I will keep back my sins from multitudes,
And I may fly for safety to my father.
Theres divers ways, heaven instruct the privat'st.
And best for my escape: fare ill, not well,
Thou and thy lustful Master: from all but one,
This key now frees me, O! that I bear about,
Which none but mercies key can deliver out.
My Lord, I spy the king coming pri〈…〉ely
By himself, my Lord, one were as good attempt
To wake a watchman at three a clock in the morning,
My Lord, lend me your keys if you'll not 〈◊〉 your self:
Me thinks he should wake himself with 〈◊〉, but 〈◊〉 may be
The more noise makes him sleep the sounder; the best is,
I take it, the king has a private key to let in himself;
If he have, he will do his own work himself, and my Lord
For this time shall be an innocent pander,
In this act of sleep a harmless husband may be so
To his own wife, Tic as I guest, he is come
In of himself.
Whore's your Master?
H••s h〈…〉
In his private meditation•, my L•i••.
He was ever heavy, whore's 〈◊〉?
Safe enough,
My Liege, she 〈◊〉 my Lord into these 〈◊〉
With the very musique of her tongue, but they 〈◊〉 all dis∣co•d•.
Command h•• 〈◊〉, her father 〈…〉,
He has a noble fortune to 〈…〉ing 〈◊〉
Conquest and royal 〈◊〉, I 〈◊〉 not well
Requite him: therefore I 〈…〉
What I return, how the villain snores!
Sleep on Sir, your sin will be the less, in being
My b•with. Now where is she?
Alas my Lord,
I have been—.
Been imp, where have you been?
Seeking about all the corners in the Castle
For Iacinta.
Why, is she to seek slave?
I can neither hear nor see her any where.
Rogue, thou neither feast, nor he•r'st more if I see not her:
I'll go seek better, my L•ige, I doubt some ledger∣domain,
But if I find not her within, I know the way out.
You dormouse, baby of fifty, bundle of security,
Awake Rogue, pocks of your heavy flesh, hast thou no soul?
Minion, I'll clog your heals with irons for this,
Will you not let me rest by you?
Mischief op your eye-lid〈…〉 block, image.
I will tell the king, and he shall tickle you for this.
Sir death, I'll tickle you for this, •oggerhead, where'• I〈…〉?
O my Liege, is it your My•sty, I beseech you par∣don me:
These after dinner-n••• are the rep•sts to my body.
Diseases devour your body, where'• I〈…〉?
Safe, safe, my Liege, my k•y•s, wh•r• he my keys,
Saw you my keys, my 〈◊〉.
Confirmed, •he has the keys, and is fled the castle,
Dog, hell-hound, thou shalt be my 〈◊〉, sl〈…〉
I'll drag this 〈…〉ull 〈◊〉 into his 〈◊〉.
Nay but my 〈…〉.
And the 〈◊〉 I •old 〈…〉 by 〈◊〉
When I went to sleep, and my first dream told me
They were there still. My boy, my Cob, saw you my Cob, my Liege?
Dogs worry you both; search slave in every angle,
Send pursuit after her, if thou returnst her not,
Thou shalt curse thy being.
If she be not above steeples,
Nor beneath hell, I'll find her, for so high
And low I can reach and dive, as heavy as I am.
If she escape us, and once reach her father,
Now in his height of honour, we know not how
He may receive his wrongs, nor the event;
We will command him distant from the Court,
And his prisoners sent to us; And this shall ha••e
Before her possible speed, if she scope:
Wele threaten his heads loss, if he deny um,
Those that do wrong, had need keep safety by um.
O that some striking air had blasted me
Before this poison entered at mine cares;
Married?
Madam, sweet Madam.
Madam! prithee mock me not, nor guard my folly
With such a linsey wolsie ornament.
Madam, is the mad dame, and thence mad woman:
Define it so and I will borrow still
That little of my store. A coat of tissue
If a fool wears it, is but a fools coat.
Such are my trappings; oh for t•me thats gone,
Equality, oh sweet equality,
Borne under Libra, thou hast both right hands,
Without advantage, or priority.
Base ones made big by beauty are but slaves,
Their Lords ne'er truly bed but in their graves.
Hai a dangerous conceit, call my brother, Fid•lla.
Then let me council you, know hes open,
Plain, and rustical, and altered from his first condition,
What ever your purpose is, let it not appear to him.
Prithee be gone, and call him.
Am I despised so soon? wedlock unjust,
Unequal nuptials are not love, but lust:
Come back past time, oh tic a fruitless call,
I may repent, but find no help at all.
Now I forestall thee heaven ere I begin,
Forgive me, I must act some a heinous sin,
I must now be changed.
In. Lady sister, did your Madamship
Send for my worship?
I did send for you brother.
You may entreat me.
I hope so, I have a letter
To my Lord (brother) containing so much love
And secrecy; as I would trust none willingly
But your self f•r the delivery.
A letter sister!
I would not have you to take me for a Carrier,
Or a Porter to carry words, or letters more
Then it pleases me; yet in the way of a Nuntius,
Partly Ambassador, or so, I will
Travel for your sake.
Look you, this is all, brother.
Is this all sister?
Unless you'll add another:
Commends by word of mouth▪
By word of mouth?
It was not well spoken sister.
Why brother?
Why what words are there, but words of the mouth?
Except it be words of the tail, which would sound but il•
In my Lord brothers cares: for words behind
A mans back are but wind, you know that.
But be most careful in the delivery, I entreat you brother;
You know our wedding is only known to us,
A thing concealed from wide mouthed rumour, then should you
Find him in company with Nobles of his own rank.
Tush, I can smell the rankest of them all.
Say amongst Ladies you shoud find him sporting
Dancing, kissing, or any such like wantonness,
Take heed your rude approach does not move him to any di•••ste.
O my noun sister, my nose is a little more a kin to you
Now then ever it was; you would have me be an informer
Of unlawful games, as Ticktack, whipper ginny, in &amp; in.
No trust me brother, only to instruct you I speak;
For the least disparagement should chance to him
His pleasure forbidding it, would be a death to me,
Well sister, here is my hand, and my heart is some where
Here about me too, but I'd be loath to bring him
Forth to witness, but I will be very careful.
You undo me else brother.
Pha, d'e think me for
A fool or your brother (sister)
Do not think
But at your return I shall be very thankful.
As for that, it is sufficient your Ladyship is my sister; oh ye little amiable rogue you, a good face is a good dowry, I see sometimes; when we two tumbled both in a belly together, little did our mother think which should have been the Madam; I might have been cut the tother way iffaith, if it had pleased the sisters three, if the Mid∣wife had but known my mind when I was borne, I had been two stone lighter; but much good do thee with thy good fortunes; farewell honourable flesh and blood, I will deliver to my noble brother, pretty trim Lady, I think we are eyed alike; fare thee well, I cannot choose but see thee as long as I look• upon thee. 
Effect thy own content, paper and ink,
And then thou bring the work into my hands.
Fudella.
Madam.
Thou love me Fudella.
Do you make a question ont Lady?
No, I rather
Speak it as acknowledgement, suppose I went
In the right noble way, to meet my foe
In the field, woudst be my second.
To my second life, Madam.
I do •ntend no such viragoes part,
But in shape, a danger to thee far more worse,
But when tic done, the spacious world shall have to under∣stand,
Spite of the low condition of my birth,
High spirits may be lodged in humble earth.
Sad still!
I am as I was ever Lady,
Full of retired thoughts.
You draw these backward
Should be coming on, and meet in nuptial pleasures.
All strive to be their own Physicians (Lady)
We know whats best and fittest to be done,
But who can follow it?
Till the disease be known
In vain it were to study remedy,
Pray whats your cause of sadness?
I have none, Lady.
Why are you not merry then?
You must find fault with my complexion for it,
Nature, perhaps, has not compounded me
Of equal portions; yet you discover
Diseases outward, I not feel within,
Me thinks I'm merry.
No, I have heard you sigh so violent,
They have waked my slumbers with you in bed,
One gust following another, as you would breath
Out all your air together, there most be cause.
I know not how to win your good belief, Lady,
But if you'll trust me; Lazarello come hither.
A murrin o the carrier brought me hither, I shall sit the worse this two days, but I think I have requited his sides for it; Now to my letter, pat yffaith, here's my noble brother; hum, I have a pestilent Lady to my sister, she told me I should find him amongst Ladies; if she had said Lady she had guest singular well yffaith, I will carry it as well as I can for my honourable brothers credit.
Fie, that's a lame excuse, you won not honour
Equal with your will, my self from the Castle saw you,
Most nobly do, I saw you unhorse three brave opposers,
You kilt and captived many enemies.
Nay now sweet Lady
You make too strict an inquisition,
Men emulate in honour for the best.
Who would be second that can foremost 〈◊〉
For this a man may wrangle with 〈◊〉 fate,
And grieve and envy at another fortunes.
Hum, hum, hum.
See you you fellow.
Waft him hence good Lazarell•, I am undone else,
Look here Dionisia, here's a jewel,
I never showed thee yet.
Tic a very pretty one,
Shall I have it?
With all my heart sweet.
He gives me aim, I am three bow• too short,
I'll come up nearer next time.
When does the Army
March hence, Antonio?
Some three days hence.
I must prepare to go:
I'll go with you Antonio.
By no means sweet, I'll send for thee
With more harmonious musique.
Indeed I must.
Come, come, indeed you shall not.
He wonnot off Sir.
A mischief carry him.
No! shall I have no notice taken of me!
I'll begin in another tone with you. Hum, hum, hum,
There was a Nobleman of Spain, Lady, Lady,
That went abroad, and came not again
To his poor Lady.
Oh cruel age, when one proud brother, Lady, Lady,
Shall scorn to look upon another,
Of his poor Lady.
How now, what fellow's this?
No mans fellow here, Lady, yet a good fellow too
In place where.
Who! this fellow, Lady! he that knows not him,
Knows not a man of mirth, this Doctor I tell you
Gives as good cure for the melancholy.
As the best Empiric in Spain, what ere he be.
I would he would practise on Antonio then.
Troth Madam tic a good plot, please you to walk
I'll man you to the Castle, leave them together,
Tic an equal match, if he make him not merry,
Heel most terribly trouble his melancholy.
Heel make me more sad I fear.
I had rather stay and partake some mirth.
I am no women's fool (sweet Lady) tic two trades in Civil; as your mans Taylor, and your women's Taylor: So your Lords fool, and your Ladies •oole, I am for the tongue, not for the bauble.
Well Antonio, I'll leave you, and sir make him merry,
And I'll reward thee:
If I cannot make him merry, I know who can.
Who I prithee?
T will out.
Why my—you can Lady.
Now you jest too broad sir.
That's women's jesting, Madam.
I was afraid he would have named his sister.
I will make bold to be covered, brother thou know
Oh brother.
Look thee theres black and white for thee from the little honourable ra••all my sister, and a thousand com∣mendations too without book, which I was bid to tell thee by roat, if thou can read and hear all at once.
Yes I can.
Theres honourable bones a breeding, my sister is the peevishest piece of Ladies flesh grown of late, we have good sport at it to see her vex and fret, she boxes me as familiarly as if I were her Cobbler, for talking to her, an un∣natural varlet, to strike her own flesh and blood, but I bear with her for thy sake.
I thank you fort, brother.
Nay, she cuts her lace, and eats raw fruit too, what sallet do you think she longed for tother day?
I know not:
For a what doe call um? those long upright things that grow a yard above the ground; oh Cuckoo pintle roots, but I got her her belly full at last.
So it was well.
But the best lest was, she bit her shoemaker by the ear as he was drawing on her shoes; and another time her Taylor for girding her too straight, he had a long nose, but she did so pinch his bill; what, hast thou good news bro∣there?
Very good brother, all I read are well.
Yes faith brother, we are in health, and drink to thine sometimes.
Brother, I would have your swift return.
It was my sisters charge, she thinks of long things, poor heart.
I cannot give you the entertainment I would bro∣there, but I pray you let this provide for you.
This is Hostess, Tipster, Chamberlain, &amp; all, bro∣there.
In the morning early my letter shall bee ready for you.
I will lye in my boot all night, but I'll bee ready as soon as your letter: Bonos nocios, mi fritter.
Stay brother, one thing I must ask you,
And pray you tell me, Whats your thought of me,
Finding me in a Ladies company?
O brother, I would not have you think you have a fool to your kindred, what! I understand these toys, there are foul, and there are fish, there are wag-tayles, and there are Mermaids.
Of what sort do you think she is?
Oh brother, definitions and distinctions! fie on um, come, I know flesh and blood will be sporting. And I were a married man my self, I would not always be at home, I would hawk, and hunt, and ride, there are divers members in one body, there are flesh days, and there are fish days, •man must not always eat one sort of meat.
I see you are a wag brother.
Always let a married man get his own children at home if he can, if he have a bit abroad for procreation or so—.
Well good night brother, I pray hold a good open∣neon of me.
O Sir, I can wink with one eye like a gunner, shall I make my sister sick of the yellow laundies? no, thought is free, whatsoever I speak•, I'll say nothing; Vale, valet, valet, valetote. 
I can dissemble mirth no longer.
Oh my afflicted soul, were thou capable
Of separation, thou woudst now be rent
Into a thousand pieces: 〈◊〉.
Now Sir, you are full of news I'm sure.
Heavy and froward news: whore's Dionisia?
At distance enough in the Castle; you may speak.
I am discovered, Margarita knows of this
Her wrong, and my disloyalty.
It was no mystery,
And must be found, but how does she bear it.
Better then her birth,
As well as my addition to her, nobly,
And if her hand does not belie her heart,
She's glad that I have found an equal liking.
She has done as becomes her.
Yet with this request,
That I would not forsake her utterly,
But some times see her, tic articled too,
That twice a week shed have my fellowship
By night, and private stealths, the which obtained,
Shed loose the name of wife, and never shame
To be called my Concubine.
I, this is well,
Fine light pageant work, but now sure building,
This gilds a while, but will at length wash off again;
This roof must be raised upon a sounder groundsill;
Give me your free bosom, you have one heart, and two ways,
Which may have the better part freely.
My conscience
And my affection war about this quarrel,
My conscience saith the first, but my affection,
The second.
So then, you shoud
Love Margarita, but do love Dionisia.
My heart's triangled, two points Dionisia•s,
And that downwards Margarets, and that's the smallest.
I thank you for this free delivery:
You seal your friendship to me, now let me build,
I ha'te, I'll rid your griefs at once; will you
But give consent.
To any fair condition.
No worse then Margarets request to you,
Or very little, return your letter, that
You will satisfy all her desire, appoint
Your first nights approach, and privately.
Night cannot hide it ever.
But hear me,
You shall not go, I will supply your place,
Not to blemish, but to preserve your honour:
Command your entertainment, so secret be,
As that no lights may lead you to your chamber,
Let me alone to counterfeit for once,
And once shall serve for all, if it but take,
And that she bed with me, not for the act,
For there your honour must be weighed, but company,
Shall serve the turn, then rise I and proclaim
Both our luxurious sin〈…〉; how 〈◊〉 she then
Claim any part in you?
Tic a strange extreme•
Ulcers must have co〈…〉sives to eat, not •kind,
Extremes must have extremes to co•pe withal.
It will not yield else.
I like it, and allow it;
Tic more then water that must fight with wilde fire.
This passage shall be inst〈…〉lie prepared
With some of my wearin••, brought as near my self
As art can make, this Ring to strengthen it,
I could subtract a third from my estate
To heal her injury, and quite blot out
That •own•s mine honour, being voyc't,
It must be curd; pardon heaven and Margaret,
There is an innate falling from what's good,
Which nothing can r•p•ire in's but our blood.
THat I should ten leagues be in scorn removed
From Court unto my co•ntrey house! for what?
Tic very strange; know you the cause?
Not I, my Lord.
I cry you mercy Sir, and my king mercy,
And I beshrew my •ho•ghts for be〈…〉g troubled.
I know the can my self, his gr•ce is wise,
For seeing me on a 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉,
So eye-able to the world, the 〈◊〉 slaves,
The multitude in their loud be〈…〉g voice•,
Might add so much to me Sir, as might dim
His own proper 〈◊〉, for such 〈◊◊〉 see
The present 〈◊〉, 〈…〉, or 〈◊〉,
He gives me saf•tie 〈◊◊〉, 〈◊◊〉
Himself much worth and honour, for Sir, what honour
Can subjects have, but is 〈…〉
Due 〈◊〉 •heir Crown•, 〈…〉,
I do app〈…〉 〈◊〉, 〈…〉
Your prisoners must be sent 〈◊〉 too my Lord.
Ha? my prisoners? 〈◊〉 go•• somewhat further,
Sir, I befe〈…〉 yo• this day 〈◊◊〉
Your self into our 〈◊◊〉 nobly 〈◊〉,
The 〈…〉 go 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 •oo
This very night 〈◊〉 ••swer and conf•r•e
What he command•.
To morrow I must return.
You shall, 〈◊◊〉 I pray be merry with us:
Command•d 〈◊〉 •he Co〈…〉 my prisoners ••ned for!
Tic strange; oh my forgetful m〈…〉rye!
I did not ask how my 〈◊〉 〈◊◊〉:
But she forgets too, minds not me her father,
We will mix um both together, but my prisoners!
Sir, here is a woman (forede by some tide of sor∣row)
With tears entreats your pity, and to see you.
If any soldier has done violence to her,
Beyond our military discipline,
Death shall divide him from us, Fetch he• in.
I have my self a daugh〈…〉, 〈◊〉 on whose face
But thinking, I must no•d• be pitiful:
And when I ha told my conquest to my king,
My poor girl then shall know, how for her sake
I did one pious act; is this the creature!
Yes, my Lord, and a sad one.
Leave us: a sad one!
The down-c••• loo〈…〉, calls up comp•ssion in me,
A Coarse going to the gr••e looks not more deadly,
Why kneelst thou! art thou wronged by any soldier!
Rise, for this honour is not due to me.
Hast not a tongue to read thy sorrows out!
This book I understand not.
O my dear father!
Thy father? who has wronged him?
A great Commander.
Under me!
Above you.
Above me? whose above a General?
None but the General of all Spaines Armies,
And thats the king, king R•d••icke; hes all goodness.
He cannot wrong thy father.
What was Tarquin?
A king, and yet a 〈…〉isher.
Such a sin
Was in those days a monster, 〈◊〉 〈…〉tic common.
Prithee be plain.
Have not you Sir, a daughter?
If I have not, I am the wretchedest man
That this day lives: for all the wealth I have
Lives in that child.
O for your daughters s•ke then hear my woes.
Rise then, and speak um.
No, let me kneel still,
Such a resemblance of a daughters duty,
Will make you mindful of a fathers love:
For such my injuries must exact from you,
A you would for your own.
And so they do,
For whilst I see thee kneeling, I think of my Iacinta.
Say your Iacinta then (chaste as the Rose)
Coming on sweetly in the springing bud,
And ne'er felt heat, to spread the Summer sweet:
But to increase and multiply it more,
Did to it self keep in its own perfu•e:
Say that some rapine hand had plucked the bloom,
Iacinta like that flower, and ravished her,
Defiling her white lawn of chastity,
With ugly blacks of lust; what would you do?
O tic too hard a question to resolve,
Without a solemn Council held within
Of mans best understanding faculties:
There must be love, and fatherhood, and grief,
And rage, and many passions, and they must all
Beget a thing called vengeance; but they must sit upon it.
Say this were don• by him that carried
The fairest seeming face of friendship to your self.
We should fall out.
Would you in such a case respect degrees?
I know not that.
Say he were noble.
Impossible: th'acts ignoble, the Bee can breed
No poison, though it suck the juice of hemlock.
Say a king should doo'〈…〉 were the〈…〉 less done
By the greater power, does Majesty extenuate a crime:
Augment it rather.
Say then that Rod•rick, your king and Master,
To quit the honours you are bringing home,
Had ravished your Iacinta.
Who has sent
A fury in this fowle-faire shape to vex me?
I ha seen that face me thinks, yet know it not:
How dare thou speak this treason, against my king?
Durst any man it• world, bring me this lye,
By this, had been in hell; Rodoricke a Tarquin?
Yes, and thy daughter (had she done her part)
Should be the second Lucre•ce: view me well,
I am Iacinta.
Ha?
The king my ravisher.
The king thy ravisher! oh unkingly sound:
He dares not sure, yet in thy sullied eyes
I read a Tragic story.
O noble friends,
Our wars are ended, are they not?
They are Sir.
But Spain has now begun a civil war.
And to confound me only: see you my daughter?
She sounds the Trumpet, which draws forth my sword
To be revenged.
On whom? speak loud your wrongs,
Digest your choler into temperance:
Give your considerate thoughts the upper hand,
In your hot passions, twill assuage the swelling
Of your big heart; if you have injuries done you,
Revenge them, and we second you.
Father, dear father.
Daughter, dear daughter.
Why do you kneel to me Sir?
To ask thee pardon that I did beget thee,
I brought thee to a shame staines all the way
Twixt earth and Acheron: not all the clouds
(The skies large canopy) could they drown the S〈…〉
With a perpetual inundation,
Can wash it ever out, leave me I pray.
His fighting passions will be ore anon,
And all will be at peace.
Best in my judgment,
We wake him with the fight of his won honours:
Call up the army, and let them present
His prisoner• to him, such a sight as that
Will brooke no sorrow near it.
It was a good Doctor that prescrib'de that physic
I'll be your patient Sir, show me my soldiers,
And my new honours won, I will truly weigh them,
With my full griefs, they may perhap• o••come.
Why now theres hope of his recovery.
Iacinta welcome, thou art my child still,
No forced stain of lust can alienate
Our consanguinity.
Dear Father,
Recollect your noble spirits, conquer grief,
The manly way: you have brave foes subdued,
Then let no female passions thus orewhelm• you.
Mistake me not, my child, I am not mad,
Nor must be idle; for it were more fit,
(If I could purchase more) I had more wit,
To help in these designs, I am grown old:
Yet I have found more strength within this arm,
Then without proof I durst ha boasted on.
Roderick thou king of monsters could thou do this?
And for thy lust confine me from the Court,
There• reason in thy shame, thou should not see me.
Ha! they come Iacinta, they come, hark, hark,
Now thou shalt see what cause I have given my king:
Stand, pray stand all, deliver me my prisoners:
So 〈◊〉 well, wondrous well, I have no friends
But these my enemies, yet welcome brave Moors,
With you •le parley; first I defle you all.
How?
I am a vowed for to your King, to Rod•rique.
How Iulia〈…〉!
Nay we fear you not, here's our whole army;
Yet we are strong enough from fear or flight.
Make us understand a reason Iulianus,
If for disloyalty reason may be given
Of this your language.
〈◊〉 you 〈…〉y Judges whom I make my foes?
Was my power placed above my mercy, or mercy
Above my power? went they not hand in hand?
Ever most nobly.
Ever, ever.
Why then should Rod•rique doe this base deed?
You doe distract us Sir, beseech you name it.
Behold this child of mine, this only mine,
I had a daughter, be she is ravished now.
Ravished?
Yes, by Rod•rique, by 〈◊〉, tyr〈…〉, Rod•rique:
O most abhorrid deed?
Join with me noble Spaniard• in Revenge.
We will.
Have I your hearts?
Our ••ves sh〈…〉 •eale it.
Then Prince•y 〈◊〉, here I free thee,
And all thy valiant Moors: Wilt thou call back
Thy scattered forces, and incorporate
Their strengths with mine, •nd with me march through Spain,
Sharpening thy sword with vengeance for my wrong•?
Most willingly, to ••nde me f•••er to thee,
Plight me thy ravished daughter to my wife,
And thou shalt see my indignation fly
On wings of Thunder.
O my season• hell,
A Christians arms embrace an infidel!
Isle not compel her heart, wo•e, win, and wed her:
Forced has she bin too much,—My honoured friends,
What We all thought to ha borne home in Triumph,
Must now be seen there in a Funeral,
Wrecked Honour being chief Mourner; here's the Hearse
Which weal all follow;—Roderique we come,
To give thy lust a scourge, thy life a doom.
Sleeps he Fit•lla?
Slumbringly Madam; hoe's not yet in his dead sleep.
Tic now his dying, anon comes his dead sleep.
For never shall he wake, until the world
Hath Phoenix-like bin hid in his own ashes,
Fydella, take my strength into thine arms,
And play the cruel executioner,
As I will first instruct thee.
I am so far
From shrinking, Madam, that Isle gladly be
The Prologue to Ant〈…〉s Tragedy.
Ant〈…〉s Tragedy! that very Name
Should strike even sparks of pity from the flint:
Intone•! husband A〈…〉.
Remember there's another owes that Name.
I, that's that's the poison kills me; shall a strumpet
(For shoe's no better) rob me of a treasure
So dear to me as he was; yet her I pardon:
The master-thiefe lies here, and he must dye fort:
All mercy hence I banish. Justice look down
To see a women's vengeance; thus I begin,
And follow thus and thus, now I am in,
Nothing shall pull me back.
Oh, oh.
He has passage yet for breath.
Here's remedy for that, pull Fydella.
He would speak it seems.
Never; his tongue betrayed me once, I will
No more listen my temptations; hear he shall
A while, and that but deafly: Intone•,
I was your wife, Lordly Ant•no•,
And in that balance equalled with your self,
I was your handmaid, and you might have trod
On my humility, I had kissed your feet,
But with disdain thou trampledst on my throat,
As I doe now on thine, and will deface
What nature built for honour, not deceit:
Our wedding was in private, so our divorce,
Yet this shall have as fre and open blazon
As a truth-speaking goodness; O my Fydella,
Thou little instrument of my revenge,
I would not have thee (for thy duty) lost,
There's gold; hye thee to safety, fare thee well,
I must ne'er see thee more, this place will be—
Not too hot for me Madam; my complexion
Is natural to it: good fortunes follow you;
If I might counsel you, I would conceal it:
If you can fly, doe not betray your self.
Fie, prithee away, thou wilt mar all the glory,
Conceal the deed? even to the bended brow
Of the sterne Judge, Isle speak, and call for justice,
Proud of my glorious vengeance, I will smile
Upon my dreadful Executioner:
It was that was first enacted in my breast,
She shoud not dare to kill, that dares not die,
Tic needy mischief, and hoe's basely bent
That dares doe ill, yet fear the punishment.
SOme musique.
Musique Sir! tic all untunde,
Remember your proud enemies approach,
And your unreadinesse to entertain um.
If all be set upon a careless hazard,
What shall care doe there?
Rouse you like a Lion,
And fright this heard of Foxes, Wolves, and Bears,
From daring to come near you: a Kings eye.
Has Magical charms in it to bind treason down,
They fight like thieves for spoil, you for your own;
O Piamentelli, theres within my bosom,
An army of Furies mustered, worse than those
Which follow Iulianus: Conscience beats
The Drum of horror up.
For what! a Maidenhead!
Pray be your self, and justify the act,
Stand on your guard, and royalize the fact
By your own dispensation.
Go call our friends together, if we have none,
Hire them with double pay, our self will search
And break those dangerous doors which have so long
Kept Spain in childish ignorance.
O good my Lord,
Forbear, there's fatal prophesies forbid you.
There's fatal fooleries; tell me of prophesies!
Shall fear affright me? no; upon my life
Tic hidden treasure kept for needful hours,
And now tic come; tic gold must purchase soldiers;
Shall I not seek it then? alone Isle break
Op those forbidden doors, go muster men.
This I dread more then all our enemies,
If good proceed from this, no Magic Art
Shall fright me.
Or good, or bad, Isle throw the dice my self,
And take the chance that false; thou art the first,
Hell wakens, yet Isle on, twenty at least
I must pass through before I break the spell,
If this door thither lead, Isle enter hell.
So now I me entered to the fatal chamber,
Show now thy full effects, ha? what sight's this?
Tic holiday in hell, the fiends are loose,
I have enfranchised you, thank me Devils;
Was this the fatal incantation
That here was locked so many fearful ages,
And was it decreed for me to dislocate?
Fire consume you geomantick Devils,
Where borrowed you those bodies, you damned thieves?
In your own shapes you are not visible,
Or are you yet but fancies imaginary?
What's he that me presents? I have not sent
My carcass forth, I am not sleeping now,
And my soul strayed forth, I am my real self,
Must I be captived by a traitor so?
Devil thou playact me false; undiadem'd?
And such a sooty fiend inherit me?
Iacinta, too, that she-curse, must she have part?
Kneeling to them, here's a solemnity
In the Devils name; go reign in Sulphur, or in
Some frozen Labyrinth; this Kingdom's mine:
Thou there that me personat'st, draw forth thy sword,
And brandish't against hell, Isle show thee how?
What Magic binds me? what furies hold mine arm.
Piamentelli, Avilla, none succour me?
What ails you Sir?
My foes are come upon me.
Coming they are, but yet a league distant, Sir,
Zounds they are come, and have bin here with me.
Traitorous Iulianus, and his ravished daughter,
An army of Moors, of Turks and infidels.
Your fancies trouble you, they are but coming,
Too near in that, make up to your soldiers,
Full twenty thousand now will follow you and more.
The Moore's a coming, &amp; the devil too that must
Succeed me in my last monarchy, take arms and fight,
The fiends shall know they have not plaid me right.
O for a private place to bee hanged in; when all hope's gone, welcome despair; which way soever the day goes, I'm sure this is my way; If the King overcome, I shall be hanged for Iacintaes escape, if she rise, I fall in recompense of her wrongs. All my grief is, I want an heir to have my purse and clothes, one that would take the pains for me, an honest hangman were now as good
a companion as I would desire to meet with; I have lived a Lord, and I would be loath to dye an executioner.
Murder is come to light; Oh sister how hast thou overthrown our honourable house before it was well co∣veered; oh ambitious sister, half a share in a Lord would not content thee, thou would have all or none, now thou hast none, for thou hast kilt thy Lord and husband.
I was a Lord, although a bawdy Lord.
I was a Lords brother, although a bawdy Lords bro∣there.
O Lechery, how hast thou puffed me up and un∣done me.
O Lechery, thou hast battend me a while, and then spoiled me.
Ha? what art thou?
Partly honourable, partly miserable.
Give me thy hand.
Give me thy halter then.
Art thou a hangman then?
I, and a mad one, but now I droop, and am rea∣die to drop into the budget.
Look here's work for thee, here's clothes, and here's money, wot thou take the pains to hang me?
I have lived a Lords brother, and would be loath to die a hangman.
Doe not desire to die, live till thou die of thine own accord.
Tic my desire, but I want a cord of mine own, prithee lend me thine.
Let me persuade thee to be charitable to thy self, spare thy self, and hang me, I have been a Pander, know thou what a Pander is?
In brief a knave; more at large thus;
Hoe's a thing that is poor,
He waits upon a whore,
When shoe's sick, hoe's sore,
In the streets he goes before,
At the chamber waits at door,
All his life a runs of the score,
This I know, and know no more.
All this Isle add to it,
He wears long locke,
And villainous socks,
Many nights in the stocks,
Endures some knocks,
And a many of mocks,
Eats reversions of cocks,
Yet lies in the flocks,
Thrives by the smocks,
And dies with the pox.
All this I have been, and now desire to be hanged for it.
What hast thou there?
A hundred marks, besides leases, and lands which I have wickedly gotten, all which I will bestow on thee, if thou wilt take the pains to hang me.
Hum? my brother is dead, and there is no way to raise our house again but by ready money or credit; the hangman many times mounts above his betters; well I will hang, but my conscience bears me witness, tic not for any good will I bear unto thee, nor for any wrong that I know thou hast committed; but innocently for thy lands, thy leases, thy clothes, and thy money. And so come a long with to me the next tree, where thou shalt hang till thou art dead, and stink above ground.
With all my heart, my guts, my lights, my liver, and my lungs.
Fly, fly my Lord.
With what wings?
With wings of speed.
Your foes, Sir, conquer, and your souldies bleed,
The barbarous Moore is titled by your name,
The Spanish King; therefore your safest speed
Will be to Biscany, there you may find
New friends, new safety, and new kingly minds.
There is no friendship where there is no power,
I must crave now, oh poverty most poor,
To beg of them received mine al•es, before.
I have defended them:
They'll you relieve.
Isle make the proof: what do you call the man
Whose prowess in that rightful victory
Against the Moors did so much honour win?
A〈…〉.
He was, and is, and may be, but not long?
This poisoned Iuli〈…〉 has hatterd him.
Thou art my subject still Pia•••telli.
Whilst I am Pia•••telli.
Were thou gone,
I then might boast, I were a King alone,
For but thy self I doe not know one subject,
Then subjects all, since you•• not let me die,
Isle seek a weary life in Biscany.
Thou mutable piece of nature, dost thou fly me?
Th'at• frightful to me.
I shall be more frightful,
If thou repell a proffered arm of love,
There will rebound a hate blacker in Art
Then in similitude; forget me not,
Have not I chac't thy wronger from his ground,
And my triumphant self thy conqueror?
I am thy King.
Isle fear thee then?
Not love me!
The word is poisoned in thy very tongue,
Love thee? as I would love my ravisher.
Thy father shall repent.
He must, and will,
That ere he freed a captive infidel.
Look for a vengeance.
Yes, some barbarous one,
Tic natural to thee, base African,
Thine in side a blacker then thy sooty skin.
Oh Iulianus, what hast thou done? thast sc•p't
The raging Lion, to wrestle with a Dragon,
He would have slain with a majestic gripe.
But this with venom; better had bin thy fate
By him to fall, then thus, by such a ••••and.
Bring forth that traitor, same that lustful whore.
What wilt thou monster?
Any thing that's monstrous.
Reward a traitor.
Traitor?
Be thine own judge,
What art thou but thy Kings, and Kingdoms ruin?
Was it thy hopes, that ever I should trust thee?
Traitors are poisoned arrows drawn toth'head.
Which we shoot home at mischief; being struck dead,
Then let the arrow be consumed in fire.
Hast not betrayed thy King and Country basely
For thee (ungrateful, villainous Moore) I have,
I have deserved to die, but not by thee,
And I beseech thee, bloody Tyrant, hasten
My punishment.
That boon is easily g〈…〉.
Tic now full glory to thee, to strike h〈…〉
Set the black character of death upon 〈◊◊〉
Give me a sentence horrid as thy self art,
Speak in thy barbarous language, thy last doom,
A tyrants Axe sends me •o a •••st home.
Pluck out his eyes, and her exclaiming tongue,
She shall in silent sorrow then lead him,
Her eyes shall be his st•••••.
O spare her tyrant.
By her offence and wrong thou hast aspirde,
Then tread not on her virtues, 〈◊〉 enough
That I doe suffer for the good 〈◊〉 I did
To set thy 〈…〉 above my head:
Oh spare my child.
Entr••t for me? forbear Sir,
Either be you dumb or let him not hear,
I shall have mental 〈…〉 for heaven,
Fuller effectual then this tongue 〈◊◊〉.
And for the author of my 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉,
I shall have 〈…〉.
O Justice, Justice, thou that •ilst the throne
〈◊◊〉 Justice 〈…〉.
Give me thy sharpest 〈◊〉.
Against 〈◊〉
My self the 〈…〉 〈◊〉.
〈…〉.
Yes, and see, here's 〈◊〉
A〈…〉 ghost! murdered by me, 〈…〉
〈◊〉 and 〈…〉.
To kill my friend, (my 〈…〉 friend) 〈◊◊〉.
Thou strangledst L〈…〉
O my hard 〈◊〉
My aim, was full at thee.
End thy just hate,
For I am parting from thee; see those two
That wronged thee are both wounded to the death,
With grief she, I by poison lose my breath.
Forgive him, but spare not me.
How came you wounded?
I clap my hands at this your tragedy,
My birth was base, but my revenge flew high.
A noble girl, a lusty stout Virago.
Iul•••••, for a wrong done to his daughter,
(The fatal Engine that hath beat down Spain)
Revolted from his King, and set that Moore up,
Who now insults, being but a captive the•,
And cause in honest language I was just
In taxing this revole of 〈◊〉,
He bid a soldier kill me, who re〈…〉ing 〈◊〉,
He himself struck me; life was 〈◊〉 thus long,
But for the cleansing of my conscience:
I feel death p•ngs, forgive me both, and all,
Let my soul 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 any body f•ll
With honour I got hon••, 〈◊〉 my 〈◊〉 •hr•ves,
Thus false the wretched husband of two wive•s
So, here's 〈◊〉 of 〈…〉,
A wholesome example to all succ〈…〉▪
Let every wise man take h••d of two 〈◊〉,
Tic ••o 〈…〉 of the 〈◊〉
My self should break one of 〈…〉 hearts.
What should I call thee, widow, shall wee marry one ano∣there now.
And beget Chimeras, I doe not think
That ever any one husband 〈◊◊〉
On us both 〈…〉
Dost 〈◊◊〉 〈…〉 〈◊◊〉 thing
Which should supply the place of 〈◊〉 in 〈◊〉,
Merely fantastical▪ are thy 〈◊〉
Such featherd follies, idle giggloto〈…〉▪
Are these the rites due to a funeral?
Why? hast never seen the sun-shine of a rainy day?
Who does believe a widows tears to be her hearts sorrow?
Are they not then better spa'rd then derided?
Let me see then what thou dare do with wet eyes,
That I dare not answer with a smiling cheek?
What thou dare not second I dare doe.
Begin, Isle pledge thee.
Thou dare not.
Try me.
Thus then I come to thee A〈…〉;
Thou did forsake me living, being 〈◊〉
I will enjoy thy monu••••all bed.
I, hast thou that resolution?
Me thinks a woman (〈◊〉 I am) should not out do me,
I must dye one day, and as good this day as another,
Whereabouts is my heart, I think all over my body,
I am all heart, and therefore cannot miss,
Some creatures dye singing, why not I merrily,
Make me room A〈…〉 and 〈◊〉,
Weal all tumble in one bed together,
Isle lie as close as she on thy left side,
And have as many kisses too, th••'• my bargai••;
My sins are all upon thy conscience,
But I forgive thee, and 〈◊◊〉 the Clarke to•,
My soul will have 〈◊〉 passage, my body I b•queath
To thee Aut••io, I am your wife,
And will come to ••d to you, thus I make unready,
Thus I lie down, thus kiss, and this embrace
Isle ever keep, I am 〈◊◊〉 with play,
I needs must sleep for ever.
Excellent pasti•••
Tic night with me for ever, where'• this tie•ant?
Turn me but to him, and from th•se darkened eyes
I shall discover his Cymerian face,
For tho all is dark, yet still that's visible,
And nothing else to me; see ran here vile〈…〉,
Look what a bloody pageant thou hast made;
I borrow eyes to guide me of my child,
And her Isle lend a tongue to curse thee with.
Ha, ha, ha.
Thou l••••est at misery.
Tic well, thou gives a gr••e 〈◊〉 my for〈…〉,
Yet wherefore should thou glory in it? this work
Is none of thine, tic heavens merciful justice,
For thou are• but the 〈◊〉,
The master 〈◊〉, and th•se 〈◊〉
That did these bloody 〈◊◊〉 upon'•,
Thy second slaves, and yet I more deserve,
I was a tra• to• to my lawful King,
And tho my w〈…〉 〈…〉cked on 〈◊◊〉,
I had no warrant signed for my revenge,
Tic the peoples sins that makes tyr•n•• King•,
And such was ••no for thee, now I obey,
But my affliction teaches 〈◊〉 too 〈◊〉
On bloody 〈…〉ger, 〈◊〉 up my 〈◊〉.
〈…〉
Nor give thee living in captivity,
Thy body shall enjoy the general prison.
But thy soul set 〈◊〉.
Thou art good in th••, and no•••.
Nay it shall nobler •e in the perfor〈…〉,
Give him weapons, thou art a soldier,
And shalt end so; Isle be thy opp〈…〉,
With od• of eyes, but not of arms, I vow,
If thy dark aim hit in my face, Isle stand,
And die with thee, if not, fall by my hand.
Thoul't hurt my pen••ence, for I shall bless
All the ill deeds 〈◊〉 I have done for thee,
In this so noble end,
B• pr〈…〉 then.
One thing more of 〈◊〉, be a prophet to me first,
For thou know what shall become of my poor Iacinta,
What end to her 〈◊〉.
〈◊◊〉 end thou 〈◊〉 know it.
O〈…〉 it noble be, and honourable;
Her life has had 〈◊◊〉 strokes of 〈◊〉;
Oh let her end be sp〈…〉g.
〈◊〉 shall be noble too.
I 〈◊〉 for her that has no tongue to beg,
And what 〈…〉 my saint yielding breath,
Shall all be spent in blessings over thee:
Farewell Iacinta, take my latest blessing,
I know thy soul returns a thanks to me,
Make haste to overtake me, if thou be stayed,
Think of Cl••patra and Brutus wife,
There's many ways to end a weary life.
Come Sir, I stand before you.
Thur I come,
Thy death Isle venture, but receive mine own,
So, I have my doom, and I have hit too.
Ha, ha, ha,
Laugh then 〈◊〉 any 〈…〉ed then.
O bloody homes•de, thou hast slain thy daughter.
False villain, hast thou then so mocked my woes,
To make me fatal butcher of my child?
W•• she the target to defend thy body?
Forgive me my Iacinta, it was in me
An innocent act of blood, but tyranny
In that black monster: it is not much ill,
Better my hand then a worse arm should spill
Thy guiltless life; what art thou going yet?
Thy warm blood cools, my sun begins to set,
Nature shrinks backward to her former forms,
Our souls climb stars, whilst these descend to worms.
See tyrant, from thy further strokes we fly,
Heaven do thy will, I will not cursing die.
So, now we live beholding unto none
Upon this stayre we do ascend our throe••,
Give us our title.
Long live Mule〈…〉 King of Spain.
Your silence it confirms, take hence their bodies,
Give them to Christians, and let th•• bestow
What ceremonious sunerals they please.
We must pursue the flying R〈…〉.
All must be ours, weal have no Kingdom sh••er,
Let Chroniclers write, here we begin our reign,
The first of Moors that •re was King of Spain.

YOu have shown a world of wealth;
I did not think there had been a Merchant
Lived in Italy of half your substance.
Isle give the King of Spain
Ten thousand Ducats yearly, and discharge
My yearly Custom. The Hollanders scarce trade
More generally then I: my Factors wives
Wear Shaperoones of Velvet, and my Scriveners
Merely through my employment, grow so rich,
They build their Palaces and Belvidears
With musical Water-workes: Never in my life
Had I a loss at Sea. They call me on th'Exchange,
The fortunate Young man and make great suite
To venture with me: Shall I tell you Sir,
Of a strange confidence in my way of Trading,
I reckon it as certain as the gain
In erecting a Lottery.
I pray Sir, what doe you think
Of Seignior Baptisto's estate?
A mere Beggar▪
Hoe's worth some fifty thousand Ducats.
Is not that well?
How well? for a man to be melted to snow water,
With toiling in the world from three and twenty,
Till threescore for poor fifty thousand Ducats.
To your estate it is little I confess:
You have the Spring-tide of Gold.
Faith, and for Silver,
Should I not send it packing to th'East Indies,
We should have a glut on it.
Here's the great Lord Contarino.
Oh, I know his business, he's a suitor to your sister.
Yes Sir, but to you,
As my most trusted friend, I utter it,
I will break the alliance.
You are ill advised then;
There lives not a completer Gentleman
In Italy, nor of a more ancient house.
What tell you me of Gentry, it is nought else
But a superstitious relic of time past:
And sift it to the true worth, it is nothing
But ancient riches: and in him you know
They are pitifully in the wane; he makes his colour
Of visiting vs so often, to sell land,
And thinks if he can gain my sisters love,
To recover the treble value.
Sure he loves her entirely, and she deserves it.
Faith, though she were
Crooked shoulderd, having such a portion,
She would have noble Suitors; but truth is,
I would wish my noble Venturer take heed,
It may be whiles he hopes to catch a Gilt head,
He may draw up a Gudgeon.
Hoe's come: Sir, I will leave you.
I sent you the Evidence of the piece of land
I motioned to you for the Sale.
Yes.
Has your Counsel perused it?
Not yet my Lord: Doe you intend to travel?
No.
Oh then you loose
That which makes man most absolute.
Yet I have heard of divers, that in passing of the
Alps, have but exchanged their virtues at dear rate for other vices.
Oh my Lord, lye not idle;
The chiefest action for a man of great spirit,
Is never to be out of action: we should think
The soul was never put into the body,
Which has so many rare and curious pieces
Of Mathematical motion, to stand still.
Virtue is ever sowing of her seeds:
In the Trenches for the Soldier; in the wakeful study
For the Scholar; in the sorrows of the sea
For men of our Profession, of all which
Arise and spring up Honour. Come, I know
You have some noble great Design in hand,
That you levy so much money.
Sir, Isle tell you,
The greatest part of it I mean to employ
In payment of my Debts, and the remainder
Is like to bring me into greater bonds, as I aim it.
How Sir?
I intend it for the charge of my Wedding.
Are you to be married, my Lord?
Yes Sir; and I must now entreat your pardon,
That I have concealed from you a business,
Wherein you had at first been called to Counsel,
But that I thought it a less fault in Friendship,
To engage my self thus far without your knowledge,
Then to doe it against your will: another reason
Was, that I would not publish to the world,
Nor have it whispered scarce, what wealthy Voyage
I went about, till I had got the Mine
In mine own possession.
You are dark to me yet,
Isle now remove the cloud. Sir, your sister and I
Are vowed each others, and there only wants
Her worthy mothers, and your fair consents
To stile it marriage: this is a way,
Not only to make a friendship, but confirm it
For our posterities. How doe you look upon it?
Believe me Sir, as on the principal Colume
To advance our House: why you bring honour with you,
Which is the soul of Wealth. I shall be proud
To live to see my little Nephews ride
Of the upper hand of their Uncles; and the Daughters
Be ranked by Heralds at Solemnities
Before the Mother: all this derived
From your Nobility. Doe not blame me sir,
If I be taken with it exceedingly:
For this same honour with vs Citizens,
Is a thing we are mainly fond of, especially
When it comes without money, which is very seldom,
But as you doe perceive my present temper,
Be sure I am yours, feared with scorn and laughter,
At your over confident purpose, and no doubt,
My mother will be of your mind.
Tic my hope sir.
I doe observe how this Romelio,
Has very worthy parts, were they not blasted
By insolent vain glory: there rests now
The mothers approbation to the match,
Who is a woman of that State and bearing,
Tho she be Citie-borne, both in her language,
Her Garments, and her Table, she excels
Our Ladies of the Court: she goes not gaudy,
Yet have I seen her wear one Diamond,
Would have bought twenty gay ones out of their clothes,
And some of them, without the greater grace,
Out of their honesties.
She comes, I will try
How she stands affected to me, without relating
My Contract with her Daughter.
Sir, you are nobly welcome, and presume
You are in a place that's wholly dedicated
To your service.
I am ever bound to you for many special favours.
Sir, your fame renders you most worthy of it.
It could never have got a sweeter ayre to fly in,
Then your breath.
You have bin strange a long time, you are weary
Of our unseasonable time of feeding:
Indeed the Exchange Bell makes vs dine so late;
I think the Ladies of the Court from vs
Learn to lye so long a bed.
They have a kind, of Exchange among them too,
Marry unless, it be to hear of news, I take it,
Theirs, is like the New Burse, thinly furnished
With Tiers and new Fashions. I have a suite to you.
I would not have you value it the less,
If I say, Tic granted already.
You are all Bounty, tic to bestow your
Picture on me.
Oh sir, shadows, are coveted in Summer,
And with me, tic Fall of the Leaf.
You enjoy the best of Time;
This latter Spring of yours, shows in my eye,
More fruitful and more temperate withal,
Then that whose date is only limited
By the music of the Cuckoo.
Indeed Sir, I dare tell you,
My Looking-glasse is a true one, and as yet
It does not terrify me. Must you have my Picture?
So please you Lady, and I shall preserve it
As a most choice Object.
You will enjoin me to a strange punishment:
With what a compelled face a woman sits
While she is drawing? I have noted divers,
Either to fine smiles, or suck in the lips,
To have a little mouth; ruffle the cheeks,
To have the dimple seen, and so disorder
The face with affectation, at next sitting
It has not been the same; I have known others
Have lost the entire fashion of their face,
In half an hours sitting.
How?
In hot weather,
The painting on their face has been so mellow,
They have left the poor man harder work by half,
To mend the Copy h• wrought by▪ but indeed,
If ever I would have mine drawn to'th life,
I would have a Painter steal it, at such a time,
I were devoutly kneeling at my prayers,
There is then a heavenly beauty in it, the Soul
Moons in the Superficies.
Excellent Lady,
Now you teach Beauty a preservative,
More then against fading Colours; and your judgment
Is perfect in all things.
Indeed Sir, I am a Widow,
And want the addition to make it so:
For mans Experience has still been held
Women's best eyesight. I pray sir tell me,
You are about to sell a piece of Land
To my son, I hear.
Tic truth.
Now I could rather wish,
That Noble men would ever live ith Country,
Rather then make their visit's up to'th City
About such business: Oh Sir, Noble Houses
Have no such goodly Prospects any way,
As into their own Land: the decay of that,
Next to their begging Churchland, is a ruin
Worth all men's pity. Sir, I have forty thousand crowns
Sleep in my Chest, shall waken when you please,
And sly to your commands, Will you stay supper?
I cannot, worthy Lady.
I would not have you come hither sir, to sell,
But to settle your Estate. I hope you understand
Wherefore I make this proffer: so I leave you.
What a Treasury have I perched.
I hope you understand wherefore I make this proffer.
She has got some intelligence, how I intend to marry
Her daughter, and ingenuously perceived,
That by her Picture, which I begged of her,
I meant the fair Iolenta: here's a Letter,
Which gives express charge, not to visit her
Till midnight: fail not to come, for tic a business
That concerns both our honours.
Yours in danger to be lost, Iolenta.
Tic a strange In•unction; what should be the business?
She is not changed I hope. Isle thither straight:
For women's Resolutions in such deeds,
Like Bees, light oft on flowers, and oft on weeds.
Oh sister come, the Taylor must to work,
To make your wedding Clothes.
The Tombe-maker, to take measure of my cossin.
Tombe-maker? look you,
The king of Spain greets you.
What does this mean, do you serve Process on me?
Process? come you would be witty now.
Why, what's this, I pray?
Infinite grace to you▪ it is a Letter
From his Catholic Majesty, for the commends
Of this Gentleman for your Husband.
In good season: I hope he will not have my
Allegiance stretched to the undoing of my self.
Undo your self? he does proclaim him here
Not for a Traitor, does he?
You are not mad;
For one of the Noblest Gentlemen.
Yet Kings many times
Know merely but men's outsides, was this commendation
Voluntary, think you?
Voluntary: what mean you by that?
Why I do not think but he begged it of the King,
And it may fortune to be out of's way:
Some better suite, that wooed have stood his Lordship
In far more stead: Letters of Commendations,
Why tic reported that they are grown stale,
When places fall in the University.
I pray you return his Pass: for to a Widow
That longs to be a Courtier, this Paper
May doe Knights service.
Mistake not excellent Mistress, these commends
Express, his Majesty of Spain has given me
Both addition of honour, as you may perceive
By my habit, and a place here to command
Ore thirty Galleys; this your brother shows,
As wishing that you would be partner
In my good Fortune.
I pray come hither, have I any interest in you?
You are my Brother.
I would have you then use me with that respect,
You may still keep me so, and to be swayed
In this maine business of life, which wants
Greatest consideration, your Marriage,
By my direction: Here's a Gentleman—
Sir, I have often told you,
I am so little my own to dispose that way,
That I can never be his.
Come, too much light
Makes you Moone-eyed, are you in love with title?
I will have a Herald, whose continual practise
Is all in pedigree, come a wooing to you,
Or an Antiquary in old Buskins.
Sir, you have done me
The maynest wrong that ere was offred
To a Gentleman of my breeding.
Why sir?
You have led me
With a vain confidence, that I should marry
Your sister, have proclaimed it to my friends,
Employed the greatest Lawyers of our State
To settle her a jointure, and the issue
Is, that I must become ridiculous
Both to my friends and enemies: I will leave you,
Till I call to you for a strict account
Of your unmanly dealing.
Stay my Lord.
Doe you long to have my throat cut? Good my Lord,
Stay but a little, till I have removed
This Court-mist from her eyes, till I wake her
From this dull sleep, wherein sheele dream herself
To a deformed Beggar: you would marry
The great Lord Contarino.
Contarino
Were you talking of? he lost last night at Diee
Five thousand Ducats; and when that was gone,
Set at one throw a Lordship, that twice trebled
The former loss.
And that flew after.
And most carefully
Carried the Gentleman in his Carroch
To a Lawyers Chamber, there most Legally
To put him in possession: was this wisdom?
O yes, their credit in the way of gaming
Is the mayne thing they stand on, that must be paid,
Tho the Brewer bawl for's money; and this Lord
Does she prefer in the way of marriage,
Before our Choice. Here noble Ercole,
You'll be advised I hope: Know for your sakes
I married, that I might have children;
And for your sakes, if you'll be ruled by me,
I will never marry again. Here's a Gentleman
Is noble, rich, well featured, but above all,
He loves you entirely; his intents are aimed
For an Expedition against the Turk,
Which makes the Contract cannot be delayed.
Contract? you must do this without my knowledge;
Give me some potion to make me mad,
And happily not knowing what I speak,
I may then consent too't.
Come, you are mad already,
And I shall never hear you speak good sense,
Till you name him for Husband.
Lady, I will doe a manly Office for you,
I will leave you, to the freedom of your own soul,
May it move whither heaven and you please.
Now you express your self most nobly.
Stay sir, what doe you mean to doe?
Hear me, if thou dost marry Contarino,
All the misfortune that did ever dwell.
In a parents curse, light on thee.
Oh rise Lady, certainly heaven never intended
Kneeling to this fearful purpose.
Your Imprecation has undone me for ever.
Give me your hand.
No sir.
Gived rue then:
Oh what rare workmanship have I seen this
To finish with your needle, what excellent music
Have these struck upon the Viol!
Now Isle teach a piece of Art.
Rather a damnable cunning,
To have me go about to gived away,
Without consent of my soul.
Kiss her my Lord, if crying had been regarded,
Maidenheads had ne'er been lost, at least some appearance
Of crying, as an April shower in the Sunshine.
She is yours.
Nay, continue your station, and deal you in dumb show; kiss this doggedness out of her.
To be contracted in tears, is but fashionable.
Yet suppose that they were hearty.
Virgins must seem unwilling.
Oh what else; and you remember, we observe the
Like in greater Ceremonies then these Contracts,
At the Conseration of Prelates, they use ever
Twice to say nay, and take it.
Oh Brother.
Keep your possession, you have the door bithring,
That's Livery and Seasin in England; but my Lord,
Kiss that tear from her lip, you'll find the Rose
The sweeter for the dew.
Bitter as gall.
I, I, all you women,
Although you be of never so low stature,
Have gall in you most abundant, it exceeds
Your brains by two ounces. I was saying somewhat;
Oh doe but observe ith City, and you'll find
The thriftiest bargains that were ever made,
What a deal of wrangling ere they could be brought
To an upshot.
Great persons doe not ever come together.
With revelling faces, nor is it necessary
They should; the strangeness and unwillingness
Wears the greater state, and gives occasion that
The people may buzz and talk of't, tho the Bells
Be tongue-tide at the Wedding.
And truly I have heard say,
To be a little strange to one another,
Will keep your longing fresh.
I, and make you beget
More children when yare married: some Doctors
Are of that opinion. You see my Lord, we are merry
At the Contract, your sport is to come hereafter.
I will leave you excellent Lady, and withal
Leave a heart with you so entirely yours,
That I protest, had I the least of hope
To enjoy you, tho I were to wait the time
That Scholars doe in taking their degree
In the noble Arts, it were nothing, howsoever
He parts from you, that will depart from life,
To doe you any service, and so humbly
I take my leave.
Sir, I will pray for you.
Why thats well, twill make your prayer complete,
To pray for your Husband.
Husband?
This is the happiest hour that I ever arrived at.
Husband, I husband: come you peevish thing,
Smile me a thank for the pains I have tan.
I hate my self for being thus enforced,
You may soon judge then what I think of you
Which are the cause of it.
You Lady of the Laundry, come hither.
Sir?
Look as you love your life, you have an eye
Upon your Mistress; I doe henceforth bar her
All Visitants: I do hear there are Bawds abroad,
That bring Cut-works, &amp; Man-toons, &amp; convey Letters
To such young Gentlewomen, and there are others
That deal in Corne-cutting, and Fortune-telling,
Let none of these come at her on your life,
Nor Dews ace the wafer woman, that prigs abroad
With Muskmeloons, and Malakatoones;
Nor the Scotchwoman with the Citterne, do you mark,
Nor a Dancer by any means, tho he ride on's foot-cloth,
Nor a Hackney Coachman, if he can speak French.
Why sir?
By no means: no more words;
Nor the woman with Maribone puddings. I have heard
Strange juggling tricks have been conveyed to a woman
In a pudding: you are apprehensive?
Oh good sir, I have travelled.
When you had a Bastard, you travelled indeed:
But my precious Chaperoones,
I trust thee the better for that; for I have heard,
There is no warier Keeper of a Park,
To prevent Stalkers, or your Night-walkers,
Then such a man, as in his youth has been
A most notorious Deare-stealer.
Very well sir,
You may use me at your pleasure.
By no means Winifrid, that were the way
To make thee travel again: Come be not angry,
I doe but jest, thou know, wit and a woman,
Are two very frail things, and so I leave you.
I could weep with you, but tic no matter,
I can doe that at any time, I have now
A greater mind to rail a little: Plague of these
Vnsanctified Matches; they make vs loathe
The most natural desire our grandam Eve ever left vs.
Force one to marry against their will; why it is
A more ungodly work, then enclosing the Commons.
Prithee peace;
This is indeed an argument so common,
I cannot think of matter new enough,
To express it bad enough,
Heere's one I hope will put you out of't.
How now sweet Mistress?
You have made sorrow look lovely of late,
You have wept.
She has done nothing else these three days; had you stood behind the Arras, to have heard her shed so much salt water as I have done, you would have thought she had been turned Fountain.
I would fine know the cause can be worthy this
Thy sorrow.
Reach me the Caskanet, I am studying Sir,
To take an Inuentory of all that's mine.
What to doe with it Lady?
To make you a Deed of gift.
That's done already; you are all mine.
Yes, but the Devil would fine put in for's share,
In likeness of a Separation.
Oh sir, I am bewitched.
Ha?
Most certain, I am forespoken,
To be married to another: can you ever think
That I shall ever thrive in it? Am I not then bewitched?
All comfort I can teach my self is this,
There is a time left for me to dye nobly,
When I cannot live so?
Give me in a word, to whom, or by whose means
Are you thus torn from me?
By Lord Ercole, my Mother, and by Brother.
Isle make his bravery fitter for a grave,
Then for a wedding.
So you will beget
A far more dangerous and strange disease
Out of the cure; you must love him again
For my sake: for the noble Ercole
Had such a true compassion of my sorrow.
Hark in your ear, He show you his right worthy
Demeanour to me.
Oh you pretty ones,
I have seen this Lord many a time and oft
Set her in's lap, and talk to her of Love
So feelingly, I doe protest it has made me
Run out of my self to think on it; oh sweet breathed
Monkey, how they grow together? well, tic my opinion,
He was no women's friend that did invent
A punishment for kissing.
If he bear himself so nobly,
The manliest office I can doe for him,
Is to afford him my pity, since h e's like
To fail of so dear a purchase: for your mother,
Your goodness quits her ill; for your brother,
He that vows friendship to a man, and proves
A traitor deserves rather to be hang d,
Then he that counterfeits money; yet for your sake
I must sign his pardon too. Why doe you tremble?
Be safe, you are now free from him.
Oh but sir,
The intermission from a •it of an ague
Is grievous: for indeed it doth prepare vs,
To entertain torment next morning.
Why hoe's gone to sea.
But he may return too soon.
To avoid which, we will instantly be married.
To avoid which, get you instantly to bed together,
Doe, and I think no Civil Lawyer for his fee
Can give you better Council.
Fie upon thee, prithee leave vs.
Be of comfort sweet Mistress.
On one condition we may have no quarrel about
Upon my life none. (this.
None upon your honour?
With whom? with Ercole?
You have delivered him guiltless.
With your Brother? Hoe's part of your self.
With your complemental Mother?
I use not sight with women
To morrow weal be married:
Let those that would oppose this union,
grow ne'er so subtle, and entangle themselves
In their own work like Spiders, while we two
Haste to our noble wishes, and presume,
The hindrance of it will breed more delight,
As black copartaments shows gold more bright.
Am I well habitat?
Exceeding well; any man would take you for a Merchant: but pray sir resolve me, what should bee the reason, that you being one of the most eminent Civil Lawyers in Spain, and but newly arrived from the East Indies, should take this habit of a Merchant upon you?
Why my son lives here in Naples &amp; in's riot
Doth far exceed the exhibition I allowed him.
So then, &amp; in this disguise you mean to trace him.
Partly for that, but there is other business
Of greater consequence.
Faith for his expense, tic nothing to your estate, What to Don Crispiano, the famous Corregidor of Civil, who by his mere practise of the Law, in less time then half a Jubilee, hath gotten thirty thousand Ducats a year.
Well, I will give him line,
Let him run on in's course of spending.
Freely?
Freely:
For I protest, if that I could conceive
My son would take more pleasure or content,
By any course of riot, in the expense,
Then I took joy, nay souls felicity
In the getting of it, should all the wealth I have
Waste to as small an atomy as Flies
In the un, I doe protest on that condition,
It should not move me.
How's this? Cannot hee take more pleasure in spending it ryotously, then you have done by scraping it together: O ten thousand times more, and I make no question, five hundred young gallants will be of my opiniō.
Why all the time of your Collectionship,
Has been a perpetual Calendar, begin first
With your melancholy study of the Law
Before you come to singer the Ruddocks, after that
The tyring importunity of Clients,
To rise so early, and sit up so late,
You made your self half ready in a dream,
And never prayed but in your sleep: Can I think,
That you have half your lungs left with crying out
For Judgements, and days of Trial. Remember sir,
How often have I borne you on my shoulder,
Among a sh•ale or swarm of reeking Night-caps,
When that your Worship has bepist yourself,
Either with vehemence of Argument,
Or being out from the matter. I am merry.
Be so.
You could eat like a Gentleman, at leisure;
But swallow it like •lap-dragons, as if you had lived
With chewing the Cud after.
No pleasure in the world was comparable too't.
Possible?
He shall never taste the like, unless he study law.
What, not in winching sir?
Tic a Court game, believe it,
As familiar as Gleek, or any other.
Winching? O fie, the Disease follows it:
Beside, can the fingering Taffaties, or Lawns,
Or a painted hand, or a Breast be like the pleasure
In taking Clients fees, and piling them
In several goodly rows before my Desk?
And according to the bigness of each heap,
Which I took by a lear: for Lawyers do not tell them,
I veiled my cap, and withal gave great hope
The Cause should go on their sides.
What think you then
Of a good cry of Hounds? It has been known
Dogs have hunted Lordships to a fault.
Cry of Cures?
The noise of Clients at my Chamber door,
Was sweeter Music far, in my conceit,
Then all the Hinting in Europe.
Pray stay sir,
Say he should spend it in good House-keeping.
I marry sir, to have him keep a good house,
And not sell't away, Id find no fault with that:
But his Kitchen, Id have no bigger then a Saw-pit;
For the smallness of a Kitchen without question,
Makes many Noblemen in France and Spain,
Build the rest of the house the bigger.
Yes, Mock-beggers.
Some seuenscore Chimneys,
But half of them have no Tonnels.
A pox upon them Cuckshawes that beget
Such monsters without fundaments.
Come, come, leave citing other vanities;
For neither Wine, nor Lust, nor riotous feasts,
Rich clothes, nor all the pleasure that the Devil
Has ever practised with, to raise a man
To a Devils likeness, ere brought man that pleasure
I took in getting my wealth: so I conclude.
If he can out-vie me, let it fly to'th Devil.
Yon's my son, what company keeps he?
The Gentleman he talks with,
Is Romelio the Merchant.
I never saw him till now,
A has a brave sprightly look, I knew his father,
And sojourned in his house two years together,
Before this young mans birth; I have news to tell him
Of certain losses happened him at Sea,
That will not please him.
What that dapper fellow
In the long stocking? I doe think it was he
Came to your lodging this morning.
Tic the same,
There he stands, but a little piece of flesh,
But he is the very miracle of a Lawyer,
One that persuades men to peace, &amp; compounds quarrels
Among his neighbours, without going to law.
And is he a Lawyer?
Yes, and will give counsel
In honest causes gratis, never in his life
Took fee, but he came and spake for it, is a man
Of extreme practise, and yet all his longing,
Is to become a Judge.
Indeed that's a rare longing with men of his pro∣fession. I think heel prove the miracle of a lawyer indeed.
Heere's the man brought word your father dyed in the Indies.
He died in perfect memory I hope,
And made me his heir.
Yes sir.
He's gone the right way then without question:
Friend, in time of mourning, we must not use any action,
That is but accessory to the making men merry,
I doe therefore give you nothing for your good tidings.
Nor doe I look for it sir.
Honest fellow, give me thy hand, I doe not think but thou hast carried New years gifts to'th Court in thy days, and learndst there to be so free of thy pains taking.
Here's an old Gentleman says he was chamber∣fellow to your father, when they studied the Law toge∣there at Barcelona.
Doe you know him?
Not I, he's newly come to Naples.
And what's his business?
A says he's come to read you good counsel.
To him, rate him soundly.
And what's your counsel?
Why, I would have you leave your whoring.
He comes hotly upon me at first: whoring?
O young quat, incontinence is plagued
In all the creatures of the world.
When did you ever hear, that a Cockesparrow
Had the French pox?
When did you ever know any of them fat, but in the nest? ask all your Cantaride-mongers that question; remember your self sir.
A very fine Naturallist, a Physician, I •a•e you by your round slop; for tic just of the bigness, and no more, of the case for a Urinal: tic concluded, you are a Physician. What doe you mean sir, you'll• take cold.
Tic concluded, •ou are a fool, a precious one, you are a mere stick of Sugar Candy, a man may look quite thorough you
You are a very bold gamester.
I can play at chess, &amp; know how to handle a rook.
Pray preserve your velvet from the dust.
Keep your hat upon the block sir,
Twill continue fashion the longer.
I was never so abused with the hat in the hand
In my life.
I will put on, why look you,
Those lands that were the Clients, are now become
The Lawyers; and those tenements that were
The Country Gentleman's, are now grown
To be his Taylors.
Taylors?
Yes, Taylors in France, they grow to great
Abominable purchase, and become great officers.
How many Ducats think you he has spent
Within a tweluemonth, besides his fathers allowance?
Besides my fathers allowance?
Why Gentleman, doe you think an Auditor begat me?
Would you have me make even at years end?
A hundred ducats a month in breaking Venice glasses.
He learnt that of an English drunkard,
And a Knight too, as I take it.
This comes of your numerous Wardrobe.
I, and wearing Cut-worke, a pound a Purl.
Your dainty embroidered stockings,
With overblown Roses, to hide your gouty anckles.
And wearing more taffeta for a garter, then would serve the Gally dung-boat for streamers. (strissimi.
Your switching up at the horse-race, with the Illu-
And studying a pussing Arithmetic at the cock∣pit.
Shaking your elbow at the Taule-boord.
And resorting to your whore in hired velvet,
With a spangled copper fringe at her netherlands.
Whereas if you had staid at Padua, and fed upon
Cow trotters, and fresh beef to Supper.
How I am baited?
Nay, be not you so forward with him neither, for tic thought, you'll prove a maine part of his undoing.
I think this fellow is a witch
Who I sir?
You have certain rich city Chuffs, that when they have no acres of their own, they will go and plow up fools, and turn them into excellent meadow; besides some Enclosures for the first Cherries in the Spring,
And Apricots to pleasure a friend at Court with.
You have Potecaries deal in selling commodities to young Gallants, will put four or five coxcombs into a sieve, and so drum with them upon their Counter; theyle searse
them through like Ginny Pepper, they cannot endure to find a man like a pair of Tarriers, they would undo him in a trice.
May be there are such.
O terrible exactors, fellows with six hands,
And three heads.
I those are Hell hounds.
Take heed of them, theyle rent thee like Tenter∣hooks. Hark in your ear, there is intelligence upon you; the report goes, there has been gold conveyed beyond the Sea in hollow Aneres. Farewell, you shall know me better, I will doe thee more good, then thou art aware of.
Hoe's a mad fellow.
He would have made an excellent Barber,
He does so curry it with his tongue.
Sir, I was directed to you.
From whence?
From the East Indies.
You are very welcome.
Please you walk apart,
I shall acquaint you with particulars
Touching your Trading in the East Indies.
Willingly, pray walk sir.
Oh my right worthy friends, you have staid me long, one health, and then aboard; for all the Galleys are come about.
Signior Ercol•,
The wind has stood my friend sir, to prevent
Your putting to Sea.
Pray why sit?
Only love sir,
That I might take my leave sir, and withal
Entreat from you a private recommends
To a friend in Malta, it would be delivered
To your bosom, for I had no time to write.
Pray leave vs Gentlemen.
Wilt please you sit?
Sir, my love to you has proclaimed you one,
Whose word was still led by a noble thought,
And that thought followed by as fair a died:
Deceive not that opinion, we were Students
At Padua together, and have long
To'th worlds •ye shown like friends,
Was it hearty on your part to me?
Unfeigned.
You are false
To the good thought I held of you, and now
Join the worst part of man to you, your malice,
To uphold that falsehood, sacred innocence
Is fled your bosom. Signior, I must tell you,
To draw the picture of unkindness truly,
Is to express two that have dearly loved,
And fallen at variance; tic a wonder to me,
Knowing my interest in the fair Iolenta,
That you should love her.
Compare her beauty, and my youth together,
And you will find the fair effects of love
No miracle at all.
Yes, it will prove prodigious to you.
I must stay your Voyage.
Your Warrant must be mighty.
'Tas a Seal from heaven
To doe it, since you would ravish from me
What's there entitled mine: and yet I vow,
By the essential front of spotless Virtue,
I have compassion of both our youths:
To approve which, I have not tan the way,
Like an Italian, to cut your throat
By practise, that had given you now for dead,
And never frowned upon you.
You deal fair sir.
Quit me of one doubt, pray sir.
Move it.
Tic this,
Whether her Brother were a maine Instrument
In her design for Marriage.
If I tell truth, you will not credit me.
Why?
I will tell you truth,
Yet show some reason you have not to believe me:
Her Brother had no hand in it, first not hard
For you to credit this: for you may think,
I count it baseness to engage another
Into my quarrel; and for that take leave
To dissemble the truth. Sir, if you will fight
With any but my self, fight with her Mother,
She was the motive.
I have no enemy in the world then, but your self;
You must fight with me.
I will sir.
And instantly.
I will haste before you, point whither.
Why you speak nobly, and for this fair dealing,
Were the rich Jewel which we vary for,
A thing to be divided, by my life,
I would be well content to give you half:
But since tic vain to think we can be friends,
Tic needful one of vs be tan away,
From being the others enemy.
Yet me thinks, this looks not like a quarrel.
Not a quarrel?
You have not apparelled your sury well,
It goes too plain like a Scholar.
It is an ornament makes it more terrible,
And you shall find it
A weighty injury, and attended on
By discreet valour; because I doe not strike you,
Or give you the lye, such foul preparatives
Would show like the stale injury of Wine.
I reserve my rage to sit on my swords point,
Which a great quantity of your best blood
Cannot satisfy.
You promise well to your self.
Shall's have no Seconds?
None, for fear of prevention.
The length of our weapons.
Weal sit them by the way:
So whether our time calls vs to live or dye,
Let vs doe both like noble Gentlemen,
And true Italians.
For that let me embrace you:
Me thinks, being an Italian, I trust you
To come somewhat too near me:
But your Jealousy gave that embrace to try
If I were armed, did it not.
No believe me,
I take your heart to be sufficient proof,
Without a privy coat; and for my part,
A Taffeta is all the shirt of Mayle
I am armed with.
You deal equally.
Where are these Gallants, the brave Ercole,
And noble Contarino?
They are newly gone sir,
And bade me tell you, that they will return
Within this half hour.
Met you the Lord Ercole?
No, but I met the devil in villainous tidings.
Why, what's the matter?
Oh I am powered out like water, the greatest
Rivers in the world are lost in the Sea,
And so am I: pray leave me.
Whore's Lord Ercole?
You were scarce gone hence, but in came Contarino.
Contarino?
And entreated some private conference with Ercole,
And on the sudden they have giu'ns the slip.
One mischief never comes alone:
They are gone to fight.
To fight?
And you be Gentlemen,
Doe not talk, but make haste after them.
Let's take several ways then,
And if it be possible for women's sakes,
For they are proper men, use our endeavours,
That the prick doe not spoil them.
You'll not forgo your interest in my Mistress?
My sword shall answer that; come, are you ready?
Before you fight sir, think upon your cause,
It is a wondrous foul one, and I wish,
That all your exercise these four days past,
Had been employed in a most fervent prayer,
And the foul sin for which you are to fight
Chiefly remembered in it.
Id as soon take
Your counsel in Divinity at this present,
As I would take a kind direction from you
For the managing my weapon; and indeed,
Both would show much alike.
Come are you ready?
Bethink your self,
How fair the object is that we contend for.
Oh, I cannot forget it.
You are hurt.
Did you come hither only to tell me so,
Or to doe it? I mean well, but twill not thrive.
Your cause, your cause sir:
Will you yet be a man of Conscience, and make
Restitution for your rage upon your death-bed?
Never, till the grave gather one of vs.
That was fair, and home I think.
You prate as if you were in a Fence-schoole.
Spare your youth, have compassion on your self.
When I am all in pieces, I am now vnsit
For any Ladies bed; take the rest with you.
I am lost in too much daring: yield your sword.
To the pangs of death I shall, but not to thee.
You are now at my repairing, or confusion:
Beg your life.
Oh most foolishly demanded,
To bid me beg that which thou can not give.
See both of them are lost; we come too late.
Take up the body, and convey it
To Saint Sebastians Monastery.
I will not part with his sword, I have won't.
You shall not:
Take him up gently: so, and bow his body,
For fear of bleeding inward.
Well, these are perfect lovers.
Why, I pray?
It has been ever my opinion,
That there are none love perfectly indeed,
But those that hang or drown themselves for love:
Now these have chose a death next to Beheading,
They have cut one another throats,
Brave valiant Lads.
Come, you doe ill, to set the name of valour
Upon a violent and mad despair.
Hence may all learn, that count such actions well,
The roots of fury shoot themselves to hell.
Your losses I confess, are infinite,
Yet sir, you must have patience.
Sir, my losses I know, but you I doe not.
Tic most true, I am but a stranger to you, but am
Wished by some of your best friends, to visit you,
And out of my experience in the world,
To instruct you patience.
Of what profession are you?
Sir, I am a Lawyer.
Of all men living,
You Lawyers I account the only men
To confirm patience in vs, your delays
Would make three parts of this little Christian world
Run out of their wits else.
Now I remember, you read Lectures to Iulio,
Are you such a Leech for patience?
Yes sir, I have had some crosses.
You are married then I am certain.
That I am sir.
And have you studied patience?
You shall find I have.
Did you ever see your wife make you Cuckold?
Make me Cuckold?
I ask it seriously, and you have not seen that,
Your patience has not tan the right degree
Of wearing Scarlet; I should rather take you
For a Bachelor in the Art, then for a Doctor.
You are merry. (angry.
No sir, with leave of your patience, I am horrible
What should move you?
Put forth that harsh Interrogatory, if these eyes
Ever saw my wife doe the thing you wot of.
Why Isle tell you,
Most radically to try your patience,
And the mere question shows you but a Dunse in it.
It has made you angry; there's another Lawyers beard
In your forehead, you doe bristle.
You are very conceited:
But come, this is not the right way to cure you.
I must talk to you like a Divine.
I have heard some talk of it very much, and many
times to their Auditors impatience; but I pray,
What practise doe they make of't in their lives?
They are too full of choler with living honest,
And some of them not only impatient
Of their own sleights injuries, but stark mad,
At one another preferment: now to you sir,
I have lost three goodly Carracks.
So I hear.
The very Spice in them,
Had they been shipwrecked here upon our coast,
Would have made all our Sea a Drench.
All the sick horses in Italy
Would have been glad of your loss them.
You are conceited too,
Come, come, come,
You gave those ships most strange, most dreadful,
And unfortunate names, I never looked they'd prosper.
Is there any ill Omen in giving names to ships?
Did you not call one, The Storms Defiance;
Another, The Scourge of the Sea; and the third, The great Leuiathan?
Very right sir.
Very devilish names
All three of them: and surely I think,
They were cursed in their very cradles, I doe mean,
When they were upon their Stocks.
Come, you are superstitious,
Isle give you my opinion, and tic serious:
I am persuaded there came not Cuckolds enough
To the first Launching of them,
And it was that made them thrive the worse for it.
Oh your Cuckolds hansell is pried for in the City.
I will hear no more,
Give me thy hand, my intent of coming hither,
Was to persuade you to patience; as I live,
If ever I doe visit you again,
It shall be to entreat you to be angry, sure I will,
Isle be as good as my word, believe it.
So sir: how now?
Are the Scritch-owles abroad already?
What a dismal noise yon bell makes,
Sure some great person's dead.
No such matter,
It is the common Bell-man goes about,
To publish the sale of goods.
Why doe they ring before my gate thus?
Let them into'th Court, I cannot understand
What they say.
For pities sake, you that have tears to shed,
Sigh a soft Requiem, and let fall a Bead,
For two unfortunate Nobles, whose sad fate
Leaves them both dead, and excommunicate:
No Churchmans prayer to comfort their last groans,
No sacred seed of earth to hide their bones;
But as their fury wrought them out of breath,
The Canon speaks them guilty of their own death.
What Noble men I pray sir?
The Lord Ercole, and the noble Contarino,
Both of them slain in single combat.
O, I am lost for ever.
Denied Christian burial, I pray what does that,
Or the dead lazy march in the Funeral,
Or the flattery in the Epitaphs, which shows
More sluttish far then all the Spiders webs
Shall ever grow upon it: what doe these
Add to our well being after death?
Not a scruple.
Very well then,
I have a certain Meditation,
If I can think of somewhat to this purpose,
Isle say it to you, while my mother there
Numbers her Beads.
You that dwell near these graves and vaults,
Which oft doe hide Physicians faults,
Note what a small Room does suffice,
To express men's good, their vanities,
Would fill more volume in small hand,
Then all the Evidence of Church-land.
Funerals hide men in civil wearing,
And are to the Drapers a good hearing,
Make the Heralds laugh in their black Payment,
And all die Worthies die worth payment.
To the Altar Offerings, tho their fame,
And all the charity of their name,
'Tweene heaven and this yield no more light,
Then rotten trees, which shine in the night.
Oh look the last Act be the best in the Play,
And then rest gentle bones, yet pray,
That when by the precise you are viewed,
A Supersede as be not sued,
To remooub you to a place more airy,
That in your stead they may keep chary
Stockfish, or Seacole, for the abuses
Of sacrilege have turned graves to vilder uses.
How then can any Monument say,
Here rest these bones, till the last day,
When time swift both of foo• and feather,
May bear them the Sexton •ens not whither.
What care I then, tho my last sleep,
Be in the Desert, or in the deep,
No Lamp, nor Taper, day and night,
To give my Charnel chargeable light:
I have there like quantity of ground,
And at the last day I shall be found.
Now I pray leave me.
I am sorry for your losses.
Um sir the more spacious that the Tennis court is,
The more large is the Hazard.
I dare the spiteful Fortune doe her worst,
I can now fear nothing.
Oh sir, yet consider,
He that is without fear, is without hope,
And sins from presumption; better thoughts attend you.
Poor Iolenta, should she hear of this?
She would not after the report keep fresh,
So long as flowers in graves.
How now Prospero.
Contarino has sent you here his Will,
Wherein a has made your sister his sole heir.
Is he not dead?
Hoe's yet living.
Living? the worse luck.
The worse: I doe protest it is the best,
That ever came to disturb my prayers.
How?
Yet I would have him live
To satisfy public Justice for the death
Of Ercole: oh go visit him for heavens sake.
I have within my Closet a choice Relic,
Preservative against swooning, and some earth,
Brought from the Holy Land, right sovereign
To staunch blood: has he skilful Surgeons, think you?
The best in Naples?
How oft has he been dressed?
But once.
I have some skill this way:
The second or third dressing will show clearly,
Whether there be hope of life: I pray be near him,
If there be any soul can bring me word,
That there is hope of life.
Doe you prise his life so?
That he may live;
I mean to come to his try all, to satisfy the Law.
Oh, first nothing else?
I shall be the happiest woman.
Here is cruelty appareled in kindness.
I am full of thoughts, strāge ones, but they are no good ones.
I must visit Contarino, upon that
Depends an Engine shall weigh up my losses,
Were they sunk as low as hell; yet let me think,
How I am impaired in a hour, and the cause of't,
Lost in security: oh how this wicked world bewitches,
Especially made insolent with riches:
So Sails with fore-winds stretched, doe soonest break,
And Pyramids ath top, are still most weak.
Look up sir, you are preserved beyond natural reason, you were brought dead out a'th field, the Surgeons ready to have embalmed you.
I do look on my action with a thought of terror,
To doe ill and dwell in it, is unmanly.
You are divinely informed sir.
I fought for one, in whom I have no more right,
Then false executors have in Orphans goods,
They cozen them of; yet tho my cause were nought,
I rather chose the hazard of my soul,
Then forego the complement of a choleric man.
I pray continue the report of my death, and give out,
Cause the Church denied me Christian burial,
The Vice admiral of my Galleys took my body,
With purpose to commit it to the earth,
Either in Cecil, or Malta.
What aim you at by this rumour of your death?
There is hope of life
In Contarino; and he has my prayers,
That he may live to enjoy what is his own,
The fair Iolenta; where, should it be thought
That I were breathing, happily her friends
Would oppose it still.
But if you be supposed dead,
The Law will strictly prosecute his life
For your murder.
That's prevented thus,
There does belong a noble Privilege
To all his Family, ever since his father,
Bore from the worthy Emperor Charles the fifth,
An answer to the French Kings challenge, at such time
The two noble Princes were engaged to fight.
Upon a frontier arm of the sea in a flat-bottom'd Boat,
That if any of his Family should chance
To kill a man in the Field, in a noble cause,
He should have his Pardon; now sir, for his cause,
The world may judge if it were not honest.
Pray help me in speech, tic very painful to me.
Sir I shall.
The guilt of this lies in Romelio,
And as I hear, to second this good Contract,
He has got a Nun with child.
These are crimes that either must make work
For speedy repentance, or for the Devil.
I have much compassion on him,
For sin and shame are ever tide together,
With Gordian knots, of such a strong thread spun,
They cannot without violence be undone.
Well sir, now I must claim your promise,
To reveal to me the cause why you live thus clouded.
Sir, the King of Spain
Suspects, that your Romelio here, the Merchant
Has discovered some Gold-myne to his own use,
In the West Indies, and for that employs me,
To discover in what part of Christendom
He vents this I reassure: Besides, he is informed
What mad tricks has bin plaid of late by Ladies.
Most true, and I am glad the King has heard on it:
Why they use their Lords, as if they were their Wards;
And as your Dutchwomen in the Low-Countries,
Take all and pay all, and doe keep their Husbands
So silly all their lives of their own estates,
That when they are sick, and come to make their Will,
They know not precisely what to give away
From their wives, because they know not what they are
So hear should I repeat what factions, (worth:
What Bat-fowling for Offices,
As you must conceive their Game is all i'thnight,
What calling in question one another honesties
Withal what sway they bear in the Viceroys Court,
You'd wonder at it:
Twill doe well shortly, can we keep them off
From being of our Council of War.
Well, I have vowed,
That I will never sit upon the Bench more,
Unless it be to curb the insolences.
Of these women.
Well, take it on my word then,
Your place will not long be empty.
Excellently well habitat, why me thinks,
That I could play with mine own shadow now,
And be a rare Italianated Jew;
To have as many several change of faces,
As I have seen carved upon on Cherrystone;
To wind about a man like rotten Ivy,
Eat into him like Quicksiluer, poison a friend
with pulling but a loose hair frō's beard, or give a drēch,
He should singer of't nine years, and ne'er complain,
But in the Spring and Fall, and so the cause
Imputed to the disease natural, for slight villainies,
As to coin money, corrupt Ladies Honours,
Betray a Town to'th Turk, or make a Bonefire
A'th Christian Navy, I could settle too't,
As if I had eat a Politician,
And digested him to nothing but pure blood.
But stay, I loose my self, this is the house.
Within there.
Now sir.
You are the men of Art, that as I hear,
Have the Lord Contarino under cure.
Yes sir, we are his Surgeons,
But he is past all Cure.
Why, is he dead?
He is speechless sir, and we doe find his wound
So festered near the vitals, all our Art
By warm drinks, cannot clear th'impostumation,
And hoe's so weak, to make
By the Orifix were present death to him.
He has made a Will I hear.
Yes sir.
And deputed Iolenta his heir.
He has, we are witness too't.
Has not Romelio been with you yet,
To give you thanks, and ample recompense
For the pains you have tan.
Not yet.
Listen to me Gentlemen, so I protest,
If you will seriously mind your own good,
I am come about a business shall convey
I arge legacies from Contarino's Will
To both of you.
How sir?
Why Rome. has the will, &amp; in that he has given vs nothing.
I pray attend me: I am a Physician.
A Physician? where doe you practise?
In Rome.
O then you have store of Patients.
Store? why look you, I can kill my •o a month
And work but in the forenoons: you will give me leave
To jest and be merry with you, but as I said,
All my study has been Physic, I am sent
From a noble Roman that is near a kin
To Contarino, and that ought indeed,
By the Law of Iliance, be his only heir,
To practise his good and yours.
How, I pray sir?
I can by an Extraction which I have,
Tho he were speechless, his eyes set in's head,
His pulses without motion, restore to him
For half an hours space, the use of sense,
And perhaps a little speech: having done this,
If we can work him, as no doubt we shall,
To make another Will, and therein assign
This Gentleman his Heir, I will assure you,
Fore I depart this house, ten thousand Ducats,
And then weal pull the pillow from his head,
And let him ••no go whither the Religion sends him
That he died in.
Will you giue's ten thousand Ducats?
Upon my Iewisme.
Tic a bargain sir, we are yours:
Here is the Subject you must work on.
Well said, you are honest men,
And go to the business roundly: but Gentlemen,
I must use my Art singly.
Oh sir, you shall have all privacy,
And the doors locked to me.
At your best pleasure.
Yet for all this, I will not trust this Jew.
Faith, to say truth,
I doe not like him neither, he looks like a rogue.
This is a fine toy fetch a man to life,
To make a new Will, there's some trick in it.
Isle be near you Jew.
Excellent as I would wish: these credulous fools
Have given me freely what I would have bought
With a great deal of money. softly, her's breuth yet;
Now Ercole, for part of the Revenge,
Which I have vowed for thy untimely death:
Besides, this politic working of my own,
That scorns President, why should this great man live,
And not enjoy my sister, as I have vowed
He never shall? Oh, he may alters will
Every New Moon if he please; to prevent which,
I must put in a strong Caveat. Come forth then
My desperate Stiletto, that may be worn
In a women's hair, and ne'er discovered,
And either would be taken for a Bodkin,
Or a curling iron at most; why tic an engine,
That's only fit to put in execution Barmotho Pigs,
A most unmanly weapon,
That steals into a mans life he knows not how:
O great Caesar, he that past the shock
Of so many armed Pikes, and poisoned Darts,
Swords, Slings, and Battleaxes, should at length
Sitting at ease on a cushion, come to dye
By such a Shoo-makers aule as this, his soul et forth
At a hole, no bigger then the incision
Made for a wheal•: vos foot, I am horribly angry,
That he should dye so scurvily: yet wherefore
Doe I condemn thee thereof so cruelly?
Yet shake him by the hand, tic to express,
That I would never have such weapons used,
But in a plot like this, that's treacherous:
Yet this shall prove most merciful to thee,
For it shall preserve thee
From dying on a public Scaffold, and withal
Bring thee an absolute Cure, thus.
So, tic done: and now for my escape.
You Rogue Mountebank,
I will try whether your inwards can endure
To be washed in scalding lead.
Hold, I turn Christian.
Nay prithee bee a Jew still;
I would not have a Christian be guilty
Of such a villainous act as this is.
I am Romelio the Merchant.
Romelio! you have proved your self
A cunning Merchant indeed.
You may read why I came hither.
Yes, in a bloody Roman Letter.
I did hate this man, each minute of his breath
Was torture to me.
Had you forborne this act, he had not lived
This two hours.
But he had died then,
And my revenge unsatisfied: here's gold;
Never did wealthy man purchase the silence
Of a terrible scolding wife at a dearer rate,
Then I will pay for yours: here's your earnest
In a bag of double Ducats.
Why look you sir, as I do weigh this business,
This cannot be counted murder in you by no means.
Why tic no more, then should I go and choke
An Irish man, that were three quarters drowned,
With pouring Vsquebath in's throat.
You will be secret
As your soul. (then.
The west Indies shall sooner want gold, then you
That protestation has the music of the Mint in it.
How unfortunately was I surprised, I have made my self a slave perpetually to these two beggars.
Excellent; by this act he has made his estate ours.
He presently grow a lazy Surgeon, &amp; ride on my foot-cloth; He fetch from him every eight days a policy for a hundred double Ducats; if hee grumble, Isle peach.
But let's take heed he doe not poison vs.
Oh, I will never eat nor drink with him,
Without Unicorns Horn in a hollow tooth.
Oh.
Did he not groan?
Is the wind in that door still?
Ha! come hither, note a strange accident:
His Steel has lighted in the former wound,
And made free passage for the congealed blood;
Observe in what abundance it delivers the putrefaction.
Me thinks he fetches his breath very lively.
The hand of heaven is in it,
That his intent to kill him should become
The very direct way to save his life
Why this is like one I have heard of in England,
Was cured a'th Gout, by being racked in the Tower.
Well, if we can recover him, here's reward
On both sides: howsoever we must be secret.
We are tide too't,
When we cure Gentlemen of foul diseases,
They give vs so much for the cure, and twice as much,
That we doe not blab on it. Come lets to work roundly,
Heat the Lotion, and bring the Searing.
Why do you grieve thus? take a Looking-glasse,
And see if this sorrow become you; that pale face
Will make men think you used some Art before,
Some odious painting: Contarino's dead.
Oh that he should dye so soon.
Why, I pray tell me,
Is not the shortest fever the best? and are not bad Plays
The worse for their length?
Add not to'th ill you've done
An odious slander; he stuck in the eyes a'th Court,
As the most choice jewel there.
Oh be not angry;
Indeed the Court to well composed nature
Adds much to perfection: for it is or should be,
As a bright Crystal, Mirror to the world,
To dress it self; but I must tell you sister,
If the excellence of the place could have wrought salvation,
The Devil had ne'er fallen from heaven; he was proud,
Leave vs, leave vs?
Come, take your seat again, I have a plot,
If you will listen to it seriously,
That goes beyond example, it shall breed
Out of the death of these two Noble men,
The advancement of our House.
Oh take heed, a grave is a rotten foundation.
Nay, nay, hear me.
Tic somewhat indirectly, I confess:
But there is much advancement in the world,
That comes in indirectly. I pray mind me:
You are already made by absolute Will,
Contarino's heir: now, if it can be proved,
That you have issue by Lord Ercole,
I will make you inherit his Land too.
How's this? issue by him, he dead, and I a Virgin!
I know you would wonder how it could be done,
But I have laid the case so radically,
Not all the Lawyers in Christendom,
Shall find any the least slaw in it: I have a Mistress
Of the Order of Saint Clare, a beauteous Nun,
Who being cloystred ere she knew the heat,
Her blood would arrive to, had only time enough
To repent, and idleness sufficient
To fall in love with me; and to be short,
I have so much disordered the holy Order,
I have got this Nun with child.
Excellent work made for a dumb Mid-wife.
I am glad you grow thus pleasant.
Now will I have you presently give out,
That you are full two months quickened with child
By Ercole, which rumour can beget
No scandal to you, since we will affirm,
The Pre-contract was so exactly done,
By the same words used in the form of marriage,
That with a little Dispensation,
A money matter, it shall be registered
Absolute Matrimony.
So then I conceive you,
My conceived child must prove your Bastard.
Right: for at such time
My Mistress false in labour, you must fine the like.
Tic a pretty feat this, but I am not capable of it.
Not capable?
No for the thing you would have me counterfeit,
Is most essentially put in practise: nay, tic done,
I am with child already.
Ha by whom?
By Contarino, doe not knit the brow,
The Pre-contract shall justify it, it shall:
Nay, I will get some singular fine Churchman,
Or tho he be a plural one, shall affirm,
He coupled vs together
Oh misfortune!
Your child must then be reputed Ercoles.
Your hopes are dashed then, since your Votaries issue
Must not inherit the land.
No matter for that,
So I preserve her fame. I am strangely puzzled:
Why, suppose that she be brought abed before you,
And we conceal her issue till the time
Of your delivery, and then give out,
That you have two at a birth, ha, were not excellent?
And what resemblance think you, would they have
To one another? Twins are still alike:
But this is not your aim, you would have your child
Inherit Ercoles Land,—Oh my sad soul,
Have you not made me yet wretched enough,
But after all this frosty age in youth,
Which you have witched upon me, you will seek
To poison my Fame.
That's done already.
No sir, I did but fine it,
To a fatal purpose, as I thought.
What purpose?
If you had loved or tendered my dear honour,
You would have locked your poniard in my heart,
When I named I was with child; but I must live
To linger out, till the consumption of my own
Sorrow kill me.
This will not doe; the Devil has on the sudden furnished me with a rare charm, yet a most unnatural falsehood: no matter so twill take.
Stay sister, I would utter to you a business,
But I am very loath: a thing indeed,
Nature would have compassionately concealed,
Till my mothers eyes be closed.
Pray what's that sir?
You did observe,
With what a dear regard our mother tendered
The Lord Contarino, yet how passionately
She sought to cross the match: why this was merely
To blind the eye of the world; for she did know
That you would marry him, and he was capable
My mother doted upon him, and it was plotted
Cunningly between them, after you were married,
Living all three together in one house,
A thing I cannot whisper without horror:
Why, the malice scarce of Devils would suggest,
Incontinence 'tweene them two.
I remember since his hurt,
She has been very passionately enquiring,
After his health.
Upon my soul, this Jewel,
With a piece of the holy Cross in it, this relic,
Valued at many thousand crowns, she would have sent him, lying upon his death bed.
Professing as you say,
Love to my mother: wherefore did he make
Me his heir?
His Will was made before he went to fight,
When he was first a Suitor to you.
To fight: oh well remembered,
If he loved my mother, wherefore did he loose
His life in my quarrel?
For the affront sake, a word you understand not,
Because Ercole was pretended Rival to him,
To clear your suspicion; I was gulled in it too:
Should he not have fought upon it,
He had undergone the censure of a Coward.
How came you by this wretched knowledge?
His Surgeon ouer-heard it,
As he did sigh it out to his Confessor,
Some half hour fore hee died.
I would have the Surgeon hanged
For abusing Confession, and for making me
So wretched by the report. Can this be truth?
No, but direct falsehood,
As ever was banished the Court: did you ever hear
Of a mother that has kept her daughters husband
For her own tooth? He fancied you in one kind,
For his lust, and he loved
Our mother in another kind, for her money,
The Gallants fashion right. But come, ne'er think on it,
Throw the foul to the Devil that hatched it, and let this
Bury all ill that's in it, she is our mother.
I never did find any thing ith world,
Turn my blood so much as this: here's such a conflict,
Between apparent presumption, and unbelief,
That I shall dye in it.
Oh, if there be another world in the Moon,
As some fantasticks dream, I could wish all men,
The whole race of them, for their inconstancy,
Sent thither to people that. Why, I protest,
I now affect the Lord Ercoles memory,
Better then the others.
But were Contarino living.
I doe call any thing to witness,
That the divine Law prescribed vs
To strengthen an oath, were he living and in health,
I would never mary with him.
Nay, since I have found the world
So false to me, Isle be as false to it;
I will mother this child for you.
Ha?
Most certainly it will be guile part of my sorrow.
Oh most assuredly, make you smile to think,
How many times ith world Lordships descend
To divers men, that might and truth were known
Be heir, for any thing belongs to'th flesh,
As well to the Turks richest Eunuch.
But doe you not think
I shall have a horrible strong breath now.
Why?
Oh, with keeping your counsel, tic so terrible foul,
Come, come, come,
You must leave these bitter flashes.
Must I dissemble dishonesty? you have divers
Counterfeit honesty: but I hope here's none
Will take exceptions; I now must practise
The art of a great bellied woman, and go fine
Their qualms and swoundings.
Eat unripe fruit, and Oatmeal, to take away your colour.
Dine in my bed some two hours after noon.
And when you are up,
Make to your petticoat a quilted preface,
To advance your belly.
I have a strange conceit now.
I have known some women when they were with child,
Have longed to beat their Husbands: what if I,
To keep decorum, exercise my longing
Upon my Taylor that way, and noddle him soundly,
Heel make the larger Bill for it.
Isle get one shall be as tractable too't as Stockfish.
Oh my fantastical sorrow,
Cannot I now be miserable enough,
Unless I wear a pyde fools coat:
Nay worse, for when our passions
Such giddy and uncertain changes breed,
We are never well, till we are mad indeed.
So, nothing in the world could have done this,
But to beget in her a strong distaste
Of the Lord Contarino: oh Jealousy,
How violent, especially in women,
How often has it raised the devil up in form of a law case!
My especial care must be, to nourish craftily this fiend,
Tweene the mother and the daughter, that the deceit
Be not perceived. My next task, that my sister,
After this suppofed child-birth, be persuaded
To enter into Religion: tic concluded,
She must never marry; so I am left guardian
To her estate: and lastly, that my two Surgeons
Be waged to the East Indies: let them prate,
When they are beyond the Lyne; the Callenture,
Or the Scurvy, or the Indian Pox, I hope,
Will take order for their coming back.
Oh heere's my mother: I ha strange news for you,
My sister is with child.
I doe look now for some great misfortunes
To follow: for indeed mischiefs,
Are like the Visits of Franciscan Fryers,
They never come to pray upon vs single.
In what estate left you Contarino?
Strange, that you can skip
From the former sorrow to such a question!
Isle tell you, in the absence of his Surgeon,
My charity did that for him in a trice,
They would have done at leisure, and been paid for it.
I have killed him.
I am twenty years elder since you last opened your lips.
Ha?
You have given him the wound you speak of,
Quite thorough your mothers heart.
I will heal it presently mother: for this sorrow
Belongs to your error: you would have him live,
Because you think hoe's father of the child;
But Iolenta vows by all the rights of Truth,
Tic Ercole's: it makes me smile to think,
How cunningly my sister could be drawn
To the Contract, and yet how familiarly
To his bed. Doves never couple
Without a kind of murmur.
Oh, I am very sick.
Your old disease, when you are grieved,
You are troubled with the Mother.
I am rapt with the Mother indeed,
That I ever bore such a son.
Pray tend my sister,
I am infinitely full of business.
Stay you will morn for Contarino.
Oh by all means, tic fit, my sister is his heir.
I will make you chief mourner, believe it.
Never was woe like mine: oh that my care,
And absolute study to preserve his life,
Should be his absolute ruin. Is he gone then?
There is no plague in the world can be compared
To impossible desire; for they are plagued
In the desire it self: never, oh never
'Shall I behold him living, in whose life
I lived far sweetlier then in mine own.
A precise curiosity has undone me; why, did I not
Make my love known directly? it had not been
Beyond example, for a Matron
To affect in the honourable way of Marriage,
So youthfall a person: oh I shall run mad,
For as we love our youngest children best:
So the last fruit of our affection,
Where ever we bestow it, is most strong,
Most violent, most unresistable,
Since tic indeed our latest Hardest-home,
Last merriment Fore Winter; and we widows,
As men report, of our best Picture-makers,
We love the piece we are in hand with better,
Then all the excellent work we have done before,
And my son has deprived me of all this. Ha my son,
Isle be a fury to him, like an Amazon Lady,
Id cut off his right pap, that gave him suck,
To shoot him dead. Isle no more tender him,
Then had a Wolf stolen to my tear in the night,
And robbed me of my milk: nay, such a creature
I should love better far. -Ha, ha, what say you?
I doe talk to somewhat, me thinks; it may be
My evil Genius. Doe not the Bells ring?
I have a strange noise in my head: oh, fly in pieces,
Come age, and wither me into the malice
Of those that have been happy, let me have
One property more then the Devil of Hell,
Let me envy the pleasure of youth heartily,
Let me in this life fear no kind of ill,
That have no good to hope for: let me dye
In the distraction of that worthy Princess,
Who loathed food, and sleep, and ceremony,
For thought of loosing that brave Gentleman,
She would fine have saved, had not a false countenance,
Let me sink, where neither man,
Nor memory may ever find me.
This is a private way which I command,
As her Confessor. I would not have you seen yet,
Till I prepare her. Peace to you Lady.
Ha?
You are well employed, I hope; the best pillow in the.
World for this your contemplation, is the earth,
And the best object heaven.
I am whispering to a dead friend.
And I am come
To bring you tidings of a friend not dead,
Reserved to life again.
Say sir.
One whom I dare presume, next to your children,
You tendered aboue life.
Heaven will not suffer me utterly to be lost.
For hee should have been
Your son in Law, miraculously saved,
When Surgery gave him ore.
Oh, may you live
To win many souls to heaven, worthy sir,
That your crown may be the greater. Why my son
made me believe he stole into his chamber,
And ended that which Ercole began
By a deadly stab in's heart.
Alas, she mistakes,
Tic Contarino she wishes living; but I must fasten
On her last words, for my own safety.
Where, oh where shall I meet this comfort?
Here in the vowed comfort of your daughter.
Oh I am dead again, instead of the man, you pre∣sent me the grave swallowed him.
Collect your self, good Lady,
Would you behold brave Contarino living?
There cannot be a nobler Chronicle
Of his good then my self: if you would view him dead,
I will present him to you bleeding fresh,
In my penitence.
Sir, you doe only live,
To redeem another ill you have committed,
That my poor innocent daughter perish not,
By your wild sin, whom you have got with child.
Here begin a I my compassion: oh poor soul!
She is with child by Contarino, and he dead,
By whom should she preerue her fame to'th world,
But by my self that loved her above the world?
There never was a way more honourable,
To exercise my virtue, then to father it,
And preserve her credit, and to marry her.
Isle suppose her Contarino's widow, bequeathed to me
Upon his Death: for sure she was his wife,
But that the Ceremony a'th Church was wanting.
Report this to her, Madam, and withal,
That never father did conceive more joy
For the birth of an heir, then I to understand,
She had such confidence in me. I will not now
Press a Visit upon her, till you have prepared her:
For I doe read in your distraction,
Should I be brought a'th sudden to her presence,
Either the hasty fright, or else the shame
May blast the fruit within her. I will leave you,
To commend as loyal faith and service to her,
As ere heart harboured; by my hope of bliss,
I never lived to doe good act but this.
Withal and you be wise,
Remember what the mother has reueal'd
Of Romelio's treachery.
A most noble fellow in his loyalty.
I read what worthy comforts I have lost
In my dear Contarino, and all adds
To my despair.—Within there.
Fetch the picture hangs in my inner closet. I remember,
I let a word slip of Romelio's practise
At the Surgeons: no matter I can salve it,
I have deeper vengeance that's preparing for him,
To let him live and kill him that's revenge
I meditate upon.
So, hang it up.
I was enjoined by thepartie ought that picture,
Forty years since, ever when I was vexed,
To look upon that: what was his meaning in it,
I know not, but me thinkesvpon the sudden,
It has furnished me with mischief such a plot,
As never mother dreamt of Here begins
My part in the play: my sons estate is sunk,
By loss at sea and he has nothing left,
But the Land his father left him. I is concluded,
The Law shall undo him Come hither,
I have a weighty secret to impart,
But I would have thee first confirm to me,
How I may trust, that thou can keep my counsel,
Beyond death.
Why Mistress, tic your only way,
To enjoin me first that I reveal to you
The worst act I ere did in all my life:
So one secret shall bind one another.
Thou instru'st me
Most ingenuously, for indeed it is not fit,
Where any act is plotted, that is nought,
Any of counsel to it should be good,
And in a thousand else have hoped in the world,
The intelligence of one another shame,
Have wrought far more effectually then the tie
Of Conscience, or Religion.
But think not, Mistress,
That any sin which ever I committed,
Did concern you, for proving false in one thing,
You were a fool, if ever you would trust me
In the least matter of weight.
Thou hast lived with me
Th•se forty years; we have grown old together,
As many Ladies and their women doe,
With talking nothing, and with doing less:
We have spent our life in that which least concerns life,
Only in putting on our clothes: and now I think on it,
I have been a very courtly Mistress to thee, (time,
I have given thee good words, but no deeds, now's the
To requite all; my son has six Lordships left him.
Tic truth.
But he cannot live four days to enjoy them.
Have you poisoned him?
No, the poison is yet but brewing.
You must minister it to him with all privacy.
Privacy? It shall be given him
In open Court, Isle make him swallow it
Before the Judges face: if he be Master
Of poor ten arpines of land forty hours longer,
Let the world repute me an honest woman.
So twill I hope.
Oh thou can not conceive
My unimitable plot; let's to my ghostly Father,
Were first I will have thee make a promise
To keep my counsel, and then I will employ thee
In such a subtle combination,
Which will require to make the practise fit,
Four Devils, five Advocates to a women's wit.
Take her into your Office sir, she has that in her
Belly, will dry up your ink I can tell you.
This is the man that is your learned Council,
A fellow that will trowel it off with tongue:
He never goes without Restorative powder
Of the lungs of Fox in's pocket, and Malligo Reasins
To make him long winded. Sir, this Gentlewoman
Entreats your Counsel in an honest cause,
Which please you sir, this Brief, my own poor labour
Will give you light of.
Doe you call this a Brief?
Here's as I weigh them, some fourscore sheets of paper.
What would they weigh if there were cheese
Wrapped in them, or Figdates.
Joy come to you, you are merry;
We call this but a Brief in our Office.
The scope of the business lies ith Margent sheet.
Me thinks you prate too much.
I never could endure an honest cause
With a long Prologue too't.
You trouble him.
Whats here? oh strange; I have lived this 60 years,
Yet in all my practise never did shake hands
With a cause so odious. Sirrah, are you her knave?
No sir, I am a Clarke.
Why you whoreson fogging Rascal,
Are there not whores enough for Presentations,
Of Overseers, wrong the will of the Dead,
Oppressions of Widows, or young Orphans,
Wicked Diuerses, or your vicious cause
Of Plus quam satis, to content a woman,
But you must find new stratagems, new pursuits,
Oh women, as the Ballet lives to tell you,
What will you shortly come to?
Your Fee is ready sir.
The Devil take such Fees,
And all such Suits i'thtayle of thee; see the slave
Has writ false Latin: sirrah Ignorance,
Were you ever at the University?
Never sir:
It is well known to divers I have Commenced
In a Pew of our Office.
Where, in a Pew of your Office?
I have been dry-foundred with it this four years,
Seldom found Non resident from my desk.
Non resident Subsumner:
Isle tear your Libel for abusing that word,
By virtue of the Clergy.
What doe you mean sir?
It cost me four nights labour.
Had thou been drunk so long,
T'hadst done our Court better Service.
Sir, you doe forget your gravity, me thinks.
Cry ye mercy, doe I so?
And as I take it, you doe very little remember,
Either womanhood, or Christianity: why doe ye meddle
With that seducing knave, that's good for nought,
Unless the to fill the Office full of Fleas,
Or a Winter itch, wears that spacious Inkehorne
All a Vacation only to cure Tetters,
And his Penknife to weed Corns from the splay toes,
Of the right worshipful of the Office.
You make bold with me sir.
Woman, yare mad, Isle swear it, &amp; have more need
Of a Physician then a Lawyer.
The melancholy humour flows in your face,
Your painting cannot hide it: such vildsuits
Disgrace our Courts, and these make honest Lawyers
Stop their own ears, whilst they p'ead &amp; thats the reason
Your younger men that have good conscience,
wear such large Night-caps; go old woman, go pray,
For Lunacy, or else the Devil himself
Has tan possession of thee; may like cause
In any Christian Court never find name:
Bad Suits, and not the Law, bred the Laws shame.
Sure the old man's frantic.
Plague on's gouty fingers,
Were all of his mind, to entertain no suits,
But such they thought were hottest, sure our Lawyers
Would not purchase half so fast:
But here's the man,
Learned Seignior Contilupo, here's a fellow
Of another piece believe it, I must make shift
With the foul Copy.
Business to me?
To you sir, from this Lady.
She is welcome.
Tic a foul Copy sir, you'll hardly read it,
There's twenty double ducats, can you read sir?
Exceeding well, very, very exceeding well.
This man will be faued, he can read; Lord, Lord,
To see, what money can doe, be the hand never so foul,
Somewhat will be picked out on it.
Is not this Viuere honest?
No, that's struck out sir;
And where ever you find viuere honest in these papers,
Give it a dash sir.
I shall be mindful of it:
In troth you write a pretty Secretary,
Your Secretary hand ever takes best in mine opinion.
Sir, I have been in France,
And there believe it your Court hand generally,
Takes beyond thought.
Even as a man is traded in it.
That I could not think of this virtuous Gentleman
Before I went to'th tother Hogg-rubber.
Why this was wont to give young Clerks half fees,
To help him to Clients. Your opinion in the Case sir.
I am struck with wonder almost extaside,
With this most goodly Suite.
It is the fruit of a most hearty penitence.
Tic a Case shall leave a President to all the world,
In our succeeding Annals, and deserves
Rather a spacious public Theater,
Then a pent Court for Audence; it shall teach
All Ladies the right path to rectisie their issue.
Lo you, here's a man of comfort.
And you shall go unto a peaceful grave,
Discharged of such a guilt, as would have lain
Howling for ever at your wounded heart,
And rose with you to Judgment. (of Judgment.
Oh give me such a Lawyer, as will think of the day
You must urge the business against him
As spitefully as may be.
Doubt not. What is he summoned?
Yes, &amp; the Court will sit within this half hour.
Peruse your Notes, you have very short warning.
Never fear you that:
Follow me worthy Lady, and make account
This Suite is ended already.
You would have a private seat sir.
Yes sir.
Here's a Close•t belongs to'th Court,
Where you may hear all unseen.
I thank you; there's money.
I give you your thanks again sir.
First possible Romelio's persuaded,
You are gone to the East Indies.
Most confidently.
But doe you mean to go?
How? go to the East Indies?
And so many Hollanders gone to fetch sauce for their pic∣keld Herrings; some have been pepperd there too lately, but I pray, being thus well recovered of your wounds,
Why doe you not reucale yourself?
That my fair Iolenta should be rumor'd
To be with child by noble Ercole,
Makes me expect to what a violent issue
These passages will come. I hear her brother
Is marrying the Infant she goes with, fore it be borne,
As if it be a Daughter,
To the Duke of Austrias Nephew; if a Son,
Into the Noble ancient Family
Of the Pala•afini: Hoe's a subtle Devil.
And I doe wonder what strange Suite in Law,
Has hoped between him and's mother.
Tic whisperd' mong the Lawyers,
Twill undo him for ever.
Doe you hear Officers?
You must take special care, that you let in
No Brachigraphy men, to take notes.
No sir?
By no means,
We cannot have a Cause of any fame,
But you must have scurvy pamphlets, and lewd Ballets
Engendered of it presently.
Have you broke fast yet?
Not I sir.
It was very ill done of you:
For this cause will be long a pleading; but not matter,
I have a modicum in my Buckram bag,
To stop your stomach.
What first? Greene ginger?
Greene ginger, nor Pellitory of Spain neither,
Yet twill stop a hollow tooth better then either of them.
Pray what first?
Look you,
It is a very lovely Pudding-pye,
Which we Clerks find great relief in.
I shall have no stomach.
No matter and you have not, I may pleasure
Some of our Learned Council with it; I have done it
Many a time and often, when a Cause
Has proved like an after-game at Irish.
Tic a strange Suite, is Leonora come.
She's here my Lord; make way there for the Lady.
Take off her Veil: it seems she is ashamed
To look her cause in the face.
Shoe's sick, my Lord.
Shoe's mad my Lord, &amp; would be kept more dark.
By your favour sir, I have now occasion to be at your el∣bow, and within this half hour shall entreat you to bee angry, very angry.
Is Romelio come?
I am here my Lord, and called I doe protest,
To answer what I know not, for as yet
I am wholly ignorant, of what the Court
Will charge me with.
I assure you, the proceeding
Is most unequal then, for I perceive,
The Council of the adverse party furnished
With full Instruction.
Pray my Lord, who is my accuser?
Tic your mother.
She has discovered Contarino's murder:
If she prove so unnatural, to call
My life in question, I am armed to suffer
This to end all my losses.
Sir, we will doe you this favour,
You shall hear the Accusation,
Which being known, we will adiourne the Court,
Till a fortnight hence, you may provide your Counsel.
I advise you, take their proffer,
Or else the Lunacy runs in a blood,
You are more mad then she.
What are you sir?
An angry fellow that would doe thee good,
For goodness sake it self, I doe protest,
Neither for love nor money.
Prithee stand further, I shall gall your gout else.
Come, come, I know you for an East Inti Merchant,
You have a spice of pride in you still.
My Lord, I am so strengthened in my innocence,
For any the least shadow of a crime,
Committed against my mother, or the world,
That she can charge me with, here doe I make it
My humble suite, only this hour and place,
May give it as full hearing, and as free,
And unrestrained a Sentence.
Be not too confident you have cause to fear.
Let fear dwell with Earth-quakes,
Shipwrecks at Sea, or Prodigies in heaven,
I cannot set my self so many fathom
Beneath the height of my true heart, as fear.
Very fine words I assure you, if they were to any
Well, have your entreaty: (purpose,
And if your own credulity undo you,
Blame not the Court hereafter: fall to your Plea.
May it please your Lordsh. &amp; the reverend Court,
To give me leave to open to you a Case
So rare, so altogether void of President,
That I doe challenge all the spacious Volumes,
Of the whole Civil Law to show the like.
We are of Council for this Gentlewoman,
We have received our Fee, yet the whole course
Of what we are to speak, is quite against her,
Yet weal deserve our fee too. There stands one,
Romelio the Merchant; I will name him to you,
Without either title or addition:
For those false beams of his supposed honour,
As void of true heat, as are all painted fires,
Or Glow-wormes in the dark, suite him all basely,
As if he had bought his Gentry from the Herald,
With money got by extortion: I will first
Produce this Aesops Crow, as he stands forfeit,
For the long use of his gay borrowed plumes,
And then let him hop naked: I come to'th point,
It is been a Dream in Naples, very near
This eight and thirty years, that this Romelio,
Was nobly descended, he has ranked himself
With the Nobility, shamefully usurped
Their place, and in a kind of lawcy pride,
Which like to Mushromes, ever grow most rank,
When they do spring from dung-hills, sought to oresway,
The Fliski, the Grimaldi, Dori,
And all the ancient pillars of our State;
View now what he is come to: this poor thing
Without a name, this Cuckoo hatched ith nest
Of a Hedge-sparrow.
Speaks he all this to me?
Only to you sir.
I doe not ask thee, prithee hold thy prating.
Why very good, you will be presently
As angry as I could wish.
What title shall I set to this base coin;
He has no name, and for's aspect he seems,
A Giant in a May-game, that within
Is nothing but a Porter'• Isle undertake,
He had as good have travelled all his life
With Gypsies: I will sell him to any man
For an hundred Chickeens, and he that buys him of me,
Shall loose byth hand too.
Lo, what you are come too:
You that did scorn to trade in any thing;
But Gold or Spices, or your Cochineele,
He rates you now at poor Iohn.
Out upon thee, I would thou were of his fide,
Would you so?
The devil and thee together on each hand,
To prompt the Lawyers memory when he founders.
Signior Contilupo, the Court holds it fit,
You leave this stale declaiming against the person,
And come to the matter.
Now I shall my Lord.
It shows a poor malicious eloquence,
And it is strange, men of your gravity
Will not forgo it: verily, I presume,
If you but heard your self speaking with my ears,
Your phrase would be more modest.
Good my Lord, be assured,
I will leave all circumstance, and come toth purpose:
This Romelio is a Bastard.
How, a Bastard? Oh mother,
Now the day begins grow hot on your side.
Why she is your accuser.
I had forgot that; was my father married to any other woman, at the time of my begetting?
That's not the business.
I turn me then to you that were my mother,
But by what name I am to call you now,
You must instruct me: were you ever married
To my father?
To my shame I speak it, never.
Not to Franscisco Romelio?
May it please your Lordships,
To him I was, but he was not his father.
Good my Lord, give vs leave in a few words,
To expound the Riddle, and to make it plain,
Without the least of scruple: for I take it,
There cannot be more lawful proof in the world,
Then the oath of the mother.
Well then, to your proofs, and be not tedious.
Isle conclude in a word:
Some nine and thirty years since, which was the time,
This woman was married, Francisco Romelio,
This Gentleman's putatiue father, and her husband
Being not married to her past a fortnight,
Would needs go travel; did so, and continued
In France and the Low-Countries eleven months:
Take special note of the time, I beseech your Lordship,
For it makes much to'th business: in his absence
He left behind to sojourn at his house
A Spanish Gentleman, a fine spruce youth
By the Ladies confession, and you may be sure
He was no Eunuch neither; he was one
Romelio loved very dearly, as oft haps,
No man alive more welcome to the husband
Then he that makes him Cuckold.
This Gentleman I say,
Breaking all Laws of Hospitality,
Got his friends wife with child, a full two months
Fore the husband returned.
Good sir, forget not the Lambskin.
I warrant thee.
I will pinch by the buttock, to put you in mind of't.
Prithee hold thy prating.
What's to be practised now my Lord? Marry this,
Romelio being a young novice, not acquainted
With this precedence, very innocently
Returning home from travel, finds his wife
Grown an excellent good Huswife, for she had set
Her women to spin Flax, and to that use,
Had in a study which was built of stone,
Stored up at least an hundredth weight of flax:
Marry such a thread as was to be spun from the flax,
I think the like was never heard of.
What was that?
You may be certain, she would lose no time,
In braging that her Husband had got up
Her belly: to be short, at seven months end,
Which was the time of her delivery,
And when she felt her self to fall in travel,
She makes her Waiting woman, as by mischance,
Set fire to the flax, the flight whereof,
As they pretend, causes this Gentlewoman
To fall in pain, and be delivered
Eight weeks asore her reckoning.
Now sir, remember the Lambeskin.
The Midwife strait howls out, there was no hope
Of th'infants life, swaddles it in a stead Lambeskin,
As a Bird hatched too early, makes it up
With three quarters of a face, that made it look
Like a Changeling, cries out to Romelio,
To have it Christened, least it should depart
Without that it came for: and thus are many served,
That take care to get Gossips for those children,
To which they might be Godfathers themselves,
And yet be no arch-Puritans neither.
No more.
Pray my Lord give him way, you spoil his oratory else: thus would they jest were they feed, to open their sisters cases.
You have urged enough;
You first affirm, her husband was away from her
Eleven months.
Yes my Lord.
And at seven months end,
After his return she was delivered
Of this Romelio, and had gone her full time.
True my Lord.
So by this account this Gentleman was begot,
In his supposed fathers absence.
You have it fully.
A most strange Suite this, tic beyond example,
Either time past, or present; for a woman,
To publish her own dishonour voluntarily,
Without being called in question, some forty years
After the sin committed, and her Council
To enlarge the offence with as much Oratory,
As ever I did hear them in my life,
Defend a guilty woman; tic most strange:
Or why with such a poisoned violence
Should she labour her soones undoing: we observe
Obedience of creatures to the Law of Nature,
Is the stay of the whole world; here that Law is broke,
For though our Civil Law makes difference
Tween the base, and the legitimate; compassionate Nature
Makes them equal, nay, she many times prefers them.
I pray resolve me sir, have not you and your mother
Had some Suite in Law together lately?
None my Lord.
No? no contention about parting your goods?
Not any.
No flaw, no unkindness?
None that ever arrived at my knowledge.
Bethink your self, this cannot choose but savour
Of a women's malice deeply; and I fear,
You're practised upon most devilishly.
How hoped Gentlewoman, you reueal'd this no sooner?
While my husband lived, my Lord, I durst not.
I should rather ask you, why you reveal it now?
Because my Lord, I loathed that such a sin
Should lie smothered with me in my grave; my penitence,
Though to my shame, prefers the revealing of it
Above worldly reputation.
Your penitence?
Might not your penitence have been as hearty,
Though it had never summoned to the Court
Such a conflux of people.
Indeed I might have confessed it,
Privately toth Church, I grant; but you know repentance
Is nothing without satisfaction.
Satisfaction? why your Husbands dead,
What satisfaction can you make him?
The greatest satisfaction in the world, my Lord,
To restore the land toth right heir, &amp; thats my daughter.
Oh shoe's straight begot then.
Very well, may it please this honourable Court,
If he be a bastard, and must forfeit his land for it,
She has proved her self a strumpet, and must loose
Her Dower, let them go a begging together.
Who shall pay vs our Fees then?
Most just.
You may see now what an old house
You are like to pull over your head, Dame.
Could I conceive this Publication
Grew from a hearty penitence, I could bear
My undoing the more patiently; but my Lord,
There is no reason, as you said even now,
To satisfy me: but this suite of hers
Springs from a devilish malice, and lier pretence,
Of a grieved Conscience, and Religion,
Like to the horrid Powder-Treason in England,
Has a most bloody unnatural revenge
Hid under it: Oh the violencies of women!
Why they are creatures made up and compounded
Of all monsters, poisoned Minerals,
And sorceress Herbs that grows.
Are you angry yet?
Would men express a bad one,
Let him forsake all natural example,
And compare one to another; they have no more mercy,
Then minous fires in great tempests.
Take heed you doe not crack your voice sir.
Hard hearted creatures good for nothing else,
But to wind dead bodies.
Yes, to weave seaming lace with the bones of their
Husbands that were long since buried, and curse them when they tangle.
Yet why doe I
Take Bastardy so distastfully, when in the world,
A many things that are essential parts
Of greatness, are but by-slips, and are fathered
On the wrong parties.
Preferment in the world a many times,
Basely begotten: nay, I have observed
The immaculate Justice of a poor mans cause,
In such a Court as this, has not known whom
To call Father, which way to direct it self
For Compassion: but I forget my temper,
Only that I may stop that Lawyers throat,
I doe beseech the Court, and the whole world,
They will not think the baselyer of me,
For the vice of a mother: for that women's sin,
To which you all dare swear when it was done,
I would not give my consent.
Stay, heere's an Accusation,
But here's no proof; what was the Spaniards name
You accuse of adultery?
Don Crispiano, my Lord.
What part of Spain was he borne in?
In Castle.
This may prove my father.
And my Master, my Client's spoiled then.
I knew that Spaniard well: if you be a Bastard,
Such a man being your father, I dare vouch you
A Gentleman, and in that Seignior Contilupo,
Your Oratory went a little too far.
When doe wee name Don Iohn of Austria,
The Emperors son, but with reverence:
And I have known in divers Families,
The Bastards the greater spirits; but to'th purpose,
What time was this Gentleman begot?
And be sure you lay your time right.
Now the mettle comes to the Touchstone.
In Anno seventy one, my Lord.
Very well, seventy one:
The Battle of Lepanto was fought in it,
A most remarkable time, twill lye for no mans pleasure▪
And what proof is there more then the affirmation of the
Mother, of this corporal dealing?
The deposition of a Wayting-woman served her the same time.
Where is she?
Where is our Solicitor with the Waitingwoman?
Room for the bag and baggage.
Here my Lord, Oretenus.
And what can you say Gentlewoman?
Please your Lordship, I was the party that dealt
In the business and brought them together.
Well.
And conueyed letters between them. (house?
What needed letters, when tic said he lodged in her
A running Ballad now and then to her Viol,
For he was never well, but when he was fiddling.
Speak to the purpose, did you ever know them bed together?
No my Lord,
But I have brought him to the bed side.
That was somewhat near to the business;
And what, did you help him off with his shoes?
He wore no shoes, an't please you my Lord.
No? what then, Pumps?
Neither.
Boots were not fit for his journey.
He wore Tennis-court woollen slippers,
For fear of creaking sir, and making a noise,
To wake the rest of the house.
Well, and what did he there,
In his Tennis-court woollen slippers?
Please your Lordship, question me in Latin,
For the cause is very foul; the Examiner of the Court
Was fine to get it out of me alone in the Counting-house,
Cause he would not spoil the youth of the Office.
Here's a Latin spoon, and a long one,
To feed with the Devil.
Id be loath to be ignorant that way,
For I hope to marry a Proctor, &amp; take my pleasure abroad
At the Commencements with him.
Come closer to the business.
I will come as close as modesty will give me leave.
Truth is, every morning when hee lay with her,
I made a Caudle for him, by the appointment
Of my Mistress, which he would still refuse,
And call for small drink.
Small drink?
For a Iulipe.
And said he was wondrous thirsty.
What's this to the purpose?
Most effectual, my Lord.
I have heard them laugh together extremely,
And the Curtain rods fall from the tester of the bed,
And he ne'er came from her, but hee thrust money in my
hand; and once in truth, he would have had some dealing
with me, which I took; he thought it would be the only
way ith world to make me keep counsel the better.
That's a stinger, tic a good wench, be not daunted.
Did you ever find the print of two in the bed?
What a questions that to be asked, may it please your
Lordsh▪ tic to be thought he lay nearer to her then so.
What age are you of Gentlewoman?
About six and forty, my Lord.
Anno seventy one,
And Romelio is thirty eight: by that reckoning,
You were a Bawd at eight year old: now verily,
You fell to the Trade betimes.
There ya're from the Bias.
I doe not know my age directly; sure I am elder,
I can remember two great frosts, and three great plagues,
And the loss of Callis, and the first coming up
Of the Breeches with the great Codpiece,
And I pray what age doe you take me of then?
Well come off again.
An old hunted Hare, she has all her doubles.
For your own gravities,
And the reverence of the Court, I doe beseech you,
Rip up the cause no further, but proceed to Sentence.
One question more and I have done:
Might not this Crispiano, this Spaniard,
Lye with your Mistress at some other time,
Either before or after, then ith absence of her husband?
Never.
Are you certain of that?
On my soul, never.
That's well he never lay with her,
But in anno seventy one, let that be remembered.
Stand you aside a while. Mistress, the truth is,
I knew this Crispiano, lived in Naples
At the same time, and loved the Gentleman
As my bosom friend; and as I doe remember,
The Gentleman did leave his Picture with you,
If age or neglect have not in so long time ruined it.
I preserve it still my Lord.
I pray let me see it, let me see the face
I then loved so much to look on.
Fetch it.
I shall, my Lord.
No, no, Gentlewoman,
I have other business for you.
Now were the time to cut Romelio's throat,
And accuse him for your murder.
By no means.
Will you not let vs be men of fashion,
And down with him now hoe's going?
Peace lets attend the sequel.
I commend you Lady,
There was a maine matter of Conscience,
How many ills spring from Adultery!
First, the supreme Law that is violated,
Nobility oft stained with bastardy,
Inheritance of Land falsely possessed,
The husband! corned, wife shamed, and babes unblessed,
So, hang it up in the Court; you have heard,
What has been urged against Romelio.
Now my definitive sentence in this cause,
Is, I will give no sentence at all.
No?
No, I cannot, for I am made a party.
How a party? here are fine cross tricks,
What the devil will he doe now?
Signior Ariosto, his Majesty of Spain,
Confers my Place upon you by this Patent,
Which till this urgent hour I have kept
From your knowledge: may you thrive in it, noble sir,
And doe that which but few in our place doe,
Go to their grave vncurst.
This Law business
Will leave me so small leisure to serve God,
I shall serve the King the worse.
Is hee a Judge?
We must then look for all Conscience, and no Law,
Heel beggar all his followers.
Sir, I am of your Counsel, for the cause in hand
Was begun at such a time, fore you could speak;
You had need therefore have one speak for you.
Stay, I doe here first make protestation,
I ne'er took fee of this Romelio,
For being of his Council, which may free me,
Being now his Judge, for the imputation
Of taking a Bribe. Now sir, speak your mind.
I do first intrear, that the eyes of all here present,
May be sixth upon this
Oh, I am confounded. this is Crispiano.
This is my father, how the Judges have bleated him.
You may see truth will out in spite of the Devil.
Behold, I am the shadow of this shadow,
Age has made me so; take from me forty years,
And I was such a Summer fruit as this,
At least the Painter sayned so: for indeed,
Painting and Epitaphs are both alike,
They slatter vs, and say we have been thus:
But I am the party here, that stands accused,
For Adultery with this woman, in the year
Seventy one: now I call you my Lord to witness,
Four years before that time, I went to'th Indies,
And till this month, did never set my foot since
In Europe; and for any former incontinence,
She has vowed there was never any: what remains then,
But this is a mere practise against her son,
And I beseech the Court it may be sifted,
And most severely punished.
Vds foot, we are spoiled,
Why my Client's proved an honest woman.
What doe you think will become of me now?
You'll be made dance •achrimae I fear at a Carts
You Mistress, where are you now? (tail.
Your Tennis court slips, and your tan drink
In a morning for your hot liner; whore's the man,
Would have had some dealing with you, that you might
Keep counsel the better.
May it please the Court, I am but a young thing,
And was drawn a•sie, varsie into the business.
How young? of five and forty?
Five and forty, and shall please you!
I am not five and twenty:
She made me colour my hair with Bean-flower,
To seem older then I was; and then my rotten teeth,
With eating sweet-meats: why, should a Farrier
Look in my mouth, he might mistake my age.
Oh Mistress, Mistress, you are an honest woman,
And you may be ashamed on it, to abuse the Court thus.
Whatsoere I have attempted,
Against my own fame, or the reputation
Of that Gentleman my son, the Lord Contarino
Was cause of it.
Who I?
He that should have married your daughter?
It was a plot belike then to confer
The land on her that should have bin his wife.
More then I have said already, all the world
Shall ne'er extract from me; I entreat from both,
Your equal pardons.
And I from you sir.
Sirrah, stand you aside,
I will talk with you hereafter.
I could never away with after reckonings.
And now my Lords, I doe most voluntarily
Confine my self unto a stricter prison,
And a severer penance, then this Court can impose,
I am entered into Religion.
I the cause of this practise; this ungodly woman,
Has sold her self to falsehood: I will now reveal my self.
Stay my Lord here's a window
To let in more light to the Court.
Mercy upon me! oh, that thou art living
Is mercy indeed!
Stay, keep in your shell a little longer?
I am Ercole.
A guard upon him for the death of Contarino.
I obey the arrest of the Court.
Oh sir, you are happily restored to life,
And to vs your friends.
Away, thou art the Traitor:
I only live to challenge this former suite,
Touched but thy fame, this accusation
Reaches to thy fame and life: the brave Contarino
Is generally supposed slain by this hand.
How knows he the contrary?
But truth is,
Having received from me some certain wounds,
Which were not mortal, this wild murderer,
Being by Will deputed Overseer
Of the Nobleman's Estate, to his sisters use,
That he might make him sure from surviving,
To revoke that Will, stole to him in's bed, and kilt him.
Strange, unheard of, more practise yet!
What proof of this?
The report of his mother delivered to me,
In distraction for Contarino's death.
For my death? I begin to apprehend,
That the violence of this women's love to me,
Might practise the disinheriting of her son.
What say you to this Leonora?
Such a thing I did utter out of my distraction:
But how the Court will censure that report,
I leave to their wisdoms.
My opinion is,
That this late slander urged against her son,
Takes from her all manner of credit:
She that would not stick to deprive him of his living,
Will as little tender his life.
I beseech the Court,
I may retire my self to my place of penance,
I have vowed my self and my woman.
Go when you please: what should move you
Be thus forward in the accusation?
My love to Contarino.
Oh, it bore very bitter fruit at your last meeting.
Tic true: but I begun to love him,
When I had most cause to hate him, when our bloods
Embraced each other, then I pitied,
That so much valour should be hazarded
On the fortune of a single Rapier,
And not spent against the Turk.
Stay sir, be well advised,
There is no testimony but your own,
To approve you slew him, therefore no other way
To decide it, but by Duel.
Yes my Lord, I dare affirm against all the world,
This Noble man speaks truth.
You will make your self a party in the Duel.
Let him, I will fight with thē both, sixteen of them.
Sir, I doe not know you.
Yes but you have forgot me, you and I have sweat
In the Breach together at Malta.
Cry you me•••, I have known of your Nation
Brave Soldiers.
Now if my father
Have any true spirit in him, Isle recover
His good opinion Doe you hear? doe not swear sir,
For I dare swear, that you will swear a lye,
A very filthy, stinking. rotten lye:
And if the Lawyers think not this sufficient,
Isle give the lye in the stomach,
That's somewhat deeper then the throat;
Both here, and all France over and over,
From Marselys, or Bayon, to Callis Sands,
And there draw my Sword upon thee,
And new scour it in the gravel of thy kidneys.
You the Defendant charged with the murder,
And you Second there,
Must be committed to the custody
Of the Knight-Marshall; and the Court gives charge,
They be to morrow ready in the Lists
Before the Sun be risen.
I doe entreat the Court, there be a guard
Placed ore my Sister, that she enter not
Into Religion: shoe's rich my Lords,
And the persuasions of Fryers, to gain
All her possessions to their Monasteries,
May doe much upon her.
Weal take order for her.
There's a Nun too you have got with child,
How will you dispose of her?
You question me, as if I were graved already,
When I have quenched this wild-sire
In Ercoles tame blood, Isle tell you.
You have judged to day
A most confused practise, that takes end
In as bloody a trial, and we may observe
By these great persons, and their indirect
Proceedings, shadowed in a veil of State.
Mountains are deformed heaps, swelled up alofts
Vales wholesomer, though lower, and trod on oft.
Well, I will pu up my papers,
And send them to France for a President,
That they may not say yet, but for one strange
Law suite, we come somewhat near them.
How dost thou friend? welcome, thou and I.
Were play-fellowes together, little children,
So small awhile ago, that I presume,
We are neither of vs wise yet.
A most sad truth on my part.
Why doe you pluck your veil
Over your face?
If you will believe truth,
There's nought more terrible to a guilty heart,
As the eye of a respected friend.
Say friend, are you quick with child?
Too sure.
How could you know
Of your first child when you quic•ned?
How could you know friend?
Tic reported you are in the same taking.
Ha, ha, ha, so tic given out:
But Ercoles coming to life again, has shrunk,
And made innisible my great belly; ves faith,
My being with child was merely in supposition,
Not practise.
You are happy, what would I give,
To be a Maid again?
Would you, to what purpose?
I would never give great purchase for that thing
Is in danger every hour to be lost: pray thee laugh.
A Boy or a Girl for a wager?
What heaven please.
Nay, nay, will you venture
A chain of Pearl with me whether?
Isle lay nothing,
I have ventured too much for it already, my fame.
I make no question sister, you have heard
Of the intended combat.
O what else?
I have a sweet heart in it, against a brother.
And I a dead friend, I fear; what good counsel
Can you minister unto me?
Faith only this,
Since there's no means in the world to hinder it,
Let thou and I wench get as far as we can
From the noise of it.
Whither?
No matter, any whither.
Any whither, so you go not by sea:
I cannot abide rough water.
Not endure to be tumbled? say no more then,
Weal be land-Souldiers for that trick: take heart,
Thy boy shall be borne a brave Roman.
O you mean to go to Rome then.
Within there. Bear this Letter
To the Lord Ercole. Now wench, I am for thee
All the world over.
I like your shade pursue you.
Well, I do not think but to see you as pretty a
piece of Law-flesh.
In time I may,
Marry I am resolved to take a new way for it.
You have Lawyers take their Clients fees, &amp; their backs are no sooner turned, but they call them fools, and laugh at them.
That's ill done of them.
There's one thing too that has a wild abuse in it.
What's that?
Marry this,
That no Proctor in the Term time be tolerated to go to the Tavern aboue six times in the forenoon.
Why man?
Oh sir, it makes their Clients overtaken,
And become friends sooner then they would be.
Leave the Room, Gentlemen.
Wherefore should I with such an obstinacy,
Conceal my self any longer. I am taught,
That all the blood which will be shed to morrow,
Must fall upon my head; one question
Shall fix it or untie it: Noble brother,
I would fine know how it is possible,
When it appears you love the fair Iolenta
With such a height of fervor, you were ready
To father another child, and marry her,
You would so suddenly engage your self,
To kill her brother, one that ever stood,
Your loyal and firm friend?
Sir, Isle tell you,
My love, as I have formerly protested
To Contarino, whose unfortunate end,
The traitor wrought: and here is one thing more,
Dead all good thoughts of him, which I now received
From Iolenta.
In a Letter?
Yes, in this Letter:
For having sent to her to be resolved
Most truly, who was father of the child,
She writes back, that the shame she goes withal,
Was begot by her brother.
O most incestious villain.
I protest, before I thought it was Contarinos Issue,
And for that would have veiled her dishonour.
No more.
Has the Armourer brought the weapons?
Yes sir.
I will no more think of her.
Of whom?
Of my mother, I was thinking of my mother.
Call the Armourer.
You doe love me sir, you say?
O most entirely.
And you will marry me?
Nay, Isle doe more then that.
The fashion of the world is many times,
To make a woman nought, and afterwards
To marry her: but I a'th contrary,
Will make you honest first, and afterwards Proceed to the wedlock.
Honest, what mean you by that?
I mean, that your suborning the late Law-suite,
Has got you a filthy report: now there's no way,
But to doe some excellent piece of honesty,
To recover your good name.
How sir?
You shall straight go, and reveal to your old
Mistress, for certain truth, Contarino is alive.
How, living?
Yes, he is living.
No, I must not tell her of it.
No, why?
For she did bind me yesterday by oath,
Never more to speak of him.
You shall reveal it then to Ariosto the Judge.
By no means, he has heard me
Tell so many lies ith Court, he will ne'er believe me.
What if I told it to the Capuchin?
You cannot think of a better; for as your young Mris.
Who as you told me, has persuaded you,
To run away with her: let her have her humour.
I have a suite Romelio left In the house,
The habit of a Jew, that Isle put on,
And pretending I am robbed, by break of day,
Procure all Passengers to be brought back,
And by the way reveal my self, and discover
The Commicall event. They say shoe's a little mad,
This will help to cure her: go, go presently,
And reveal it to the Capuchin.
Sir, I shall
A pox ont, I have undertaken the challenge very foolishly: what if I doe not appear to answer it?
It would be absolute conviction
Of Cowardice, and Perjury; and the Dane,
May to your public shame, reverse your Arms,
Or have them ignomiously fastened
Under his horse tail.
I doe not like that so well.
I see then I must fight whether I will or no.
How does Romelio bear himself? They say,
He has almost brained one of our cunningest Fencers,
That practiced with him.
Very certain; and now you talk of fencing,
Doe not you remember the Welsh Gentleman,
That was travailing to Rome upon return?
No, what of him?
There was a strange experiment of a Fencer.
What was that?
The Welshman in's play, do what the Fencer could,
Hung still an arse; he could not for's life
Make him come on bravely: till one night at supper,
Observing what a deal of Parma cheese
His Scholar devoured, goes ingeniously
The next morning, and makes a spacious button
For his foil of tosted cheese, and as sure as you live,
That made him come on the braueliest.
Possible!
Marry it taught him an ill grace in's play,
It made him gape still, gape as he put in for it,
As I have seen some hungry Usher.
The tosting of it belike,
Was to make it more supple, had he chanced
To have hit him a'th chaps.
Not unlikely. Who can tell me,
If we may breath in the Duel?
By no means.
Nor drink?
Neither.
That's scurvy, anger will make me very dry.
You mistake sir, tic sorrow that is very dry.
Not always sir, I have known sorrow very wet.
In rainy weather.
No, when a woman has come dropping wet
Out of a Cuckingstoole.
Then it was wet indeed sir.
Having from Leonoras Wayting-woman,
Delivered a most strange Intelligence
Of Contarino's recovery, I am come
To sound Romelio's penitence; that performed,
To end these errors by discovering,
What she related to me. Peace to you sir,
Pray Gentlemen, let the freedom of this Room
Be mine a little. Nay sir, you may stay.
Will you pray with me?
No, no, the world and I
Have not made up our accounts yet.
Shall I pray for you?
Whether you doe or no, I care not.
O you have a dangerous voyage to take.
No matter, I will be mine own Pilot:
Doe not you trouble your head with the business.
Pray tell me, do not you meditate of death?
Phew, I took out that Lesson,
When I once lay sick of an Ague: I doe now
Labour for life, for life. Sir, can you tell me,
Whether your Tolledo, or your Millain Blade
Be best tempered?
These things you know, are out of my practice.
But these are things you know,
I must practice with to morrow.
Were I in your case,
I should present to my self strange shadows.
Turn you, were I in your case,
I should laugh at mine one shadow.
Who has hired you to make me Coward?
I would make you a good Christian.
Withal, let me continue
An honest man, which I am very certain,
A coward can never be; you take upon you
A Physicians place, rather then a Divines.
You go about to bring my body so low,
I should sight in the Lists to morrow like a Dormouse,
And be made away in a slumber.
Did you murder Contarino?
That's a scurvy question now.
Why sir?
Did you ask it as a Confessor, or as a spy?
As one that fine would jostle the devil
Out of your way.
Um, you are but weakly made for it:
Hoe's a cunning wrestler, I can tell you, and has broke many a mans neck.
But to give him the foil, goes not by strength.
Let it go by what it will,
Get me some good victuals to breakfast, I am hungry.
Here's food for you.
Pew, I am not to commence Doctor:
For then the word, Devour that book, were proper.
I am to sight, to sight sir, and Isle do it,
As I would feed, with a good stomach.
Can you feed, and apprehend death?
Why sir? Is not Death
A hungry companion? Say? is not the grave
Said to be a great devourer? Get me some victuals.
I knew a man that was to loose his head,
Feed with an excellent good appetite,
To strengthen his heart, scarce half an hour before.
And if he did it, that only was to speak,
What should I, that am to doe?
This confidence,
If it be grounded upon truth, tic well.
You must understand, that Resolution
Should ever wait upon a noble death,
As Captains bring their Soldiers out of the field,
And come off last: for, I pray what is death?
The safest Trench in the world to keep man free
From Fortunes Gunshot; to be afraid of that,
Would prove me weaker then a teeming woman,
That does endure a thousand times more pain
In bearing of a child.
O, I tremble for you:
For I doe know you have a storm within you,
More terrible then a Sea-fight, and your soul
Being heretofore drowned in security,
You know not how to live, nor how to dye:
But I have an object that shall startle you,
And make you know whither you are going.
I am armed for it.
Tic very welcome, this is a decent garment
Will never be out of fashion. I will kiss it.
All the Flowers of the Spring,
Meet to perfume our burying:
These have but their growing prime,
And man does slourish but his time.
Survey our progress from our birth,
We are set, we grow, we turn to earth.
Courts adieu, and all delights,
All bewitching appetites;
Sweetest Breath, and clearest eye,
Like perfumes go out and dye;
And consequently this is done,
As shadows wait upon the Sun.
Vain the ambition of Kings,
Who seek by trophies and dead things,
To leave a living name behind
And weave but nets to catch the wind:
O you have wrought a miracle, and melted
A heart of Adamant, you have comprised
In this dumb Pageant, a right excellent form
Of penitence.
I am glad you so receive it.
This object does persuade me to forgive
The wrong she has don me, which I count the way
To be forgiven yonder: and this Shroud
Shows me how rankly we doe smell of earth,
When we are in all our glory. Will it please you
Enter that Closet, where I shall confer
Bout matters of most weighty consequence,
Before the Duel.
Now I am right in the Bandileere for the gallows.
What a scurvy fashion tic, to hang ones coffin in a scarf?
Why this is well:
And now that I have made you fit for death,
And brought you even as low as is the grave,
I will raise you up again speak comforts to you
Beyond your hopes, turn this intended Duel
To a triumph.
More Divinity yet?
Good sir, doe one thing first, there's in my Closet
A Prayer book that is covered with guilt Vellum,
Fetch it, and pray you certify my mother,
Isle presently come to her.
So now you are safe.
What have you done?
Why I have locked them up
Into a Turret of the Castle safe enough,
For troubling vs this four hours; and he please,
He may open a Casement, and whistle out to'th Sea,
Like a Boson, not any creature can hear him.
Wast not thou a weary of his preaching?
Yes, if he had had an houre-glasse by him,
I would have wished him he would have ioggd it a little.
But your mother, your mother's locked in to.
So much the better,
I am rid of her howling at parting.
Hark, he knocks to be let out and he were mad.
Let him knock till his Sandals fly in pieces.
Ha, what says he? Contarino living?
I, I, he means he would have Contarino's living
Bestowed upon his Monastery, it is that
He only fishes for. So, it is break of day,
We shall be called to the combat presently.
I am sorry for one thing.
What's that?
That I made not mine own Ballad: I doe fear
I shall be roguishly abused in Meeter,
If I miscarry. Well, if the young Capuchin
Doe not talk a'th flesh as fast now to your mother,
As he did to vs a'th spirit; if he doe,
Tic not the first time that the prison royal
Has been guilty of close committing.
Now to'th Combat.
Contarino living?
Yes Madam, he is living, and Ercoles Second.
Why has he locked vs up thus?
Some evil Angel
Makes him deaf to his own safety, we are shut
Into a Turret, the most desolate prison
Of all the Castle, and his obstinacy,
Madness, or secret fate, has thus prevented,
The saving of his life.
Oh the saving Contarino's,
His is worth nothing: for heavens sake call louder.
To little purpose.
I will leap these Battlements,
And may I be found dead time enough,
To hinder the combat.
Oh look upwards rather,
Their deliverance must come thence: to see how heaven,
Can invert mans firmest purpose: his intent
Of murdering Contarino, was a mean
To work his safety, and my coming hither
To save him, is his ruin: wretches turn
The tide of their good fortune, and being drenched
In some presumptuous and hidden sins,
While they aspire to doe themselves most right,
The devil that rules ith ay re, hangs in their light.
Oh they must not be lost thus; some good christian come within our hearing: op the other casement that looks into the city.
Madam, I shall.
Give the Appealant his Summons, doe the like
To the Defendant.
Can any of you allege ought, why the Combat
Should not proceed?
Nothing.
Have the Knights weighed,
And measured their weapons?
They have.
Proceed then to the battle, and may heaven
Determine the right.
Soit le Battle, et Victory a ceux que droit.
Stay, I doe not well know whither I am going:
It were needful therefore, though at the last gasp,
To have some Church mans prayer. Run I pray thee,
To Castle No; this key will release
A Capuchin and my mother, whom I shut
Into a Turret, bid them make hast, and pray
I may be dead ere he comes. Now, Victory a ceux que droit.
Hold, hold, for heavens sake hold.
What are these that interrupt the combat?
Away to prison with them.
We have been prisoners too long:
Oh sir, what mean you? Contarino's living.
Living!
Behold him living.
You were but now my second, now I make you
My self for ever.
Oh here's one between,
Claims to be nearer.
And to you dear Lady,
I have entirely vowed my life.
If I doe not dream, I am happy to.
How insolently has this high Court of Honour
Been abused!
How now, who are these?
A couple of strange Foul, and I the Falconer,
That have sprung them. This is a white Nun,
Of the Order of Saint Clare; and this a black one,
You'll take my word for it.
Shoe's a black one indeed.
Like or dislike me, choose you whether,
The Down upon the Ravens feather,
Is as gentle and as sleek,
As the Mole on Uenus cheek.
Hence vain show, I only care,
To preserve my Soul most fair.
Never mind the outward skin,
But the Jewel that's within:
And though I want the crimson blood,
Angels boast my Sister-hood.
Which of vs now judge you whiter,
Her whose credit proves the lighter,
Or this black, and Ebon hew,
That unstained, keeps fresh and true:
For I proclaim't without control,
There's no true beauty, but ith Soul.
Oh tic the fair Iolenta; to what purpose
Are you thus eclipsed?
Sir, I was running away
From the rumour of this Combat: I fled likewise,
From the untrue report my brother spread
To his politic ends, that I was got with child.
Cease here all further scrutiny, this paper
Shall give unto the Court each circumstance,
Of all these passages.
No more: attend the Sentence of the Court.
Rareness and difficulty give estimation
To all things are in the world: you have met both
In these several passages: now it does remain,
That these so Comical events be blasted
With no severity of Sentence: You Romelio,
Shall first deliver to that Gentleman,
Who stood your Second, all those Obligations,
Wherein he stands engaged to you,
Receiving only the principal.
I shall my Lord.
I thank you,
I have an humour now to go to Sea
Against the Pirates; and my only ambition,
Is to have my Ship furnished with a rare consort
Of Music; and when I am pleased to be mad,
They shall play me Orlando.
You muft lay wait for the Fiddlers,
Theyle fly away from the press like Watermen.
Next, you shall marry that Nun.
Most willingly.
Oh sir, you have been unkind;
But I doe only wish, that this my shame,
May warn all honest Virgins, not to seek
The way to Heaven, that is so wondrous steep,
Through those vows they are too frail to keep.
Contarino, and Romelio, and your self,
Shall for seven years maintain against the Turk,
Six Galleys. Leonora, Iolenta,
And Angiolella there the beauteous Nun,
For their vows breach unto the Monastery,
Shall build a Monastery. Lastly, the two Surgeons,
For concealing Contarino s recovery,
Shall exercise their Art at their own charge,
For a tweluemonth in the Galleys: so we leave you,
Wishing your future life may make good use
Of these events, since that these passages,
Which threatened ruin, built on rotten ground,
Are with success beyond our wishes crowned.

RIGHT noble and worthy Assembly: It hath been a
very ancient and la•dable custom, in the best go∣uerned
commonwealths, to admit and favourably to
allow interludes and discourses upon the Stage for divers
reasons; but especially two. The one, to entertain the well∣conditioned
people with some delightful and fruitful con∣ceits,
thereby as it were to deceive idleness of that time which
it had allotted for worse purposes. The other, for the just
reprehension of such as with serious and more grave adieu∣sings
cannot or will not be so freely admonished and corre∣cted.
The later of these two respects hath begotten this
Dialogue, ready to b• acted, principally and specially poin∣ting
that Imp which is infortunately fostered up to this
day, to ruin it self with infamy. Only this comfort is af∣forded,
that if he be present, and withal silent, he may sup∣pose
that of all others it concerns not him. If hee be absent
(as most likely he is) then every other that finds himself
parcel guilt may see the deformity, and forbear the excess.
Other touches and passages are, which our Author and wee
present not with mind to offend any, but to please the well∣disposed.
And so in the name of all the rest I entreat
•ourteous •udience, and pardon of all faults.
HOw much wee that have been tra∣uailers
differ from other kinds of
people? So soon as we arrive, we
are attended to the Burse or Rande∣vou
of Merchants. There we walk
as if the whole world hath need to
be informed, yea and directed by vs
in matters of greatest moment; such
as is traffic and commerce with foreign nations, and the
state and disposition of those kingdoms through which we
have passed. For it may be we can give intelligence of pre∣parations
and invasions. We can demonstrate their strength
and munition. We can number their Captains and Gene∣rals.
We can discover their designs and confederates. And
finally, we can lay plots to cross and make void all their
purposes, and stratagems, which these home-bred and coun∣try
spun people can never attain unto. Therefore by
good right we are had in esteem, and special request, and
courteously received of Councellors of state wheresoever
we come. Neither doe w• tie our selves to any one domini∣on
more then another, but indifferently to all states we de∣liver
freely the condition of every nation. And the place we
••ll i••o is our best beloved so long as there we tarry, and
not a minute longer. We oblige our selves to no Prince for
gold nor gain, nor be pensioners to any Monarch: but
with desire to see more we pass through all gouernements,
vnchecked and uncontrolled, because we take part with
none, offend, none, nor are false to any. And this life wee
love aboue all lives, not content with any life, but that
which seeks an other life.
Monsieur Proberio, you are welcome home.
That's more then you know Segnieur Simplo, what
country shall be my home?
Then you are welcome into England.
Thanks gentle Simplo.
What news? And what company came over
with you?
News I have none but ordinary to tell you. With
the state I shall have some business. And in my company
came over an old acquaintance of yours, one Segnieur An∣tonio,
a man of extraordinary action and faction.
If it be the man I contiecture him to be▪ his name
is plain Anthony, an English man, borne some 70 miles
from London Northwest, and hath been beyond seas some
•even or twelve years.
That's the man. But wee call him Segnieur Anto∣nio,
by reason of his travellers in Italy and other places.
As he hath changed his name and country, hath
he not altered his conditions? I assure you he was very ho∣nest,
and of good expectation before he went.
No, upon my word. Hee came over a great deal
better then he went, and well qualified: and there was no
doubt but he would continue so still, but that covetousness,
and the diuel's on it.
What? is he given to that? it were great pity.
Well, this Sir Antonio or Anthony whether you
will▪ hath seen many countries, and learned many strange
qualities.
Strange qualities! bee they as good as they bee
strange?
Nay, doe you judge? Isle tell you some of them.
And if you like them, we'll put them in print, and set them
up to be sold at the Hospital porch, near S. Nicholas sham∣bless,
and annexed to the great thing in magna chart•, or
magno folio, entiuled, an Admonition to householders.
Well, if they deserve so, it shall be so; and I'll be∣stow
the cost in printing, and deal with a friend for their
allowance sub pri•ilegio.
But first I'll account to thee what accidents wee
had in travail.
But I'll hear nothing till I hear them.
No? what if I should first read a Sermon preached
within these seven days at Amsterdam by a man of most
pure profession and invention not ordinary, passing all that
lived before or behind him in the novel strain; himself of
the right cut of Carolstadius: in which Sermon hee proves
most deucutly, that it is Idolatry to fight against the Turk.
Would thou not hear that first?
No. What tell thou me of Sermons? let's have
these qualities without any more digressions.
Well, since you are so desirous, you shall have them
by whole sale, retail them at leisure when you come home.
Imprimis, when he lives in a great town like, London,
he loves to lye in a corner over the Kitchen, because the Jack
shall not whirl too often, to waken or distract him in pray∣er.
His dinners are for the most part ordinary, except four
days in the week he visit his house-keeping friends. And
at supper a couple of eggs, and a bit of cheese is a choice
diet after a liberal dinner: besides it saves fire and washing
of dishes.
But if I were his man, if he kept no better cheer
at his chamber▪ I would make the cheesefrye until the but∣la
were spent.
But your cunning would fail you, for hee hath a
trick beyond your reach for preserving his cheese. But to
the next.
Secondly, hee so cavils and wrangles with any man that
he deals withal, that they no•er agree or love after, and
yet every Saturday he makes eauen with all the world.
Thou tell me a wonder. How shall I believe
this?
It is so: choose whether thou wilt believe me, or no.
Let me see how these can be reconciled.
Can thou not reconcile them? I see thou art a ve∣rye
barren fellow; thou hast not a spoonful of wit. I am sor∣rye
that ever I undertook to teach thee these incomparable
tricks of Don Antonto, laboured for so toughly in climbing
the Alps, and so dangerously brought down▪ Thou
look too neerehand, as if a man would spy for a Wood∣cock
in the next queath of bushes; whereas thou oughtst to
elevate thy aspect• to thy uttermost kenning, as those doe
that lye on their backs to keep sight of hawk which as∣per
beyond the first region. Search me the furthest corner
of thy capacity, and there see if perhaps doe lye as in an ab∣struse
angles, some secret pattern of these proiects. Every
B•zzard will pry if a mowle or a mouse shall happen in an
hours watching to creep from a bush right under her
stand: give me the Eagle soaring conceits, to spy what
springs before the furthest ranger a mile off.
I know not how to dive into this bottomless secret▪
It is sure some riddle. I pre thee suspend me no longer: for if
I should beat my brains with an Iron pestle, not a sprinkle
of them will light upon the outside of this enigmatical pro∣position.
Nay, good now tell me, how he that palters with
every body, should be eauen at weeks end.
Well, I will not stick with thee for this once, but
look not for it often; for I'll not use you to it. Find them
out by your own study for me hereafter. You are of age
one would think. Thus it is: hearken well what I say at
first. for Isle not repeat it again for losing of time. He i•
•a•en with all the world every Saturday. Those were my
words, and I'll make them good; mark diligently.
Nay, pre thee dispatch, or else I cannot mark as I
was wont to doe. The mark will bee out of my mouth if
you come not quickly out with it.
Well, every Saturday night he makes eauen with all
the world, because hee will be the better disposed against
sunday. Hem Ha.
Alas! not yet▪ I am not able to endure it, I faint.
He is even that is to say. Ha. Ha. Have.
O my heart: not yet. A penieworth of Aquauit•,
if I shall live.
Hold, hold: thou shalt have it presently: tic at my
tongues end.
Well, say on. If my senses fail not, Isle hear you.
He loves no body then, a•d no body loves him. And
thus thou see there's no odds, but all eauen.
What a jest is this? there's an eauen reckoning
with the devils name. You shall be hanged before Isle tor∣meant
my self with desire to hear any more of your knavish
tricks. Isle besworn I had like to mared all. It wrought with
me like a purgation. It has given me a treble stool at once,
though I find no fault. I have it hot▪ and worse then any per∣fuming
pan in the world. You scurvy fellow, an it were no
for loosing land I have  not
marvel though a man must be sick at heart (I swear) and
study so hard, and strain my wits to reach the rea•on of this
riddle. I am sure I did overshoot it 40. yards, and had like
to put a dozen cases, how these two cases might well e∣nough
have stood together in one subject salua conscientia,
taken out of Scotus, and Thomas Equines, fully resolved by
them; but still I doubted I should fall short: therefore I
thought better to conceal them: and now doest thou gull
me thus grossly?
Ha. Ha. Have. An thou be a good fellow rehearse• three•
or four of these cases thou had like to have produced; and
let's judge how fitly they had been applied if need had
been.
To what end? for thee to mock me more? you
may command: but if I were willing, thou hast now put
them quite out of my mind, I know not where to begin.
I think so. Thou were pockily distempered.
Will it please you to proceed? let's hear some
more of your goodly squires conditions.
Thirdly. When he means to ride to his county∣house,
he goes three days before to some grooms at court.
And if from them he leatne any news (if it be but of a posy
given the king of France by his nurse, or that a fisher man
sailing by the Barmoothes saw a fire at singing of a hog) this
carries him scot-free to all the • gentlemen's houses of his ac∣quaintance
situate, set, lying, &amp; being within seven miles
of the high way of any side until at length he set foot at his
own stable door pecunijs numerates remaining entire in his
right pocket. And the like he can doe retrogrado to Lone∣don,
but by variety of friends because the same news may
be news forward and backward.
This is a very plain trick, and needs no such en∣comions,
and Epithets of commendation as you bestow on it.
Is it so Sir? ther's your judgment, and bolt soon
shot. But if I show that it is a very difficill, ambiguous, pe∣rilous,
perplexed and involved stratagem, what will become
of your opinion hereafter?
Who? here's a business about riding a few miles by
many gentlemen's houses, as though it requires such engine∣os
circumstances.
I, that it does Sir. And I undertake to make it ap∣pear
though perhaps you have ne'er a capcase to put it in.
First Segnior Anthony so soon as he puts foot in the stir∣rope,
is to fear least the Master &amp; Mistress should not be at
home &amp; his perplexity in that case is very hardly dissolved.
Secondly how to carry his tales and discourses methodi∣cally.
Thirdly to take heed he discover no familiarity with the
gentleman's adversary.
Lastly what kind of farewell he were best to take at par∣ting.
These be matters of mighty moment (as thou see)
which he hath to cast, and recast; to meditate, and ponder;
to toss, and tumble; to revolue, and refolue; to put forward
with Pro, and pull back with country, to object, and confute;
to throw doubts and mishaps like snow-bals, and against
them erect bulwarks &amp; defences, to admit wounds &amp; scars,
and to apply salves; to conclude, come what come will to
have cordials in store, &amp; all little enough to save his best be∣loved
in his purse. And yet thou Dunstable breed thoughtst
it as easy a matter to perform them handsomely as to make
a good posit with a quart of new like and a quantity of
clear chamberly.
Sir I confess all these be far aboue my element:
and that in many years study I cannot comprehend one of
them, therefore, I leave th• to your cavaglyer without Peer
in mine opinion. Hath he any more qualities of this nature?
Lets have them, for at least I shall learn some wit out of
them.
Thou learn wit out of them? never while thou •∣vest:
not honestly neither. They will rather rob thee of those
wits thou hast, he hath infinite such as these, which in very
pity to thee I forbear to relate at this time▪ These are e∣nough
to conceive at once. For if I should drive them all in∣to
thy brains together, though it were with a tenne-penny∣nail,
thou could not carry them away: but rather they
would make thee mad in the case thou art now.
Why? what case am I in think thou?
Not sit I was to receive such potions without due
preparation.
What shall I doe to be made fit for their operatiō?
Isle take any course thou wilt prescribe me to get perfection.
And I can imitate like an Ape.
Thou makst a large offer, &amp; a rash, which full soon
(I doubt) thou wilt revoke: but isle try thee. Before thou be∣gin
to profess this art, thou m••t forget all rules and instru∣ctions
of manners taught thee by thy fathers, godfathers, or
schoolemasters, and renounce all good counsel given thee
from the beginning of the world to this day: that so being
an empty a•d void vessel thou moist be the more apt to re∣ceiue
the tincture and impression applied. And thus begin
thy A.B.C. in matchevillaines school. Otherwise; if tho•
should reserve but so much as a secret intention to keep
thine old honesty on the one side of thy head, and lay open
the tother side to entertain these restless and still stirring
crotchets, there would be such hurly burly in thy brain, that
all the wit thou hast will not keep them in order. Therefore,
if thou desire to be of the cunning cure▪ and withal love
thine own peace▪ come clear without wit or honesty, weal
teach enough in a week to serve thee all thy life time. Il•
bring thee acquainted, and then isle turn him loose to teach
and furni•h thee with destructions enough for a whole
country.
Destructions. What should I doe with them ex∣cept
it were to destroy others. But I doubt I shall pay dear
for my schooling, and that I like not. But for the other point
of parting with my former good lessons, faith, I can quickly
doe that for I never gained any thing by them, therefore I
can be content to come to him as naked as ever I was born.
That's great step to your well profiting I may say
to you; and tic a great sign of grace to be obedient, and
wholly to resign your self to good inspirations: but can
thou tell when thou hast good counsel given thee?
Not I; more then a child: For now you hau∣made
me put off all my old learning I am become a very in∣nocent,
as if I were this day taken from my mammee: but I
trust you because you are my friend. I hope y•ule put me to
none, but such as shall teach me enough for my money. And
you say he is wise and will give me samples enough, &amp; then
I warrant you Isle take um like a sponge till I be twice so big
as I am.
Well, then thus far we are agreed. And I wish you
not to stand upon his getti•g by you, least you be penny∣wise,
and pound foolish.
How learned you his cunning so perfectly? hau•
you known him long.
O, I• why I have known him these 30 years at
least, and conversed with him in his best times; somewhat 〈◊〉
cost me you must think, but that's past. I would not for any
thing but that I did known thoroughly.
Has he been in Italy then as you said before?
I that he has, and carried from thence more th•n all
the towns in Italy could spare.
what's that?
I will not tell thee, thou hast already more then
thou can well bear: thou art almost drunk with the very
smell of his wit, or else thou would never so idly ask me a
question which I told thee twenty times.
Monsieur Proberi•, I have heard all the confe∣rinse
between you and Simplo: and I doe so much mislike
your discourse that I cannot choose but oppose my self in my
friends behalf whom I hear egregiously to be wronged by
you Pr•beri•.
In what Noverindo, have I done him injury?
In all your speech generally: and in many parti∣culars.
O vinversall Noverindo in what particulars?
Tic no matter. Isle tell him all when we meet next▪
That's not matter. but can thou disprove me in a∣•y
thing I said? or dost thou know any good by him that I
have not spoken of▪
Faith, or else I know but little: for if you praise •
friend on this fa•hion I prithee speak the worst ••ou can
by me.
Sir, it may be• Isle pleasure you so much: but to the
mat•er▪ can thou disprove me in any thing I feed?
Yes, that I can, &amp; that I will. I can disprove thee
in •hat thou •aidst hee never deal•▪ with any man but hee
cavils, and wrangles with him▪ which is untrue. And I had
much ado to keep in my mother tongue, but could have
found in my heart presently to have put the lye down thy
throat, but I did bridle my nature to hear all thou would
speak. And now to demonstrate thy falsehood, I say, and will
i•stiff that he is as good a 10 ith 100 man either to give or
take as any is in London▪ and that he keeps his days (espe∣cially
of receipt) as strictly to an hour as any man. And fur∣there,
that hee cavilled or wrangleth not with any in this
Kind: therefore you are a lying fellow.
Not to forward with your lies Noverindo if you
love your self: for though I will not fight for fear of the
proclamation yet know I can make you give me satisfacti∣on
upon your knee if I would complain: but I will seek no
such advantage; for the cause it self give me victory e∣nough
over thee, and returns the lie most bra•ely into thy
gullet. I can prove Noddy Noverindo, that in thy own trade
and his of decemper cent. when he lost 100l which the scri∣uener
delivered his own messenger after the bond sealed,
(who ran away with the money) he brake his day, and sued
the scrivener striving to recover the whole, or some compo∣sition
by that means.
But did he recover any? or did the scrivener give
him any thing?000?
He re•oared not; nor got any thing from the scri∣uener.
But was not this a wrangle, and a shameful cavil? yea
and with a Noverint man himself which thou deny? 000
now thou lie in thy swallowing place Noverindo.
Segnieur Simple•, Help me a little. Can thou say
no good of this gentleman▪ it frets me to the heart to hear
a man of our own making to be thus misused.
Faith not I, not much, saving that I have heard
many years ago• that he was a reasonable honest man but
for's religion, and they say still hes a kind of a Papist.
What a rascal stis? doe I call thee to speak in his
behalf, and dost thou prate of religion? what has he or I to
doe with religion? I dare swear that hes an honest man of
no religion.  and younders the man, let's see
now who dares charge him with religion. I hope he and I
have work enough and never busy our felues about religi∣on.
So many banckrupts, and housekeepers now adays tic
time to look about vs.
What? dost thou find fault with housekeepers:
you'll please him never a whit with that, for ant were not for
good housekeepers he would have many hungry meals▪
I find fault with such housekeepers as dare not
show their faces without their own doors. I cannot endure
this. Isle complain to him on you both, if ever hee light on
you within the lash of the law, ther's no ••rcy: and tic no
matter, teach you to speak so evil of him behind his back.
Why cockscomb; how can thou tell his back
was towards vs.
Well, mock on, it was in his abc•nce, thats all one:
Isle tell him if you'll give me nothing.
Give thee, yes a rope 
these caterpillars are al for what will you give me like
I•das▪
Bonu• dies▪ Sign•ur Antonio, Magnify••; the worcester∣thiest
gentleman that ever consorted with the bankers of
this city. Sir I hope you make no doubt •o• teneri &amp; firm∣la
obligari•ibi aut t•o certo attnrnato, &amp;c. And further obe∣ligamus
nos, &amp; quemlibet nostrum, heredes, &amp; exec••ores no∣stros
&amp;c. The condition is to bee ever ready at your lowest
service.
What a rogue stis? he can speak nothing but obli∣gations
as Ovid did verses.•
Gramarcees gentle Noverindo: how go the rates
now?
Sir you may have as much as you will at eight in
the hundred, others pay ten.
I thank you: then I have a match already: a friend
of mine must use a thousand pound and entreats my band;
Isle •ay he shall have it by my means. Thou •halt have forty
shillings in the hundred for brocage▪ and I will gain other
forty shillings, this is but twelve in the hundred that's dog
cheap, I know some pay a great deal more: And Isle have
good land twice the worth for my counter security. Let me
alone to hamper them.
You are wiser sir, fast bind fast find. And if they
fail you'll trice them. I trow upon the mortgage.
Ah ha, art avis'd of that? surely I shall doe them
good to make the fools take heed of others. And what fault
is in me, a bargain is a bargain: and if I give them a little
more for their land when it is forfeited, they may thank me
but no parting with the land, for it is so deep if a man would
dig it that it reaches to hell, and ther's no redemption.
Well, this is agreed: and if you will have 30001
•peak• but the word, and give three days warning, weal
come at your whistle as your wife was wont to doe: but
theres a thing I must impart to you which (I hope) you will
take well at my hands, being but the relator.
What? is any Backrupt that hath my sums put
forth▪
Not one, they are as safe as in your chest.
Let it be what it will then, I care not a rush.
Sir it is some discredit to you if it be true.
If it be true, and discredit I weigh it not.
Ah noble Antony  pardon me if•
I be bold with your worship, for no man could have spoken
more pithily, and more like our own corporate brother
then this was: why Sir for all the world so are wee, never
moved say what men will: wee could not live richly if men
had cause to speak well of vs, give me your hand, Isle live &amp;
die with you for that word▪ and leo here with this handof
mine I reach you the hearts of all our company; now I dare
say any thing to you without fear, or blushing. That which
I was so vnwillidg to utter was no more but this: it is very
credibly reported that you never deal, or contract with a∣ny
but you •evil, wrangle•, paulter, wrench, shift, chapp,
change, deny, •efuse, go back from your word, break off,
and play all manner offowle play; whereupon all men speak
evil of you, and as many as had once commerce will never
more meddle with you.
All this is nothing, I have heard twenty times so
much with my own ears, and smile at the poor fellows
that they spend their time with talking of me. But did thou
ever hear but I gained by them all.
Nay, that's certain: they all agree on that as a
verdict.
Why, there's it then. Now thou seeft where wit
lodges, with me, or with them.
Faith it is true. And they have nothing to charge
a man withal but Conscience and Religion, and such imper∣tenant
stuff. But I think I have taken down some of the•
about the word Religion of the oldest stamp, that you
should be tainted withal, and I trow I have so silenced them
that you shall not need to trouble your self with studying
to revenge• it.
I, they talk their pleasure behind my back, but
I wish they would speak one word to ground an action v∣pone▪
Did thou hear him (whosoever he was) say, I am a
Papist?
O, no Sir, I warrant you, they dare not for forty
pound say so. But that you were one, that you look like
one, that your heart is so still, if you durst for losing some
of your goods, that you were honester when you stuck to
it. That now you dissemble. And such like words full of su∣spition,
but not to bear an action. They are crafty enough
for that. But I trow. Sir, you are too wise, and so I answered
for you.
Thou did well. I know some of them would
gladly catch me in a trip. But Isle watch them well enough.
No man better met here then your self. I
was in great care for an Associate in the affair with this day,
and almost every day I undertake.
Sir my society will afford you small contentment,
if my daily tasks required not my attendance, where by
perpetual vow I have engaged all my hours until my death.
For I am fit for no other employment but my beads▪ Never∣thelesse
if it please you briefly to let me know your desire, I
will by my answer you reasonable satisfaction.
When I doe seriously consider the worlds present
condition: And that we which converse abroad with all
sorts of people are subject to so many mistaking, censures,
and un•ur reports, that it passes the skill of any man to
ca•y himself uprightly, &amp; without blame, I begin to judge
you, and your like only happy, who chuising to leave the
world, have procured quietness to your life. But Sir Her∣mito,
I marvel what hath removed you from your cave to
the country. Are you as weary of private living, as I am of
too much company? The news must needs be great, and
strange which brings you hither.
No such matter, as that my intended course of
dwelling with my self sequestered fro• all resort, should
have an end so long as my abode in this world endures.
Far be it from my thought ever to wish the change of my
estate. As now I am I trouble not others, nor any man of∣fendeth
me. And where no mistake is, who can think of al∣teration?
my resolution hath bred my contentment: the
peace which I enjoy, counter-valueth all manner of wants.
And my spiritual excercises take away tediousness. The cause
of my coming hither (Sir Securus) is a Proclamation late∣lie
set forth by the king, that all his subject being men of
21 years, &amp; upwards, living within 50 miles of the Court,
shall appear there within 14 days after notice given them.
And about three days past, a pilgrim passing by my cell,
told me of this Edict, and that it was upon allegiance. So
I being his subject (though serving him to no other purpose,
but praying for him) thought it my duty to make my ap∣pearance.
and to depart without delay.
Sir, I am right to have intercepted you (when∣•her
you be travailing to or fro the Court) because this day
is appointed for hearing and determining many controver∣sies,
and censuring sundry sorts of people: And some of
these differences beyond my learning. You therefore come
very fitly to aide me. And this whole affair being prince∣pally
for peace making, and ending debates without suite
of Law▪ you may not refuse to join with me in a work of
so great charity.
In very deed Sir, every ought to yield his best
help to such works. And although I have already razor∣ded
my appearance at Court, and licenced to return to my
poor home▪ and would willingly spend some hours with
you to so good a purpose; yet (Alas Sir) I am like to pre∣veil
very little with any body, wanting both acquiantance
and authority among them whosoever they be: therefore I
entreat my fruitless presence may bee spared; but I will
not be wanting to you with my prayers for your success.
Sir, for your authority and acquaintance it shall
not skill. All that I have both those ways, s•alb confer∣red
upon you equally with my self. If they despise you,
they shall contemn me also. Only I entreat your com∣panie
panie this day, and then I cease troubling you further what∣soever
need require hereafter.
Sir I expect no entreaty, neither will I wrong you so
much as to make further request to my poor self. I stay
willingly and am at you• service in all things.
No servant of mine Sir, but my friend upon equal
•earmes.
Neighbour Hortano, I have considered of the great coil
we had the last Sabouth after evening prayer in the verstrie a∣bout
putting down the Holy-dayes. It hinders our busi∣ness
much. And me thinks this praying in a Church a∣mong
those of high degree is nothing pleasantable, and
blushing takes away my devotion. I can pray a great deal
better, and with a more comely grace when I whistle at
plow. And me thinkes't were a goodly matter if every man
in's calling might follow his focation, and there doe such
devotion as his stmacke stands to.
Faith, neighbour Rustico, I am even of your mind.
For Isle bide by it, I ha more weeds grows in one Holiday,
then in three work days.
O, you are a Gardner, it becomes you well to agree
with the Husband man, if we two hold together, we shall be
•oo hard for twenty fools.
Indeed it were a gay thing if wee could put down
these Holy-dayes, as you say. Me thinks' it were an easy mat∣la
as well as we ha put down the Fasting-dayes pell mell,
hand over head. An wee wood hang together it were soon
done, but when some are so arseward twill never be.
You talk you know not what. There were no rea∣son
in it: for that were the way to break all order, and give
our minds altogether to toil, and never serve God. For
you would not s••y •here neither if you had your will, but
the Sondayes should shortly go down for company. You
will leave nothing standing.
O, you are a Tailor, you speak for your profit▪ For
an it were not for Holy-dayes, which require fine clothes,
and much change, you might beg your bread.
You hit the •ail on the head neighbour Rustico.
Weal put them down an you'll keep stroke with me.
Nay Sir, if any man hit the nail on the head, it
should be you, because you are a Smith▪ but soft, you are so
hot with your rip rapping, that you miss the nail and An∣•yle
also. For my part although I doe boldly work on Ho∣lie▪
days as other tailors use Christmas day and all, yet
would I not miss the Holy-dayes for any good, nor would
I break the order without necessity. But is it so easy a mat∣la
to put down the Holy-dayes think you? And will
you doe it with the furious fire-forke? And you Master
Gardner that will rake up Holy-dayes and Fasting-dayes
like weeds, and bury them all in a rrench, you are both
both foully deceived. For neither have you put down the
Fasting-dayes, because still they are bidden in Churches,
nor is the case alike▪ for Fasting is private, and cannot so
well be punished, but if you come not to Church, up you go
not to Church, up you go for a Recus••t an you were my
father.
Why for all that •hut we be troubled with so ma∣ny
holidays? wood not fewer serve the turn as well? I doe
not think our auncetrums were so pestered.
Yea, and with many more; and kept the eves half
holy.
How didne a then for doing their business? sure a
were all beggars. And yet twood anger me that my grand∣sir
should be a beggar. I it wood.
Not so neither. They lived very well: and had not
the twentieth beggar that we have: and were great house∣keepers
every man almost. They built all the Towns, Col∣ledges▪
and Religious houses.
Didne a so indeed? I cha hard my grandsire, &amp; gran∣name
tauke much of those things. Sure but I think they
went to plow and cart on the workydaies, and built those
things you tauke on upon the holidays, or else it cood no∣•er
be.
No, no. They suffered no kind of lighter works to
•e done in those days, much less such pain•full labours as
they were.
Why were the Saiuts days kept holy at all? Tell
me some reason for it.
They did in those days give gre• honour to such
as suffered death for Christian religion, although the men
were as poor as Christs fi•shermen. And therefore the days
of their martyrdom they kept holy, and came to Church to
glorify and praise that God, for whom those Saints died,
there were people exhorted to doe the like.
But I mislike the very ground, and cause of those
holidays which (you say) is suffering death willingly. Doe
not we die fast enough (think you) against our wills, but we
must set up a trade of dying with a good will▪
Thou speak against reason. For if thou must
needs dye, first, or last, were not better to die for a glorious
cause, so to be sure of heaven, &amp; willingly in perfect memo∣rye,
then against thy will wrestling with death, &amp; overcome
in the end with great pain, and perhaps past thy senses.
Reason me no reasons▪ I speak as I think, I pro∣test
from my heart I had rather doe any work in the world
then dye. What? never come home again to my wife, and
my pretty barnes? Why, I have a boy, his name is Jack; hee
has a face as welfavor'd as any great turnippe root, with a
crack in the midst, which is the very proportion of his
mouth. I will not willingly leave that boy for all the deaths
in the world. No I will not. But if I must needs dye whether
I will or no, I wood have death take me asleep, that I may
not see his face, for if I did I would run away as hard as ever
I could for my life.
Mr Acuto talk with me, hee speaks like a fool. I
have more wit then twenty such loggerheads.
Nay, then I have more wit then thou can get▪ for
I can make my horses turn up the ground, and thou must
doe it with thy hands and feet, else thou can earn no mo∣ny.
Come neighbour Volcano, we two wise men will leave
these two to play the fools here until our •urn come a∣gain.
Now Acuto▪ let vs two conclude what shall be∣come
of these holidays, and as we agree, I warrant it shall
go. And thou hast almost persuaded me to let them stand.
But let vs go and read a book I have at home of the lives
of Saints to furnish vs with stronger reasons against our
next encounter with these Dunce•, and then wee will end
this controversy.
How think you by this S. Hermito? would you
have imagined that such plain fellows as these be, should
call a business of this nature in question? By this you may
may guess what stirring heads we have to deal withal, and
how easy a matter to keep them in order.
It is somewhat strange. And the more unlearned
the men are, the harder to be satisfied. But he hope is, that
as mad men doe best service when some of their like are
most unruly, so these men being alike unskilful will soon
confound each other, and so give over the business.
It is not unknown to me that very many doe censure
my deeds as wicked and not beseeming a Christian. But this
is the iniquity of the time, because they doe not distinguish
between persons and seasons. For my actions being not or∣denariate,
are not to be judged by ordinary, but refined wits.
For now your down right dealing is exploded, as too sub∣jest
to every mean capacity.
Yonder is thy master that shall be (Simplo▪) thou shalt
lose no time, weal to him suddenly. Segnieur Intones. All
hail to your person. Here is a man desires to serve you; to
be your pupil; to imitate your actions so near as his vessel
can hold the print. And he will doe well. For hee is made
all of wax, very pliant, empty of all thing▪ 〈◊〉 a little money
and a tenement or two of land lying next your freehold on
the south side, worth 101 per annum.
He is welcome. Have you given him any prince∣ples,
such as you know are necessary? and is he docible•▪
He is ready for your hand Sir. I will not commit
such an error (knowing you as I doe) but lay the foundati∣on.
You may work upon him as you list I warrant you.
Sir I hope you shall find me di•igent, and accor∣ding
to your heart.
Thou hast a good sterne countenance, I like thee
well: if thy mind be as untoward it will be suitable.
I warrant you Sir, no man shall get any thing of
me, but I will know how he comes by it, except your self,
whom I will trust withal I have. Deal with me as you
please.
I thank you. Nay, if I deal not well with you, I
wish no man should deal ill with me. I hear you have land
lying near me, I would have you bee a good husband, and
keep it. Let me lay up your writings safe least some deceive
you of them.
That you shall Sir▪ here they be. They shall be in
pawn to you for my good behaviour: for I think no man
will give his word for me.
Thou art the fittest man for me that ever I met
withal: nor any man (I think) will undertake I shall bee a
good master to thee.
Tic no matter sir, I will stand to your gentleness.
Well said: and Isle even deal with thee thereafter.
Thou hast a service a dog would not have it, except
his tail were already so short cut to his breech that no
more could be spared. I warrant thou has• seen the last of
thy writings. They will pull thy land after them. And that's
but law.
Is it true that you told me (Acuto) at our last parley here
that there were ••ch valiant people in times past that will∣lingly
and you•efully went to their death when they might
have in•oyed life longer.
There is no question of it except wee should dis∣credit
all Historiographers, who make honourable mention
of them i• all ages before vs. And in our own time and
memory there have been many •uch men.
I p•otest it is a wonderful courage these people
have, and in mine opinion far beyond the stoutness of the
soldiers. For they go to kill and contend, not meaning to
dye, which only they strive against, and avoid by all means
they can▪ and provide aboue all things to bee well armed for
safety of life. But the martyr with not resisting, conquers
death, and fears not that which is feared and shunned of all
others. Therefore I think them worthy of great honour
and p••petuall memory. But who are they (say you) that
give testimony of them? me thought it was a very fine word.
They be Historiographers.
O Histornoggerfers. a brave word. Isle make a
knot of these letters.
No, Historiographers man.
Now I have it Histriagerfers.
Not so neither: you must mark well, &amp; pronoūce
it just as I doe.
That I will be sure to doe.
Thus then. Hi-sto-ri.
Stay there. Now gape (he gapes &amp; Hortano looks
in his mouth) lets tell, how many teeth ha you? 22. hough,
whoos within there? a pair of pincers.
What to doe?
Why to pull two teeth out a your mouth for I ha
but just 20.
And what of that?
Mary because you'll ha me say it just as you doe, &amp;
that I cannot except you &amp; I have the like number of teeth.
I, and Isle measure your tongue, that if it bee longer then
mine it may be cut even: for it is my duty being a gardner,
to doe all b• line and level.
That's no matter: so that you utter the syllables
full as I doe.
Yes I make no question, though I lack a few teeth
but I can swallow a sullebub as full as you.
A sullebub. I did not speak of a sullebub.
No? that you did. Isle be judged by all this comp∣no.
No such matter. I said you must observe every syl∣lable.
Go too then▪ I wool: up with it once again.
Can thou tell what a syllable is?
No, not I more then my dog.
How wilt thou observe them then if thou know
not a syllable?
Let me alone for that: Isle make a shift. Doe you say
the word, and if there be ere a one there, Isle find him I war∣rant
you.
Ere a one there man? why the word is framed of
many syllables.
Very well: how shoot I miss them then? turn me
loosse. Isle take it as soon as it peeps out of thy mouth as pa∣rats
doe bread and butter.
Come then mark well▪ His-to-ri-o-gra-phers.
Isle lay ten pound to nothing, Isle not miss a straws
breadth, His-to-ri-o-gra-fers.
That's right indeed.
Law, did no• I tell you so? Nay you never had an
apter scholar in your life then I am: twool doe you good to
teach me.
I am glad of it: this was soon learnt indeed: now
put together, and speak it short as I did.
I will: but you need not doubt that it's safe, &amp; will
never be lost. But to satisfy you Isle doe it, and that quickly,
Histor-cockafurrs.
Whoo: the longer the worse.
This is your faut: that wood ha me say it so fast: &amp;
•is a very s•urvie word to hit, except a man have a mouth
made thereafter.
I think you are fasting to day▪ and that hinders
your speech: go play and fill your belly▪ and weal at it
again soon.
Thanks gentle Master: and the next time you teach
me, weal doe it very closely ant please you. For I doe not
mean to be very lavish of my learning, when it shall bee at
the biggest in no company but yours.
So doe all cunning folks: be dainty of your skill▪
or else you shall never bee entreated at first, nor thanked at
last.
Hortano: •ou have been a great while prating with that
pricking fellow and make no reckoning of my neighbour
Rustico and m•▪ Belike you think to engross the honour of
the wholle business to your selves. But I tell you plainly, if
you have termind to put the Holidays down you shall not
cousin vs so: for it shall be well known that I helped to knock
um down as much as any man in the parish: and that I gave
the hottest stroke about it.
Sir you are much mistaken. The Tailor is an honest
man, and a true man, (although it be impossible) and we are
fully agreed they shall stand, &amp; be kept as holy as they were
the last year.
Are you so Sir? you are but a treacherous fellow for
your labour, and a coward too: for I warrant thou had ra∣there
be at a good dinner then a battle: were not wee two
worthy to be of the council? Well; Isle bee even with thee
for this trick▪ Isle swear, Isle not say a prayer this twelue-month
upon any holiday that shall doe any living creature
good.
What a villain is this? then thou wilt not pray for
thy self?
No, goodman woodcock? as though I were a li∣avenge
creature.
Yes; a man would think so; art thou not?
No that I am not. And Isle prove it by an argumen,
and a sluttegim too. I tell thee, I can chop Logic an I list.
I can prove thee an Ass, or any such h•rne beast with a trice
I learnt it at Sturbridge fair, the while I was selling hob∣nails:
there was such argenication among the scholars
there, whether my nag which I gilt the year before were
now a horse or no▪ I set um all one such a froth with spouting
one against the tother, that some of the slaver lighted on
my face, and yet I had my nag between them and me for
fear they would fight, and pull me under their feet. But an
they had fought I never meant to part um. To be shor•▪ with
gaping upon them, I swallowed so much Logic as will
serve me the longest day of my life▪ And now Isle practise
upon thee to prove my self no living creature.
What a goose art thou? Is it possible thou can
speak, and yet be no living creature? prove this and prove
anything.
I will prove this▪ and I will prove any thing by Lo∣gecko:
what a maim it is for a man to bee ignorant of the
virtue and power of Logic. I pity thee, and all such as be
unlearned like thy self. Why man: I will prove by Logic
that he which was the last year an• yet lives, is not.
That were strange. How? He that was the last year
and yet lives, is not. I cannot devise how this should be: for
if he live, how can he choose but have a being?
Now it shall appear how short you are with want
of Logic. But Isle teach thee a little. Hee that was the last
year (yea and the last week) an honest man, an• yet lives, is not
now an honest man.
This may be. For I have heard an old saying (and I
think it bee true) that a man may as soon depart with his
honesty, as with any thing he hath.
So then. Dost not▪ thou think now, that I am as
well able to prove my self no living creature?
I promise you I am in some doubt of it now: go on.
Every living creature loves some other creature. But
I love no other creature. Ergo I am no living creature. Now
Hortano take all the herbs of thy garden &amp; still their water
to powder, thou can never wash out the strength of this
•rgomen▪ I make it just as they did theirs at Cambridge• above•
my nag. I remember the words, and shall doe as long as my
nag lives. For one of them spouted thus. Every horse hath
stones: but this beast hath no stones; Ergo he is no horse. And
I clapped him on the back and told him that hee spake truth.
For I gilt him the last year, and eat his stones to my break∣fast.
But I had like to have mared all by saying so. For there
was a nimble-headed Scholar that stood by, (and yet had
nothing to doe with the question) went about to prove me
a horse, and thus he began. Every living beast, or Animal,
that hath in him horse stones, is a horse. But this Animal,
(meaning me) hath horse stones in him, Ergo he is a horse. I
was stricken in such a maze (knowing that I did eat the
horse stones) that I was like to sink where I stood, and even
presently to congeal into a horse. But there was by chance
an honest Scholar by, who saw my colour quite gone, took
pity on me, and bade me be of good cheer, I shoot not be
a horse. And told the tother to his face, that there was a
flacy in his argumen. And then fetched him about with a R•∣cumbentibus,
and proved that the horse stones which I had
eaten, were consumed, and became such stuff as I cannot tel
you without Sir reverence of your teeth; and that they did
not grow in me as they doe in horses: Ergo the case was al∣ter'd.
Then upon this point of growing, and not growing,
there was such a stir, that all the horse-coursers in the
Fair came about vs. One said they did grow, another de∣nyed
it▪ and such part taking on both sides, that in the end I
was content (being desirous to make them friends) to bee
searched in the open market, and so was cleared before them
all to have no more stones then I shoot have. And glad was
I that I was not a horse. Had not I (think you good cause
to remember Logic? Yes, I shall never forget it if I should
live 100 years.
Go to then: if you bee such a scholar I will not
dispute with you about the Holy days, but my neighbour
Acuto hath been a scholar as well as you, and hee is able
to show you many reasons why they ought to continue.
And he hath fully converted me.
I will not be judged by Acuto, nor by a better man
then he. Why, I tell you my neighbour Rus•ico and I, think
our selves as good men as A•uto and you, and we are two
to two. Weal never yield while the Plow and chains
hold, and that will be a good long time; for as fast as they
wear, I can mend them.
Will you refer it then to judgment of indiffe∣rent
men? we are all neighbours, let vs not fall out about
things that none of vs have skill in.
Yes, weal be judged, but not by any brave people;
for they will all take part with the Tailor that makes their
apparel gaudy, and with the Gardner that makes them plea∣sant
wakes and knots.
Weal give you the choice, so that you name none
of your own trade, and an indifferent man.
You say honestly, Nay truly we are desirous to
have an end of it, so that none of vs be his own carver. Here
sits a country Gentleman, a plain man, a good house-kee∣per,
and peace-maker among all his neighbours: he is no
Justice of peace, so there is no fear to speak our mind
before him, nor need we any minerator to him, he is very
courteous.
Weal not refuse him, nor any that is honest.
God save you Sir. Here is a great controversy
between four neighbours, two against two. Reasons are
alleged on both sides, and neither part will agree to other.
In the end we accorded to refer the matter to you, we be∣seech
you to consider, and order it as you please, and then so
shall it be.
The controversy is beyond my skill, it being mat∣la
of divinity; but mine opinion is, they ought still to bee
kept. For I persuade my self, that our Ancestors (which
did all things well) had special reasons for these days to
be kept holy. What their reasons were, I take not upon me
to set down: there •its a Religious man, he is more like to
quench your thirst, and resolve your doubts then I am.
Most Reverend Sir, though we be strangers to you,
we are bold to ask your counsel in a business of weight.
You are welcome whosoever you are: no marvel
though you be strangers to me, who have estranged my self
from all the world: but what counsel can you expect from
me, who am not like to give wordly men any satisfaction,
since I have already given the world with all his business an
utter farewell.
Sir, our business is not worldly, though it concern
worldly men, even as your life is not worldlike, though by∣deli
you live on earth.
Nay M. Acuto, stand aside, or Isle have you taken a∣way,
for you mar the poly, you are very forward to take
the tale out of my mouth, as if you had more wit, but I think
not so. I began first to speak unto this man, therefore I will
have the last word. Sir, our business with you shall be short▪
for I am a hot fellow, and I strike thick and short. This Tai∣ler
takes long and wide stitches, and draws out the time to
make his work seem much. Our difference is for the Ho∣ly-dayes
as they stand in the Calendar, whether it were fitter
they should be returned into working days as they were
at the first, or remain to the worlds end. If you judge they
ought to stand, we are content, and will work harder at o∣there
times. If you will have them down, doe but say the
word, &amp; hold up your finger, weal maule v• to the ground
at a blow.
Your questiō is not hard to decide, &amp; fit enough for
me to deliver mine opinion in. It is true, they were all work∣ing
days at the first. For which purpose it is said, such work
as thou doest, work it in those six days, and not on the sea∣uenth
day. Yet God did never forbid any of those six days
to be kept holy▪ And the Christian Church hath appointed
many days to be kept holy in memory of Saints which suf∣feared
dive•se torments for Christs sake, who suffered all for
them, and for them all. And those to be kept to the worlds
end, that their facts and fame might never die, but enco•∣rage
others to tread their bloody but Heavenly steppes.
Therefore since the Church of God and custom of Christi∣an
countries have so ordered it, let no mans private rashness
presume such alto•ation, as to make away or put out the
Holy-dayes, but with due reverence to observe them.
Gods blessing on you Sir, you have quite confiscated
my conceit. Isle kill him that would have them down. Such
a sermon every day would make me keep all the •est of the
week holy. You neighbour Rustico, you and I will hang
together, and change together. Isle never meddle with any
matter out of the length and breadth of my Anvil, fall back,
fall edge while I breathe▪ Me thinks I am good enough
with this little teaching, I shall never need to mend here∣after.
I could find in my heart to go to hanging present∣lie,
and be a martyr, if I might have no time to think of the
pain, but go alive to Heaven.
I told you so much before, you never needed to
have troubled the good man.
Thou told me so? what care I for thy telling? If
thou told me my father were dead (though I knew hee be
buried) I will not bleeue thee. And yet I would not for
forty pound he were alive again. This is a grave man, and
his ver•e countenance speaks truth. Tauke no more o•t,
I am quite dissolved they shall stand fast: and Isle keep them
very devoutly. And Isle persuade all the Parish to doe the
like.
Thou teach all the Parish. Wilt thou turn prea∣cher?
No preacher Sir, but I hope all the Parish comes to
my shop for one thing or other. And cannot I then give um
part of my tal•ned as well as the Cobblers are wont to doe, and
I am sure it will become me as handsomely as them.
Go Simple• to Mistress Sylvester in Sheerelane, desire her
•o lend me a pair of sheets, a p••lowbeere, half a dozen of
•apkins, and a towel.
I will Sir, 
but now I remember me Porber•• told me you have linen
enough of your own.
He was the more fool to tell you so▪ but you
must not use to cross me thus. Doe as you are bidden. Will
not out own la•t the longer if wee wear of other folks
sometimes? when we have gone through all our friends so
often that none will lend vs, then it is time enough to wear
our own.
I understand the conceit now. Isle tell her you lo•t
your key.
Best of all. Doe so. I perceive thou need no
broker.
No Sir, no; such a tuitor as you will serve turn
well enough.
 You come in good time. I was
beholding to you in my gre•test necessity: And I purpose
to requite all your deserts. At this present an accident is
fallen, which will be beneficial to you with a little diligence
had. A messenger of mine received a hundredth pound by
my direction from a serivener in this town, and ran away
with it into Ireland, find him out, and get the hundredth
pound, I give it you.
I thank you Sir, but it is a thousand to one I shall
never find him; and if I doe, I know not the man, and the
money perhaps spent.
If this fail Isle give you another as beneficial as it▪
That's easily done. For I think this is little worth.
I have an employment for you, one Sir Retlaw, &amp;
Master Eloc, his father-in-law are bound with me in divers
bonds, I for them, and they for me. The whole sum is a
thousand pound, the greater part they are to pay. I have
their counter-bonds for all. What they have for my debt
I know not. I would have you be perfect in the accounts as
they stand in my book, and then demand of them a recko∣ning
between vs.
Well Sir, this shall be done with effect.
Sir I have brought the linen, she lent it willingly. So I
saved the lie; she desires you to sup with her to night.
Ha, sup there? with all my heart. But how shall
I doe with my two eggs at home? they will bee too stale,
remember soon to carry them to the Al•-house, but mea∣sure
them well in your hand with griping.
I will Sir. I would desire your counsel in a mat∣la
concerns my self. One Fred, a neighbour of yours
desires to buy my land, whereof you have the writings, and
will give me more then it is worth. What will you advise
met to doe?
I think it not amiss to take his money, and put
it out to use, and therein I can pleasure you. My scrivener
shall doe it as for me, and he will get good men for your
money.
I thank you Sir: then I will absolutely bargain
with him, and send him to you for the writings.
Doe so: but bee not long: for I have business in∣stantly
for you.
What an Ass is this? doth he think I will let any man
buy a thing so near my nose, but I will lay hold of it with
my teeth? I will have his land doe what he can. And I will
have it one 40• the cheaper for this trick, that he will offer
to sell it from me. He thinks belike to make a porter of me
to cary his writings from Lawyer to Lawyer; but if I be, I
will be well paid for my pains. I have a device in my head,
which I will extend to the uttermost, seeing he puts me to
it. Trust? there's a trust with all my heart to serve other
men's turns. No, I never Iou'd that. I remember to have
learned that charity begins with it self. And a Cooke licks
his own fingers before he di•hes the meat for others. Doe
they not know what it is to get writings out of my hands?
It seems they never entered bond to me. If they had, they
would not presume thus. If nothing else would serve to hold
them, yet this I can allege, that they are my security for his
good behaviour (although I care not six pence for any se∣curitie,
because I never mean to trust him for a crowns
worth of any thing. And I have all you to witness, that for
his good behaviour he pawned them to me.
I am glad to meet you here Sir, your man and I have
bargained for his land not far from me, but very near you.
Welcome neighbour Fred. Let me speak with
you a•id. Take heed what you doe. His title is nought, else
I would have had it my self, and you know it lies •it for me.
But let him not know I •aid so.
I were much to blame if I should Sir: no, I war∣rant
you. I thank you for this caveat. I might soon have
lost my money so.
Stay awhile, you shall hear more to his face.
Come hither Simplo. This honest man tells me, he is in speech
with you about your land, and I was content to •et you run
〈◊〉 your course. But doe you forget that it is pawned to me
for your good behaviour?
Sir, such a thing there was. But my hope is you
will not be my hinderance.
Your hinderance. No; but if this be true (as you
cannot deny it) have you not forfeited your land and w••∣tings
by your evil behaviour, offering to sell it •o a strange•
and not to me?
That's a plain case Sir. Isle not 〈◊〉 with hi•
land, nor any of my neighbours shall, for I will 〈◊〉 them all•
Nay, I may say to you Sir, I am told he hath no good title
to it.
Were you told so? Well, farewell neighbour
Fred.  How now Simplo. To keep your land▪
no man will be your Tenant? and to •ell it, who will dea••
with you? Did you not hear him say it is reported you
have no good title? Well; in hope you will doe me true
service, I will help you out of these briars. Tell me true▪
What should he have given for your land?
Indeed Sir he should have paid me 150•. And if
you help me not I am undone.
It had been worth 150•. if it had not been thus
disgraced, but now it is worth little. Well, if I give you 100•.
for it, what will you say?
If you will give me 100•. for it, I shall think my
self much bound to you while I live. And so I doubt not
but you will keep the land safe. For the title was as good
as could be until you had my writings. It may be they took
wet in the last great rain, and so they did shrink.
I will give thee 100•. And no rain will shrink
the money: the Sun will doe it most hurt: for it will melt
very fast.
You know how to keep it from melting better
then I. Let me entreat you to order it as your own▪
I will give thee my credit for that.
It▪ is much to be feared that this greedy griper will
utterly spoil this poor man both of money and land, h••
mind is altogether upon dece•• and ruin of others. Tic∣pity
any •onest body should have to do with him that •••∣dies
nothing but mischief.
I am sorry to see so much wickedness in one man
as appears in him, hee is able to infect a whole country.
And it were a happy thing if hee were banished the com∣merce
of all Christians.
Of all the music in the world there is none like to that
which is found in hawking. For, the questing of Spaniels,
the spring of pa••ridges, the jingling of Hawk bells, and
thundering of horse heals is the best consort, and pleases
me aboue all delights.
Your Comparison is too general. Had you exce∣pted
hunting I might have joined hands with you against all
others, but now I am become your adversary. For it is con∣fe••ed
of all sorts, that the mu•icke in hunting, both for con∣•inuance
of the sport. for a delightful exercise contenting
the ear, and gentle-men-like pastime the world cannot
compare with vs▪ and so we hunters cary the Bell away.
Indeed you hunter carry the Bell, but not for any
good doing, no more then you doe by carrying the horn to
very mans house. What time and order your hounds obe∣serve with
their natural harmony, I will not dispute (they
and their keepers being seldom in order) but of this I am
sure, that there are few kennels of hounds in England▪ but
while some are in chase after Hare, or Fox, others are killing
sheep in full cry of the poor harmless beast: whereupon
is grown that proverb. The Foxkills the lambs▪ and the
hounds the old sheep. But I cannot endure you should chal∣lenge
hunting to 〈◊〉 better with a gentlemā then hawking.
Every Clown can keep a dog, and •he more carrion he ea∣teeth
the more egregiou••• he smells: but the hake adore∣•eth
a kings 〈◊〉, besides the admirable conquest the faulk∣ner
makes in a ha•kes natu•e, bringing the wild Haggard
having all the earth &amp; seas to scour over uncontrollable,
〈◊〉 attend and obey her keeper so, that at his very voice she
turns towards and stoups to his glove. Hounds are so pre∣judieiall
to the common-wealth, that I dare undertake to
prove, that (next unto drunkards) they are the greatest spoil∣lers
of poor men's bread.
I like all well enough but the last words of yours
(Sperto) for me thinks it is as good sport to hear the
Falconer and the Hue•la fall out, as for thieves to appeach
one an other▪ Good fellows take their liquor quietly with∣out
any of these faults, and help to hold up tillage by the
swift utterance of the surmounting grain.
The immoderate and excessive disorder in drinking,
and more then swinish swallowing, that neither belly nor
head can contain, but must recoil by the way it entered in,
is the most pernicious inconvenience that this kingdom
suffered.
Your invective against good companions (for so
I must needs call them that love drink) is •o bee refelled
rather with a Cudgel, then with reason. When had you any
gallant Captain, or man of resolution but would drink
health after health, until themself were past health and
help?
Who was more valiant then Captain Shinke?
Yet moore then he, who loved drink?
Like matter, like patron was his valour in his drink?
or was he best able to perform a noble exploit, when his
legs failed his giddy head▪
No, he was ever like a Swine,
When strength of drink• closed his •yen.
Boy, a pipe of Tobaccho What is it a Clock?
It is almost eleven.
I doubt it be no more indeed. I am so sleepy still:
go see if Monsieur Parvagracio be stirring. 
I am very melancholic this morning whatsoever I ail. I
care not if I send for my Physician: or whether the cause be
that I lost all my money yesternight, and now know not
where to get more until I have conferred with my Agent
for discommodities, nor wh•re to dine scot-free in the
mean time.
Sir, hee was asleep when I came to his chamber,
but his page waked him. He remembers his love, and desires
you to beat his chamber an hour hence, then his Barber
comes, as he does every sunday in steed of prayers. Hee
charged me to tell you that hee hath an ounce of the most
transcendēt Tobaccho that ever crossed the salts, sent him by
a Lady of his secret knowledge and yours, with whom you
both must dine this day. The property of this Tobaccho is
to yield a porringer full of Rheum every pipefull: and pro∣cure
ventositie conveniently to descend very odoriferous,
and secure from audibility. She reserues store of it for her
own special use in times of necessity, as of attendance in
Court, hearing of Plays, •itting at Cards, and the like. Fur∣there,
that a little of it taken pill-fashion, will diffuse and di∣sperse
mixion, so that a Lady may abide in company forty
eight hours, not disposed to evaporation. Besides he willed
me to tell you▪ that this Lady yesterday hath received a
book from a friend of hers that went over with Sir Rob•rt
Shirley in•o Persia, entitled de flatibus separandis ac dividen∣dis,
cos{que} emittendis; not forward at the face as gamers use
to doe in wars, but a•e•e, as Iacke-an-apes delivers squibs,
written by a learned Physician doctorated by the magnify∣cent
order of the Mountebanks there, she will anon at di∣ner
entreat you two to lay your heads together for transla∣ting
this book into English. And where you find any sent
worth the nothing▪ you will make stoppes upon it, and deli∣for
your opinion by way of comment for the better under∣taking
the fence, with the particular causes and effects of e∣very
several and distinct •um produced thereby. And here∣after
at better leisure she will have the subject of the whole
book Anatomatized by her own Surgeon, and set forth in
due proportion and colours, and give it a convenient room
in her gallery.
This is good news; shall wee dine there? and
snuff this dainty Tobaccho? that's excellent. heere's a
shilling to drink 
 go too, it is no matter now: the next time I
have a good hand a dice Isle give thee two shillings. Why
now I feel my self well again. Go boy, tell my Physici∣an
he shall not need to come.  Stay, I
have not sent for him •ow I remember me.
Have you done my business (Proberio) with the Knight
and his son-in-law?
I have cast up these accounts exactly, and your
share is to pay 200•, and no more. I have often visi•ed them▪
and put them to such a plunge as you never saw: for they say
you ought to pay 400•. and yet they cannot avoid but they
must pay 800•. They have lost their notes, their servants be
changed: and they are so puzzled as you never knew men:
they desire respite a week. I gave it them, and so it rests.
Ha, ha, he. And did the fat Knight fret so? let
him fry too. I will stick close to my counterbands.
Sir I thought good to put you in mind of one thing.
You have my bonds of eight or nine score pounds in your
hands▪ discharged ten years since, I pray you let me have
them up.
O, take no care, they shall never hurt you.
But I wish I had them up, we are all mortal.
The next time, I light on them I will cancel them.
Simplo go you to Mistress Bow▪ desire her to lend me half
a dozen eggs until market day, look you choose the fair•st.
Proberio, I would fine do somewhat for you. A
friend of mine wants a good Steward, I will help you with
the place: or there is a widow worth 400•. I think I can
make the march for you▪
I thank you Sir, either of them I will accept. 
 This is like his 100•. offer which his
messenger ran away withal. It will come to nothing;
but now I know he hath some business for me.
I would fine have your opinion in a bargain of land
I have made with one Pohssib, to the value of 7000•. drawn
into articles with both our hands to it. The chief motive
of our bargain is a marriage between two young children.
I pray you calculate whether the bargain be gainful or
no.
If you ha•• bargained already, it i• too late for me
to deliver my opinion.
Not a whit too late. There is nothing done but
the land assured to me, and 3000•. of money paid. If I find
It not fit for me, Isle rend the bargain all to shivers. What?
two words to a bargain.
Why. I know you can doe it if you list, you can
play fast and loose as well as any man. Well, you shall soon
know how I like it.
I never finished any bargain yet, nor doe I mean
this shall be the first.
Go to the Lawyer, and ask if t•e writings be ready for
your land, that you may receive your 100•. 
I have a couple of followers most unfit for my humour. Pro∣barrio
is so full of scrupulosity, that nothing passes his fingers
that savers not of conscience. Such a man would I deal with∣all,
but not dwell withal. Such a man would I have deal
with me, but not deal for me. Simplo, he is diligent, but a∣las
his brains want salt.
Sir, the writings are done, when you please I am
ready to seal. I think the Lawyer is a very honest man,
he hath made them reasonable me thinks: for I am but to
warrant it from all men, I have nothing to doe with wo∣men.
It is well. Wee will go presently. But I must
stay until Proberio come: for I doe not well know where I
am until he have done a business of mine.
Sir I met him in Chancery Lane, he promised to be
here before me, but I made great haste to tell you the wri∣tings
were ready. I would so fine be a sealing. I am won∣derfully
fallen out with my land.
Sir, the bargain with Master Pohssib is the worst
that ever was made: for if he or his wife doe live 30 years,
(as by probability they will) you lose 17000l. by the bar∣gain
at least. And if they die sooner, you shall save little.
Therefore my advice is, that either you buy it absolutely for
ready money, or yield it back with reasonable consider∣tion
for your money lent, so shall you be free from exclama∣tions.
I thought so, I warrant thou art as fearful of ex∣clamations,
as of thunder-bolts: there is nothing with you
but exclamations, imputations, infamy, reports, descry∣dite,
and the like. A rush, a rush, and they are all one to me.
Well, I thank you for your pains. Now ply the Knight &amp;
his Father-in-law about the 1000l. account.
I will.  then until the next
need I am cashiered.
What is your opinion sir Hermito of this mans di∣sposition?
Alas, I could wish the poor man would consider
better of his souls state. Hee seems to have a great wit,
which he bends wholly to gather worldly wealth, not re∣guarding
how he gets it. We that have put riches in the last
place of our care, or rather fly from them as pernicious doe
indeed, condemn for folly all the corking and study to
increase our own hurts as they will prove to be, especially
gotten by indirect means.
Doe you call him poor, who is reckoned very
rich, and full of money to put out for gain? such men are
nowadays highly esteemed, much sued unto, and among
their praises that is chief, that he excelled others in money
at use. And in the country among plain fellows it is a
special mark or token that he is a good man (as they call
him) if he have 100•1. or tow at use, and without that he is
not counted sound, or out of debt.
More is the pity. It was wont to bee a thing odi∣os
among Christians, and used by none but Jaws▪ And
therefore we call such men poor, as being needy of good∣nes
and grace, have they never so great abundance so got∣ten
as they make their owners beggarly for grace.
Tic a marvailous toil and trouble that we courtiers are
put to, and little considered by the world abroad: for it is
commonly midnight before wee can be showed our cham∣bers.
There wee lye like dead persons until next day at
noon. All this while no body comes at vs, nor provides
vs any supping, nor so much as moans vs. Then are we for∣ced
to ri•e for stark hunger. Thus tied to our dinner till two
of the clock: from that time until four, we must not stir
from our seat, one discourse after an other holds vs fast.
Then go we on visitation from chamber to chamber: and
before wee know perfectly how every one had their health
since yesternight, and exchanged our complemental
terms, the clock strikes seven. Then duty calls vs to
Court our most respected and perfumed Mistress, whereof
we are not discharged till nine. Now supper bids every one
repair to his mess, which commonly continues no longer
then ten. And so after a crash of two hours in play, wee
are driven every one to his kennel at midnight, as I said be∣fore.
And this miserable life we lead, and yet are wee en∣vied
to have all the pleasures in the world. But I think no
wise man will so judge if he felt that we know.
Master Sperato. I have much desired to debate with you
the matter of drinking, and necessity thereof, because at our
last meeting here you were so bitter in speech as if wormwood
had been all night stooped in your stomach. Therefore
I sent for you once again to try if I can persuade you to re∣cantation
of your error.
That you may easily doe Gulato. For if singing the
same song over again may pleasure you, I can doe it with
much addition of voluntary.
Is it even so? then I see thou want breeding,
that art ungrateful for a kindness offered; and ignorant, not
sensible of the salutiferous operation of well brewed Ale:
which for thy edification, I will manifest and demonstrate
by a very familiar and apt similitude: and within the circum∣ference
of thy feeble comprehension, whereunto I will now
accommodate my whole oration.
You are grown very eloquent of late. I think the
Ale hath oiled your tongue.
Why, thou art in the right. I tell thee I am at this
instant so inflamed with the spirit of malt, and my wits so
refined with the manifold reverberations, and continual
posting correspondence between the residence of that li∣quor
in my stomach, and the quintisencicall receipts in my
head, that no particle of time passes, but whole streams of
exusflations, and insufflations ascend to the brains, and
there work wonders. By reason whereof it were not hard
for me to furnish Ryder himself with 2000 new words not
yet seen in his Dictionary. I could turn Astronomer▪ and
give names to any stars that want. I can pass for a Physi∣cian
among many fools, and kill as many as the best Doctor
of them all. Finally, what would I not undertake as now I
am armed? But to return to my druggicall similitude,
from which thy way wardnes hath diverted me.
Nay, let that alone until an other time. I under∣stand
already as much as I need for that matter: I must be
gone.
You shall stay to hear it; and let me have your
judgment, whether I might not with a little reading prove
a perfect urinal•st.
You are so troublesome when you fall into this
case that I cannot skill of your company.
I tell thee it is the best Physic that ever thou
had.
I believe it before-hand. What need you more?
O Master Spurco, you are welcome: speak your
mind freely: doe not you think it better to sit merrily a
whole winters day, and most part of the night by a good
fire, and command (like men of authority) the Tipster
to fill vs an Ocean of drink if we lift, and there among
good fellows to hear more news then all the world
knows to be true, then to toil and trash in the dirt with∣out
conversation, seldom coming near one another as
Hunters doe.
No certainly. I hold it a beastly thing to sit besea∣ling
upon a bench, and suck in drink, as pigs do dregs
in a trough: which custom although some base Huntimen,
and Falconers use, yet if I did think that Hunting were as
odious and displeasing to God as drunkenness is, I would
soon dispatch my dogs.
And I will free the Court from the foul &amp; loath∣some
custom of drunkenness. For seldom and with very
few it is used there. Officers, and order forbids it as vnseem∣lie
for a Princes palace. I wish we were as clear from Idle∣ness,
pride, disdain, envy, lechery, covetousness, flat∣rye,
lying, cosenage, oppress•on, and unthriftiness, as we are
from drunkenness.
Mary Sir, these are vices enough. And except you
were guilty of all the deadly sins, and breach of every
commandment, I know not what you could add to these.
The delights of hunting and hawking, as also of o∣there
exercises, were (no doubt) ordained by God to com∣fort
man in his banishment here, and to give him a taste of
the unspeakable pleasures in Heaven, (our own c•untire)
but the excess and abuse of any pastime, argues the receiver
unreasonable, and turns the benefit into detriment.
Of drunkards I say shortly and sharply; they deprave
Gods blessings, rob and murder the poor, undo the
Common-wealth, bring Gods curse upon the country; de∣privy
themselves of Heaven, and merit Hell.
The Courtier (who ought to bee the square of the coun∣try
by his civil example) pulls upon himself the ruin of
millions, and sins much with doing little.
I am crushed in the head: no more drinking; fare∣well
good Ale.
Give me thy hand. Wee are all in little better case
for any thing I hear by the judgment of wise men.
I have had such a stir with this same beggar Pohssib, his
wife, and his friends: and so many complaints they have
made to the King and Council, and turn themselves into
all shapes and faces to force me either to go through with
the bargain or give it over, that diverse of my friends are
brought to favour his part for stark equities sake. But doe
all what they can I will have it, and not have it: I will hold
it, and not hold it. And I will none of the purchase, and yet
not give it over.
I told you Sir, what an intricate business it would
prove to be, and full of slander: therefore I wished you to end
it by yielding the bargain back, for that will be the end of
it.
Thou know not what will be the end of it, nor
I my self; but I can best guess, because I know his poor e∣state.
I have made a privy search into his debts; and some
creditors I have pulled upon him sooner then they meant.
And in writing I have every sum he owes to neighbours,
to workmen, and to his very servants. And this is the
plummet I sound withal. This must bring the fi•h into my
net Proberio. But what have you done with the Knight and
his Father-in-Law Master Eloc, for the 1000l. account?
Sir, that account goes otherwise then you would
have it; for they prove that there was 12001. taken up, and
of that you are to pay 400l.
Are you sure of that?
I am so sure, that I am ashamed ever to have spoken
in a matter so contrary to good conscience.
You are so spic'd-conscienc'd, that there is no
dealing with you. Will you demand if they will swear in
Chancery, that so is the account.
That I will doe, and I am sure they will not refuse
it.  this is but to colour his
dishonest meaning, he knows the truth as well and bet∣la
then they.
These fellows are so rash, that a little thing will
satisfy them. I am partly persuaded the accounts be as he
speaks, but it is good to be sure. Thus thou must do Simon∣plo
in like cases, if thou wilt be a wise, politic and wary
fellow.
I hear it well Sir, and have locked it up safely in
my memento. I give you many thanks for the 1001. you
gave me for my land, and for your careful putting out the
money as your own. I again for my part have sealed the
writings, and am ready to doe any thing else for making it
sure to you. It is a good hearing that Master and man agree
so well as your worship and I doe now. Now they say it is a
good title, and they will not make question of it, since you
have gotten it.
No, I think not: for all their babbling they will
not easily begin sui•e with me to recover it away.
Fear nothing of that Sir, I can tell you news.
They say now your title to it is as good as any man hath to
his land. And that you will keep my 100l. as safe as the
land; and that's good for me.
That's no news. You may see now what it is to
be circumspect in my dealing, and to have a name to hold
fast. Learn this against the time that you have more land.
Did you ever hear (neighbour Hortano) such a broil
between man and wife as yonder was between Porco and
his wife? you and I did very wisely to come away. For sure
they did strive before vs for their credit sake to get the vi∣ctorie
of each other by scolding; now we are gone perhpas
they will give over. Me thought it was very no some to
hear such unseemly words pass from married folk.
Sure their bitterness passed the bou•ds of hume∣night.
They make me afraid of marrying, if such jars fall out
between those that be one flesh.
Let it not discourage you more then it repents
me that I am married: for it lies in your power to have all
well and quiet if you chance to mary even one of the short
rib• of the great Devil.
How can that be neighbour Rustico? if you can
teach me that, you doe much. For I have heard many say,
that it is impossible to tame a shrew by any means, except
by having no woman at all.
If you talk of taming by violence, you say well,
it cannot be, for the more you strive to break their stomach▪
the more it grows; like camamile, the more you tread it, the
more it spreads; and like a tree felled, where will grow 40
springs. But take a twig by the top▪ and gently bend it by
little and little, it will grow in what fashion you will. A wasp
is a shrewd stinging beast by nature, but if she light upon
your face and hands, and creep up and down, let her a∣lone,
and take her pleasure, she will doe you no harm, and
quietly pass away. So if your wife will meddle with all
things, give her liberty to doe what she will, you shall have
her merry else she were worse then the Devil.
I think this is very likely: but who can endure his
wife to doe what she lists at all times?
That can I, and that must you, or else you are• not
wise; for if you may have peace upon any conditions, is it
not your fault if you •buse to be jarring?
But I have heard say▪ it is better to have honourable
wars, then inconvenient peace.
That is among strangers and enemies; but among
friends, and with your self, what peace can bee dishonou∣rabble?
How comes thou to be so cunning in this kind
of argument?
Even as you may if you will take the course that I
doe. I have a wife, the best creature that ever you saw in the
order that she takes with me. But if I should be churlish, as
perhaps you would be, and cross her never so little, she
would rage like a fury of Hell. She speaks, and I give ear;
she gives counsel, and I practise; she commands, &amp; I obey;
she chides, and I hold my peace; she preaches, and I believe;
thus we live as lo•mgly as Master and Scholar.
But who could abide his wife to teach and con∣troll
him?
Every man that loves his ease. And if all wives be
〈◊〉 mine is, she shall be thrice happy to obey her. For she is the
best woman to bring up husbands that ever was borne. She
will so instruct them in the wonderful virtue of patience,
that if they will be ruled by her monitions, they shall be as
good as martyrs, a great deal better then living Saints. I
thank her heartily, she is my Pilcatory in this world, I shall
go straight to Heaven whenever I dye. Therefore left I
should lose the benefit of the blessed state I stand in by any
misdemeanour of mine. I dare not offend her in the least
matter. O it is a great blessing to have such a wife.
But for all this it should bee long before I would
choose such a wife, which did desire to cary such a hand over
me as she doth over thee.
O neighbour Horton•, that thou did but taste of
the fruits of patience! 
 Look where my wife is; I know her by the
sign of the Bible. See how devout she is. She never looks
lightly lower then the Element. You may say what you will
now, she cannot hear a word, her meditations be so fer∣vent.
Why doth she cary that cudgel while she is pray∣ing?
 That is
her rod of discipline, and a strange thing it is which now I
tell you. She is never so rapt up in her devotions, but if I cō∣mit
the least fault (as wretched man that I am many times I
doe, and my best actions are abominable) she perceives it
presently (and yet is deaf to all other noise) and she come•
to me fiercely in the heate of her charity, and corrects me
very handsomely with that wand.
But will she correct her servants with this cudgel?
O no, very seldom, she does not love them so
well) except it be a very great fault. But in me (for the en∣tire
love she bears me) she will not suffer the least sin un∣punished,
lest (as she saith) any might remain to bee rebu∣ked
by hell fire.
But I had rather be her servant, then her husband,
if she strike with such twigs.
Had you so? but so had not I. For by this I am
made sure of my election, when I doe patiently endure so
great correction.
How doth she bring up thy son Jack?
Admirably well: for lest he should prove an Idol∣tour
she will not let him ask blessing upon his knees. And
lest he should abate of his mettle and stomach, he must no∣ver
put off his hat to vs, nor be denied any thing he calls for:
so that being now but six years old he will fight, scratch,
and tumble himself upon the ground, crying until his hart
break if he may not have his will in every thing. Then is
there no way but give it him, or else he will die with skre∣ming.
O, he will prove a man of outrageous spirit. It makes
me sometimes doubt he should not be my child, he hath so
noble a stomach, far beyond mine. And, but that I know
his mother to be a very religious professor, I assure you it
would trouble me much, he discovers s• much fury in his
fashions, and such might by his madness, that I think ma∣ny
times some giant got him when my wife was asleep, for
I am sure she would never suffer it waking.
Nay, nay, if your wife bee a woman of that com∣mand
as you describe he• to be, and as she makes show of no
less by her part, it may well be, the Boy takes his courage
from her, and his outward personage from you.
You say well neighbour Hortano, that may be;
but I doe half mistrust my own worth in getting such a
child: but yet I love him as well as if he were my own.
I came hither to seek a kind of husband that I
have. He wants government and discipline (I am sure) ere
this time: for I have not seen him these three days past: the
poor man will be undone, if I light not on him shortly.
O, she seeks me. What a good woman is this?
I must needs go to her. Stand by neighbour▪ and note
how zealously she will edify me. How doe you good wife?
I knew it was you so soon as I saw you any thing near me.
May I be so bold as to ask where you have been these two
or three days? My boy Jack and I think long until you
come home.
Why should you ask so foolish a question? you
know that I must frequent my contemplation: in which I
cannot be less then two or three days: the fervour of spy∣rit
is such among the elect that they may not depart in short
time from their meditations, especially having such learned
Teachers among vs, that are never wearied, and willing to
accompany and conduct vs in the darkest dangers. O the
delights, pleasures, and sweet delectations that we feel du∣ring
the time of these contemplations, that wee think no
time contentedly spent but when we are employed in these
exercises. I think verily my goodly boy Jack was begot∣ten
and conceived in these deep contemplations.
What wife; and I not there?
Alas man, why should you trouble your self with
these matters which be so far out of your reach? was it
not enough if my spirit did wish you present? or that in
conceit you were with me? what if you were asleep at
that instant, and so it were revealed to me by the spirit? or
if you had been present, and my spirit should inwardly te∣stiff
unto me that a teaching Saint must be preferred, ought
not you to give place? I pray you husband give over to
mu•e on these hidden secrets, for otherwise these thoughts
ma• make you •orne-mad.
How can you defend that to be lawful to be got∣ten
with child by any but your husband?
Inde•d wife I cannot but think this reason good
that you say, but I would have been glad to bee father to
my own child if it had pleased you.
What doe you talk of reason? it is beyond reason.
It is matter of predestination, and preordination. Where is
now your obedience and pati•nce so often inculked un••
unto you? I perceive it is ready to fly out by your exteri∣our
parts, but I will chastise this rebellious flesh, and make it
subie•• to the spirit.
Where learned you to beat your husband?
It is lawful &amp; possible for me to extract tears from
his f••nty hart with this rod of discipline, correcting him
as the spirit moves me.
But how shall he know that a good spirit moves
you to correct him?
That appertains not to him to examine. It is suffi∣cient
that his wife hath that inward testimony which ena∣b•eth
and emboldened her to doe her function, and to mi∣nister
disciplinary documents. And this hee is firmly to
hold, or else he loses his election.
Nay wife; rather then I should not be one of the e∣lect
I pray you beat me again.
You are not to inform me when I shall strike. It is
the lively spirit which directs me: and now it tells me
you need not at this time more to bee humbled. Go in
peace, and be patient.
O Gods blessing on thy kind heart. See how fa∣vourable
a spirit she hath. I cannot choose but weep for this
love.
Lo now Hortano the virtue of this rod, which
brings so plentiful tears from this Rock•• stomach of
his.
But for all this I see no ground or proof you have,
that a wife shall take upon her to teach and correct her hus∣band.
You allege Scripture as far as Rome is from Rock∣ingham,
and expound it at your pleasure, and frame it to
your own fancy: but if I were your husband I would cud∣gill
you well, and by the word maintain it better.
What not yet understand thou the text? O fool,
and slow of belief! If thou were my husband 
 I would ding it into thy brain in
another fashion then by proofs. I pre thee tell me, must
not men be taught and instructed?
Yes: but what, shall women doe it?
Who else I pray you▪ shall beasts doe it? Although
women may not speak in the Church (which is great pity)
yet we may preach in chambers, and men are tied to hear
vs.
No, nor sluts neither: but men shall instruct men.
Jump. And so womnn instruct women, and none of
them shall come to other. And how shall there then be pro∣creation
of the holy ones, and the Israel of God bee multi∣plied?
Nay neighbour Hortano, I warrant you my wife
will prove any thing she saith one way or other. But good
wife, let me entreat one thing at your hands (if your spirit
cōsent, that is, that I may call your son Jack my boy for my
credit sake. And that he may know no other but he is mine,
and then shall I be quiet in mind, and think you deal ve∣rye
justly and liberally with me.
With all my heart. And I profess unto you that hee
shall never know otherwise by me: but I doubt his gene∣rous
spirit will not suffer him (after a few years of descry∣tion)
to tarry long in that error, but that he will heroical∣lie
disdain to have you otherwise accounted of then his
reputed father: and that he is rather the son of some zea∣lous
brother, who never sees the Relikes of Charing-crosse,
but wishes hee were on horse-backe with a lance in his
hand, in full speed to bear it down. And yet his mother ex∣treame
honest for all this.
All this I stedfastlic •wprd•. And I am afraid my
own weakness will be the first discoverer, and plead not
guilty to getting of such a son. Nevertheless (good wife)
I cannot choose but thank you much for your kindness, that
he shall be called my son, that men may think so nobly
yet of me to doe such a deed. And for you wife) I will
swear you are a very honest woman for all this.
No husband. You shall not swear so rashly. I
thank you as much as though you did. Your saith shall
save you without swearing.
Was ever man more blessed with a wife then I am?
(Then he holds his hands before his face, &amp; false to a silent me∣ditation
a prery while, at last fetching a great sigh, hee saith)
The Lord make me thankful. (Then he h•des his face with
his hands again, and so stands a while sighing and sobbing,
•ntill Hortano shake him by the arm, saying).
How now Rustico, what wilt thou doe: kill thy
self with this same foolish zeal? pluck up a good heart,
and live to see thy boy a man.
A man. He is a man already at six years age by
his great stomach; and I think in my conscience I am not
half his father. But I beshrew you for troubling me, you
have done you know not what: for I was even melting into
• martyr.
A martyr. How can thou be a martyr?
O yes, and I shall die so patiently, that I dare not
call for a posit how sick soever I be for fear of sinning, till
the very point of death. And now I begin to be hart-sick.
If you find your self so sick indeed, I wish you to
make your will, and dispose of your estate.
How? make my will? thats the next way to die in
earnest.
Not a whit nearer death for that.
O yes. A will, and a toling bell are as present death
as Gods tokens. No: •le none of that.
Let me persuade you (neighbour Rustico) to make
your will. I assure you it is superstition to think death to be
•error you for that cause.
Superstition. The Lord defend me▪ I had rather not
•o observe order in any thing then to be thought superstiti∣os.
I agree to you neighbour, and thank you for your gen∣•le
persuasion. I will presently doe it while I am in perfect
memory.
• First, for my soul; I will not bequeath it to God, but let
•t go even as it is predestined.
2 My body may be buried if my executor will pay for it, or
else let it alone, and be patient, as I was when I lived.
3 At my burial I de••re my wife to preach, and no body
to hear her but my sweet boy •ask and I.
4 Forty shillings I give to any man that shall put me into
the book of Martires.
5 My wit, &amp; such like movables I leave as an heireloome
to my son Jack  upon whom
my desire is that the firmament may power down as many
joyful lots as there are hears upon his fingers ends; &amp; that
his seed may multipli• like mice in a maltheape.
6 All my breeches I bestow upon my beloved wife.
7 My land (if any be given me after my death) I freely be∣stow
upon him that shall marry her to amend his bargain.
8 The rest of my goods and chattels which cannot bee
found I will shall be equally divided (at my executors dis∣creation)
among the poor of the parish wheresoever I shall
die.
9 And of this my last will and testament I make the long∣est
siuer in London my sole executor, because I will have no
fighting, nor suits in law for my goods.
10 And you neighbour Hortano I make overseer of this
my will, and for your pains to be taken therein, I give you
all that shall be overplus after execution of the same,
Now my sight fails. Lead me, lead me good neighbour
home: and to bed, and so farewell, and good night.
Here is more work for vs Noverindo (and wee will not
work for simple fees though foedum simplex bee a good te∣nure)
a friend of mine wants 2000•1 and I must have it for him
within these two days or he seeks elsewhere.
In any case hold him in, let him not scope, hee shall
pay for his expedition. Isle about it, and Isle have it for you
within 24 hours, or Isle give you my head 
 I had almost forgot a
matter of weight: you are entreated by the whole comp∣no
of our sort, that some order may bee taken to check• the
sauciness of divers mean persons that enquire for monies
to be taken up. They make no more ado, but with hats on
their heads, ask the question thus: have you 100• to lend
upon good security: what a malapertness and abuse is this?
Of my honesty Sir. (what a villain was I to swear so deep∣lie?)
there be many knights, and some Lords that have not
always 1001 to lend upon an instant. And then what reason
is there, that we which have it at all hours should be so slē∣dearly regarded?
You say well Noverindo: I wish it to be redress∣sed:
bu• what would the company have me to doe?
This Sir: you are acquainted at Court: they entreat
that you would use your friends to get a grant under the
broad seal (whatsoever it cost) that we may erect an office
with a master and clerks belonging to it, to the end that e∣very
one which wants money may repair thither, and upon
request to the under clerks speak with the master of the of∣fice,
and •hence take directions how to proceed, and so obe∣taine
money. This will make them know themselves, and
yield duty to them that it appertains: when they shall
come by degrees to the worth of money.
This I like well; but it will be a great charge to
maintain master and clarks in an office, so shall wee loose
much out of our gain.
Sir you mistake it quite. The company hath argue∣ed
that case to and fro. The master and clarks will pick out
a living well enough I warrant you out of them that take up
m•hie, and this will free them from other brocage. As you
know all offices are maintained by the suitors, not by the
granters of the place.
Right: but who shall be at the charge of the pa∣tent?
That must be done by the company. But weal
lose nothing by it. For wee are determined to let no money
go but one way or other we will get 30 in the 100. And if
we give commodities we will have more: &amp; tic reason too.
The worse the bargain is, the more they must lose that take
it. And there is another thing that we will be at the charge
of Sir. Wherein we must crave your help also. And that is:
some arms from the king of Heralds appropriated to our
company alone, and hanged up behind the master of the
office: this will give honour to the place, and cause suitors
to understand they enter into a court of command and au∣thoritie.
O, I could fit these fellows to a hair. I could de∣vise
them a crest as fit as a fan for a for•horse.
Proberio: here is Noverindo hath a piece of im∣ploiment
for you, and thinks you can discharge it well if
you list. And Isle see you well considred. It is this. That you
move the Heralds to give the company. Crest with the
due circumstances. And go in my name they will doe it the
more freely.
Sir I am the only man for such a business. If the
Herald cannot aptly conceive it, I can instruct him. Isle un∣dertake
to have it speedily.
Thanks Proberio: and thou shalt not travail for
unthankful persons.
Sir, it will cost 101 besides somewhat for expedition:
and I must have it ready to pay: for I will not come from
him till I bring it.
Here is 101 and a piece for expedition: and ano∣there
for thy pains: study hard to have it exactly done, thou
shalt have two pieces more. 
 stay, one word before you go. Let it bee
somewhat terrible to the beholders: weal make them do•
(that same) in their breeches.
But so you may scarre them quite away, they will
come there no more.
I warren: thee: if they were sure to go to prison
within a while after, they will come again for money. They
are very venturous: nay desperate: nay foolchardy. O, moans
is money, and they must have it.
Say no more, Isle be your warrant, it shall bee fear∣full
enough.  and make some of you stain the
place you stand in, and look backward what drops behind
you. Let me alone, Isle dress you as you should bee trimmed
30 in the 100. Isle not forget that upon my word.
It is even high time the world were at an end, for I think
all trades are decaying: when my father put me to the Innes
of Court he advised me in any case to study, so that I might
be called to the bar, and then (saith he) fear not to live in
all plenty and credit. But I find it otherwise, for now that I
am exalted thither, my law serves me not to get my com∣mons.
I wish I had been bred a Tipster: that trade is now
more gainful with froth then ours with all our words. And
for any thing I see tic like to last to the worlds end, whereas
ours can be good no longer then people bee contentious.
And that is a special argument the ale. sellers use against vs,
saying that we gain by falling out of neighbours, &amp; friends
but they grow rich by meeting of good fellows, and sit∣ting
together lovingly. There are so many hindrances
grownevp of late that it is impossible our reign should
long continue although it be true (and wee complain not)
that malice is as great among men as ever it was, and can be
wished: but the mischief is, their money fails, &amp; they grow
wiser.
I marvel what will satisfy your greedy desires.
have you not the whole kingdom at your service &amp; beck?
what Lord, Knight, Gentleman, Merchant, Husbandman,
or other sort of people is not attendant at your study doors,
with paying and praying? and glad that the fee which hee
gives is of that glorious operation, that it breeds no wrin∣cles
in your forehead, but is cheerfully received? What
co•gees, and submissive requests to peruse their case with a
little care? What troupes conduct you to the bar? What
venison sent to your feafts? What respect and entertain∣meant
if you vouchsase to visit their country houses? And
finally, what honour and homage can bee done to subjects,
but you have it in all fulness, and yet you whine as not con∣tented.
I perceive you would murmur if you were so hand∣led
as poor merchants are, that unless we turn Usurers,
we cannot live.
You complain without cause Mureto. Your
case is far better then ours: for if one country or common∣ditty
afford not gain, you can go into another, and chop
and change as often as you list. We are tied to one country
and place. You may offer your wares▪ and are sure to have
traffic as the times and prices be. We may not tender our
service to any, but sit gaping in our chambers, as melancho∣like
as mice, until some body chance to knock at the
door.
It is merry when fisher-men complain of Hearing∣men.
Surely the world might well spare of both sorts of
you a great number. Concerning you Master Mureto, it is
clear that you play the merchant with vs, who bite and
whine at your impositions. although you lose nothing; but
the whole burden thereof falls upon them who spend the
commodities, and must ere they buy, pay the shot of your
impositions whatsoever it be.
And for you Master Lawyer, that grow fat with the
drops which false from other men's brows, and be merry
with the frets that gall the Clients hearts: whose grief
is always to hear of peace and charity; and rejoice with
the Fox, that the hens fall out for their perch: what foul•
find you with this world that was never so rich with envy,
and full of suits? You are like the by•e among gamesters,
which gains whosoever lose. But if all men were of my
temper, I would make you leap a yard high for a groat.
What, a whole yard? what if I were never at
the dancing school, and cannot caper so high?
Then thou should have but two pence.
Nay; I know a trick worth two of that. For if
our craft fail, Isle turn minister: and that I am sure will not
deca•.
Woe be to that P••each that shall have a Lawyer to
their Pastor▪ some bee already troubled sufficiently with
citations; they need no common Law writs. And without
a capias vtlegaium, a Lawyer can never preach.
Who can endure this filthy Farmer to rail as he
doth at vs two Mureto? Let vs set upon him. Are you so
free without fault Master Granite, that you may throw your
stones so thick at others? Belike no complaints are made
against you for hoording up co•no against a dear year, for
selling to badgers at a dear rate, and not serving the mar∣ket:
for mingling bad corn with the good, and foul dres∣sing
of the best. For deceitful plowing your neighbours
ground that hires you at a hard rate, which makes the poor
man weep at harvest. Besides many other country tricks
which breed new cases among old Lawyers, which I could
argue upon an hour together, if I were not presently to go
to the hall to move in the Kings beneh upon an e•action fir∣me.
By liken (Master Granato) you had been as good
held your peace as buckled with a Lawyer. I sue•e he hath
in few words touched you to the quick, and done you no
•rong neither in mine opinion: but wee will adiourne this
disputation until our next meeting, and in the mean time
provide your self for a better defence.
Sir, Master Eloc and the Knight have given me a copy of
their account, and according to your charge, and their de∣fence
I have drawn bill and answer. I have showed it them;
they liked it, and wish it should be engrossed, and put into
the Court, they will depose the answer is true.
Is it so? well, give me them. If I find them in that
forwardness I will take their word, and end it with kind∣nes.
Proberio, you must remove your trunks and stuff
presently. I will clear my chambers from all men but my
self.
What? just so soon as I have done all your busi∣ness
must I be gone, you might have suffered me until you
go out of town, if then you will needs have me remove.
You were wont to let me lye here a week after, or as long
as I needed. Mary now I find the cause of that to be, that
you had then some business for me to doe.
Yes; but I purpose to sell my lodgings, and I must
have them out.
Where shall I lye this night, being suddenly vnpro∣vided?
and whither shall I cary my stuff?
You shall have a bed at the Inn where my horses
stand. And your stuff may be put in the out room, near
the garden.
There they may be stolen; but I must bee content,
(though not pleased) if there be no remedy.
You owe me six pound; you must provide it pre∣sently,
or else I will arrest your sureties.
That six pound I doe not owe, although you got
my bond for it by a very hard and undue course. And to
this I will depose. And if I did, I hope you will not exact
it, having received such kindness heretofore from me when
I was able, and you in extreme need thereof, and now do∣ing
you so many services.
Tell me nothing of that; you have been satisfied
in your diet and lodging to a better value.
In lodging? I am ashamed to hear such a word,
(though you be not to allege so base a reckoning) I had
always my own sheets, except sometimes when mine
were finer, you would change with me for worse. And the
great diet I had was sometimes a piece of chief, and one
egg; for which benefits, I have travailed like a Porter, &amp;
written like a Clarke. Is this your gratitude for good turns
past? and are all your promises thus performed?
How? gratitude? every beggar talks of gre∣titude.
It is for such as you to •ue for mercy, not to talk of
gratitude, which is among equals.
These were not your words to me, when you were
a beggar, and a borrower from m•e, and had need of the
poorest help; but then you found no beggar of me, but
your best friend.
A proper reckoning. This fellow looks for re∣compence.
Why, he had my countenance which made him
many times respected. And I could yet be content to speak
for him, but doth he expect farther? why, the fellow knows
not the world. Simplo, tell him that if my word may doe
him any good, he shall have it: but if he love his liberty, let
him challenge no deeds at my hands. He never had more of
me then my word for that he now claims. And doth hee
think to build castles upon my word? if he doe, they shall
come down apace. Now he is gone to remove his stuff,
bid my Attorney take out execution against his surety.
This is cold comfort for me. Sir, you make me
half afraid, you will turn me off at the worst time of the
year. I am not able to deserve so well at your hands as he
hath done, and yet so lightly regarded. That is very hardly
done.
Do•t thou fear turning off? it comes with a
fear, and ends with a fever. Thou moist go as soon as thou
wilt after him.
If it please you to give me my 1001. I will take my
leave now.
Soft a while, where is your witness that I have
100•. of yours? And if I had, thou were content I should
use it as mine own. But go to, Isle pay thee. There was a
knave ran away with 100•. of mine, Isle change with thee;
seek him out, take the money, and hang him▪ that's interest.
 This is a poor help for my
1001. for all this Isle not leave his service until I get my 1001.
or somewhat for it. I wood I had my land again at a ven∣ture.
Sir, I have removed my stuff into your garden room;
but there it is not safe from robbing. And at your Inn I
can have no lodging. I must sit by my stuff all night.
It will be so much the safer.
I hear besides that my surety is in execution at
your suite for the six pound.
That may be. I cannot help it unless I be paid.
You know I owe you nothing of that money.
I know not that.
Will you have my oath?
No.
Will you refer it to friends?
No.
To your own brother?
No.
I protest upon my faith no penny of this money is
due. And yet to save my surety I offred a fine mewed Gos∣•auk•,
which before good witness you did accept, and cau∣sed
me to keep a whole Michaelmasse •ea•me in London:
but at the end of that very teat•me unknown to me, you
sneaked out of town leaving order to have my surety are∣sted,
and so followed, that now hee is • execution upon
that only suite. I say no more, but demand judgment in
this case.
Proberio, I have done thee the grace to hear thee
to the full. And it joys me much, that either he shall die in
prison, or I shall have that money.
Was there ever any so hard hearted? Twenty
years past, when I was in prosperity, and he at point of
death, by rigour of Law, I took many costly journey to
Court, labouring for his pardon. I did him all the good
offices that a true friend could doe for another. And I left
nothing undone that might doe him good. Besides, I lent
him 50•. gratis in those times, my self paying interest for
that money. At which time what vows and promises he
made me, I let pass, as ungrateful to my heart in repeating,
and serve to no other purpose but for a warning, and a wō∣der
that so much ingratitude should harbour in an English
man. And now you are all witnesses of my reward.
Now Granato, if you be content to yield the victory un•o
Master Malingua this Lawyer, and confess to have
wronged vs merchants with the petulance of your prating;
you may perhaps have your punishment extenuated if wee
be your Judges, and so quietly shut up all among our selves.
I am so far from any such confession and submiss∣zion,
that I offer to maintain every word spoken in our last
contention. And for judgment I appeal from you both;
and know that I am your ancient from the time that Adam
dug the earth for his living.
Then purge your self Granato from the crimes
we charged you withal: and the end will try if you had
not done better to take penan•• for your faults at our
hands.
For the high prices of corn (which falsely and
absurdly you impute unto husbandmen) if you had either
wit or honesty you would soon grant that there are two
maine reasons for it which lye not in our power to redress,
but in the States wisdom to help. One is, the vncontrol∣led
and improvident liberty for all sorts &amp; degrees to mar∣rye,
so that many are grand-mothers at 30 years old. The
other is the multitude of Enclosures and decay of tillage.
And if we corne-men did not till all the ground we can get;
how dear (think you) would corn bee shortly? Many
other Reasons for brevity sake I omit, but these will hold
argument against you for term of both your lives, and
after your decease to your heirs males lawfully begot∣ten.
Believe me Master Mureto, this Farmer hath
made for himself a reasonable good Apology, and put vs a
hard case. It seems he hath studied well since our last parley.
But what say you Granato to your evil words lavished out
against Lawyers? therefore you must yet crave pardon.
Not I truly. For I gave you no worse speeches then
you give one another at the bar, nor so evil. For there
you fall out like any skoulds: but the worst is, you will be
friends at dinner, yet never in charity I think. And I see
no reason I should stoop to either of you, considering the
goodness of my cause. For I will be judged by any indiffe∣rent
man, if I, and such as I am, be not honester and better
then both your factions.
Since thou hast offred it, thou shalt not escape
until that be tried, Here sit a couple that seem very wise
by their silence, weal bee judged by them. What say you
Mureto?
With all my heart. For wee can not bee worse
then we are howsoever we speed.
A match. Isle refuse no mans opinion that is not of
your ranks.
Gentlemen. We need not report the causes of our
reference unto you. All our jars, and wrangles you have
heard. We entreat you to finish them with your doom.
To deal plainly with you all, mine opinion is,
that the world is generally more wronged and abused by
the Lawyer and merchant, then by the Farmer, who though
he have faults, yet gets he his living more honestly, and is of
necessity to be harboured. But Sir Hermito I must refer
the full decision of their cause to your censure.
That one of them is better then the other, I doe
not see; therefore me thinks the question should rather be
which is the worst. The Farmer that deceives so far as
his capacity will carry him, is condemned by his intention
to doe worse if his skill did enable him.
The Lawyer is a necessary member of the commonwealth
to find and determine every mans right. But if willingly
he oppugn right, and be enemy to peace, he is the Devils
agent, and Christs enemy.
Likewise a merchant which causes commerce and ami∣tie
between severed nations is a man commendable. But
if he use fraud, then is he pestiferous, and deserves banish∣meant
where no society is.
I told you Master Malingua, we could not lose
by the bargain. Now the Farmer is as bad as we. What
say you Granato to this gear?
I say little. Why? I can be content to bee as disho∣nest
as you. I am not proud of my honesty, nor doe I love
to be singular.
But now thou see we may be as honest as you, if
we will our selves.
Who denies that? I stand not much upon that
neither.
But hath this Hermits preaching done thee no
good? can thou be content to mend if we doe so too?
Yes, with all my heart. And Isle bee good before
both you if you mend not the faster.
Content. Let vs all amend: for I think in my
conscience it is even high time.
All our hands wee will join together in manner
of a vow that it shall be so.
Now, could I meet my merchant Noverindo, I have
here a whole library for his learning. Here he may study
while he spend his heart-blood with struggling, yet no•er
reach the depth with his petitoes.
How long I think until I meet Noverindo. All is ready
at our office, but the Blazonrse of our coat of Arms to be
set up, and for want of that we lose many hours. For there
be store of suitors without, that think long to seal they
care not what. But wee will not open the door until wee
furnish it with that gashefull spectacle to affront them. Yet
time is precious with vs, who must account to an hour, else
Isle not give a fart for a monie-monger that shall lose a mi∣nut
negligently.
This catiffe is careful of losing time in his wrath∣heaping
gain; but that this time be well spent, he takes no
care•at all. Well Sir, you shall not complain of me for kee∣ping
you too long from the Devil, the sooner you go, the
better for the country you live in. Noverindo: why fret
you your self? I have more need to bee choleric for
staying here this hour, waiting your leisure, while I might
have gotten 20•• by other employments.
I cry you mercy Master Proberio. I am sorry for
that. And I thought you had not dispatched our business.
I pray you let me see it. All our occasions are at a stand until
it come, for it must be set up before any be admitted thither,
or else the world will think it to be a new devised trick, and
not appendant to our corporation.
None but fools will think so when they view it
well, they shall be caught to acknowledge that it was due to
you long since, even from your first denomination.
Well said Proberio, so would I have it appear
indeed. Unfold, let me see it quickly. I am with child till
I see it.
With child? with the Devil you are. But soft Sir,
is there no more in the case then you make show of? what
presently see it, and have it, and set it up?
No. Why should there be any more circumstan∣ces
used? is it not ours, and belongs to vs only?
But Sir, have you forgotten my two pieces you
promised me upon finishing the business? I warrant you I
have deserved it you need not grudge me.
If I like it, I will perform your two pieces. Will
you not trust me for 44. shillings?
Why should you ask me such a question? Is there
any man in Christendom or in Kent, that you will trust for
40. shillings without good security?
No. But you have good security: for you have
the thing it self in your hand, which you may keep.
Yes, I have, and will keep you from sight of it un∣till
I have my money. For what can I tell? you may be so
overjoyed with the sight, that you may run mad upon
it. And then what guardian of yours while you live, or ad∣ministrator
when you die will pay me 44. shillings, especi∣ally
being due for a thing that put you out of your wits?
Therefore satisfy your self, you shall not see it until I have
every penny of my money.
How shall I know that it is done when I have
paid you?
Even as I know that you will pay me 100•. when I
and my sureties haue-seal'd the bond to your use before I
receive a penny.
You say well. Come, here is your money.
Now you shall see it. 
 Look here Sir, heere's rods in peace
for the villains.
 What Tiburnist is this? And
what's the mystery of all this picture?
Sir. this Tiburnist, or hangman is the Devil. And
this fellow that hath the purse is Iudas. the figure of 30 with
p-ioin'd to it signifies 30 pence, for which he sold his master.
That which follows is meant of Christ, worth a hundred
worlds: for which fact the Devil put a halter about his neck
and hanged him. So shortly this is the sum of all.
Iudas who for 30d sold Christ infinitely greatest
Was hanged by the Devils help, and reputed with the basest.
Before you saw the history,
Now you hear the mystery.
Tic a good exposition. But I wood I had my two
pieces again. I doe not like it very well, for many ignorant
people will take it far otherwise: as thus, 30. p. 30•. for a
hundredth. And he that takes 30• in the 100. is to be hanged
by the Devil.
Tic true. many may think so: but your Clerks must
inform them in the sense. No man can put a secret in fi∣gures
but it may be diversely interpreted. And so be all ore∣cles
taken in sundry senses.
But I wish it were made plainer to the vnderstan∣ding:
for the more part will take it as I did at first sight.
Why should you think so?
Because I cannot imagine any other meaning so
proper to those figures as that I conceived.
That's because you are parcel • guilty. But I will
gather two other conceits as proper as that of yours.
If you can doe so I am satisfied.
Thus 30• pro 100. that is, hee that gives 30 in the
100 is worthy to be hanged.
That judgment is very prejudicial for vs, &amp; may
force from vs many Clients.
I doe but guess at this for variety sake, And then an∣other
is this. 30• in the 100. hee that will not give 30 in the
100 is worthy to be hanged.
O this; this. none like to this. Now I like this riddle
excellent well that yields so many, &amp; so witty cōstructiōs.
Nay here one more comes flowing in. I tell you tic
a very copious theme. • could keep you here this hour
with voluntary variety. I remember them as fast as they
come into my brains by huddles. 30 in the 100. and the
hangman by: that is, he that will not give 30 in the 100. shall
bee hanged before he get any money there.
And so he shall • warrant him. This is as good or
rather better then the other. I commend thee Proberio. ei∣there
of these will serve our turn.
Here, thou shalt have one piece more. Isle bee bigger to
thee then my word. Thou wilt make all our worships harts
merry with this device.
I thank you Sir. And if you knew with what alacri
tie, and willingness I went about it, you would think it
well bestowed.
Let him go, he carries his own rod. No man that hath
his senses will conjecture otherwise then himself did at
first. videlicet.
He that takes 30 in the 100 and not a penny under,
Is worthy to be pendent till the hemp crack• asunder.
I bad you go to M. Thompson for my rent, have you
brought it.
Sir, he hath sent your rent all but 30 shillings which
he abated for 80 caudles at 4• the caudle.
What an ass art thou? I sent thee for my rent, no•
to pay for caudles.
Why sir, he deducted it, then how could I help it?
it were a great shame not to pay for your diet in the accoūt.
You should have left the imputation to me.
So I did nevertheless: but for my credit sake that
fetched them every morning I thought reason to discharge
your score.
Score? what score? is my hand at it? or did you
keep a tallie?
I kept no tallie but he is a very honest man, &amp; his
wife chalked them up behind the do•e.
I am as honest as they. but yet I never use to keep
reckoning of caudles when they be eaten half a year before
and the taste washed from my throat. If hee cannot afford
his Landlord 100. caudles without money, he is no Tenant
for me. What; no less then 30 shillings in caudles taken
out of my rent at a clap, who did ever hear of the like? And
the price too is monstrous: groats apiece? why, it were
enough for a supper at my chamber. Indeed they were very
sweet and good, but what of that? a man may buy gould
too dear. Tell him from me, I will not allow him a penny
for caudles, and yet I will have my rent.
Sir, there stands a poor gentlewoman called Mi∣stress
Richardson at the door, and desires to speak with you.
A poor woman, what have I to doe with poor
folks? bid her come in, she shall•be never the richer for me.
Sir, a kinsman of yours and mine, a knight, when he went
to travail had no money to spare, but bestowed on me 10•
which you owe him by this your bill. I beseech you to pay
me, for now I am in want.
Let me see the bill. If it be mine I will discharge
it. She gives him the bill, and after well viewing, 〈◊〉 off
the seal, and saith▪ I owe him nothing, nor will pay thee a∣ny
thing.
Why doe you tear the bill • if you will not pay
it.
Did not you say it was my bill? if it be mine, why
may not I doe with it as I list my self?
But you promised to discharge it; and doing so,
it is at your pleasure to tear or burn it.
Have I not discharged it think thou? I warrant
thee •is sure enough for ever charging me ago•e.
O heavens! was there ever such a monster hatched•
what age but this could have fostered so degenerous, so
shameless, so frontlesse a beast as thou ••t? It had been
happy for many that have had to do with thee if that Skin∣•r•
this had been flayed from that impudent face of thine.
Be gone; Thy tongue is left thee to rail at large,
but thy means be short to revenge thy self by law. There∣fore
feed upon thy woes, and tears, money thou get
none of me.
Courage my companions. Pluck up your hearts, me
thinks I hear the sound of trumpets and drums within
my breast. Whether I wake or sleep nothing but Alarms
beset my thoughts: wars cannot be far off. Every thing
prognosticates stirs and broils. The very children •u∣flare
in the streets. We have lived a great while like meta∣•orphised
men. It is such a sight for soldiers to walk in
Pawles with long cloaks and grave attire as if they were
turned Civilians. Why should we alter our proper habits
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
being ensigns of honour? Hath not the whole need of vs
by turns, and fits? And to one place or other we are still in∣vited.
We succour the besieged, and relieve the distressed.
We restore kingdoms, and set captives at freedom. We
•os and tennis Crowns and Monarchies, &amp; bestow them
at pleasure. Finally we make the earth tremble, and disco∣lore
the running streams.
Some few faults we have, but not worthy to be so general∣lie
condemned.
The life of a soldier as now adays it is used, is
of all occupations the worst: and in a word is the high way
to Hell.
You need not bend your self so stiff•y against a∣no
sorts of people, •e they never so wicked, being your self•
one of the basest and most unnecessary fruitspillers that e∣ver
made themselves mercenary. An Intelligencer, a spy, an
Euesdropper is hated, and shunned of all the world.
As true as I live, it were a good deed to appre∣hend
you. Isle lay my life you are an enemy• to the state.
Yes to your state. doe you kick already? nay
Isle gale you better yet. with thy borrowed bravery thou
perkest, and insinuatest thy self into the best company, &amp;
vnderminest their thoughts with thy lavish and warranted
impeaching of states proceedings. And if any perhaps se∣cond
thee in thy fained murmurin• him thou pursue, and
become first his animator, and then his accuse•. such a one
was D. Pary until the snare hee laid for others compassed
his own neck.
Sir, you doe vs unsufferable injury: we are busi∣ed
only in our Countries service, and certify all things of∣fensiue
to it.
Thats the intent of your mission, and cause of
your entertainment. But you (to seem diligent) attend
ma••e times to bibles and toys, and the better to pack a∣wa•e
paper you send your own surmises when weightier
•ffaires either happen not, or escape you. And so least you
seem to neglect your service, you return tri••es.
For any thing I see you are both pernicious mē∣bers,
and never to bee nourished but in cases of necessity.
We Musicians are fortunate who hurt none, and covet to
please none. We drive away melancholy, We recreate the
mind, and revive the benumbed spirits, and are welcome to
all sorts. Such soldiers as you are Segnieur Furioso I make
no more account of, then of so many foul thistles in a me∣dow
at Midsommer, whose heads every child will whip
off with a wand And I will have a still, plain, temperate lad
shall break thy bones with his blow, when such ay•e bea∣ters
will •carce pierce the skin. I will my self bee one of
the six Musicians that with the help of a few unarmed silly
folks shall kill 100 such soldiers in an hour: and yet we
Musicians will have no weapons but instruments of music.
How shall this come to pass, I desire to hear for
my learning?
Thus. I will assemble a few falre women as honest
as I would have them, and wine enough. You shall have
your bellies full of all your desires. They shall dance you
faint, and kiss you weary. And when you cannot feel a
needle thrust through your noses they shall cut your throats
with ease. And we musical mates will celebrate your In∣fernalls
with bells upon our fiddles.
Now with you Sir •ask. ••pper, or M. Corraso (if so you
be stiled) I will be brief. While you doe your prince and
country good service, I wish you rewarded: but the first
time you be treacherous you should be well guarded.
What now foolish fiddler, do•t thou think freely
to carry away these exorbitant and opprobrious t•arms?
Isle have thee banished all houses of my acquaintance. It is
not long since you were teaching the lute to a pretty wench
and witty, and were fingering her frets unfit for your di•tie.
Its best for you to be quiet, least I tel the rest which I know.
Sir Hermito▪ If you bee no•. I am weary with hey∣ring
such variety of vice. The soldier that was wont to be•
the honour of every country he came in, and a glory of
his own, is now become odious abroad, and intolerable
at home. The intelligencer might doe good service if you
could devise to keep him from doing hurt, which is as
hard as to restrain a man of war having letters of Mart
from robbing his own country men.
The Musician that ought to present nothing evil foun∣ding,
is now the setter of all unsavoury sonnets. His office
was to teach the measures and dances of order and come∣lines,
not the lofty L•valto and tricks of •ntemperance.
I assure you Master Securus those things are as dis∣tasteful
to me as to any other. And I am so much the safer
that I live from their sight and knowledge. The Soldier,
the Spy, and the Musician have their several abuses much
degenerating from their first institutions; if any man can
persuade them to repair unto my cell, I will doe my best
to reform them.
How now Simple, what's the news now?
Marry I was never in such a scurvy case in my
life.
What is it? hast thou the pox?
No, tic worse. that's but a toy, tic the plague. I
am so pestered with yonder woman Suzanne Richardson. She
says you did tear lier bill of 10•. she scolds, she tails; she
threatens to dwell with you, to lay her child at your door,
and set up the cause upon your gate: and every thing •hee
will doe until she be agreed withal. She makes me weary
of my life: she follows me like a ghost: and now she stands
at door. If you had not been here she had never left m••,
but she cannot abide to see you.
All this I little care for; but there's a thing in it. I
fear the Sty•-cha••er because she hath wi•nes (or else I
would not care neither) I must agree with her, bid her
come in.
You showed me an old rotten note tother day. Tic not
worth two pence. What would you have• I owe you no∣thing.
The note was worth 10• till you fl•gred it, now tic
not worth a halfe-penie indeed: but if you will give me no∣thing,
I will tell the King. I am a poor• widow, he will help
me.
The King woman? Alas, he hath great business,
never trouble him with this toy. Isle give •hee somewhat in
charity, but not a penny of duty.
Charity? that would I fine see from you. Pay first
the 10• which is due, and then bestow your charity.
Well, woman, here is 50 shillings with a good
will: take this, or get more any way you can.
I should have had an ounce, here is but a quarter.
I am poor, therefore I am constrained to take this, but I
leave the rest upon your conscience still.
Nay, then I care not, we•'l doe well enough with
conscience Simple. I am glad tic at an end in Law.
So am I Sir, now I shall bee quiet. An you marked
Sir, I never entreated you for conscience sake to give her a∣no
thing, but for my trouble. Nay I have learned to stretch
a conscience with any man since I came to you. And tic
soon learned if a man will give his mind to it: for the good
will of a jade•• all. What a fool was I that began no sooner
to study it •
But I have more• news to tell you Sir. As I came by the
Chancery office I was called in to see a ••rye foul bill, put
in against you •t M. Thompso•s suit, for things which you
did take (not altogether steal) out of his house. And for a
lease apparel hee challenges from you: and there a•e also
your fourscore and ten cawdles in a row: in every line a
Caudle, spiced and sweet, &amp; as hot as ever they went down
your throat: and some say they shall be still upon record in
perpetuam rei memoriam, if it bee true, it shall• go hard but
ever•e morning in term times as long as I live Isle spend
my penny at one of them.
Hath he served me so? well. tic a maxim with me
Simplo to be ashamed of •othing (as thou know) but yet
Isle be even with him. He shall out of his house whatsoever
it cost me.
There is also another bill against you by your
wives near cousin, wherein you are charged (not directly
with stealing, but taking without the owners privitie or cō∣sent)
a picture, a map, and other household stuff.
I make no more reckoning of that imputation then
of the rest. For if the worst fall I shall have them as they bee
praised.
Nay, if you care not for the manner of taking thē,
the matter is not great otherwise.
Not a rush Simplo, sa•e and think what they will,
I am sorry • took no more.
But one thing made me laugh heartily, and in my
conceit it was a witty trick that was told me lately, that
you borrowed 100• of a gentlewoman called Mis•ris Fer∣•ers
Gratis, and put it out for 10 in the 100. And after a
year and a half with much ado• paid her: and so you got
15• handsomely. I would I could tell whereto borrow two
or three 1000• in that sort. Me thinks I have wit enough to
thrive on this fashion.
Tic a fine way indeed, and cleanly (so that a m•̄
look to his security) And comes in without stoc•e of his
own: a very beggar may grow rich thus: and every paul∣try
knave may thrive so, if he take heed. Millers use this
trick to lend a bushel of another mans corn ground into
meal to be paid again in wheat, so he takes told twice of
one bushel, and no cost of his own, It is but making the
first 〈◊〉 •ay so much the longer.
There are yet two other things objected, but both
of our nature therefore though it were a huddle, it makes
but a single game. One was this that you picked the first le•∣la
out of a trunk full of linen, (the letter for the surname
serving your name as well as the owners you'll• stand) and
put on A. instead of R. which was picked out. And this was
Mr. Rellips linen. The other was that you marked pillows,
and oath•r stuff o• a noble mans with your own mark, and
•sed them as your own. I forgot the noble mans name but
it sounds like a port town toward the sun when it is at
the highest. They had much of their stuff again, but some
••ucke in your finger•. And reason too I think: shall a man
take pa•nes to mark another mans goods for nothing? A
halter for him that hath no better wit then so, to thrive by.
There was such a speech of this marking, but I de∣no
it.
And what then? will that serve the turn?
It must serve. for they shall never prove directly
that I did or caused it to be done.
But they were found in your possession. and then
how can you avoid the discredit?
Discredit? they may bee glad to have their things
•gain. who can tell but they be mine? I am sure they na••
my mark. And how shall a man know his own but by his
mark? And howsoever these things are, time will wear
them out of memory.
All these are well answered. What sa•e you Sir to
the taking of a conveyance out of a painted box in your fa∣there
in laws study▪ by means of a key with pretence of
another business?
Tush. I •aid it there again when I saw they kept
such a stir about a paltry piece of parchment. I will not
be beholding to them.
What an unkindness was that, tha• your father in
law did threaten to sue you for 700• you owed him? Alas
Sir I see you have been much wronged among them. Hang
such a father.
I but I dealt well enough with him: for I sent him
word that if he did sue me I would bring him in more trow∣ble
then twice so much money could excuse him for other
matters.
And reason too I think. shall they make a man pay
money before he be willing? twood make a man doe that
awood not, when they go to extremities. I have done for
this time Sir. the next time you call for news I hope I shall
have as much more. But now I remember me there is one
thing more. Your lawyer asked me for a fee for your last
business: shall I give it him?
No. I am sure he did not ask you. I brought a co∣sen
of mine tother day to him that gave him a fee. Indeed I
told him that he should go to my lawyer and give him no
fee. But when I had him there, and he put his case, I which∣per'd
my cousin in the ear to offer him a fee: But I did not
whisper my lawyer to refuse it. and so very honestly hee
took it: and I know therefore hee will expect no fee for
my own business.
Then belike I mistook it. perchance hee thanked
you for bringing your cousin to give him a fee without
cause, being well resolved before by other Council. Well
now Sir I hope you will bestow my freedom upon me. I
desire no more cunning then now I have, and Isle serve you
still, and set up for my self: for I had rather bee a double
knave then a single fool.
I will not stick with thee Simplo: go to the Cham∣berlaine
there it must be done.
What say thou boy? me thought wee had but a short
dinner to day with yonder dainty Lady and tarried so long
for it. How fared you in the hall?
We had very short commons. and I am hungry
s•ill: we had no meat but your revertion, and the scraps of
your trencher when I changed with you.
Alas we left nothing but bare bones. wee had but
a quarter of a neck of mutton between three, and Parua∣gracio
and I eat• no meat nor bread since yesternight at 10
• clock: and from my trencher thou could get little but
the fat squiz'd from the flesh which I eat. I was so hungry
that me thought I could have eaten that small Lady, and her
great cheer all at a meal. Here go thou to dinner at some
ordinary 
stay till I have money: thou can fast a little, can thou not?
Yes a little, if I can get no meat.
Yonder comes Pestifer• my brother. He could no∣ver
have come in a better time: for I have neither money nor
clothes to paw•e: but boy not a word of our wants: weal
seem to be very flush: the offer shall come from himself,
else we shall have him very coy and deer•.
By your favour Sir I am bold to see as you doe. I
heard you were evil  at ease with melan∣cholie.
Welcome Pestifero: indeed I have been a little trow∣bled
in mind. but now I am very merry.
In good time Sir, I am glad of your worships amend∣meant.
I doubted least you lack't money, and were sad upon
it. I came to pleasure you, if that had been your disease.
Thanks for thy good will Pestifero: but I am preti∣lie
stored at this instant: I know not how soon I shall
want, for all things are uncertain in this world.
Very true Sir, many changes in this age. wilt
please you then to make provision against a raini• day, and
take this while it may be had?
I, but then you know interest will run on it is
no good husbandry to take it so long before the time it
may be I shall not need it this seven night yet.
Way Sir, if you bee so provident that you •eckon
of we•kes. it is time for me to be gone: I have other friends
to pleasure, that scorn to stand upon two months past be∣fore
the sealing, from the time of the first be speaking the
commodity resting from them until their security were
provided. Isle see you some other time.
Nay ftaie: I am not covetous. I hate it with my
heart: if it may doe th•e a kindness I can be content to ac∣cept
thy friendly offer, so thy commodity bee vendible. I
know thou come in good will.
Vendible Sir? yes that it is: and you will say so
soon: no man will suffer it long in his house.
What stuff is it?
Of diverse sorts: I know not my self: but they
are finely packed up. I saw a car unloading with such ware e∣ven
now as I came, it is a commodity more sought for by
day and night then any I know. I tell you it troubles the
Lord Mayor, and all the Justices to keep the people in or∣der
that gather these wares, they are so eager in catching at
them.
Of what value is the commodity?
You may have 100l worth, or half, as you please.
What will 100l worth yield to be sold?
At a word it will yield you 60l readily: Isle not
dissemble.
What security?
Your self and your friend such another.
What say you M. Parvagracio? you know him.
I know him well I warrant you he shall be taken.
What will content you.
What you please Sir, 40 shillings, Isle not ingrate
upon you,
Now let me cast up my account. 40l lost out of the
principal at the first 10l the interest. 40 shillings the bro∣kerr.
All this is but 52l in the 100, tic reasonable as the world
goes now: here is my hand. As I am a gentleman Isle have it
upon these terms, so that the bargain be no worse then
you speak of, put the bands to making. Now tell me what
call you the commodity?
The commodity Sir, is old rags, such as are foūd
in street d••ghills with raking day and night as I told you.
What a villain art thou? old rags? how durst
thou presume to offer me old rags?
Why Sir, I tell you they are ready money at the pa∣per
mills.
Paper me no mills. Isle not foul my fingers with
them.
You shall not need Sir, I will take order for selling
them▪ and I hope you can abide to tell the money when I
bring it. I wood your worship had 1000l worth of them, as
filthy things as they be.
So would I: but it shall never be said for my credit
sake that I took up a commodity of old rags or doub∣lets.
I have heard of many scurvy bargains, but never the
like to this.
Why sir, tic but your fancy. And now you cannot
go back: here is witness enough you engaged your ho∣nor
to have it. take the less and save your reputation.
I did so indeed, the more fool I to pass my word
before I felt their stink. I cannot abide to think on them.
But to save my credit go to, dispatch. Isle have the whole
100l since I must have some. Isle never give my bond for •
little.
Well sir, it shall be done.
Now boy, was not this well handled? I must have
had them upon any terms: but hee never perceived it.
Did thou mark how •ee entreated me with respective
terms, and pinned the bargain upon me? Those bee al∣ways
the best penie-worths. It is a goodly thing to bee
wise. Remember boy when thou come to years, to take
this course o• thri•ing.
Indeed Sir you carried this business admirable•••
the end. I would rather then 40l for my mind sake my old
master your Worships father had st•od in a corner, and had
heard, and observed his sons wisdom. I warrant it had
been worth 1000l to some body.
Well. Now wee want nothing for getting this▪
th•eescore pound but Par•agracio to seal. Go •eeke him
out, and weal be merry.
I go fetch him.
I think the air is infected, that such contagious
caterpillars swarm abroad in this age to destroy vouth, that
scarce one fruit among 100 comes to bee ripe but is first
rotten. Such as this broker is are nourished by the Devil for
no cause but to waste young men in old prisons. And these
cormorants which set them a-worke to entice youth to these
pestilent adventures me thinks they can have no hope that
he which receives so little money upon great bonds, doth e∣for
mean to pay them. For he deals not with one of these
gripers, but with as many as he can find will be content with
his own security. Therefore when he comes to bee are∣sted
he is buried alive for all, and pays none.
I wish they were all so served. then the loss of the
money on the one side, and the sharpe rod of imprisonment
on the other side, would bring both sorts to repentance, •
bethink themselves of using • good conscience to deceive
on neither part. But if your Chancellor hold on his course
i• allowing the extortioner no more but the bare money
made of such commodities that will shortly end the abuse.
For this E•ops dog will learn to hold the next piece better▪
then to be deluded with a shadow of double ga•no.
Take heed to my horses▪ that they bee well
walked stuffed and dressed.
I warrant you Sir, and your Worship may have
provender of all sorts.
Will it please you to see your chamber?
Yes▪ but I must have the best in the house.
You shall Sir. What wilt please your worship to
have to sup•?
First bring me a crusty manchet, and a single pot
of beer.
It shall be done Sir  heere's a
hot guest I perceive by the single pot.
What will you have to supper Sir, that wee may
bespeak it for we are very hungry?
It is not wisdom to eat a meal when you are
hungry, for then you eat too much and surfeit. Even as it
is not good to fight or correct scholars when you are in
choler, for then you will doe it beyond measure. I am as
hungry as you, yet I will eat but a manchet, and drink
twice of one pot.
What Sir? will you take up the best chamber, and
spend but two pence for your part. And this at Croydon so
near London?
No more. And but for the best chamber I would
spend but a penny, a pint of beer and a half penny bread.
What a shame were this if your friends should
hear it?
Leave the disgrace to me. I can bear it. Pass••
graviora.
Come Purgato▪ thou and I will bespeak our sup∣per.
20d a piece wee will spend to stop this current of rue∣more.
Here is a delicate manchet Sir. what meat to your supper?
This is not crusty enough. Change it.
But we have no better in the house.
I will have it changed.
Well Sir, I will doe my best. what shall my Mi∣stress
provide for your supper?
When thou hast changed the manchet thou shalt
know.
A long journey have I ridden, and all day fasting, except
a breake-fast at my friends house. Now if I should fill my
belly, two shillings will not serve in sheer meat for me•
and my two men. This way yet I s•ue somewhat: for these
hungry knaves out of their own purses •pend three shil∣lings
two pence: for I will allow but pence a p••ce. I hope
they will not compare with me to ask two pence a piece
as I spend. O to morrow, to morrow at dinner will I carry
in for fear of foul weather, when I come to Master Rem∣•af
his house, my continual host and friend, whom I cannot
bauke, he is so conveniently in my way, and keeps good
cheer. Oh, by that time my stomach will be tanquamig∣nis
accensus, a flaming fire, dispatching all meates it touch∣eth.
And it is Phys•cke sometimes to keep a stomach so
fiery: for it will consume the very worms if any crawl
up to the stomach for lack of nutriment in the maw.
Sir, I have been with all the bakers in the town for a
crusty loaf.
Thou hast done well. this is as it should be.
Now Sir, what to supper? my Mistress stands at
gaze until I tell her.
My friend. I have a very evil stomach, it will
endure nothing toward night but bread and drink, my
men I think will have something.
 Here is a custo∣mer
for Paltocks Inn, but weal nick him well enough
in his horse-meate, and scurvy sheets.
I hear the knave well enough, but Isle watch you
for both. My horses shall have but little provender. Isle call
at some Farmers house to morrow, and •ate a p••ke in his
stable▪ and for sheets Isle lay them by, and change with my
men▪
Sir, have you found Parvagrac••? when will he come▪
To tell you the naked truth Sir I have been asleep
till I heard you call for your g•lashes: for I was so hungry,
that if I had not slept I 〈◊〉 committed Burglary somewhere
to get victuals: Now Isle find him out. 
 but I pray you Sir remember to
give me my two sh•llings you promised me for bringing
news of your dinner. Now you shall have money, I speak
before it bee gone.
Yes, and before it be come. why dost thou tarry•
the Scrivener will think v••ong; and a worse matter; per∣haps
wee shall give them too much time to enquire of our
states.
I can soon have him if all other things were rea∣die:
you know where you left him at the Ladies, where you
both dined. He said he would follow you. I marvel hee is
so long. But I warrant they are up to the noses in the new
book de flatibus. It is best for me to know if the bonds bee
ready before I fetch him, lest he be angry to leave the La∣dies
company before need require. Intrat Parvagracio.
But look where he is come alone without carrying Sir▪ you
saved me a labour. I was sent for you. Can you smell out
good bargains? you come without calling. When thrift is
•n the market you are ever in the way?
What good bargain crack is toward me?
My Master shall have money, and you must bee
bound with him.
Is that a good bargain wag? well, I have such
an other a-bruing for your Master to bee bound with me.
but where is he?
Here, at hand. Now to the s•rivener and broker
go I.
I am glad to hear of your good furniture toward,
and I come to prostrate my seal and service at you• worthy
feet.
Sir, with all complements for such kind love, I
receive your readiness. And doe reciprocally promise to be
ever at your beck.
Sir, the bonds be ready for the seal. I have seen
the commodity of rags, and I like them well. They never
dusty you except they be stirred. But they are foul and hey∣vi.
I wood we had sold them by gold smiths weight for so
much in silver. I did see a fellow lift a bundle of them up to
a carre, and he grunted hard; he made me remember my La∣dies
book de flatibus. For I looked ever when hee would
have let fly.
Well lets go seal the bonds, and lose no time.
Ins•tiat• goes on saring, But what have wee here? Isle see
this sight for all the haste.
Why tic a woman. Dost not see what it is?
A woman? tic not a woman. The head is a dog.
tic a maremaide, half a dog, half a woman.
No tic but the hair of a dog in fashion, pulled from
these Island dogs.
In fashion? there's a fashion for a fool. What's
that she casts upon her head?
That's the powder of a rotten post.
A tale of a tub, the powder of a pudding: will you
make me believe that?
Doest thou think it so strange? upon my credit
I know some are spoken to for providing such powder by
Ladies. I am in earn•t. I assure you tic very common.
I think they be common indeed that bee dressed
with dust.  not •
dog say you? the head is a dog. The chiefest part is a dog.
well, say what you will, you shall never make me believe
but it is either a dog, or a dogged woman.
Be she what she will in conditions, I warrant thee
tic a woman in sex, or never trust my judgment again.
What's that about her neck? a pancake, or a tansy?
Tic a band yellow starched▪ how can thou think
it to be a tansy?
Because it looks so yellow. Marie it is not so well
I wish it were, for then I would eat it up, for I have not half
dined.
No. it were pity to devour her▪ me thinks tic a ve∣rye
pretty creature.
Dost thou like her so well? Isle go woo her: she
has no impediment, but I may marie her, may I not?
Not that I know, except she be honest.
Is that an impediment? nay, the honester the bet∣la.
Isle to her instantly. I see no reason but I may fall in love
with her on the sudden. And happy is that wooing that
is not long in doing: but stay, are you sure she is a woman? I
am in some doubt. And I would be very loath to mary her
except she prove a woman.
I warrant thee she is a woman. why should thou
fear it?
Have I not cause to fear it? for if I should be ma∣ried
to a beast, or a jade, I were utterly undone. is it not
good to be sure?
Mistrust not that. thou moist know by her speech
and voice whether she be a woman or no.
Cannot her tongue deceive me?
Yes like enough, but not in this case, And if the
worst fall you may easily know the first night you I•e to∣gether.
I thank you for nothing when it is too late.
Why too late? thou moist be rid of her presently,
and be parted the next day.
I could like that well enough so that I had her pore∣tion,
but is there such a course to be taken, that they cannot
be tied so fast, but they may easily be undone?
No question but the marriage is void.
That's an excellent trick. I wish I had a grant un∣der
the great seal to unmarry all those that would fine be
parted. I would purchase Lordships, Towns, &amp; Countries.
If you had, yet must you use discretion in it, and de∣vide
none but such as are indeed no marriages at first, but
had impediments not dispensable. Otherwise you might be
cause of great sin, and inconvenient••. You must examine
the reasons, and proceed judicially, before you sever them
rashly.
Never tell me, let them look to that at their own
peril. It would take up too much time if there came to me•
but 100 in a day to examine them all. No. no. if they were
willing to be sundried, I would vncouple them: let them
range afterword which way they will for me. Well upon
thy word that I may be livorced from her if she prove not
a certain woman Isle upon her whatsoever she be. And Isle
catch her upon a sudden for fear least it be a dog &amp; bite
me.
A way cocks-combe. I am ashamed on thee: come
back, what dost thou mean?
O that same is a very suspicious head. I am afraid
of it.
Afraid of a dead dog? what a cowardly thing is
that?
A dead dog? marry perhaps the hair is upon •
cu•ster snapper then the right owner was.
Be ruled by me; Isle stand between thee and al dan∣gers.
go orderly to her, take her by the right hand as if thou
would dance with he. He dances toward her and sings.
Hey niny. nony no. Hey niny n•. Hey noniny nonin•▪
Hey ninyno. So he dances toward her.
What a fellow art thou? a Courtier? a Cowdriuer,
come hither once again. Dost thou think to speed &amp; go
about It so like a Clown▪ Thou must woo her, as you
court your ladies in the palace.
O, must I so? I thought she had been a country
gentlewoman, and that the more plainly I had dealt, the
better she would like me. But all is well enough yet, for no
body saw me.
Thou art deceived in that: for they are as fine and
•urious as any Lady in Court, though they be not proud a
whit.
Is it so? well, then I can fit her, she shall have cour∣ting
enough. And I am glad you tell me of it; for I was in
earnest to have loved her beyond measure, &amp; so might have
fallen mad, and marred all: but now Isle doe even as wee doe
at Court, make many shows of love and service, and
intend nothing less. But yet thus honestly Isle deal with
this woman (because she is a stranger) that if I love her, and
like her, Isle love her until I leave her. Well, tic time to bee
doing, for my love begins to cool very fast: I must kindle
it again. 
Fair Lady, it becomes not gentlemen of good breeding to
talk of the weather, or time of the day, or use such idle im∣pertinent
speech: therefore, (all preambles and digressions
s•t aside) I come to understand if you bee pleased to admit
me into the list of your devoted servants.
Indeed Sir, it seems you have been well bred, else
you had never grown to this stature.
Did not I tell you what I should find of her? she snarls al∣ready.
Isle lay my life she will prove currish, her looks make
it plain, come sweet Lady, what answer to my question?
Nay first I had need to answer your complaint to
your friend, that I am so cursed and churlish. What uncivil
term did I give, deserving so sharpe a censure? women
know not how to speak. If merrily, then our jest is termed
s•offing, and quipping. I• soberly, then our modesty is
counted coyness, and want of courtesy. So that unless wee
say nothing, we commit error. And yet silence is not clee•e:
for then are we sheep (alias) fools.
How could you hear what I said to him, since I
turned my mouth from you?
But you turned not mine ears from your mouth.
Pardon this fault good Lady. I will be more care∣full
hereafter.
No doubt you will: to have me further off when
you say the worst.
I mean not so. but rather to speak the best of
you in all places and companies as your merits (I know)
will enforce me.
Nothing comes from you (I see then) but by con∣strained.
O that you would give over rebuking, no man
shall reform himself before me. Forgive what is past. If I
offend again, deny me all favour.
Tell them I will come anon.
Sir, it is against nature to remit injuries, therefore
your request is unreasonable. But for his sake that gave the
counsel, I will for give my greatest enemies: yet you must
know it is lawful to reprehend your misdemeanours.
This comforts me much, for she may be a Christian for any
thing I hear yet.
You that content your self with no habitation
but a Princes Palace, and will serve no less creature then
Caesar: that no sooner pass the Porters lodge, but li•t up
your legs and lips, as if you had commission to control
the country, to breathe nurture from your nostrils, and be
patron to poor people: whose gate and gesture give te∣stimonie
to your hearts haughtiness: and whose count∣nonce
must outface all encounterers, how could you bee so
grossly ouer-shot, as to cast your self unacquainted, un∣friended
vncommended, and vnpresented into the comp∣no
of a gentlewoman of fashion?
I cry you mercy. Of what fashion are you that I
might not doe as I did without offence?
Why Sir? are you a courtier? and ask of what fa∣shion
I am? doe you not see that I am of the newest, and
•ea•est fashion? who sees my band and periwig, &amp; doubts
of that: I am persuaded you will prove a counterfeit•, and
no courtier, that are ignorant in so general a knowledge?
It was not the newest fashion the last year, and
no Cronicle make▪ mention of 〈◊〉. Therefore if any man
had written. Nihil factum est quote non fuit factum prius. I
would have given his Proverbs the lye. For this saffroning
was never used but in Ireland for bodily linen, to dissipate
the company of creepers. And for such torturing of these
Izeland Imps, with •radicating their fleeces, thereby to en∣joy
the roots, which best will abide the basting, it hath need
to be new, for it is no some, and makes your pretywig no∣•hinge
handsome.
Sir, let it suffice you that it is the newest fashion
this very day. And if the sight and smell of it offend your
nose, you know the ordinary remedy is to remove your
nose. Yet I suppose by your paleness you use to take Ta∣baccho,
then which, nothing is more fulsome.
Indeed, I want colour in my face, and wish I had
the art to get so rosie a cheek as you have.
You doe but guess that I use art to give grace to
•y feature, so it is easy for you to be deceived: but I will
tell you a certain rule to know if any woman be painted.
Let me bee beholding to you for this cunning in∣fallible.
If you suspect it, take a pin, and scratch her cheek
pretty deep to the bone, and if it b••ed not, assure your self
she is painted.
I see now you are disposed to be pleasant with me.
I bear all kindly. Now I entreat you to proceed with
publishing my other faults, that when I know them all, I
may amend, and so appear perfect in your sight.
Secondly, I charge you with flattery, at every word
calling me Lady: which you are very sure I am not, seeing
me come hither on my own feet, whereas if I were a Lady
I must of necessity be at my Carriage with 4 horses, or else
my honour is in the dust in summer, and in the mire in win∣la.
This then is an inexcusable sin of yours.
Alas. what should I call you not knowing your
name? And you of all the women that ever I knew are an∣gre
for giving you more then your due. But rather then I
will displease you that way, I will devise some other Epithe∣ton
of courtesy, until you determine to take Ladyship upon
you, so well as it would become you.
Nay, I would not have you think that I am excee∣dingly
angry for mistaking my present condition. It was a
fault, but very venial. Your other errors I will conceal
for this time, as unwilling to oppress you with penance,
since I find you so freely to offer satisfaction.
Then now vouchsafe to receive me into your ser∣vice,
since no man shall carry himself more dutifully.
If I were fit to receive one of your sort, how could
you serve me and the king too? can you serve two masters?
No. but one master and a mistress may both bee
served without breach of fidelity, and with great facility.
Very hardly, respecting the persons inequality:
but if I should be so minded, what can you doe?
All, that is not done before I come.
Can you, and will you doe whatsoever I ent•eat
or command you without grudging?
Yes, with all readiness and alacrity, &amp; without ex∣caption.
Then I request and command you to let me alone,
and never hereafter speak to me.
That's an unreasonable request, and unjust com∣mandement.
There ought to bee justice and possibility in e∣very
commandment; but this hath neither of them.
I will prove it hath both, or else I release your word.
Prove that, and Isle perform your will: for I have
vowed to serve you, and it is injustice to break it. And I am
in love, and it is impossible to limit it.
I thought so. draff was your errant▪ but drink you
would have. you seek a service, but you mean to be master:
this trick will fail you: for I have vowed before-hand, and
I am bound to keep it.
You can make no vow contrary to mine, because
you never knew my intention, nor person before this day.
Yes, contrary enough, as white is to black. And
to hold you no longer in suspense, my vow and purpose is
to be a Nun.
A Nun? There was never Nun with such attire, and
in such a Cloister.
O Sir, I can quickly cast off this attire, and get a
Nuns habit. If the mind be changed, the apparel will soon
be altered.
Of what order (if you speak in earnest) that I may
visit your Cloister? for love hath gotten such dominion.
that I cannot so part with you. And yet to this cross I know
not what to say: for it takes from me all liberty to move
further.
What will it avail you to know my Cloister, and
walk without the wall? for there, all access &amp; intercourse
is barred.
Let my love yet bee so far requited, as to know
your name and or•er you enter into. It will ease my mind,
that none other inioies you. O, this love is like a quart
ague, and a suite in Law! A good day, and a bad: now hope.
•hen despair. To night cō•ort, tomorrow morning al dashed.
Sir I must crave respite to answer you directly to
these questions: for I must have my friends advice before I
resolve. And so for this t•me I take leave.
Now, let vs go seal these bonds in the mean
space, and by that time perhaps she will come again.
Bonds? I am in bonds enough I think, bound
hand, foot, heart, mind, wit and will. Hee that is in love
needs no other chain to hold him▪ he is fast in prison, and
locked sure enough for •scoping. O Parvagracio! dost thou
talk of going? whither should I go? Is it not enough that
my love is gone, and that all is gone with her? my heart is
gone with her, and she is gone away with my heart: whither
can I go without my heart? And whither she is gone, and
〈◊〉 •he hath carried my heart I know not. Sealing. what
ta•• 〈◊〉 thou of sealing? I have set my hand, my •eel, my har•
and all to the love of her. She is gone away with this deed
of gift. It is deliue•ed before witness. It is •nroll'd. I have
acknowledged a fine. I have suffered her to recover against
me; and delivered her peaceable possession. The Law is at
an end▪ what else would you have me seal? I can give her no
further assurance. her counsel cannot devise it. why do you
trouble me with unnecessary requests?
O my good friend Insatiato recall thy self like a
wise man. thou speak like a man distracted. go with me,
and take a little rest. It will not be lo•g before she come to
this place again. We will send your Page to find her.
A little rest I warrant you. Go? you are still upon
going. Go whither you will, I will not stir a foot from
hence. What if she come in our absence, and go away dis∣contented?
then shall I never see nor hear her again. No•
here I lost her, here I will find her, or lose my self.
But you will trouble and hinder other actors that
have parts here to play as well as you.
Actors. what actors? Is this a stage? Is this a play?
no. tic a game in earnest. tic no jest, tic love in sadness. Let
them come that come will: if any come but my love, I have
nothing to say to them. Doe you as you think good.
Nay, if you stay, I will not go. I will not leave my
friend so.
Have you locked up all the doors, and delivered the foul
linen to be washed▪
All is safe, and every thing done.
Have you given the Cobblers wife the 7 eggs
we left at breakfast?
She hath them.
This is but ill husbandry to lose 7 eggs at a
••ap, and my belly not very full.
Sir, they are well bestowed, they will doe the
poor woman good, and you have eaten pretty well.
I have not eaten so well as you think for. And
they are not fit meat for her mouth: some grosser meat
would doe her more good.
I warrant you Sir, she can eat an egg without
surfeiting, as well as the finest Lady in this Land.
Come on, since tic done, let them go: but 
 I cannot ride my journey contentedl•e until I have
these eggs. Simplo, fetch them again. Tell the woman,
she shall have as many or more another time.
 Now must I fetch these
eggs from the poor woman against my nature.
 I was never ashamed of a master before. There
are few times that we ride forth, but a roasted Rabbit, a piece
of chief, or a dry breast of mutton is trussed up in the cloak-bag,
especially when wee lye at an Inn the next night (as
now we shall.) And but for fowling the cloake-bag, and
his clothes, we had carried these eggs now.
There is no such stuff now in the cloak-bag I
trow? If I thought there were, I would throw it to the dogs
rather then it should ride behind me.
Is there not? tic a great chance then; &amp; I am much
deceived if there be none: for there were some scraps left
yesternight, and I find them not in any room in the
house.
That shall be tried by and by. Be these his tricks?
though I be his horse-keeper, Isle carry no coals nor bones
neither I trow. (hee vndoeth an end of the cloake-bag, and
there takes out a napkin full of pieces of bread, a quarter of a
breast of mutton, a piece of boil•d beef, a pudding, a bone of a
loin of veale: that he vnpinneth, and lifting it up by one cor∣ner,
lets all fall, and presently catches at them with his hands
upon the ground, scrambling every way as hee would ca•ch at
a Rat, saying.) What's become of her? take heed gentle∣women
she get not up. I swear, I had almost caught her.
Was there not a Rat there? Masters, you below, came she
not that way?
Langheth, and saith. How now Purgato. What, art
thou at span-counter with Rats? I perceive thou would
have fought with any Rat in London rather then she should
have be guiled thee of thy provender.
My provender? the dogs shall •ate it, before any
bit shall come in my mouth. How came he by these scraps,
and what would he doe with them?
Thou art but a novice Purgato. and had as much
wit when thou suckedst (I think) as now. And besides for
that thou came to him but yesterday (in a manner) art eg∣norant
of his fashions. I will instruct thee. The night before
he rides from London, he will invite some of his acquain∣tance
to supper with him (at their own charge more then
his) then the remnant he packeth up thus. And at the next
Inn he lodges in (if it be two days thence) he •ates these
•ates under the colour of a little joint there dressed. And by
this means hee is counted at his Inn a very small meat∣man,
but everie-where else a tall trencher-man. But thou
must understand the chamberlain and tipster are sent down
when these dainties are in devouring.
But doe you eat any of this dainty trash with
him?
Or else I must go hungry to bed, and ride empty
the next day.
As true as I live, hee shall never bring me to this
gear. And the next time he makes such a mess, Isle pro∣vide
sauce: for Isle put a fresh horse-turd in the midst. And
my trotting horse will soon season it all alike.
Come away, I have eaten four of these eggs,
the rest I have put in bran to preserve against the nix
Term: but what's here? how came this meat here? me
thinks I should know these pieces.
It may be so Sir, but I did never see the like.
Why so?
As I had the cloake-bag under mine arm, I felt a
thing stir within it: and in searching▪ I found these scraps,
and among them an huge Rat. And she went away invisible:
for I am sure we could not see which way she ran, nor could
I catch her, doe what I could, and yet I scrambled at her with
both my hands.
Why doe you not gather up the meat, and put it
up again?
What? and the Rat had pissed on it for fear, and it
stinks too bad.
How can thou tell th•t a Rat had pissed on it,
when you confess you did see no Rat?
No, not which way she ran away. But if yonder
boy had gaped wide enough, hee might have caught her in
his mouth: and doe you think I saw not a Rat? I am sure
there was a Rat, for my mind gave me so. And further, I
had like to caught her. All this company can tell what a
course I had at her, if you will not believe me.
Go to, go to. You are a fool. Put them up
and let vs away.
I were a fool indeed, and a beast too, if I would
put them up.
I bid you put them up like a fool as you are.
I cannot put them up like a fool, nor I will not.
Thou shalt put them up, or serve me no longer.
With all my hey•t master, Isle turn you off at this
instant. Here is witness enough I have giuen̄ you lawful
warning.
Gather up this meat Simplo, thou and I will
fare the better. Tic but sending this knaves horse down by
the Carrier. Or else Isle drive him with his load, he shall be
the sumpter horse.
How lik'st thou this sport Insatiato? hath it diver∣•ed
thy thoughts a little?
It was some recreation I must needs say: but my
fit is coming on apace.  And loo••
where she comes. Now I tremble with fear of a deadly
doom; but I must speak howsoever I speed. Welcome
sweet Mistress. Now kill, or keep me alive with your an∣swear.
Your questions •ir (if I forget not) were, what
was my name, and what order I purpose to enter. My name
is Levity. And my desire is to be a Nun of my mothers
order. But if my virginity were not of full age; and Maiden-head
a dangerous burden, I would be a Nun of a straighter
order.
Your mothers order? what order is that? I never
heard of a Nun have a child, no husband, and yet continue
in Cloister, and a Nun before she had a child.
My mother vowed chastity, and after that had a
child by her husband.
Why Leu•tia? this is a riddle, and a wonder to me;
yet this English I pick out of it, that you may have a hus∣band
as your mother had. And then if it please you, I may
be your ghostly father after the fashion of this c•untry: but
how, or why your mother or you should vow chastity, I
see not, no• would I be married to such a Nun.
Alas Insatiato, I perceive thou art simple in this bu∣sins,
or else not yet come to thy self again. Levity speaks
well, but thy capacity is very muddy. Would thou not
have thy wife vow chastity, but be an harlot? there is cha∣steady
and continence among married folk, so long as they
be faithful each to other. But virginity goes further: and
that is sequestered continence during life, not admitting
company for procreation.
I understand it now (thanks to thee Parvagraci•)
but this creature would have delayed me longer, and dulled
my wits without mercy.
But I thank her yet for the kind order she hath made
to be of her mothers order. I hope (sweet Mistress Levity)
you will hear no motion to overthrow this order again.
And now tell me, what say you to my vow, which in all e∣qu•tie
must be performed. You see I was content (though
much against my mind) that you should have kept your
vow of virginity, (if so had stood your resolution) now I
appeal to your own court for Justice, and hope you will
give as good way to the fulfilling of my vow, which is no∣ver
to leave your service and company.
I heard you talk at Random of such a thing. Ma∣ny
such (I doubt not) you have made, and quickly broke•n;
and this of the same mettle, &amp; so will prove as bri•le. Cour∣tlers
vows of this nature are but words, a little more stiffly
blown out of their mouths, then the rest of their speech,
but come no nearer their hearts. The gunner puts a little
more powder in the gun to make it carry the shot further,
but hits the mark no whit the righter: So they drive their
vows with a little stronger breath, but their intention i•
not the straighter.
Indeed I confess that I have sometimes done as
you say: but now my heart is right, and my meaning direct.
How shall that appear to me?
I dare vandertake (Lady Levity) he means justly
by you: for I have seen him in a dangerous passion when
you left our company, which if you had heard, standing in
some secret place, you could not but have compassion on
him. or else you were very d•sdain•ull and cruel. Besides I
know it is a great matter that would stay him so long as he
hath talked with you from dispatching a business of great
importance, as you may partly perceive by the messenger
coming so often in the mean time to have him away.
Sir, a s•condor of a tale makes many times an in∣credible
thing believed. And for your testimony, I give
him credit the better, and perhaps I was within ••light and
hearing too, when this gentleman was so loue-sicke as
you speak of, which made me in very pity come the so∣ner
in to relieve him. And I would not have you think Par∣vagracio
that I am disdainful, for that wins nothing
but hatred: nor am I cruel, for that is ever payed home with
extreme misery. Now yet am I proud (which vice you
touched not) for that is derided of all wise people, but my
fear and doubt was always to be deceived.
Here is my hand I will never deceive you.
Here is my hand I will never leave you. But what
a fool was I? I should have agreed for maintenance and
joincture before I had been handfast.
That's no matter, Isle perform as well as if I were
bound hand and foot. I will allow you 10l a year for
pins, 5l for shoes, 15l for stockings, garters, bodies, and
g•rdles, 50l for gowns, petticoats and such like: 20l for all
sorts of linen and new fashions, this is 100l a year, and is
as much as my living will afford. And for performance of
this any friend of yours shall have a statute upon all the
land I have. And for your joincture, I will give good issue∣rance,
that the longer •iuer of vs two shall possess all I have,
If I die not worth a groat.
I like all well but my allowance for pins: it is not
enough: for it is a base fashion nowadays to use cufhnets
and save pins. The very warmth of our bodies, will
change their colour in three hours, and they will be croo∣ked
with pulling off, fie upon them: but Isle be a good hus∣wife
otherwise▪ and get as much by other means as shall
piece out this pension to make it serve. Sir, I have skill in
Physic, I can cure the 〈◊〉 in any man. And if hee be
never so lean, and rawboned, I can so diet him in half a
year, that he will be fed until he grow purse-sicke. And
for thee (sweet heart) be of good cheer, for thou shalt no∣ver
die (without a great chance) as long as I live. For I can
play a trick, that if thou be never so cold, or frozen almost
to death, I can make thee luke-warme in half an hour.
 Ha may lively Levity,
we cannot choose but thrive if thou hast these trades. But is
thy portion in sure hands?
Fear nothing of that, you shall have me and my
portion at an instant, all together ready bagg'd.
Best of all, then it requires no telling Here is a to∣ken
for thee my chicken.
What? knives? O, I will not take them in any wi•e,
they will cut love.
No, no: if they cut any thing, they will cut away
unkindness.
Pardon me (good Sir) you shall not give them
me. If needs you will that I wear them, do you lose, and I
will find them.
That's a toy of all toys. That were fitter for a stag•
then a wedding.
Indeed you shall not deny me this first request, I
pray you lose them.
Well, tic no news to be made a fool by a woman.
Isle doe it, if it were worse.
This is as it should be: now I have deceived desti∣•ie.
This is Superstich my shoes, now he hath fooled
a foppery. And you have found a foolery.
You mock this Parvagracio. I warrant you do•
not think it evil luck if the salt fall toward you.
But I doe if no body overthrow it.
What if a Hare cross your way? is that nothing nei∣there?
That's •will luck indeed if I have no dogs to
course her.
Parvagracio. I prithee lead Levity to my lodge∣ing.
I must crave pardon to go about a special business
which concerns all my worth: but we will dispatch quick∣lie
and follow. And meet me the next way Parvagracio wee
must have your help. Isle go before.
In any case look to the maine chance, for now
you have a clog. It is the first gift every wife gives her
husband.
Now boy. wee must about these bonds sealing to
put vs in suits for this wedding Wee shall sure thrive now.
Two such bargains gone through in one day. A stranger
for a wife▪ and rags for our wealth. We cannot want after
the•e matches. I could have found in my heart to asked her
some money and mist this ragged money. But what if she
•aue none? she saith I shall have her and all ready bagg'd.
Perhaps she means that herself is ready bagg'd to my
hand I cannot tell▪ there be such tricks in the world. I doubt
I am utterly undone with this foolish match.
Why sir, if you be let it not trouble you, I hope you
shall have better luck in greater matters, &amp; yet if she have
a good portion you are happy, if she have none, yet you
may be even with her if it please you al•hough she prou• •
roaring girl.
Can thou tell which way to be even with her?
Mary to have as little as she. And if I were 〈◊〉 you
I would serve her so, teach her to come •mptie handed to a
man of your spending.
Well: we must make the most of her that I can now
• have her: and take no care for any thing▪ that• the way to
live long and leave nothing.
Gentlemen (you two I mean M. 〈◊〉 and Sir 〈◊〉)
my master entreats you by•h to come to his chamber
for a short space, he will go twice so fair for you any other
time.
Thank your master, we have dined already, and
can eat nothing: another time we will see him if wee have
•o business.
O you mistake it Sir neither now, nor any other
time for eating: there is no meat: my Master does not vie to
quilt his friends stomach• with too much meat. No, hee
would speak with you about a note he hath caused to bee
drawn he will 〈◊〉 you to p•rvse it, and do him a favour
it is in the nature of a certificate.
Truly he shall have no hand of m•no to any wri∣•ing
nor to any purpose, nor for my credit sake will I come
•n his company. I doe ••again what it is. He knows th•t
•e hear so m•ch evil of him that he d•ubts we will speak
•s we find. And therefore he would have vs give commē∣•ations
of him to some friend of our• in some small request
which he never means to sue for. But this our good repor•
he will keep by him par•lie to stop our mouths (hoping
we will not speak contrary to our testimony in writing,
and pa•tly for his credi• to be showed upon every o•cas•on
against all that have cause to speak evil of him. Let him
content him•elf we ref•se to come near him.
Honest friend: I marv•ll with what conscience
〈…〉 ••rue one that is 〈…〉.
Mary Sir with as wide and large a conscience as a∣ny
man hath, and as thoroughly tentered. My master &amp; I are
no niggards of our conscience. Besides I am bound by my
100l to serve him.
Thou were as good lose thy 100l at first, as at la•t
for he will in the end deceive thee of it.
If he doe then I hope hee will teach me cunning
worth 100l to deceive others. &amp; so I may double my 100l.
For I doe not think but hee hath gotten many 100l with
art. And Isle never leave him tell I get all his tricks and now
he hath made me free he will use me as his fellow.
By that means thou wilt accompany him to •ell.
Down the lane to the Devil. Nay an wee go to
no worse place •hen Hell I care not: for I doe not think but
my mast• hath craft enough for any Devil on um all.
But there he shall meet with his crafts master.
What? master my master in craft? that were some∣what
strange, yet Isle believe any thing but that. Well I shall
tell him you will not co•e. And what's the reason you will
not co•e? I have almost forgotten.
Mary because at our baptism wee vowed to r•∣nounce
the infernal Spirit. And now •pone our own expo∣rience
and judgment we abandon al• incarnate Devils.
Abandon? what's that? if I can observe that word
right▪ I shall ca•y the rest well. I know what you mean by
a carnation •ivell.
What doe you judge of these passages M. Securu•?
Su•ely Sir▪ it is hard upon the sudden to deliver
• •rue sentence upon so many contrarieties as this day wee
have heard. But b•eefly I think they o•light all to 〈◊〉 du∣ced
unto two maine heads of Good and Bad. and of the
worst to choose the least: and of the be•te• take the most.
In part I dissent from y•u but in part I ag•ee. If we
be constrained to choose among things whi•h are 〈…〉
best to permit the least: but if a man have freedom 〈◊〉
best choice is to refuse evil be it never so little. Among •he
several discourses this day acted. I note many vices va•l•d
over with froth, and flourish of words, but the same again
vnma•ked with substantial matter, and laid naked to di•∣grace.
So it 〈◊〉 they are not propounded to imitate,
but 〈◊〉 forth to be sha•ed. They are pa•nted in colour• but
in a map of 〈…〉 some 〈…〉,
but such as run to ruin. They are brought forth to be
rewed; but to manifest their ugliness. They come not here
•o be liked, but loathed; not to be fau•red, but derided. Not
•llowed in private, but in public to be condemned. S• I
•op that all wise hearers will a•oid the sins and abuse•
•ere touched (which are many) and follow good counsel
•f they heard any. Which that they may doe my part is to
•ray to the g•for of wisdom. And so Sir, wishing much pro
parity to your charitable endeavours, I take leave▪ and the
•axed way to my poor quiet Cell.
〈…〉
〈…〉
〈…〉
〈…〉
NOw that your pa••ence hath permitted vs to bring unto
〈◊〉 end this present Dialogue, wee stand in good hope of
〈◊〉 c••mince•, that no more offence will bee taken at any word
〈◊〉 passed then we had meaning to go•e, which wee protest
〈…〉 at all. For it were against reason and our own ends 〈◊〉
drive hence that company, which we w•sh rather •oubled, then
out of it one to be spared. I• rests that we render you very
〈◊〉 and h•r•ie thanks. And that all ••r hearts pray for the
K•ng and his families enduring happiness, 〈…〉

WHen first this Toy was public, it was unknown
To the Author, and before it was feathered flown;
He now consents, that you should see it once more,
Because he hath more faults, then it had before.
He knows there is a snarling Sect in the Town,
That do condemn all wit except their own;
Were this Play ne'er so good, it should not take,
Nothing must pass that Gentlemen do make.
Whilst I did sit in the Pit, I heard one say
There ne'er was poorer language in a Play;
And told his Neighbour, he did fear the vile
Composure would go near to spoil his stile.
Another damned the Scene with full-mouth'd oaths,
Because it was not dressed in better clothes;
And rather wished each Actor might be mute,
Then he should loose the sight of a fine suit.
O Wit and Judgement both! what they do raise
To prejudice, is here the chiefest praise:
Would it be proper, think you, for a Swain,
To put on Buskins, and a lofty strain?
Or should a Shepherdess such phrases vent,
As the Spring-Garden Ladies complement;
Should a rough Satire, who did never know,
The thing we call a Taylor Lord-like go
In Silks and Satins? Or a Country Lass
Wear by her side a Watch or Looking-Glasse:
Faith Centlemen, such Solecisms as these
Might have done well in the Antipodes:
It argues a strange ignorance to call
Every thing foolish, that is natural:
If only Monsters please you, you must go
Not to the Stage, but to a Bartholomew Show.
The Author aims not to show wit, but Art,
Nor did he strive to pen the Speech, but Part;
He could have writ high lines, and I do know
His pains were double to descend so low:
Nor does he think it infamy, to confess
His stile as Careless as the Skepherdess.
Good voices fall, and rise, and Ʋirgil, who
Did Georgics make, did write the Aeneids too:
Laurel in woods doth grow, and there may be
Some wit in Shepherds plain simplicity:
The pictures os a Beggar and a King
Do equal praises to a Painter bring;
Meadows and Groves in Landscapes please the eye
As much as all the City bravery:
May your ears too accept this rural sport,
And think your selves in Salisbury Plain, not Court.
OFt hath your Court the Forests gilded o'er,
Making that glorious which was rude before.
You having greater power then Orpheus, now
Draw woods unto your Court▪ each tree doth bow,
And homage pay: O may all Forests be
As loyal to your Majesty, as we.
Enjoy these Sylvian sports, may they appear
Pleasing, as Hunting of the Noble Deer:
But let the Poet scope, may it be your will,
To frolic in the mirth, but not to kill.
So may he please you often: at first start,
Wound not his Play, and you'll make him a Hart.
GRieve not fond man, nor let one tear
Steal from thy eyes, she'll hear
No more of Cupids shafts, they fly
For wounding her, so let them dye.
For why should thou nourish such flames as burn
Thy easy breast, and not have like return.
 Love forces love, as flames expire,
If not increased by gentle fire.
Let then her frigid coolness move
Thee to withdraw thy purer love;
And since she is resolved to show
She will not love Do thou do too:
For why should beauty so far charm thy eyes,
That if she frown thoul't prove her Sacrifice.
Love, &amp;c.
Play on, let Musique feed the ear, which is 
Denied my Mistress voice. That strain again:
Oh it is composed of Harmony, it has
The Magic of a Sirens note. So, So. 
Now let them sing what in my sleep I dream't
Of Cupids cruelty.
Blind Cupped lay aside thy Bow,
Thou dost not know it's use,
For Love, thou Tyranny dost show,
Thy kindness is abuse.
Thou who were called a pretty Boy,
Art thought a Scheleton,
For thou like death dost still destroy,
When thou dost strike but one.
Each vulgar hand can do as much,
Thin heavenly skill we see,
When we behold one Arrow touch
Two marks that distant be.
Love always looks for love again,
If e've thou wound mans heart,
Pierce by the way his rib, and then
He'll kiss, not curse thy Dart.
Enough, no-more.
Why should I tax thy power gentle Boy,
That holds so much Divinity, it awes
Not mortals only, but makes other powers
Sub-Deities to thine? Great Love forgive me,
I'll with religious and devout submission
Beg reconcilement for my errors.
Sir.
Your Father doth command your presence.
Tell him
My duty shall present it self; I go
Like an unwilling Sacrifice to pay
My life, 'am loath, but must obey.
Can you be Mistress of so cold a heart,
When such a flame as mine Courts you to warm it?
Think but how long and with what testimonies
Of my true service I have wood your favour.
You are deceived Lariscus, I have not
Such a cold heart as you pretend, nor am I
Ungrateful to your love you have expressed;
But you must pardon me, if I forbear,
And pause before I give my self away.
You men, when you enjoy what you desire,
Cool in affections, and being married
We lose our price and value, while we keep
Our freedom, you pour forth your service to us,
And study new ways of devotion too
How to preserve us: Yet I do not make
This my reason, that I am so slow
In giving you that answer you desire:
I have professed already that I love
Your Person.
These are words, Oh give me proof!
And let not Hymen wast his holy tapers;
Give me Possession of my Happiness.
Tame your affection, if you love me as
You have made boast, you will not think it tedious
To expect till I declare my resolution.
Me-thinks that Lovers might content themselves
Sometimes to meet, and talk, and smile, and kiss,
Without desire of more possession.
Thus I could satisfy my self, and you
A man, that better can correct your passions,
Should rest in this. The wish of more betrays
But the rank part of Love.
Were every Virgin
Of this opinion, the Race of men
And women would be lost; had but your Mother
Been of that mind, the world had never known
Such a thing as Castarina, whose sweet frame
And charming beauty, now hath made Lariscus
The subject of your pity.
Well Lariscus,
If you will arm your self with noble thoughts,
And think without examining my heart,
I have some reasons why I thus delay you,
You will perhaps find no cause to repent:
Yet I am free, nor can you challenge me
Of any injustice, if I should to another
Dispose my heart; no vows have past on my side
To meet with yours; what I may do hereafter
In your assurance, may deserve a welcome.
Cleobulus is making to this walk,
And young Philaretus, let us withdraw
To the next Grove.
I am happy to wait on you.
Is this the reward of all my care? Hast thou
Forgot thy Birth and generous blood? Have I
By my own industry added to the Estate
My Father left me, with an hope to make
Thee great, and match thee to a Family
Of Honour? and have you thrown your kind heart
Forsooth, upon a Beggar, a base Shepherdess?
Oh Sir forbear! The thunder when it breaks,
Carries no more horror with it, then this
Speech of yours. Can she be base, whom Nature
Hath graced with all perfections of the first
Creation? I tell you Sir, were all
As she, Pandora should receive her ills
Into her Box again, and man as at
The first, should be exempted from a fear
Of death.
Alas poor silly Boy! thou think
That virtue, which is only varnished o'er
With modest looks.
Such modest looks as grace
Arismena, cannot be counterfeit: She's
No Impostor: her chaste looks are the true
Symptoms of what lies treasured in the heart,
To which l've vowed devotion, and will pay
My love religiously to her chaste self.
But ere you do it, think on these aged hairs,
And tell me, if their whiteness exact not
Your quick obedience to my will.
Indeed
I must confess you are my sather, and
May by that challenge Sir, to be the Pilot
Of my will, and in ought which may concern
Me (but my wife.) You shall bear greater sway
Then I my self.
I thank thee Sir; in things
Of most importance I must be a stranger;
In slight and common things you'll use my counsel.
Nay Sir; I did mean
To beg here your consent with all humility
Became a son; and I did nourish hope
You would be kind, and make my wishes happy;
For I must here profess, I love her so,
That were the world propounded, my reward
To change that deer affection to this maid,
Thus I would spurn it. My soul flies to her
With wings of chaste and zealous love.
You're then resolved?
I am.
To marry without a portion?
Without such portions as the world esteems:
And yet she is not Sir so poor, she has—
What has she foolish Boy, a nest of sheephooks?
Her fathers goodly armoury; a stock
Of tar, and searing irons, to grace your dining room,
Where for variety, instead of Arms
Shall hang so many Bottles and old Pouches:
Abroad his rotten sheep will raise a sum
To build, and purchase Towns; you'll learn a trade too
Of lying in the Sun, and lousing of
Your ragged Wardrobe, besides the art
Of whistling to the dog that barks again
To help a Consort; these are precious things;
And then the beauteous Paragon your wife
With her Straw-Hat and Linsey-Wolsey robe,
A Petticoat has served her twelve May days,
Besides the Feasts of jegging about May-Poles,
Is such a treasure?
If you consider Sir how great a virtue
Lies hid under so mean a veil; shall I
Despise a Diamond because it comes not in
A golden Casket: all which the Poets feign
Was extant in Astrea fled, will seem
But as one drop unto the Sea, if my
Sweet Arismena's virtues be but weighed.
And this you praise so much, shall be your sole
Patrimony.
Sir, your pleasure.
A goodly Patrimony: Virtue will buy
Lordships, and stock your grounds, maintain the off-spring
Of your admired choice; yes, and at length
Leave something to your Noble Family.
Much wealth consists Sir in the enjoying
A virtuous Wife: admit you gave me to
A woman with a Golden Mine, whose vast
And unexhausted entrails can scarce
Be fathomed, yet she may be a Strumpet Sir,
And so defile your unadulterate Race.
Will bags heaped with coin restore chaste blood
Into those sinful veins? I know it will serve
As Panders to corrupt your Noble Stock;
Oh think on that, and tell me if my choice
Deserve your scorn?
If you can find estate
And riches to her comeliness, and create
A Noble blood to fill her bright transparent veins,
I may consent.
The grounds we walk in Sir, and what your eye
In flowery meads may see abroad, are hers:
She has a thriving father, unto whom
She is sole child; these things I grant hold no
Proportion to your estate, and yet
A less may bring content, but where she comes
To crown all this; what can be an addition
To my felicity? Pray Sir be not cruel,
But give consent.
Thou mention'st only shadows,
And art in love with baseness, leave this folly,
And think not of her.
Bid me Sir not live,
And it will be much easier to obey you;
But while I have my breath, and use my reason,
I must be Arismena's Votary.
You must?
My heart's compelled.
Twill break that heart when you find want and force to turn a Shepherd.
It is a pleasant change.
So, so, I here cast off
The relation of a Father, thou art no more
My son, I will adopt a stranger, and
He shall have all, my care meant thine.
You are
Unmerciful: think Sir that once your self
Did love, and I have heard you tell a story
Something like mine, how much unpossible
You found it to withdraw your heart from one
Inferior in Blood, and Fortune too.
But Sir, I was my self,
And had no father to offend.
The Act
Was still the same.
Still arguing? no more,
I banish thee my sight, and what is mine.
Be absent from my thoughts, and know I can
Leave off to be a Father, when my Son
Shall cease his duty to my care.
You might
Have given me a gentle doom, but since
You banish me your presence, I must go
To be repaired in Arismena's smiles,
And there entomb your frowns: Yet let me beg
Your blessing first, which shall while you deny me
The benefit of what you have, to me
Serve as a Patrimony.
You hav't.
Thanks worthy Sir, for now I'll strip my self
Of these mis-seeming weeds, the Shepherds green
Shall cloth Philaritus, nor can it make
Him poor, if Arismena smiles. The rich
Have wakeful nights, whilst the poor mans Turf
Begets a peaceful sleep, in which they're blessed
From frigid fears all day, at night with rest.
He's gone: Has Loves inflamed dart then pierced
Past all recovery? I do pity him,
But must not show it; if there be any means
That time or art can show me to reduce him,
I'll study it.
Good day Cleobulus:
You do my field a grace to take the air in it:
Oh! are you come? Do ye hear? you have a Daughter.
I hope I have.
A fair one too.
She's a pretty Sun-burnt wench.
What Portion will you give with her?
Why Sir, she has a Portion.
Say y' so?
Pray let me know the sum, happ'ly I may
Graft her in a Family of Honour Sir.
Excuse me then, good Sir, if I appear
Too great a praiser of my own, she has
An honest mind, and that some men account.
A Portion Sir, it is not found in all
Her Sex, if stories may be credited:
She's young, and in my eyes fair, I dare yet
Believe 'em, she's handsome, and she can
Pray too, and spend not all the morn to dress her.
's this all her Portion?
If I do like the man would be her Husband,
I can give Acres too, and many Flocks
Of sheep.
And will that make her in your judgement
A fitting match for my Philaritus?
I do not say it will.
Why then is she in love with him?
Why? is Philaritus in love with Arismena?
I, and not without your knowledge too, you have
By base temptations and devises wrought him
To affect her; but I'll cross all your plots.
Have I contrived the ruin of your Son,
And basely wrought him to affect my Daughter?
I tell you Sir, I wished both good to you and him,
But know I scorn as much your Son
Should marry with Arismena, as you
Can hate Philaritus for loving her.
Out Beggar, know that if my Son Philaritus
Doth marry Arismena, I will throw him
Quite from my blessing, from my state, from all,
And smile to see the ruin of you all.
Pray stay, and hear what I resolve, if my
Daughter do marry, nay but entertain
A good thought of your Son, rich as you are,
I'll turn her out of doors without my blessing,
And not relieve her, though at point to starve.
I fear you not, nor your estate, I shall
Live in despite of your so generous blood,
Yes, and live honestly, which you rich men do not.
Get off my ground.
So, so, your goodly ground.
I'm vexed, but he shall find ever I ha done,
My Daughter is too good for his proud Son.
They're gone again, and we may take this walk
Without the fear of spies; but you delay
To satisfy my urgings with discourse
Of that must be remove,d, before my wishes
Can meet their happiness.
The memory
Of banished Paromet my Father wounds
Each thought I vary. If your Uncles power
Could make his doom reversed—
If we might own
The knowledge where he is.
Yet he hath being,
For else some vision would have taught my dreams,
Both how, and where he died, till he's restored,
My vows have sealed my resolution
To live a Maid, and not till then Lariscus
Must hope for Castarina. So adieu.
You have pronounced my sentence worse then death,
My torments will be lingering. Paromet,
If living, is not to be found, if dead,
All my desires must lose their ends. But stay,
Jealousy prompts me to suspect she mocks me:
I'll to the Oracle, my doubts shall be
Quickly resolved from its Divinity.
Come Shepherds come, impale your brows
With Garlands of the choicest flowers The time allows.
Come Nymphs decked in your dangling hair,
And unto Sylvia's shady Bowers With hast repair:
Where you shall see chaste Turtles play,
And Nightingales make lasting May,
As if old Time his youthful mind,
To one delightful season had confined.
What Musick's this doth reach our ears?
Which sounds like that made by the Spears,
And so affects the eager sense,
It is ravished with its excellence.
The air doth smell of Indian spice,
Or that the senses stupefies,
Which by Arabian winds is spread
From the ashes of a Phoenix dead.
Whence is this wonder.
See, see, where
The lovely Goddess doth appear:
Fair Sylvia, she that orders how
Before Pans Altars we should bow,
And for propition every year
Of the choice flees our sheep do bear:
Pay thankful Sacrifice, that he
May keep our flocks from danger free.
Instruct us Goddess what's thy will,
Upon this levy wood-crown'd hill,
I do invite you to Pans feast,
Where each shall be a welcome Guest.
Then to the musique of my voice,
Move gently on each with his choice,
But so that no malicious eye
See ought to task your modesty;
For your delights must always be
Attended on by chastity.
It is time the Sacrifice begin,
Devotion must be done within;
Which done; you may of Ceres taste,
And Bacchus gifts, but make no wast:
For oft where plenty injured stands,
The bounteous Gods do shut their hands:
The snowy fleeces you have shorn,
And cropped the golden ears of corn;
Lyaeus blood is pressed and put
Into the safe preserving Butt:
There when the cold and blustering air
Invites you from the Plains, (yet fair)
To take warm shelters, that may keep
Your selves in health, and ek your sheep.
Will into your numbed limbs inspire
An active and preserving fire;
Let your expressions then be free,
And gently moving follow me
On Shepherds on, we'll Sacrifice
Those spotless Lambs we prize
At h•guest rate, for Pan doth ke•p
From harm our scatt'ring sheep:
And hath deserved
For to be served
With those ye do esteem the best
Amongst the flock, as fittest for his feast.
Come Ʋirgins, bring your garlands here,
And hang them every where:
Then let his Altars be overspread
With Roses fresh and red;
Burn Gums and Spice,
Rich Sacrifice.
The Gods so bounteous are, ye know
Ye mortals cannot pay them what ye owe.
Here's harmless mirth; o it is a happiness
To be in such sweet company! who would
Not forsake all the riches of the world
For one he loved? Did she but live as pure
As are those souls contained in Shepherds weeds.
Oh Love! what man hath power to resist
Thy piercing darts, which like a fatal lightning
Hurt not the skin nor flesh, yet wound the heart?
I that this morning was my Fathers joy,
The sole hope of his age and fortune, am
Become a stranger to his family;
By him exiled, and thrown from all his cares;
I scarcely in this habit know my self,
Yet I am happy in it, and shall be happier,
If Arismena, for whose sake I suffer,
Smile on the change, she's here, and with her.
Her fair Companion Castarina; I'll
Obscure my self, and listen to their talk.
Indeed Arismena I must chide you for it,
Because you are fair, indeed the fairest Shepherdess
In all Arcadia, must that make you cruel?
That Beauty would become you more, if you
Would show you had a heart like other Nymphs;
Or if you cannot love, you need not scorn
Those that express their service.
Thou art foolish,
I do 'em Justice; should I smile upon
Their passions, and pity 'em, or but nourish
Their folly, they would more afflict themselves,
And trouble me; I give 'em soon their answer,
Tell 'em what they shall trust to, that they may not
Languish in expectation.
Well, you have a heart—
Yes, I feel it beat, but it is not yet
Infected with that mischief you call Love,
Nor I hope sha'not; but if Virgins loved
Themselves, they would place a better guard about
Their bosoms, and preserve their innocent freedom,
And not let every flattery betray 'em.
Give up their liberty for a song or sigh
Of any whining Lover.
Do you think
That no man can deserve your love?
I ne'er
Examine their deserts, that may endanger me,
They are all alike to me that court my favour.
Now fie on Love, it ill befits,
Or man or woman know it,
Love was not meant for people in their wits,
And they that fondly show it.
Betray their too much feathered brains,
And shall have only Bedlam for their pains.
To love, is to distract my sleep,
And waking, to wear fetters,
To love, is but to go to School to weep,
I'll leave it for my betters.
If single love be such a curse,
To marry, is to make it ten times worse.
Come Arismena, you in vain do hide
Yourself from me, I see through your disguise
It is pretty well dissembled, but I know
Your heart is not so empty as you speak it,
I know you love—
Whom prithee?
Nay, he does
Preserve you too, were you more fair, and to
That beauty had a soul above your Sex,
You know Philaritus.
Ha, ha, ha!
A Gentleman,
Heir to Cleobulus, but his Fortune is
The least addition, he is Fems darling,
And one whose service is an heaven to you
Being but a Shepherdess.
But a Shepherdess!
Why Castarina, I do value my
Being a Shepherdess above all his hopes
And fortunes, nor should change that honest title,
For all the honours of the Court, but, because
It seems thou hast opinion that I love him,
I'll clear my heart to thee, and hold it truth
What I affirm: it is true Philaritus
Is a desertfull Gentleman, and hath made
Express signs of his dear affection to me;
But by Diana's self, he is to me
In point of Love, no more then he that is
The rudest Shepherd of the Plain.
No more;
I do believe you, and rejoice to hear it,
For in her heart poor Castarina loves him,
Though he knew it not.
Who's that? Hath not
Some Shepherd overheard us?
Yes, but one
That shall take no delight to publish what
Concerns his own misfortune.
Is not this Philaritus?
Turned Shepherd for your sake:
How every garb doth become him?
Do not
Fly me sweet Arismena, for I bring
No danger to your person, sooner death
With torture should let fall his strings upon
My heart, then once Philaritus should bring
A thought that should displease fair Arismena?
What is your will Sir, for I now have but
Short time for stay; and if your business be
No other then you late propounded to me,
You need not a repetition,
Unless you take delight to hear me say,
I cannot love?
Why then I cannot live.
Yes, many a fair day, and enjoy a love
Of far more worth then Arismena is,
A foolish Shepherdess.
He must not be
A man, and hold his life long, that should dare
To speak that language.
Well Sir, is this all
The affairs with me, the minutes call me hence.
Poor Caftarina, in what plight art thou
To see the treasure of thy heart slide from thee,
And power it self into another Bosom:
She is composed of tyranny; I should not
Be so hard-hearted. would Philaritus
Direct his passions hither. Oh my Fate!
Indeed Philaritus I cannot help
All this, I'm not your Fathers Governor,
It is but your disodedience, you may
Recover him again, if you will take
My counsel, and throw off this foolish love;
Your Father's wise, and I am of his mind
Partly; you take a course to lose your self:
And where you urge the penance you are willing
To undergo for love of me, I answer,
As you cannot resist what love compels you to,
I cannot help that I am not in love,
It is your fate to have too much, and I
Too little love, all this must be obeyed.
Steel break his heart, let me advise you Sir
Be not too much dejected, this is but
A short lived humour, I dare prophecy
You may be happy in your affection.
Make not my wound ridiculous I pray
By flattering me with hope; she is all marble.
Come Castarina; stay, is not that Gracculus?
I'm glad I have you, oh Mistress.
What's the matter?
Feel here, and here, and indeed every where.
Hast thou met with a Satire, thou art frighted?
Worse, worse, the devil would not have
Put me into this sweat.
Prithee speak, Why art thou so distracted?
He bleeds too.
It would make you mad to be used as I have bin, but that's
Not all; oh Mistress, your Father and my Master,
Ah! What of him? is he sick?
No, no; worse, worse▪
Is he dead?
Worse, worse, an he had been dead my head had not been broke, and my bones made powder in my skin, with his Sheephook.
What's the wonder?
Speak the worst:
Why then he is possessed
With an evil Spirit?
Yes the devil is in him I think, he came home in such a fury, and has beaten us all round, the poor Whelp in the Chim∣ney Corner for offering but to open his jaws, being newly waked
out of his dream with his thundering, and his brains beaten out, which the Cat perceiving, run mad out of the top of the Chim∣ney: The first word he said was, Arismena, Arismena, and be∣cause you appeared not, the next thing was a blow, this blood can witness. I could scarce recover my tongue to tell him you were not within, but after half a dozen more knocks and kicks one with another, for I was not to choose, bad me run in the de∣vils name and fetch you, and presently, or go hang my self; ima∣gin I was glad to be out of his reach, and with as much hast as my bruises would allow, I have sought you up and down, now I have found you, pray come home, and know his meaning, I dare not appear without you, I must choose my tree else. Oh my shoulders! I think I were best hang my self presently to be out of my pain.
It is very staange, but Castarina come,
Nay, thou shalt bear me company, and help
To calm his passions. Farewell Philaritus.
That word carries some comfort yet; Oh may
Blessings reward thy tongue for it; and yet it is,
If I remember, but the common word
At parting. Farewell, something it contained
Once, but it is now grown empty, and no wish
Of happiness: Was ever man thus lost
In the labyrinth of Love, to Court my Mistress
A flinty hearted woman? Oh my Stars!
You were ungentle to design me such
A miserable fate, to affect, where I am
Scorned, and have no power to withdraw
My heart from ruin; death were an easy change:
Why, I am in the way, it must needs break
My heart at last, I must once die, and it is
Better to die in love then otherwise.
When by the current of yon' Crystal stream
I sate me down, a gentle slumber closed
These wearied eyes▪ and dreams transforming love,
Made beauty seem imperfect in her self,
For then, oh then, sad thoughts disturbed my mind;
I sighed forth that, which in my knowing sense
Was Heresy to think; so pure I know
Was Castarina's love, that to misdoubt,
Were breach of faith, and yet such fancies did
Arise within my troubled brain, I know
Not what to hope, or doubt. O fancy!
Thou works't too much upon my nature, and I
Am too too credulous of dreams; yet pass
Thou ill suspicions of my love, they shall not
Disturb my rest, which like to healthful blood
Shall run in all my veins, and by my hopes
Create a new established peace, which shall
Extinguish fearful thoughts, as Lucifer
Exhales the grosser vapours from the earth.
Then till Apollo's Oracle propounds
More cause of fear, I'll hope the best;  this sweet
Harmony tells me, I'm near the sacred place
Which will resolve my doubts: And see! the Temple
Doors yield me a free access unto his Throne;
Yet I'll forbear to speak, till he have ceased
His Musique on his charming Lyre.
WE to thy Harp Apollo sing,
Whilst others to thy Altars bring
Their humble prayers
For length of days:
Or else for knowledge of their Fates,
Which by their prayers thou renovates,
And dost renew
Not as their due,
But as their worth, incites thy love
To shower thy blessings from above. 
I am all wonder.
Thou who dost all secrets know,
Ʋouchsafe for to descend so low,
As to resolve a doubt which springs
From dreams, and such sad nightly things.
Shall Castarina be my Love?
Speak Apollo, and if she prove
But kind unto my vows, I swear
I'll offer Incense every year,
And oft my grateful thanks return,
And Spices on thy Altars burn.
Thou shalt find crosses in thy love,
Yet time may make them blessings prove;
For when the Ʋirgins o'er her Hearse,
Have placed the Garland and sad verse,
And bathed the cold earth with their tears,
Thy hope shall overcome thy fears.
And till that she be dead, shall not
Enjoy her love: Untie the Knot.
Be clearer Oracle, and leave me not
In doubt: What! are your gates already shut
Open but once again, and speak, although
Your voice be death, let not my trembling soul
Be tortured through despair, or else be grieved
By vain expecting of my joys. Say great
Apollo, Is she mine?—Not a word.
Art thou grown deaf unto our prayers; then here
Begins my misery; and where I did
Expect the clear unfolding of my doubts,
There I perceive a Riddle.—I shall be
Crossed in my love, and yet from thence derive
New blessings. Can effects spring from a cause
'Has difference in the extreme? When she is dead
I shall enjoy her love. With what delight
Can my flame meet her cold and uselesle earth?
Or must I then form to my memory
Her living shape, and with defer embrace
That Shadow, which my fancy now commands,
And when I please gives me possession of.
The juggling God makes pastime of my passions:
But why do I profane? great Power forgive me,
It is a just punishment; for being curious
To know the mystery of Fate, I must
Refer the event to what is ordered by
The high disposer of my destiny.
COme on my fellow Satires, we will be
Still Masters of the Woods, and please our selves
And our appetites, no matter though
The foolish Shepherds rail upon us, let us
Pursue our game, no Shepherdess shall scope 〈◊〉,
Unless they wa•• with stronger guard, and when
Men come like Armies to destroy us, we
Trust to our nimble feet, and leave them cursing,
Because they have not wings to overtake us.
The Nymphs, because we are deformed, contemn us,
But if we take them at advantage, we
Teach 'em repentance, and delight our selves
Upon their rape; the last I grappled with,
Was a delicious Thief.
Pursue your pleasures;
Only I charge you, if in any walk
Of yours, the beautiful Arismena
Chance to appear, none touch her to offence;
And lest your presence fright her, hast away,
She must be mine, although I'lmost despair:
That so much sweetness should affect a Monster,
For I have against my nature courted her,
Lain prostate at her feet, with sighs and tears
Besought her to compassionate a heart
That languished for a kiss, still she has scorned me,
Next time I meet her at advantage, I
Will satisfy my full desires upon her.
We will obey.
All other of her tribe
Are free to you, but she must be my prey:
Oh I am ravished but with the thought
How sweet a piece of flesh I shall compel
To serve my pleasure; not a thousand prayers
Nor rivers of her tears shall quench my lust:
Methinks I have her at embrace already;
We live to please our sense, and wo'd not change
Our Goatish shapes with any soft humanity
To court a female, and be made their fools,
And die for love of any peevish Giglet.
Yet it is not much amiss to flatter them,
If so they may be won.
Right, but if they
Be obstinate indeed, use violence,
And snatch your own delight from their fair Bosoms,
And glory in it; when we have broke their Maiden-heads
They'll serve a doting Shepherd. Come be frolic,
And leap into a dance to practise our
Activity, the place is most secure:
Lustily Pipes; I am all fire methinks.
Oh good Mr. Satire! Ah! ah!
How came you by this fellow?
He came not by me, but overtook me an't please you, a pox on his heels. Oh! what will become of me?
I, here's right, out of the frying pan into the fire.
My Master has half thrashed me to death—
Your Master, what's your Mistress?
My Master is the Shepherd Brachius,
Father of the fair Arismena.
Arismena, ha!
What shall we do with him?
Hang him upon the next tree,
Ah! if you hang me, I shall never be my own man a∣gain: Ah!
Let's tear him to pieces,
Limb by limb,
Roast him, and eat him,
He will make a feast, the fool is fat.
You'll never endure my flesh in your mouths Gentlemen; Ah!
What not yours?
Alas I am not sweet, do not your worships smell me? it is rank within my linings.
No, be advised by me, this fellow I have heard runs neigh∣ing after the Wenches, the first thing we do Let's geld him;
agreed.
I have an excellent Whittle to cut
His throat, or to carve him, Come Sirrah.
Do ye hear sweet-fac'd Gentlemen, you talk of hang∣ing, I'll choose my Gallows, I, let me be trust up before you untrusse me, O that fashion let me die a man, and not a Capon! Oh misery! Alas I have nothing to speak on! Ah! ah! If ever I neighed after any Female, or beckoned, or whistled, but to Boptaile our Bitch, that helps me to look to our sheep, and kennels with me, which I hope is no offence; or flung so much
as a wanton eye upon any Cream-fac'd Shepherdess in Arse∣dia, let me whipped to death with Nettles, or flea me alive: Oh courteous, hairy, hoary, Satirical Gentlemen.
I have considered, stand off, and I'll pronounce his sentence.
You had better have been hanged at first, as I wo'd had you.
Or roasted, flayed, or any thing,—he'll pay you—.—
Or carved, as you were advised; he'll torture you, prepare to be seven years a dying.
Oh! do, do what you please with me, I shall not need to make my will, or if I did, you wo' not let me go home to fetch what I would bestow upon you in Legacies, and to trust a∣ny of you to be my Executors, is to no purpose; you have fright∣ed me half dead already. Now, now.
Do you serve the fair Arismena?
I have not served out my time, would you would give me leave to deserve Indentures.
What will you do to save your life now?
Do? why if it please you to command me, I will do a∣ny thing, oh! any thing, to please any of your friends here to give their consent, and be bound hand and foot, I'll cut their throats.
Ha!
If you be so contented.
Will you promise, nay swear to bring your Miftress to this place to morrow, pretending you have found out some Fountain or delightful Spring, or what other invention you can tempt her with, but let no body else come with her.
She shall come by this hand, is that all? If I do not tice her hither, why carve me when you take me next, as that will not be long, if I perform not my Covenants, do what you will with me; we two will meet you here.
Not meet me, not a word of me, or any of my Companions.
Do ye think I am such an Ass? what care I who meets, you'll do me no hurt.
Nor her, we will only be merry, and dance a little.
Nay use your pleasures, I'll bring her, or let me be gored to death with your Worships horns.
I'll trust thee, farewell, if you fail, look to it,
I must keep my oath, and bring her hither, or they'll
firk me when they catch me again: But she's my Mistress, what then? and may—thereby hangs a tale, hum! Why there's no great harm if they do but—and so let her go, she'll pass for a Maid a reasonable while after this lecherous Goat has a mind to her, no matter, I shall be thought innocent, and preserve my skin from their fangs by it.
I save my self, I'd give my Sister, Wife,
And almost hang my self to save my life.
Sir, be assured you have a Daughter, whose
Happiness consists more in being
A subject to your will, then could she boast
The mighty treasure of the Indian Mines.
Say thou so Girl? it is well, very well said,
And yet there's something in a corner of
Thy eye, makes me suspect, dost weep?
If any sorrow Sir appear in me,
It is that you suspect me to dissemble.
Indeed I speak with freedom of my heart,
I never loved Philaritus, nor will.
Nor will: how's that? not if I should command.
How now? you go too far.
Sir, you amaze me.
I am amazed my self, and half distracted,
But look you do not love him; if he have
By any secret Love trick crept into
Your heart, out with him, tear him out again
Upon my blessing: Because he's a Gentleman,
Must we be trod upon? our souls are free
And high as his: What, I am Bracheus still,
And thou art Arismena still, my Daughter,
Obedient I hope; ha! art thou not?
And he is but Cleobulus, a man
Of more estate, more dirt, and dunghill acres,
Wears richer clothes, and feeds more daintily,
Yet he's but flesh and blood, his Son too good
To look on Arismena, threatened and cursed
For loving thee, he sha' not need, he sha' not.
Indeed he has often wooed me Sir, and I
As often have denied, for trust me Sir
I cannot love at all yet, and it were strange
If he should creep into my good opinion,
And I not know on it: Willingly I would
Not dream I loved him, but if waking we
Join our affections, I must lose my reason.
So, so, this makes for me, how it doth joy
My heart to hear 'em both so peremptory?
His Father told me ye had both changed hearts,
Which was no small vexation, to hear
My Daughter had bestowed her self without
My knowledge and consent.
Sooner should I
Have thrown my self on some devouring Beast,
Then yield my heart to proud Philaritus
Without your will.
I'ave found thee hitherto
A dutiful child, and on the full assurance
Of what thou speak is truth, I wish all blessings
Be powered into thy lap Girl, and so I leave thee.
But if you play false play, and juggle with 'em,
Do ye hear? I say no more, and yet I'll speak it,
I'll turn thee greying with the Flock, and curse thee.
Sir, my obedience shall deserve your blessing.
Kneel down, and take it, and a kiss, go too,
I'll not suspect thee now, my heart's unquiet,
But twill I hope come to his own again.
Farewell Castarina, you love my Daughter,
Counsel her not to love Philaritus.
Most heartily, I hope she wont Sir.
Now Castarina, am I worth your credit,
Are you confirmed Philaritus has no Engagement here.
You told me so before.
Daughter, a word, my mind is changed, and I
Consider if you do affect Philaritus
It can be no dishonour; and his Father 
Says he does love thee infinitely, besides
He is a pretty handsome, pretty Gentleman.
What do I hear? her Father speak such kind
And loving language to Arismena
Of lost Philaritus: oh happiness!
And he has had good breeding, he shall have
A good estate, being his Fathers Heir.
How's this? But Sir, you said his Father had
Quite thrown him off for his affection
To me.
Indeed he threatened some such matter,
But things may easily be reconciled,
And he may be reduced to love him Girl
When things are done, therefore be wise.
Thus low,
And lower in my heart, I speak my duty,
You gave me life, but good Sir take it not from me
Ever you compel your Daughter against her heart
To love and marry with Philaritus.
Though other eyes and judgements give him all
The praise a young man can deserve, to me
He holds no substance, a mere Apparition;
And so with my consent he vanishes.
Again, again, let me embrace my Girl
To my own heart, it was but my desire
To try thee again, I hate him and Cleobulus,
And to the grave shall follow thee with more
Comfort, then to his Marriage. Now farewell,
Be constant Girl, and bless thy aged Father.
He's strangely troubled.
Oh my grieved soul!
Ha! is it not Philaritus?
Away, I wo' not stay to hear him speak.
You must alone then Arismena, for
I cannot go so so
She flies 〈◊〉; ••ight;
As I appeared some ugly killing Serpent,
Yet Castarina stays. Pray was not that
Fair Arismena that went hence? and yet
You may be silent still, I know it was she;
Sure I want eyes to look upon my self,
And there is some deformity my sight
Cannot discover; what think you, am I
So strange a Monster?
You are fair and comely
In my opinion.
You are charitable,
Would Arismena thought so; and yet why
Do I pursue my torment; if she scorn me,
Why do I place her here, so near my heart?
Be wise Philaritus.
You counsel well.
And love, where you may find your love rewarded.
Sure there is none that can affect Philaritus;
Why blush you Castarina?
Would you could so easily read my heart.
I have it,
It may do me good, this is a gentle Shepherdess,
Forgive me heart if I dissemble with thee:
Fair Shepherdess, you have been witness to
My Loves sad story; and when Arismena
Was cruel to my vows, you seemed to bear
A part of grief with me, and that deserves
My thanks, I wo'd say love, if you accuse not
My change too soon. She cruel hath despised me,
And Justice bids me punish her, and bless
My self, by off'ring to your care my heart.
Philaritus doth mock poor Castarina.
She comes too fast upon me, yet I know not, 
A woman's heart is fathomless, she's returned.
If you sweet Castarina smile upon me
I'll quickly bury Arismena's frowns
In those fair Eyes.
What do I see and hear!
So soon turned Votatrie to Castarina
Oh man where is thy faith! yet I deserve it
My heart's too great to speak to him, I find
A mutiny in my thoughts, who's this Lariscus.
The Shepherd that affects Castarina
The object will as little please his Eyes
For she is taken with Philaritus.
Oh cruel Castarina!
Is this the reward of all my loving service?
This sight afflicts me, is Philaritus
My rival? and by destiny appointed
The barr to all my hopes, If I mistake not
Report speaks his devotion directed
Only to Arismena, She's here too
A witness of his falsehood. How do you
Affect their Actions Arismena?
You.
Are not too much delighted I imagine,
They are both false, Oh for revenge! I'll do it
Why should we be so tame? Philaritus
Is perjured.
Castarina is too cruel.
Be ruled by me and punish 'em.
They observe us.
It shall but vex their Eyes, Let us seem loving.
Lariscus and Arismena they embrace.
And so let us.
By Jove, plays with his hair,
He kisses her, was I thus scorned for him
I am not well
Good Castarina leave me.
Not well, defend good Heaven! where is your pain?
Here at my heart.
At your heart.
Nay then I shall find you will be another
Disease to me, pray have me.
How's this poor Castarina.
Me thinks all this might have an easy cure
A little blood dram'd from the heart would doe it
And then I am revenged, no I am then
A greater triumph to her pride, no woman
Is worth our smallest part of life, and man
Betrays a Cowardice for a wantons scorn
To practise wounds upon himself; yet I
Must not be altogether tame and suffer
There is a subject fit for my revenge
Lariscus must not long enjoy his breath
Or I must sacrifice my self to death.
It is more then I expected, for I meant
To take revenge on thee Philaritus.
The injury done me by thy ambition and courtship of Arismena is no way to be pardoned, if thou hast any spirit meet me at Apollo's Oak this afternoon, where I will either punish thy insolence, or with my own blood write my self
Had I not known the fair Castarina.
Or thy accomplsh't virtues, this had bin
A cause sufficient to inflame my blood
But as thou art the subject of my thoughts
This will increase my zealous flame, and whilst
Philaritus thinks Arismena steels
My point, tic thou adds vigour to my arm
Fair Castarina's written here and in
Each wound I make sweet Castarina shall
Be read. Yet stay! Cool thy strong passions heart
Let not fond Love be blind, use reason ere
Thou fight and weigh what in a woman can
Deserve a wound. Why Castarina's fair,
And seems to have a Soul above her Sex
That may inflame my heart. Oh no! She may
But seem a glorious Star, and then in what
A case is poor Lariscus in when he
Shall wound Philaritus and find his Love
Beneath his thoughts it would be a Corrosive
Beyond a Cure, and does already make
Me hinge like to a doubtful needle drawn
Betwixt two Loadstones, which at once inclines
To both and neither; Yet vanish all such thoughts
They are most false be then revenged Lariscus
And meet the fury of thy enemies spear
Whose flatteries have destroyed thy hope in fear,
Now cruel Castarina if I dye
There is an end of Lovers misery.
I Have discovered his intention
To court my beauty, that he might appear
In his neglect, to Arismena; more
Desired by her; It is our general humour,
And I my self would now enjoy Lariscus
Because he now neglects me. But my fears
Will not allow me to believe it possible
Let it be ordered then by Providence
And Time, Whats here contained, ah! a Challenge 
Sent from Philaritus unto Lariscus.
Oh my Stars happy influence! they have made me
The means for blessed prevention of their ruins
Twixt whom their own dissembling hath begot
A mutual jealousy. I must be sudden
Not dally with occasion! It is our Fate
To increase our loves by others seeming hate.
This place will yield an Echo to thy voice,
Come therefore Graculus, Let's pass the time
More pleasantly, you have a merry Song I know.
Truth Mistress, you know my Songs they are rude, Yet such as Nature, not Art, hath taught me I'll power into your ears.
I am in love and cannot woo
Heigho! Heigho! what shall I doe,
I gape and sigh and sometimes weep
For Phillis that my heart doth keep.
I love her hair and forehead high
Then am I taken with her eye,
Her cheek I doe commend for gay
But then her nose hang's in my way.
Her lips I praise but then steps in
Her white and pretty dimpled chinn,
But there her neck I doe behold
Fit to be hung with chains of Gold.
Her breast's are soft as any down
Beneath which lies her Maiden Town,
So strong and fortified within
In vain I hope to take it in.
Excellently sung Graculus.
Nay I have a voice, and had not my Masters beating and a cruel fright stuck by me, I had sung most melodiously.
What fright's this you talk of?
O Mistress about this place, I, here about a Satire met me, and so misused me, as had I not been more then man I could ne'er have lived, the very signs of their nipping me are like embroide∣rye on my flesh, Oh! doe not touch me it is a pain to think on them.
I seize you cruel fair one; but from those Lips
Will force no amorous Kiss, if your pure soul
Denies me one, I will but aspire
So high as to salute your hand, and if
With freedom you shall grant me that, I'll boast
How much I am obliged.
Dare not to touch.
See brightfull Star, your voice has shrunk me back
And I lie prostrate at your feet, nor from the Earth
Will raise my trembling joints, till that clear voice
Which struck me down shall raise me from the ground
And by your genuine voice create my soul
As pure from dregs of Earth, as yours.
It is well
This language argues more then what you seem
And could almost entice me to believe
I might shake off the fear, which doth arise
From sight of your grim shape, yet still those looks
Those ravenous looks affright my heart, and I
cannot be safe midst such deformity.
O stay! Let not this outward shape amaze
Your brighter self; The mind that's fair may well
Excuse what Nature hath misshap't. Grant that
She had bestowed as comely parts upon
This outward form as ere Narcissus had
Yet if the mind had bin mishapped the man
Would (like some curious peace of Marble) seem
A glorious form, and wo'nt the rich endowments
Of the inward man; Virtue and wit, those parts
Which make him different from a moving statue.
Rise from the moist bedewing Earth, your tongue
Has won so much, that I'll admit your touch
My hand.
Which with Devotion I will Kiss.
So you'll wish no more.
One touch upon that Lip
And I have done.
I grant so you'll be gone.
Not yet, this Kiss has ravished me, and now
You have betrayed your self, it had bin easy
To give ore when I was conquered by your speech
But now I have taste those sweets which hangs upon
Your Lips, you may expect the day and night
As soon should meet as I not Kiss again
O I'm undone.
No fair one I can leave
Immodest Kiss, and love entirely love
Those noble parts that grace thy better self
What though thou see me rude? yet in this shape
There is a soul can honour thee, and I
Must now embrace thee as my Joy.
Defend
Me Powers.
From what?
From Ravishing.
None means
So bad, or ill a deed; the gentile breath
Which from the Phoenix nest perfumes
The rosie morn, Is not more chaste then I
The Idolater adores not his Idol
With greater reverence then I will you.
Horror!
Why
Thus passionate? No mortal pays Devotion
With greater zeal unto his private Larr
Then I my duty fair to you.
I dare not hear.
You must and shall, for if you do not turn
Your frowns to smiles, I shall but force that from
Your breast which might be freely gained.
Deliver Gods!
By all you name you stir not hence, the flame that's kind∣led here will not be so suppressed
Either consent to be my mate, or from
Your bosom I will pluck my own delights.
O help.
Deliver Stars from such a cursed fate!
Nay then I must be bold and force you render up
Your cold Virginity unto my greedy lust. 
Assist you Powers assist.
Cursed be thy letchrous soul, may all thy stock
Perish in thee
Oh I am slain.
Why stand you trembling? wipe all paleness from
Your cheeks, here's none to fright you here
But poor Philaritus, and in his soul
You may repose your peaceful rest, he which
Has ventured thus, will think no blood his own
If it be kept from being spilt, when he
May spend it in your service.
You have Sir
Engaged me beyond my desert, and though
Arismena be a woman and can repay
Nought but her thanks, yet those shall be so oft
And justly paid to you, that all the world
Shall know my heart is not ungrateful
For so great a favour.
You may be pleased
Arismena to find a thing more grateful
Then formal thanks, if you'll return your love
Twill make me happy, and renew a life
For trust me I doe wonder how I live
Without your resignation of my heart
Which you have fair one, and I cannot last
Unless you give it back
I doe resign it
Most willingly. I claim no title in it.
But yet you cannot for indeed my heart
Is bound with yours, and unless you bestow
Your own I must be void, no heart can be
Encircled in this breast but yours.
Why? you
Would not have me pluck out my heart to have it swallowed.
You're pleased to jest, you know my
Meaning, and if you will can add a joy
To my sick soul
You'll have me render then
Love back for love, why that I cannot doe
Why Arismena, why? have I deserved
So ill that you should kill me for my faith
And make another rich in your affection.
Sure you are changed and this is but pretence
Castarina is your love, and had you bin
Lover of me, as you would seem, she had ne'er
Bin courted by Philaritus.
How like the Ivy hath my heart desired
To show by what embraces I would hold you
I have no loving thought on other beauty
You're life, and from your smiles I gain
My bliss.
If then your bliss consists in me
I'm sorry that my eyes invite my heart
To grant another suite, for trust me Sir
I could wish (in the reqitance of this
Last favour) that I could bestow my heart
On you, which since I dare not doe I take
My leave, and wish you rest for your own sake.
Stay yet and hear me a few words, I know not
How long I have to live, and rather then
Be punished thus with your continual scorn,
I'll put on wings to meet death; but be sure
My troubled spirit shall pursue thee living,
And represent my passions, and not leave thee
Till thou by such a cruelty as thy own
From him whom thou effect best, shall suffer
As I have done, and dye to meet me in
The gloomy shades of lovers.
Fare you well Sir, I'll think on it.
Why dost not break thou foolish heart, but thou
May be art destined for Lariscus sword.
Death will be happiness, I'll kiss that fate
Rather then live the object of her hate.
Mischief pursue you both, he wounded me,
But not I hope to death, though I seemed so
I'll be revenged upon you both for this
I fear I bleed too inward, If I die,
My curses shall procure their Tragedy.
HOw vain unbridled youth is that's ore swayed
By giddy passion resolutely hazard
For satisfaction of their trivial rage
Their souls eternity? Castarina
Hath informed me that young Philaritus
And Lariscus doe intend to venture
Like Prodigal gamesters, at one cast, the stock
Of both their live and fortunes: Prevention
Must be soon applied, or their too much beat
May prove their utter ruin; and though Cleobulus
Count me the object of his scorn, my care
shall give him notice of their wilde intents.
Good day to you Sir, may I desire you would
Let your Master know I'd speak with wit him.
I shall.
Perhaps Cleobulus, whose scrupulous soul
Is apt to make a question of my faith
May judge this act a flattery, a pretence
Of seeming friendship that with more safety
Philaritus may obtain his desire
Of Arismena, then to hazard
him to the danger of Lariscus spear.
But these are vain surmises; my intents
Are plain and virtuous, and good actions ever
How ere miscontrived carries their reward
Still with themselves.
Would you with me?
Yes.
Speak your intents.
Philaritus—
Shall not enjoy your daughter.
It is not my suite.
Say y'so Sir, I shall with far more patience hear you.
Briefly thus
I am informed, and tic a serious truth
Your son Philaritus (whose noble soul
Cannot endure a Rival in his Love)
Hath sent a Challenge to Lariscus
O Sir think what deserved pity twill excite
In every honest bosom, that two such plants
Should be cut off from earth ere their full growth
As by a violent Tempest, So, or one
Or both are like to perish, for this morn
They are resolved to try their skill at Arms.
Which you would have me to prevent?
It is your part.
Ah, Ah, Ah;
You are mistaken then, for well I find
Your aim, and see you do contrive this plot
To win me to consent Philaritus
Should marry Arismena; but you are too
Too young to cheat a Fox, and therefore
Ought to take more subtiler ways then this
Why you contemned my Son but now, and if
That rage sprang from the heart, you would be glad
He should receive the danger you pretend.
My rage was grounded here, and know right Sir
I cannot, neither will I now repent
What then my pasfion uttered, I have more
Of man within me, yet see here's the Challenge
Sent from Castarina, which I will keep
Though eminent mischief follow; I d little thought
This discovery of your Sons danger wo'd
Have merited this entertainment.
So your best fate protect you.
May be
That Bracheus is noble in his thoughts
And truly doth intend the good of young
Philaritus: Why should he else affirm
Hee has the the challenge? and means nothing else
But friendship with Cleobulus? I was
Too hasty in my speech, and therefore will
Send for him back; within there tell Bracheus
I'd speak with him.
I shall Sir.
If now
I see the Challenge, I shall soon perceive
Whether it be Philaritus his hand
Or no, and then I soon shall find his plot.
Did you send for me?
I would
Acknowledge that I was too rash for to
Suspect your goodness ere I had a cause
Sufficient for my ground, and therefore would—
Have me produce the reasons which occasioned
My former speech to you.
Tic my ambition.
Nay since you urge my anger, you shall know
I slight as much your fury as your love:
Nor shall you by entreaties win me to
Prevent the mentioned danger; He who can
Be so unjust as to misdoubt my truth,
Shall perish in his ignorance, before
A syllable I utter shall deliver
Him from his sudden ruin.
I pray be'nt so resolute,
I shall be diligent unto your speech,
And weigh each word that issues from your tongue,
And study how to show my self your friend.
My rage is not malicious, like a spark
Of fire by steel enforced out of a flint,
It is no sooner kindled, but extinct.
This paper will inform you all.
Tic so, my Son has challenged Lariscus
Into the field. O Fate!
Fear not, If you
Have but a forward will to act what I
Shall counsel, doubt not, your affairs shall meet
A fortunate Issue.
O how I pray!
Your ear.
You council well, you and my better Fate,
And by this means will cure their bloody hate.
The pain of my late wound hath robed my spirits
Of strength and use: the blood that won't to dance
Through the concaves of my veins, now moves
With a dull beating in my quiet pulses,
And I begin to faint. Thou gentle earth
Allow me what sweet comfort rest affords,
And let thy verdant bosom be my bed.
I am a rogue and deserve hanging for betraying my poor Mistress: She's tossed and tumbled by this time: Let me see.
Oh!
Thats not her voice, ha! the Goats! the Satyrs!
Whore's my Mistress, he has not eaten her I hope.
Help me I am wounded.
And if I did think so, I would be more familiar.
I cannot go, help I shall bleed to death.
He's almost kilt. First my lecherous friend
Whore's my Mistress?
She was rescued by a man has almost slain me.
Now I have a great mind to kill him outright, howe∣ver I will dominere
Whore's your hurt?
Here, oh! thou dost pain me.
Would you have a Surgeon; you shall be hanged first.
Sweet friend assist me.
Now I will make amends for all, and carry this Satire home to our house, where we will whip him twice a day; and af∣la the maids have gelded him, I will hang up in our chimney to dry for bacon. Sirrah you are no rascal, you deserve not to be firk'd and jerked and yerk'd: my dog a mountain, you are wilde, I'll tame you now I think on it, what if I cut out his eyes and then show him upon market days to the Orations where eve∣rye man and maid will give money to have a lash at him like a b•inde Bear.e What doe you think of a wench you pestiferous goat, you must be rutting, and no flesh serve you but my Mistress, come I'll bring you to them shall cool your liver.
Gently, oh gently, gentle Shepherd oh I shall dye.
Not till we'ave done, you must have your carnality, I was pinched and trod on, you dogs face, does your abominable worship remember? and threatened on peril of my life to pimp for your bestiality, well there is no remedy you shall upon my back to the house of correction.
Dear friend use mercy, I repent.
Friend and mercy, Yes I will be your friend to help you to a dog whip, and mercy in abundance
I say.
Oh Mr. Satire
Gentile Mr. Goat, I did but jest.
You shall be hanged in earnest.
Help, a Rape, Mudrer, Felony, Oh! I am undone
I shall be eaten up alive.
I love thee yet Lariscus for thy boldness
To meet an enemy and could wish thy error
To 'ave bin unborn, but cannot bear an injury
So great as to corrival my affection
In beauteous Arismena.
Thy own tongue
Betrays a cause that makes thee worth my killing
Thy guilt of flattering my Castarina.
Come fight, and let our courage meet and execute,
Not talk.
Revenge hath wings, thou needs not call it
Upon thee with more hast.
Hold.
Stay.
An other duel must be fought, this place
Is ours.
If Philaritus attempt
A wound upon Lariscus, here
I'll punish it with Arismena's death.
And if Lariscus hurt Philaritus
Within the bosom of Castarina
I'll hide this killing Arrow: never look
With wonder at us, you kill one another
And send your foolish Ghosts to rail at us:
No, rather let us execute, and save
That cruelty upon our selves, you being
Men that are troublesome to the world and us.
Oh here, make me happy Arismena
My breast will meet thy shaft.
Stand fair.
And mine
Shall glory to be pierc'st by Castarina.
Have at you then
Thus doe I shoot a kiss.
And thus I aim at thee.
Pardon my dear Philaritus I have
With too much trial of thy love offended
If not too late, here I resign my heart
In satisfaction, and am thine, without
Affection to Lariscus, with whom I
Conspired to make thee think we loved each other
Upon thy courtship unto Castarina,
Who told me of your meeting, and contention
Which now must dye in your embracing us.
I am extas'd with joy.
And am I welcome?
To my heart.
If all seconds were so careful to
Compound, there would not be so many slain.
Here we begin our joys.
May they last ever.
Help!
Help!
Villains! Devils!
You come upon your death.
They have our spears.
That I could look 'em dead, the slaves out fly
The wind, they're gone, they're lost for ever,
Our heaven but now discovered, we are thrown
To hell, and suffer torment above all
The wretched souls endured.
There's no pursuing now,
Let us collect and muster strength to be
Revenged upon their goatish generation.
Gods must pursue the Ravishers, for mankind
Wants force; where shall I hide my cursed head?
You sha'not grieve, nor curse alone while I
Am partner in so great a misery.
See those commands that I imposed be strictly
Kept, and least so much as but a noise of their
Complaint be heard, be sure you bind, and gag
Them both; why stay you thus? be quick, and not
Less merciful then poisoned Arrows from
A Tartars bow.
We suddenly obey.
Its fit. Now will I glut my self, and in
A full revenge tickle my spleen; O twill be
Brave sport to wind these aged sirs in such
A labyrinth, as their industrious care
Shall more enfold them in, then set them free.
But see I talk, not execute; Delay
Brings danger with it, and oft designs betray.
Tic strange these woods should be inhabited
With store of Satyrs, yet we find none of
Their horrid Cells. There's no place that has escaped
Our narrow search, though the sulphurous earth
Hath breathed forth all its ills, and hung its fogs
To dark the Ayre, yet have we ventured through
Their loathsome smells, to find a Satyrs cave,
But they are hid; some intelligencing
Devil has told their sudden Fate, and helped
Them to some aerie wings.
Curse light on them!
Had we bin of the female sex, they wo'd
Have showed themselves.
Right.
But now they fly us.
Yet the lightness of
Their heels shall not free them from a deadfull Fate:
We fall like lightning on their heads, and scorn
To welcome rest, until our spears have bathed
Their steely points within their murderous souls.
I like thy resolution well.
Who's here?
Coridon the news with thee?
This will declare my coming
I wonder that my Father writes to me.
Read and perhaps thou wilt not wonder.
 Since thou art charmed with Arismena's beauty, and accounts nothing cordial but her love; I cannot choose but praise thy constancy, and wish to see thee encircled in Arismena's arms; Her Father hopes as much, who with me expects your present coming to my house.
This Physic comes too late, this kindness should
Have blessed your Son before, read read Lariscus
And tell me if my Fathers love be timely,
O my accursed Stars, by whose black influence
My Fate is poisoned thus, that I could reach you
To be avenged upon your golden heads,
Which I would pluck from heaven, and bury in
The earth, never to shine again.
Let me persuade in this extreme to go
And let me wait upon you to your Father,
He's powerful and may at his command
Raise men enough to ransack all the woods
And find the caves where dwell these horrid Satyrs
Whom we will torture for the Rape committed,
As they shall wish themselves in Hell to be
Rid of our punishment: we must be active,
And live to be revenged, not sigh away
Our spirits thus.
Thou dost advise me well,
This may assist us to perform our duty
To our abused fair ones, and revenge
Their stain in part, but sure nothing can be
Enough to recompense their cruelty.
IT will rejoice my Son Philaritus
To find such comfort in my Letter, which
Speaks all my anger off, and full consent
That he should Marry beauteous Arismena.
You writ that I was willing too.
I did.
Good Bracheus now my friend, I did consider
The errors of my passions, and with much
Contention in my self at last resolved
This way to merit pardon, you by this
Have had a trial of my Sons affection
To your fair daughter.
Sir you shall command
What is in Bracheus power, I had a passion
And old mans anger too, which your good nature
Already hath forgiven.
You are perfect
In what we have designed, to perfect all
Our joys, and make a fair contentment swell
In every bosom, storms cannot last always,
The blackest night must have a day succeed it,
And pleasures have enlargement in our heaart
When we have suffered pain: I wonder that
My Son makes no more hast.
Here's your servant.
Your Son my young Mr. is come Sir.
Alone: It was misfortune I forgot
Lariscus in my Letter.
He's come with him.
Excellent, then all things may be fortunate,
You'll please to doe what we devised already
To entertain them.
I'll about it instantly.
So, so, a sudden change will much delight
His care oppressed heart; he's here, my blessing, 
And then to you a welcome good Lariscus.
Me thinks you wear a sadness in your brows,
What sullen clouds disguise your Faces thus?
It is a time of joy Philaritus,
You read my Letter, and consent that you
Should marry Arismena, and that Bracheus
And I are friends. What sorrow?
I prithee
If thou hast strength Lariscus tell him what
Sad chance hath robed our hearts of all delight
For I shall faint in the repetition.
Your comfort comes too late Cleobulus.
Too late! why pray?
I prithee speak the sad news in his ear,
I dare not hear the sound: what thing is man?
How like a leaf tossed by the wind? he knows
No certain way. O love thou art concerned
To bear a part in our revenge, and if
Thou be a God, aid two oppressed lovers
A against the lustful Fiends have ravished all
Our joys and wealth away!
You fright me Sir,
By Satyrs snatched away? and could you not
Pursue 'em?
They had first surprised our weapons
With which they kept us back, whilst two of their
Black crew flew from us with the prey,
Oh had you heard the cry of the wronged virgins!—
Nay heaven did hear it too
But had no thunder ready, not one shaft
Of vengeance to throw upon the Ravishers.
Justice is dead, or in a sleep, and we
Poor mortals pray and are not pitied.
Do ye know what then became of your two Mistress∣ses?
I know fair Arismena cannot live
After her bodies stain.
There came late to me
A grave learned Gentleman, that has
Great knowledge in the secret art of Magic,
I will entreat his skill in this afaire,
He'll tell us all the event: I'll to him my self,
Stay here a while.
Though I expect there can
Be nothing but more cause of sorrow for us,
Let's hear what he can say, or show.
He may
Direct us too, to order our revenge,
But I suspect no Art can tell us where
The poor things are.
My Mr: has prevailed already with the Gentleman: Who holds it easy to discover all.
Is this he?
You are welcome Sir.
Alas poor young men, their faces
Carry too much of sorrow, but the Fates
Must be obeyed, I am informd of your
Desires, and I request none may be with us
But these two, please you to depart, there is
Some reason in my art Sir for your absence.
Most willingly.
Sit down I pray, but stir not on your lives
Nor speak to what you see; you must suppose
What ere you see is not substantial
But aerie shapes that represent the life
Of those you seek, which to offend may be
Most prejudicial nay dangerous
Even to your lives; the charm shall not delay
Your expectation longer: doe you know
The Satyrs when you see 'em once again.
The same, the very same.
Be they Devils.
We'll revenge them here.
Do, kill thy Father boy.
Murder thy Uncle.
Ah! Are you the cruel Satyrs?
Yes and have we hope
Made you amends: They were our men
Which we both shaped, and fitted for that purpose.
You frighted us.
It is confessed, but now
We'll cross your hopes no more, but give you those
Ye term your greatest happinesfe: May heaven
Make their wombs fruitful with as blessed issue
As ere gave Parents hopes.
These wishes Sir
Adds to my great content, and were
But Arismena here, there were not in
The world that which could make Philaritus
Accursed.
It is my wonder that she stays
Thus long.
What noise is that?
Some's strangled sure.
Hear tic plainer now.
Let's in I pray.
Ell's well I hope.
We hear a noise but can
Not tell where tic.
 Oh! Oh! Oh!
Hark!
Its here abouts.
Oh horror!
Unbinde the men.
I am afraid.
What sport's this?
No sport, the Satyrs—
What of them?
Having intelligence (I know not by what means) of your disguising of your selves into their shapes, have surprised the houfe; and ere we were aware bound and gaggd us as ye see; so instead of us brought in Arismena and Castarina, who since have
carried them away leaving us in this lamentable case.
Plagues pursue them.
Horror attend them.
Furies!
Rise in my brain and help me to revenge.
Fix me for ever here, oh you that send
The active lightning from your throne, or trust
Me with your thunder once—Dare you not?
Or have I more consuming flames within?
Yes my breath may blast them all—stand off 
Furies swell up my breast, and in this rage
I could unmake the world, and turn it back
Into its first unpolished heap, and shall
Perform some worthy deed worthy Philaritus.
This doth distract my Son.
We'll counsel him
Till we have set him right.
I'm lost in grief
And smalls the hope I have to find relief.
Here may we rest and ease
Our tired limbs, whilst some refreshing gale
Courts our sad fears into a sweet repose,
Sit down.
I'll doe what you command, yet I
Am fearful here's more danger then we see.
Your too too nice Fates guide! to Fates yield wee,
For pensive cares can't alter their Decree.
This was her wonted place, on these green banks
She sate her down, when first I heard her play
Unto her lessening sheep; nor can she be
Far from the spring she's left behind. That Rose
I saw not yesterday, nor did that Pink
Then court my eye; She must be here, or else
That graceful Marigold wo'd sure have closed
Its beauty in her withered leaves, and that
Violet too wo'd hang its velvet head
To mourn the absence of her eyes: And see 
Where she doth lie, purging the moistened ayre
With her more gentle breath: Methinks she chides
Me in her sleep, and frights my blood to paleness
As I stand: But come, I am resolved
Nor can I longer now forbear to force
Arismena to come with me, whilst I
Leave Castarina to her Destiny.
Sleep Castarina whilst thy sense
Doth loose its use, from fancy take
Instructions of that Excellence,
They'll keep thee safe when you are awake.
Nice honour is so rich a thing
That to preserve it rather dye
Or kill the Ravisher would fling
Such stains upon thy Modesty.
Tic fair and just revenge for they
Whose bosoms lodge such foul intents
Tic fit should dye and daily pay▪
Their debt to the sin in punishment.
Stay gentle Spirit, and with those sweet sounds
Strike on my waking sense, that I may be
Confirmed tic no illusion: I'll obey
The counsel of my Genius; sure it was it
That guards me: Would it would appear again
And teach thee Arismena—ha! She's gone;
And whither? how! my ignorance! and wonder!
A whirlwind in its giddy motion carries
Light matters not more swiftly, then shoe's vanished,
Hath danger frighted her? or is she forced
By some rude Satire? Thou that did instruct
My soul so lately, guide me to the knowledge
Of her much doubted Fate, or show the way
She's fled, that I may follow. Arismena!
Let me oretake thee; a ravenous Bear,
Or Wolf hath seized thee, I would share thy harms
And both die folded in each others arms.
Come fair one, cast off your trembling fear,
No violence shall force your Love, I'll rather choose
To pierce this breast, then let one accent fall
That may offend your ear.
You doe offend
In speaking thus.
I should displease you more
To snatch my pleasures from your breast
You wo'd
Indeed, and doe already fright my blood
To paleness in my cheeks.
Oh say not thus, I doe
Confess I have not in the stock of my
Deserts enough to force one bounteous smile
For to create me new; but let not that
Cause you to frown, or with one angry look
Turn me to ashes as I stand.
Still you
Doe gild the Pill, you'd have me take, but I
Assure you Sir my heart is none of mine,
Though the bright Marriage God has yet forborne
To light his Tapers. We breath both from one soul.
Come, come, you doe but jest to egg me more
By your delays.
You'll find I speak the truth,
And covet more to die a Martyr for
This cause, then live to be an Empress.
Are you so resolute? so stout, go in,
Visit the rooms I led you through, look on
Those stings you are to feel unless you doe
Consent, and then consider that if they
Enforce you not, you shall be quickly sent
To those blessed fields you vainly hope to view.
That death is welcome which shall render me
A chaste example unto posterity.
These Arcadian Nymphs are patterns to the world
Of chastity; had my breath bin spent on
Ladies of the Western court, they would have proved
More gentle then to let one thus long sue
Without a close embrace, whilst these fly from
The name, fearing the sound might get
An Act of lust.
Here comes another too
Whose brighter soul shall not by me be forced.
Fair Maid?
Bless me ye Powers!
From what?
From you and all your cursed
Associates.
Why fair one? I carry
Nothing to affright you but this shape.
In that
Lurks all thats bad.
Judge not thus ill, the respect
I'll show to you shall merit better thoughts.
You show respect, heavens defend! can I
Believe there is civility amongst Wolves,
Or that a Lyon can be brought to couch
Before his prey. Stand off, or you shall feel I dare 
Be more then woman, sluice your blood, and laugh
To see your soul expire.
Stay gentle Nymph
This little blood has checked my daring soul.
But dost thou bleed? oh stop the murmuring stream
Least my Feeble nature sink at the sight 
Of blood.
Art thou so quickly changed, is that
Great spirit which thou proudly boasts turned to
Effeminacy? Come kiss me, or I'll
Draw so much of thy own twill fright thee more
To view it streaming from thy veins.
Keep off
For I dare suffer—
A kind salute.
No,
Death and meet it through more tortures then ere
Tyrants could invent.
I'll try your valour,
And get you yonder till I've framed a death
More horrid then ere fancy thought on yet.
Let fall your stings, they shall be welcomed too;
I'll kiss the hand which shall dismiss a maid
And praise thy act in the Elizean shade.
Nothing can alter her, but as the Stars
Keeps still her constant course; yet something I
Will doe—I, it shall so, and if
This fails I'll try some other plot.
The news?
The Shepherds are ensnared.
O bring them in. 
They're timely tan, for now my plot may find
A good success, or as I am, I may
Either revenge or lengthen out my day.
Unbinde us slaves.
I, doe, pull your arms to pieces, twill be a torture we forgot to invent.
That I could kill my self.
Or any thing rather then die by their ignoble hands.
Patience is our only remedy.
Here comes one will tame you Sir.
I am resolved nor though I can will grieve.
The spies are brought.
You have done well: Now see that one of you
Muster enough to guard these woods, whilst we
Afflict our punishments on these.
I go.
Come hither you that are the Master of
These woods, and think it nothing to destroy
Whole troops of Satyrs What wo'd you bestow
On us to set you free? wo'd you give up
Your Virgins to our use, and let us take
The beauties of your Land?
Destruction first.
Nay you should enjoy them too, only we—
Wo'd crack their Maindenheads—
And we sho'd then—
Be married to them.
Right.
And leave our Lands to those
You get.
Yes.
A halter first.
Say so! Tear limbs.
From off the trees give them a welcome.
Strange Musique!
The screech-Owles Dirge ere death.
Their notes are changed.
And now they sound as when the dying Swan
Fills the Echoing woods with harmony.
What shall become of poor Philaritus?
We'll dye encircled in each others arms.
Fetch in the youths and let them sing the Songs
They have prepared.
What now?
Our sentence.
Sigh Shepherds sigh
Spend all your breath in groans
Lay your sweeter Music by
Hearken only to the Drones.
Henceforth no other Garlands view
But what are made of dismal yew,
Tic fit all nature now should morn
And every tree to Cypress turn.
Those Nymphs are gone
Whose looks in awe did keep
The Wolf and Fox who alone
More then Pales blessed our sheep,
Their sweetest grass the Lambs did find
Where their bright eyes not Phoebus shined,
In every place where they did come
They made a new Elizium.
Wretched Swains ye now can have
No Paradise but in the Grave,
 Die, then die, since they are fled
 The only life is to be dead.
Unbinde the men.
What then?
I ask your pardons Sirs, and wo'd
Be glad to know what can deserve your smiles.
Jest not foul soul, it is a death to live
The object of your view, we can as bravely
Suffer, as you torment, and were those here
Which you have ravished from their loves, we wo'd
But shed some funeral tears upon their hearse
And gladly meet our deaths.
They're dead indeed,
And since you know their fates, you shall be brought
Unto their Tombs: I'll drop as many tears as you
To show my penitence, although it be
A thing averse for me to weep, yet when
I think what goodness I've destroyed, I must
Accuse my lust, and then lament your loss.
Accursed slaves.
Nay dry your tears, for if
There be such groves and joyful fields as you
Call fortunate, your Nymphs are sporting in
Their shades, triumphing ore our cruelty.
They died unspotted then.
They did, and breathed
Out souls as pure as ayre before it mixed
With Earth.
Blessed virgins! Lead forward to their Tombs,
I long to pay a funeral tear, and weep
Till I'm become the only Niobe.
They are enclosed in these, in them is hid
More riches then the world has left, but I
Sin in their praise, my tears shall expiate
My crimes.
Which is my Arismena's Tomb.
This.
I will bedew this chest, whilst you Lariscus
Weep your griefs ore that
Oh Castarina!
Send from the Elizean fields thy ghost to call
Me hence, let not my airy soul be pend
Within this lump of clay, and I be absent
From that rich place, thy purer parts doe bless.
My eyes grow dry, this breast has so much grief I cannot vent my tears.
I can supply what you doe lack, methinks I could im∣balm both corpse in mine, or else
Create a Sea with Rivers from my eyes.
My sorrows flow
So fast I want expressions for my griefs.
Rise from the earth, your tears can't raise them from
Their silent Urns.
But yet they may perchance
Hasten my Journeys sooner then I dream't.
Rather then so we will rise and live again.
Alive!
Yes, and have I hope made you amends
For all the injuries I've done. It is true
I oft have thought to woe Arismena
To consent to marry me, but I found
Her ever constant to Philaritus,
Besides this shape has frighted her, which thus
I now cast off.
Paromet.
Your father Castarina.
I know it Sir, and was acquainted with
The plot, but had not leave to crown you sooner
With the happy news, or else I should ere this
Have blessed you from your fears:
And beg a pardon for the wounds I gave you.
You are called home, and every one rejoices
Your doom's reversed.
I've practised all that's done
With this intent, that if I could procure
Arismena as my Love, I hoped I sho'd
The easier entreat you to sue for my
Return, which I doe find you have obtained
And doth exact my service ever and binds
Me to entreat your pardon Arismena.
I can forgive, and had you wronged me more
You have made a large and fair requital, in
Giving me up chaste unto Philaritus.
Doe we not dream?
Most certainly we are
Awake, and now made happy.
At last
Our hearts meet.
Never to be disjoined.
And once again take Castarina from Her Fathers hands.
Welcome again dear heart
To my own bosom.
And now the truth of the dark Oracle
Is clearly illustrated, Thou wast dead,
Dead to my hopes; and now I doe enjoy thee
After thy restitution to new life
Whence thy Lariscus doth derive his own,
Thy faithful true Lariscus.
I believe it
Though you suspected me.
Allow that error.
A reconciliation and free pardon.
Henceforth I will be guarded with such care
A jealousy shall not assault one thought
Without repulse.
What noise is that?
No more plots I hope.
No, no,
It is Graculus whom I have cause to be
Kept close.
O prithee free him all are friends.
Hoe's here and I'll obscure my self.
Oh the horrid place, and tortures I have both seen and felt, are you their Master? Doth any of you desire to see Hell before you go thither.
The fellow's mad and thinks there's no other place but that.
If you doe? come but with me and I will show a place—such a place as goes beyond the fire spitting Moun∣taine and has worse tortures in it by half then the gnawing Vul∣ture, Ixions wheel, or whatsoever else the lying Poets doe ima∣gin. O Master! had you but some little grudgings of what I have endured you wo'd—I, that you wo'd run mad, wilde, nay—almost try the certainty of eternity, rather then have your bones thus unjoynted in your skin.
Ah, Ah, Ah, you're rightly served for betraying your Mistress.
The Devil! how came you to the knowledge of that?
Why I told em.
Oh free me from a Fury, a Devil.
Neither you see.
Exiled Paromet, had I known this I wo'd—
What?
Why—
Nay out with it.
Have told Castarina to've bin freed by my discovery.
Oh!
Well sirrah go and be glad you have escaped thus.
And so I will, for I well deserve to 'ave lost an Arm, or something else that's dearer to me, for betraying a Virgin. Oh my bones.
The night begins to wast, come therefore on
I long till Marriage Rites have made these Lovers one.
Lead on, and may the Gods come short of those
Delights these happy pairs may find.
To all
My thanks: come my dearest Arismena
After so many conflicts with my Fate
I meet in thee my happiness, our Loves
Shall be more glorious for the Eclipse.
Thus Memphian Balms that are of richest worth
Once bruised do send most precious Odours forth.
LAdies and gentle youths be pleased to spare
One eye to view this Goblin thatched with hair,
And then (what ever Language he hath flung
From the wilde fury of a Satyrs tongue)
He does presume your softer Sex will scan
Some walking Cottage wronged you, not a man:
He does confess his language never knew
That smooth humanity which lives in you;
Nor dares he think he can reform this Sin,
Till some new Mart of manners doe come in:
Besides he thought this rough behaviour due
To female Faries, it was not meant to You.
His fancy dreamed of Elves, but now does fear
The Sexes glory has bin injured here.
For when he sees a Constellation rise
Shot from the glorious light of several eyes
That gild the Orb, he knows these are not Bowers
For Silvian dames, but some diviner powers.
And what the Revels of the woods grant free
This chaster Scene hath raised to blasphemy.
Well since the crime is Acted, here he stands
The doom of female weapons, nails and hands.
And since his language hath profaned thus long,
Faith Ladies clap him soundly for this wrong.

BE dumb those now harsh notes, our softer cares
shall never be acquainted with such sounds.
Peace (our grand Captain) see here Amurath,
that would have once confronted Mars himself,
(Acknowledged for a better Deity)
Puts off ambitious burdens; and doth hate
through bloody Rivers to make passages,
whereby his Soul might flote to Acheron.
Wrinkle your brows no more (sterne fates) for we
scorn to be made the servile Ministers
to cut those threads, at which your selves have trembled,
esteeming us the fiercer Destiny.
Yet must great Amurath thank those sacred powers,
they have enriched our souls with such a price,
as had those Heroes, whose revengeful Arms
served Mars a ten years Prentiship at Troy,
ere dreamed succeeding times should be possessed
with such an unparalleled, unprized beauty as my Saint,
they would not have prevented so their bliss,
but been most humble Suitors to the Gods
to have protracted their then fond spent life
but to behold this object; which out-shines
their Helena, as much as doth the eye
of all the World dazzle the lesser fires.
Jove, Isle outbrave thee; melt thy self in Lust,
embrace at once all starre-made Concubines,
Isle not envy thee, know I have to spare
beauty enough, to make another Venus;
And for fond Gods, that have no reward in store
to make me happier, here Isle place my Heaven.
And for thy sake, this shall my Motto be,
I conquered Greece, one Grecian conquered me.
But (gracious Lord) those streams (we see) soon ebb,
which with outrageous swelling flow too fast;
forbid (Lucina) this soon kindled fire,
should ere burn out it self. Tic a true Theme,
That ne'er lasts long, that seems most extreme.
Can this rich price of nature, precious jem,
give entertainment to suspecting guests?
Come, come, these arms are curious chains of love,
with which thou link'st my heart aeternally,
thy cheeks the royal Paper interlined,
with Natures Rhetoric, and loves persuasion
stands there attracting still my gazing eye:
This then Isle read, and here I now will fine,
that those all antique fables of the Gods
are writ in flowing numbers; first thy lip,
was fair Europaes, which they say, made Jove
turn a wild Heifer: next, this sparkling eye
was the Aemonian Io's: then, this hand
Ladies, fair Mother to those Star-made Twins;
Thus, thus Isle Comment on this golden Book:
Nature nor Art, have taught me how to fine;
Fairest, it was you first brought me to this vain:
In loving Combats, now I valiant prove,
let othets war, great Amurath shall love.
Brave resolution! O the fond thoughts of man!
awake Euno! Isle find stratagems:
There shall be Physic, to purge this disease:
light sores are gently used; but such a part
must be cut off, left it infect the heart.
Schahin, Our Tutor, we command this night
be solemnised with all delightful sports
thy learned invention best can think upon.
Prepare a Mask, which lively represents,
how once the Gods did love: that shall not teach
us by examples; but we'll smile to think,
how poor and weak their idle faining was
to our affection. Schahin, be free in wit,
and sudden: now come my Kingdoms Bride:
Hymen would wed himself to such a Bride.
Nature, and all those universal powers,
which showed such admirable Godlike skill,
in framing this true model of our selves,
this Man, this thing called man, why doe you thus,
make him a spectacle of such laughter for you,
when in each man we see a Monarchy?
For, as in states, all fortunes still attend:
So with a Kingdom, with a complete state
will governed, and well managed in him self:
both each man bears, when that best part of man,
(Reason) doth sway and rule each Passion.
Affections are good Servants: but if Will
makes them once Master, they'll prove Tyrants still.
No more King now, poor Subject AMURATH;
whom I have seen, break through a Troop of Men,
like lightning from a Cloud: and done those Acts,
which 'ene the Furies would have trembled at:
Treading down Armies, as if by them he meant
of dead men's backs to build up stairs to Heaven:
And now lied lurking in a women's arms,
drenched in the Lethe of Ignoble lust,
appoints me for the wanton Engineer
to keep his so loose thoughts in smoothing tune.
Woman, enticing woman, golden hook
to catch our thoughts, and when we once are caught
to drag's into the public view of shame;
And there we lye bathed in incestuous pleasure
for all good men to laugh and scorn at once.
Bane to my senses! I could either wish
our birth were like those Creatures, which we say
Are bred from putrid and corrupted matter;
Then that we should acknowledge our dear being
with grass and flowers: for what else is our state
up to the top? But then the weight shall fall
upon their head that cause it. Work (my brain)
tush, blood, no??? water must wash off this stain.
Shine here (my beauty) and expel the night
more than a thousand stars that grace the Heavens:
Me thinks, I see the Gods inventing shapes
in which they mean to court thee. Jove he frowns,
and is more jealous, more suspicious
of thee, then all the painted Truls, whose eyes
bedeck the all enamelled Firmament.
Beauty (my Lord) it is the worst part of woman,
a weak poor thing, assaulted every hour
by creeping minutes of defacing time;
A superficies which each breath of care
blasts off: and every humorous stream of grief,
which flows from forth these Fountains of our eyes,
washes away, as rain doth Winters snow.
But those blessed guitars of all Nuptial rites,
have wrought a better cement to make fast,
the hearts of Lovers; the true name of Wife
guilds o'er our thrones, with a more constant shape
than can be subject or to time, or care:
And in our selves; yea in our own true breasts
we have obedience, duty, careful Love;
And last and best of all, we may have Children,
Children are Hymens pledges, these shall be
perpetual chains, to link my Lord and me.
Art thou a Woman? Goddess, we adore,
and Idolise what we but loved before.
What Devils have men been, whose furious brains
have oft abused that Deity called Woman:
dipping their Ravens quil in Stygian Ink,
to blast such heavenly paper as your faces!
Were all the enticing lusts, damned policies,
prodigious fascinations, unsearched thoughts,
dissembled tears, broke vows, loathed appetites,
luxurious and unsatiate desires;
Were all these of women equally weighed,
that virtue in thy breast twill out-balance all,
and recompense the ruin of all thy Sex.
So please your Majesty, L. Schahin's ready
for entrance with his Masque.
Tell him, we're wholly bent for expectation.
Sit, sit (my Queen) Music exceed your Spheres,
think I am Jove, and Godlike please our ears.
Gaze you mortals, gaze you still,
On the Gods now look your fill.
Jove and Juno are descending,
Yet her Jealousie's not ending,
Mars, sterne Mars, he will not fight,
But with Venus when it is Night.
Daphne crowns Apollos head,
Whom she would embrace in Bed;
Neptune swells his frothy cheek,
Cause Diana is not meek.
Gaze you mortals, &amp;c.
Come now my (Sister and Wife) we'll begin
to court afresh! Nay, lore not (Heavens Queen)
here on this greene we'll a Lavalto dance;
What if our hairs grow silver, yet our strength
Is young, and vigorous. Say (fellow Gods)
(Since we are full of Nectar, and our cares
Lye drenched in our Nepenthe) take your Queens, and be
All jovial; Mars for our Daughter Venus,
Apollo join with Pallas, Brother of Floods
embrace Diana; Gods sometimes merry be;
but in the night, when mortals may not see.
How now (wanton?) Can I no where go,
for recreation, but you follow me?
Is this your recreation? Fie! My Lord,
will you be wanton still! For here you came
For some new Harlot, some new Queen for you.
Juno, Wife.
Your Sister, (thunderer,) and not your Wife!
Banished from Heaven I am; and your Bed:
resign them both to Strumpets, Concubines.
And now you come to see a fresh new lass,
in which Pole now, or in what part of heaven
shall she be stellified?
Shall still sinister thoughts wrong our intent?
well (Juno) well, you'll ever be a woman,
a very, very woman! But since she scolds,
Let's hence (ye Gods) lest her infectious breath
blast the succeeding day; and mortals curse
her hel-bred jealousy: Calumnious woman,
Come, scold in heaven; For if Gods lived on Earth,
suspicious tongues would blame most innocent mirth.
Well, Jove looked pale, I touched him to the quick;
it is some new Minion he came down to see:
Hark (jealousy) know Juno is a woman!
Am I not mad yet? Mistress Bride, adieu,
Jove shall not steal a kiss; My curse is past,
when thou sleep first a Bride, may sleep thy last.
Fair Bride, I sang thy Epithalamy,
and left Elysium for thy Nuptials:
Juno here thundered against the Thunderer;
knowing how thy beauty dazzles hers,
she durst not let heavens King once glance a look,
but threatened with her helbred incantations,
to metamorphic thine unparall'ell'd
and most celestial shape into worse forms;
And more prodigious than ever poisoned charms
wrought on the fabled Concubines of Jove:
but know great Queen, my Mother Venus vows
her everlasting guard to save such beauty;
Lest if thou perish, Nature her self
lose her only parterne of serenity.
But I must hast, Love, which the Gods protect,
can never be endangered by neglect.
Schahin, thine Art is excellent but say,
doe Gods fall out for love amongst themselves?
My Lord, these are but fables: yet to make
the show more pertinent, and to grace your Queen,
conceit took leave to put the frown on Iuno.
My Lords and friends, we shall be ever thankful
and rest a Debtor to your courtesy.
Not so, fair Queen, but durst I now entreat
the Kings detaining from the sweets of Bed,
there yet remains one thought upon conceit,
which you would doubly grace me to behold.
Our worthy Tutor shall obtain a night,
a night of us, in any case we can!
But then let me inform your Majesty,
that it is a warriors show, which once you loved,
but now are free from.
it is best of all, with greediness we will see it,
O how the soul doth gratulate it self
when safely it beholds the dangerous state
of others, and it self security free!
Glad are we still to stand upon the shore,
and see afar off others tossed in the Sea:
or in a Gallery at a Fencers stage,
we laugh when mutually each one takes wounds;
Sit still (Eumorphe:) Schahin, thy show in hast;
It is best delight, to think on troubles past.
Stay you most worthy shades??? brave Hector, stay;
And proud Achilles, know your massy Tombs,
which have so long orewhelm'd your valiant bones,
yawns wide to let the imprisoned coerces forth.
I must afresh embalm your sacred Trunks,
and sweet your memory with most happy oil
of just report; the Gods awaked me Fame
from out the oblivious Sepulchre of sleep,
to drop that Ink into old Homers pen,
wherewith he curiously hath lined your names,
enfolding them in Everlasting Cedar,
and make them live to all posterity.
Virtue to valour hath his gift assigned,
great men may dye, yet deeds still rest in mind.
??? in non-Latin alphabet ???
most fortunate young man, whose worth is crowned
with everlasting Trophies of renown,
how hath he set thee on the wings of fame
which soar in the middle region of high glory,
proposed to all, a never dying story!
May it please thee (Son of Jupiter) to accept
a Present, which our fight enriched us with?
Is it a Band of stubborn Soldiers, Captain?
O no (my Liege) of exquisite formed Ladies,
Darius his wife, the wonder of her Sex;
Besides a Troop of such shaped Ganimedes,
that Love not equals.
Philoxenus, We thank thee. Yet hark,
there is a secret we would know of thee,
and you must tell Us: on your faith you must.
My Liege ???
Nay, no Court oil (by your leave) no flattery,
we are but man, this very trunk of ours,
Is but a Vessel filled with humane blood,
and we trust not that Parasite like pen,
??? in non-Latin alphabet ???.
All the destroying vices of frail man,
I may be subject to; but what base looseness,
or supple Luxury, did thou ere observe
so to benumne our sense, that thou should think
we could be pleased with such effeminate Presents?
Know sir, our eyes shall have that abstinence
that will not look on them, on boys, or women.
Hence then, and present some coward with them.
Give me a spectacle would please the Gods,
and make them bend their Ivory brows to the Earth;
a man, a Soldier, strong with his wounds;
amongst fate and ruin, upright and unshap't,
his mind being all his guard, his wall, and armour???
and if he fall, still noble wrath remains
in his amassed Trunk: not all the darts
stuck in his sides, making him all one wound,
affright his courage; but wrath lending weapons,
himself doth seem a new and horrid War.
Nor are those Milke-sops which beguile the time,
with stealing minutes from their Ladies lips,
such as the Gods doe love; for as the Wind
loses it's force, if it be not opposed
with woods of strong and stubborn planted trees;
So Virtue, if it walk in trodden paths.
That breaks up honours gap, and makes the way
through paths of death: that flame burns strong
which is resisted: valour shines in wrong:
Of Alexanders Soldiers be this said,
war was as peace, when he the army led.
Brave Macedon, how truly hast thou weighed
the reason of mans birth! who is equal borne,
for all the world, as well as for himself.
the world's a field too narrow for thy worth,
and although Nature hath her enacted bounds
for Sea and earth, nay for the heavens themselves,
nor Sea nor earth shall coop thy valour up:
Valour of Nature ever this attains,
that it breaks forth, far, and beyond her chains,
and this Isle trumpet out; The whole worlds Ball,
in which thou art so great, to thee is small.
When men want worlds to show their virtue in,
that is the crime of the Gods, and not their sin:
It is a decree of a true Soldiers mind,
to think nought done, when ought is lest behind.
On (valiant youth) for, know I will appoint
a Grecian Prince, who so shall steep his quill
to paint thy name in Wels of eloquence,
that this thy scorn of Lust shall be proposed
for Kings example to posterity.
Know mortals, that the men the Gods most love,
in hard and dangerous Arts they always prove
When men live brave at first, then fall to crimes,
their bad is Chronicle to future times:
For, who begins good Arts, and not proceeds
he but goes backward in all noble deeds.
Death consecrates those men whose awful end,
though most men fear, yet all men must commend.
Scahin, the Macedon's heholding to thee,
and history shall pay you thanks for this,
which we rest Debtors for.
Great Prince, such kindness of acceptance pays
For things which are but for a Kings delight:
in seeing them, he amply doth requite.
Eumorphe, Love, Queen, Wife, le'ts hast to Bed,
and may we wish this night eternal time.
Scahin, good night: good night, kind gentlemen.
Thus when we are dead shall we revive of the stage:
one hour can present a kings whole age.
Observed you not the Kings looks? Grew they not pale?
O yes (Lord Schahin) you must be his Parent,
and snatch him out of the Gulf he's falling in.
That feigned speech of Alexanders wrought
like to most purging Physic; nights then black,
when it is compared with day: Boldness is clear,
when it is presented before bastard fear.
Isle tell thee, Eurenoses, thou art a Soldier,
and I am both a Soldier, and a Scholar;
And for these two Professions am both most glorious,
and most meritorious; Pallas is for both:
O what Tysiphon, what snaked scourge
can make a Scholar, that should never sleep,
but twixt the Pillows of Pernaessus Hills,
and dip his lips in springs of Helicon,
make him by snoring on a wanton breast,
and suck the adulterate and spiced breath
of a lewd famed woman?
And for a Soldier (Schahin,) let me speak:
We that doe know, the use of swords and fire,
we that doe know, halters can throatle us,
shall we ere venture on a Women's cruelty?
We that endure no Lords, shall we endure
a woman to overcome us? Most true Demophoon,
I reverence thy memory: no pewling phrase
could so enchain thee to thy Thracian Dame,
but thou would rather perish than she save thee.
Isle not declaim long on that common theme,
but they have lust lye in their fingers ends,
and whilst their sweet-hearts breath sticks in their sheets,
they will admit another Lucrece in the day,
to be a Thais, if the night will not gain-say.
Why (Eurenoses) why should we endure
a new Queen now? this Kingdom wants not heirs:
we know (should we have more) it were dangerous.
But hark! The Queens for Bed-inticing sleep
with charms of Music: well, even such a Night
may yet prove dismal ere the following Light!
Scahin, let's in:
the first degree to purge such else as these,
is to instruct the patient his disease:
that you have done.
Yea, and will yet once more
adventure a new stratagem. Just when the King
he has rid his Chamber, and with covetous hast
thinks for to clip Elisium, and drink deep
of his long wished delight, I having skill
and uncontrolled access, will in disguise
seem his deceased Fathers apparition:
and by all ties of children to their Parents,
bid him forsake that vile bewitching woman.
An easy Medicine doth and sure will work,
to rub shrewd wounds, make them but fester more,
Foul Med'cines we worse brook, than a foul sore.
Madam make hast, The King will be impatient
if he be from you long. O Happiness!
Why Menthe! then thou deem us happy
thus to command a world of services,
to have a King my subject; and attended
with these harmonious sounds t'affect our ears?
Yes (truly Madam) it is a happiness.
It is, were 't Eternal: but I fear a power,
a women's power, doth but make sport with us.
Why, were we not once (Menthe) a Captive Wretch?
Yes Lady! now your happinesse's the more:
Riches please best, when there went want before.
That power which raised us from so base, so high,
can throw us down again as suddenly:
Me thinks my life is but a Players Scene
in the last Act: my part was then to play
a captive creature, and a Queen to day.
Your Morals (Madam) are too serious;
Me thinks these Ornaments should elevate
your dumpish spirits. Think this Bed a place,
in which no Icy slipping chance hath power;
A Kings safe Bed is like a guarded Tower.
No (Menthe) no, it is not the Bed of state,
nor the free smile of a well pleased King:
it is not the embracing Arms of Emperors,
nor all the Gems that so enwreathe the brows
can so allure Fortune unto their gaze,
as she should still be constant; O she's blind,
nor doth she know her self where she is kind;
Those, those are Kings, and Queens, whose brest's secure,
like brazen walls, Lust's entrance not endure;
Where impotent ambition not intrudes,
nor the unstable talk of multitudes;
Fortune serves such, they happiness command
more than all Lybia's gold, all Tagus sand;
as heaven hath given us no more conspicuous things,
than form or beaury: so like a forward spring,
Nothing more short.
Madam, divine not of a change; Belief
is too too prone, in entertaining grief!
Our Lord attends, to enter in,
and surely sleep envyeth his delight,
for he sits heavy on my drowsy lids,
draw all our Curtains; sleep be guiles our ears.
Madam, good night, time helps suspicious fears!
Drop golden showers, gentle sleep,
And all the Angels of the Night,
Which doe us in protection keep,
Make this Queen dream of delight
Morpheus be kind a little, and be
Deaths now true Image, for 't will prove
To this poor Queen, that then thou art hee;
Her grave is made in the Bed of love.
Thus with sweet sweets can Heaven mix gall,
And marriage turn to Funeral.
Turk, Amurath, slave, nay something baser,
King! For all airy titles which the Gods
have blasted man withal, to make them swell
with puffed up honour, and ambitious wind,
this name of King holds greatest antipathy
with manly government: for if we weigh,
It is subjects, and not Kings bear all the sway.
Each whispered murmur from their idle breath
condemns a King to infamy, to death;
Were there a Metempseucosis of souls,
and nature should a free Election grant
what things they afterwards would reinforme,
the vain and haughtiest minds the Sun ere saw,
Would choose it's Cottage in some Shepherds flesh,
nay, be confined within some Dog or Cat,
than (Antique-like) prank in a Kings gay-clothes???
Were I no King, and had no Majesty,
I had more then all Kings, blessed liberty;
And without rumour might enjoy my choice,
not fearing Censure of each popular voice.
Poor men may love, and none their wills correct:
but all turn Satyrs of a Kings affect.
O my base greatness! What disastrous star
professed it self a Midwife at my birth,
to shape me into such prodigious States?
But hence regard of tongues! Were we a Saint,
some envious tongue would dare our names to taint:
and he from slander is at securest rest,
not that hath none, but that regards it least.
Open you envious Curtains; here's a sight,
that might commend the act of Love so Chaste.
Were now the chariot-guider of the Sun
weary o's task, and would entreat a day
of Heaven to rest in, here's a radiant Look,
that might be fixed in the midst of the Axle-tree;
and in despite of dark conspiring Clouds,
she would out-shine Sun, Moon and all the Stars.
O, I could court thee now (my sweet) a fresh,
mixing a kiss with every period;
Telling the Lilies how they are but wanne,
earth in the vernant spring is dull, and dark,
compared with this aspect! the Aeasterne ayre,
fanned with the wings of Mercury and Jove,
infectious, but compared with this perfume.
Hence then the ambition of that furious * youth, Alexis
who knew not what a crime his rashness was!
I might overcome more Kingdoms, have more dominion,
enthrone my self an Emperor of the world;
I might, I might; Amurath thou might.
The Christians now will scoff at Mahomet;
Perchance they sent this wretch thus to enchant me!
O my perplexed thoughts! Tush, Isle to bed,
should the commanding Thunder of the Gods
prohibit me, or strike me in the act.
Talk on (vain rumour) fame I dare thy worst!
Call me a Lusty, Lazy, wanton, coward!
should I win all the world, my breath once fled,
my bad would still survive all good be dead.
Eumorphe, sweet, I come! you sacred powers
who have bestowed some happenssse on man,
to help to pass away this sinful life,
Grant me a youthful vigour yet a while,
full veins, free strength, complete and manly sense,
to know, and take a beauty most immense!
Amurath, Amurath.
Devil, Devil; what?
Dare thou appear before an Angel (Fiend?)
O Amurath, why doth intemperate Lust,
raging within thy furious youthful veins,
burst through thy fathers Tomb? Disturb his soul?
Know, all the torments that the fabulous age
dream't, did afflict deceased impious Ghosts,
heartbiting-hunger, and soule-searching thirst,
the ne'er consumed, yet ever eaten prey
that the devouring Vulture feeds upon,
are not such tortures as our off-springs crimes:
They, they sit heavy on us, and no date
Makes our compassionate affection cease.
O thou hereditary Ulcer, hark,
by the name of Father, and by all those cares
which brought me to my grave, to make thee great:
Thou that hast nothing of me but my crown:
My enterprise surpassed the boundless Sea,
cutting the churlish Waves of Hellespont,
when the flood stood which wind for to obey!
Euxinum groaned beneath my burdenous ships:
I was the first of all the Turkish Kings
that Europe knew, and the fond Christians plague.
What coward blood ran flowing in my veins,
when thou were first begot, who merest all
thy Fathers acts by thy untamed desires?
Wherefore with Stygian curses I will lade thee:
First, may she prove a Strumpet to thy Bed,
be her lips poison, and let her loose embraces???
be venomous as Scorpions: If she conceive
a Generation from thee, let it be;
as ominous as thou hast been to me;
Rebellious to thy Praecepts, printing cares
upon thy aged brows. O may they prove,
as Faries for to lash thee in thy rest!
But Amurath, if thou can quench this flame,
if thou wilt cut this Gordian thread, and rend hence
that putrid When which cleaves unto they flesh,
be all thine actions prosperous. Mahomet
shall be auspicious unto each design;
Fortune to show thee favour shall be proud,
Farewell. If what men doe speak last before
they die take root, then dead men's should take more.
What, art thou vanished? Know (thou careful spright)
thou shalt no sooner pierce the wandering clouds
with unperceived flight, than my resolve
shall expiate my former Vanity.
Look on thy son, thou airy intellect,
and see him sacrifice to thy command!
Now Titan turn thy breathing coursers back,
start hence bright day, a sable Cloud invade
this universal Globe, break every prop
and every hindge that doth sustain the Heavens:
For straight must die a woman, I have named
a crime, that may accuse all Nature guilty.
The Sex wisely considered, deserves a death;
For think this, Amurath, this woman may
prostrate her delicate and Ivory limbs
to some base Page, or Skull, or shrunk up Dwarf,
Or let some Groom lye feeding on her lips,
she may devise some misshapen trick
to satiate her goatish Amurath;
and from her bended knees at Meditation,
be taken by some slave to the deep of Hell!
You are a brave Creature, were thou not a woman.
Tutor! Come! thou shalt see my well-kept vow,
and know my hate, which saw me dote but now:
Schahin! Eurenoses! Captains, ho!
Our Tutor, Eurenoses, Captains, welcome.
Gallants, I call you to a spectacle:
My brest's too narrow to hoard up my joy???
Nay, gaze here Gentlemen! give Nature thanks,
for framing such an excellent sense as Sight,
whereby such objects are enjoined as this???
Which of you now imprison not your thoughts
in envious and silent policy.
My Lord to whatsoever you shall propose,
my sentence shall be free.
Euren And mine.
And mine.
Which of you then dare challinge to himself
such a pathetical Prerogative,
so stoically severed from affection?
That, had he such a Creature as lies here,
one, at whom Nature her self stood amazed,
one, whom those lofty ecstasies of poets,
should they decay, here't must nor barely dump
their dull inventions with similitudes,
taken from Sun, Moon, Violets, Roses;
and, when their ruptures at a period stand,
a silent admiration must supply.
Only name her, and she is all described.
Hyperbole of women, Colour it self
is not more pure, and incontaminate!
sleep dotes on her and grasps her eye-lids close?
the sky it self hath only so much blew
as the azure in her veins lends by refluxe.
Here's breath that would those vapors purify,
which from Avernus chokes the flying Birds:
here's heat would tempt the numbed Athenian,
though all his blood with age were congealed ye!
Now, which of you all is so temperate,
that did he find this Jewel in his bed
(unless an Eunuch) could refrain to grapple,
and dally with her? come! speak freely all.
Truly (my Lord) I came of mortal parents
and must confess me subject to desires;
freely enjoy your Love!
that were she mine, I surely would do no less.
What saith Eurenoses?
My Lord, I say,
that they may rail at light, that ne'er saw day;
but had I such a Creature by my side,
were the world twice enlarged, and all that world
overcome by me, all volumes writ,
made clean and filled up by Rhetoric strains
of my great deeds, Historians should spend
their Ink and Paper in my sole Chronicle;
A thousand such alluring idle charms
could not conjure me from betwixt her arms.
Your sentence Ch???s-Illebeg?
What need your grace depend upon our breath?
I vow (my Lord,) if all those scrupulous things
which burden us with precepts so precise,
those parents, which when they are married once
and past their strength of years, think their sons straight
should be as old in every thing as they;
I say my Lord, did my head wear a crown,
that Queen should be the chiefest jem to adorn it,
spite of all hate. That's an unhappy state,
when Kings must fear to love least subjects hate.
Well spoke, three Milksops, Schahin. your sword,
Now, now be valour in this manly arm
to cut off troupes of thoughts that would invade me!
Think you my mind is waxy to be wrought
int'any fashion? Orchanes, thy strength!
Here do I wish, as did that Emperor,
that all the heads of that enticing Sex
were upon hers, thus then should one full stroke
mow them all off.
there kiss now (Captains) do, and clap her cheeks:
this is the face that did so captive me:
these were the looks that so bewitched mine eyes:
here be the lips, that I but for to touch,
gave over fortune, victory, fame and all;
these were two lying mirrors where I looked
and thought I saw a world of happiness.
Now tutor, shall our swords be excercised
in ripping up the breasts of Christians?
Say Generals, Whither i'st first?
For Thracia.
On then for Thracia, for he surely shall,
that conquers first himself, soon conquer all.
Thou sacred guitar of the arched Heavens,
who can collect the scattering stars, and fix
the Erratique planets in the constant pole!
O why should thou take such solicitous care
to keep the ayre, and Elements in course?
That Winter should unclothe our Mother Earth,
and wrap her in a winding sheet of snow;
that then the spring duly revives her still,
unbinds her sinews, fills her clung up veins
with living dew, and makes her young again.
Next that, the Nemean terror breathes her flames,
to parch her flax hairs with furious heat;
which to allay too, thou op'st the Chataracts,
and water'st the worlds gardens with blessed drops;
can thou, which can sustain the ponderous world,
and keep it in true poise, securely sleep,
letting a Tyrant (which with a fillip, thus;
thou might sink to earth) to baffle thee?
A warrior in thy fields, I long have been
To see if in thy sacred providence,
Thou meanst to arm me with thy thunder-bolt,
Yet, yet, it strikes not; now he Giant-wise,
Dares thee again; pardon our earnest zeal
What ere's decreed for man, by thy behest,
He must perform, and in obedience rest.
Thou, like Spectators when they do behold
an hardy youth encountering with a Bear,
or something terrible??? then they give a shout;
so dost thou even applaud they self to see
Religion striving with Calamity.
Which while it often bears, and still rests true,
it's fence against all that after shall ensue.
Turk, isle oppose thee still; Heaven has decreed,
That this weak hand, shall make that tyrant bleed???
a man religious, firm, and strongly good
cannot oath??? sudden be, nor understood.
Rise (Soul!) enjoy the prize of thy brave worth:
Schahin, the Present that thou so professed,
should from the City of Orestias,
make proud our eyes! then tell me, Hast thou slain
a thousand superstitious Christian souls?
made them stoop to us: O, I would bath my hands
in their warm blood to make them supple (Schahin)
that they may wield more Spears: our hands are dull,
our furie's patient! Now will I be a Turk.
and to our Prophet's Altars do I vow,
that to his yoke I will all necks subdue,
or in their throats my bloody Sword imbrew.
Then King, to add fresh oil unto thy hate,
and make it raise it self a greater flame,
see here these Christians heads; thus still shall fall
before thy fatal hand, these impious slaves:
so long as numbers 's wanting to the sand,
so long as day shall come with Sun, and night
be spangled with the twilight dawning stars,
whilst floods shall fall into the Ocean,
shall Christians tremble at Turks thundering strokes.
So am I Amurath, the great King of Turks,
O how it glads me thus to posh their brains,
to rend their locks, to tear these Infidels!
Who thundered when these heads were smitten off?
Stars I could reach you with my lofty hand,
it is well, enough, enough, (great Amurath)
for now I sit in Orchanes great Throne,
and sacrifice due Rites to Mahomet;
yet why enough? Isle on, and dung the Earth,
with Christians rotted trunks, that from that soil,
may spring more Cadmean Monsters to overcome them.
Captains, what Countries next shall we make flow,
with Channels of their blood?
To Servia (my Lord) there are troops of arms,
gathered to resist Mohammedan.
At Bulgaria, there they set on fire,
the Countries as they pass, it were good we haste.
Why they do well! we like of their desire
to make the flame in which themselves must fry!
Ruin, destruction, famine, and the sword,
shall all invade them: Sun stay thou thy flight,
and see the sneaks in their own River drenched,
whilst with their blood our furious thirst is quenched!
Whither (Bulgaria) whither must we fly?
the Butcherous Turk's at hand. Blessed Sanctity!
if thou did ere guard goodness, wall our towers,
bring strength into our Nerves. For in thy cause
our Breasts upon their Rapiers we will run;
we'll with just hope confront the tyrants rage,
meet him in the face, fury will find us arms,
there is a power can guard us from all harms.
Let us be sudden: for we will not find scope,
to see our haps. Who most doth fear, may hope.
Governor, Captains, hast unto your arms:
the dangers imminent, and the Turk's at hand.
-(Cobelitz) must we still wade thus deep
in blood and terror?
Yes (Servia) we must, we should, we ought,
Ease and lucresse keeps baseness company.
Shall we not blush to see the register
of those great Romans, and Heroic Greeks,
which did those acts, at which our hearts are struck
beneath all credence, only to win fame?
and shall not we for that Eternal name?
To live without all credence, even to win fame,
is not to know life's chief, and better parts:
To us of future hopes: calamity
must help to purchase immortality.
Well spoke (trueChristian) they who still live high,
and snoare in praised applause ne'er know to bear,
a contumely, or check, or fate.
Wisely to steer a Ship, or guide an Army,
undaunted hardiness is requisite;
O then lets to our weapons! make him yield;
they which deny all right, oft give it ith'Field.
Why (Gentlemen) we want no foes to fight,
nor need we turn our weapons on our selves.
You lazy rogue, what come in my Cabinet?
Conspiring slave, you murmured gan'st th'allowance,
and would persuade upon a larger pay,
to betray all Garrisons, and turn Turk.
Thou half Can-carousing rascal, Isle tear thee,
and those treacherous veins of thine. Will you see,
Blew-Jackets, will you see your Corporal wronged?
well, since I fight for victuals, for company.
Use now your swords and Bucklers.
Treason, the next man that speaks or strikes a blow.
Then shall our Laundresses fight for us?
Why, Amazons! Baudicans, come help to scratch.
O Cobelitz, what way shall we appease them?
Out, thy Corporal (huswife) hath the itch,
you now will have foul washing. Drab, Isle tear your mouth:
An inch or two yet wider.
What, soldiers! think you each distasteful word,
given amongst your selves so strong an obloquy,
that revenge spurs you to each others death?
And will not seek to wash those blasphemies,
in Seas of their foul blood, which are belched out
by our approaching foes, against the Essence
of the Eternal!
Leave, leave, these factions; cease these mutinies
Hark, their Drums take advantage of these stirs:
let us oppose our strength against our foe;
and in our Camp let not one Soldier be,
who will not find, and strike his Enemy.
Now (blessed guitar and great strength of arms)
if in thy secret and hidden decree,
thou hast not yet appointed the full time
wherein thou meanest to tame this Tiger,
who dare murmur against thine hidden will?
Be we slain now, there's victory in store,
which when thou please thou 't give, and not before.
Give us still strength of patience, not to wish,
a funeral honour unto all the world,
when we are perishing, we will still believe,
those dangers worth our death we undergo,
whilst he, who's ours, is alike thy foe.
Should Fortune lose this day, when we are slain,
thou can give hands, and strength, and men again;
on thee we trust then, and on thee bear,
scorning for Heaven's sake to shed a tear.
Bassa, we thank thy valour and discretion,
in finding fit occasion to invade
the mutinous Christians! these Captives here
shall be good Presents to our worthy Master.
General, now trust me these young slaves,
be full of Valour, they have metal in them.
Yes: and to his Highness shall perform
a Service which I long have thought upon,
and when his Turkish Majesty requires;
they'll fit to be a near attendant Guard,
on all occasions to the Emperor;
therefore they shall be called Janissaries,
by me first instituted, for our Princes safeties sake.
Their vigour &amp; strong hearts becomes such service,
for to overcome them made our Soldiers sweat
much Turkish blood: the Servians kept the Fight
with stubborn hard resistance, The Bulgarians
left the right wing; there set I forward first,
and like a torrent rolled destruction on,
raising huge storms of blood, as doth the Whale
puff up the waves against a mighty Ship;
me thinks, I see the Rivers of their gore:
their Leaders trampled on by Turkish Horse,
the Body of their Army quite dispersed,
themselves all floating in Vermilion pools,
with their own weapons hasting to their death,
and such a slaughter did we make of them,
as Nature scarce can ere repair again.
One hastening t'others death, pulling to ground
him that held up, so they each other drowned.
Still are they confident upon a power,
they know not what, who (as they think) can snatch
their precise souls from out the jaws of death.
Yes, such a superstition doth possess them;
for when they looked for nothing but their fate,
and danger stood in sweat upon their brows:
they yet scorned Mahomet, and profaned his Rites,
and nought but horror made them to believe
so many men were fighting on his side,
as might have changed my seat, and part in the world,
(though Nature stood against) to a new place:
or carry Sestos whereby Abydos stands,
or pull down Atlas with so many hands.
How like our Captains the last Victory?
(if any can prophecy of future things)
me thought I did dream of this blessed hap.
How fortune did involve them in their ruin!
and flight from danger, brought them in their ruin.
each one astonished with a sudden fear,
knew not the danger that was then most near.
To add more triumph, I present my Liege,
with these young Rebels, which you may bring up
in all the praecepts of our Mahomet.
And, (for great Emperor, your person wants
a thing which much ore-Clouds your light of state,
attendant Janissaries to a Prince:)
these may be so trained up, as to supply
the duty fit for such a Majesty.
Bassa, we thank thy strength, Schahin your counsel
and to that end, let them have safe protection.
But we must treat now of a marriage (Lords)
the German Ogly, he whose Sceptre sways
the Phrygian confines in strong Asia,
by Embassy entreats that he may join
his Daughter Hatum to our Bajazet.
Ambassador, here to our Counsel speak
your Masters Message.
Please then your Maj. and these reverend heads
to be informed my masters will by me?
In wedlock if your prince may be combined
to the fair princess his sole daughter,
he freely gives the Phrygian territories,
and Bythinia to you for your dowry;
Cutas, Simon, Egregios, Sansale,
Abbettingon, the Ottomans estate;
which Ottomans, because he not endures,
the Noble Zelzucciom family protests,
to join with you in quelling their ambition
May it please your majesty to like mine advice,
it's good to have alliance with such friends;
Kings that combine themselves are like to shafts,
the ancient Sage proposed unto his sons;
which whilst together they were close compact,
arms, knees, and his whole strength, could never break;
take one by one, they with a touch were cracked:
so Kings may be overcome that stand alone;
but two such princes, knit thus hand in hand,
should Nations totter they would firmly stand.
Yes Schahin, we'll approve what thou says,
then from us carry the great Asiaes Monarch
this our kindest greeting:
tell him, the gates of Prusa shall stand op,
and the glad ayre shall Echo notes of joy???
to entertain her who shall bless our Land
with hopeful issue; greedy thoughts expect
her soon arrival; and so (Ambassador)
inform thy princess, when she shall appear,
A lasting Starr shall shine within our sphere.
O Servia, our Cities are turned flames;
each strives to hast his own and others death:
And as though heaven conspired destruction too,
that rains down scalding Sulphur on our heads,
here one that lies thick gasping for his breath
is choked with blood that runs from his fellows wounds;
whilst others for the dead are making graves,
themselves are made the corps that do fill them.
Nobles, and base, together perish all,
and a drawn sword sticks fast in every rib;
our stones are died Vermilion with our blood:
old creatures that are creeping to the grave,
are thrust on faster.
Infants, but in the threshold of their lives,
are thus kicked off: Oh most disastrous times,
to love our deaths, and make our life our crimes!
See, see, the ruins of our goodly Walls,
our Cities smoke hinder the sight of heaven:
The conqueror yet amazed measures out our Towns,
with eyes of terror, and doth scarce believe
he hath overcome us, yet among these fires,
our dead men are denied their funeral flames:
And those infectious carcasses do perform,
a second murder on the rest that live;
and all the hope of safety that we have,
is now to fix our flattering lips it's feet:
mercy (perhaps) may wearied slaughter meet.
Will you do so? speak, for I am determined???
No (worthy General) heaven avert
and arm you with the proof of better thoughts!
What though a Tyrant strives to terrify
all Christendom, and would not be beloved;
let not your fears give impious rage such scope,
as for to bring Religion to profaneness:
fortune and heaven will scorn to try a man,
that hurls his weapons hence and runs away:
How is he worthy of heavens victory,
that, when it frowns, dares not look up and see?
Me thinks we three are now environed round,
with hosts of Angels, and our powerful Mars
is putting bows of steel into our hands:
he doth suggest our wrath, and bids us on.
O what an army it is to have a cause
holy and just; there, there's our strength indeed!
???Tu mente Labantes,
Direge nos, dubios, et certo Robore firm.
If we must dye, the narrow way to bliss
shall be made wide for us: the gate's wide op,
and the spread Palace entertains with joy.
Mean time, let's look like men upon our grief,
our frown fate Despot, Bulgaria, come.
Turk, once more at thee (Tyrant) mortals must
command heavens favour in a case so just. 
Sends our proud father-in-law this greeting to us?
was our sword sheathed so soon to hear this answer?
My Lord, he bad me tell you that it was you
have made him leave off this great Prophets wars,
when he was hewing down the Christians;
therefore submission should not now appease him,
no, though your wife, his daughter, should her self,
upon her penitent knees be suppliant.
No sooner shall the Tycian splendid Sol
open heavens Casements, and enlarge the day,
but his horse hoofs shall beat your treacherous earth;
and that you may be warned of his approach,
murder and flames shall be his Prodromo's!
Confederate Princes, and my kind allies,
shall his proud nostrils breath those threats on us?
Moreover, my Lord will, or win, or raze,
Iconium and Larenda.
Iconium and Larenda? I? No more?
had best look first, how safe his Prusa stands.
Lords, I am moved, and will forget my Queen
was ere the issue of his hated blood:
My spline is tossed within, mine entrails pant,
as, when the Sea is raised with Southern gusts,
the wind allayed, yet still the waves will tremble,
Princes, now bind your selves with such strong chains,
your faith and breaths can make; swear to me all,
to be as firm to me against Amurath,
as is the skin and flesh unto the Nerves; 
We all swear we will.
Then all here kiss my sword,
which shall be steeped within the head-mans throat:
We will make him know those will not fly in war,
which may in policy entreat a peace!
Hast thy course (time) and soon reduce the year!
Lucan: ??? Infestique obvia Signs
Sign, pares aquilas, &amp; pile minantia piles.
Ensigns may Ensigns meet, Carmania's King,
great Aladdin, scorns to avoid a Turk.
Princes, and Neighbours, muster up your strength,
that we may meet him on his full Career;
and let it be Carmanian's pride to say,
to overcome him we ask no second day.
Thine O Hymen, thine is she,
Whose Beauties verse Calliope,
Sing to Marriage ties an Io;
Io to Hymen.
To thee Apollo is my suit,
Lend me a while thy silver Lute,
O what a woe it is to bring,
A Bride to Bed and never sing,
Io to Hymen.
When she's old, still seems she young,
When she's weak, to her be strong!
Be Cyprus, both, and Paphos here,
Love, sing with merry cheer,
Io to Hymen.
You Gods of Marriage, sacred Protectoress
of lawful propagations, and blessed Love,
be most propitious to these grafted stemmes;
drop dewing showers of generation on them.
Think (Son) this day so prodigal of blessing,
as, that had Juno taskt thee (like Alcides)
to grapple with Stymphallides, or cleanse
Again stables: or like the Trojan Boy,
sit like a Shepherd on Dardanias hills,
such a reward as this fair Queen repays.
O thou hoped future off-spring, spare thy Parent!
Hurt not this tender womb, these Ivory worlds,
in which a pretty people yet shall live
when you are born; O be within your limbs
the Gransire, Amurath, and fathers strength;
line their faces (Nature) with their mothers dye:
And let the destinies make the ensuing night
in their Eternal Books, with notes most white.
Grant it great Mahomet.
Most awful father, and my honoured Prince,
although it be enacted by the heavens,
that in these bonds of marriage, such curse
attends on Princes above private men,
that no affection, nor home-nourisht Love
but state and policy must elect their wives,
which must be fetched from Countries far remote;
yet the protecting Powers have such a care,
both of their off-springs and their Kingdoms state.
That to what they ordain, they work in us
a sudden willingness to mike's obey;
for in this breast, I do already feel
that there's a kindling a Diviner heat,
which disobedience never shall extinguish.
And if there be any felicity
from these united Loves to be derived
from the weak sex unto the husbands soul,
then may my Lord make his affection sure,
to be repaid with an untainted Love.
With soft and yielding curtsy in all
he shall command, my willing arms shall still
be op t'enfold within a wives embrace,
if any comfort else there be in store,
(which modesty keeps silent to it self
cause only husbands and the night must know it)
my Loyalty shall ever all perform:
and though my Lord should frown, Isle be the same,
green wood will burn with a continued flame:
Princess, our ardour is already fired,
yet with no violent temerity;
such as might fear it's short and soon decaying:
thy virtue seems so to exceed thy Sex,
and wisdom so far to out-pace thy years,
that, surely (Princess) soon maturity,
argues in them hidden Divinity.
Expected Hymen here hath bound our hands
and hearts, with everlasting ligaments:
Fortunate both we are, and have one bliss,
the want of which for ever doth infect
with anxious cares the sweets of marriage beds:
our parents benediction and consent,
they are the truest Hymens, and should be
to children the best marriage Deity.
Thus then attended with such sacred charms
our last day of content shall never come;
till we must part by th'unresisted doom,
with a pleased error we will age beguile,
all stars on us, an equal yoke, must smile,
Now (Lords) who'le dance
a Turkish measure? Ladies our nerves are shrunk;
and you now fix the sign of age on me,
you, who have blood still flowing in your veins,
be nimble as an Hart: Caper to the Spheres:
O you are light, that want the weight of years! 
And health to our Bride and her father:
O (Nobles) would this wine were Christians blood,
but that it would Phrenetique humours breed,
and so infect our brains with Superstition!
Auspicious fortunes to great Amurath:
to op more springs to this full-tide of joy,
know (potent Emperor) I from Europe bring
six daughters of six several Kings,
whose Cities we have equalled to the ground;
and of their Palaces did torches make,
to light their souls through the black cave of death.
Describe (good Captain) how the dogs were wea???ried.
So weary were they to endure our swords,
that by impetuous mutiny themselves
turned on each other, slew their Masters;
Childrens own hands tore out their fathers throats,
and each one strove who should be slaughtered first;
Here did a brother posh out a brothers brains,
some in stinking Quagmires, and deep Lakes
(which they had made t'avoide their excrements)
ran quick, and in the lake lay buried.
Good Executioner of our most just wrath!
Nor did it leave till death it self was weary,
murder grew faint, and each succeeding day
showed us the slaughter of the day before.
Amongst carcasses and funerals we stood,
denying those that lived such Ceremonies
as in their Temples to the Indian gods,
with prayers and vows they daily offred:
Nor destiny, nor cruelty ere left,
till they had nothing for to work upon;
for, of so many souls that breathed of late,
these six are all remain: which as a Pledge
of my best service to your Majesty,
I here am bold to yield an offer.
Nor shall this present be unrecompenced;
for thy true service, on thee Isle bestow
all the rich gifts, which all these Asian Lords
brought to adorn these happy Nuptials;
on you fair Bride, great Princess, and our Daughter
do we bestow these Virgins (daughters to Kings)
for your attendance.
We are two much bound unto our Princely Fa???there
No (Daughter) no, we hope thou art the spring
from whence shall flow to all the world a King.
Captains and Lords, to morrow we must meet,
to think of our rebellious son in Law.
Be this time all for comfort and delight,
short wedding days make it seem long to night. 
Here set we down our miserable load,
O Cobelitz, with whom is it that we fight?
With Lybian Lyons? Or Hyrcanian Bears,
which grind us daily in their ravenous teeth?
The Tyrant (as it were destructions Engineer)
helps Nature to destroy the worlds frame quickly.
Alas, my Lord, that needs not, every day
is a sufficient helper to decay:
Great workman, who art sparing in thy strength
to bring things to perfection: and to oreturn
all thy best works, thou use sudden force.
when mans an Embryo and first conceived,
how long it is ere he sees his native light?
Then born, with expectation for his growth,
tenderly nourished, carefully brought up:
grown to perfection, what a little thing
serves to call on his sudden ruining?
Come Cobelitz, amongst those demolished stones
we'll sit as Hecuba, at those Trojan walls:
our tears shall be false glasses to our eyes,
through these we will look, and think we yet may see
our stately Pinnacles, and strong founded holds:
that which one hour can delapidate,
one age can scarce repair.
No sir, for nothing's hard
to Nature, when she means for to consume:
A thousand Oaks (which time hath fixed in the earth,
as Monuments of lasting memory)
are in a moment turned to ashes; all
things that rise slowly, take a sudden fall.
What course now, Cobelitz? must we still be yoked
to misery, and murder? We scarce have room
upon our bodies to receive more wounds,
and must we still oppose our selves to more?
Yes! We are ready still; a solid mind
must not be shook with every blast of wind.
Pollux, nor Hercules, had none other art,
to get them Mansions in the Spangled heavens
then a true firm resolve; the Adriatike Sea,
shall from his currents with tempestuous blasts
be sooner moved, than virtue from its aim.
Let us but think (when we so many see
enjoying greater quiet than our themselves)
how many have endured more misery;
Ilion, Ilion, what a fate had thou?
How fruitful were thou in matter for thy foe?
Thus we'll delude our grief, make our self glad,
to think of miseries that others had.
Ay, (Captain) ay; they that furnish thee
with sentences of comfort, never saw,
their Cities burnt, their Countries desolate.
It is easy for Physicians for to tell
advice to others, when themselves are well.
Tush, tush (my Lord) there's on our side we know,
one that both can, and will our weak hands guide,
one that will strike and thunder; Giant then,
look for a dart! we must not appoint when;
mean while help to convey this burden hence.
Turk, though thy tyranny deny us graves,
corruption will give them spite of thee:
Nor do our corps, such Tombs and Caverns need:
for our own flesh, still our own graves do breed:
And, whom the earth receives not when they die,
heavens vault overwhelms them, so their tomb's ith'skie. 
Besieged on every side? Iconium taken?
Entrenched within my foes my self must lie
wrapped in my Cities ruin. Turks come on.
Nay but my Lord, mean you to meet your death?
let's hast our flight, and trust more to our feet
then words, or hands???
Why so much of our blood
is already spilt, as should the glittering Sun
exhale it upward, it would obnubulate
It's luster, else to fiery Motors turn.
some counsel (Lords) he that's amidst the Sea,
when every curled wave doth threat his death,
yet trusts upon the oars of his own arms,
and sometime the salt some doth pity him.
A VVolf, or Lion, that hath filled his gorge
with bloody prey, at last will lie to sleep,
and the unnaturalst creatures not forget
their love to those whom they do know their own:
My wife's his daughter; since we cannot stand
his fury longer, she shall swag his wrath.
The boisterous Ocean when no winds oppose,
grows calm: revenge is lost, when't hath no foes.
Why then (my Lord) array your self in weeds
of a Petitioner: take the Queen along,
and your two children; they may move his eyes;
for, desperate sores ask desperate remedies.
Go (Lords) go: fetch some straight. O heavens!
O fortune, they that lean on thy cracked wheel,
and trust a Kingdoms power, and domineer
in a walled Palace, let them look on me,
and thee (Carmania;) greater instances
the world affords not to demonstrate
the frail estate of proudest Potentates,
of sturdiest Monarchies: high Pinnacles
are still invaded with the prouder winds;
they must endure the threats of every blast;
the tops of Caucasus and Pindus shake
with ivy crack of thunder; humble Vaults
are ne'er touched with a bolt: ambiguous wings
hath all the state, that hovers over Kings.
I, I, this vesture sits my misery!
this badge of poverty must now prevail,
where all my Kingdoms power and strength doth fail.
Why should not a prophetic soul attend
on great men's persons, and forewarn their ills?
Raging Boots doth doth not so turmoil
the Lybian ford, as Fortune doth great hearts.
Bellona and Erynnis scourge us on;
should wars and treasons cease, why our own weight
would send us to the earth, as spreading arms
make the huge trees in tempest for to split.
For as the slaughter-man to pasture goes,
and drags that Ox home first, whose Bulk is greatest,
the lean he still lets feed: disease takes hold
on bodies that are pampered with best fare;
so doth all ruin choose the fairest marks,
at which it bends, and strikes it full of shafts;
ambition made me now that eminent Butt:
And I that fell by mine own strength, must rise
by professed weakness; Buckets full sink down,
whilst th'empty dance in the ayre and cannot drown.
Come (Lords) he out of's way can never range,
who is at furthest; worst ne'er finds ill change.
Our hate must not part thus; I'll tell thee (Prince)
thou 'ast kindled violent Aetna in our breast,
and such a flame is quenched with nought but blood:
His blood whose hasty and rebellious blast???
gave life unto the fire; should heaven threat us;
know, we dare menace it; are we not Amurath?
(whose awful name is even trembled at)
so often dared by Pygmy Christians;
which we will crush to ayre? what haughty thought
buzzed thy presumptuous ears with such vain blasts,
to puff thee into such impetuous acts?
or what, durst prompt thee with a thought so frail,
as made thee covetous of so brave a death,
as this known hand should cause it? know, that throat
shall feel it strangled with some slave brought up
to nought but for an Hangman: thy last breath,
torn from thee by a hand that's worse than death.
Why then, Isle (like the Roman Pompey) hide
my dying sight, scorning imperious looks
should grace so base a stroke with sad aspect;
thus will I muffle up and choke my groans,
lest a grieved tear should quite put out the name
of lasting courage in Carmanias fame.
What? still stiff necked? Is this the truce you beg?
Sprinkled before thy face those Rebel Brats,
shall have their brains, and their dissected limbs,
hurled for a prey to Kites; for (Lords) it is fit
no spark of such a mountain threatening fire,
be left as unextinct, least it devour,
and prove more hot unto the Turkish Empier,
then the Promethean blaze did trouble Jove!
first sacrifice those Brats.???
(Dear father) let thy fury rush on me;
within these entrails sheath thine unsatiate sword,
and let this ominous, and too fruitful womb
be torn insunder, for from thence those Babes,
took all their crimes; error made them guilty,
it was Natures fault, not theirs: O if affection
can work, then now show a true fathers love;
if not, appease those murdering thoughts with me:
For as Jocasta pleaded with her sons
for their dear Father, so to a Father I
for my dear babes and husband; husband, father,
Which shall I first embrace? Victoriors father,
be blunt those now sharp thoughts, lay down those threats,
unclasp that impious Helmet; fix to earth
that monumental Spear, look on thy child
with pardoning looks, not with a warriors eye:
Else shall my breast cover my husbands breast,
and serve as buckler to receive thy wounds.
Why dost thou doubt? Fairest thou thy daughters faith?
I fear, for after Daughters perjury,
all Laws of Nature shall distasteful be;
nor will I trust thy children or thy self.
No Father, it is I: fear you him, he you,
I both, but for you both, for both you war;
so that it is best with him that's overcome.
O let me kiss (kind father) first the earth
on which you tread, then kiss mine husbands cheek.
Great King embrace these babes, you are the stock
on which these Grafts were planted???
True, and when sprouts do rob the tree of sap,
they must be pruned.
Dear Father, leave such harsh similitudes:
By my deceased Mother, (to whose womb
I was a ten months burden:) By your self,
(to whom I was a pleasing Infant once)
pity my husband, and these tender Infants.
Yes, to have them collect a manly strength,
and their first lesson that their Dad shall teach them
shall be to read my misery.
Stern Conqueror: but that thy daughter shows,
there once dwelt good in that obdurate breast,
I would not spend a tear to soften thee.
Thou see my Countries turned into a grave:
my Cities scare the Sun with fiercer flames,
which turn them into ashes, and my self
so flickt and carved, that my amazed blood
knows not through which wound first to take it's way;
if not on me, have mercy on my babes, ???
which, with thy mercy thou may turn to Love.
No sir, we must root out malicious seed:
nothing sprouts faster, than an envious weed!
We see a little Bullock, amongst an Herd
(whose horns are yet scarce crept from out his front)
grows on a sudden tall, and in the Field,
frolics so much, he makes his Father yield.
A little Twig left budding on an Elm,
ungratefully bars his Mother sight from Heaven!
I love not future Aladins.
Threat all a Conqueror can, can threat but death,
and I can die: but if thou would have mercy!???
Let's see your feet, we're proud with this hands kiss!
The higher those great powers have raised you,
press that which lies below with gentler weight:
to pardon miseries is Fortunes height:
alas, these infants, these weak sinewed hands
can be no terror to these Hectors arms!
Beg (Infants) beg, and teach these tender joints
to ask for mercy; learn your lisping tongues
to give due accent to each syllable:
nothing that Fortune urges to, is base;
put from your thoughts all memory of descent:
forget the Princely Titles of your Fathers:
if your own misery you cannot feel,
learn thus of me to weep, of me to kneel.
Do (boys) and imitate your Parents tears,
which I (like Priam) shed, when he beheld,
Hector thrice dragged about the Trojan Walls.
He that burst op the Gates of Erebus,
and roused the yelling Monster from his Den,
was conquered with a tear. Great Monarch learn,
To know how dear a King doth weeping earn.
Good Grandsire see, see how my Father cries!
Good Mother take my napkin for your eyes!
(Good father) hear, hear how thy daughter prays!
Thou that know how to use stern Warriors arms,
learn how to use mild VVarriers pity too.
Alas? Can ere these ungrown strengths repair
their Fathers battered Cities? Or can these,
these orethrown Turrets? (Iconium) what small hopes
hast thou to lean upon? If these be all?
Not half so mild hath our misfortune been
that any can ere fear us: Be pleased ???
Rise (my dear Child) as Marble against rain,
so I at these obedient showers, melt;
thus I do raise thy Husband: thus thy Babes:
freely admitting you to former State.
But Aladdin, wake not our wrath again;
"Patience grows fury that is often stirred;
when Conquerors wax calm, and cease to hate,
the conquered should not dare to reiterate.
Be thou our Son and Friend.
By all the Rites of Mahomet, I vow it.
Then, for to seal unto you this our love,
your self shall lead a wing in Servia,
in our immediate VVars; we are to meet
the Christians in Cassanoe's Plains with speed:
Great Amurath ne'er had time to breath himself,
so much as to have warring with new Foes;
no day securely to his Sceptre shone,
but one VVars end, still brought another on. 
Let now victorious wreathes ingirt our brows,
let Angels 'stead of Soldiers wield our arms
against him, who that our Cities might be his,
strives to depopulate, and make them none!
But look, look in the air (me thinks) I see
an Host of Soldiers brandishing their Swords;
each corner of the Heaven shoots thunderbolts,
to nail these impious forces to the Earth.
Soldiers stand to it, though fortune bandy it's,
let's stand her shocks, like sturdy Rocks in the Sea,
on which the angry foaming Billows beat,
with frivolous rush, and break themselves, not them;
stand like the undaunted countenance of the sky,
or, like the Sun, which when the foolish King,
thought to obscure with a cloud of darts,
out looked them all, our lives are all enchanted,
and more invulnerate than Thetis Son.
We shall have hands and weapons: if the stone
of Fortune glide from under our weak feet,
and we must fall, yet, let all Christians say,
It is She, and not the Cause, that wins the day.
We must believe Heaven hath a greater care
of them, whom Fortune doth so oft out dare!
Gentlemen, Brothers, Friends, Soldiers, Chri???stians,
we have no reason to command of Heaven
a thing denied to all mortality.
Nor should we be so impudently proud,
as in this weak condition to repute
our selves above the stroke of Lady Chance,
a caution must divine it, ever fixed,
that whilst her checks equally fall out,
community should ease their bitterness.
I could afresh now shed those Princely tears,
to think such sudden ruin should attend
Heroic spirits glittering in bright arms!
But if the Grecian (when he heard the dreams
disputed subtly by Philosophers,
to prove innumerable extant worlds)
was struck with pensiveness, and wept to think
he had not yet obtained one for himself;
what terror can affright a Christians thoughts
who knows there is a world, at liberty
to breath in, when this glass of life is broke?
our Foes with circling fury are entrenched;
Pelions of Earth and darkness shall orelade them,
whilst we shall mount, and these our spirits light,
shall be yet ponderous to depress them lower.
Nay, my Enthusiastic soul divines,
That some weak hand shall from the blazing Zone
snatch Lightning, which shall strike the snarling Cur
with horror and amazement to the Earth,
which Hell cannot oppose! Turk, Tyrannise,
stand, yet at length to fall my sacrifice.
Super Olympic vigour will (no doubt).
squeeze all thy supercilious rancor out! 
Who set the world on fire?
How now (ye Heavens) grow you
so proud, that you must needs put on curled locks,
and cloth your selves in Periwigs of fire?
Mahomet (say not but I invoke thee now!)
command the puny-Christians demi-God
put out those flashing sparks, those Ignes fatui,
or i'll unseat him, or with my Looks so shake
the staggring props of his weak seated Throne,
that he shall find he shall have more to do
to quell one Amurath, than the whole Giant brood
of those same Sons of Earth, than ten Lycaons.
Do the poor snaks so love their misery
that they would see it by these threatening lights?
Dare ye blaze still? I'll toss up Buckets full
of Christians blood to quench you: by those hairs
drag you beneath the Center: there put out
all your presaging flames in Phlegeton.
Can you outbrave me with your piddling Lights?
Yawn earth with Casements as wide as hell it self. 
Burn heaven as ardent as the Lemnian flames,
wake pale Tisiphon, spend all thy snakes;
Be Oecus, and Minos, as severe
as if the Goal delivery of us all
were the next Sessions. Isle pull Radamant
by his flaming furs from out his Iron Chair.
Horror, dismal cries, and yells
Of these thy Grandsires thee fore-tels,
Furies sent of thee to learn
Crimes, which they could ne'er discern.
Furies sent, &amp;c.
O Amurath thy Father's come,
To warn thee of a sudden doom,
Which in Cassanoe's fields attends
To bring thee to thy hellish friends.
Which in Cassanoes, &amp;c.
Megaera and Ennio both do stand
Trembling lest when thou art damned,
Chief of Furies thou should be,
And they their snakes resign to thee.
Chief of Furies, &amp;c.
Terror, we a while will leave thee,
Till Cocytus Lake receive thee.
Cerberus will quake for fear
Where he a new Turks fate shall hear.
Cerberus will, &amp;c.
Now who the devil sent my Grandsires hither?
Had Pluto no task else to set them too?
He should have bound them to Ixions wheel,
or bid them roll the stone of Sysiphus:
Beshrew me, but their singing did not please me!
Have they not been so drunk with Lethe yet,
as to forget me? They can portend no ill;
for, should the fates be twining my last thread,
yet none durst come from hell to tell me so.
Shall I be scared with a Night-walking Ghost;
or what my working fancy shall present?
Why, I can look more terrible then night,
and command darkness in the unwilling day:
Make Hecate start, and draw back her head
to wrap it in a swarthy veil of clouds.
Drop sheets of Sulphur, you prodigious skies,
Cyclops, run all thy Bullets into Aetna,
then vomit them at once; should Christians
couch to the bottomless abyss of Styx,
or hide themselves under Avernaes shade,
this arm should fetch them out. Day must perform
what I intend, wrath rains a bloody storm:
And now, gins rise the Sun, which yet not knows
the misery it shall see on Amuraths Foes!
Lords, Leaders, Captains??? 
Your Highness up so soon?
He small rest takes,
that dreams on nought but bloody broils and death.
Your Grace seems much distempered: Beds of sweat
bedew your brows with never-wonted paleness
Why; see you not? The heavens are turned Court Ladies,
and put on other Hair besides their own:
can guess (learned Schahin) what these flames portend?
My Lord, such things as these, we men must see,
and wonder at, and yet not search the reason;
perchance unwholesome fogs exhailed by the Sun
are set a blazing by his too near heat:
but it is not lawful that a mortal eye
should dare to penetrate Heavens secrecy.
Doth it not bode a Conquest?
Yes, against the Christians:
for, unto them it bends sinister looks,
and frowns upon their Army more than ours.
So, so: come on, ere Phosphorus appear
let's too't, and so prevent that sluggard Sol.
If we want Light, we'll from our Whinyards
strike fire enough to scorch the Universe;
Mine Armour there! 
Now (Mahomet) I implore
thy promised Aid for this auspicious day:
toss me aloft, and make me ride on Clouds:
If my Horse fail me, those fire breathing jades,
(which the boy Pha??thou knew not how to guide)
will I pluck out from out the flaming Team,
and hurl my self against those condense Spheres,
on which I'll sit, and stay their turning Orbs;
the whole vertigious Circle shall stand still,
but to behold me: Mine Armour, ho!
So, help on here; now like Alcides do I girt my self
with well knit sinews, able to stagger Earth,
and threaten Nature with a second Chaos:
If one impetuous broil remain to come
in future ages, set on foot this hour.
How well this weight of steel bents my strength!
Me thinks the Gods stand quivering, and doe fear
(when I am armed) another Phlege???'s near.
Chiron shall see his Piadus at my feet;
And isle climb up to heaven, and pull it down
and kick the weighty burden of the world,
from off the Babies shoulders that supports it.
for I am safer Buckled against my foe,
then sturdy Jason, who by the enchanted charms
Medea gave, encountered Unicorns,
Quilt Lyons, struggled with fire-belching Bulls,
obtained a glorious prize, a Fleece. A Fleece
dipped deep in tincture of the Christ'ans blood
shall be my spoil; nay should they hide their heads
in their Gods bosom, here's a sword shall reach them.
Come they shall know no place is free from wrath,
when boiling blood is stirred in Amurath.
Here, mighty Prince, take view of Victory,
and see the field too narrow for thy spoils.
Erynnus hides her head as if afraid,
to see a slaughter she durst never hope for.
Earth hath the Carcasses: and denies them Graves,
and lets them lie and rot, and fat her womb,
scorning to be unto the slaves a Tomb.
Where are become those ominous Comets now?
What? are those pissing Candles quite extinct?
leave their disastrous snuffs no stench behind them?
it is something yet, that their God sees their slaughter,
lending sulphurous Meteors to behold
the blessed destruction of these Parasites.
I knew the Elements would first untie
the Nerves of the Universe, then let me dye.
See (King) heres's one worm yet that dare confess
he breaths and lives, which once this hand crushed down.
Ha, ha, by Mahomet, and we are weary now:
Some Mercy shall lay Victory asleep.
It will a Laureate prove to this great strife,
amongst all these murdered to give one his life,
so we'll descend. 
From what a dismal grave am I awaked,
entombed within a Golgatha of men!
Have all these Souls prevented me in bless,
and left me in a dream of happiness?
But soft! me thoughts he said he would descend!
Then, Heavens, one minutes breath, that's all I ask,
and then I shall perform my lifes true task.
Poor slave, would live?
Yes Turk to see thee dye.
Howl, howl, grim Tartar, yale (thou grisly Wolf)
force forth the blood from out thy gaping Wound!
Dii tibi non mortem, quae cunctis poena paratur,
Sed sensum post fata, tu dent (imp) morti.
My spirit makes me not to feel thy weapon!
Hold, you cracked Organs, of my shattered life,
I 'm not touched yet; can I not mock my death,
and think it is but a dream tells me I 'm hurt?
Dare thou then leave me (blood?) Can be so bold
as to forsake these veins to flow on Earth?
And must I, like th'unhappy Roman, dye
by a slaves hand?
Tyrant, it is known
He's Lord of others lives that scorns his own.
I that could scarce ere sleep, can I ere die?
And will none fear my life when I am dead;
Tortures and torments for the murderer.
Ha, ha, ha! 
I thank thee (great omnipotent) that I
shall here laugh out the lag end of my life!
Villain, thy laugh wounds worse then did thy Dagger.
Are you Lethargic (Lords) in cruelty?
Nay, hear me (Turk) now will I prompt their rage:
Locke me up in the Bull of Phalaris,
cut off these eye-lids, bid me then out-gaze
the parching Sunbeams; flea this tender skin,
set nests of Hornets on my rawest flesh,
let the Siconian Clouds drop brimstone on me,
power boiling Lemnos on my greenest wounds,
put on my shoulder Nessus poisoned shirt,
bind all these bloody faces to my face,
Rack me, Procrastes like ??? 
Hell, oh! I cannot brooke your smallest touch.
Ha, Ha! each groan is Balsam to my wounds:
I am perfect well. 
Rascal, dare deride us?
Yea? and while your witty furies shall invent
for me some never heard of punishment;
I see a guard of Saints ready to take me hence.
Take then free flight my new rewarded soul,
and seat thee on the winged Seraphims,
hast to the Empyreum, where thy welcome
shall be an Haleluia, anthem'd forth
By the Chorus of the Angell-Hierarchy.
Pierce with swift plumes, the concave paths of the Moon
Where the black air enlightened is with stars.
Stay not to wonder there at wandering Signs,
at bi-horn'd Gemini, or Amphions Harp,
at Arctos, or Boots, or the Bear,
(Which are to please wizard Astrologers:)
Soar higher with thy pitch, and then look down
to laugh at the hard trifles of the world;
Perchance some oft have known a better life,
Never did one ere leav' it more willingly.
Fear your death (Gods!) for I have lost my life,
and what, I most complain, my tyranny.
Soul, to detain thee from thy wished rest!
were but an envious part! arise, farewell:
To stay thee to accuse or fate or man,
would show I were unwilling yet to leave thee.
But dear companion hence: cut through the ayre
let not the grosenesse of my Earth ore-lime
thy speedy wings, fly without weight of crime. 
O, now have I and Fortune tried it out.
With all her best of favours was I crowned
and suffered her worst threats, when most she frowned.
Stay (Soul! a King, a Turk, commands thee stay.
Sure I am but an actor, and must strive
to personate the Tragic ends of Kings.
And so (to win applause unto the Scene)
with fained passion thus must grasp at death.
O but I see pale Nemesis at hand:
Art thou dull, fate, and dost not overspread
Cimmerian wings of death throughout the world;
What? Not one Earthquake? One blazing Comet
T'accompany my soul to his Funeral?
Is not this hour the general period
to ne'er returning time! Last breath command
a new Deacalions deluge, that with me
the world may swim to his Eternal Grave.
Crack hindge that holds this globe, and welcome death.
Wilt thou not stay Soul? Friend, not stay with Kings?
Sink then, and sink beneath the Thracian Mount.
Sink beneath Ethos, be the Brackish Waves
Of Acheron thy Tomb; Isle want a Grave;
So all parts fear, which first my Corps shall have;
For in my Grave, Isle be the Christians foe,
here like a massy pyramid isle fall,
Isle strive to sink all the whole fabric with me:
quake pluto, for it is I that come
a turk, tyrant, and a conqueror.
and with this groan, like thunder will I cleave,
the timorous earth, whilst thus my last I breath. 
O easy powers, to give us all at first,
but in their loss, they make us most accursed. 
The Taper of your Fathers life is spent;
We must have light still and adore a Sun.
that next is rising; therefore mighty Prince,
upon your shoulders must the ponderous load
of Empire rest.
Why (Lords) we have a Brother,
who, as in the same blood he took a share,
so let him bear his part in Government.
My Lord, within the selfsame Hemisphere
It's most prodigious when two Suns appear.
One body by one soul must be informed.
Kingdoms like (marriage beds) must not endure
any corrival. Rome was ne'er secure
whilst she contained a Pompey; and a Caesar.
Like as one Prophet we acknowledge now,
so of one King in state we must allow.
You know the Turkish Laws, Prince be not nice
to purchase Kingdoms, whatsoever the price.
He must be lopped, send for him he must dye.
O happy Bajazet, that he was borne
to be a King when thou wast Counsellor.
Call in our Brother Jacup.
Why (Lords!) is Amurath so light a weight?
Is this the Trunk of the Turkish Emperor?
Oh what a heap of thoughts are come to nought?
What a light weight is he unto six men,
who durst stand under Ossa, and sustain 't?
My Lord, these Meditations fit not you:
You are to take the honour he hath left,
and think you of his rising, not his fall! 
Let your decree be sudden, here's your Brother.
Brother, I could have wished we might have met
at times of better greeting! Our father hath
bequeathed to the Grave these ashes, to us his State.
Nor have we leisure (yet) to morn for him.
Brother, you know our state hath made a Law,
that, he that sits in a Majestic Chair,
must not endure the next succeeding heir.
Yes, we doe:
And, Brother, doe you think it is crime enough
to dye, because I am son to an Emperor?
My Lord, we know there breathes in him that ayre
of true affection, that he doth much desire
you should be equal in his Kingdom with him:
But still when two great evils are proposed;
the less is to be chosen.
My Lord, your life 's but one:
Kings are the threads whereto there are inweaved
millions of lives, and he that must rule all
must still be one that is select from all.
Although we speak, yet think them not our words,
But what the Land speaks in us! Kings are free;
And must be impatient of equality.
And is it even so?
How have these Dogs fawned on me, licked my feet
when Amurath yet lived! Felt all my thoughts,
and soothed them to the sight of Empire!
And now the first would set their politic hands
to strangle up that breath, a blast of which
their nostrils have sucked up like perfumed ayre.
Well brother well, by all men this is spoke,
that heart that cannot bow, may yet be broke.
Brother, you must not now stand to upbraid;
They which doe fear the vulgars murmuring tongue,
Must also fear the authority of a King;
For rulers must esteem it happiness,
that with their gov'rnment they can hate suppress:
they with too faint a hand the Scepters sway,
Who regard love, or what the people say:
To Kindred we must quite put off respect,
when 't is so near it may our Crown affect.
Then name of Brother doe I thus shake off,
for 't is in vain their mercy to implore,
when impious Statists have decreed before.
Yet King, although thou take my life away
see how Isle dye in better state then thou!
Who like (my Father) after his greatest glory
May fall by some base hand: The Minister.
To take my breath, shall be thy self a King.
Yet give me leave a while to Prophecy.
You that so Puppet-like delude your hopes,
and Wyer-draw the ancestry from Kings,
thinking, that fates dare not approach your blood
till they doe seize you, then you leave this Earth,
Not as you went, but by compulsion dragged;
Still begging for a morrow from your Grave,
and with such shifts you doe deceive your selves,
as if you could deceive mortality,
No (Brother King) not all the Glowworm state,
which makes thee be a Horse-leach to thy blood,
Not all the Parasitest' Minions thou maintainst,
nor the restorative Dishes that are found out.
Not all thy shifts and tricks can cheat mortality,
or keep thee from a death that's worse then mine.
Should all this fail, age would profess it self
a slow, but a sure Executioner.
O it is a hard thing well to temperate
decaying happiness in great estate.
But this example by me may you gain,
that at my death! not of Heaven complain.
Pull then, and with my fall pull on thy self
Mountains of burdenous honour, which shall curse thee.
Death leads the willing by the hand
But spurs them headlong on, that dare command.
Take up this Trunk; and let us first appoint
our Fathers, and our Brothers Funerals.
the sense less body of that Caitiff slave,
hurl to a Ditch. Posterity shall hear
Our less ill Chronicled, but time shall hear
these minutes rather, then repeat their woe.
Now Primacy, on thee Isle mediate,
Which who enjoy thee, are in blessed estate.
Whose age in secure silence fleets away,
Without disturbance to his funeral day;
Nor ponderous nor unquiet honours can
Vex him, but dyes a primer ancient man.
What greater powers threaten inferior men,
a greater power threatens him again:
And like to wasted Tapers Kings must spend
their lives to light up others: So all end.

