COme to Casarea to night?
Most true Sir,
The Emperor in person?
Do I hue.
Tic wondrous strange, the marches of great Princes
Like to the motions of prodigious Meteors.
Are step, by step observed, and loud tong'd Fame
The hat binger to prepare their entertainment:
And were it possible, so great an army,
Though covered with the night, could be so near:
The Governor cannot be so vnfriended
Among the many that attend his person,
But by some secret means he should have notice
Of Casars purpose in this, then excuse me
If I appear indredulous.
At your pleasure.
Yet when I call to mind you never failed me
In things more difficult, but have discovered
Deeds that were done thousand leagues distant from me,
When neither woods, nor caves, not secret vaults,
No nor the power they serve, could keep these Christians,
Or from my reach or punishment, but thy magic
Still laid them open: I begin again
To be as confident as heretofore.
It is not possible thy powerful art
Should meet a check, or fail.
Look on these vestals,
The holy pledges that the gods have given you,
Your chaste fair daughters. Were it not to upbraid
A service to a moister not unthankful,
I could say this in spite of your prevention,
Seduced by an imagined faith, not reason,
(Which is the strength of Nature) quite for saking
The Gentile gods, had yielded up themselves
To this new found religion. This I crossed,
Discovered their intentions, taught you to use
With gentle words and mild persuasions,
The power, and the authority of a father
Set of with cruel threats and so reclaimd em,
And whereas they with torments should have died,
(Hells furies to me had they undergone it) 
They are now votaries in great Iupiters temple,
And by his Priest instructed, grown familiar
With all the Mysteries, nay the most abstruse ones
Belonging to his Deity.
T was a benefit
For which I ever owe you, Hail Ioues Flamen,
Have these my daughters reconcilde themselves
(Abandoning for ever the Christian way)
To your opinion.
And are constant in it,
They teach their teachers with their depth of judgment,
And are with arguments able to convert
The enemies to our gods and answer all
They can object against vs.
My dear daughters.
We dare dispute against this new sprung sect
In private or public.
My best Lady.
Persevere in it.
And what we maintain
We will seal with our bloods.
Brave resolution.
I even grow fat to see my labours prosper.
I young again to your devotions.
Doe.
My prayers be present with you.
Oh my Harpax.
Thou engine of my wishes, thou that steeldst
My bloody resolutions, thou that armst
My eyes against womanish tears and soft compassion.
Instructing me without a sigh to look on
Babes torn by violence from their mothers breasts
To feed the fire, and with them make one flame:
Old men as beasts, in beasts skins torn by dogs:
Virgins and matrons tire the executioners,
Yet I unsatisfied think their torments easy.
And in that just, not cruel.
Wear all scepters
That grace the hands of kings made into one,
And offered me, all crowns laid at my feet,
I would contemn them all, thus spit at them.
So I to all posterities might be called
The strongest champion of the Pagan gods
And rooter out of Christians.
Oh mine own,
Mine own dear Lord, to further this great work
I ever live thy slave.
No more the Governor.
Keep the ports close, and let the guards be doubled
Disarm the Christians, call it death in any
To wear a sword, or in his house to have one.
I shall be careful Sir,
It will well become you.
Such as refuse to offer sacrifice
To any of our gods, put to the torture.
Grub up this growing mischief by the roots,
And know when we are merciful to them,
We to our selves are cruel.
You pour oil
On fire that burns already at the height,
I know the Emperors Edict and my charge,
And they shall find no favour.
My good Lord,
This care is timely, for the entertainment
Of our great moister, who this night in person
Comes here to thank you.
Who the Emperor?
To clear your doubts, he does return in triumph,
Kings lackying by his triumphant Chariot,
And in this glorious victory my Lord,
You have an ample share: for know your son,
The ne'er enough commended Antoninus,
So well hath fleshd his maiden sword, and died
His snowy plumes so deep in enemies blood,
That besides public grace, beyond his hopes
There are rewards propounded.
I would know
No mean in thine could this be true.
My head answer the forfeit.
Of his victory
There was some rumour, but it was assured
The army passed a full days journey higher
Into the country.
It was so determined,
But for the further honour of your son,
And to observe the government of the city,
And with what rigour, or remiss indulgence
The Christians are pursued he makes his stay here.
For proof his trumpets speak his near arrival. 
Haste good Sempronius, draw up our guards,
And with all ceremonious pomp receive
The conquering army. Let our garrison speak
Their welcome in loud shouts, the city show
Her state and wealth.
I am gone.
O I am ravished
With this great honour, cherish good Theophilus
This knowing scholar, send your fair daughters
I will present them to the Emperor,
And in their sweet conversion, as a mirror
Express your zeal and duty. 
Fetch them good Harpax.
So at all parts I find Caesarea
Completely governed, the licentious soldier
Confined in modest limits, and the people
Taught to obey, and not compelled with rigour;
The ancient Roman discipline reuin'd,
(Which raised Room to her greatness, and proclaimed her
The glorious mistress of the conquered world)
But aboue all the service of the gods
So zealously observed, that (good Sapritius)
In words to thank you for your care and duty
Were much unworthy Dioclesians honour
Or his magnificence to his loyal servants.
But I shall find a time with noble titles
To recompense your merits.
Mightiest Caesar
Whose power upon this globe of earth, is equal
To loves in heaven, whose victorious triumphs
On proud rebellious Kings that stir against it
Are perfect figures of his immortal trophies
Won in the giants war, whose conquering sword
Guided by his strong arm, as deadly kills
As did his thunder, all that I have done,
Or if my strength were centupld could do,
Comes short of what my loyalty must challenge.
But if in any thing I have deserved
Great Casars smile, tic in my humble care
Still to preserve the honour of those gods,
That make him what he is: my zealc to them
I ever have expressed in my fell hate
Against the Christian sect, that with one blow
Ascribing all things to an unknown power,
Would strike down all their temples, and allows them
Nor sacrifice nor altars.
Thou in this
Walk hend in hand with me, my will and power
Shall not alone confirm, but honour all
That are in this most forward.
Sacred Caesar;
If your imperial Majesty stand pleased
To shower your favours upon such as are
The boldest champions of our religion,
Look on this reverend man, to whom the power
Of searching out, and punishing such delinquents,
Was by your choice committed, and for proof
He hath deserved the grace imposd upon him,
And with a fair and even hand proceeded
Partial to none, not to himself, or those
Of equal nearness to himself, behold
This pair of Virgins.
What are these?
His daughters.
Now by your sacred fortune they are fair ones,
Exceeding fair ones, would it were in my power
To make them mine.
They are the gods, great Lady,
They were most happy in your service else,
On these when they fell from their fathers faith
I used a judges power, entreaties failing
(They being seduced) to win them to adore
The holy powers we worship, I put on
The scarlet robe of bold authority,
And as they had bin strangers to my blood,
Presented them in the most horrid forms
All kind of tortures, part of which they suffered
With Roman constancy.
And could you endure
Being a father, to behold their limbs
Extended on the rack?
I did, but must
Confess there was a strange contention in me,
Between the impartial office of a Judge,
And pity of a father, to help Justice
Religion stepped in, under which odds
Compassion fell: yet still I was a father,
For even then, when the flinty hangmans whips
Were worn with stripes spent on their tender limbs,
I kneeled, and wept, and begged them though they would
Be cruel to themselves, they would take pity
On my gray hairs. Now note a sudden change,
Which I with joy remember, those whom torture
Nor fear of death could terrify, were overcome
By seeing of my sufferings, and so won,
Returning to the faith that they were borne in,
I gave them to the gods, and be assured
I that used justice with a rigorons hand
Upon such beauteous virgins, and mine own,
Will vseno favour where the cause commands me
To any other, but as rocks be deaf
To all intreatics.
Thou deserve thy place,
Still hold it and with honour, things thus ordered
Touching the gods tic lawful to descend
To human cares, and exercise that power
Heaven has conferd upon me, which that you
Rebels and traitors to the power of Rome
Should not with all extremities undergo,
What can you urge to qualify your crimes
Or mitigate my anger?
We are now
Slaves to thy power, that yesterday were kings,
And had command ore others, we confess
Our grandsires paid yours tribute, yet left vs
As their forefathers had desire of freedom.
And if you Romans hold it glorious honour
Not only to defend what is your own,
But to enlarge your Empire, (though our fortune
Denies that happiness) who can accuse
The famished mouth if it attempt to feed,
Or such whose fetters eat into their freedoms,
If they desire to shake them off.
We stand
The last examples to prove how uncertain
All humane happiness is, and are prepared
To endure the worst.
That spoke which now is highest
In Fortunes wheel, must when she turns it next
Decline as low as we are. This considered
Taught the Egyptian Hercules Sesostris
(That had his chariot drawn by captive kings)
To free them from that slavery, but to hope
Such mercy from a Roman, were mere madness.
We are familiar with what cruelty
Room since her infant greatness, ever used
Such as she triumph over, age nor sex
Exempted from her tyranny: scepterd Princes
Kept in your common dungeons, and their children!
In scorn trained up in base Mechanic arts
For public bondsman; in the catologue
Of those unfortunate men, we expect to have
Our names remembered.
In all growing Empires
Even cruelty is useful, some must suffer
And be set up examples to strike terror
In others though far of but when a State
Is raised to her perfection, and her Bases
Too firm, to shrink, or yield, we may use mercy
And do it with safety, but to whom? not cowards?
Or such whose baseness shames the conqueror,
And robs him of his victory, as weak Perseus
Did great AEmilius. Know therefore kings
Of Epire, Pontus, and of Macedon,
That I with curtsy can use my prisoners
As well as make them mine by force, provided
That they are noble enemies: such I found you
Before I made you mine, and since you were so,
You have not lost the courages of Princes,
Although the Fortune: had you borne your selves
Deiectedly, and base, no slavery
Had been too easy for you, but such is
The power of noble valour, that we love it
Even in our enemies, and taken with it,
Desire to make them friends, as I will you.
Mock vs not Caesar.
By the Gods I do not.
Unloose their bonds, I now as friends embrace you,
Give them their Crowns again.
We are twice overcome,
By courage and by curtsy.
But this latter,
Shall teach vs to live ever faithful Vassals,
To Dioclesian and the power of Rome.
All Kingdoms fall before her.
And all Kings
Contend to honour Caesar.
I believe
Your tongues are the true Trumpets of your hearts,
And in it I most happy Queen of fate,
Imperious Fortune mix some light disaster
With my so many joys to season em,
And give them sweeter relish, I am girt round
With true felicity, faithful subjects here,
Here bold Commanders, here with new made friends.
But what's the crown of all in thee Artemia,
My only child whose love to me and duty
Strive to exceed each other,
I make payment
But of a debt which I stand bound to tender
As a daughter, and a subject.
Which requires yet
A retribution from me Artemia
Tide by a fathers care how to bestow
Ay well of all things to me most precious.
Nor will I therefore longer keep thee from
The chief joys of creation, marriage rites,
Which that thou may with greater pleasure taste of,
Thou shalt not like with mine eyes but thine own
Amongst these kings forgetting they were captives,
Or these remembering not they are my subjects,
Make choice of any, by Ioues dreadful thunder,
My will shall rank with thine.
It is a bounty
The daughters of great Princes seldom meet with.
For they, to make up breaches in the state,
Or for some other politic ends are forced
To match where they affect not, may my life
Deserve this favour.
Speak, I long to know
The man thou wilt make happy.
If that titles
Or the adored name of Queen could take me,
Here would I fix mine eyes and look no farther.
But these are baits to take a mean borne Lady,
Another that boldly may call Caesar father.
In that I can bring honour unto any
But from no king that lives receives addition
To raise desert and virtue by my fortune,
Though in a low estate were greater glory,
Then to mix greatness with a Prince that owes
No worth but that name only.
I commend thee,
Tic like thy self.
If then of men beneath me
My choice is to be made, where shall I seek
But among those that best deserve from you,
That have served you most faithfully, that in dangers
Have stood next to you, that have interposd
Their breasts as shields of proof to dull the swords
Aimd at your bosom, that have spent their blood
To crown your brows with Laurel.
Citherea
Great Queen of love be now propitious to me.
Now mark what I foretold.
Her eyes on me,
Fair Venus son draw forth a leaden dart,
And that she may hate me, transfix her with it,
Or if thou needs wilt use a golden one,
Shoot in the behalf of any other,
Thou know I am thy votary else where.
Sir.
How he blushes!
Welcome, fool, thy fortune,
Stand like a block when such an Angel courts thee.
I am no object to divert your eye
From the beholding.
Rather a bright Sun
Too glorious for him to gaze upon
That took not first flight from the Egles aciry.
As I look on the temples, or the gods,
And with that reverence Lady I behold you,
And shall do ever.
And it will become you,
While thus we stand at distance, but if love
(Love borne out of th'assurance of your virtues)
Teach me to stoop so low.
O rather take
A higher flight.
Why fear you to be raised?
Say I put off the dreadful a we that waits
On Majesty, or with you share my beams,
Nay make you to outshine me change the name
Of subject into Lord, rob you of service
Thats due from you to me, and in me make it
Duty to honour you, would you refuse me?
Refuse you Madam, such a worm as I am,
Refuse, what kings upon their knees would sue for?
Call it, great Lady, by another name,
An humble modesty that would not match
A Molehill with Olimpus.
He that's famous
For honourable actions in the war;
As you are Antoninus, a proved soldier
Is fellow to a king.
If you love valour,
As it is a kingly virtue, seek it out,
And cherish it in a king, there it shines brightest,
And yields the bravest lustre. Look on Epire,
A Prince, in whom it is incorporate,
And let it not disgrace him, that he was
Overcome by Caesar, (it was a victory
To stand so long against him,) had you seen him,
How in one bloody seen he did discharge
The parts of a Commander, and a soldier,
Wise in direction, bold in execution;
You would have said, great Caesars self excepted,
The world yields not his equal.
Yet I have heard,
Encountering him alone in the head of his troop,
You took him prisoner.
Tic a truth great Princess.
Isle not detract from valour.
It was mere fortune,
Courage had no hand in it.
Did ever man
Strive so against his own good.
Spiritless villain,
How I am tortured, by the immortal gods
I now could kill him.
Hold Sapritius hold,
On our displeasure hold.
Why, this would make
A father mad, tic not to be endured,
Your honours tainted in it.
By heaven it is,
I shall think of't.
Tic not to be forgotten.
Nay kneel not Sir, I am no ravisher,
Nor so far gone in fond affection to you,
But that I can retire my honour safe.
Yet say hereafter that thou hast neglected
What but seen in possession of another
Will run thee mad with envy.
In her looks
Revenge is written.
As you love your life study t'appease her.
Gracious madame hear me.
And be again refused?
The tender of
My life, my service, not since you vouchsafe it,
My love, my heart, my all, and pardon me:
Pardon dread Princess that I made some scruple
To leave a valley of security
To mount up to the hill of Majesty,
On which the nearer Jove the nearer lightning.
What knew I but your grace made trial of me?
Durst I presume to embrace, where but to touch
With an vnmannerd hand was death? the Fox
When he saw first the forests king, the Lyon
Was almost dread with fear, the second view
Only a little daunted him, the third
He durst salute him boldly: pray you apply this,
And you shall find a little time will teach me
To look with more familiar eyes upon you
Then duty yet allows me.
Well exscusde.
You may redeem all yet.
And that he may
Have means and opportunity to do so,
Artemia I leave you my substitute
In fair Casarea.
And here as your self
We will obey and serve her.
Antoninus
So you prove hers I wish no other heir,
Think on it, be careful of your charge Theophilus,
Sapritius be you my daughters guardian.
Your company I wish confederate Princes
In our Dismatian wars, which finished
With victory I hope, and Maximinus
Our brother and copartner in the Empire
At my request won to confirm as much,
The kingdoms I took from you weal restore,
And make you greater then you were before.
Oh I am lost for ever, lost Macrinus,
The anchor of the wretched, hope for sakes me,
And with one blast of fortune all my light
Of happiness is put out.
You are like to those
That are ill only, cause they are too well,
That surfeiting in the excess of blessings
Call their abundance want: what could you wish,
That is not fallen upon you? honour, greatness,
Respect, wealth, favour, the whole world for a dowre,
And with a Princess, whose excelling form
Exccedes her fortune.
Yet poison still is poison
Though drunk in gold, and all these flattering glories
To me, ready to starve, a painted banquet
And no essential food: when I am scorched
With fire, can flames in any other quench me?
What is her love to me, greatness, or Empire,
That am slave to another, who alone
Can give me ease or freedom?
Sir you point at
Your dotage on the scornful Dorothea,
Is she though fair the same day to be named
With best Artemia? in all their courses
Wisemen propose their ends: with sweet Artemia
There comes along pleasure, security,
Ushered by all that in this life is precious:
With Dorothea, though her birth be noble,
The Daughter to a Senator of Rome,
By him lest rich (yet with a private wealth
And far inferior to yours) arrives
The Emperors frown (which like a mortal plague
Speaks death is near) the Princess heavy scorn,
Under which you will shrink, your fathers fury,
Which to resist even piety forbids,
And but remember that she stands suspected
A favourer of the Christian Sect, she brings
Not danger but assured destruction with her:
This truly wai'd, one smile of great Artemia
Is to be cherished and preferred before
All joys in Dorothea, therefore leave her.
In what thou think thou art most wise, thou art
Grossly abused Macrinus, and most foolish.
For any man to match aboue his rank,
Is but to sell his libetty; with Artemia
I still must live a servant, but enjoying
Divinest Dorothea, I shall rule,
Rule as becomes a husbands for the dangers,
Or call it if you will assured destruction,
I slight it thus. If then thou art my friend,
As I dares wear thou art, and wilt not take
A Governors place upon thee, be my helper.
You know I dare and will doe any thing.
Put me unto the test.
Go then Macrinus
To Dorothea, tell her I have worn,
In all the battles I have fought her figure,
Her figure in my heart, which like a deity
Hath still protected me, thou can speak well,
And of thy choyself language, spare a little
To make her understand how much I love her,
And how I languish for her, bear her these jewels
Sent in the way of sacrifice, not service,
As to my goddess. All lets thrown behind me,
Or fears that may deter me: say this morning
I mean to visit her by the name of friendship,
No words to contradict this.
I am yours,
And if my travel this way be ill spent,
Judge not, my reader will, by the event.
Turn Christian, wud he that first tempted me to have my shoes walk upon Christian soles, had turned me into a Capon, for I am sure now the stones of all my pleasure in this fleshly life are cut off.
So then, if any Coxcomb has a galloping de???sire to ride, here is a Gelding, if he can but sit him.
I kick for all that like a horse, look else.
But thats a kickish Jade, fellow Spungins, have not I as much cause to complain as thou hast? When I was a Pagan, there was an Infidel Punk of mine, would have let me come upon trust for my corvetting, a pox of your christian Coxatrices, they cry like Poulterers wives, no mo???ney, no Cony.
Bacchus, the God of brewed Wine and Sugar, grand Patron of rob pots, vpsie-freesie-tiplers, and super-naculam takers; this Bacchus, who is head warden of Vintners Hall, Ale-cunner, Mayor of all Victualing houses, the sole liquid Benefactor to bawdy-houses, Lanze prezado to red Noses, and inuin cible Adelantado over the Armado of pimpled, deep scarleted, rubified, and carbuncled faces.
What of all this?
This boon Bacchanalion stinker, did I make legs to.
Scurvy ones, when thou were drunk.
There is no danger of loosing a man years by making these Endures, he that will not now and then bee Calabingo, is worse then a Calamosthe: when I was a Pagan and kneeled to this Bachhus, I durst out-drinke a Lord, but your Christian Lords out-boule me: I was in hope to lead a sober life, when I was converted, but now amongst the Christians, I can no sooner stagger out of one Alhouse but I reel into another: they have whole streets of nothing but drinking rooms, and drabbing chambers, jumbled to???gether.
Bawdy Priapus, the first schoolmaster that taught Butchers how to stick pricks in flesh, and make it swell, thou know was the only Ningle that I cared for under the Moon, but since I left him, to follow a scur???uy Lady, what with her praying and our fasting, if now I come to a wench &amp; offer to use her any thing hardly (cel???ling her being a Christian she must endure) she presently handles me as if I were a clove, &amp; cleaves me with disdain as if I were a Calves head.
I see uo remedy fellow Hircius, but that thou and I must be half Pagans and half Christians, for we know very fools that are Christians.
Right, the quarters of Christians are good for not thing but to feed Crows.
True, Christian Brokers, thou know, are made vpof the quarters of Christians, parboil one of these rogues and he is not meat for a dog: no, no, I am re???solved to have an Infidels heart, though in show I carry a Christians face.
Thy Last shall serve my foot, so will I.
Our whimpring Lady and Mistress sent me with two great baskets full of Beef, Mutton, Veale and Goose fellow Hircius.
And Woodcock fellow Spungins.
Upon the poor lean Ass fellow, on which I
ride, to all the Almswomen: what think thou I hue done with all this good cheer.
Eat it, and be choked else.
Wud my Ass, basket and all were in thy maw if I did: no, as I am a demi Pagan, I sold the victuals, and kind the money into pottle pots of wine.
Therein thou shewdst thy self a perfect demy-Christian too, to let the poor beg, starve and hang, or dye a the pip: our puling snotty-nose Lady sent me out like???wise with a purse of money, to relieve and release prisoners: did I so think you?
Wud thy ribs were turned into grates of iron then.
As I am a total Pagan, I swore they should be hanged first: for sir Spungius, I lay at my old ward of lechery, and cried a pox in your two-penny wards, and so I took scurvy common flesh for the money.
And wisely done, for our Lady sending it to pri???sonars, had bestowed it out upon lousy knaves, and thou to save that labour casts it away upon rotten whores.
All my fear is of that pinke-an-eye Iacke-an Apes boy, her page.
As I am a Pagan, from my codpiece downward that white-fac'd Monkey, frights me to, I stole but a dirty pudding last day out of an almsebasket, to give my dog when he was hungry, and the peaking chitface page hit me in the teeth with it.
With the dirty pudding; so he did me once with a cowturd, which in knavery I would have crumd into ones porridge, who was half a Pagan to: the smug dandiprat smells vs out whatsoever we are doing.
Does he! let him take heed I prove not his back friend; He make him curse his smelling what I doe.
Tic my Lady spoils the boy, for he is ever at her tail: and she's never well but in his company.
O! now your hearts make ladders of your eyes
In show to climb to heaven, when your devotion
Walks upon crutches: where did you waste your time
When the religious man was on his knees,
Speaking the heavenly languague.
Why fellow Angelo, we were speaking in peddlers
French I hope.
We ha not been idle, take it upon my word.
Have you the baskets emptied which your Lady
Sent from the charitable hands, to women
That dwell upon her pity?
Emptled em! yes, Id be loath to have my belly so empty, yet I'm sure, I munched not one bit of them nei???there.
And went your money to the prisoners.
Went no, I carried it; and with these fingers paid it away.
What way? the devils way, the way of sin,
The way of hot damnation, way of lust:
And you to, wash away the poor mans bread
In bowls of drunkenness.
Drunkenness! yes, yes, I use to bee drunk: our next neighbours man called Christopher has often seen me drunk, has he not?
Or me given so to the flesh, my cheeks speak my doings.
Avaunt you thieves, and hollow hypocrites.
Your hearts to me lie open like black books,
And there I read your doings.
And what do you read in my heart?
Or in mine? come amiable. Angelo, beat the flint of your brains.
And lets see what sparks of wit fly out, to kindle your Carebruns.
Your names even brand you, you are Spurgius called
And like a Sponge you suck up liquorous wines
Till your soul reels to hell.
To hell! can any drunkards legs carry him so far.
For blood of grapes you sold the widows food.
And starving them, tic murder, whats this but hell.
Hircius your name, and Goatish is your nature:
You snatch the meat out of the prisoners mouth,
To fatten harlots, is not this hell to,
No Angel, but the devil waits on you.
Shall I cut his throat.
No, better burn him, for I think he is a witch, but sooth, soth him.
Fellow Angelo, true it is, that falling into the com???pany of wicked he-Christians for my part.
And she-ones for mine, we have 'em swim in shoal hard by.
We must confess, I took too much of the pot, and he of tother hollow commodity.
Yes indeed, we laid lil on both of vs, we cozened the poor, but it is a common thing, many a one that counts himself a better Christian then we two, has done it, by this light.
But pray sweet Angelo, play not the tell-tale to my Lady, and if you take vs creeping into any of these mouse???holes of sin any more, let Cats flea off our skins.
And put nothing but the poi sond tails of Rats into those skins.
Will you dishonour her sweet charity.
Who saved you from the tree of death and shame.
Wud I were haugd rather then thus betold of my faults.
She took vs, tic true, from the gallows, yet I hope she will not bar yeomen sprats to have their swinge.
She comes, beware and mend.
Lets break his neck, and bid him mend.
Have you my messages (sent to the poor)
Delivered with good hands, not robbing them
Of any jot was theirs.
Rob 'em Lady, I hope, neither my fellow nor I am thieves
Delivered with good hands madam, else let me never
like my fingers more when I eat butterd fish.
Who cheat the poor, and from them pluck their alms.
Pilfer from Heaven, and there are thunderbolts
From thence to beat them ever, do not lye,
Were you both faithful true distributors?
Lye Madame, what grief is it to see you turn
Swaggerer, and give your poor minded rascally servants the lye.
I'm glad you doe not, if those wretched people
Tell you they pine for want of any thing.
Whisper but to mine ear, and you shall furnish them.
Whisper, nay Lady, for my part Isle cry whoop.
Play no more Villains with so good a Lady,
For if you doe ??? ??? ???.
Are we Christians?
The foul Fiend snap all Pagans for me.
Away, and once more mend.
Takes vs for Botchers.
A patch, a patch.
My book and Taper.
Here most holy Mistress.
Thy voice sends forth such music, that I never
Was raisht with a more celestial sound,
Were every servant in the world like thee,
So full of goodness, Angels would come down
To dwell with vs, thy name is Angelo,
And like that name thou art, get thee to rest,
Thy youth with too much watching is oppressed.
No my dear Lady, I could weary slarres,
And force the wakeful Moon to lose her eyes
By my late watching, but to waite on you,
When at your prayers you kneel before the Altar,
Me thinks I'm singing with some Quire in Heaven,
So blessed I hold me in your company:
Therefore my most-lou'd mistress do not bid
Your boy so serviceable to get house,
For then you break his heart.
Bee ny me still then,
In golden letters down isle set that day
Which gave thee to me, little did I hope
To meet such worlds of comfort in thy self,
This little pretty body, when I coming
Forth of the temple, heard my begger-boy,
My sweet faced godly begger-boy, crave an alms,
Which with glad hand I gave, with lucky hand,
And when I took thee home, my most chaste by some
Me thought was filed with no hot wanton fire,
But with a holy flame, mounting since higher
On wings of Cherubines then did before.
Proud am I that my Ladies modest eye,
So likes so poor a servant.
I have offered
Handfuls of gold but to behold thy Parents,
I would leave Kingdoms, were I Queen of some,
To dwell with thy good father, for the son
Bewitching me so deeply with his presence,
He that begot him must do it ten times more,
I pray thee, my sweet boy, show me thy parents,
Be not ashamed.
I am not, I did never
Know who any mother was, but by yon Palace
Filled with bright heavenly Courtiers, I dare assure you,
And pawn these eyes upon it, and this hand,
My father is in Heaven, and pretty Mistress,
If your illustrious hour Glass spend his sand
No worse then yet it does, upon my life
You and I both shall meet my father there,
And he shall bid you welcome.
A blessed day,
We all long to be there, but lose the way.
Sunne-god of the day guide thee Macrinus.
And thee Theophilus.
Gladst thou in such scorn,
I call my wish back.
I'm in hast.
One word,
Take the least hand of time up: stay.
Be brief.
As thought: I pritheo tell me good Macrinus
How health and our fair Princess lay together
This night, for you can tell, Courtiers have flies
That buzz all news unto them.
She slept but ill.
Double thy curtsy, how does Antoninus?
Ill, well, straight, crooked, I know not how.
Once more,
Thy head is full of Winde-mils: when does the Princess
Fill a bed full of beauty, and bestow it
On Antoninus on the wedding night.
I know not.
No, thou art the Manunscript
Where Antoninus writes down all his secrets,
Honest Macrinus tell me.
Fare you well Sir.
Honesty is some Fiend, and frights him hence,
A many Courtiers love it not.
What piece
Of this State-wheele (which winds up Antoninus)
Is broke, it runs so iarringly? the
Man is from himself divided: Oh thou the eye
By which I wonders see, tell me my Harpax,
What gad fly tickles so this Macrinus,
That up. flinging thy tail, he breaks thus from me,
Oh Sir, his braine-panne is a bed of Snakes,
Whosestings shoot through his eye-balls, whose poyso???nous spawn
Engenders such a fry of speckled villainies,
That valesse charms more strong then Adamant
Bee used, the Roman Angels wings shall melt,
And Caesars Diadem be from his head
Spurned by base fecte, the Laurel which he wears
(Returning victor) be enforced to kiss
That which it hates (the fire.) And can this Ram,
This Antoninus-Engine, being made ready
To so much mischief, keep a steady motion,
His eyes and feet you see give strange assaults.
I'm turned a marble Statue at thy language,
Which printed is in such crab'd Characters,
It puzzles all my reading, what (ith name
Of Pluto) now is hatching.
This Macrinus
The time is, upon which love errands run
Twixt Antoninus and that ghost of women,
The bloodless Dorothaea, who in prayer
And meditation (mocking all your gods)
Drinks up her ruby colour, yet Antoninus
Plays the Endymion to this pale faced Moon,
Courts her, seeks to catch her eyes.
And what of this?
These are but creeping Billows
Not got to shore yet, but if Dorothaea
Fall on his bosom, and be fired with love,
(Your coldest women do so) had you ink
Brewed from the infernal Styx, and not all that blackness
Can make a thing so foul, as the Dishonours,
Disgraces, Buffettings, and most base affronts
Upon the bright Artemia, Star of Court,
Great Caesars Daughter.
I now construe thee.
Nay more, a Firmament of Clouds being filled
With Iouet Artillery, shot down at once
To posh your Godsin pieces, cannot give
With all those Thunderbots so deep a blow
To the Religion there, and Pagan lore
As this; for Dorothea hates your gods,
And if she once blast Antoninus soul,
Making it foul like hers: Oh the example???
Eats through Cesareas heart, like liquid poison
Have I invented tortures to tent Christians,
To see but which, could all that scales Hells torments
Have leave to stand aloof here on earths stage,
They would be mad till they again descended,
Holding the pains most horrid, of such souls,
May-games to those of mine, has this my hand
Set down a Christians execution
In such dire postures, that the very hangman
Fell at my foot dead hearing but their figures,
And shall Macrinus and his fellow Masquer
Strangle me in a dance.
No, on, I do hug thee,
For drilling thy quick brains in this rich plot
Of tortures against these Christians: on, I hug thee.
Both hug and holy me, to this Dorotheae
Fly thou and I in thunder.
Not for Kingdoms
Piled upon Kingdoms, theres a villain Page
Waits on her, whom I would not for the world
Hold traffic with, I do so hate his sight,
That should I look on him I must sink down.
I will not loose thee then, her to confound,
None but this head with glories shall be crowned.
Oh, mine own as I would wish thee.
My trusty Angelo, with that curious eye
Of thine, which ever waits upon my business,
I prithee watch those my still-negligent servants
That they perform my willin whats enjoined them
To'th good of others, else will you find them flies
Not lying still, yet in them no good lies:
Be careful dear Boy.
Yes, my sweetest Mistress.
Now Sir, you may go on.
I then must study,
A new Arithmatike, to sum up the virtues
Which Antoninus gracefully become,
There is in him so much man, so much goodness,
So much of honour, and of all things else
Which makes our being excellent, that from his store
He can enough lend others, yet much taken from him,
The want shall be as little as when Seas
Lend from their bounty to fill up the poorness
Of needy Rivers.
Sir, he is more indebted, to you for praise, then you to him that owes it.
If Queens viewing his presents, paid to the whiteness
Of your chaste hand alone, should be ambitious,
But to be parted in their numerous shares,
This he counts nothing: could you see maine Armies
Make battles in the quarrel of his valour,
That tic best, the truest, this were nothing,
The greatness of his State, his fathers voice
And arm, owing Cesarea, he never boasts of
The Sun-beames, which the Emperor throws upon him,
Shine there but as in water, and guild him
Not with one spot of pride, no dearest beauty,
All these heaped up together in one scale,
Cannot weigh down the love he bears to you
Being put into the other.
Could gold buy you
To speak thus for your friend, you Sir are worthy
Of more then I will number, and this your language
Hath power to win upon another woman,
Top of whose heart, the feathers of this World
Are gaily stuck, but all which first you named,
And now this last, his love to me are nothing,
You make me a sad Messenger.
But him self
Being come in person, shall I hope hear from you
Music more pleasing.
Has your ear Macrinus
Heard none then?
None I like.
But can there be
In such a noble Casker, wherein lies
Beauty and chastity in their full perfections,
A rocky heart killing with cruelty
A life thats prostrated beneath your feet?
I am guilty of a shame I yet never knew,
Thus to hold parley with you, pray Sir pardon.
Good sweetness, you now have it, and shall go,
Be but so merciful, before your wounding me
With such a mortal weapon, as Farewell,
To let me murmur to your Virgin care,
What I was loath to lay on any tongue
But this mine own.
If one immodest accent
Fly out, I hate you everlastingly.
My true love dares not doe it.
Harms inspire thee.
See you, doe you see, our work is done, the fish you angle for is nibbling at the hook, and therefore un???truss the Codpeece point of our reward, no matter if the breeches of conscience fall about our heals.
The gold you earn is here, dam up your mouths, and no words of it.
No, nor no words from you of too much dam???ming neither; I know women sell themselves daily, and are ?????????knied out for silver, why may not we then betray a scurvy mistress for gold.
She saved vs from the Gallows, and only to keep one Proverb from breaking his neck, weal hang her.
Tic well done, go go, year my fine white boys.
If your red boys, tic well known, more life???uour'd
faces then ours are painted.
Those fellows trouble vs.
Away, away.
I to my sweet placket.
And I to my full pot.
Come, let me tune you, glaze not thus your eyes
With selfe-loue of a vowed Virginity,
Make every man your glass, you see our Sex
Doe never murder propagation,
We all desire your sweet society,
And if you bar me from it, you doe kill me,
And of my blood are guilty.
O base Villain.
Bridle your rage sweet Princess.
Could not my fortunes
(Reared higher far then yours) be worthy of you,
Me thinks my dear affection makes you mine.
Sir, for your fortunes were they mines of gold,
He that I love is richer; and for worth,
You are to him lower then any slave
Is to a Monarch.
So insolent, base Christian.
Can I, with wearing out my knees before him
Get you but be his servant, you shall boast you're equal to a King.
Confusion on thee,
For playing thus the lying Sorcereste.
Your mocks are great ones, none beneath the Sun
Will I be servant too: on my knees I beg it,
Pity me wondrous maid.
I curse thy baseness.
Listen to more.
Oh kneel not Sir to me.
This Knee is Emblem of an humbled heart,
That heart which tortured is with your disdain,
Justly for scorning others; even this heart,
To which for pity such a Princess sues,
As in her hand offers me all the World,
Great Caesars daughter.
Slave thou lie.
Yet this
Is adamant to her, that melts to you
In drops of blood.
A Very dog.
Perhaps
Tic my religion makes you knit the brow,
Yet be you mine, and ever be your own,
I ne'er will screw your conscience from that power
On which you Christians lean.
I can no longer,
Fret out my life with weeping at thee villain; sir,
Would when I got thee, the high thunder hand
Had struck thee in the womb.
We are betrayed.
Is that your I doll, traitor, which thou kneelst to,
Trampling upon my beauty?
Sir, bandog,
Wilt thou in pieces tear, our Iupiter,
For her? our Mars, for her? our Sol, for her?
A whore, a hel-hound, in this globe of brains
Where a whole world of tortures for such furies
Have fought as in a Chaos) which should exceed,
These nails shall grubbing lye, from scull to scull,
To find one horrider, then all, for you,
You three.
Threaten not, but strike, quick vengeance flies
Into thy bosom, caitiff: here all loves dies.
O I am thunder-struckel
Wee are both ore whelmed.
With one high raging billow.
You a soldier,
And sink beneath the violence of a woman?
A woman! a wronged Princess: from such a star
Blazing with fires of hate, what can be looked for
But tragical events? my life is now
The subject of her tyranny.
That fear, is base,
Of death, when that death doth but life displace
Out of her house of earth; you only dread
The stroke, and not what follows when you are dead,
There's the great fear indeed: come, let your eye,
Dwell where mine doe, you'll scorn their tyrannies.
My fathers nerues put vigour in mine arm,
And I his strength must use; because I once
Shed beams of favour on thee, and with the Lyon
Played with thee gently when thou strokst my heart,
He not insult on a base humbled prey,
By lingering out thy terrors, but with one frown
Kill thee: hence with 'hem to execution.
Seize him, but let even death it self be weary
In torturing her: He change those smiles to shrieks,
Give the fool what she is proud of (martyrdom)
In pieces rack that Bawd to:
Albeit the reverence
Jove our gods and you, are in my bosom
Torrents so strong, that pity quite lies drowned
From saving this young man, yet when I see
What face death gives him, and that a thing within me,
Says it is my son, I'am forced to be a man,
And grow fond of his life, which thus I beg.
And I deny.
Sir you dishonour me,
To sue for that which I disclay me to have,
I shall more glory in my sufferings gain,
Then you in giving judgment, since I offer
My blood up to your anger: nor do I kneel
To keep a wretched life of mine from ruin:
Preserve this temple (builded fair as your is)
And Caesar never went in greater triumph
Then I shall to the scaffold.
Are you so brave Sir,
Set forward to his triumph, and let those two
Go cursing along with him.
No, but pitying,
(For my part, I) that you loose ten times more
By torturing me, than I that dare your tortures,
Through all the army of my sins, I have even
Lobord to break, and cope with death to th'face;
The visage of a hangman frights not me;
The sight of whips, rackes, gibbets, axes, fires
Are scaffoldings, by which my soul climbs up
To an Eternal habitation.
Caesars imperial daughter, hear me speak,
Let not this Christian Thing, in this her pageantry
Of proud deriding, both our gods and Caesar,
Build to her self a kingdom in her death
Going laughing from vs. No, her bitterest torment
Shall be to seele her constancy beaten down,
The bravery of her resolution lie
Battered by the argument, into such pieces,
That she again shall (on her belly) creep
To kiss the pavements of our Panim god.
How to be done.
He send my daughers to her,
And they shall turn her rocky faith to wax,
Else spit at me, let me be made your slave,
And meet no Romans but a villains grave.
Thy prisoner let her be then: and Sapritius
Your son, and that be yours: death shall be sent
To him that suffers them by voice or letters
To greet each other. Rifle her estate,
Christians to beggary brought grow desperate.
Still on the Bread of poverty let me feed.
O my admired mistress; quench not out
The holy fires within you, though temptations
Shower down upon you: clasp thine armour on,
Fight well and thou shalt see, after these wars
Thy head wear Sun beams, and thy feet touch stars.
How now Angelo how first? how first? what thread spins
That whore Fortune upon her wheel now.
Comesta, comesta poor knave.
Com a port von, com a port von, my petite garsoone
Me partha wee Comrade, my half inch of mans
Flesh, how run the dice of this cheating world, ha?
Too well on your sides, you are hid in gold
Ore head and ears.
We thank our fates, the sign of the gingle-boyes hangs at the doors of our pockets.
Who wud think that we coming forth of the arse, as it were, or fag end of the world, should yet see the golden age, when so little silver is stirring.
Nay who can say any citizen is an Ass, for lading his own back, with money, till his soul cracks again, only to leave his son like a gilded coxccombe behind him? will not any fool take me for a wiseman now, seeing me draw out of the pit of my treasury, this little god with his belly full of gold.
And this full of the same meat out of my ambrey
That gold will melt to poison.
Poison, wudit wud, whole pintes for healths shall down my throat.
Gold poison! there's never a she-thrasher in Ca???sarea that lives on the flail of money will call it so.
Like slaves you sold your souls for golden dross,
Bewitching her to death, who stepped between
You, and the gallows.
T was an easy matter to save vs, she being so well backed.
The gallows and we fell out, so she did but part vs
The misery of that mistress is mine own,
She beggerd, I left wretched.
I can but let my Nose drop in sorrow with wet eyes for her.
The petticoat of her estate is unlaced I confess.
Yes, &amp; the smock of her charity is now all to pieces
For love you bear to her, for some good turns
Done you by me, give me one piece of silver.
How la piece of silver! if thou were an Angel of gold
I would not put thee into white money, unless I weighed thee, and I weigh thee not a rush.
A piece of silver! I never had but two calves in my life, and those my mother left me; Isle rather part from the fat of them, then from a mustard-tokens worth of Argent.
And so sweet Nit we crawl from thee.
Adieu, demi-dandiprat, adieu
Stay one word yet, you now are full of gold.
Id be sorry my dog were so full of the poxc.
Or any Sow of mine of the measles either.
Go, go, you're beggars both, you are not worth
That leather on your feet.
Away, away boy.
Page you do nothing but set patches on the soles of your jests.
I'am glad I tried your love, which see I want not,
So long as this is full.
And so long as this.???so long as this.
Spungius you're a picke-pocket.
Horcius thou hastnimb'd -. so long as, not so much money is left as will buy a louse.
You are a thiese, and thou lie in that gut through which thy wine runs, if thou deny it.
Thou lie deeper then the bottom of mine en???raged pocket, if thou affrontst it.
No blows, no bitter language, all your gold gone.
Can the devil creep into ones breeches?
Yes, if his horns once get into the codpeece,
Come, sigh not, I so little am in love
With that whose loss kills you, that see tic yours,
All yours, divide the heap in equal share,
So you will go along with me to prison,
And in our mistress sorrows bear a part:
Say, will you?
Will we?
If she were going to hanging, no gallows should part vs.
Lets both be turned into a rope of Onions if we do
follow me then, repair your bad deeds past,
Happy are men when their best days are last,
True master Angele, pray sir lead the way.
Let him lead that way, but follow thou me this way.
I live in a Jail.
A way and shift for our selves, sheele do well enough there, for prisoners are more hungry after mutton, then Catchpoles after prisoners.
Let her starve then if a whole Jail will not fill her belly.
Sick to the death I fear.
I meet your sorrow,
With my true feeling of it.
She's a Witch,
A sorceress Theophilus, my son
Is charmed by her enticing eyes, and like
An image made of wax, her beams of beauty
Melt him to nothing; all my hopes in him.
And all his gotten honours find their grave
In his strange dotage on her. Would when first
He saw and loved her, that the earth had opend
And swallowd both alive.
There's hope left yet.
Not any, though the Princess were appeasd,
All title in her love surrenderd up,
Yet this coy Christian, is so transported
With her religion, that unless my son
(But let him perish first) drink the same potion
And be of her belief, sheele not vouchsafe
To be his lawful wife.
but once removed
From her opinion, as I rest assured,
The reason of these holy maids will win her,
You'll find her tractable, to any thing
For your content or his.
If she refuse it,
The Stygian dampes breeding infectious airs,
The Mandrakes shrieks, or Basiliks killing eye,
The dreadful lightning that does crush the bones
And never singe the skin, shall not appear
Less fatal to her, then my zeal made hot
With love unto my gods; I have deferd it
In hope to draw back this Apostate,
Which will be greater honour then her death
Unto her fathers faith, and to that end
Have brought my daughters hither.
And we doubt not
To do what you desire.
Let her be sent for,
Prosper in your good work, and were I not
To attend the Princess, I would see and hear
How you succeed.
I am commanded to,
Isle bear you company.
Give them your Ring
To lead her as in triumph if they win her
Before her highness.
Spare no promises,
Persuasions, or threats I do conjure you,
If you prevail, it is the most glorious work
You ever undertook.
She comes.
We leave you.
Be constant and be careful.
We are sony
To meet you under guard.
But I more grieved
You are at liberty, so well I love you,
That I could wish, for such a cause as mine
You were my fellow prisoners: prithee Angels
Reach vs some chairs, please you sit?
We thank you,
Our visit is for love, love to your safety.
Our conference must be private, pray you therefore
Command your boy to leave vs.
You may trust him
With any secret that concerns my life,
Falsehood and he are strangers, had you Ladies
Been blessed with such a servant, you had never
Forsook that way (your journey even half ended)
That lead to joys eternal. In the place
Of loose lascivious mirth, he would have stirred you
To holy meditations, and so far
He is from flattery, that he would have told you,
Your pride being at the height, how miserable
And wretched things you were, that for an hour
Of pleasure here, have made a desperate sale
Of all your right in happiness hereafter.
He must not leave me, without him I fall,
In this life he is my servant, in the other
A wished companion
Tic not in the devil,
Nor all his wicked arts to shake such goodness.
But you were speaking Lady.
As a friend
And lover of your safety, and I pray you
So to receive it; and if you remember
How near in love our parents were, that we
En'n from the cradle were brought up together.
Our amity increasing with our years,
We cannot stand suspected.
To the purpose.
We come then as good Angels Dorothea,
To make you happy, and the means so easy,
That be not you an enemy to your self,
Already you enjoy it.
Look on vs
Ruined as you are once, and brought unto it
By your persuasion.
But what followed Lady,
Leaving those blessings which our gods gives freely,
And showered upon vs with a prodigal hand,
As to be noble borne, youth, beauty, wealth,
And the free use of these without control,
Check, curb, or stop, (such is our Laws indulgence)
All happiness forsook vs, bonds and fetters
For amorous Twins, the Rack and Hangmans whips
In place of choice delights, our Parents curses
Instead of blessings, scorn neglect, contempt
Fell thick upon vs.
This considered wisely,
We made a fair retreat, and reconciled
To our forsaken gods, we live again
In all prosperity.
By our example
Bequeathing misery to such as love it,
Learn to be happy, the Christian yokes too heavy
For such a dainty neck, it was framed rather
To be the shrine of Venus, or a Pillar
More precious then Crystal to support
Our Cupids Image, our Religion Lady
Is but a varied pleasure, yours a toil
Slaves would shrink under.
Have you not cloven feetel are you not devils?
Dare any say so much, or dare I hear it
Without a virtuous and religious anger?
Now to put on a Virgin modesty,
Or maiden silence, when his power is questioned
That is omnipotent, were a greater crime,
Then in a bad cause to be impudent.
Your Gods, your temples, brothel houses rather,
Or wicked actions of the worst of men
Pursued and practised, your religious rites,
O call them rather juggling mysteries,
The baits and nets of hell, your souls the prey
For which the Devil angles, your false pleasures
A steep descent by which you headlong fall
Into eternal torments.
Doe not tempt
Our powerful gods.
Which of your powerful gods,
Your gold, your silver, brass, or wooden ones?
That can, nor do me hurt, nor protect you,
Most pitied women, will you sacrifice
To such, or call them gods or goddesses,
Your Parents would disdain to be the same,
Or you your selves? O blinded ignorance,
Tell me Caliste by the truth I charge you,
Or any thing you hold more dear, would you
To have him deified to posterity,
Desire your father an Adulterer,
A Ravisher, almost a Parricide,
A vile incestuous wretch?
That pity
And duty answer for me.
Or you Christeta,
To be hereafter registered a goddess,
Give your chaste body up to the embraces
Of Goatish lust, have it writ on your forehead,
This is the common Whore, the prostitute,
The Mistress in the art of wantonness,
Knows every trick and labyrinth of desires
That are immodest.
You judge better of me,
Or my affection is ill placed on you,
Shall I turn Strumpet?
No, I think you would not,
Yet Venus whom you worship was a whore,
Flora the Foundresse of the public Stews,
And has for that her sacrifice: your great god,
Your Iupiter, a loose adulterer,
Incestuous with his sister, read but those
That have canonised them, you'll find them worse
Then in chaste language I can speaks them to you,
Are they immortal then that did partake
Of humane weakness, and had ample share
In men's most base affections? subject to
Unchaste loves, anger, bondage, wounds, as men are.
Her Iupiter to serve his lust turned Bull.
The ship indeed in which he stole Europe.
Neptune for gain builds up the walls of Troy
As a day-labourer, Apollo keeps
Admetus sheep for bread; the Le????????? Smith
Sweats at the Forge, for hire; Lyometheus here
With his still growing Liver feeds the Vulture;
Saturn bound fast in hell with adamant chains;
And thousands more, on whom abused error
Bestows a deity, will you then dear Sisters,
For I would have you such, pay your Devotions
To things of less power then your selves?
We worship
Their good deeds in their Images.
By whom fashioned,
By sinful men? Isle tell you a short tale,
Nor can you but confess it was a true one.
A King of Egypt being to errect
The Image of Osiris, whom they honour,
Took from the Matrons necks the richest Jewels
And purest gold, as the materials
To finish up his work; which perfected,
With all solemnity he set it up
To be adored, and served himself his Idol;
Desiring it to give him victory
Against his enemies, but being overthrown,
Enraged against his god (these are fine gods
Subject to humane fury) he took down
The senseless thing, and melting it again,
He made a Basing, in which Eunuchs washed
His Concubines feet, and for this sor did use
Some months it served: his mistress proving false,
As most indeed do so, and grace concluded,
Between him and the Priests, of the same Basing
He made his god again, think, think of this,
And then consider, if all worldly honours
Or pleasures that do leave sharpe stings behind them,
Have power to win such as have reasonable souls,
To put their trust in dross.
Oh that I had been borne
Without a father.
Piety to him
Hath ruined vs for ever.
Think not so,
You may repair all yet, the Attribute
That speaks his Godhood most, is merciful,
Revenge is proper to the Fiends you worship,
Yet cannot strike without his leave, you weep,
Oh tic a heavenly shower, celestial balm
To cure your wounded conscience, let it fall,
Fall thick upon it, and when that is spent,
Isle help it with another of my tears.
And may your true repentance prove the child
Of my true sorrow, never mother had
A birth so happy.
We are caught our selves
That came to take you, and assured of conquest
We are your Captives.
And in that you triumph,
Your victory had been eternal loss,
And this your loss immortal gain, fix here,
And you shall feel your selves inwardly armed
Against tortures, death, and hell, but take heed sisters,
That or through weakness, threats, or mild persuasions
Though of a father, you fall not into
A second and a worse Apostasy.
Never, oh never, steeled by your example,
We dare the worst of tyranny.
Heir's our warrant,
You shall along and witness it.
Be confirmed then
And rest assured, the more you suffer here,
The more your glory, you to heaven more dear.
Sapritius though your son deserve no pity,
We grieve his sickness, his contempt of vs
We cast behind vs, and look back upon
His service done to Caesar, that weighs down
Our just displeasure, if his malady
Have growth from his restraint, or that you think
His liberty can cure him, let him have it,
Say we forgive him freely.
Your grace hindeys
Ever your humblest Vassals.
Use all means
For his recovery, though yet I love him,
I will not force affection, if the Christian
Whose beauty hath out-riuald mine, be won
To be of our belief, let him enjoy her,
That all may know when the cause wills, I can
Command my own desires.
Be happy then,
My Lord Sapritius, I am confident
Such eloquence and sweet persuasion dwells
Upon my Daughters tongues, that they will work her
To any thing they please.
I wish they may,
Yet tic no easy task to undertake,
To altar a perverse and obstinate woman. 
What means this shout.
Tic seconded with Music,
Triumphint music, ha.
My Lord your Daughters
The pillars of our faith having converted,
For so report gives out: the Christian Lady,
The Image of great Iupiter borne before them
Sue for access.
My soul divined as much,
Blessed be the time when first they saw this light,
Their Mother when she bore them to support
My feeble age, filled not my longing heart
With so much joy, as they in this good work
Have thrown upon me.
Welcome, oh thrice welcome
Daughters, both of my body and my mind,
Let me embrace in you my bliss, my comfort,
And Dorothea now more welcome too,
Then if you never had fallen off, I am ravished
With the excess of joy, speak happy daughters
The blessed event.
We never gained so much
By any undertaking.
Oh my dear Girl,
Our gods reward thee.
Nor was ever time
On my part better spent.
We are all now
Of one opinion.
My best Christeta,
Madame if ever you did grace to worth,
Vouchsafe your Princely hands.
Most willingly:
Doe you refuse it?
Let vs first deserve it:
My own child still, here set our god, prepare
The Incense quickly, come fair Dorothea,
I will my self support you, now kneel down
And pay your vows to Iupiter,
I shall doe it
Better by their example.
They shall guide you,
They are familiar with the sacrifice,
Forward my Twins of comfort, and to teach her
Make a joint ossring.
Thus. Cal. And thus. 
Profane
And impious, stand you now like a Statue?
Are you the Champion of the Gods? where is
Your holy zeal, your anger?
I am blasted,
And as my feet were rooted here, I find
I have no motion, I would I had no sight too,
Or if my eyes can serve to any use,
Give me thou iniut'd power a sea of tears,
To expiate this madness in my Daughters:
For being themselves, they would have trembled at
So blasphemous a deed in any other,
For my sake hold a while thy dreadful thunder,
And give me patience to demand a reason
For this accursed act.
T was bravely done.
Peace damned Enchantress peace, I should look on you
With eyes made red with fury, and my hand
That shakes with rage should much outstrip my tongue,
And seal my vengeance on your hearts, but nature
To you that have fallen once, bids meagaine
To be a father, O how durst you tempt
The anger of great Jove?
A lack poor Jove,
He is no Swaggerer, how smug he stands,
Heel take a kick, or any thing.
Stop her mouth.
It is the ancientst godling do not fear him,
He would not hurt the thiese that stole away
Two of his golden locks, indeed he could not,
And still tic the same quiet thing.
Blasphemer.
Ingenious cruelty shall punish this,
Thou art past hope, but for you yet dear daughters,
Again be witched, the dew of mild forgiveness
May gently fall, provided you deserve it
With true contrition, be your selves again,
Sue to the offended deity.
Not to be
The Mistress of the earth.
I will not offer
A grain of Incense to it, much less kneel,
Not look on it but with contempt and scorn,
To have a thousand years conferred upon me
Of worldly blessings, we profess our selves
To be like Dorothea, Christians,
And owe hee for that happiness.
My ears
Receive in hearing this, all deadly charms
Powerful to make man wretched.
Are these they
You bragged could convert others?
That want strength
To stand themselves?
Your Honour is engaged,
The credit of our cause depends upon it,
Something you must doe suddenly,
And I will.
They merit death, but falling by your hand,
It will be recorded for a just revenge
And holy fury in you.
Doe not blow,
The Furnace of a wrath thrice hot already,
AEtna is in my breast, wild fire burns here,
Which only blood must quench: incensed power,
Which from my infancy I have adored,
Look down with favourable beams upon
The Sacrifice (though not allowed thy Priest)
Which I will offer to thee, and be pleased
(My fiery zeal incidng me to act it)
To call that justice, others may stile murder.
Come you accursed, thus by the hair I drag you
Before this holy altar; thus look on you
Less pitiful then Tigress to their prey.
And thus with mine own hand I take that life
Which I gave to you. 
O most cruel Butcher.
My anger ends not here, hells dreadful porter
Receive into thy ever open gates
Their damned souls, and let the futies whips
On them alone be wasted: and when death
Closes these eyes, twill be Elizium to me,
To hear their shrieks and howlings, make me Pluto
Thy instruments to furnish thee with souls
Of this accursed fact, nor let me fall
Till my fell vengeance hath consumed them all.
Tic a brave zeal.
O call him back again,
Call back your hangman, here's on prisoner left
To be the subject of his knife.
Not so.
We are not so near reconcilde unto thee,
Thou shalt not perish such an easy way.
Be she your charge Sapritius now, and suffer
None to come near her till we have found out
Some torments worthy of her.
Courage Mistress,
These Martyrs but prepare your glorious fate,
You shall exceed them and not imitate.
Spunoius.
My fine rogue, how first? how goes this totterd world
Hast any money?
Money! no, the Tavern. Ivy clings about my money and kills it. Hast thou any money?
No, my money is a mad Bull, and finding any gap opend, away it runs.
I see then a Tavern and a Bawdy-house have fa???ces much like, the one has red grates next door, the tother has peeping holes within doors; the Tavern hath ever???more a bush, the bawdy close sometimes neither hedge nor bush. From a Tavern a man comes reeling, from a bawdy house not able to stand. In the Tavern you are consent with paltry Wine, in a bawdy-house by a painted Where, Money may have Wine, and a Whore will have Money, but neither can you cry, Drawer you Rogue, or keep door rotten Bawd, without a silver Whistle, wee are justly plagued therefore for running from our Mi???stress.
Thou did, I did not; yet I had run to, but that one gave me turpentine pills, &amp; that stayde my running.
Well: the thread of my life is drawn through the needle of necessity, whose eye looking upon my lousy breeches, cries out it cannot mend'em: which so pricks the linings of my body, and those are Heart, Lights, Lungs, Guts, and Midriff, that I beg on my knees to have Atro???pos (the Tailor to the destinies) to take her shears and cut my thread in two, or to heate the Iron goose of Mortality, and so press me to death.
Sure thy father was some botcher, and thy hungry tongue bit off these shreds of complaints, to patch up the elbows of thy nittie cloquence.
And what was thy father?
A low minded Cobbler, a Cobbler whose zeal set many a woman upright, the remembrance of whose Awl I now having nothing, thrusts such scurvy stitches into my soul, that the heel of my happiness has gone awry.
Pity that ere thou trodst thy shoe awry.
Long I cannot last, for all sowterly wax of comfort melting away, and misery taking the length of my foot, it
boots not me to sue for life when all my hopes are seam. rent, and go wetshod.
This shows th'at ta Cobblers son by going through stirch: O Hircius wud thou &amp; I were so happy to be cobblers
So would I, for both of vs being now weary of our lives, should then be sure of shoemakers ends.
I see the beginning of my end for I am almost starved.
So am not I, but I am more then famished.
All the members of my body are in rebellion one against another.
So are mine, and nothing but a cooke being a constable can appease them, presenting to my nose, instead of his painted staff, a spitfull of rost-meate.
But in this rebellion, what vprores do they make, my belly cries to my mouth, why dost not gape &amp; feed me
And my mouth sets out a throat to my hand why dost not thou lift up meat and cram my choppes with it.
Then my hand hath a fling at mine eyes, be???cause they look not out and shark for victuals.
Which mine eyes seeing, full of tears, cry aloud, and curse my feet for not ambling up and down to feed Colon, since if good meat be in any place, tic known my feet can smell.
But then my feet like lazy rogues lie still, and had ra???there do nothing, then run to and fro, to purchase anything
Why mong so many millions of people, should thou and I only bee miserable totterdemalions, rag-a???muffins, and lousy desperates.
Thou art a mere I amino, I am-an-as, consider the whole world, and tic as we are.
Lousy, beggarly, thou whoreson Assa Faetida.
Worse, al tottrings, al out of frame, thou Fooliamini
As how arsnicke: come make the world smart.
Old Honour goes on crutches, beggry rides caroched, honest men make feasts, knaves sit at tables, cowards are laptin velvet, soldiers (as wee) in rags: Beauty turns
Whore; Whore Bawd; and both dye of the pox: why then when all the world stumbles, should thou and I walk up???right?
Stop, look who's yonder.
Fellow Angelo! how does my little man? well.
Yes, and would you did so, where are your clothes?
Clothes! you see every woman almost go in her loose gown, and why should not wee have our clothes loose?
Wud they were loose.
Why where are they?
Where many a velvet cloak I warrant at this hour keeps them company, they are pound to a Broker.
Why pound, whore's all the gold I left with you?
The gold! we put that into a Scriveners hands, and he has consent vs.
And therefore I prithee Angelo, if thou hast ano???there purse, let it be confiscate, and brought to devastation.
Are you made all of lies? I know which way
Your gilt-wing'd pieces flew; I will no more
Be mocked by you: be sorry for your riots,
Tame your wilde flesh by labour, eat the bread
Got with hard hands: let sorrow be your whip
To draw drops of repentance from your heart,
When I read this amendment in your eyes,
You shall not want, till then my pity dies.
First not a shame that this scurvy Puerilis should give vs lessons?
I have dwelt thou know along time in the Sub???vrbs of the conscience, and they are ever bawdy, but now my heart shall take a house within the walls of honesty.
O you drawers of wine, draw me no more to the bar of Beggary; the sound of Score a pottle of sack, is worse then the noise of a scolding oyster wench, or two Cats in???corporating.
This must not be, I doe not like when conscience
Thawes, keep her frozen still: how now my masters?
Dejected, drooping, drowned in tears, clothes torn,
Lean, and ill coloured, sighing! whats the whitlewinde
Which raises all these mischiefs? I have seen you
Drawn better on it. O! but a spirit told me
You both would come to this, when in you thrust
Your selves into the service of that Lady,
Who shortly now must die; whore's now her praying
What good get you by wearing your our feet,
To run on scurny errands to the poor,
And to bear money to a sort of rogues,
And lousy prisoners.
A pox on'em, I never prosperd since I did it.
Had I bin a Pagan still, I could not have spit white for want of drink, but come to any Vintner now and bid him trust me, because I turned Christian, and he cries puh,
You're righly served; before that peevish Lady
Had to doe with you, women, wine, and money
Flowed in abundance with you, did it not?
Oh! those days, those days.
Beat not your breasts, tear not your hair in madness
Those days shall come again be ruled by me,
And better (mark me) better.
I have seen you sir as I take it, an attendant on the Lord Theophilus.
Yes, yes, in show his servant, but hark hither.
Take heed no body listens.
Not a Mouse stirs.
I am a Prince disguised.
Disguised! how! drunk,
Yes my fine boy, Isle drink to, and be drunk,
I am a Prince, and anyaman by me
(Let him but keep my rules) shall soon grow rich,
Exceeding rich, most infinitely rich,
He that shall serve me, is not starved from pleasures
As other poor knaves are; no, take their fill,
But that sir, we are so ragged...
You'll say, you'd serve me.
Before any master under the Zodiake.
For clothes no matter; I have a mind to both.
And one thing I like in you, now that you see
The bonefire of your Ladies state burnt out,
You give it over, do you not?
Let her be hanged.
And poxd.
Why now you're mine.
Come let my hosome touch you.
We have bugs Sir.
Ther's money, fetch your cloths home, theres for you
Avoid Vermin: give over our mistress! a man can???not prosper worse if he serve the devil.
How? the devil! Isle tell you what now of the devil,
He's no such horrid creature, cloven footed,
Black, saucer-eyde, his nostrils breathing fire,
As these lying Christians make him.
No!
He's more loving,
To man, then man to man is.
Is hee so! wud wee two might come acquainted with him.
You shall: he's a wondrous good fellow, loves a cup of wine, a whore, any thing, you have money, its ten to one but Isle bring him to some Tavern to you or other.
Isle be speak the best room ith; house for him.
Some people he cannot ondure.
Weal give him no such cause.
He hates a civil Lawyer, as a soldier does peace?
How a commoner?
Loves him from the teeth outward.
Pray my Lord and Prince, let me encounter you with one foolish question: does the devil eat any Mace in's broth?
Exceeding much, when his burning fever takes him, and then hee has the knuckles of a Bailiff boiled to his breakfast.
Then my Lord, he loves a Gatchpole does he not? Har. As a Bearward does a dog, a Gatchpole! he has sworn if ever he dies, to make a Sergeant his heir, and a Yoeman his overseer.
How if he come to any great mans gate, will the Porter let him come in sit?
Oh, hee loves Porters of great men's gates, because they are ever so near the wicket.
Doe not they whom he makes much on, for all his stroking their cheeks, lead hellish lives under him.
No, no, no, no, he will be damn before he hurts a???ny man. Doe but you (when you're thoroughly acquainted with him) ask for any thing, see if it does not come.
Anything!
Call for a delicate race whore; she's brought you.
Oh my elbow itches: will the devil keep the door?
Be drunk as a beggar, he helps you home.
O my fine devil! some watchman I warrant, I wonder who's his constable.
Will you swear, roar, swagger? he claps you.
How! ath' chops.
No, ath' shoulder, and cries O my brave boy.
Will any of you kill a man?
Yes, yes, I, I.
Whats his word, hang, hang, tic nothing.
Or stab a woman.
Yes, yes, I, I.
Here's the worst word he gives you, a pox on it go on.
O inueaglingrascall, I am ravished.
Go get your clothes, turn up your glass of youth,
And let the sands run merrily, nor do I care
From what a lavish hand your money flies,
So you give none away, feed beggars.
Hang 'em.
And to the scrubbing poor.
Isle see 'em hanged first.
One service you must do me.
Anything.
Your Mistress Dorothea, ere she suffers,
Is to be put to tortures, have you hearts
To tear her into shrieks, to fetch her soul
Up in the Pangs of death, yet not to die.
Suppose this she, and that I had no hands, heere's my teeth.
Suppose this she, and that I had no teeth, heere's my nails.
But will not you be there sir.
No, not for hills of diamonds, the grand Master
Who schools her in the Christian discipline,
Abhors my company; should I be there,
You'd think all hell broke loose, we shall so quarrel.
Ply you this business; he, her flesh who spares
Is lost, and in my love never more shares.
Here's a Master you rogue.
Sure lie cannot choose but have a horrible number of servants.
O You that are half gods, lengthen that life
Their deities lend vs, turn ore all the volumes
Of your mysterious AEsculapian science
T'encrease the number of this young mans days,
And for each minute of his time prolonged,
Your fee shall be a piece of Roman gold
With Caesars stamp, such as he sends his Captains
When in the wars they earn well: do but save him,
And as he is half my self, be you all mine.
What art can do, we promise: physics hand
As apt is to destroy, as to preserve,
If heaven make not the medicine; all this while
Our skill hath combat held with his disease,
But tic so armed, and a deep melancholy
To be such in part with death, we are in fear
The grave must mock our labours.
I have been
His keeper in this sickness, with such eyes
As I have seen my mother watch ore me,
And from that observation sure I find,
It is a Mid wife must deliver him.
Is he with child, a Mid wife:
Yes, With child,
And will I fear lose life if by a woman
He is not brought to bed: stand by his Pillow
Some little while and in his broken slumbers
Him shall you hear cry out on Dorothea,
And when his arms fly open to catch her,
Closing together, he falls fast asleep,
Pleased with embracings of her airy form;
Physicians but torment him, his disease
Laughs at their gibrish language, let him hear
The voice of Dorothea, nay but the name,
He starts up with high colour in his face,
She or none cures him, and how that can be,
(The Princess strick't command, barring that happiness)
To me impossible seems.
To me it shall not.
Isle be no subject to the greatest Caesar
Was ever crowned with Laurel, rather then cease
To be a father.
Silence sit, he wakes.
Thou kilst me Dorothea, oh Dorothea.
Shees here; I enjoy her.
Where, Why doe you mooke me,
Age on my head hath stuck no white hairs yet,
Yet I'm an old man, a fond doting fool
Upon a woman, I to buy her beauty,
(Truth I am bewitched) offer my life,
And she for my acquaintance hazirds hers,
Yet for our equal sufferings, none holds out
A hand of pity.
Let him have some Music.
Hell on your fiddling.
Take again your bed Sir,
Sleep is a sovereign Physic.
Take an Asses head Sir,
Confusion on your fooleries, your charms,
Thou stinking Glister-pipe, whore's the god of rest,
Thy Pills, and base Apothecary drugs
Threatened to bring unto me, out you Impostors,
Quacksaluing, cheating Mountbankes, your skill
Is to make sound men sick, and sick men kill.
O be your self dear friend.
My self Macrunis
How can I be my self, when I am mangled
Into a thousand pieces, here moves my head,
But wheres my heart? where ever, that lies dead.
Follow me thou damned Sorcores, call up thy spirits,
'And if they can, now let 'em from my hand
Untwine these witching hairs.
I am that spirit,
Or if I be not (were you not my father)
One made of Iron should how that hand in pieces
That so defies this sweet Monument
Of my loves beauty?
Art thou sioke?
To death.
Would thou recover?
Would I live in bliss?
And doe thine eyes shoot daggers at that man
That brings thee health?
It is not in the world?
First here?
Oh Treasure, by enchantment locked
In Caves as deep as hell, am I as near.
Break that enchanted Caut, enter, and rifle
The spoils thy lust hunts after, I deseend
To a base office, and become thy Pander
In bringing thee this proud Thing, make her thy Whore,
Thy health lies here if she deny to give it,
Force it, imagine thou assaultst a town,
Weak wall, too't, tic thine own, beat but this down,
Come, and un seen, be witness to this battery,
How the coy strumpet yields.
Shall the boy stay sir.
No matter for the boy,
Pages are used to these odd bawdy
Shufflings, and indeed are those
Little young snakes in a Furies head
Will sting worse then the great ones,
Let the Pimp stay.
Oh guard me Angels,
What Tragedy must begin now?
When a Tiger
Leaps into a timorous heard, with ravenous Jaws
Being hunger-staru'd, what Tragedy then begins?
Death I am happy so, you hitherto
Have still had goodness spared within your eyes,
Let not that Orb be broken.
Fear not Mistress,
If he dare offer violence, we two
Are strong enough for such a sickly man.
What is your horrid purpose sir, your eye
Bears danger in it?
I must.
What.
Speak it out.
Climb that sweet Virgin tree.
Plague a your trees.
And pluck that fruit which none I think ever tasted:
A soldier, and stand sumbling so.
O Kill me, 
And heaven will take it as a sacrifice,
But it you play the Ravisher, there is
A Hell to swallow you.
Let her swallow thee.
Rise for the Roman Empire (Dorothea)
I would not wound thine honour, pleasure forced
Are unripe Apples, sour, not worth the plucking,
Yet let me tell you, tic my fathers will,
That I should seize upon you as my prey.
Which I abhor as much as the blackest sin
The villainy of man did ever act. 
Dye happy for this language.
Dye a slave,
A blockish Idiot.
Dear sir, vex him not.
Yes, and vex thee too, both I think are geldings,
Cold, Phlegmatike Bastard, you are no brat of mine,
One spark of me, when I had heate like thine
By this had made a Bonefire: a tempting whore
(For whom you are mad) thrust even into thine arms,
And standst thou puling? had a Taylor seen her
Her at this advantage, he with his crosse-capers
Had rufled her by this, but thou shalt curse
Thy dalliance, and here before her eyes
Tear thy flesh in pieces, when a slave
In hot lust bathes himself, and gluts those pleasures
Thy niceness durst not touch, call out a slave,
You Captain of our guard, fetch a slave hither.
What will you do dear Sir.
Teach her a trade, which many would learn
In less then half an hour, to play the Whore.
A Slave is to me, what now.
Thou hast bones and flesh
Enough to ply thy labour, from what country
Were thou tan Prisoner, here to be our slave.
From Britain.
In the west Ocean.
Yes.
An Island.
Yes.
I am fitted, of all Nations
Our Roman swords ever conquered, none comes near
The Britain for true whooring: sirrah fellow,
What would thou doe to gain thy liberty?
Doe! liberty! fight naked with a Lyon,
Venture to pluck a Standard from the heart
Of an armed Legion: liberty! Id thus
Bestride a Rampire, and defiance spit
In the face of death; then, when the battring Ram
Were fetching his career backward to posh
Me with his horns in pieces: to shake my chains off,
And that I could not do it but by thy death,
Stood thou on this dry shore, I on a rock
Ten Piramids high, down would I leap to kill thee,
Or dye my self: what is for man to doe
Isle venture on, to be no more a slave.
Thou shalt then be no slave, for I will set thee
Upon a piece of work is fit for man,
Brave for a Britain, drag that Thing aside
And ravish her.
And ravish her! is this your manly service,
A Devil scorns to do it, tic for a beast,
A villain, not a man, I am as yet
But half a slave, but when that work is past,
A damned whole one, a black ugly slave,
The slave of all base slaves, do it thy self Roman,
Tic drudgery fit for thee.
Hes bewitched too,
Bind him, and with a Bastinado give him
Upon his naked belly 200. blows.
Thou art more slave then I.
That power supernal on whom waits my soul,
Is Captain ore my chastity.
Good sir give ore,
The more you wrong her, your selfes vexed the more,
Plagues light on her and thee; thus down I throw
Thy Harlot thus bi'th hair, nail her to earth,
Call in ten slaves, let every one discover
What lust desires, and surfeit here his fill,
Call in ten flaues.
They are come sir at your call.
O oh. 
Where is the Governor?
There's my wretched father.
My Lord, Sapritius, hoe's not dead, my Lord,
That Witch there.
T is no Roman gods can strike
These fearful terrors, O thou happy maid,
Forgive this wicked purpose of my father.
I doe.
Gone, gone, he's peppered: tic thou
Hast done this act internal.
Heaven pardon you,
And if my wrongs from thence pull vengeance down
(I can no miracles work) yet from my soul
Pray to those powers I serve, he may recover.
He slirres, help, raise him up, my Lord.
Where am I?
One cheek is blasted.
Blasted! Wheres the Lamia
That tears my entrails? I'm be witched, seize on her?
I'm here, do what you please.
Spurn her too'th bar.
Come boy, being there, more near to heaven we are
Kick harder, go out witch.
O bloody hangmen, thine own gods give thee breath,
Each of thy tortors is my several death.
Doe you like my service now, say am not I
A Master worth attendance.
Attendance, I had rather like clean the soles of
your dirty boots, then wear the richest suit of any infec???ted Lord, whose rotten life hangs between the 2 Poles.
A Lords suit! I wud not give up the cloak of your service to meet the splay-foot estate of any leftey'd knight aboue the Antipodes, because they are unlucky to meet.
This day isle try your loves to me, tic only
But well to use the agility of your arms,
Or legs, I am losty at them.
Orany other member that has no legs.
Thou't run into some hole.
If I meet one that's more the?? my match, &amp; that I can???not stand in their hands, I must &amp; will creep on my knees.
Here me my little teem of villains, hear me,
I cannot teach you Fencing with these Cudgels,
Yet you must use them, lay them on but soundly,
Thats all.
Nay if we come to malling once, puh,
But what Wall-nut tree is it we must beat.
Your Mistress.
How! my Mistress! I begin to have a Christians heart, made of sweet butter, I melt, I cannot strike a woman??.
Not I, unless she scratch, bum my mistress!
You're Coxecombes, silly Animals,
Whats that?
Drones, Asses, blinded Moles, that dare not thrust
Your arms out to catch Fortune, say you fall off,
It must be done you are conuetted Rascals,
And that once spread abroad, why every slave
Will kick you, call you motley Christians,
And half faced Christians.
The guts of my conscience begin to be of whit-leather,
I doubt me I shall have no sweet buttet in me.
Deny this, and each Pagan whom you meet
Shall forked fingers thrust into your eyes.
If we be Cuckolds.
Doe this, and every god the Gentiles bow to,
Shall add a fathom to your line of years.
A hundred fathom, I desire no more.
I desire but one inch longer,
The Senators will as you pass along
Clap you upon your shoulders with this hand,
And with this hand glue you gold when you are dead,
Happy that man shall be can get a nail,
The paring ???, they the dort under the nail
Of any of you both, to say this dirt
Belonged to Spungius or Hercius.
They shall not want dirt under my nails, isle keepe'em long of purpose, for now my singers itch to bee at her.
The first thing I doe Isle take her Ore the lips.
And I the hips, we may strike any where.
Yes, any where.
Then I know where isle hit her.
Prosper and be mine own; stand by, I must not
To see this done, great business calls me hence,
Hoe's made can make her ours his violence.
Fear it not sir, her ribs shall be basted.
He come upon her with rounce, robble-hobble, and thwicke thwack thirlety bouncing.
According to our Roman customs, bind
That Christian to a Pillar.
Insernall Furies,
Could they into my hand thrust all their whips
To tear thy flesh thy soul, tic not a torture
Fit to the Vengeance, I should heap on thee,
For wrongs done me: me! for flagitious facts
By thee done to our gods, yet (so it stand
To great Cesaraes Governors high pleasure)
Bow but thy Knee to Iupiter and offer
Any slight sacrifice, or doe but swear
By Caesars fortune, and be free.
Thou shalt.
Not for all Caesar fortune, were it chaind
To more worlds, then are kingdoms in the world,
And all those worlds drawn after him: I defy
Your hangmen; you now show me whither to fly.
Are hentormentors ready?
Shrink not dear mistress.
My Lord, we are ready for the business.
You two! whom I like fosterd children fed,
And lengthened out your starved life with bread:
You be my hangman! whom when up the ladder
Death hald you to be strangled, I fetched down
Clothd you, and warmd you, you two my tormentors.
Yes, use.
Divine powers pardon you.
Strike. 
Beat out her brains???,
Receive me you bright Angels.
Faster slaves.
Faster: I am out of breath I'am sure: if I were to beat a buck, I can strike no harder.
O mine arms, I cannot list'em to my head.
Joy aboue joys, are my tormentors weary
In torturing me, and in my sufferings
I fainting in no linbe: ????????????anto strike home
And feast your fury full.
These dogs are ours. 
Which snarl, yet bite not: see my Lord, her face
Has more bewitching beauty then before,
Proud whore: it smiles, cannot an eye shart out
With these.
No sir, not the bridge of her nose fall, tic full of Iron work.
Lets view the oudgols, are they not counterfeit.
There fix thine eye still, thy glorious crown must come
Not from soft pleasure, but by martyrdom,
There fix thine eye still, when we next do meet, 
Not thorns, but roses shall bear up thy feet:
There fix thine eye still.
Ever, ever, ever.
Wee are mocked, these bats have power down to fell giants, yether skin is not feared.
What rogues are these.
Cannot these force a shriek. 
Oh! a woman has one of my ribs, and now five more are broken.
Cannot this make her roar. 
Who hired these slaves? what are they?
We serve that noble Gentleman there, he entisde vs to this dry-beating, oh for one half pot.
My servants! two base rogues, &amp; sometimes servants
To her and for that cause forbear to hurt her.
Unbind her, hang up these.
Hang the two hounds on the next tree.
Hang vs! master Harpax, what a devil shall we be thus used.
What bandogs but you two wud worry a woman!
Your mistessell but clapped you, you flew on:
Say I should get your lives, each rascal beggar
Would when he met you, cry, out helhounds, traitors
Spit at you, fling dirt at you, and no woman
Ever endure your fight: tic your best course
(Now had you secret knives) to stab your selves,
But since you have not, go and be hanged.
I thank you.
I is your best course.
Why stay they trifling here?
To gallows drag'em by the heals: away.
By the heals! no sir, wee have legs to doe vs that service.
I, I, if no woman can endure my sight, away with me.
Dispatch'em.
The devil dispatch thee.
Death this day ride in triumph, Theophilus.
See this witch made away to.
My soul thirst for it,
Come, I my self, thy hangmans part could play.
Ohhasten me to my coronation day.
Is this the place where virtue is to suffer,
And heavenly beauty leaving this base earth,
To make a glad return from whence it came,
Is it Macrinus? a scaffold thrust forth
By this preparation
You well may rest assured that Dorethea
This hour is to die here.
Then with her dies
The abstract of all sweetness that's in woman,
Set me down friend, that ere the iron hand
Of death close up mine eyes, they may at once
Take my last leave both of this light, and her:
For she being gone, the glorious Sun himself
To me's Cymerian darkness.
Stange affection!
Cupped once more hath changed his shafts with death,
And kills in stead of giving life.
Nay weep not,
Though tears of friendship be a sovereign balm,
On me they are cast a way: it is decreed
That I must die with her, our clew of life
Was spun together.
Yet sir tic my wonder
That you who hearing only what she suffers,
Partake of all her tortures, yet will be
To add to four calamity, an eye witness
Of her last Ttagicke scene, which must pierce deeper
And make the wound more desperate.
O Macrinus,
T would linger out my tormentselfe, not kill me,
Which is the end I aim at, being to die to.
What instrument more glorious can I wish for,
Then what is made sharpe by my constant love
And true affection. It may be the duty
And loyal service with which I pursued her,
And sealed it with my death, will be remembered
Among her blessed actions, and what honour
Can I desire beyond it?
See she comes,
How sweet her innocence appears, more like
To heaven it self then any sacrifice
That can be offered to it. By my hopes
Of joys hereafter, the sight makes me doubtful
In my belief, nor can I think our gods
Are good, or to be served, that take delight
In offerings of this kind, that to maintain
Their power, do face the master piece of nature,
Which they themselves come short of she ascends,
An every step raises her nearer heaven.
What god so erethou art that most enjoy her,
Receive in her a boundless happiness
You are too blame
To let him come abroad.
It was his will,
And we were left to serve him, not command him,
Good sir be not offended, nor deny
My last of pleasures in this happy object
That I shall ere be blessed with.
Now proud contemner
Of vs and of our gods, tremble to think
It is not in the power thou serve, to save thee.
Not all the riches of the sea increased
By violent shipwrecks, nor the unsearched mines
Mammons unknown exchequer shall redeem thee.
And therefore having first with horror weighed
What tic to die, and to die young, to part with
All pleasures, and delights: lastly, to go
Where all Antipathies to comfort dwell
Furies behind, about thee, and before thee,
And to add to affliction the remembrance
Of the Elision joys thou might have tasted,
Had thou not turned Apostate to those gods
That so reward their servants, let despair
Prevent the hangmans sword, and on this scaffold
Make thy first entrance into hell.
She smiles,
Vnmou'd by Mars, as if she were assured
Death looking on her constancy would forget
The use of his inevitable hand.
Derided to? dispatch I say.
Thou fool
That gloriest in having power to ravish
A trifle from me I am weary of:
What is this life? to me not worth a thought
Or if to bee esteemed, it is that I loose it
To win a better, even thy realice serves
To me but as a ladder to mount up
To such a height of happiness where I shall
Look down with scorn on thee, and on the world,
Where circled with true pleasures, placed aboue
The reach of death or time, twill be my glory
To think at what an, easy price I bought it.
There's a perpetual spring, perpetual youth,
No joint benumbing cold, nor scorehing heate,
Famine nor age have any being there:
Forget for shame your Tempe, bury in
Oblivion, your fainde your Hesperian Orchards
The Golden fruit kept by the watchful Dragon
Which did require Hercules to get it
Compared with what grows in all plenty there,
Deserves not to be named. The power I serve
Laughs at your happy Arabia, or the
Elision shades, for he hath made his bowers
Better indeed then you can fancy yours.
O take me thither with you.
Trace my steps
And be assured you shall.
With mine own hands
He rather stop that little breath is left thee,
And rob thy killing fever.
By no means,
Let him go with her, do seduced young man,
And waite upon thy saint in death, do, do,
And when you come to that imagind place,
That place of all delights, pray you observe me,
And meet those cursed things I once called daughters,
Whom I have sent as harbingers before you,
If there be any truth in your religion,
In thankfulness to me that with care hasten
Your journey thither, pray send me some
Small pittance of that curious fruit you bossed of.
Grant that I may go with her, and I will.
Wilt thou in thy last minute dam thy self?
The gates to hell are open.
Know thou tyrant
Thou agent for the devil thy great master
Though thou art most unworthy to taste of it,
I can and will.
Oh! mountains fall upon me,
Or hide me in the bottom of the deep,
Where light may never find me.
Whats the matter?
This is prodigious, and confirms her witch craft.
Harpax my Harpax speak.
I dare not stay,
Should I but hear her once more I were lost,
Some whirl wind snatch me from this cursed place,
To which compared (and with what now I suffer)
Hells totments are sweet slumbers.
Follow him.
He is distracted, and I must not loose him,
Thy charms upon my servant cursed witch,
Gives thee a short repricue, lethernot die
Till my return.
She minds him not, what object
Is her eye fixed on?
I see nothing.
Mark her.
Thou glorious minister of the power I serve,
For thou art more then mortal, first for me
Poor sinner, thou art pleased a while to leave
Thy heavenly habitation? and vouchsafe
Though glorified, to take my servants habit,
For put off thy divinity, so looked
My lovely Angelo.
Know I am the same,
And still the servant to your pictie,
Your zealous prayers and pious deeds first won me
(But it was by his command to whom you sent 'em)
To guide your steps. I tried your charity,
When in a beggars shape you took me up
And clothd my naked limbs, and after fed
(As you believed) my famished mouth. Learn all
By your example to look on the poor
With gentle eyes, for in such habits often
Angels desire an Alms. I never left you,
Nor will I now, for I am sent to carry
Your pure and innocent soul to joys eternal,
Your martyrdom once suffered, and before it
Ask any thing from me, and rest assured
You shall obtain it
I am largely paid
For all my torments, since I find such grace
Grant that the love of this young man to me,
In which he languishes to death, may be
Changed to the love of heaven,
I will perform it.
And in that instant when the sword seta free
Your happy soul his shall have liberty.
Is there ought else?
For proof that I forgive
My ?????????, who in scorned desired
To taste of that most ????????? fruit I go to
After my death as sent from me, be pleased
To give him of it.
Willingly dear Mistress.
I am amazed
I feels a holy fire
That yields a comfortable heate within me.
I am quite altered from the thing I was.
See I can stand, and go alone, thus kneels
To heavenly Dorothea, touch her hand
With a religious kiss.
He is well now,
But will not be drawn ?????????.
It matters not,
We can discharge this works without his help:
But see your son. Sapr, Villain
Sir I be seech you,
Being so near our ends diuoroe vs not.
He quickly make a soparation of' om.
Hast thou ought else to say?
Nothing but blame
Thy tardiness in sending me torest,
My peace is made with heaven, to which my soul
Begins to take her flight, strike, O. strike quickly,
And though you are un moved to be my death
Hereafter when my story shall be read,
As they were present now, the hearers shall
Say this of Dorothea with wet eyes
She lived a virgin, and a virgin dies. 
O take my soul along to waite on mine.
Your son sinks to. 
Already dead.
Die all.
That are or favour this accursed Sect,
I triumph in their ends, and will raise up
A hill of their dead Karkatses, to or clooke
The Pyrenean Hills, but isle root out.
These superstitious fools, and leave the World
No name of Christian.
Ha, heavenly Music.
Tic in the ayre.
Illusions of the Devil
Wrought by some one of her Religion.
That fine would make her death a miracle,
It frights not me: because he is your son
Let him have burial, but let her body
Be cast forth with contempt in some high way,
And be to Vultures and to Dogie prey.
Is it Holiday (Oh Caesar) that thy servant,
(Thy Provost, to see execution done
On these base Christians in Casarea)
Should now want work: sheep these Idolaters
That none are stirring, As a curious Painter 
When he has made some admirable piece,
Stands off, and with a searching eye examines
Each colours how tic sweetened, and then hugs
Himself for his rare workmanship.??? So here 
Will I my Drolleries and bloody Lantskips
Long past wrapped up unfold to make me merry
With shadows, now I want the substances. 
My Muster-booke of Hel-hounds, were the Christians
Whose names stand here (alive) and armed, not Rome
Could move upon her Hindges. What I have done,
Or shall hereafter, is not out of hate
To poor tormented wretches, no I am carried
With violence of zeal, and streams of service
I owe our Roman gods. Great Britain, what.
A thousand wives with brats sucking their breasts,
Had hot Irons pinch 'em off and thrown to swine;
And then their fleshy backparts he wed with hatchets,
Were mine'd and baked in Pies to feed starved Christians. Ha, ha.
Again, again, ???East. Anglas???, oh, East-Angles,
Bandogs (kept three days hungry) worried
1000. British Rascals, styed up, fat
Of purpose, stripped naked, and disarmed.
I could outstare a year of Suns and Moons,
To sit at these sweet Bul-baitings, so I could
Thereby but one Christian win to fall
In adoration to my Iupiter. Twelve hundred
Eyes board with Augurs out: oh! eleven thousand
Torn by wild beasts: two hundred ram'd in the earth
To'th armepits, and full Platters round about'em,
But far enough for reaching, eat dogs, ha, ha, ha.
Tush, all these tortures are but phillipings,
Flea-bitings; I before the destinies
My bottom did wind up, would flesh my self
Once more, upon some one remarkable
Aboue all these, this Christian Slut was well,
A pretty one, but let such horror follow
The next I feed with torments, that when Rome
Shall hear it, her foundation at the sound
May feel an Earth-quake. How now? 
Are you amazd'd Sir???so great a Roman spirit and does it tremble.
How came thou in? to whom thy business?
To you:
I had a mistress late senthence by you
Upon a bloody errand, you entreated
That when she came into that blessed Garden
Whither she knew she went, and where (now happy)
She feeds upon all joy, she would send to you
Some of that Garden fruit and flowers, which here
To have her promise saved, are brought by me.
Cannot I see this Garden?
Yes, if the Master
Will give you entrance. 
Tic attempting fruit, and the most bright checked child I ever viewed,
Sweet smelling goodly fruit, what flowers are these?
In Dioclesians Gardens, the most beauteous
Compared with these are weeds: is it not February?
The second day she dyed: Frost, Ice and snow
Hang on the beard of Winter, wheres the sun
That guilds this summer, pretty sweet boy, say in what Country
Shall a man find this Garden ???, my delicate boy, gonel Vanished!
Within there, Iuliarues and Gota. ???
My Lord.
Are my gates shut?
And guarded.
Saw you not ??? a boy.
Where?
Here hee entered, a young Lad, 1000. blessings danced upon his eyes, a smooth faced glorious Thing, that brought this Basket.
No sir?
Away, but be in reach if my voice calls you,
No! vanished! and not seen, be thou a spirit
Sent from that Witch to mock me, I am sure
This is essential, and how ere it grows,
Will taste it.
Ha, ha, ha, ha. 
So good, isle have some now sure.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, great lickorish fool.
What art thou?
A Fisherman,
What doest thou catch;
Souls, souls, a fish called souls.
Geta.
My Lord.
Ha, ha, ha, ha. 
What insolent slave is this dares laugh at me?
Or what first the dog grins at so?
I neither know my Lord at what, nor whom, for there is none without but my fellow Iulianus, and hoe's making a Garland for Iupiter.
Iupiter! all within me is not well,
And yet not sick.
Ha, ha, ha, ha. 
What's thy name slave?
Go look. 
Tic Harpax voice.
Harpax, go drag the Caitiff to my foot,
That I may stamp upon him.
Fool, thou lie. 
Hoe's yonder now my Lord.
Watch thou that end
Whilst I make good this.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. 
Hoe's at Barli-breake, and the last coulple are now in hell,
Search for him, all this ground me think is bloody,
And paved with thousands of those Christians eyes
Whom I have tortu'd, and they stare upon me;
What was this apparition? sure it had
A shape Angelical; mine eyes (though dazzled
And daunted at first sight) tell me, it wore
A pair of glorious wings, yea they were wings,
And hence he flew; tic vanished, Iupiter
For all my sacrifices done to him
Never once gave me smile: how can stone smile, 
Or wooden Image laugh? ha! I remember
Such Music gave a welcome to my ear,
When the fair youth came to me: tic in the Ayre,
Or from some better place, a power divine,
Through my dark ignorance on my soul does shine,
And makes me see a conscience all stai'nd ore,
Nay drowned and damned for ever in Christian gore.
Ha, ha, ha. 
Again, what dainty relish on my tongue
This fruit hath left, some Angel hath me fed,
If so toothfull, I will be banqueted. 
Hold.
Not for Caesar.
But for me thou shalt.
Thou art no Twin to him that
Last was here.
You powers whom my soul bids me reverence
Guard me: What art thou?
I'm thy Master.
Mine.
And thou my everlasting slave; that Harpax,
Who hand in hand hath led thee to thy Hell
Am I.
Avaunt.
I will not, cast thou down
That Basket with the things in it, and fetch up
What thou hast swallowed, and then take a drink
Which I shall give thee, and i'm gon.
My Fruit!
Does this offend thee? see
Spent it to'th earth,
And tread upon it, or isle peece-meale tear thee.
Art thou with this affrighted? see, hears more. 
Fling them away, isle take thee else &amp; hang thee
In a contorted Chain of Icicles
In the frigid Zone: down with them.
At the bottom,
One thing I found not yet, see. 
Oh, I'm tortured.
Can this do it? hence thou Fiend infernal hence.
Clasp Iupiters Image, and away with that.
At thee isle fling that Iupiter, for me thinks
I serve a better Master, he now checks me
For murdering my two daughters, put on by thee,
By thy damned Rhetoric did I hunt the life
Of Dorothea, the holy Virgin Martyr,
She is not angry with the Axe nor me,
But sends these presents to me, and its ?????????
Ore world to find her, and from her white hand
To beg a forgiveness.
No, isle bind thee here.
I set up a strength aboue thine: this small wea???pone me thinks is Armour hard enough.
Keep from me. 
Art posting to thy center? down hel-hound, down,
Me hast thou lost; that arm which hurlesthee hence
Save me, and set me up the strong defence
In the fair Christians quarrel.
Exit thy foot there,
Nor be thou shaken with a Caesars voice,
Though thousand deaths were in it: and I then
Will bring thee to a River that shall wash
Thy bloody hands clean, and more white then Snow,
And to that Garden where these blessed things grow,
And to that martyred Virgin, who hath sent
That heavenly token to thee; Spread this brave wing
And serve then Caesar, a far greater King.
It is, it is some Angel, vanished again!
Oh come back ravishing Boy, bright Messenger,
Thou hast (by these mine eyes fixed on thy beauty)
Illumined all my soul, now look I back
On my black Tyranies, which as they did.
Out dare the bloudiest, thou blessed spirit that leads me,
Teach me what I must do, and to doe well,
That my last act, the best may Parallel.
Glory and Conquest still attend upon
Triumphant Caesar.
Let thy wish fair Daughter
Be equally divided, and hereafter
Learn thou to know and reverence Maximinus,
Whose power with mine united makes one Caesar.
But that I feare't would be held flattery,
The bonds considered in which we stand tide
As love, and Empire, I should say till now
I ne'er had seen a Lady I thought worthy
To be my Mistress.
Sir, you show yourself
Both Courtier and Soldier, but take heed,
Take heed my Lord, though my dull pointed beauty
Stained by a harsh refusal in my servant
Cannot dart forth such beams as may inflame you,
You may encounter such a powerful one,
That with a pleasing heate will thaw your heart
Though bound in ribs of Ice, love still is love,
His Bow and Arrows are the same, great Iulius
That to his successors left the name of Caesar
Whom war could never tame, that with dry eyes
Beheld the large plains of Pharsalia, covered
With the dead Carcases of Senators
And Citizens of Rome, when the world knew
No other Lord but him, struck deep in years to,
And men gray haird forget the lusts of youth:
After all this, meeting fair Cleopatra,
A suppliant to the magic of her eye,
Even in his pride of conquest took him captive,
Nor are you more secure.
Were you deformed
(But by the gods you are most excellent)
Your gravity and diseretion would overcome me,
And I should be more proud in being a Prisoner
To your fair virtues, then of all the Honours,
Wealth, Title, Empire, that my sword hath purchased
This meets my wishes, welcome it Artemia
With out-stretch'd arms, and study to forget
That Antoninus ever was thy fate
Reserved thee for this better choice, embrace it.
This happy match brings new nerues to give strength
To our continued league.
Hymen himself
Will bless this marriage which we will solemnise
In the presence of these Kings.
Who rest most happy
To be eye-witnesses of a Match that brings
Peace to the Empire.
We much thank your loves,
But wher's Sapritius our Governor,
And our most zealous provost good Theophilus?
If ever Prince were blessed in a true servant,
Or could the gods be debtors to a man,
Both they and we stand far engaged to cherish
His pietic and service.
Sir the Governor
Brookes sadly his sons loss although he turned
Apostate in death, but bold Theophilus
Who for the same cause in my presence sealed
His holy anger on his daughters hearts.
Having with tortutes first tried to convert her,
Dragged the bewitching Christian to the scaffold,
And saw her loose her head.
He is all worthy,
And from his own mouth I would gladly hear
The manner how she suffered.
Twill be delivered
With such contempt and scorn, I know his nature
That rather twill beget your highness laughter
Then the least pity.
To that end I would hear it.
He comes, with him the Governor.
O Sapritius,
I am to chide you for your tenderness,
But yet remembering that you are a father,
I will forget it, good Theophilus
He speak with you anon: nearer your care, to Sapritius.
By Antoninus soul I do conjure you,
And though not for religion, for his friendship,
Without demanding whats the cause that moves me,
Receive my signet, by the power of this
Go to my prisons, and release all Christian
That are in fetters there by my command.
But what shall follow?
Haste then to the port,
You there shall find two tall ships ready rigged,
In which embark the poor distressed souls
And bear them from the reach of tyranny,
Enquire not whither you are bound, the dietic
That they adore will give you prosperous winds,
And make your voyage such, and largely pay for
Your hazard, and your travail: leave me here
There is a scene that I must act alone.
Haste good Macrinus, and the great God guide you.
Isle vndertake't, theres some thing prompts me to it
Tic to save innocent blood, a Saintlike act,
And to be merciful has never been
By mortal men themselves esteemed a sin.
You know your charge.
And will with care observe it.
For I profess he is not Casars friend
That sheds a tear for any torture that
A Christians suffers. Welcome my best servant
My careful, zealous Provost, thou hast toyld
To satisfy my will though in extremes,
I love thee for it, thou art firm rock, no changeling:
Prithee deliver, and for my sake do it
Without excess of bitterness or seosses
Before my brother and these kings, how took
The Christian her death.
And such a presence
Though every private head in this large room
Were circled round with an imperial crown,
Her story will deserve, it is so full
Of excellence and wonder.
Ha! how's this?
O mark it therefore, and with that attention,
As you would here an Embassy from heaven
By a winged Legate, for the truth delivered,
Both how and what this blessed virgin suffered:
And Dorothea but hereafter named,
You will rise up with reverence, and no more
As things un worthy of your thoughts, remember
What the canonised Spartan Ladies were
Which lying Greece so bosts of, your own matrons
Your Roman dames whose figures you yet keep
As holy relics in her historic
Will find a second urn. Gracohus, Cornelia,
Pauline that in death desired to follow
Her husband Seneca, nor Brutus Portia
That swallowd burning coals to overtake him,
Though all their several words were given to one
With this is to be mentioned.
Is he mad?
Why they did die Theophilus, and boldly.
This did no more.
They out of desperation
Are for vain glory of an aftername
Parted with life. This had not mutinous sons
As the rash Gracchi were, nor was this Saint
A doting mother as Cornelia was:
This lost no husband in whose overthrow
Her wealth and hononr sunk, no fear of want
Did make her being radios, but aiming
At an immortal crown, and in his cause
Who only can bestow it; who sent down
Legions of ministering Angels to bear up
Her spotless soul to heaven; who entertained it
With choice celestial music, equal to
To the motion of the spheres, she vncompeld
Changed this life for a better. My Lord Sapritius
You were present at her death, did you ere here
Such ravishing sounds?
Yet you said then it was witchcraft,
And devilish illusions.
I then hard it
With sinful cares, and belch'd out blasphemous words
Against his deity, which then I knew not,
Nor did believe in him.
Why dost thou now? or dare thou in our hearing?
Were my voice
As loud as is his thunder, to be heard
Through al the world, all potentates on earth
Ready to burst with rage should they but hear it,
Though hell to aid their malice lent her furies
Yet I would speak, and speak again, and boldly,
I am a Christian, and the powers you worship
But dreams of fools and madmen.
Lay hands on him.
Thou twice a child (for doting age so makes thee)
Thou could it not else thy pilgrimage of life,
Being almost past through in the last moment,
Destroy what ere thou hast done good or great,
Thy youth did promise much, and grown a man
Thou made it good, and with increase of years
Thy actions still bettered as the Sun
Thou did rise gloriously, kepst a constant course
In all thy journey, and now in the cuening
When thou should pass with honour to thy rest,
Wilt thou fall like a Metcor?
Yet confess
That thou art mad, and that thy tong and heart
Had no agreement.
Doe, no way is left else
To save thy life Theophilus.
But refule it
Destruction as horrid and as sudden
Shall fall upon thee, as if hell stood open
And thou were sinking thither.
Here me yet
Here for my service past.
What will he say?
At cuer I deserved your favour here me,
And grant one boon, tic not for life I sue for,
Nor is it fit that I that ne'er knew pity
To any Christian, being one my self
Should look for any: no, I rather beg
The utmost of your cruelty; I stand
Accountable for thousand Christians deaths,
And were it possible that I could die
A day for every one, then live again
To be again tormented, t were to me
An cafie penance, and I should pass through
A gentle cleansing fire, but that denied me,
It being beyond the strength of feeble nature,
My suit is you would have no pity on me.
In mine own house there are a thousand engine
Of studied cruelty, which I did prepare
For miserable Christians, let me seele
As the Sicilian did his brazen bull,
The horridst you can find, and I will say
In death that you are merciful.
Despair not
In this thou shalt prevail, go fetch 'em hither, 
Death shall put on a thousand shapes at once
And so appear before thee, racks, and whips,
Thy flesh with burning pinsorstorne, shall feed
The fire that heats them, and whats wanting to
The torture of thy body, Isle supply
In punishing thy mind: fetch all the Christians
That are in hold, and here before his face
Cut'cm in pieces.
Tic not in thy power,
It was the first good deed I ever did,
They are removed out of thy raceh, how ere
I was determined for my sins to die,
I first took order for their liberty,
And still I dare thy worst.
Dind him I say,
Make every artery and sinew crack,
The slave that makes him give the loudest shrike
Shall have ten thousand Drachmas, wretch isle force thee
To curse the power thou worship'st.
Never, never,
No breath of mine shall ever be spent on him, 
But what shall speak his Majesty or mercy:
I am honoured in my sufferings, weak tormentors
More tortures, more: alas you are unskilful,
For Heavens sake more; my breast is yet vntorne:
Here purchase the reward that was propounded,
The Irons cool, here are arms yet and thighs,
Spare no part of me.
He endures beyond
The suffrance of a man.
No sigh nor groan
To witness he has feeling.
Harder Villains.
Unless that he blaspheme hoe's lost for ever,
Iftorments cuer could bring forth despair,
Let these compel him to it. oh me
My ancient enemies again, 
Most glorious vision,
Did ere so hard a bed yield man a dream
So heavenly as this? I am confirmed,
Confirmed you blessed spirits, and make hast
To take that crown of immortality
You offer to me; death till this blessed minute
I never thought thee slow paced, nor could I
Hasten thee now for any pain I suffer,
But that thou kepst me from a glorious wreath
Which through this stormy way I would creep to,
And humbly kneeling with humility wear it.
Oh now I feel thee, blessed spirits I come
And witness for me, all these wounds and scars,
I die a soldier in the Christian wars. 
I have seen thousands tortured, but ne'er yet
A constancy like this.
I am twice damned.
Haste to thy place appointed cursed fiend,
In spite of hell this soldier's not thy prey,
Tic I have won, thou that hast lost the day.
I think the centre of the earth be cracks,
Yet I still stand vnmou'd, and will go on,
The persecution that is here begun,
Through all the world with violence shall run.

ROscio.
My Lord.
Hast thou divulged the news
That my son died at Athens.
Yes my Lord,
With every circumstance, the time, the place,
And manner of his death; that it is believed
And told for news with as much confidence
As if it were writ in Gallobelgicus.
That's well, that's very well, now Roscio
Follows my part, I must express a grief
Not usual, not like a well left heir
For his dead father, or a lusty Widow
For her old husband, must I counterfeit,
But in a deeper, a far deeper strain
Weep like a Father for his only son,
Is not that hard to doe, ha, Roscio?
Oh no my Lord,
Not for your skill, has not your Lordship seen
A player personate Ieronimo?
By th'masse tic true, I have seen the knave paint grief
In such a lively colour, that for false
And acted passion he has drawn true tears
From the spectators eyes, Ladies in the boxes
Kept time with sighs, and tears to his sad accents
As had he truly bin the new man he seemed.
Well then Isle near despair; but tell me thou
Thou that hast still been privy to my bosom,
How will this project take?
Rarely my Lord,
hen now my thinks, I see your Lordships house
 with suitors of the noblest rank,
And my young Lady your supposed Heir
 more with wooing then the Grecian Queen
In the long absence of her wandering Lord.
Theres not a ruinous nobility
In all this kingdom, but conceives a hope
Now to ebuild his fortunes on this match.
Those are not they I look for, no, my no
Are spread for other game, the rich and greedy
Those that have wealth enough, yet gape for more
They are for me,
Others will come my Lord,
All sorts of fish will press upon your nets,
Then in your Lordships wisdom it must lie
To cull the great ones, and reject the fry.
Nay fear not that, there's none shall have access
To see my daughter, or to speak to her,
But such as I approve, and aim to catch.
The jest will be, my Lord, when you shall see
How your aspiring suitors will put on
The face of greatness, and belly their fortunes
Consume themselves in show, wasting like Merchants
Their present wealth in rigging a fair ship
For some ill venture de voyage, that undoes um.
Here comes a youth with letters from the Court,
Bought of some favourite at such a price
As will for ever sink him, yet alas
ell's to no purpose, he must loose the prize.
This was a jest well thought of, the conceit
Will feed me fat, with sport that it shall make,
Besides the large adventures it brings home
Unto my daughter. How now.
My Lord, Count Virro is come to see you.
Conduct him in; So, so, it takes already
See Roscio see, this is the very man
My project aymd at, the rich Count that know
No end of his large wealth, yet gapes for more
There was no other loadstone could attract
His Iron heart, for could beauty have moved him,
Nature has been no niggard to my girl,
But I must to my grief, here comes the Count.
Is your Lord a sleep?
No Sir.
I think not, my Lord, Count Virro.
How doe you Sir.
I do entreat your Lordship pardon, my grief and some want of sleep have made me at this time unmannerly, not fit to entertain guests of your worth.
Alas Sir I know your grief.
It was that that fetched you hither.
You've lost a worthy and a hopeful son,
But heaven that always gives, will sometimes take
And that the best, there is no balsam left vs
To cure such wounds as these but patience,
There's no disputing with the acts of heaven,
But if there were, in what could you accuse
Those powers that else have been so liberal to you,
And left you yet one comfort in your age:
A fair and virtuous daughter.
Now it begins.
Your blood is not extinct, nor your age childless, from that fair branch thats left may come much fruit to glad posterity, think on that my Lord.
Nay heaven forbid I should rapine at what the
Justice of those powers ordain, it has pleased
Them to confine my care only to one, and to
See her well bestowed is all the comfort I now
Must look for, but if it had pleased heaven that
My son, ah my Eugenio.
Alas good Gentleman.
Fore heaven he does it rarely.
But Sir, remember your self, remember your
Daughter, let not your grief for the dead make
You forget the living, whose hopes, and fortunes
Depend upon your safety.
Oh my good Lord, you never had a soon.
Unless they were bastards, and for them no
Doubt but he has done as other Lords do.
And therefore cannot tell what tic to loose
A son, a good son, and an only son.
I would, my Lord, I could as well redress
As I can take compassion of your grief
You should soon find an ease.
Pray Pardon me my Lord, if I forget my self toward you at this time, if it please you visit my house ofter you shall be welcome.
You would fine sleep my Lord, Isle take my leave auen send you comfort, I shall make bold shortly to visit you.
You shall be wondrous welcome,
Wait on my Lord out there.
So now he's gone, how think thou Roscio,
Will not this Gudgeon bite?
No doubt my Lord,
So fair a bait would catch a cunning fish.
And such a one is he, he ever loved
The beauty of my girl, but thats not it
Can draw the earth bred thoughts of his gross soul
Gold is the God of his idolatry,
 hope of which Isle feed him, till at length
I make him fasten, and Ixion like
For his loved Iuno grasp an empty cloud.
How stands my young Lady affected to him.
There's all the difficulty, we must win her to love , I doubt the peevish Girl will think him too , he's well near threescore: in this business I must eaue somewhat to thy wit and care, praise him beyond all measure.
Your Lordship ever found me trusty.
If thou effect it, I will make thee happy.
Eugenios sister then is the rich heir
By his decease.
Yes, and the fair one too,
She needs no gloss that fortune can set on her,
Her beauty of it self were prize enough
To make a king turn beggar for.
Hoy day,
What in love Clerimont, I lay my life tic so,
Thou could not praise her with such passion else.
I know not, but I slept well enough last night,
But if thou saw her once, I would not give
A farthing for thy life, I tell thee Philocles
One fight of her would make thee cry, ay me,
Sigh, and look pale, me thinks I do imagine
How like an Idolatrous lover thou would look
Through the eye-lids, know no body.
Tic very well, but how did your worship scope
You have seen her.
True, but I have an
Antidote, and I can teach it thee.
When
I have need on it Isle desire it.
And twill
Be worth thy learning, when thou shalt see the
Tyranny of that same seuruy boy, and what fools
He makes of vs; shall I describe the beast?
What beast?
A lover.
Doe.
Then to be brief, I will pass over the opinion of your ancient fathers, as likewise those strange Loves spoken of in the Authentic histories of chivalry Amadis du Gaul, Parismus, the Knight of the Sun, or the witty Knight Don Quixote de la Manse, where those brave men, neither Enchantments, Giants, Wind-mils, nor flocks of sheep could vanquish, are made the trophies of tryumphing love.
Prithee come to the matter.
Neither will I mention the complaints of Sir Guy for the fair Phelis, nor the travels of Parismus for the love of the beauteous Laurana, nor lastly, the most sad penance of the ingenious knight Don Quixote upon the mountains of Scienna Morenna, mooud by the unjust disdain of the Lady Dulcinea del Toboso,  or our modern Authors, I
will not so much as name them, no not that excellent treatise of Tullies Love, written by the Master of Art.
I would thou would pass over this passing ofor of Authors, and speak thine own judgment.
Why then to be brief, I think a Lover looks like an Ass.
I can describe him better then so my self, he looks like a man that had sat up at Cards all night, or a stale Drunkard wakened in the midst of his sleep.
But Philocles, I would not have thee see this Ladie, she has a bewitching look.
How dare thou venture man, what strange medicine hast thou found, Ouid near taught it thee, I doubt I guess thy remedy, for love, go to a bawdy house or so, first not?
Faith, and that's a good way I can tell you, we younger brothers are beholding to it, alas wee must not fall in love and choose whom wee like best, wee have no Jointures for um, as you blessed heirs can have.
Well I have found you Sir, and prithee tell me, how got thou Wenches?
Why I can want no Panders, I lye in the Constabless house.
And there you may whore by authority,
But Clerimont, I doubt this Paragon
That thou so praise, is some il favoured Wench
Whom thou would have me laugh at for commending.
By heaven I spoke in earnest, trust your eyes,
Isle show you her.
How can thou doe it?
Thou know this Ladies father is to mine
A deadly enemy, nor is his house,
Open to any of our kindred.
That's no matter,
My lodging's the next door to this Lords house,
And my back Window looks into his Garden,
There every morning fair Leucothoe,
(For so I hear her named) walking alone,
To please her senses makes Aurora blush,
To see on brighter then her  appear.
Well I will see her the
Yet for her sake be advised better Sir,
Impudent Rascal, can look me in the face,
And know how thou hast wronged me, thou hast
Dishonoured my Daughter, made a whore on her.
Gentle Sir,
The wrong my love has made to your fair Daughter
Tic now too late to wish undone again,
But if you please, it may be yet closed up
Without dishonour, I will marry her.
Marry her, she has a hot catch of that, marry a Beggar, what Jointure can thou make her?
Sir I am poor I must confess,
Fortune has blessed you better, but I swear
By all things that can bind, it was not your wealth
Was the foundation of my true built love,
It was her single vncompounded self,
Her self without addition that I loved,
Which shall for ever in my sight outweigh
All other women's fortunes, and themselves,
And were I great, as great as I could wish
My self for her advancement, no such bar
As Fortunes inequality should stand
Betwixt our loves.
Good Father hear me.
Dost thou not blush to call me father, Strumpet Isle make thee an example.
But hear me
Sir, my shame will be your own.
No more I say, Francisco leave my house, I charge You come not here.
I must obey and will,
Dear Luce be constant.
Till death
Here's a fine wedding towards, the
Bridegroom when he comes for his bride,
Shall find her great with child by another man,
Passion a me minion, how have you hid it so long?
Fearing your anger Sit, I strived to hide it.
Hide it one day more then, or be damned,
Hide it till Shallow be married to thee,
And then let him do his worst.
Sir I should too much wrong him.
Wrong him, there bee great Ladies have done the like, tic no news to see a bride with child.
Good Sir.
Then be wise, lay the child to him, he's a rich man, tother's a beggar.
I dare not Sir.
Do it I say, and he shall father it.
He knows he never touch me Sir.
Thats all one, lay it to him, weal out face him tic his: but hark, he is coming, I hear the Music, swear thou wilt doe thy best to make him think tic his, swear quickly.
I doe.
Go step aside, and come when thy que is, thou shalt hear vs talk.
Morrow Father.
Son bridegroom welcome, you have been looked for here.
My Tailor a little disappointed me, but is my Bride ready.
Yes long ago, but you and I will talk a little, send in your Music.
Go wait within, and tell me father, did she not
Think it long till I came.
I warrant
Her she did, she loves you not a little.
Nay that I dare swear, she has given me many
Tastes of her affection.
What before you
Were married.
I mean, in the way
Of honesty father.
Nay that I doubt,
Young wits love to be trying, and to say
Truth, I see not how a woman can deny a man
Of your youth and person upon those terms,
You'll not be known ont now.
I have kissed
Her or so.
Come, come, I know you are no
Fool, I should think you a very Ass, nay I tell
You plainly, I should be loath to marry my
Daughter to you if I thought you had not tried
Her in so long acquaintance, but you have tried
Her, and she poor soul could not deny you.
Ha ha have.
Faith tell me son, tic but a
Merry question, she's yours.
Upon my
Virginity father.
Swear not by that,
Isle ne'er believe you.
Why then as I am
A Gentleman I never did it that I remember.
That you remember, oh first thereabouts.
Heel take it upon him presently.
You have been so familiar with her,
You have forgot the times, but did you never
Come in half fuddled, and then in a kind humour,
Caetera quis nescit.
Indeed I was wont to serve my mothers maid so when I came half foxed as you said, and then next morening I should laugh to my self.
Why there it goes, I thought to have chid you son Shallow, I knew what you had done, tic too apparent, I would not have people take notice of it pray God she hide her great belly as she goes to Church to day.
Why father is she with child?
As if you knew not that, fie, fie, leave your dissembling now.
Sure it cannot be mine.
How's this, you would not make my daughla a whore, would you? this is but to try if you can stir my choler, your wits have strange tricks, do things over night when you are merry, and then deny um. But stay, here she comes alone, step aside, she shall not seevs,
Ah my dear Shallow, thou need not have made
Such hast, my heart thou know was firm enough
To thee, but I may blame my own fond love,
That could not deny thee.
She's with child indeed, it swells,
You would not believe me, tic a good wench,
She does it handsomely.
But yet I know if
Thou had bin thy self, thou would near have
Offered it, it was drink that made thee.
Yes sure, I was drunk when I did it, for I had
Forgot it I lay my life twill prove a girl
Because it was got in drink.
I am ashamed to see any body.
Alas poor wretch, go comfort her, Luce.
Sweet heart, nay never bee ashamed, I was a little too hasty, but Isle make thee amends, weal bee married presently.
Be cheery Luce, you were man and wife before, it wanted but the ceremony of the Church, and that shall be presently done.
I I, sweet heart, as soon as may be.
But now I think ont son Shallow, your wedding must not now be public, as we intended it.
Why so?
Because I would not have people take notice of this fault, weal go to Church, only we three, the Minister and the Clerk, thats witnesses enough, so the time being unknown, people will think you were married before.
But will it stand with my worship to be married in private.
Yes, yes, the greatest do it, when they have been  before hand, there is no other way to save your bries credit.
Come lets about it presently.
This is closed up beyond our wishes.
I am undone, unless, thy wit Francisco,
Can find some means to free me from this fool,
Who would have thought the sot could be so gross
To take upon him what he never did,
To his own shame, Isle send to my Francisco,
And I must loose no time, for I am dead,
If not delivered from this loathed bed.
SEE Philocles, yonders that happy shade,
That often veils the fair Lucothoe,
And this her usual hour, sheele not be long,
Then thou shalt tell me, if so rare an object
Ere blessed thine eyes before.
Well, I would see her once,
Were but to try thy judgment Cleremont.
And when thou doest, remember what I told thee,
I would not be so sick, but soft look to thy heart,
Yonder she comes, and thats her waiting woman.
Now gaze thy fill, speak man how likest thou her.
Psecas.
Madam.
What flower was that
That thou were telling such a story of
Last night to me.
Tic call Narcissus Madam
It bears the name of that too beauteous boy,
That lost himself by loving of himself,
Who viewing in afaire and crystal stream
Those lips that only he could never kiss,
Dotes on the shadow, which to reach in vain
Striving, he drwones thus scorning all beside
For the loved shadow the fairer substance died.
Fie fie, I like not these impossible tales,
A man to fall in love with his own shadow,
And died for love, it is most ridiculous.
Madam I know not, I have often seen
Both men and women court the looking glass
With so much seeming contentation,
That I could think this true, nay wear it about um
As lovers do their Mistress counterfeit.
Thas not for love, but to correct their beauties
And draw from others admiration,
For all the comfort that our faces give
Unto our selves is but reflection
Of that fair liking that another takes.
I would we were a little nearer um
We migh but hear what talk these wenches have
When they are alone, I warrant some good stuff.
Tic happiness enough for me to see
The motion of her lips.
I aith first there abouts.
Why Philocles, what lost already man,
Struck dead with one poor glance, look up for shame
And tell me how thou likest my judgment now,
Now thou doest see.
Ah Cleremont too well,
Too well I see what I shall never taste,
You Ladies beauty: she must needs be cruel
(Though her fair shape deny it) to the son
Of him that is her fathers enemy,
That, Cleremont, that fatal difference
Checks my desire, and sinks my rising hopes,
But loue's a torrent violent if stopped,
And I am desperately mad: I must
 must be hers, or else I must not be.
Contain that passion that will else overwhelm
All virtue in you, all that is called man,
And should be yours, take my advice my heart
My life to second you, let vs consult,
You may find time to speak to her and woe her.
May, nay I will in spite of destiny,
 women and faint hearted fools complain
In languishing despair, a manly love
Dares show it self and press to his desires
Through thickest troops of horrid opposites,
Were there a thousand waking Dragons set
To keep that golden fruit: I would attempt
To pluck and taste it, tic the danger crowns
A brave achievement: what if I should go
And boldly woo her in her fathers house
In spite enmity, what could they say?
It were madness that not wisdom rash attempts
Betray the means, but never work the end.
She would not hate a man for loving her,
Or if she did, better be once deemed
Then live for ever haplesse.
But take time,
The second thoughts our wise men say are best.
Delaye's a double death, no I have thought
A means, that straight Isle put in execution,
Isle write a Letter to her presently,
Take how it will.
A Letter, who shall carry it?
Isle tell thee when I have done, hast thou Pen and Ink in thy Chamber.
Yes, there is one upon the Table, Isle stay here at the window, and watch whether she stay or not, what a sudden change is this.
Did not count Virro promise to be hear
To day at dinner.
Yes Madame that he did, and I dare swear
He will not break.
He needs not, he is rich enough, unless
Hee should break in knavery, as some of our Mhints doe now adays.
Break promise Madame I mean, &amp; that he will not
For your sake, you know his business.
I would I did not, he might spare his pains
And that unusual cost, that he bestows
In pranking up himself, and please me better
He would not please his Taylor and his Barber,
For they got more for your sake by their Lord
Then they got this twenty years before.
Ah Psecas, Psecas, can my father think
That I can love Count Virro, one so old
(That were enough to make a match unfit)
But one so base, a man that never loved
For any thing called good, but dross and pelf,
One that would never, had my brother lived
Have moved this suit, no I can never love him,
But can thou keep a secret firmly Psecas.
Doubt me not Madame.
Well Isle tell thee then,
I love, alas, I dare not say I love him,
But there's a young and noble Gentleman,
Lord Euphues son, my fathers enemy.
A man whom natures prodigality
Stretched even to envy in the making up,
Once from a Window my pleased eye beheld
This youthful Gallant as he rode the street,
On a corvetting Courser, who it seemed
Knew his fair load, and with a proud disdain
Checked the base earth, my father being by
I asked his name, he told me Philocles,
The son and Heir of his great enemy:
Judge Psecas then, how my divided breast,
Suffered between two meeting contraries,
Hatred and Love, but Loves a deity,
And must prevail against mortals, whose command
Not ove himself could ever yet withstand.
What is the letter done already, I see these Lovers have nimble inventions, but how will you send it.
What a question's that, see thou this stone.
Ah, then I see your drift, this stone must guide your
Fleeting Letter in the Ayre, and carry it to that
Fair Mark you aim at.
Hard by her.
I think you would not hit her with such stones as this,
Lady look to your self, he that now throws one
Stone at you, hopes to hit you with two.
But prithee tell me what doest think this Letter may doe.
Well I hope,
Tic ten to one this Lady oft hath seen you,
You never lived obscure in Syracuse,
Nor walked the streets unknown, and who can tell
What place you bear in her affections,
Loved or mislik'd; if bad, this letter sent,
Will make her show her scorn, if otherwise,
Fear not a women's wit, sheele find a time
To answer your kind Letter, and express
What you desire she should, then send it boldly,
You have a fairer make there.
Cupped guide my arm,
Oh be as just blind God as thou art great,
And with that powerful hand, that golden shaft
That I was wounded, wound you tender breast,
There is no salue but that, no cure for me,
See what a wonder it strikes um in, how it should come.
Sheele wonder more to see what man it comes from.
I like her well, yet she is not afraid to open it:
She starts, stay mark her action when she has read the Letter.
"LEt it wrong this Letter that it came,
"From one that trembled to subscribe his name,
"Fearing your hate, O let not hate descend,
"Nor make you cruel to so vowed a friend,
"If you'll not promise love, grant but access,
"And let me know my woes are past redress,
"Be just then beauteous Judge, and like the laws
"Condemn me not till you have heard my cause,
"Which when you have, from those fair lips return
"Either my life in love, or death in scorn.
Am I awake or dream I, is it true
Or does my flattering fancy but suggest
What I most covet.
Madame the words are there,
Isle swear it canna be, nor be illusion.
It is too good for truth.
Mock me not fortune,
She kissed it, saw thou her, by heaven she kissed it.
And with a look that relished love, not scorn,
This Letter may be forged, I much desire to know the certainty, Psecas thy help must further me.
Isle not be wanting.
Here comes my father, he must not see this.
No nor your tother sweet heart, hee is with him yonder.
Nay noble Count you are too old a Soldier
To take a maids first no, for a denial,
They will be nice at first, men must pursue
That will obtain, woe her my Lord and take her,
You have my free consent if you can get hers,
Yonder she walks alone, go comfort her.
Isle doe the best I may, but we old men
Are but cold comfort, I thank your Lordships love.
I wonder Roscio that the peevish Girl
Comes on so slowly on peswasions
That I can use, do move the setting forth
Count irroes greatness, wealth and dignity
Seems not to affect her, Roscio.
I doubt the cause my Lord,
For were not that, I dare engage my life,
She would be won to love him, she has placed
Already her affections on some other.
How should I find it out
Why thus my Lord
Theres never man nor woman that ere loved,
But chose some bosom friend whose close converse,
Sweeten their joys, and ease their burdened minds
Of such a working secret, thus no doubt
Has my young Lady done, and but her woman,
Who should it be, tic she must out with it,
Her secrecy if wit cannot orereach,
Gold shall corrupt, leave that to me my Lord,
But if her Ladies heart doe yet stand free
And vnbequeath'd to any, your command
And fathers jurisdiction interposed
Will make her love the Count, no kind of mno
must want to draw her.
Thou art my Oracle,
My Brain, my Soul, my very being Roscio,
Walk on and speed whilst I but second thee.
It is even so, Count irro is your rival,
See how the old Ape smugs up his mouldy chap
To seize the bit.
He must not if I live,
But yet her father brings him that has the means
That I should ever want.
If he do marry her
Revenge it nobly, make him a Cuckold boy,
Thou jests that feels it not, prithee lets go,
Stay, Isle not curse him briefly for thy sake,
If thou doest marry her may thou be made
A Cuckold without profit, and ne'er get
An Office by it, nor favour at the Court,
But may thy large ill gotten treasury
Be spent in her bought lust, and thine own gold
Bring thee adulterers, so farewell good Count.
My Lord, ther's a Messenger within
Desires access, has business of import,
Which to no ear but yours he must impart.
Admit him, now friend, your business with me.
If you be the Lord Polimetes.
The same.
My Lord, I come from Athens with such news
As I dare say is welcome though unlooked for,
Your son Eugenio lives whom you so long
Thought dead and mourned for.
How, lives.
Upon my life my Lord I saw him well
Within these few days.
Thanks for thy good news,
Towards him Roscio, but now tell me friend
Hast thou reueal'd this news to any man
In Syracuse but me.
To none my Lord,
At every place where I have staid in town,
Enquiring for your Lordships house, I heard
These tragic, but false news, the contrary
I still concealed, though knew, intending first
Your Lordships ear should drink it.
Worthy fiend.
I now must thank your wisdom as your love
In this well carried action, Isle requite it,
Mean time pray use my house, and still continue your
Silence in this business, Roscio make him welcome, and
Part as little from him as you can for fear.
Think it done, my Lord.
Psecas come hither.
Be like your self, let not a cruel doom
Pass those fair lips, that never were ordained
To kill, but to revive.
Neither my Lord
Lies in the power to doe.
Yes sweet to me.
Whom your scorn kills, and pity will revive.
Pity is showed to men in misery.
And so am I, if not relieved by you.
It were pride in me, my Lord, to think it so.
I am your beauties captive.
Then my Lord,
What greater gift then freedom can I give,
Tic that that Captives most desires, and that
You shall command, you're free from me my Lord,
Your beauty contradicts that freedom Lady.
come noble Count, I must for this time interrupt you
You'll find time enough within to talk.
Isle wait upon your Lordship.
Thus in disguise I have discovered all,
And found the cause of my reported death,
Which did at first amaze me, but tic well,
Tic to draw on the match between my sister
And this rich Count, heaven grant it be content
As well as fortune to her, but I fear
She cannot love his age, how it succeeds
I shall perceive, and whilst unknown I stay,
I cannot hurt the project, help I may.
This will make good work for you in the spiritual
Court, Shallow is a rich man.
I marry Sir,
Those are the men we look for, ther's somewhat
To be got, the Court has many businesses at this
Time, but they are little worth, a few waiting
Women got with child by Serving-men or so, scarce
Worth the citing.
Do not their Masters get
Um with child sometimes.
Yes no doubt, but
They have got a trick to put um off upon their
Men, and for a little portion save their
Own credits; besides, these private marriages
Are much out of our way, we cannot know when
There is a fault.
Well, these are no
Starters I warrant you, Shallow shall not deny it,
And for the Wench she need not confess it, she hs
A mark that will betray her.
I thank you
Sir for your good intelligence, I hope tic certain.
Fear not that, is your citation ready.
I have it here.
Well step aside, and come when I call, I hear um coming.
Set forward there, Francisco what make you here.
I come to claim my right, Parson take heed,
Thou art the Author of adultery
If thou conjoin this couple, shoe's my wife.
you saucebox.
Father, I thought she had been mine, I hope I shall not loose her thus.
Francisco, dare not to interrupt vs, for I swear thou shalt endure the laws extremity
For thy presumption.
doe your worst, I fear not,
I was contracted to her.
What witness have you.
Heaven is my witness, whose imperial eye saw our contract.
What an Ass is this to talk of contracting, hee that will get a wench, must make her bigger as I have done, and not contract.
Sir, you are abused.
Why so.
The wife you go to marry is with child, and by another.
A good iesty faith, make me believe that.
How comes this fool possessed, he never touched her I dare swear.
No more Francisco as you will answer it,
Parson set forward there.
stay,
If this will not suffice, Sumner come forth.
A Sumner, we are all betrayed.
God save you all, I think you guess my business,
These are to cite to the spiritual Court
You master Shallow, and you mistress Luce,
Ask not the cause, for tic apparent here,
A carnal copulation, ante matrimonium.
This was a bar unlooked for, spiteful Francisco
Injurious Franklin, could the laws divine,
Or humane suffer, such an impious act,
That thou should take my true and lawful wife,
And great with child by me, to give t'another,
Gulling his poor simplicity.
Do you mean me Sir.
Gallants Farewell, my writ shall be obeyed.
Summer it shall.
Isle take my leave, theres nothing now for me to do
Farewell good master Parson.
Francisco can thou say thou ever loved my daughter, and would thou thus disgrace her openly.
No, I would win her thus,
And did you hold her credit half so dear
As I, or her content, you would not thus
Take her from me, and thrust her against her will
On this rich fool.
You are very bold with me Sir.
Let me have news what happens dearest Luce.
Else let me die.
This was your doing Luce, it had been
Unpossible he should ere have known the time
So truly else, but Isle take an order next time
For you babbling.
Whats the matter father.
We may
Thank you for it, this was your haste that will
Now shame vs all, you must be doing a fore your
Time.
It was but a trick of youth father,
And threrefore now you must even stand in a
White sheet for all to gaze at.
How,
I would be loath to wear a surplice now, tic a
Disgrace the house of the Shallows never knew
All the hope is, officers may be bribed, and so they will, it were a hard world for vs to live in else.
You say true father, if it were not for corruption, every poor rascal might have justice as well as one of vs, and that were a shame.
This was a cunning stratagem well laid,
But yet Francisco th'hast not won the prize:
What should I do, I must not let this cause
Proceed to trial in the open Court,
For then my daughters oath will cast the child
Upon Francisco: no, I have found a better,
I will before the next Court day provide
Some needy Parson, one whose poverty
Shall make him fear no Cannons, he shall marry
My daughter to rich Shallow, when tic done
Ou gold shall make a silence in the Court.
I must return your answer to my Lady,
He tell her you will come.
Come,
And such a Angel call, I should forget
All Offices of Nature, all that men
Wish in their second thoughts, ere such a duty
Commend my service to her, and to you
My thanks for this kind Message.
I never breathed till now, never till now now
Did my life relish sweetness, break not heart,
Crack not ye feeble Ministers of nature
With inundation of such swelling joy,
To great to bear without expression:
The Lady writes that she has known me long
By sight, and loved me, and she seems to thank
Her stars she loves, and is beloved again,
She speak my very thoughts, by heaven tic strange
And happy when affections thus can meet;
She further writes at such an hour to day,
Her fathers absence, and all household spys
Fitly removed, shall give access to me
Unmarked to visit her, where she alone
Will entertain discourse and welcome me.
I hope tic truly meant, why should I fear,
But wisdom bids me fear: fie, fie, tic base,
To wrong a creature of that excellence,
With such suspicion I should injure her,
I will as soon suspect an angel false,
Treason near lodged within so fair a breast,
No, if her hand betray me, I will will run
On any danger, tic alike to me
To dye, or find her false, for on her truth
Hangs my chief being, well Isle lose no time
No not a minute, dearest love I come,
To meet my sweetest wishes I will fly,
Heaven and my truth, shield me from treachery.
I Cannot credit it, nor think that she
Of all the noble youth in Sicily,
Should make so strange a choice, that none but he,
None but the son of my vowed enemy
Must be her mate, it strikes me to amaze,
Minion take heed, doe not belie your Mistress.
Mercy forsake me if I doe my Lord,
You charged me to confess the truth to you,
Which I have fully done, and presently
Isle bring you where concealed, you shall both see
Their privacy and hear their conference.
Well I believe thee wench, and will reward
Thy trust in this, go get thee in again
And bring me word when Philocles is come,
Sir you'll be secret to our purpose.
As your own breast my Lord.
I shall rest thankful to you:
This stranger must be soothd lest he mar all.
This was well found out my Lord, you now have means to take your enemy.
With blessed occasion I will so pursue
As childless Euphes shall for ever rue.
Rise in thy blackest look direst Nemesis
Assistant to my purpose, help m glut
My thirsty soul with blood. This bold young man
To his rash love shall sacrifice his life.
What course you intend, to ruin him.
Why kill him presently.
Oh no my Lord,
You'll rue that action, think not that the Law
Will let such murder sleep unpunished.
Should I now let him go now I have caught him
Yes Sir, to catch him faster, and more safely.
How should that be? speak man.
Why thus my Lord;
You know the law speaks death to any man
That steals an Heir without her friends consent,
This must he do, his love will prompt him to it,
For he can never hope by your consent
To marry her, and she tic like will give
Content, for women's love is violent,
Then mark their passage you shall easly find
How to surprise them at your will my Lord.
Thou art my Oracle dear Roscio,
Here is Psecas come again; how now what news?
My Lord they both are coming please you withdraw, you shall both hear and see what you desire.
Ye are welcome Noble Sir and did my power,
Answer my love your visitation,
Sold be more free, and your deserved welcome
Expressed in better fashion.
Best of Ladies,
It is so well, so excellently well,
Coming from your wished love, my barren thank
Wants language for it, there lies in your fair looks
More entertainment then in all the pomp
That the vain Persian ever taught the world,
Your presence is the welcome I expected,
That makes it perfect.
Tic your noble thought
Makes good whats wanting here, but gentle friend,
For so I now dare call you.
Tic well Minion you are bold
Enough I see to choose your friends without my leave.
Tic my ambition ever to be yours.
Think me not light, dear Philocles, so soon
To grant thee love, that others might have sought
With eagerest pursuit, and not obtained,
But I was yours by fate, and long have been,
Before you wood Leucothoe was won,
And yours without resistance.
Oh my Stars
It was your kind influence, that whist I slept
In dullest ignorance, contrived for me
The way to crown me with felicity.
You may be deceived though,
You have no such great reason
To thank your Stars if you knew all.
And know fair Mistress you have met a love,
That time, nor fate, nor death can ever change,
A man that but in you can have no being:
Let this kiss seal my faith.
And this mine.
Nay too't again, your sweet meat shall have sour sauce.
But sweet, amongst all these Roses ther's one thorne
That pricks and galls me, our parents enmity
Will cross our loves, I doe assure my son
This father never will give his consent.
No so I think, he moves me still to Virro
That old crazed Count, and with such vehemence
I dare scarce bide his presence if I deny him;
Therefore we must be speedy in our course,
And take without his leave what he denies.
I thank you for that good daughter.
I told you Sir twould come to this at last.
Oh thou hast spoke my wishes, and hath showed
Thy self in love as true as beautiful;
Then let's away dearest Leucothoe,
My fortunes are not poor, then fear no want,
This constant love of ours may prove so happy,
To reconcile our parents enmity.
Heaven grant it may.
Never by this means yongster.
But soft now I think better ont Isle not go.
Why dearest, is thy love so quickly cold?
No, but isle not venture thee, thine is the danger,
Thou know tic death by law to steal an heir,
And my dear brothers most untimely death,
Hath lately made me one, what if thou should be taken.
Oh fear not that, had I a thousand lives,
They were too small a venture for such prise,
I tell thee sweet, a face not half so fair
As thine, hath armed whole actions in the field,
And brought a thousand ships to Tenedos,
To sack lamented Troy, and should I fear
To venture one poor life, and such a life
As would be lost in nor possessing thee:
Come come, make that no scruple, when shall we go.
This present evening, for to morrow morning
My father looks that I should give consent
To marry with the Count,
Best of all, would it were this present hour,
Isle go prepare, but shall I call thee here.
Oh no, weal meet.
Where dearest.
East from the City by a Rivers side,
Not distant half a mile there stands a grove,
Where often riding by I have observed
A little Hermitage, there I will stay
If I be first, if you, doe you the like,
Let th'houre be ten, then shall I best escape.
Ne'er sweeter comfort came from Angels lips
I know the place, and will be ready there
Before the hour: Isle bring a friend with me
As true as mine own heart, one Clerimont,
That may doe vs good if danger happen.
Use your pleasure.
Dearest farewell,
Hours will seem years till we are met again.
Ah Sirrah, this gear goes well, god a mercy girl
For thy intelligence, why this is as much as a
Man could desire, the time, place, and every thing;
I warrant um they pass no further, well
Go thou in and wait upon thy Mistress, shees
Melancholy till she see her sweet heart again, but
When she does, she shall not see him long,
Not a word of whats past among vs for your life.
I warrant you my Lord.
Isle not so much as show an angry look,
Or any token that I know any of their proceedings,
But Rosio, we must lay the place strongly, if they
Should scope vs, I were prettily fooled now after all
This.
Why tic impossible my Lord, weal go
Strong enough, besides I think it fit we took
An Officer along with vs to countenance it the
Better.
Thou say well, go get one,
Isle go my self along with you too, I love
To see sport though I am old, you'll go
Along with vs to Sir.
I Sir, you shall
Command my service when you are ready.
Now Euphues, what I did but barely act
Thy bleeding heart shall feel, loss of a son
If Law can have his course, as who can let it,
I know thou think mine dead, and in thy heart
Laugh at my falling house, but let them laugh
That win the prize, things ne'er are known till ended.
Well I like my sisters choice, she has taken a man
Whose very looks and carriage speak him
Worthy, besides he is Noble, his fortunes sufficient,
They both love each other, what can my father
More desire, that he gapes so after this old
Count that comes for the estate, as tother upon
My soul does not, but pure spotless love, but
Now his plot is for revenge upon his old enemy:
Fie, Fie tic bloody and unchristian, my soul
Abhors such acts, this match may rather
Reconcile our houses, and I desire where worth
Is to have friendship, as on my soul tic there.
Well Philocles I hope to call thee brother.
Somewhat Isle doe, Isle go persuade Count irro
Not to love her, I know the way, and Isle but
Tell him truth her brother lives, that will
Cool his love quickly; but soft, here comes
The Count as fit as may be.
She loves me not yet, but that's no matter,
I shall have her, her father says I shall,
And I dare take his word, maids are quickly
Ouer-rul'd, ah, ah, me thinks I am grown younger
Then I was by twenty years, this Fortune
Cast upon me, is better then Medeas charm, to
Make an old man young again, to have a
Lords estate freely bestowed, and with it such
A beauty as should warm Nectors blood,
Make old Priam lusty. Fortune I see thou love me
Now, Isle build a Temple to thee shortly, and
Adore thee as the greatest deity. Now what are you.
A poor Scholar my Lord, one that
Am little beholding to Fortune.
So are most of your profession,
Thou should tke some more thriving
Occupation, to be a judges man, they are
The bravest now adays, or a Cardinals
Pander, that were  good profession and gainful.
But not lawful, my Lord.
Lawful,
That Cardinal may come to be Pope, and
Then he could pardon thee and himself too.
My Lord I was brought up a Scholar.
And I thank your counsel, My
Lord, I have some for you, and therefore I
Came.
For me, what I prithee.
Tic weighty and concerns you near.
Speak, what first?
My Lord, you are to marry old Polimetes Daughter.
And Heir.
No Heir
My Lord, her Brother is alive.
How, Thou art mad.
My Lord,
What I speak is true, and to my knowledge
His father gives it out in policy to marry his
Daughter the better, to hook in suitors, and
Specially aimed at you, thinking you rich
And covetous, and now he has caught you.
But dost thou mock me.
Let me be ever miserable if I speak
Not truth, as sure as I am here Eugenio lives,
I know it, and know him, where he is.
Where prithee.
Not a days journey hence,
Where his father enjoined him to stay till your
Match, and sends word to him of this plot:
Besides, I ouer-hard the old Lord and his man
Roscio, laughing at you for being caught thus.
Why, were thou at the house then.
Yes, But had scurvy entertainment
Which I have thus revenged
Beshrew my heart I know not what
To think on it, till like enough, this Lord was
Always cunning beyond measure, and it
Amazed me that he should grow so exreme
Kind to me on the sudden to offer me all this:
Besides this fellow is so confident, and on
No ends of couznage that I can see; well,
I would fine enjoy her, the Wench is
Delicate, but I would have the estate too, and
not be gulled, what shall I doe, now brains
If ever you will, help your Master.
It stings him.
Well, so, Sir,
What may I call your name?
Irus my Lord.
Your name as well as your attire
Speakers you poor.
I am so.
And very poor.
Very poor.
Would you not gladly take a course
To get money, and a great some of money.
Is gladly if your Lordship would but
Show me the way.
Hark ye.
Oh my Lord, Conscience.
Fie, never
Talk of the Conscience, and for Law thou art
Free, for all men think him dead, and
His father will be ashamed to follow it
Having already given him for dead,
And then who can know it, come be wise,
Five hundredth crowns Isle give.
Well, tic poverty that does it, and not I,
When shall I be paid.
When thou hast done it.
Well give me your
Hand for it my Lord
Thou shalt.
In writing, to be paid when I have
Poisoned him, and think it done.
Now thou
But love has made me bold, the time has been,
In such a place as this I should have feared
Each rolling leaf, and trembled at a reed
Stirred in the Mooneshine, my fearful fancy
Would frame a thousand apparisions,
And work some fear out of my very shadow:
I wonder Philocles is tardy thus,
When last wee parted every hour, he said,
Would seem a year till we were met again,
It should not seem so by the hast he makes
Isle sit and rest me, come I know he will.
This Clerimont this is the happy place
Where I shall meet the sum of all my joys,
And be possessed of such a treasury
As would enrich a Monarch.
This is his voice,
My Philocles.
My life, my soul, what here before me,
Oh thou dost still out go me, and dost make
All my endeavours poor in the requital
Of thy large favours, but I forget my self.
Sweet bid my friend here welcome, this is he
That I dare trust next mine own hearth with secrets.
But why art thou disguised thus.
I durst not venture else to make escape.
Even now me thinks I stand as I would wish
With all my wealth about me, such a love
And such a friend, what can be added more
To make a man live happy, thou dark grove
That hast been called the seat of Melancholy,
And shelter for the discontented spirits;
Sure thou art wrong, thou seem to me a place
Of solace and content, a Paradise
That gives me more then ever Court could doe
Or richest Palace, blessed be thy fair shades,
Let birds of music ever chant it here,
No croaking Raven, or ill booting Owl
Make here their baleful hahitation
Frighting thy walks, but may thou be a grove
Where loves fair Queen may take delight to sport:
For under thee two faithful Lovers meet,
Why is my fair Leucothoe so sad.
I know no cause, but I would fine be gone.
Whether sweet.
Any whether from hene.
My thoughts divine of treason, whence I know not,
There is no creature knows our meeting here
But one, and thats my maid, she has been trusty
And will be still I hope, but yet I would
She did not know it, prithee lets away
Any where else, we are secure from danger.
Then lets remove, but prithee be not sad.
What noise is that.
Ay me.
Oh fear not Love.
Upon um Officers, yonder they are.
Thieves, Villains.
Thou art the Thief and the Villain too,
Give me my Daughter thou ravisher.
First take my life.
Upon um I say.
Knock um down Officers if they resist,
Oh they are lost, ah wicked, wicked Psecas;
So keep um fast, weal have um faster shortly, and for you Minion, Isle tie a clog about your neck for running
away any more.
Yet do but hear me father.
Call me not father thou disobedient wretch,
Thou Run-away, thou art no child of mine,
My Daughter ne'er wore Breeches.
Oh Sir, my Mother would have done as much
For love of you, if need had so required,
Think not my mind transformed as my habit.
Officers away with um, peace Stumpet,
You may discharge him, he's but an assistant.
Oh stay and hear me yet, hear but a word
And that my last it may be, doe not spill
The life of him in whom my life subsists,
Kill not two lives in one, remember Sir,
I was your Daughter once, once you did love me,
And tell me then, what fault can be so great,
To make a father murderer of his child,
For so you are in taking of his life.
Oh think not Sir that I will stay behind him
Whilst there be Aspes, and Knives, and burning Coals
No Roman dame shall in her great example
Outgo my love.
Oh where will sorrow stay,
Is there no end in grief or in my death
Not punishment enough for my offence,
But must her grief be added to afflict me;
Dry up those Pearls dearest Leucothoe,
Or thou wilt make me doubly miserable,
Preserve that life, that I may after death
Live in my better part, take comfort dear,
People would curse me, if such beauty should
For me miscarry, no, live happy thou,
And let me suffer what the law inflicts.
My offence was as great as thine,
And why should not my punishment.
Come have you done, Officers away with him.
Isle be your keeper, but Isle look better to you.
But Rosie you and I must about the business:
sir let it be your charge to watch my Daughter,
And see she send no message any whither,
Nor receive any.
It shall my Lord.
Isle be an Argus, none shall come here I warrant you,
My very heart bleeds to see two such lovers so
Faithfully parted so. I must condemn my father,
Hes too cruel in this hard action, and did not
Nature forbid it, I could rail at him, to reek
His long fostered malice against Lord Euphues thus
Upon his son, the faithful lover of his own
Daughter, and upon her, for should it come to pass
As he expects it shall, I think to would kill her
Too, she takes it : See in what strange amazement
Now she stands, her grief has spent it self so
Far that it has left her senseless, it grieves
Me thus to see her, I can scarce forbear revealing
Of my self to her, but that I keep it for a
Better occasion when things shall better answer to
My purpose: Lady.
What are you.
In that my Lord your father has appointed
To give attendance on you.
On me, alas I need no attendance,
He might bestow his care better for me.
I came but lately to him, nor doe I mean
Long to stay with him, in the mean time Lady
Might I but doe you any service.
All service is too late, my hopes are deseperate.
Madame, I have a feeling of your woe,
A greater your own brother could not have,
And think not that I come suborned by any
To undermine your secrets, I am true,
By all the gods I am, for further trial
Command me any thing, send me on any message
Isle doe it faithfully, or any thing else
That my poor power can compass.
Oh strange fate
Have I lost pity in a fathers heart,
And shall I find it in a stranger: Sir
I shall not live to thank you, but my prayers
Shall go with you.
Tic not for thanks or need
But for the service that I owe to virtue
I would doe this.
Surely this man
Is nobly bred, how ere his habit give him:
But Sir, all physic comes to me too late,
There is no hope my Philocles should live
Unless the King were pleased to grant his pardon,
Twe're good that he were moved.
Ah who should doe it,
I fear me tic in vain, Count Virro
And my father both will cross it, but I would venture
If I could get but thither.
Thats in my power
To give you liberty, your father left me
To be your keeper, but in an act
So meritorious as this, I will not hinder you,
Nay I will waite upon you to the Court.
A thousand thanks to you, well isle go,
Grant oh you powers aboue, if Virgins tears,
If a true loves prayers had ever power
To move compassion grant it now to me,
Armed with so strong a vigour, my weak words
They may pierce deep into his kingly breast,
And force out mercy in spite of all opposers.
Come lets away.
MY dearest Luce, were thy old Sire as just
As thou art truly constant, our firm love
Had never met these oppositions,
All my designs as yet, all practises
That I have used, I see are frustrated,
For as my fair intelligencer writes,
He will before the next court day provide
Some careless person that in spite of laws
Shall marry her to Shallow, this being done,
He means to hold the Couts severity
To by a golden bit, and so he may,
Al it is too true, I must prevent it,
And that in time, before it grow too far;
But how, there lies the point of difficulty:
But what strange sight is this that greetes mine eyes,
Alphonso my old Captain, sure tic he.
Thus once again from twenty years exile,
Tossed by the storms of fortune too and fro,
Has gracious heaven given me leave to tread
My native earth of Sicily and draw
That air that fed me in my infancy.
Tic he, most noble Captain, oh what power
Has been so gracious as to bless mine eyes
Once more with sight of my most honoured master.
Kind yuth the tears of joy that I have spent
To greet my native country have quite robbed
Mine eyes of moisture, and have left me none
To answer thy affection, but tell me,
Tell me how thou hast lived in Syracuse
These five years here, since that unluckily storm
Divided vs at Sea.
Faith poorly Sir,
As one that knows no kindred nor alliance,
Unknown of any have I shifted out,
But I have heard you say that I was borne
In Syracuse, tell me what stock I come of,
What parentage, how mean so ere they be,
They canoe well be poorer then my self,
Speak, do you know them Sir?
Yes very well,
And I am glad the fates have brought me home,
For thy dear sake, that I may now disclose
Thy honourable birth.
Honourable?
Yes noble youth, thou art the second son
To old Lord Euphues, a man more worthy
And truly noble never drew this ayre;
Thy name's Lysandro, this discovery
Will be as welcome to your friends as you.
You do amaze me Sir.
Isle tell you all,
It was my fortune, twenty a year ago,
Upon the Tyrrhene shore, whose sea divides
This Isle from Italy, to keep a fort
Under your noble father, where your self
Then but a child, was left to my tuition,
When suddenly the rude assailing force
Of strong Italian Pirats so prevailed,
As to surprise of the fort and vs.
Your name and noble birth I then concealed,
Fearing some outrage from the enmity
Of those fell Pirates, and since from your self
I purposely have kept the knowlenge of it.
As loath to grieve your present misery
With knowledge of what fortunes you had lost,
That this is true, you straight shall see th'effect,
Isle go acquaint your father with the tokens,
And make his oreioyde heart leap to embrace
Thee his new found and long forgotten son:
Worthy Captain, your presence was always
Welcome to me, but this unlooked for news, I
Cannot suddenly digest.
Well Isle go to him presently.
Now my dear Luce, I shall find means to quite
Thy love, that could descend so low as I
When I was nothing, and with such affection,
This was my suit still to the powers aboue,
To make me worthy of thy constant love.
But isle about the project I intended.
Why now my Lord you are nearer to her love then ever you were yet, your rival by this accident shall be removed out of the way, for before the scornful girl would never fancy any man else.
I conceive you Sir.
I labourd it for your sake as much as for my
Own, to remove your rival and my enemy, you
Have your love, and I have my revenge.
I shall live my Lord to give you thanks, but
T'will be after a strange manner, if Irus has
Dispatched what he was hired too, then my kind
Lord I shall be a little too cunning for you.
My Lord you are gracious with the King.
I thank his Majesty, I have his care before anothere man.
Then see no pardon be granted, you may stop any thing; I knew Euphues will be soliciting for his son.
I warrant you my Lord no pardon passes whilst I am there, isle bee a bar betwixt him and the King, but hark the King approaches.
Health to your Majesty.
Count Virro, and Lord Polimetes welcome,
You have been strangers at the Court of late;
But I can well excuse you Count, you are about a wife,
A young one and a fair one too they say,
Get me young soldiers Count, but speak
When is the day, I mean to be your guest,
You shall not steal a martiage.
I thank your Majesty, but the marriage that I intended is stolen to my hand, and by another.
Stolen, how man.
My promised wife
Is lately stolen away by Philocles,
Lord Euphues son against her fathers will,
Who followed um and apprehended them,
The Law may right vs Sir, if it may have course.
No reason but the law should have his course.
Pardon dread Sovereign, pardon for my son.
Your son, Lord Euphues, what is his offence.
No heinous one my Liege, no plot of treason
Against your royal person or your state,
These aged cheeks would blush to beg a pardon
For such a foul offence, no crying murder
Hath steyned his innocent hands, his fault was love,
Love my dear Liege, unfortunately he took
The Daughter and Heir of Lord Polimetes,
Who follows him and seeks exstremity.
I seek but Law, I am abused my Liege,
Justice is all I beg, my Daughters stolen,
Staff of my age, let the law doe me right,
To his just prayers doe I bend my knee
My promised wife is stolen, and by the son
Of that injurious Lord, justice I crave.
Be like those powers aboue, whose place on earth
You represent, show mercy gracious King,
For they are merciful.
Mercy is but the Kings prerogative,
Tic Justice is his office, doing that
He can wrong no man, no man can complain,
But mercy showed oft takes way relief
From the wronged party that the Law would give him:
The Law is blind and speaks in general terms,
She cannot pity where occasion serves,
The living law can moderate her rigour,
And thats the King.
The King I hope in this will not do so,
Tic malice makes thee speak,
Hard hearted Lord, had thou no other way
To wreak thy cankered and long fostered hate
Upon my hed but thus, thus bloodily
By my sons suffering, and for such a fault
As thou should love him rather, is thy daughter
Disparaged by his love, is his blood base,
Or are his fortunes sunk, this law was made
For such like cautions, to restrain the base
From wronging noble persons by attempts
Of such a kind, but where equality
Meets in the match, the fault is pardonable.
Mercy my Sovereign, mercy gracious King.
Minion who sent for you, it were more modesty
For you to be at home.
Let her alone, speak Lady,
I charge you no man interupt her.
If ever pity touched that princely breast,
If ever Virgins tears had power to move,
Or if you ever loved and felt the pangs
That other lovers doe, pity great King,
Pity and pardon two unhappy Lovers.
Your life is not in question.
Yes royal Sir
If Law condemn my Philocles, he and I
Have but one heart, and can have but one fate.
Excellent virtue thou had not this from thy father.
Ther's Music in her voice, and in her face
More then a mortal beauty Oh my heart,
I shall be lost in passion if I hear her,
Isle here no more, convey her from my presence,
Quickly I say.
This is strange.
I told you what he would doe, I knew
He would not here of a pardon, and I against it,
He respects me.
No doubt he does my Lord
I like this passage well.
But stay,
Stay Lady, let me hear you, beshrew my heart
My mind was running of another matter.
Where the devil hath his mind bin all this while,
Perhaps he heard none of vs neither,
We may even tell our tales again.
No sure he heard vs, but tic very strange.
Tic such a tempting poison I draw in,
I cannot stay my draught, rise up Lady.
Never until your graces pardon raise me,
Ther's pity in your eye, oh show it Sir,
Say Pardon gracious King, tic but a word
And short, but welcome as the breath of life.
Isle further here the manner of this fact,
Avoid the presence all, all but the Lady,
And come not till I send.
I like not this.
Nor I here is mad dancing.
Heaven bless thy suit thou mirror of thy sex,
And best example of true constant love,
That in the Sea of thy transcendent virtues
Drown'st all thy fathers malice, and redeem
More in my thoughts then all thy kin can lose.
Now Lady what would you doe to save the life
Of him you love so dearly.
I cannot think that thought I would not doe,
Lay it in my power, and beyond my power
I would attempt.
You would be thankful then
To me if I should grant his pardon.
If ever I were thankful to the gods
For all that I call mine, my health and being,
Could I to you be unthankful for a gift
I value more then those, without which
These blessings were but wearisome.
Those that are thankful study to requite
A curtsy, would you doe so? would you requite
This favour
I cannot Sir,
For all the service I can doe your Grace
Is but my duty, you are my Sovereign,
And all my deeds to you are debts not merits,
But to those powers aboue that can requite,
That from their vastlesse treasures hope rewards,
More out of grace then merit on vs mortals,
To those isle ever pray that they would give you
More blessings then I have skill to ask.
Nay but Leucothoe, this lies in thy power to requite, thy love will make requital, wilt thou love me?
I ever did my Lord.
I was instructed from my infancy,
To love and honour you my Sovereign.
But in a nearer bond of love.
There is no nearer nor no truer love
Then that a loyal subject bears a Prince.
Still thou wilt not conceive me I must deal plain
With you, wilt thou lye with me, and I will seal his
Pardon presently; nay more, isleheap upon you
Both all favours, all honours that a Prince can give.
Oh me unhappy, in what a sad dilemma stands my choice.
Either to lose the man my soul most loves,
Or save him by a deed of such dishonour
As he will ever loath me for, and hate
To draw that breath that was so basely kept.
Name any thing but that to save his life,
I know you doe but tempt my frailty Sir,
I know your royal thoughts could never stoop
o such a soul dishonourable act.
Bethink your self, there is no way but that,
I swear by Heaven never to pardon him
But upon those conditions.
Oh I am miserable.
Thou art not if not wilful, yield Leucothoe,
It shall be secret, Philocles for his life
Shall thank thy love, but never know the price
Thou paidst for it; be wise thou heard me swear,
I cannot now show mercy, thou moist save him,
And if he dye, tic thou that art the Tyrant.
I should be so if I should save him thus,
Nay I should be a Traitor to your grace,
Betray your soul to such a foe as lust,
But since your oath is past, dear Philocles
Isle show to thee an honest cruelty,
And rather follow thee in spotless death,
Then buy with sinning a dishonoured life.
Yet pity me Leucothoe, cure the wound
Thine eyes hath made, pity a begging King,
Uncharm the charms of thy bewitching face,
Or thou wilt leave me dead: will nothing move thee,
Thou art a Witch, a Traitor, thou hast sought
By unresisted spells thy sovereigns life:
Who are about vs there, call in the Lords again,
Lord Poltes, take your daughter to you,
Keep her at home.
I will my Liege, Rosio see her there I wonder what is done.
Euphues I have tan a solemn oath
Never to grant a pardon to thy snne.
O say not so my Liege, your grace I know
Has mercy for a greater fault then this.
My oath is past and cannot be recalled.
This is beyond our wishes.
What made him swear this I wonder.
A heavy oath to me and most unlooked for,
Your justice Sir has set the period
Unto a loyal house, a Family
That have bin props of the Sicylian crown,
That with their bloods in many an honoured field,
Against the hot French, and Neopolitan
Have served for you and your great Ancestors,
Their children now can never more doe so,
Farewell my Sovereign, whilst I in tears
Spend the sd reman of my childless age,
Isle pray for your long life and happy reign,
And may your Grace and your Posterity
At need find hands as good and hearts as true
As ours have ever been.
Farewell good old man.
For you my Lord, your cruelty has deserved
A crs from me, but I can utter none,
Your Daughters goodness has weighed down your malice
Heaven prosper her.
Amen.
He is an honest man and truly noble,
Oh my rash oath, my lust, that was the cause,
Would any price would buy it in again.
Your Majesty is just.
Tic a happy Land
Where the King squares his actions by the law.
Away, you are base and bloody,
That feeds your malice with pretence of justice,
Tic such as you make Princes tyrannous,
And hated of their subjects, but look too't,
Look your own heads stands fast for if the law
Doe find a hole in your coats, beg no mercy.
Pardon vs my Lord, we were wronged.
And sought redress but by a lawful course.
Well leave me alone.
Fare well my Liege, now let him chafe alone.
Now we have our ends.
Is there no means to save him no way,
To g a dispensation for an oath,
 that I know except the Court of Rome
Will grant one, thats well thought on,
I will not spare for gold, and that will doe it,
Nicanor.
Sir.
What book is that
Thou had from Paris about the price of sins.
Tic called the Texes of the Apostolical Chancery.
Is there a price for any sin set down.
A my Sir, how heinous ere it be,
Or of what nature, for such a sum of money
As is set down there, it shall be remitted
Thats well, go fetch the book presently.
I will my Lord.
Sure there is perjury
Among the rest, and I shall know what rate
It bears before I have committed it.
How now hast brought it.
Yes Sir.
Read, I would know the price of perjury,
I shall find it quickly, here is an Index.
Imp. For murder of all kinds of a Clergy man, of a lay man, of father, mother, Son, brother, sister, wife.
Read till you come at perjury.
Item, for impoysoning, enchantments, witchcraft,
Sacrilege, simony, and their kind and
Branches. Item, pro lapsu corns, fornication
Adultery, incest without any exception or
Distinction; for sodomy, Brutality, or any of
That kind.
My heart shakes with horror
To hear the names of such detested sins,
Can these be bought for any price of money,
Or do these merchants but deceive the world
With their false Wares no more of that foul book,
I will know what I came to know,
I would not for the world redeem my oath
By such a curse as this, no more Nicanor
Unless thou find a price for Atheism.
Here is none for that my Lord, his Holiness
Can pardon that in no man but himself.
Well this is not the way,
I have thought of another that may prove,
And both discharge my oath and save his life,
Nicanor run presently, call Matho hither,
Matho the Lawyer, command him to make hast,
I long to be resolved.
I run Sir.
He is a subtle Lawyer, and may find
Some point, that in the Laws obscurity
ee hid from vs, some point may doe vs good,
I have seen some of his profession
Out of case as plain, as clear as day
To our weak judgements, and no doubt at first
Meant like our thoughts by those that made the Law,
Pick out such hard inextricable doubts,
That they have spun a suit of seven year long,
And lead their hood wink Clients in a wood,
A most irremoveable Labyrinth,
Till they have quite consumed um, this they can doe
In other cases, why not as well in this.
I have seen others could extend the Law
Upon the wrack, or cut it short again
To their own private profits, as that thief
Cruel Procrustes served his haplesse guests,
To fi them to his bed; Well I shall see,
I would Nicanor were returned again,
I would fine ease my conscience of that oath,
That rash and inconsiderate oath I took,
But see, here they are coming.
Health to my Sovereign.
Matho, welcome.
I sent for thee about a business
I would entreat thy help in.
Your Highness may command my service
In that, or any thing lies in my power.
Tic to decide a case that troubles me.
If it lye within the compass of my knowledge,
I will resolve your Highness presently.
Then thus it is, Lord Euphues son,
Young Philocles, has lately stolen away
The Daughter and Heir of Lord Polimetes,
Who is his enemy, he following him hard
Has apprehended him, and brings him to his trial
To morrow morning: thou hast heard this news.
I have my Liege, and every circumstance
That can be thought on in the business.
And what will be the issue by the Law.
He must dye for it, the case is plain,
Unless your grace will grant his pardon.
But can there be no means thought upon
To save him by the Law.
None my Lord.
Surely there may, speak man, Isle give thee
Double Fees.
It cannot be my Liege, the Statutes is plain.
Nay now thou art too honest, thou should do
As other Lawyers doe, first take my money,
And then tell me thou can doe me good.
I dare not undertake it, could it be done,
Id go as far as any man would doe.
Yes if it were to cut a poor mans throat you could,
For some rich griping Land-lord you could grinned
The face of his poor Tenant, stretch the Law
To serve his turn, and guided by his Angels,
Speak Oracles more then the tongues of men,
Then you could find exceptions, reseruations,
Stand at a word, a silible, a letter,
Or coin some scruples out of your own brains,
But in a cause so full of equity
So charitable as this, you can find nothing,
I shall for ever hate all your profession.
I do beseech your Highness to excuse me,
I cannot doe more then your laws will let me,
Nor falsify my knowledge nor my conscience.
Then I am miserable, rise Matho rise,
I do not discommend thy honesty,
But blame my own hard fate, ay Philocles
I would redeem thy life at any price,
But the Stars cross it, cruel fate condemns thee.
Come fellow watchmen, for now you are my fellows,
I pleases you to call vs so master Constable.
I do it to encourage you in your office, it is a trick that we commanders have, your great Captains call your soldiers fellow soldiers to encourage them.
Indeed and so they do, I heard master Curate trading a story book tother day to that purpose.
Well I must show now what you have to do, for I my self before I came to this prefermity, was as simple as one of you, and for your better destruction, I will deride my speech into two parts. First, what is a watchman. Secondly, what is the office of a watchman. For the first, fany man ask me what is a watchman, I may answer him, he is a man as others are, nay a tradesman, as a Vintner, a Tailor, or the like, for they have long bills.
He tells vs true neighbour, we have bills indeed.
For the second, what is his office; I answer, he may by virtue of his office reprehend any person, or persons, that wlke the streets too late at a seasonable hour.
may we indeed master Constable.
Nay, if you meet any of those rogues at seasonable hours, you may by virtue of your office commit him to prison, and then ask him whither he was going.
Why thats as much as my Lord Mayor does.
True, my Lord Mayor can doe no more then you in that point.
But master constable what if hee should resist vs.
Why if he do resist, you may knock him down, and then id him stand, and come before the Constable. So  you are sufficiently cnstructed concerning you office take your stands, you shall hear rogues wallking at these seasonable hours, I warrant you, stand close.
Purpose, now doe I take as much care to be apprehended,
As others doe to scope the watch, I must speak
To be overheard, and plainly too, or else these dolts
Will never conceive me.
Hark who goes by?
Oh my conscience, my conscience, the terror of a Guilty conscience.
How, conscience talks hee of,
He's an honest man, I warrant him, let him pass
I I, let him pass, good night honest gentleman.
These are wise officers, I must bee plainer yet.
That gold, that cursed gold, that made me poison him
Made me poison Eugenio.
How made me poison him, he's a knave I warrant him.
M. Constable has found him already,
I warrant you a knave cannot pass me, go reprehend him, Isle take his excommunication my self.
Come before the constable
Come before the Constable.
Sirrah, sirrah, you would have escaped
Would you, no sirrah you shall know the Kings
Officers have eyes to hear such rogues as you,
Come sirrah, confess who it was you poisoned, he
Looks like a notable rogue.
I do not like
His looks.
nor I.
You would deny it
Would you sir, we shall sift you,
Alas master
I cannot now deny what I have said
You over heard me, I poisoned Eugenio son to
Lord Polimetes.
Oh rascal.
my
Young Landlord.
Let him alone, the law
Shall punish him, but sir where did you poison
Him.
About a days journey hence, as he was
Coming home from Athens I met him, and
Poisoned him.
But sirrah who set you a work
Confess, I shall find out the whole no of there
Rogues, speak.
Count Virro hired me to do it.
Oh lying Rascal.
Nay he that will steal will lye.
Isle believe nothing he says.
Be lye a man of worship.
A noble man
Away with him, Isle hear no more, remit him to
Prison; Sirrah, you shall hear of these things
To morrow, where you would be loath to hear um.
Come lets go.
Isle take your counsel Sir, Isle not be seen in it, but meet you when tic done, you'll marry them.
Fear not that Sir, Isle doe the deed.
I shall rest thankful to you, till then Isle leave you.
I pray father leave vs, wee know how to behave our selves alone, me thinks Luce wee are too many by two yet.
You are merry Sir.
Now they are sure or never, poor Francisco
Thou metst thy match, when thou durst undertake
To overreach me with tricks, wher's now your Sumner?
Fore heaven I cannot but applaud my brain,
To take my daughter even against her will,
And great with child by another, her shame published,
She cited to the Court, and yet bestow her
On such a fortune as rich Shallow is,
Nay that which is the Master-peece of all,
Make him believe it is his, though he ne'er touched her,
If men ne'er met with crosses in the world,
There were no difference twixt the wise and fools,
 isle go meet um, when tic done, I fear not.
Nay fret not now, you have been worse abused
If you had married her, she never loved you.
I ever scorned thy folly and hated thee, though
Sometimes before my father I would make an Ass
Of thee.
Oh women, monstrous women,
Little does her father know who has married her.
Yes, he knows the Parson married me,
And you can witness that.
And he shall know the Parson will lye with her.
Well Parson, I will be revenged on all thy coat,
I will not plough an Acre of ground for you to
Tithe, Isle rather pasture my neighbours cattle
For nothing.
Oh be more charitable Sir, bid God give um joy.
I care not greatly if I do, he is not the first
Parson that has taken a gentleman's leavings.
How mean you Sir?
You guess my meaning, I hope to have good luck
To horse-flesh now she is a Parsons wife.
You have lain with her then Sir.
I cannot tell you that, but if you saw a woman with child without lying with a man, then perhaps I have not.
Impudent Coxcomb, dare thou say that ever thou layst with me, did thou ever so much as kiss my hand in private.
These things must not be spoken of in company.
Thou know I ever hated thee.
But when you were in the good humour you would tell me another tale.
The fool is mad, by heaven my Francisco I am wronged.
Then I must change my note, sirrah, unsay
What you have spoken, swear here before
The Parson and my self, you never touched her, or
Isle cut thy throat, it is Francisco threatens thee.
I am in a sweet case, what should I doe now, h
Father thinks I have lain with her, if I deny it
Heel have about with me, if I say I have, this
Young rogue will cut my throat.
Come will you swear.
I would I were fairly off, I would lose my wench with all my heart, I swear.
So, now thou art free from any imputation that his tongue can stick upon thee.
Well now I see tic doe.
Her's one
Shall  with you.
God give you joy son
1 line
I thank you father.
How' this, Francisco in the Parsons habit,
I have married her as you bad me Sir, but this
Was th truer Parson of the two, he tied the
 and this Gentleman is our witness
 undone, Strumpet thou hast betrayed thy  beggary, to shame beside, and that in open Court,  what thou hast sought, hang, beg, and starve, isle .
Good Sir.
I told you what would come on it.
How did your wisdom lose her?
 you see I was beguiled, and so were you.
 take her, thou see the portion thou art like o hae.
Tic such a portion as will ever please  for her sake be not unnatural.
Do not reject me father.
But for the fault  were for, or shame she should endure in , behold her yet an untouched Virgin, Cushion come  Shallow, take your child unto you, make  prove as wise as the father.
This is more strange then there, ah Luce, we
 so subtle to deceive thy self, and me; well
, tic thine own choice.
Sir we can force no bounty from you, and there must rest content with what your pleasure is.
 he is my Lord, that's he in the Parsons  thus disguised about the business I told you of
Lysandro, see your noble father.
Welcome my long lost son from all the storms
Of frowning fortune that thou hast endured
Into thy fathers arms.
I my Francisco noble.
Lord Euphues son, I am amazed.
I hear Lysandro that you are married.
Yes my Lord, this is my Bride, the Daughter and Heir of this rich Gentleman, it was only she that when my state was nothing, my poor self and Parentage unknown, vouchsaf't to know, nay grace me with her love, her constant love.
Such merit must not be forgot my son,
Daughter much joy attend upon your choice.
Now wants but your consent.
Which with a willing heart I do bestow,
Pardon me worthy son, I have so long
Been hard to you, it was ignorance
Of what you were, and care I took for her.
Your care edes no Apoogy.
But now Lysandro I must make thee sad
Upon thy wedding day, and let thee know
There is no pure and vncompounded joy
Lent to , in depth of woe
Thou  the knowledge of thy parentage,
Thy elder  Philocles must dye,
And , our name and house
Had  ever, had not gracious heaven
Sent as a  to my  age,
Thy long lost self supporter of the name.
But can there e no means to save his life.
 none, the King has tan an oath
Never to  him, but since they say
His  rpents, and fine would save him.
Then  wretched, like a man long blind,
That comes at last  see the wished for son,
But find it in eclipse, such is my case,
To meet in this dark woe my dearest friends,
Had you not heard this news before Lysandro?
Yes Sir, and did lament,
As for a worthy stranger, but ne'er knew
My sorrow stood engaged by such a tie
As brotherhood, where may we see him Sir?
This morning hoe's arraigned, put of that habit
You are in, and go along with me, leave your
Friends hear awhile.
Farewell father,
Dear Luce till soon farewell, nought but so sad
A chance, could make me cloudy now.
Well Luce thy choice has proved better then we
Expected, but this cloud of grief has dimde
Our mirth, but will I hope blow over,
Heaven grant it may.
And signior Shallow, though you have mist what
My love meant you once, pray be my guest.
I thank you Sir, Isle not be strange.
Nicanor, I would find some privy place
Where I might stand unseen, unknown of any,
To hear the arraignment of young Philocles.
The Judges are now entering, please you Sir
Here to ascend, you may both hear and see.
Well Isle go up,
And like a jealous husband here and see
That that will strike me dead, am I a King
And cannot pardon such a small offence,
I cannot do it, nor am I Caesar now,
Lust ha vncrown'd me, and my rash tan oath
Hs  of a Kings prerogative,
Come come Nicanor, help me to ascend,
And ee that fault that I want power to mend.
Bring forth the prisoner, where are the witnesses?
Here my Lords, I am the wronged party,
And the fact my man, here besides the Officers
That took them can justify.
That's enough.
Philocles stand to the Bar, and answer to such
Crimes as shall be here objected against thy life.
Read the indictment.
Spare that labour,
I do confess the fact that I am charged with,
And speak as much as my accusers can,
As much as all the witnesses can prove,
It was I that stole away the Daughter and Heir
Of the Lord Polimetes, which were to doe again
Rather then lose her, I again would venture,
This was the fact, your sentence honoured fathers.
Tic brave and resolute.
A heavy sentence noble Philocles,
And such a one, as I could wish my self
Off from this place, some other might deliver,
You must dye for it, death is your sentence.
Which I embrace with willingness, now my Lord,
Is your hate glutted yet, or is my life
Too poor a sacrifice to appease the rancor
Of your inveterate malice, if it be to
Invent some scandal that may after blot
My reputation, father dry your tears,
Weep not for me, my death shall leave no stain
Upon your blood, nor blot on your fair name
The honoured ashes of my ancestors
May still rest quiet in their tear wet Vrnes
For any fact of mine, I might have lived
If heaven had not prevented it, and found
Death for some foul dishonourable act.
Brother farewell, no sooner have I found
But I must leave thy wished for company.
Farewell my dearest love, live thou still happy,
And may some one of more desert then I,
Be blessed in the enjoying what I loose,
I need not wish him happiness that has thee,
For  bring it may hee prove as good
 worthy.
dearest Philocles,
 for any man but thee
 good my Lords
 both together
 alike, why should the law
 and lay it all on him,
 would we could as lawfully
 hee should not dye for this,
, whose that you have brought there?
 A benefactor, if it please your Lordships,
 him in my watch last night.
1 line
When's his offence?
murder.
No master Constable, it was but poisoning of a man.
 a fool.
 for ever, all will out.
What proofs have you against him?
His own profession if it please your honour.
And  ill profession, to be a murderer, thou
 has confe the fact.
Yes my Lord, hee cannot deny it.
Did he not name the party who it was that he had 
marry with reverence be it spoken.
 my Lord Polimetes his son.
How's this
He died long sense at Athens.
I cannot tell what I should think of it,
 the man that lately brought me news
1 line
 to the bar, thou  thy accusation
 say.
Ah my good Lord,
 deny what I have said,
, as my bleeding heart
Was making confession of my crime.
I told him an shall please your Lordships
 Kings officers had eyes to hear such rascals.
You have bin careful in your office Constable,
You may now leave your Prisoner,
Isle leave the fell on with your Lordship.
Farewell good
Murder I see will out.
Why did thou poison him.
I was poor,
And want made me be hired.
Hired, by whom?
By Count irro,
There he stands.
I do beseech your Lordships not to credit
What this base fellow speaks, I am innocent.
I doe believe you are, sirrah speak truth,
You have not long to live.
Please it your Lordship
I may relate the manner.
doe.
Eugenio was alive when first the news
Was spread in Syracuse he was dead,
Which false report Count Virro crediting,
Became an earnest suitor to his Sister
Thinking her Heir, but finding afterwards
Her brother lived, and coming home
Not a days journey hence, he sent me to him,
And with a promise of five hundred crowns
Hired me to poison him, that this is true
Heir's his own hand to witness it against him,
Please it your Lordships to peruse the writing.
This is his hand.
Sure as I live,
I have seen Warrants from him with just these
Characters.
Besides me thinks this fellows
Tale is likely.
Tic too true,
This fellows sudden going from my house
Put me into a fear.
Count Virro, stand to the bar,
What can you say to clear you of this murder?
Nothing my Lords, I must confess the fact.
Why then against you both doe I pronounce.
Sentence of death.
The Law is just.
Wretch that I am, is my dissembled grief
Turned to true sorrow, were my acted tears
But Prophesies of my ensuing woe,
And is he truly dead. oh pardon me
Deie Ghost of my Eugenio, it was my fault
That called this hasty vengeance from the Gods,
And shortened thus thy life, for whilst with tricks
ought to fasten wealth upon our house,
roughed a Cannibal to be the grave
Of me and mine, base bloody murderous Count.
Vile Cousner, cheating Lord, dissembler.
Peace, stop the mouth of malediction there,
This is no place to rail in.
Ye just powers,
at to the quality of mans offence,
 pe your correcting rods, and punish there
Where he has sinned, did not my bleeding heart
 such a heavy share in this days woe,
 could with a free soul applaud your justice.
Lord Euphues and Philocles forgive me
To make amends, I know's impossible
For what my malice wrought, but I would fine
 that might testify my grief
 repentance.
This is that I looked for.
Yre kind too late my Lord, had you bin thus
 required, you'd saved your self and me,
 sons, but if your grief be true
 you heartily.
And I,
Now comes my que, my Lord Polimetes,
 correction let me ask one question.
What question? speak.
if this young Lord
, would you bestow your Daughter
 upon him, would you Lord?
As willingly as I would breath my self.
Then dry all your eyes,
 hear shall have a cause to week,
, Leucothoe is no Heir,
 lives, and that clears you Count Virro
 murder.
How, lives?
Yes lives to call thee brother Philocles.
Oh my dear Brother.
My son,
Welcome from death.
Pardon me good my Lord that I thus long
Have from your knowledge kept my self concealed,
My end was honest.
I see it was,
And now son Philocles give me thy hand,
Here take thy wife, she loves thee I dare swear,
And for the wrong that I intended thee,
Her portion shall be double what I meant it.
I thank your Lordship.
Brother Euphues,
I hope all enmity is now forgot
Betwixt our houses.
Let it be ever so, I do embrace your love.
Well my life is saved yet, though my wench be lost,
God give you joy.
Thanks good my Lord.
How suddenly this tragic scene is charged,
And turned to Comedy
Tic very strange.
Let vs conclude within.
Stay,
And take my joy with you.
His Majesty
Is coming down, let vs attend.
These jars are well closed up, now Philocles,
What my rash oath denied me, this blessed howe
And happy accident has brought to pass,
The saving of thy life.
A life my Liege,
That shall be ever ready to be spent
Upon your service.
Thanks good Philocles,
But wher's the man whose happy presence brought
All this unlooked for sport: where is Eugenio?
Here my dread Liege.
Welcome to 
Welcome Eugenio, prithee ask some boon
That may requite the good that thou hast done.
I thank your Majesty, what I have done
Needs no requital, but I have a suite
Unto Lord Euphues, please it your Majesty
To be to him an intecessor for me,
I make no question but I shall obtain.
What is it? speak, it shall be granted thee.
That it would please him to bestow on me
His Niece, the fair and virtuous Lady Laeda.
With all my heart, I know twill please her well,
I have often heard her praise Eugenio,
It shall be done within.
Then here all strife ends,
Isle be your guest my self to day, and help
To solemnise this double marriage.
Your royal presence shall much honour vs.
Then lead away, the happy knot you tie,
Concludes in love two houses enmity.
Our Authors heir if it be legitimate
Tic his, if not, he dares the worst of fate,
For if a Bastard, charity is such,
That what you give, it cannot be too much,
And he, and we, vow if it may be shown,
To doe as much for yours, as for our own.

THis our Device, wee doe not call a Play,
Because we break the Stages Laws to day
Of Acts &amp; Scenes, sometimes a Comic strain
Hath hit delight home in the Master-vayne:
Thalia's prize, Melpomine's sad stile,
Hath shook the Tragic hand another while;
The Muse of History hath caught your eyes,
And she chants the pastor all Psalteries:
We now lay claim to none, yet all present
Seeking out pleasure to find your content;
You shall perceive by what comes first in sight,
It was intended for a Royal Night.
There's one hours words, the rest in Songs &amp; Dances,
Lauds no mans own, no man himself aduances,
No man is lifted but by other hands,
Say he could leap, he lights but where he stands:
Such is our fate; if good, much good may it doe you,
If not (sorry) weal lose our labours wi you.
SOldier, ta-ra-ra-ra-ra. How first? thou look as if thou had lost a field to day.
No, but I have lost a day ith field: if you take me a maunding but where I am commanding, let  show me the house of correction.
Why, thou were not maunding, were thou? there's martial danger in that, believe it.
No sir, but I was bold to show my self to some of my old and familiar acquaintance; but being disguised with my wants, there's no body knew me.
Faith, and that's the worst disguise a man can walk in; thou were better have appeared drunk in good clothes, much better there's no superfluities shame a man; as to be ouer-braue, ouer-bold, ouer-swearing, ouer-lying, ouer-whoring, these add still to his reput;
it is the poor indigence, the want, the lank deficiency; as when a man cannot be brave, dares not be bold, is afraid to swear, wants maintenance for a lye, and money to give a whore a supper: this is pauper, cuius modicum non satis est; nay, hee shall never be rich with begging neither, which is another wonder; because many beggars are rich.
Oh Cauina Facundia! this dog-eloquence of thine will make thee somewhat one day, Scholar; could thou turn but this prose into rime, there were a pitiful living to bee picked out of it.
I could make Ballads for a need.
Very well sir; and Isle warrant thee thou shalt never want subject to write of: One hangs himself to day, another drowns himself to morrow, a Sergeant stabbed next day, here a Pettifogger ath' Pillory, a Bawd in the Carts nose, and a Pander in the tail: Hic Mulier, Haec Fire, Fashions, Fictions, Felonies, Fooleries, a hundred havens has the Ballad-monger to traffic at, and new ones still daily discovered.
Prithee Soldier, no further this way, I participate more of Heraclitus then Democritus, I could rather weep the sins of the people then sing um.
Shall I set thee down a course to live?
Faith, a coorse living I think must serve my turn; but why hast thou not found out thine own yet?
Tush, thats resolved on, beg; when there's use for me,
I shall bee brave again, hugged, and beloved:
Wee are like Winter garments, in the height
And hot blood-of Summer, putoff, thrown by
For moths-meate, never so much as thought on,
Till the Drum strikes up stormesagen; and then,
Come, my well-lin'd Soldier, (with valour,
Not Valor) keep me warm; Oh, I love thee;
Wee shall bee trimmed and very well brushed then:
If wee be faced with Fur, it is tolerable;
For we may pillage then and steal our prey,
And not bee hanged for it; when the least fingering
In peaceful Summer chokes vs: A Soldier,
At the best, is even but the forlorn hope
Unto his Country, sent desperately out
And never more expected: if he come,
Peace's war, perhaps, the Law providently
Has provided for him, some house or lands
May be suspenc't in wrangling controversy
And hee bee hired to keep possession:
For there may be swords drawn, he may become
The abject second to some stinking Bailey;
Oh, let him serve the Pox first, and dye a Gentleman.
Come, I know my ends, but would fine provide for thee:
Can thou make?
What? I have no handicraft, man.
Cuckolds, make Cuckolds, it is a pretty trade
In a peaceful City; it is women's work, man,
And they are good pay-masters.
I dare not:
It is a work of supererogation, and the Church forbids it.
Prithee, what's Latin for a Cuckold, Scholar?
I could never learn yet.
Faith, the Latines have no proper word for it, that ever I read; Homo, I take it, is the best,
Because it is a common name to all men.
You're mad fellows you Scholars; I am persuaded,
Were I a Scholar now, I could not want.
Every man's most capable of his own grief.
A Scholar said you? why there are none now a days:
Were you a Scholar, you'd bee a singular fellow.
How no Scholars! What's become of um all?
Isle make it proof from your experience:
A Commander's a Commander, Captain, Captain;
But, having no Soldiers, whore's the command?
Such are wee, all Doctors, no Disciples now;
Every man's his own teacher, none learns of others:
You have not heard of our Mechanic Rabbis,
That shall dispute in their own tongues backward and forward,
With all the learned Fathers of the Jaws?
Mechanic Rabbis! what might those be!
Isle show you sir, (and they are men are daily to be scene)
There's Rabbi Iob, a venerable Silkeweauer,
Iehu, a Throester, dwellingith Spittle fields;
Theres Rabbi Abimelech, a learned Cobbler,
Rabbi Lazarus, a superstichious Taylor:
These shall hold up their Shittles, Needles, Awles,
Against the gravest Levity of the Land,
And give no ground neither.
That I believe,
They have no ground for any thing they doe.
You understand right: and these men by practique
Have got the Theory of all the Arts
At their fingers ends, and in that they'll live;
How ere they'll dye, I know not: for they change daily.
This is strange,
How come they to attain this knowledge?
As Boys learn Arithmetic, practise with Counters
To reckon sums of silver: so with their Tools
They come to Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric
And all the Sciences; as for example,
The devout Weaver sits within his Loom,
And thus hee makes a learned Syllogism:
His Woof the Mayor, and his Warp the Minor.
His Shuttle then the brain, and firm conclusion,
Makes him a piece of Stuff, that Aristotle,
Ramus, nor all the Logicians can take a pieces.
This has some likelihood.
So likewise by
His deep instructive and his mystic tools,
The Taylor comes to be Rhetorical,
First, on the spread Velvet, Satin, Stuff, or Cloth,
He chalks out a circumference Paraphrase,
That goes about the bush where the Thief stands.
Then comes his Shears in shape of an Eclipses,
And takes away the t'others too long tail:
By his Needle he understands Ironia,
That with one eye looks two ways at once:
Metonymia ever at his fingers ends.
Some call his Pickadell, Synecdoche:
But I think rather that should be his Yard
Being but Pars pro toto, and by Metaphor
All know, the Selleridge under the shop-boord,
He calls his Hell, not that it is a place
Of Spirits abode, but that from that Abyss
Is no recovery or redemption
To any owners hand what ever falls.
I could run further, were it not tedious,
And place the stiffe-toed Cobbler in his form:
But let them mend themselves, for yet ell's nought:
They now learn only never to be taught.
Let them alone; How shall we learn to live?
Without book is most perfect, for with 'vm
We shall hardly: thou moist keep a Fence-Schoole, it is a Noble Science.
I had rather beith Crown Office:
Thou moist keep School too, and doe good service
To bring up children for the next age better.
It is a poor living thats picked out of boys buttocks.
It is somewhat better then the night-Farmer yet.
Hark, What sounds are these?
Ha? Theres somewhat more,
There is in sight a glorious presence,
A presence more then humane.
An amazing one, Scholar; if ever thou could conjure, speak now.
In name of all the Deities, what art thou?
Thy shine is more then Sub-celestiall,
It is at the least heavenly Angelical.
A Patronise unto ye both, ye ignorant and vndeseruing Favourites of my Fame; You are a Soldier?
Since these arms could wield Ames
I have professed it, brightest Deity.
To thee I am Bellona: you are a Scholar?
In that poor Pilgrimage (since I could go)
I hitherto have walked.
To thee I am Minerua,
Pallas to both, Goddess of Arts and Arms,
Of Arms and Arts, for neither have precedence,
For hoe's the complete man partakes of both,
The soul of Arts joined with the flesh of valour;
And he alone participates with me.
Thou art no Soldier unless a Scholar,
Nor thou a Scholar unless a Soldier.
Ye 'aue Noble breedings both, worthy Foundations,
And will ye build up rotten Battlements
On such fair groundsels? That will ruin all:
Lay Wisdom on thy Valour, on thy Wisdom, Valour;
For these are mutual co-incidents,
What seeks the Soldier?
My maintenance.
Lay by thine Arms and take the City then.
Theres the full Cup and Cap of maintenance;
And your grief is want too?
I want all but grief.
No: you want most, what most you doe profess.
Where read you to bee rich was happiest?
He had no bay from Phoebus, nor from me
That ever wrote so, no Minerua in him,
My Priests have taught, that poverty is safe,
Sweet and secure: for nature gives man nothing
At his birth. When life and earth are wedded,
There's neither Basin held nor Dowry given,
At parting nor is any garner stored,
Wardrobe or Warehouse kept for their return:
Wherefore shall then man count his Myriade's
Of gold and silver Idols: since thrifty Nature
Will nothing lend but she will have it again,
And life and labour for her interest?
My Priests doe teach, Seek thou thy self within,
Make thy mind wealthy, thy knowing conscience,
And those shall keep thee company from hence.
Or would you wish to emulate the gods,
Live (as you may imagine) careless and free,
With joys and pleasures crowned, and those eternal,
This were to (far) exceed 'vm: for while earth lasts
The Deities themselves abate their fullness,
Troubled with cries of ne'er contented man:
Man then to seek and find it, all that hope
Fled when Pandora's Fatal box flew op.
Divine Lady, theres yet a competence
Which we come short off.
That may as well be cause
From your own negligence, as our slow blessings:
But I'll prefer you to a greater power,
Even Iupiter himself, Father and King of Gods,
With whom I may well join in just complaint:
These latter Ages have dispoiled my Fame.
Minerua's Altars are all ruined now.
I had along adored Paladium.
Offerings and Incense fuming on my shrine;
Rome held me dear, and old Troy gave me worship,
All Greece renowned me, till the Ida prize
Joined me with wrathful Iuno to destroy 'vm,
(For we are better ruined, then profaned.)
Now let the latter ages count the gains
They got by wanton Venus sacrifice,
But I'll invoke great Iupiter.
Doe, Goddess
And re-erect the ruins of thy Fame
For Poesy can doe it.
Altitonant
Imperial crowned, and thunder-armed Jove,
Unfold thy fiery Veil, the flaming Robe
And superficies of thy better brightness,
Descend from thine Orbicular Chariot,
Listen the plaints of thy poor Votaries,
It is Pallas calls, thy Daughter, Iupiter,
Tan from thee by the Lemnian Mulciber,
A Midwife god to the delivery
Of thy most Sacred fertile teeming brain.
Hark, these sounds proclaim his willing sweet descent,
If not full blessings, expect some content.
What would our Daughter?
Iust-iudging Jove,
I meditate the suite of humble mortals,
By whose large Sceptre all their Fates are swayed,
Adverse or auspicious.
Tic more then Iupiter
Can doe to please 'vm, unsatisfied man
Has in his ends no end, not hells Abyss
Is deeper gulf'd then greedy Avarice,
Ambition finds no Mountain high enough,
For his aspiring Foot to stand upon.
One drinks out all his blessings into surfeits,
Another throws um out as all were his,
And the Gods bound for prodigal supply,
What is hee lives content in any kind?
That long incensed nature is now ready
To turn all back into the fruitless Chaos.
These are two noble Virtues (my dread Sire)
Both Arts and Arms well-wishers unto Pallas.
How can it be, but they have both abused,
And would (for their ills) make our Justice guilty?
Show them their shames, Minerua: what the young world
In her unstable youth did then produce:
She should grow graver now, more sage, more wise,
Know Concord, and the harmony of goodness:
But if her old age strike with harsher notes,
We may then think she is too old, and dotes,
Strike by white Art, a Theomanticke power,
Magic Divine, not the Devils horror,
But the delicious Musique of the Spheres,
The thrice three Worthies summon back to life:
There let um see what arts and Arms comixed
(For they had both) did in the worlds broad face
Those that did propagate and beget their fems,
And (for posterity) left lasting names.
I shall, great Iupiter.
MVSES, Usher in those states,
And amongst 'vm choose your mates,
There wants not one, nor one to spare,
For thrice three, both your numbers are.
Learnings Mistress, fair Caliope,
Loud Euterpe, sweet Therpsichore,
Soft Thalia, sad Melpomine,
Pleasant Clio, large Eratho,
High aspiring eyed Vrania,
Hony-lingued Polihymnia;
Leave awhile your Thespian Springs,
And usher in those more then Kings:
We call them Worthies, it is their due,
Though long time dead, still live by you.
These three were Hebrews,
This Noble Duke was he, at whose command
Hiperion reined his fiery Coursers in,
And fixed stood over Mount Gilboa,
This Mattathias son, the Macchabee,
Under whose arm no less then Worthies fell.
This the most sweet and sacred Psalmograph,
These of another sort, of much less knowledge,
Little less valour, a Macedonian borne,
Whom afterwards the world could scarcely bear,
For his great weight in Conquest, this Troy's best soldier;
This Romes first Caesar; these three of latter times,
And to the present more familiar.
Great Charles of France, and the brave Bulloine Duke,
And this is Britains glory, King'd thirteen times.
Yeaue fair aspects, more to express Ioues power,
Show you have motion for a Jovial hour.
Were not these presidents for all future ages?
But none attains their glories (King of Stars:)
These are the fems are followed, and pursued,
But never overtaken.
The Fates below,
The gods arms are not shortened, nor doe we shine
With fainter influence; who conquers now,
Makes it his Tyrants Prize, and not his Honours,
Abusing all the blessings of the gods.
Learnings and Arts are Theories, no practiques;
To understand is all they study too:
Men strive to know too much, too little doe.
Plaints are not ours alone (great Iupiter.)
See, Time himself comes weeping.
Who he's more cause?
Who more wronged then Time? Time passes all men
With a regardless eye, at best, the worst
Expect him with a greedy appetite.
The landed Lord looks for his Quarter day,
The big-bellied Usurer for his teeming gold
That brings him forth the child of Interest:
He that beyond the bounds of heavens large blessing,
Hath made a fruitless creature to increase:
Dull earthen Minerals to propagate,
These only doe expect and entertain me:
But (being come) they bend their plodding heads,
And while they count their bags, they let me pass,
Yet instant wish me come about again.
Would Time deserve their thanks, or Jove their praise,
He must turn Time only to Quarter days.
Oh, but my wrongs they are innumerable!
The Lawyer drives me off from Term to Term,
Bids me (and I do it) bring forth my Alathae
My poor child Truth, he sees, and will not see her:
What I could manifest in one clear day,
He still delays a cloudy Jubilee.
The Prodigal wastes, and makes me sick with surfeits:
The Drunkard (strong in Wine) trips up my heals,
And sets me topsie-turuy, on my head,
Waking my silent passage in the night
With Revels, noise, and Thunder-clapping oaths,
And snorting on my bright Meridian,
And when they think I pass too slowly by:
They have a new-found vapour to expel me,
They smoke me out: ask um but why they do it,
And he that worst can speak, yet this can say,
I take this whiff to drive the Time away.
Oh, but the worst of all, women doe hate me:
I cannot set impression on their checks
With all my circular hours, days, months, and years,
But it is wiped off with gloss and pensilrie,
Nothing so hateful, as gray hairs and Time;
Rather no hair at all; it is sins Autumn now:
For those fair Trees that were more fairer cropped,
Or they fall of themselves, or will be lopped:
Even Time it self (to number all his griefs)
Would waste himself unto his ending date:
How many would eternity wish here,
And that the Sun, and Time, and Age might stand
And leave their Annual distinction,
That nature were bed-rid, all motion sleep?
Time having then such foes, he's cause to weep.
Redress it Iupiter.
I tell thee, glorious Daughter: and you things
Shut up in wretchedness, the world knew once
His age of happiness; blessed times ownde him,
Till those two ugly ills, Deceit, and Pride,
Made it a perished substance: Pride brought in
Forgetfulness of goodness, Merit, Virtue,
And placed ridiculous Officers in life;
Vaine-glory, Fashion, Humour, and such toys
That shame to be produced.
The frenzy of Apparel, that's run mad,
And knows not where to settle Masculine painting;
And the five Starches, mocking the five Senses,
All in their different and ridiculous colours,
Which for their apish and fantastic follies,
I summon to make odious, and will fit um
With flames of their own colours.
What, no respect amongst you? must I wake you
In your forgetful duties? jet before me?
Take place of me? you rude presumptuous gossip:
'Pray who am I? not I the primitiue Starch?
You blew-eyde Frokin, looks like fire and brimstone;
You Cawdle-colour, much of the complexion
Of high Shroue-Tuesday Batter, yallow-hammer:
And you my Tanzy face, that shows like Pride,
Served up in Sorrel sops, greene Sickness baggage:
And last, thou Red Starch, that wear all thy blushes
Under thy cheeks, looks like a strangled Moon calfe,
With all thy blood settled about thy neck,
The Ensign of thy shame, if thou had any;
Know, I'm Starch Protestant, thou Starch Puritan
With the blew nostril, whose tongue lies in thy nose.
Wicked interpretation!
I ha known a white-fac't hyppocrite, Lady Sanctity,
A Yellow ne'er came near her, and sh'as been
A Citizens wife too, starcht like Innocence;
But the Devils pranks not vglier: In her mind
Wears Yellow, hugs it, if her husbands trade
Could bear it, there's the spite: but since she cannot
Wear her own linen Yellow; yet she shows
Her love too't, and makes him wear Yellow hose.
I am as stiff in my opinion
As any Starch amongst you.
I, as you.
And I as any.
I scorn to come behind.
Then conclude thus:
When all men's several censures, all the Arguments
The world can bring upon vs, are applied;
The sinne's not in the colour, but the pride.
Oracle Yellow:
These are the youngest Daughters of deceit,
With which the precious time of life's beguiled,
Fooled, and abused; Isle show you straight their Father,
His shapes, his labours, that has vexed the world
From age to age, and tossed it from his first and simple state,
To the foul Center where it now abides;
Look back but into Times, here shall be shown,
How many strange Remooues the world has known. Music.
Who's this, great Iupiter?
Simplicity: hee that had first possession; one that stumbled upon the world, and never minded it.
Ho, ho! Isle go see how the World looks since I stepped aside from it, there's such heaving and shouing about it, such toiling and moyling; now I stumbled upon it when I least thought on it.
'Vds me, it is altered of one side since I left it: ho, there's a Milke-maid got with child since, me thinks; what, and a Shepherd forsworn himself? heere's a foul corner: by this light, Subtlety has laid an egg too, and will go ny to hatch a Lawyer; this was well foreseen: Isle mar the fashion on it; so, the egg's broke, and 'tas a yolk as black as buckrom: Whats here a this side? Oh, a dainty world; heere's one a sealing with his tooth, and poor man hee has but one in all, I was afraid hee would have left it upon the paper, hee was so honestly earnest; here are the Reapers singing: Isle lay mine ear to 'em:
Yonder's Simplicity whom I hate deadly,
He has held the world too long; hoe's but a fool,
A toy will cousin him: if I once fasten on it,
Isle make it such a Nursery for Hell,
Planting black Souls in it, it shall ne'er be fit
For honesty to set her simples in.
Whop! Heere's the coozningst Rascal in a Kingdom,
The Master villain, he has the thunders property,
For if he come but near the Harvest folks,
His breath's so strong, that he sours all their bottles,
If hee should but blow upon the world now, the stain would nofor get out again: I warrant, if hee were ripped, one might find a swarm of Usurers in his liver, a cluster of Scriveners in his kidneys, and his very puddings stuffed with Bailiffs.
I must speak fair to the Fool.
He makes more near me.
Lass, who has put that load? that carriage
On poor Simlcity? had they no mercy?
Pretty, kind, loving worm; come, let me help it.
Keep off, and leave your cogging; foh, how abominably he smells of controversies, Schisms and Factions! me thinks, I smell forty Religions together in him, and ne'er a good one;his eyes look like false lights, coozening trap-windowes.
The world, sweet heart, is full of cares and troubles,
No match for thee, thou art a tender thing,
A harmless quiet thing, a gentle fool,
Fit for the fellowship of Ewes and Rams:
Go, take thine ease and pipe; give me the burden,
The clog, the torment, the heart-breake, the world;
Heere's for thee, Lamb, a dainty Oaten Pipe.
Pox a your pipe; if I should dance after your pipe, I should soon dance to the Devil.
I think, some serpent sure has licked him over,
And given him only craft enough to keep,
And go no farther with him; all the rest
Is innocence about him, truth and bluntness.
I must seek other course; for I have learned
Of my Infernal Sire, not to be lazy,
Faint or discouraged at the tenth repulse:
Me thinks that world Simplicity now hugs fast,
Do's look as if it should be Deceit's at last.
So, so, l'me glad hes vanished: me thought I had much ado to keep my self from a smatch of knavery, as long as he stood by me; for certainly villainy is infectious, and in the greater person
the greater poison: as for example, hee that takes but the tech of a Citizen, may take the scab of a Courtier. Hark, the Reapers begin to sing, they are come nearer me thinks too.
HAppy times wee live to see,
Whose Master is Simplicity:
This is the age where blessings flow,
In joy we reap, in peace wee sow;
Wee doe good deeds without delay,
Wee promise and wee keep our day,
Wee love for virtue, not for wealth,
Wee drink no healths, but all for health,
Wee sing, wee dance, wee pipe, wee play,
Our work's continual Holiday,
Wee live in poor contented sort,
Yet neither beg, nor come at Court,
These Reapers have the merriest lives, they have music to all they doe; they'll sow with a Tabor, and get Children with a Pipe.
Sir, hoe's a fool, the world belongs to you,
You're mighty in your worth and your command,
You know to govern, form, make laws, and take
Their sweet and precious penalty, it befits
A mightiness like yours, the world was made
For such a Lord as you, so absolute
A Majesty in all Princely nobleness
As your self is; but to lye vse-lesse now,
Rusty or lazy in a Fools pre-eminence,
It is not for a glorious worth to suffer.
Thou'st said enough.
Now my hope ripens fairly.
Heir's a brave glistering Thing looks me in the face,
I know not what to say too't.
What's thy name?
You may read it in my looks: Simplicity.
What make thou with so great a charge about thee?
Resign it up to me, and be my Fool.
Troth that's the way to be your Fool indeed;
But shall I have the privilege to fool freely?
As ever Folly had.
I'm glad I'm rid on it.
Pray let me case your Majesty.
Thou? hence
Base Sycophant, insinuating hell-hound,
Lay not a finger on it, as thou love
The state of thy whole body; all thy filthy
And rotten flatteries stink in my remembrance,
And nothing is so loath some as thy presence.
Sure this will prove a good Prince.
Still repulsed?
I must find ground to thrive on.
Pray remember now,
You had the world from me clean as a pick,
Only a little smutted a one side,
With a bastard got against it, or such a toy,
No great corruption nor oppression in it,
No knavery, tricks, nor cozenage.
Thou say true, fool, the world has a clear water.
Make as few Laws as you can then to trouble it, the fewer the better; for always the more laws you make, the more knaves
thrive by it, mark it when you will.
Thou'st counsel in thee too.
A little against knavery, I'm such an enemy too't,
That it comes naturally from me to confound it.
Look, what are those?
Tents, Tents; that part of the world
Shows like a Fair: but pray take notice on it,
There's not a Bawdy-Boothe amongst 'em all,
You have 'em white and honest as I had 'em,
Look that your Laundresses pollute 'em not.
How pleasantly the Countries lye about,
Of which wee are sole Lord: whats that in the middle?
Looks like a point, you mean a very prick?
I, that, that.
It is the beginning of Amsterdam: they say the first brick there was laid with fresh Cheese and Cream; because mortar made of Lime and hair was wicked, and committed fornication.
Peace, who are these approaching?
Blustering fellows; the first's a Soldier, hee looks just like March.
Captain, it is you that have the bloody sweats,
You venture life and limbs it is you that taste
The stings of thirst and hunger,
There thou hast named
Afflictions sharper then the enemies swords.
Yet lets another carry away the World,
Of which, by right, you are the only Master,
Stand curtsing for your pay at your return
Perhaps with wooden legs to every Groom
That dares not look full right upon a sword,
Nor upon any wound, or slit of honour?
No more, Isle be my self; I that uphold
Countries and Kingdoms, must I halt down right,
And be propped up with part of mine own strength,
The least part too? Why, have not I the power
To make my self stand absolute of my self,
That keep up others?
How cheers our noble Captain?
Our own Captain,
No more a hireling; your great Foe's at hand,
Seek your defence elsewhere, for mine shall fail you,
Isle not be fellow-yoak't with death and danger
All my life time, and have the World kept from me,
March in the heate of Summer in a bath,
A furnace girt about me, and in that agony,
With so much fire within me, forced to wade
Through a cool river, practising in life
The very pains of hell, now scorched, now shivering,
To call diseases early into my bones,
Before I'ue age enough to entertain 'em:
No, he that has desire to keep the World,
Let him ee'n take the sour pains to defend it.
Stay, Man of Merit, it belongs to thee,
I cheerfully resign it, all my Ambition
Is but the quiet calm of peaceful days;
And that fair good, I know, thy arm will raise.
Though now an absolute master; yet to thee
Ever a faithful servant.
Giue't me sir to lay up, I am your Treasurer,
In a poor kind.
In a false kind I grant thee:
How many wild complaints from time to time
Has been put up against thee? they have wearied me
More then a Battle sixteen hours a' fighting,
I'ue heard the ragged Regiment so curse thee,
I looked next day for Leprosy upon thee,
Or puffs of pestilence as big as Wens,
When thou would drop asunder, like a thing
Inwardly eaten, thy skin only whole
Avaunt, defrauder of poor soldiers rights,
Campe-Caterpiller, hence; or I will send thee
To make their rage a breakfast.
Is it possible?
Can I yet set no footing in the World?
I'm angry, but not weary; Isle hunt out still:
For, being Deceit, I bear the Devils name,
And he's known seldom to give ore his game.
Troth, now the World begins to bee in Hucksters handling; by this light, the Booths are full of Cutlers, and yonders two or three queens going to vittaile the camp: ho, would I were whipped, if yonder be not a Parsons daughter with a soldier betweene her legs, bag and baggage.
Now it is the Soldiers time, great Iupiter,
Now give me leave to enter on my fortunes,
The Worlds our own.
Stay, beguiled thing, this time
Is many ages discrepant from thine,
This was the season when desert was stooped to,
By greatness stooped to, and acknowledged greatest;
But in thy time now, desert stoops it self
To every baseness, and makes Saints of Shadows:
Be patient, and observe, how times are wrought,
Till it comes down to thine that rewards nought.
Ho? what's the news?
Be ready if I call to give fire to the Ordnance.
Bless vs all', herre's one spits fire as hee comes, hee will go ny to mull the world with looking on it, how his eyes sparckle?
Shall the Land-Captaine, sir, usurp your right,
Yours that try thousand dangers to his one,
Rocks, shelves, gulfs, quicksands, hundred hundred horrors,
That makes the Land-men tremble when they are told;
Besides the enemies encounter,
Peace Purser, no more, I'm vexed, I'm kindled.
You, Land Captain, quick, deliver.
Proud Salt-Rouer, thou hast the salutation of a thief.
Deliver, or Isle thunder thee a pieces,
Make night within this hour, even at high noon,
Belch from the Canon: dare expostulate
With me? my fury? What's thy merit, Land-worme,
That mine not centuples?
Thy lazy Marches and safe-footed battles
Are but like dangerous dreams to my encounters:
Why, every minute the Deep gapes for me,
Beside the fiery throats of the loud fight,
When we go too't, and our fell Ordnance play,
It is like the figure of a latter day.
Let me but give the word, night begins now,
Thy breath and prize both beaten from thy body:
How dare thou be so slow? Not yetthen
Hold.
I knew it would come at last.
For this resign,
Part thou shalt have still, but the greatest mine.
Only to vs belongs the golden sway,
Th'Indies load vs; thou liu'st but by thy pay.
And shall your Purser help you?
No in sooth Sir,
Coward and coozner; how many Sea-Battels
Hast thou compounded to be cabled up?
Yet when the fights were ended, who so ready
To cast sick soldiers and dismembered wretches,
Overboard, instantly, crying, away
With things without Arms; it is an ugly sight;
When troth thine own should have been off by right:
But thou lay safe within a wall of hemp,
Telling the guns, and numbering 'em with farting:
Leave me, and speedily; Isle have thee ram'd
Into a Culuerin else, and thy rear flesh
Shot all into potcht eggs.
I will not leave yet;
Destruction plays in me such pleasant strains,
That I would purchase it with any pains.
The motion's worthy, I will join with thee,
Both to defend and enrich Majesty.
Hoyda I can see nothing now for ships;
Hark a the Mariners.
HEy, the World's ours, we have got the time by chance;
Let vs the carouse &amp; sing, for the very house doth skip and dance
That we doe now live in:
Wee have the merriest lives,
Wee have the fruitfulst Wives Of all men.
Wee never yet came home,
But the first hour we come,
We find them all with child again.
What a crew of mad Raskalls are these, they are ready at every Can to fall into the Haddocks mouths, the World begins to love Lap now.
Peace and the brightness of a holy love,
Reflect their beauties on you.
Whose this?
A Reverend shape.
Some Scholar.
A divine one.
He may be what he will for me, fellow Captain;
For I have seen no Church these five and twenty years;
I mean as people ought to see it, inwardly.
I have a virtuous sorrow for you Sir,
And it is my special duty to weep for you.
For to enjoy one world as you doe there,
And be forgetful of another Sir;
Oh, of a better millions of degrees!
It is a frailty and infirmity
That many tears must go for; all too little.
What is it to be the Lord of many battles,
And suffer to be ouer-run within you?
Abroad to conquer, and be slaves at home,
Remember theres a battle to be fought,
Which will undo you, if it be not thought.
And you must leave that World, leave it betimes,
That reformation may weep of the crimes:
There's no indulgent hand the World should hold,
But a strict grasp, for making sin so bold.
We should be careless of it, and not fond,
Of things so held, there is the best command.
Grave Sir, I give thy words their deserved honour,
And to thy Sacred charge freely resign,
All that my Fortune, and the Age made mine.
If the world be not good now, twill ne'er be good,
Theres no hope on it.
I have my wishes here, my sanctified Patron,
Isle first fill all the Chests in the Vestry,
Then theres a secret Vault for Great men's Legacies.
Art not confounded yet? struck blind or crippled,
For thy abusiue thought, thou horrid hypocrite?
Are these the fruits of thy long Orisons
Three hours together, of thy nine Lectures weekly,
Thy swooning at the hearing of an oath,
Scarce to be fetched again? Away, depart,
Thou white-fac't Devil, Author of Heresy,
Schisms, Factions, Controversies: now I know thee
To be Deceit it self, wrought in by Simony,
To blow corruption upon Sacred virtue.
I made my self sure here. Church fail me too?
I thought it mere impossible by all reason,
Since theres so large a bridge to walk upon
Twixt negligence and Superstition.
Where could one better piece up a full vice?
One service lazy, t'other ouer-nice:
There had been twixt, room enough for me.
I will take root, or run through each degree.
Whoop, here's an alteration: by this hand, the Ships are all turned to Steeples; and the Bells ring for joy, as if they would shake down the Pinnacles. How! the Masons are at work yonder, the free Masons, I swear it's a free time for them: Ha! theres one building of a Chapel of ease: Oh, he's loath to take the pains to go to Church: Why, will he have it in's house, when the Proverb says, The Diuel's at home? These great rich men must take their ease in their Inn: theyle walk you a long mile or two to get a stomach for their victuals; but not a piece of a furlong to get an appetite to their prayers.
No more, the case is clear.
Slid, who have we here?
He that pleads for the world, must fall
To his business roundly, most gracious
And illustrious Prince, thus stands the case:
The world in Greek is Cosmos, in Latin, Mundus,
In Law-French Lamont, we leave the Greek,
And come to the Law-French, or glide upon the Latin,
Ell's one business; then vnde mundus? shall we come to that?
Nonne diriuatur  munditia?
The word cleanness, Mundus, quasi mundus, clean,
And what can cleanse or mundifie the world
Better then Law, the clearer of all Cases,
The Sovereign pill or potion that expels
All poisonous, rotten, and infectious wrongs,
From the vexed bosom of the Common-wealth?
Theres a familiar phrase implies thus much,
I'll put you to your purgation; that is,
The Law shall cleanse you: Can the sick world then
Tossed up and down from time to time, repose it self
In a Physicians hand better improu'd?
Upon my life and reputation,
In all the Courts I come at, be assured
Isle make it clean.
Yes, clean away, I warrant you, we shall ne'er see it again.
I grant, my Pills are bitter, I, and costly;
But their effects are rare, Divine, and wholesome,
Theres an Excomunicate Capiendo,
Capias post K. and an No exeat Regno.
I grant, theres bitter Egrimony in um,
And Antimony, I put money in all still:
And it works preciously, who eiects injuries,
Makes um belch forth in vomit but the Law?
Who clears the Widows case, and after gets her
If she be wealthy: but the Advocate?then to conclude,
If you'll have Mundus,  Mundo, clean, firm,
Give him to me, I'll scour him every Term.
I part with it gladly, tak't into thy trust,
So will it thrive, as thy intent is just.
Pity your Trampler, Sir, your poor Solicitor.
Thee! Infamy to our profession,
Which, without wrong to truth, next the Divine one,
Is the most grave and honorabble Function
That gives a Kingdom blessed: but thou, the poison,
Disease, that grows close to the heart of Law,
And make rash censurers think the sound part perished,
Thou foul Eclipse, that interposing Equity,
As the dark Earth, the Moon, make the world Judge,
That blackness and corruption have possessed
The siluer-shine of Justice; when tic only
The smoke ascending from thy poys'nons ways
Cosnag, Demurs, and fifteen Terme-delayes:
Yet hold thee, take the Muck on it, thats thine own,
The Devil and all; but the fair Fame and honour
Of righteous actions, good men's prayers and wishes,
Which is that glorious portion of the World
The noble Lawyer strives for; that thy bribery,
Thy double-handed gripe shall never reach to:
Wit fat and filthy gain thy Lust may feast,
But poor men's curses beat thee from the rest.
Isle feed upon the Muck on it, that a while
Shall satisfy my longings, Wealth is known
The absolute step to all promotion.
Let this be called the Sphere of harmony,
In which being met, lets all move mutually.
Fair Love is in the motion, Kingly love.
Times suffer changes, and the world has been
Vexed with Remooues; but when his glorious peace
Firmly and fairly settles, here's his place,
Truth his defenor, and Majesty his grace:
We all acknowledge it belongs to you.
Only to you, Sir.
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbs.Which shows,
That if the World form it self by the King,
It is fit the Former should command the thing.
This is no place for vs.
Depart, away,
I thought all these had been corrupted Evils,
No court of Virtues, but a guard of Devils.
How blessed am I in Subjects! here are those
That make all Kingdoms happy, worthy Soldier,
Fair Churchman, and thou uncorrupted Lawyer,
Virtues great miracle, that hast redeemed
All Justice from her ignominious name.
You forget me, Sir.
What, Simplicity!
Who thinks of virtue, cannot forget thee.
I marry, my masters: now it looks like a brave world, indeed, how civilly those fair Ladies go yonder! by this hand they are neither trimmed nor trussed, nor ponyarded: Wondermeant! O, yonder's a knot of fine-sharpe-needle-bearded Gallants, but that they wear Stammel Cloaks (me thinks) in stead of Scarles: 'Slid, whats hee that carries out two Custards now under the Porters long nose? oh, hee leaves a bottle of Wine in the Lodge:
and ell's pacified, cry mercy.
Continue but thus watchful or your selves,
That the great cunning Enemies, Deceit
And his too mighty Lord, beguile you not;
And y' are the precious ornaments of State,
The glories of the world, fellows to virtues,
Masters of honest and well-purchas'd fortunes,
And I am fortunate in your partnership;
But if you ever make your Hearts the houses
Of falsehood and corruption, ugliness it self
Will be a beauty to you; and less pointed at:
Spots in deformed faces, are scarce noted,
Fair cheeks are stained, if ne'er so little blotted.
Ever the constant servants to great Virtue.
Her love inhabit you.
Now sons of vexation.
Envy, and discontent, what blame lay you
Upon these times now? Which do's merit most
To be condemned, your dullness, or the Age?
If now you thrive not, Mercury shall proclaim
You're vndeseruers, and cry down your Fame:
Be poor still, Scholar, and thou wretch despised,
If in this glorious time thou can not prosper:
Upon whose breast Noble employments sit,
By Honours hand, in golden Letters writ:
Nay, where the Prince of Nobleness Himself,
Proves ou Minerua's valiant'st hopeful Son,
And early in his Spring puts Armour on.
Unite your word's, and make of two, one brother,
And be each one perfection to the other.
Scholar and Soldier must both shut in one,
That makes the absolute and complete man:
So, now into the World, which if hereafter
You ever tax of foul ungrateful crimes,
Your dullness I must punish, not the times.
Scholar, Honour to mighty Iupiter.
The World's in a good hand now, if it hold, brother.
I hope for many ages.
Fare thee well then,
I'll over, yonder to the most glorious Wars
That ever famde Christian Kingdom.
And I'll settle
Here, in a Land of a most glorious Peace
That ever made joy fruitful: where the Head
Of him that rules, to Learnings fair renown,
Is doubly decked with Laurel, and a Crown:
And both most worthily.
Give me thy hand:
Prosperity keep with thee.
And the glory
Of Noble actions bring white hairs upon thee:
Present our wish with reverence to this Place:
For here't must be confirmed, or 'tas no grace.
WE must confess, that we have vented ware
Not always vendible: Masques are more rare
Then Plays are common; at most, but twice a year
In their most glorious shapes doe they appear.
Which if you please, accept, we'll keep in store
Our debted loves, and thus entreat you more,
Invert the Proverb now, and suffer not,
That which is seldom seen, be soon forgot.

THis Day we entreat All that are hither come,
To expect no noise of Guns, Trumpets, nor Drum,
Nor Sword and Targuet; but to hear Sense and Words,
Fitting the Matter that the Scene affords.
So that the Stage being reformed, and free
From the loud Clamours it was wont to bee,
Turmoiled with Battles; you I hope will cease
Your daily Tumults, and with vs wish Peace.
We stand a hazard now: yet being prepared,
We hope, for your own good, you in the Yard
Will lend your Ears, attentively to hear
Things that shall flow so smoothly to your ear;
That you returning home, t'your Friends shall say,
How ere you vnderstand't, It is a fine Play:
For we have in it a Conjurer, a Devil,
And a Clown too; but I fear the evil,
In which perhaps un wisely we may fail,
Of wanting Squibs and Crackers at their tail.
But howsoever, Gentlemen I swear,
You shall have Good Words for your Money here;
Stuff that will last, we hope, and died in grain:
And as ye liked, pray know the House again.
Enchantments pluck out of the Sky
The Moon, though she be placed on hie.
Dame Circes, with her Charms so fine.
Vlysses Mates did turn to Swine:
The Snakes with Charm is burst in twain,
In Meadows where she doth remain.
And here again,
She plucks each Star out of his seat,
And turns back the raging Waives;
With Charms she makes the Earth to sweat,
And raises Souls out of their Graves:
She burns men's bones as with a fire,
And pulls down the Lights of Heaven,
And makes it snow at her desire,
Even in the midst of Summer season;
And what is it cannot be done
By art of the Magician?
It is true, things most incredible are to be done,
And I believe thee gentle Book in it.
Never before my wary Tutor did
Leave this door open, which he well might call
His private Study; for here Secrets lye
Were worth mans labour to arrive to 'hem:
Here are the Names, Shapes, Powers, and Government
Of every several Spirit, their Degrees,
Their great Effects, particular Seigniories;
And amongst them I have found one, if I had
But skill to raise him for my purposes,
And here's the form of it set down at large:
But stay, what's this?
Pish, this is nought to me.
I, this.
I donnot care for Treasure.
This, this is it: Great Asmody, thou art the Spirit whom
I would converse with, And I will fetch thee, if this
Charm will doe it.
Now I have laid my Circle, fear assaults me: So says my grave Instructor all men doe when they begin this Business; but bids me here be resolute, and dread not: for bound in this Circle, and by these words constrained, they cannot hurt me.
I doe conjure thee by these potent Names:
For what thou daring Mortal? what wut thou doe with Asmody, now thou hast brought him hither?
I doe command thee that thou help me to the invisible Ring.
Ho, ho, ho, Thou foolish Thing without Art, and
less Wit, Dost think it doth require no more but so?
It is thy Masters Master-piece to doe it,
And thou dost call for nothing but thy Ruin.
Thou art now in my power, and I can tear thee
As small as Atoms, and throw thee off
Like dust before a wind: yet for I know thou art
Pupil unto my Master, and his Minion,
And may hereafter with a word release me,
Here vncoustrayn'd, I vow my self thy servant,
And will (acquaint me with thy purposes)
Effect them to the utmost of my power.
Dost thou not this in subtlety, to draw me out of my Circle, and then ruin me?
I dare as well run on the sierie Sword that wounds Malantha, Thama, or Sitrami.
I doe believe thee:
Then be gone; yet stay, a word more:
Thinks thou my Tutor; if I should conceal this Act of mine from him, that he would know it?
I think not: for hee hath given me liberty these five days.
Thanks Asmody: now leave me.
I am gone.
I will get leave of him to return back unto my Fathers house, where I will live, if Asmody can doe it, invisible.
Not far off is a Damsel whom I love,
But never yet durst tell her, nor did know it
So feelingly, as now I am removed.
Tic almost day I wished, though not for fear,
For love he's made me a bold Conjurer.
And thou were bold indeed: but youth is des-
Respects not dangers, howsoe'r they look. (perat;
I came my self unto this Art with trembling,
And when I first had raised a Spirit up,
My flesh me thought ran like my blood about me,
And I sat bathed in a cold faint swear.
But he was far from raising any Spirit:
He ran'hem so disordered, that no Devil,
Though he had heard him, wud have known his name.
But it was my device, seeing him grow
To extreme Melancholy and Discontent,
To let him view these scatt'red papers thus,
That I might sound his grief, knowing how apt
And covetous youth is of every knowledge,
If he might learn it with a little babbling:
But this is not an Art so to be gained.
Isle follow him, attending still upon him,
As if I were the Spirit he guesses me:
And if there shall be cause, Isle play my part
So well, that men shall praise the Magic Art.
Good Seignior no more irruptions, I tell you what you shall trust to: I am not like a Mill, to be turned with wind and water; not all your sighs and tears can alter me, keep 'hem for Custard-eating Dames in the City, there they may prosper.
Thou art a handsome fellow, I confess it,
Hast good parts too, I know it; Living sufficient
To keep house in the Country, and inuisie
Every good Time thy Neighbours, and at Christmas'
Distribute amongst the poor six pence apiece,
And a browne Loaf: Good Country virtues these,
And may perhaps serve for a Doctors daughter,
Though she have read Orlando Furioso.
But for me, that have looked higher into Poetry,
And for a need can couple of my self,
Have talked with Montaigne and with Machiuel,
And can make use of them; note him in this
Place shallow, here profound: and be th'only Star
Whereto all Wits advance their Iacobs Staff,
And the Supreme cry me out Excellent.
What wud three hundred pound a year doe here?
Twill keep a blew Coat and a side Saddle,
But not maintain my Coach-Horses in Provender.
Most excellent of Women, that you are worthy
All that your hopes can lodge in you, I grant:
But Fortune and the Graces were at odds
When you were gotten, else you had bin made
As great as Dignity can make a Woman.
But yet you know (I pray forgive my plainness)
That in Estate you donnot equal me,
If that were it I looked at.
Tic true:
I think my Portion is some seven score pound,
And hardly that by our lady: what it is I know not,
It lies aboue in the Garret in old rusty Armour.
But what's that to th'purpose: ther's a Spirit
(Good or bad, I know not) whispers unto me;
Be an Empress Wench, a Queen, or Duchess,
Countess, or Marquess at least, for those are trifles.
Now Isle tell thee Dorilus, because thou art a handsome Fellow, as I told thee before; when I am any one of these, thou shalt enjoy me, in plain terms, lye with me, and make a Cuckold: for my Ambition is to aduance Greatness. Look, here's thy Sister.
Come in a time I doubt to make you blush.
Why what mad conference are you two in?
For my Ambition is to advance Greatness.
As how?
Why as a Woman may doe; the manner is not to be shown now. I am glad thou art come to take off thy Brother.
Take him off, why he is not so fierce, me thinks:
What, doe you weep Brother?
Like a Watring-Pot; he wud make an excellent
Fountain in the midst of a Garden.
A moist Milke-sop Lover, hang him, on whom Love has no more operation then an Oynion: Why, did not I tell you this was the wrong way, &amp; taught you the right; Lectured unto you according to my own heart, and my heart is made of the same stuff that other Women's are: for shame leave, it is both an ill sight and an ill sign to see a man drop at the Nose.
Why you mistake me, if you think I weep.
No; what use then of your hand-kercher?
Something has touched my eye, that do's offend it.
Some Feather like a Woman.
Not so good Shuttle-cocke, your pointed wit stabs desperately at all times. Look you, it is thus: If you can love me, fair one, so; if not
So.
Yes.
So, so: For he did but so, so, For he did but so, so, and so let her go.
Ha, ha, ha, Thou art a mad Wench, and hast mercy upon no man, far worse then I.
Not worse; much about one, as the Collier to the Devil: but what shall we doe, shall we not see the Duke?
Yes faith, and thou say the word, and laugh him out of his Dominions: for to laugh him and all his train out of countenance, is nothing; I have a great mind to icere the Courtiers.
Prythe let's, there requires not much wit about it.
Is it done?
If my consent will do it, it is.
Why then it is done, and dun's the Mouse, and undone all the Courtiers: my Father's gone before to meet him.
Yes, I saw him very spruce.
Through out Ground he must come, the hour just at milking time.
Y faith it were goodha, ha.
Why dost thou laugh?
Why Isle tell thee sirrah.
No sirrah, you shannot tell me, I wonnot lose the glory of the invention, for I know you have found it.
To go like Milke-maids.
I knew it must out, or thy tongue had burnt else,
To go like Milk maids, And like Milk-maids will we go,
To make sport with the Courtiers, and triumph.
The Maids they went a milking
All in a misty morning,
Down went their milking Pales,
Up went their Terrie diddle Dales,
And all was but a milking,
And all was but a milking.
Y faith Wenches, are you for employment?
I wud my Father had bound thee Prentice seuen years ago to a Scrivener, by this time thou had
lost thy Ears: What make you eues-dropping here? I thought this had not bin a sober time of day with you.
Faith want of money Sister is guilty of the sin.
Come, supply, supply, or out goes all, Isle spoil your milking business.
By this light if thou dost, thou shalt starve for want of Butter.
Come, the Purse gingles, I hear it,
For Music with his Silver Knell
Rings vs all in at the blew Bell.
I must give him some.
Give him all to be rid of him.
What, you donnot mean to go see the Duke, Brother?
Not I in faith Sister, I have a Duck of mine own, that I must visitT'other shilling
I have no more, believe it.
Pish, I cannot endure this platring and patching between Sister and BrotherSo, now go your ways and milk, but take heed of churning; our Dairy maid got the tooth-ach with
Your mouth's stopped, first not?
Vmh.
Why so then, pray God the Wenches have clean Waistcoats.
You are resolved then.
Resolved! Thou art a Fool Iulia, thou shalt see
I will doe things beyond credulity.
This money shut have bought Tiffenie and Cobweb Lawn, And what a sin had hat bin, to nurse Pride, when it may purchase necessary Claret?
My Father allows me too little, I find that: And it were
not for this good natured Pagan, my Sister, I knew not what to doe, unless I shut run my head into a commonditty of Hemp, and that I must take up at the Gallows too, or else they wonnot trust me: yet I might have a Bargain of Crock-Butter, if I could get an Heir to be bound for it, your Country Gentlemen have no maw too't; but your Cockney were the only man, for he wud take it up, and it were but to make Tosts of.
Gentlemen all I thank you, your good wills
To me (as well as to the Duke your loyalty)
Is shown in this your Readiness and Love.
He cannot be far off: Pray let your men
Keep off the Country People, that doe swarm
As thick as doe the City multitude
At sight of any rare Solemnity.
Keep back there, keep back, or Isle make your Leather Pelches cry twango else: for some of them I am sure I made 'hem smoke so, that I feared I had set 'hem a fire. Foh, some of them have drunk sour Butter milk this morning, mingled with Garlic, which crudden together, makes but a rank smell: and then they have their Christmas Shoes on, their old dancing Pumps, up to the middle Calfe, keeps 'hem so warm, that here'le be a Perfume for the Dukes own nostrils.
Seignior Ranoff, you are well arrived.
And you sweet SeigniorIt is very precious hot,
I protest I have bin cooler under the Line.
A Halter you have.
I wud we might command some Drink here.
Nay, and we could entreat it, we were happy: for the Serving-men that were wont to be all Mouths, are now all Eyes, they have no other member useful about them.
This Lord has a most dulcet situation, pleasant, and profitable, I have seldom seen in Venice a sweeter.
Did you not see Sir a swarm of Bees as you past by?
I cannot tell indeed, I did not mark 'hem.
Me thought they looked Sir like your people of Hybla.
I cannot tell, I never had much conversation with your people of Hybla, my noble Lord.
Here's another, a Bird of the same, but a more tame one, something more quiet. Now to hear this Iay chatter, and this Owlet hold his peace, but answer him with motion, may serve for a Morrisdance.
Your Lordships Jennet in my conceit is a most understanding Beast.
Hum.
I saw the Adlantatho of Domingo mounted upon such another, not much different, nay surely nothing at all; and I donnot think but they were twins, only I think your Lordships the better.
Hum.
Your Lordship keeps the Saddle admirable,
Hum.
I wud your Lordship had bin with me at Iapon, I speak it for Horses sake, and Hseamanship togethere; I protest they are the best Riders, if I said the Rankest, I did not lye: for believe it, I hold your Rank
Ryder a good Ryder, take him always, and at all times: As your Frenchman, in Christendom I donnot know a ranker Ryder, unless it be some part North, there they are Scorers. Your Lordship has a most neat Ruff, and becomes you most elegantly.
Hum.
Is not this a fine Dialogue? How now? Who come these to milk? my Lord and's Compeere?
No, believe it Sir, they are taken up for the Dukes own tooth.
Id as live thou had told me a Tale: yet beshrew me they are a couple of handsome Calves with white Faces; but the degrees of this how come about?
Why the Duke passing by, cast his eye upon them, and with it, I believe, his fancy: for upon some consideration, he sent back, to give command, they should be brought hither to my Lords House.
It is not amiss, he does well to begin wholesome.
Will your Lordship conduct?
I, this will be good, stand aside, &amp; give 'he law.
Fair gentle Milk maid.
Sweet courteous Squire.
Good; a Wench of Language: by this hand I love thee.
Love me Sir, why you have scarce looked on me.
That's all one, I protest I love thee,
I am sorry for it.
How whi one? sorry for it? sorry-that I, whom Ladies languish for, rapine, and die?
Surely Sir, those Ladies are not sound, that die of such a scurvy disease.
You now betray your rudeness; I am angry.
You show your self an Ass, and I not care for it.
Vdfoot, and my Dagger had not bin rusty, that I might have drawn it with credit, I'd a stuck it in the middle of your Milk Pale, foolish, scurvy, course-kersie, durty-tayl'd, dangling dug Cow: A Gentleman Courtier and Traveller, whose feet he's measured the Alps, and be disgraced in a piece of vnplow'd Pasture.
I have lighted upon one of the Egyptian Idols, taught  with some Engine to put off his Hat, and screw his Face a little: I cannot speak to it like a man, yet I will talk to it as if it were one. How came you hither Sir, pray did you ride, or were you drawn in a Cart?
Hum
Nay, believe it my Lord, they are a brace of the rudest Baubees that ever drew or sucked the Milk of Innocence.
Why, but he is not a Lord, I hope, Sir?
Foolish Wench I tell thee he is a Lord, and I am little less my self, if I were in place where: what dost thou know, but I may be the Duke?
Marry God forbid, Sir.
Why, it had bin all one to thee, thou had called me Ass.
Ass unawares may prove a wise man, better considered of.
Ah, she begins to balance me.
I doe indeed Sir.
And how doe you find me now?
Full weight Sir.
O, in good time, wee shall agree anon.
The Duke
Through the general love our subjects bear to
We find my Lord your loyalty to vs: (you,
Which rellisheth more sweeter to our ears,
In their Applauses told, then by your own.
And Gentlemen I thank you every one;
You have took much pains t'see a growing Prince,
Not seasoned yet with Time to your desires:
But crowned with your loves in the Diadem,
I steadily shall hold the Sceptre out,
While lustice shall stand by me, and direct it.
I hope you will not look that I shall reign
In my first year, as your last Duke my Father
In his last: but give my Youth some liberty
To play the wanton Prince, though not the wild one.
I have I know possessed all you that know it,
With that Conceit, when I gave command,
Upon the first sight of a pair of Lasses,
That have Looks like the place where they were bred,
Cheerful and innocent to be brought to me,
That I may see their pleasing eyes again;
For me thought on the sudden they were fair ones.
I wonnot cross your Grace, but if my counsell
I prithee keep it, I have no need of it,
Donnot confine me, though I be your guest:
I know it may breed laughter, perhaps sorrow
Unto some grave ones, but I shall deceive 'hem;
I will see 'hem, and have parley with 'hem:
There's no hurt mea if you mean not any,
Nor shall this wrong your House; therefore produce the.
They are here my Lord.
Vdfoot, what will the young Duke doe trow?
Shall we have it set down in our Chronicles,
Inprimis, a brace of Milkemaids? very good.
Where are our Ladies now? they are to seek,
And must begin again to learn short Curtsies,
And dance after the Country Horne-pipe
Can there be any loss of Royalty,
To bid these welcome? If here be any Rudeness,
Let me be taskt with it, that like such Rudeness?
If Blood or Beauty ever made a Lady,
Why are not these so? I profess that man
A Traitor, does not think it: yet they are still
Themselves, and so am I. Are you not Sisters?
In Quality, and't shall please you;
Yet there may be a doubt the tother way,
For our Fathers were next Neighbours.
That's a plague Wench; she has not milked so many Kine for nothing, she knows the danger of the Horn.
I beseech your Majesty let vs depart, these fine men flowt vs.
Well said Innocence, thou art at home, and play within doors, the to there is more open.
We mean no harm, and't please you: if my Lord will spare vs a little of his sour Beer, weal make you a dainty Syllabub; that's our Quality.
Vdfoot, we shall be whipped anon for this Abuse.
I warrant thee Wench, hold up, Isle take too lashes for thy one.
Indeed you are better able  bear it.
What's the Dukes purpose trow? how he does eye 'hem. They'd be good merchandise for some of vs, now we are far from our Mistresses.
And may be so when he has done with 'hem,
That's my comfort.
What was your Father?
A Swineheard if it please you.
What yours?
A Ditcher and't shall like you.
Shoe's the better descended of the two.
VVhat'le all this come to?
If thou had bin my Sister,
And thou Daughter unto some bordering Prince,
As Florence, Padua, Verona, or some farther place.
What Prince wud not have sought and sued to you?
But go and make the Habitation
Where you were borne, and dwell, a Paradise,
And let all Courts be wild and desolate.
Excellent: my fortune's come about,
And I will venture, though my life lye on it.
My life lies on it too.
Hold thy tongue, thou art a sharer,
As I give thee example, follow. Pardon, pardon,
Great Prince, If we have through our Ignorance,
Or Folly, give it what name you please,
Wronged this fair Presence, wronged you the Light.
That came but as the Egyptians, to adore
The rising Sun, and to fall down before it.
What whirle's this?
We are poor Gentlewomen of this Country.
Neighbours unto this place, that took upon vs
This Habit, to be freer and more bold.
And yet more harless, fearing to be pressed
With the Court Complement, that plays so thick
In a young Damsels ears, it often bears
And batters down poor Virgins Chastity.
We did presume upon our strength, t'withstand
The Pages, Footmen, and the Scullery:
But when a Lord should take vs unto task,
Or others of your brave embroidered Train,
Alas we had bin like the silly Foul
Under the towering Hawk, laid flat before 'hem,
Upon the very shaking of their Feathers.
A good Wench in faith, she flouts them to their faces.
But what is this intended for trow; a Pastoral, or a Comedy?
A Comedy sure, ther's so much Wit in it.
Tic your daughter
Yes: but pray be silent, let's see the effect,
I dare not own her yet.
I let ye kneel thus long, to hear again
That most harmonious voice, And ere thou resist,
Ask something of me, fit for thee to crave,
And me to give, And thou art Mistress of it.
I shall my gracious Lord, I crave your pardon.
Pish, that is needless, for thou'st not offended;
Or if thou had, it were a poor one, that,
For I doe gived to Thieves and Murderers:
Ask me a Gift, that Time may talk of it,
Being my first Bounty, which I wud confer
Bravely and worthily, and thou art borne for it.
Had thou Birth equal unto Wit and Beauty,
Thou were a Wife for any Prince in Europe,
And I my self wud take thee to my Bed:
But rise, and think, consider what thou ask;
Yet thou art wise enough, I need not teach thee.
How nowYour haste?
Where is my Lord the Duke?
Your business?
The good old Earl ofis deceased,
And the Earldom now conferred unto your Crown.
It is some Addition; but wud he still had lived
To have kept it still, he was so true a friend.
Hast thou Thought yet?
Yes my Lord, I thank this Messenger.
There is an Earldom now fallen to your Crown.
There is.
Then that it is I crave, for him I owe
All duty, all respect, and life unto.
What's he?
One not far off; my Father.
Is he thy Father?
Yes my dread Sovereign; I beseech your pardon,
The Wench I think is frantic.
Had not thou bin her Father, thou had bin so,
To have uttered such a thought. Rise up Earl of
Thou hast thy Princes word for it.
Have I broke my brains, As these white hairs
Doe witness, for the safety of you,
And of your Father before you, and the State,
To have a private Gentleman, my Neighbor,
Merely for getting of a handsome Wench,
Raised aboue meit will not be digested,
For I will break the neck of these new Fortunes,
Or they shall mine, and crush me, into nothing.
Not any one beside my self beholds
The Beauty of this Face, where two Suns move,
Kindling new Fires to the God of Love.
The Title of a Queen much better wud
Become thee, then a Beggar. Why did not ask
To be what Nature did intend thee for,
And I wud consummate, had not Fortune set thee
So many steps below me in thy Birth?
If I might not offend my gracious Prince,
I wud make bold to speak.
I did and doe entreat thee.
And speak freely?
With all liberty.
I may I hope, without your Courtiers scorn,
Pronounce my self a Lady; and before
This Honour was conferred upon me by you,
There did run generous blood within these veins,
And if not noble: but say there did not,
And I had bin borne the last of the last
Rank of basest people; yet you have made me
(Such is the power of Princes) truly noble:
I am the daughter of an Earl, which is a Prince,
And by that Title challenge Alliance
With every other Prince of higher blood.
And if the Emperor himself were here,
He now wud own me for his Kinswoman,
For I stand in the Line of Royalty:
And who denies it, knows not Heraldry.
Here's a Wench knows how to blaze a Coat.
Therefore my Lord, my Blood can be no let,
(If I fail not in other parts) to make
A Duchess, or a Queen, and may become
(If you be pleased to make me so) your Wife,
Ambitious of your Love, not of the Title.
Famine and Wars plague my Dominions,
And strike at my own Person, but I love thee,
Infinitely love thee, love thee beyond the Word,
Beyond all Action that expresses it.
To call thee Fair, Sweet, Loving, and my Wife,
Are but poor Attributes: Thou art my Soul,
The better Part, that governs my best Thoughts,
And bids me think on Heaven, and view thee.
Thy Freeness and thy Wit, for such as doe
Respect a Dower, are sufficient.
What are Towns, Countries, that may be destroyed
By Sword or Fire, comparable to thee,
That bear about thee in one Limb the Beauty
Of twenty thousand Cities, and their Wealth?
Thou art all the World to me, for I can live
And sit down by thee with content of mind,
Without Ambition how to conquer fatther,
And think I have enough; And so shall All,
All of you here, that will be counted Subjects,
And wish the quiet of your Sovereign:
For him that does not, let him leave me now,
And I will curse him back again a Traitor;
And she herself shall curse him, and so damn him.
Nay, And't be come to that pass, I am silent.
It is best so, when the Tongue may forfeit the Head: I have a coned Speech already; Long live the Duchess.
I am glad my Lord was meale-mouth'd when she was a Milke-maid, I am sure he gave her no ill langauge.
What Princes of the East, or of the World,
When they shall see thy Picture, and me by thee,
Circling thee thus, and thy Arms so with mine, 
To show consent in our Affections,
But will consider with himself, how poor
(Although he have the Indies in his reach)
He is to me, and sigh himself to death?
Father be merry, And my Lord be you so;
For now your House is happy, and shall look
More glorious then our Palaces: Although
You left the Walls as naked as your Roof,
Let every Room be decked with Countenances
Cheerful, as at the hour I was borne,
When as I heard my Father was here with you,
And had the glad news brought him. Wast not so?
Yes, my good Lord.
Why so then: Music, and some Wine,
That I may drink a Health to her I love,
Deep as my Affections.
You shall see he will be drunk with Wine
As well as with Love.
First you shall pledge me, then it shall go round,
Unless it stop at any discontent,
Whom out of all this number I would note.
And't be good Wine, it shall ne'er stick at me, what ere the Health be.
No, Seignior; I thought you had had a Small-Beere stomach.
Never but in the Morning.
My Lord
The Courtiers begin to melt, and my mighty Madame knows how to command: I wonder what I shall be? The Dice went equally once in my own opineon for Duchess; but Duchess Mate, that's my comfort.
What eye now looks on thee, that not contemns
The Colours of the Lily and the Rose,
Which come as short of Beauty as of Sweetness?
Lend me thy hand my Joy, for I will yet
But borrow it, till with thy heart I take it
At the Temple, and make it mine for ever;
That Fame may through the world my mind discover,
Less happy being a Duke, then being a Lover.
Come Asmody, thou see I am ruled by thee, I take thy advice; and how dost thou like me in this Doctors Habit?
Why very well Sir, and handsome, you look as if you had travelled for your Degree: but it is the better, for no experience is gotten without travail.
But what shall I doe, when they bring me their brittle Pispots? I cannot cast 'hem.
No: then ge them me, I can.
Why, art thou skilful in Physic?
Enough to cast away an Urinal, or two.
Cast it away; I marry Asmody, so can I.
Why and that's sufficient. If it be troubled wala, let 'hem carry it home again to make Lye with, twill save Soap: But you must know Sir you must be reserved, and not a public Professor, like your Tutor.
As little as thou wilt, Asmody.
If it please you Sir, you may take away the first part of my Name, it does not sound so well in a Seruingman,
because hee is always at the heals of his Master.
What, thou wudst have As taken away, and be called Modie?
For your good Sir I wish it, and for brevity sake: besides Sir, you hannot one Scholar amongst twenty, but knows what Asmody is.
Thou say well: then henceforward Moody, let As go to the Spirit.
I Sir, for I am now you know your Familiar.
And a witty one, me thinks.
I must be so for I shut have a sad Master of you else. And look you Sir, because you shannot prove me a Liar, here is your sweet-hearts Brother (in time of yore your Chamber-fellow) in a worser pickle then you, for he is in love Auriumtenus, you are but up to the middl.
Why, I tell thee my Sister is such a Wild Cat, there is not her fellow again in all Germany, and yet thy Sister follows well after; they are a Couple, and so is the Devil and the Hangman, and as good Company: they'll flowt any man under the Cope; they wud laugh at me, but that they know I care not for it, and put 'hem out with an excellent Trick that I have, called borrowing of Money. Come, bear up man, and drink, look you, here's mine Host come to bid vs welcome.
How now mine Host, what time of day is it with you, ha?
Full Tide Gentlemen, full Tide. But you are welcome; I am your Servant, your Slave, your Cat, or your Dog, or any thing in Rerum nature.
Ho mine Host, first come to that Point?
Go thy ways, go sleep, and send thy Dromedaries in with Wine, and Glasses clear as Crystal.
As clear as Claridiana, my brave Bullies.
What in History, mine Host?
And in Poetry too, when I am pleased to coupleSome Wine you Knaves, some Wine.
Your legs couple ill-fauouredly, mine Host.
My legs were not brought up to it.
By your leave mine Host.
Welcome of this side too my man of Knowledge, I am thy Slave, thy Servant, Dog, or Cat, or any thing in Rerum nature.
By your leave Gentlemen.
You are welcome Sir.
I am a Stranger here, and understand
You are Gentlemen of this Country, well descended,
And I doe want such good Acquaintances,
Therefore make bold to press into your Company.
An Italian Sir, I take it.
Yes Sir, and a small practiser in Physic.
O Sir, let not your modesty wrong you,
I wud you had a Pill to purge Melancholy,
Here's a Gentleman much offended with it;
Give him a Glass of Claret, you are a Stranger,
And he will not refuse you.
That I will Sir.Fellow, some Wine.
Sir
I cry you mercy.
I drink this to your Health, &amp; I have brought it.
How Sir?
Let him drink off his Wine, and he will tell you more.
You spoke something like comfort, Sir.
I did, and will persevere.
You are a welcome man, pray show how.
Drink off your Wine, and heel show you how.
Prithee away.
Pray Sir pledge me.
I will pledge you.
Did you not drink two, Sir?
Yes marry did he, if I have two eyes, he drunk two.
Prithee mine Host stand aside, thou hast ne'er an eye.
How, ne'er an eye? that goes hard, if I have drunk out two eyes in three hours.
Now Sir will you speak?
Yes Sir, and tell you what I know, although a stranger, and till this hour never saw your face.
O Villain, they were Bedfellows together for a Twelue-month.
You are in love with fair Dorigene, Sister unto this Gentleman.
You amaze me.
It is true, Sir.
Yes very true I find it: but for the cure of this?
Why it is ordinary, get her good will, and lye with her. How think Sir, is not that the Cure?
A better cannot be applied, Isle assure you.
Wud thou were gone.
How doe you mean, in drink? give me some Wine, I had forgot my self. Mine Host, I wud drink
to thee, but thou art not able to pledge me: Therefore here's to thee honest Blew-coat.
I thank you Sir.
By your leave Gentlemen.
What Smirk? welcome, what wind drove thee hither?
The best in the four Quarters: Look you, here's Cash, Gold and Silver, you must pay your Debts, purchase new Clothes, and come to Court instantly. Your Father is made an Earl, your Sister a Duchess, and you are a Count, or I know not what; and I am an Esquire: my Boy is a Gentleman, when I have him, as I am laying about for one.
The fellow he's broken open some Goldsmiths house, and will be hanged: Dost thou know what thou dost?
My Lord, as In am a Gentleman and an Esquire, I doe renerence the very invention of your Honours next Suit: Isle help you to a Draper shall give you all your Men-Liueries, to make it of Cloth; my Haberdasher he's a new Block, and will find me and all my Generation in Beavers as long as we last, for the first hansell.
The fellow is mad.
Mad, or mad not, it is all one, I speak truth; your Father's an Earl, your Sister's a Duchess, you are a Count, or I know not what, I am an Esquire, and my Boy is a Gentleman, when I have him.
What does this fellow talk?
This fellow talks as he thinks, and thinks as he talks, and talks what he knows. I wonnot repeat it over again, for the disparagement of my Wit: but
what I say, I will maintain, what I maintain, I will say; and the very Bells themselves shall ring it out Probatum.
It is true indeed my Lord, your Sister's made Duchess ofand shall be married unto the Duke. The News doth come to Town with every Man, and no man disagrees, but constantly affirms it for a Truth.
O that it were so; by my Fathers Soul
I wud be free as that is, and as happy,
For I wud laugh this Woman from my heart,
And she shut be no more to me, then her I know not,
I wud be so much Man, and something more:
For I wud wish to enjoy her as a Man,
Lose her in mind, and find her in my blood,
And I doe feel such turnings in my thoughts.
Why now you are your self: Yet I'd advise you to go to Court, and see her.
See her, I and speak to her, and call her Woman,
There were no Treason in it, were it?
Not any.
Good; then let vs go: for what Isle doe till I come there, I know not, or if I did, I wud not vtla it.
Why Asmody, will you be found an ignorant Spirit? how hap I knew not this?
You employed not me to enquire of it.
Gentlemen, as I understand my self, I am a Lord,
I donnot know, I may be an abused Coxcomb;
But howsoever, here are good Tokens of it.
Mine Host, what have I chalked in sundry and several times?
Chalk is but Chalk, a Rundle makes a shilling, but that's nothing.
Isle come to you mine Host when you are sober.
Gentlemen, you are for the Court,
I am for the Taylors: When next we meet,
We will bring hearts as sound as our Clothes, sweet.
What, is the Duke martyed?
Questionless, by this time; they were at To have and to hold when I left'hem. Look you, here come the Feathers, the inseparable Coxcombs of the Court.
By the life-bloud which dances on her Lip,
She is all Paradise; Divine, Angelical,
The Duchess me thinks looks like a Dowdy to her.
O for an InformerCapital Treason.
If my Taylor had not bin a Knave
He had bin an honest man.
But
O there's a stop, I thought the brazen Image wud have spoke.
Asmody, you were best stay behind,
There's no place for Spirits in the Court.
O Sir, all your brave Spirits keep at Court,
And I know my distance.
If you donnot, here be those will teach you.
What comfort man? there is no fitter place
To attend their coming out, then here,
Here you may have full sight, and perhaps speech.
Nay I will have speech with her, &amp; tell her roundly
How she he's played the Murdresse with a man
That would have died most willingly for her.
What, in the passionate vain again?
No, but somewhat vehement.
The Diadem that crowned my Head, brought
Cares along with Dignity: But thou my Sweet
Hast crowned my Heart with Joys perpetual,
Love, that did lead thee to the Church a Maid,
Hath brought thee back again a perfect Wife,
And made thee fit to be as thou dost promise,
Mother of many Princes.
Pray Heaven the Duke be in his right senses,
He talks all Raptures, studied Poetry.
As every outrageous Lover does. If I were wearye of my life, I have an Adagie wud hang me instantly.
What's that?
Why the old one, Hot loue's soon cold.
To require you, That breath were better kept, to cool your Porridge.
You say very right, Sir.
This is the Face that wud not let me rest,
But visit me in Dreams: Look this way still,
And burn me with thy comfortable Beams.
I must confess, I ever had a wild,
Wanton, and untamed Tongue, but still the Heart
Of such a Matron as my Mother was:
I did and doe still love thee, and I protest
Purposed to have married thee, but that I think
Thy self wud not have wished me to have lost
A Fortune such as thisLittle did I imagine,
When I did jest those words, to have bin a Duchess.
I donnot come to task you to your word,
But to behold the Riches I have lost,
That must confess my self unworthy of you.
Hither I came resolved, to let you know
That I durst look upon you, and could lose you
Without sigh or tear: but having seen you,
You have afresh kindled the fire again,
And I must die a Martyr in your love.
What shall we doe Iulia? Dost thou see
The sad and downe-cast countenance of thy Brother?
I love him for his own sake, and for thine,
And wud not have him perish; which I fear.
Troth Madame I doubt him too: but if the worst come to the worst, it is but a foolish Lover cast away.
There are some flattering ways yet to restore him, if we could light on 'hem. Alas good Dorilus.
I never yet had other Testimony
Of your strong love, then that which all you Men
Unto your Ends can fine better then Women,
Sighs and sad words, mingled with some Tears.
If those had not bin witnesses sufficient,
Why did you not enjoin me to a Task,
Harder then ever Cruelty did yet?
You should have said; I dare thee Dorilus
To die: or doe but say so yet,
That I may be assured you can love
Dorilus dead, whom living you despised,
And I will at your feet yield my let breath.
I prithee think me not a Murderess,
To take delight in blood: no, my dear Dorilus,
Live, and live long, that I may love thee so.
Yet if thy love be, as thou dost profess,
No danger, travail, nothing that Art. can doe,
Obtained with much loss, greater difficulty,
Will be left unattempted: therefore, to try
What strength it holds in thee, and make it gained,
Better esteemed of, being hardly got,
I shall enjoin thee to a strange Design.
Let it be dangerous, and it is the better,
And I shall easilier accomplish it.
It is not dangerous, nor impossible,
For I have read even in effect the like
To have bin obtained for aQueen.
Pray speak it.
A Garland of the rarest Flowers on Earth,
The choicest to the Eye, and to the Sent,
Set with such Fruits the season of the year
Affords not in this Climb, And it must have
The virtue of continuing ever fresh,
As long as you remain constant in love.
This is the Task, which if you can obtain.
By all the Faith in Woman, and that Justice
Which punishes all Periurers, I vow
Thou shalt embrace all thy desires in me.
A Garland of all Flowers?
Of all the Earth produces, that are choice:
If I, or any one that sees it, can
Call any Flower by a Name, not there,
You not perform your Enterprise.
This is a Task indeed.
She he's sent you a picking.
But it is nothing, when the Prize is thought of that it shall purchase.
Will you undertake it?
I will not move in any other labour,
It shall be both my Business and my Pleasures:
With my best duty let me kiss your hands.
I shall not need to doubt, to enjoy your love
When I have done it?
May that Beauty which you adore in me,
Be blasted, but
I believe you: Fair farewell.
My Lord, your pardon.
For what my Duchess? Though this day alone
Should be reserved only to our selves,
Yet if thou please to lend thy Patience
To any one that is a Suitor to thee,
It shall give no dislike but rather please vs.
Here's a Duke now will make all his Subjects kind Husbands.
If he continue as he begins, Isle give my Wife the Breeches; for Women will reign, that's certain.
Reign, I and thunder and lighten too, Isle warrant thee.
A pretty dumb show, this.
How doe you Sir? you appear to me more troubled then my self.
No, I am well: Pray what's the news?
I must go travail.
Travail, what to doe?
To gather Flowers, Strawberries
And Cream.
Why how now Sirrah?
Something bold Sir, for Affinities sake.
But pray be serious with me: by that friendship, which for the time we have bin acquainted, hath bin as much as ever was made up in so few hours; I doe conjure you tell me, and tell me faithfully, all the whole passage.
I was a telling you: She has enjoined me to bring her a fair Garland, of all Flowers that can be named, which must continue fresh as long as I remain constant to her.
This is not in the power of Man to doe.
This is her imposition.
Asmodie, what think you of this?
Why I say Sir, comfort your Friend, For ere
The Sun shall twice to th'Sea decline his golden beams
Isle bring a Garland hither, made of all Flowers
That every corner of the World contains,
And with that Charm too, that it shall remain
Beauteously flourishing, while he continues
Warmed in the strength of his Affections.
Doe this my gentle Spirit, and thou shalt
Make him, who is thy Master, bound unto thee,
He shall release thee, I will buy thy years,
Although it cost me half of my Estate.
No more, some few hours hence expect me.
Sir, will you take the counsel of a Friend,
And thrust these Sorrows from you? what wud you give
To purchase such a Garland as you speak of?
I thought you Sir of more humanity,
And better breeding, then to mock misery.
I donnot mock you, and may accuse you now
For having me in such suspicion:
We are but young in our Acquaintances,
And that begets these doubts: will you impart
Half your Estate to him shut bring you this?
All, and become in debt to pay that Man.
What doe you judge your Estate to be, Sir?
Better then three hundred pound a year.
Why that shall do it. Pardon me Sir, I am poor,
And such an Accident as this perhaps,
To make a Fortune, will not in all my Age
Befall again: nor can you lose by it,
For in her favours you shall be advanced.
Without those wise Considerations,
You instantly shall have it made to you,
Not in words only, but in deeds,
If you perform what you propose to me.
Why you say well Sir, will you now to the Scriveners?
Most joyfully, and with what speed you please.
Lead Sir, Isle follow: Is it not strange to see,
That a man shut, as hath bin often shown,
Cure others griefs, yet cannot help his own.
Now Sir, you are so died in the Grape, &amp; so deboisht
With Tavern Quarrels, that here your carriage
Amongst the inferior sort will prove ridiculous:
For we shall have you down in the Wine-cellar,
Or at the Beer amongst the Guard carousing,
And after, fall to Cuffs; your Band and Doublet
Torn from your Neck &amp; Back, and your brave Breeches
Stained with the variation of each soil.
Nay good Sir donnot aggravate a Fault:
I know I have bin often in the dirt,
(And so he's many a better man then I)
Before I was the Dukes Brother; but now
I will give no man place at Wall or Kennel.
My young Lord is in my mind to a thread for that.
I know thou hast matter enough in thee,
And parts sufficient to make a Courtier;
But this same Drink, and Country Liberty,
He's spoiled thee irrecouerably.
Why Sir, what wud you have me do? you shall find I will be capable.
Why you must bend your self unto the Ladies.
Bend to the Ladies: Alas poor old man, he talks
I mean, apply your self, converse with 'hem,
And still be tendering your service to 'hem;
They will look for it: Look you, here come Presidents;
There's a young Lord now, a Knight follows him,
Mark but how they endeavour in the business.
Vdsfoot, I think my Father thinks I am an Ass:
Cannot I lead a Lady by the Arm,
Hold off my Hat, and dance my Cinque a pace;
And after a long story of my silence,
Ask how she does? I will satisfy him,
He shannot find me to degenerate
By your leave Lady.
What's he trow? he he's reasonable handsome Clothes, but they become him not.
The dumb Lord's frighted, his hair stands an end.
My Noble Lord; the Duchess Brother.
Your pardon my good Lord.
What Masculine Baboone's thisLady, I honour you.
O my good Lord, there are better Faces in the Court for you to honour.
By that all-killing Eye, that murdering Lip
Fie, fie, my Lord, you make me blush.
O Madame, donnot so, you'll spoil your painting.
Look you my Lord, my Lord your Son is at ir.
A shrewd Boy: I thought, because my self
Have bin bred up a Soldier, and unfit,
And ever was, to these Court Complements;
He, having not bin exercised, wud be so:
Isle leave him now, and take no more charge of him.
No, no, let the Surgeon look to him.
Wud I were in the Country again, I shall run mad here: your tumultuous Courtiers wonnot let me rest; Visitants early and late, and all come about one businesse, to tell me I am fair, which I know well enough, yet can be well content to let them swear it. I have the Prayers of all the Mercers, Taylors, Haberdashers, in the whole City, and their Wives Curses; for not a Man looks that way: I am the Bird, at which each welldrawn Courtier shoots his Bolt. Look you, I am spyed already: They leave all Companies, all Places; upon Service times, the Chapel, if I be not there.
Now my tongue-tied Lord, whose Language is in the Motion of his Neck, I wonder he is not troubled with the Crick: What does your Lordship say? I donnot hear you.
Hum.
Wud the World believe there were such a Man?
Pray my Lord tell me your meaning?
Hum.
Sure your Honour had a silent Nurse.
He wud have proved the Miracle of the World, if he had bin a Woman.
He wud indeed Seignior: I donnot think, but if his Tongue were clipped, he wud talk yet; what think you?
I think as you think, Lady.
Take heed of that, so you may wrong your self.
I wud my Lord that I could understand you,
I doe persuade my self then I could love you.
O sweet Lady.
Why this is well my Lord, can you go on?
I had a hard heart else.
Admirable; good my Lord go forward,
Talk, and Isle love you infinitely, that is, beyond talk.
Silence Lady is the best part of Wisdom.
Let Wisdom go to grave ones, give vs Talk,
It is Youth's Music, and doth stir Affection,
As Motion, Heat. Good my Lord talk.
Why Lady, I can talk.
O my Lord.
What aisle you, Lady?
You will ravish me.
Not I, Isle assure you I come not of the kind.
I mean you'll overcome me: And if you talk much, I shall entreat you you will hold your peace.
Nay, believe it Lady, I will not talk much: but if I list to talk, I have a Tongue that can talk much, and loud, as another Man.
I was afraid he wud have said, Woman.
But talke's but talk, therefore I use it not: but for your sake, sweet Lady, it may be that I will find a Tongue
to talk of something; and that same something must be of you, or else it is nothing.
Away my Lord, I am bound to stop mine ears; the Sirens sing in you.
Why let 'hem sing, Song is but Song, no more then Talke's but Talk; yet Talk does well, where Talk is well regarded, otherwise it is lost: And I have bin a Talker in my time, and will be so again, to give content to such a Lady as doth love to talk, or knows what talk is, and can talk her self; else it is much better for to hold ones peace: For I have heretofore bin a great Talker, and foolish Ladies that understood me not, have prayed me hold my peace, and they wud love me; just as you now, on the contrary, pray me to talk, and not to hold my peace, and then you'd love me.
I will maintain this in him, to make him talk his Lungs our.Oh,Oh.
What is the matter?
VVud I had never heard this Tongue of yours:
But I was cursed to hear it, more to provoke it.
Why doe you say so? For this Tongue of mine shall be pulled out, and thrown unto the Dogs, or to the Hawks, before it shall offend your dainty Ears, that love to hear a Tongue talk as a Tongue should doe, of Wit and Beauty, and Beauty and Wit, which doe abound in you.
Fie, fie, fie, this is not to be endured.
Believe it Lady, but it is; it is fit that you shut hear, and I shut talk, the Subject being You, and I the Talker. Wherefore have Ladies Beauty, and Men Eyes and Tongues, but to behold that Beauty, and then talk of it. I doe proclaim him here a Dunce, a Sot,
that he's a Tongue, and cannot talk of you: nay, though he had ne'er a Tongue, yet he might think a talk; and that, though not as good, might serve for talk.
The Duchess; good my Lord leave until anothere time.
I, another time, and then weal talk four or five hours together.
By this hand Wench Isle keep touch.
Touch and take my Lord, else no meddling.
Go, you are a Fool, Farewell; Expect me.
Sister Duchess, how dost? I thank thee for my Lordship. I knew thou were borne to make vs all, advance vs to the third Region. How does my Brother Duke deal with thee? Dost thou Burgeon? Shall we have Bonfires, and the Bells rung out, for joy thou hast made an Uncle? How now Iulia? what's thy Title? Lady of Honour, and Principal Secretary to my Sister, is it not? who breaks the best Jests now?
My Lord.
My Lord; no, my Lady by all means.
Fie Brother, understand your self; and as you have taken on Dignity, so put on Gravity, or you will prove ridiculous.
Let me prove what I will Sister, Isle have all the Court to imitate me: if I had bin borne a Fool, I wonder what's he wud have bin wise? Come Wench, be thy self still, and thou shalt be the Miracle of Princes,
Have all the wit thy Subjects utter, thine,
And drawn together in a Volume, called,
The Duchess of Saxonie her Apophthegms;
Which shall put down the Tales of other Nations.
Thy Birth-day shall be made a Holy-day,
And crowned with full Cups, and with deep ones too,
And I my self will first begin the Health,
And bring it up in Germany a Fashion,
Oft to salute the Cup, and kiss it sweetly.
But whore's the Duke my Brother? tired and retired?
Pray my Lord doe you speak to him, happily he will endure reproof from you.
My Lord.
I have sworn not to grant any Suits this week, therefore prithee donnot trouble meO, my Lord, I cry you mercy.
The Duchess wud be private.
Neat and private she shall be, it is fit,
Let you and I shake hands, Wisdom and Wit.
Thou art all wildness, that nothing I think will tame, but a long Voyage, and unfortunate.
O Iulia, I doe think upon thy poor afflicted Brother, Good Gentleman, that he should place his love so disastrously. I wonder how he does?
He is as great a stranger unto me as to you Madame, I never saw him since.
I hope he did not spend his time so ill
In the University at Wittemberg,
But he he's learnt so much Philosophy,
To tame those headstrong Passions.
You may pray rather he he's not spent his time
As Faustus did, and many that are there,
In Necromancy, so to perform the Task
You have laid on him.
Alas poor Wench, dost thou believe there can be such an Art?
Why, have we it not recorded, Faustus did
Fetch Bruno's Wife, Duchess of Saxoni
In the dead time of Winter, Grapes she longed for?
Such a Report there goes, but I hold fabulous.
Well, had I bin as you, I'd not have laid so deep an Oath upon it.
Wud that were my worst fear.  Look where he comes. Iulia leave me, Isle hold conferinse with him, and by delays seek to wear out his Sorrow.
I obey you Madame.
Why kneel you Dorilus?
Duty he's taught me, though you were not her
Fortune he's made you: Every thing delights
To be commanded by you; under your wish
Lies all things upon Earth, and grows for you,
Prospers for your sake, strives to be lovely,
In emulation of your Excellence.
Here is a Garland of those Flowers you spoke of,
Which Nature put forth, and Art fetched for you;
Place it upon your Head, and it shall dim
The glorious splendour of your other Crown:
Lasting it is, as it; for it shall flourish
According to your wishes, till I alter
And change the course of my Affection.
Thou dost astonish me: wud I could call
This any thing but Truth, a Dream, a Vision,
With Terrors following it, enough to sink me
Deeper in Earth then I am now aboue it.
When Flora strives to deck the Earth with Flowers,
She never showed half such variety.
Good Dorilus leave me a while to think,
And to collect my self, and then return.
I shall.
Why did these Flowers grow? to blush for me?
Or do they blush, because they have wrought my shame?
Why did not Storms and North winds nip your Buds,
And killed ye, ere you showed the Sun your Leaves?
Why did not Lightnings blast ye? Beasts or Worms
Pluck up your Roots, and make you fit for Fire?
There you had showed more glorious then here:
For here you bring, under so many Colours,
A show of Sweetness, that will breed the Plague,
And run infectiously into our Bloods.
For if I fall, what Woman will be honest?
Or being so, what's he that will believe it?
How now my Duchess? talking to thy self?
What's that? Why dost thou hide it from me?
It is rich unto the eye, but much more rarer:
Flowers so plentiful, and at this time,
It wonders me? Prithee let me see it,
I never saw so many rarious Forms
Knit up so curious: believe me, it is a Present
Fit for the Queen of Nations, and for thee;
He well deserved, that did bestow it on thee.
It is not to be bestowed Sir, it is to be bought,
And at a dear Rate too.
Why, and thou dost, no matter,
For trust me it is a very pretty Toy.
A pretty Toy must buy it.
If it wud not fade.
It will not fade Sir, it will keep too long I fear, for you to like it.
Why dost thou think so? it is like thy self,
Full of Variety, and choice Delights,
And th'longer I behold it, the more it likes me.
O, there are Serpents in it, and ugly Toads,
That burst and shed their poison; not a Flower,
But bears a sting in it, that wounds my heart:
Foul Lust and Murder, that doth follow it,
Lies hid amongst the Leaves. O throw me Sir,
Throw me from your Embraces, as far as the wild winds
Doth drive the Dust before it, and destroy me.
Like it to nothing: Purge your Land, by making
Bonfires of it and me upon some Hill,
That the black Smoke may vanish into Ayre.
And not infect your Turrets.
Why dost thou talk thus?
First kill me Sir, it will be Charity,
Then rip my Bosom up, and in my Heart
There you shall find what my Tongue loathes to utter.
I thought, dear Dorigene, I never shut
Have bin a stranger to your Thoughts, till now:
I pry thy speak, what is it troubles thee?
If I were sure that breath shut be my last,
You shut not then entreat me; but receive it,
Hoping you will be merciful, and kill me.
There is a Gentleman, named Dorilus,
That loved me before you saw me, and I him,
Although I never gave him any hope:
Upon the VVedding day he met me here,
And looked so like a man that meant to perish,
That I was willing to restore some comfort;
Whereon I wished him get me such a Garland,
Made of all Flowers that the World contains,
Not thinking such a thing could have bin done,
And for Requital promised himI cannot
Utter no more, nor shut have thought so much.
Is this all?
All? wud you more? wud you we should proceed?
Grow impudent in sin, till Thunder rent vs?
Why, but such promises may be dispensed with.
Though you had sealed it with a Vow.
I did Sir, and a great one: nor left there,
But added two or three to that; the least was,
The blasting of this Beauty he adored.
I know not how to doubt, yet this may be
A Cunning; I will try her. Let it not trouble thee,
Dear Dorigene; thou shalt perform thy Vow;
Isle be the Sufferer, and take the sin on me.
But the damnation must be mine, my Lord,
And if I pull it on me, t'shalbe this way,
Rather then wronging you.
Why so thou wrong'st me worst,
And wut deprive me of all the joys in this World.
Thou wilt teach me by ill example, how to follow thee.
Sweet, let me kiss thee, I will beg for that,
Which all men else doe labour to avoid;
It is but one hours loss of thee, I prithee
Make no more scruple of't then other Women:
It is a Crime, that not one Night in the year,
But some where or other such a Fault is made,
Nor looks the Wife the next day worse for it.
No more Sir.
Thou wilt consent?
I wil.
Why I thank thee. I have bestowed some
pains to beg my self into an Order. O Dorigene, if thou be false, the Serpent parted with his Subtlety, and closed it in the Fruit he gave thy Sex.
I know not whether I am greater blessed
Or cursed in such a Husband: Fate thou hast thy ends,
And I have mine. Come Dorilus, and take me
Now whilst I have Obedience:
Give me not respite, to enter into Considerations,
Lest I doe worser then perform my Vow.
He comesWelcome my Dorilus, be merry man,
And look upon me as a Lover should,
That he's obtained his Mistress: I am thine,
And for the time free, as I am the Dukes.
Be bold man in approaching, there's no fear
Of Spies upon vs; we are free, as people
That know no Laws, or doe command the Laws:
I have the Dukes consent for what I doe,
Nay, his entreaty: he does like to have
A Rival in the thing he loves, and is
Not different from the common sort of men,
That doe esteem them most, that most abuse 'hem.
How many ways doe you desire to kill me?
Why Dorilus?
You say the Duke's acquainted
With our Loves, it is true:
But there's no harm in that, for heel be secret,
As I have Life, he will.
Why doe you abuse me thus?
I donnot: for as I have a Soul, I'm serious,
He bid me keep my Vow; and said, the Man
That did bestow this Garland, did deserve
What? to enjoy you?
I, to enjoy me.
He did it then to give vs leave to sin,
That he might punish.
O no; he did it for my quiet: he will sooner
Strike his own eye, to offend it, nay, his heart,
Rather then mine.
What doe we then contriving Lust together?
That Rebel Blood, which rages against him,
Had better bin bestowed upon rude Beasts,
Wilder then VVolues or Tigers; we are worse:
They that wud wrong this truly Royal Prince,
This Prince of his own Passions, as of Men,
Deserve to see no day, to taste no food,
No clothes to shield him from the rage of winter,
But live more wretched then the last of Beggars,
Die without tears or prayers, and want a grave.
Take your vows back again, and place 'hem better,
For here I make a general release
Of all debts twixt vs, be a free woman,
And set up anew, with caution, that you never
Prove banker-out again, deal not so largely,
Nor trust so prodigally, lest you do meet
With such as will take the full forfeiture;
So Virtue guard you and your goodness Crown,
Your thoughts and actions with true chastity.
This is not as I look for, nor do wish.
O stay, let me not be so wretched, but to pay
The alms of a true heart, thanks for your bounty,
Which hath been greater then I can requite.
Now I do love thee Dorilus as dear
As thy own mistress virtue. And I beseech thee
Deprive vs not thy presence at the Court,
For I will live to study a reqitall,
And the Duke with me, that shall know thy worth,
And find it in thy deeds, shall entertain thee,
And in his bosom fix thee a true friend:
Thou shalt not go unless thou promise me,
I may receive and welcome thee at Court,
Since you command me, Isle not fail to offer,
My service to my Sovereign and you.
With tears of joy I love thee.
What blood have these two creatures? Cold as I am
My aged head wrapped like the Alps in Snow,
Yet if the Devil lust, had warmed me on,
Respects shut never quench the heate in me.
There is a spark already in my bosom,
And I do feel it working towards my heart,
Which when it once hath reached, and kindled
Into a flame, no premeditation
Of the offence, shall blow it out again.
The Duke has entertained a jealousy,
And employs me in the discovery,
Which makes effectual to my purposes.
Mischief is brooding in my brains, and the event
Shall work my pleasures or their discontent.
Well met Sir. How now? Melancholy.
But now I think on it, every man is so
After his height of dalliance, I did hear
You had admittance And I saith how find you her.
You have my land Sir.
Yes, in my pocket, a large hose you'll say
Can hold so many Akers: But impart,
You told me, being familiar with the Cause,
I should partake in the Event.
She he's performed
Yes, very gracious.
Why so then, what wud you more?
No more.
Zfoot, hoe's turned Echo: but I have observed,
Knock at the heart of Man afterfull joys,
And you shall find him like an empty Vessel.
I will leave you Sir.
Hear me first.
Because you may not spread a Calumny,
Which when you're not your self, Wine may bring forth:
Here I protest by all that's Righteous,
Both in Earth and Heaven, though I had bought
And paid for this Sin as your self can witness,
And might have purchased it (but with her Curses)
I gave her Vows back freely to her self,
Made her the same Duchess that she was,
And is still absolute.
How? freely gave her what cost you so dear?
Freely: and had my Life bin in the Bargain,
It had gone, And Wife and Children,
If I had bin worth 'hemO you donnot know,
And it is tedious to relate it to you.
You are a frank Giver, and you shall teach me
(For in all Goodness I will be your Scholar)
To imitate, though not to equal you:
Here take your Bonds again, If you could check
That untamed Fiend, called Lust, why should not I,
By your Example, bridle Avarice:
He is not worthy to receive, that knows not how to restore.
Pray take it, you wonnot,
You wud be singular, then look you Sir tic concealed:
Thus from the letters I do tear the law,
As you the crime you went with from your heart,
You have your own again: And I am richer
Without it, then possessing. Fare you well Sir.
Pray stay Sir, and make me not so wretched
As leave that ugly sin Ingratitude
For my Companion: I may through your friendship
Think this life happy, to score age upon me,
And die, with Stories of you to my children.
And I of you wud doe the like to mine:
That shall if I can work it, call you uncle.
Bernard my friend, and chamber-fellow.
And brother that wud be, nay must be;
Though I undertake as bad a task as picking of flowers.
For here's my spirit Asmody can fly
The same way again.
No, I have clipped his wings.
Zfoote my Tutor, I am undone.
And bound him to a fiery chariot
For threescore years, and after to be thrown
Into the bottom of the burning lake,
Boiling with Pitch and Sulphur.
Alas poor Asmody, he will be over coddled,
For his audaciousness.
Alas Sir, it was not his fault; for to say truth, I coniurde him.
You coniurde him, into what? into a blew coat
And a beard, did you not? look you ther's your Asmody.
Troth Sir, you have bin to cruel with him,
You might a let him have boiled in his liuorie,
For his heard, it was not a miss to be plucked off,
For in time it wud a bin scalded.
Come, you are a Novice, did you think you could
Proceed in my own Art, but I should know it?
I was that Asmody appeared to you,
When you kept such a thundering, with words
That were of as much effect to call or move
Spirits, as mountains: But my Dorilus,
My loving Pupil, for whose good I cannot
With all the Art I have, labour enough.
O, your zeal Sir hath bin ever shown,
Presume upon me, for I do predict
There will be need of me, and of my Art
Ere it be long: And unless it please
My Pupil Bernard, here to turn me off,
Isle even in to my liuory again.
You may do as you please Sir, but if you do,
I shall forget you are my Master, and make account
I have my servant Asmody again.
Do so, and command me as you have done,
Isle be unto your will obedient
As your own limbs, and how so ere things sort,
In spite of Fortune weal have a little sport.
Sir, I have a suite to you.
Speak it.
To know this Gentleman, and if not for my sake,
For his own to grace him, he has deserved it.
He has.
O my dear brother.
What do you mean Sir.
Away with her to prison, and let her father,
And her brother both be turned out of the Court.
Lord Raymond, be it your charge to see it done.
Unwillingly I obey you; O my hart dances,
And tuned unto so many joys, it beats
My blood about me into every part,
That I grow young again; Alas good Lady,
Why do you weep? these tears were well becoming
If you had any crime to wash away,
But you are clear as heaven; then bear your self
As confident and shining, that stands unshaken,
When men speak blasphemy and throw up curses:
Beware sweet Princess, your too zealous care,
Expressed in the behalf of your firm friend,
May be by some informing Ear snatched up,
And carried to the Duke, which wud pile high,
And heighten up the mountain of his wrath.
Let it be so, and let that mountain Fall,
And all the world, with his displeasure on me,
But hidden in the ruin, yet at last
It is my comfort, I shall be found my self.
What a well built castle is a clear Conscience?
No Battery, no Invasion stirs it,
When a guilty on, is like a Spiders web,
Shook with the motion of each little fly.
What help there lies in me much injured Lady,
Assure your self of it, as if your own heart
Had the power to work it.
I shut wrong much nobles to think otherwise.
See Madame, here's a Guard upon you.
They are welcome.
So, the devil when he means to seduce,
Puts on an Angels shape, who doth not know.
How to dissemble, must not think to grow
Or prosper in his purpose. In this plot
Envy alone is not expressed, but hot
Vntameable desires, which flame so hie;
One mischief must another satisfy.
I love, fair Iulia, and there was no way
How to obtain, but bringing to decay
The greatness of the Princess; misery
Will burst the strongest bar of Chastity.
She comes:
Where is my wretched Mistress?
Alas, she is lost, and those that seek her,
Must be companions of her misery.
Therefore be wise fair Iulia, and forget her;
Thou art as fair as she, as excellent;
And I that rule the Duke do think so.
What means this?
The meaning is like him that utters it,
Plain and sincere, to make thee Mistress
Of all the happiness which thou can wish;
As she whom I create shall stand aboue,
And laugh a the calamities of others:
Look not upon my hairs, I'm not so old
But I can kiss thee into Action,
Infuse a breath into you through your Ear,
Shall call a flaming blush into your cheek,
And turn this spring-tide of your tears to fire,
Or change 'hem into blood, and strike 'hem inward,
To incite a heate as sensual as the same
That did beget you.
I am incapable of this ill language:
But suppose I were (my Lord) as you esteem me,
Is this a time, when my heart's full of sorrow,
Ready to break for their unfortunate fates,
To give admittance to so loathed a fact,
That never could be tempted in the height
Of festivals: and all the soothing flatteries
Trust up in vows and glories of a Court.
Why? I will give you liberty to think,
To ponder on it for a little time;
For I wud rather Love should make thee mine
Then Violence or Fear. Consider of it
Without delays, return me absolute:
I am not like your dull cold Englishman,
That can attend his Mistress a whole day,
A week, a month, a year, yet check his blood,
And when it shut have vent to burst in fire,
He weeps out in water. The Sun burns
Not outward, as my blood within, passions beat
So thick and short, they make my entrails sweat.
But for a while I leave you, think and be wise.
Tic wisdom to conceal what I do think,
And truth to call thee villain: O we are
Ruined, all of vs are ruined,
Yonder she is, and weeping
Who will not be in love with sorrow, while it takes up
Her dwelling in that face, it is a question?
Whether smiles more adorn that cheek then tears.
O worthy Sir, how does my brother?
Well, donnot you fear it Lady.
Why doe you leave him?
To comfort you that have more need of it,
For he sits up and laughs at misery,
With hope to out live it, which is fortitude
Fitting a noble spirit.
Fortune my foe why dost thou frown on me, &amp;c. A good voice is a perpetual comfort to a man, he shall be sure he cannot want a Trade. Yonder's Madam Inlia, and the Italian Doctor administering, they look like a couple of Tragedians in the fourth Act, out of countenance. Right Worshipful, Charitable, most Bountiful and well disposed, please you to look upon the Estate of a poor decayed Lord, blown out of the bosom of good Fortune, unto the back side of men's Bounties, from whence a sweet gale of good will may arise to blow me out of the dead sea of want and despear, into the happy Haven of good harbour, where I may lie at rest from hunger and cold, bound unto you in the bed-rolle of benevolence, which howsoever small a pittance it shall be, in this ebb of adversity, it shall be returned treble to you again in the next tide of prosperitieSweet Madame,
Why here 'is the right fashion of the world,
To turn the backside to a man that has no money?
They are gone to wash away grief in salt water,
I mean to drown it in good Claret.
O courteous fortune that hath sennt me a Companion.
Smirk, how dost thou chicken? come hold up thy head,
And let's see the dismalitie of thy Countenance,
The doleful dumps that therein do appear,
The Knobbles of adversity and Fate. Hum.
Oh, Oh.
What Oh? where lies the Cramp?
Oh, Oh.
With that the moody squire thumpt his breast,
And reared his eyes to heaven for revenge.
Speak sweet Ieronimo.
First take my tongue, and afterword my heart.
Good both being out, now let vs have the Story.
Kicked with disgrace, and turned out of the Court
Both to the guard and black guard made a sport.
Excellent Smirk.
To Laundresses and Lackeys made a scorn,
And to all other people quite for lorn.
One, rime more, and I will crown thee Finner Laureate.
The Carters, Colliers, and the Carriers cursed me
The Porters pulled me, and the Pages pur me.
Why this tic to be a squire Smirk before your time
And your boy to be a Gentleman before you have him.
O that I had bin so happy to have lived and clef wood in the country, preached at the Buttery bar unto the Ploughmen, and there have used my authority in Folio, when all the servants of the house shut be drunk at midnight, Cum Priuilegio.
I, those were certain days, but what wut thou do now?
Learn to wind whipcord, and go hang my self.
But where did thou leave my father?
I left him condoling with two or three of his friends
At the sign of the Lamentation.
The Salutation thou meanst.
In the Salutation one way, and the Lamentation
The totherHere comes more abuse.
Me thinks sirrah, since my tongue brake loose,
I take an infinite pleasure in it, how thinks thou?
Your Lordship talks wondrous current,
For your word will go before many a mans bond.
It shall run before any mans bond for a wager.
My honourable Lord, how does the great Duchess,
Your sister?
And the good Earl your father.
With the rest of your kindred and acquaintance that bore the Court before 'hem.
I hope a man may court his Mistress now without a Patent from your honour.
I hope a man may crack your pipkin Pate,
And cut your neck of Mutton into Steakes,
If you will ot be quiet, ye brace of wicker bottles.
Wicker Bottles! he calls vs wicker bottles.
I and musty ones.
And mangy ones to, are we not?
Yes, every thing that's troublesome and stinks you are.
Ha, ha, prithee laugh at him.
I, we will laugh at him, but let vs go,
For the fellow is desperate, and perhaps may beat vs;
Such people fear no law.
Hang him, hee dares not within the confines of the Court.
I, but we may talk our selves out of the liberties,
And then he may beat vs without the confines.
Yet if he did, it were all one to me, for I can
Endure a beating as well as another man,
Custome's another Nature: but yet I wud we were gone:
Why, come then lets go back again? For my
own part, I donnot care for quarrelling there wee may be bold, though my Lord, I have a poor sister I wud prefer to cut your Honours toes.
And I have a project, if it please your Honour, to set it on foot, it may make a great many of vs ride a horseback.
O that the place were not privileged.
I, and the place were not privileged.
Why? what wudst thou doe?
Let 'hem alone, and laugh at 'hem.
Why, gramercy Smirk, thou hast instructed me.
A my conscience I shut now do so.
Yet he he gave me a bob in the project.
Why? hast thou any thing to do with proiects?
Yes, I was to prefer one for putting down Pigs in the Fair time.
How? putting down Pigs, pry thy let's hear that?
Why, a fellow that will undertake to find the Country people, and the people of the Fair, with good repast for three pence a meal.
How can that be? pry thy let's understand?
Why Sir, A cook will undertake to bake in a pasty
Four oxen, without Buttor corner wise,
Lamb and Mutton in the middle,
All kind of Foul on each side,
With their bills lying out to discover their condition,
With which he will be bound to find the fair seven days,
And give the over plus to the poor.
This is a very pretty one and profitable.
Then I have another, for the crying of small Bear, from six in the morning, till twelve at noon, for all that are Barnab.
A most necessary one, and had it bin propounded
when I was a Lord, it shut have had my countenance.
Nay, it wud ha gone forward, for all your high bloods wud a countenanced it, yet it was thought there was a rich Milke-woman wud a crossed it, and have brought it to posit drink in the winter, and whey in the Summer, and the Apothecaries wud have joined with her, to have clarified it.
Not unlikely. But Smirk, what is your purpose?
To stay till the good time, and take a whipping,
With as much resolution as a man may take a whipping
Then you look for the Lash?
I donnnot look for it, because it comes with a back blow, and there is no ward for it but Patience.
Why thou say right, and it is manly done,
Not to run from, but to meet affliction.
I, but when affliction comes like a Fury, with a whip in her hand, it is a fore matter.
Leave with thy potent charms to tear th'elements
And vex the poor inhabitants: here is the Ring
Transparent as the day, that makes the wearer
Lost to all sight, and walk invisible
To every eye but yours: And when so ere
It is your pleasure it shall loose its virtue,
Touched but with this herb and it false in pieces.
Thanks my industrious spirit.
What else is thy command'
Nought else at this time, but on all occasions
Thou in a thought be ready to attend.
I shall.
Begone. Dorilus, Bernard come forth, all things are at peace
As your hearts shall be ere I part from you,
At least forsake you: Behold this little Ring,
Purer then Crystal, full of subtler flame
Then that which sparkles in the Diamond;
Of Virtue infinite beyond its Beauty.
With this Ring Dorilus thou shalt free the Princess
At least endeavour; it is certainly reported
At her Arraignment, as the hour comes on,
She shall have none to plead her cause for her,
But her supposed crime laid op, and urged
Withal the mouth of law, and so condemned:
Yet thou that ever could speak well, without
A cause so full of matter and of Truth,
Shalt hid to all eyes, by virtue of this Ring,
Become an Orator, and plead for her,
And make the Court amazed to hear thee speak.
You amaze me, first to hear you
But Isle amaze my Pupil Bernard more,
When he shall stand by thee and hear thee talk,
Yet not have power to see thee: Put on this Ring,
Now tell me Bernard where is Dorilus?
Into air vanished, or sunk into the earth,
For I protest I see no Dorilus.
Call to him, try if he hear thee,
Dorilus, Dorilus.
Why here man, I am here.
Here; where?
Why here, close by thee, now I touch thee.
This is thy hand?
Yes.
It may be foot for any thing that I know, but that
Now I feel the fingers, thou moist hold it up at the Bar
And ne'er be burnt i the hand Isle warrant thee.
Why? I see thee plain as I did before,
And every thing else.
But that I have confidence in my Master and his Art, I wud never look to see thee again.
Look you Iulia your Mistress, comfort her,
And take the work upon you:
Isle to my blew coat again, and instantly wait on you.
All your best wishes. Fairest.
O Sir they lye in you.
O you speak music to the melancholy,
Health to the sick.
For next unto the delivery of my Mistress,
My brothers welfare is, which you promised.
Why sister I am well? next under Heaven
I praise this Gentleman.
That is his voice, where are you brother?
Here sister just before you.
Before me?
Yes, in the very mouth of you, as a man wud say
Trust me I cannot see you.
Trust me I'm glad of it, Isle talk the bolder and and the louder, they shall hear me.
This I perceive dooes somewhat trouble you.
But let it not, it shall be for a good,
Which though it cannot change, may stir your blood.
See they are hot in preparation, and people making to behold the Arraignment,
Fortune is a good huswife, she plies her wheel well
Alas poor Lady, I pity her; for a my conscience she is clear of the fact laid to her.
It is the maddest world, the report goes she hut lie with on for a Nosegay.
In some things Fame will be free I see, in some things scant; for Isle assure you it was for a Garland.
Why a Garland let it be, she had bin better won it with some other dance then the old one: but she has hard measure me thinks, not to be allowed an Advocate; for alas, what can a woman say for her self in such a case?
Dost thou think an Advocate can handle it better?
Yes, if he have a feeling of the business.
Away Traitor.
Bring forth the prisoner, place her at the Bar.
Read the Indictment.
Dorigen Ebroistene, daughter to Guide Ebroisten, in the Province of Mizzen Gentleman; and by the grace and favour of our Sovereign Lord Duke of axono made Duchess, atainted of high Treason, by commitring Adultery with one Dorilns Traohesse, a priuate Gentleman of the same Province of Mizzen, who by good and sufficient witness (beside her own shameless confession to the Duke himself) is here justly accused, and indicted of the fact; yet the Duke out of his most gracious clemency, desirous of a direct and lawful proceeding, admitteh the said Dorigendaughter to the aforesaid Guidoto answer for her self, and wishes with all his soul (such is his infinite affection to
her, that she could clear her self of the crime. So Heyuen and the Justices of her cause defend her!
Speak Lady, free and fearless, what can you say?
Nothing but that I do desire to die,
For it is sin enough that the Duke thinks
I am guilty of the fact, all the Clemency
That you can, show me or I do desire,
Is to condemn me quickly.
That I must speak it grieves me in a cause,
Which I cud wish neuet had precedence,
As it hath had too often, alas that I
Who do bleed inward, to behold this woman
Fallen by a sin equal to Lucifer.
From her clear Heaven where she stood a sty,
Moving in his arms as her proper Orb,
That I shut see this woman as I say.
Who had she bin a fixed one, had never
Shot from her sphere, but as an exhalation,
Drawn by the attractive virtue of the Sun,
Appears a glorious star yet wanting matter.
To maintain his lustre, shoots forth his flame:
And drops from whence it came unto a Dunghill,
So was this woman raised and so she fell:
That so much Beauty which was given for Honour,
And did advance her to it, shut cause shame,
Who can tell whether this be the first man,
That she hath sind withal, since usually,
Many faults are committed ere one found,
She promised the fellow of her lust,
Upon condition to make that: And what was it?
A Garland: A Garland of all flowers,
Of what effect who knows, or to what purpose,
Both being as certain as the thing it self,
How or from whence it came nay more then this;
She was so impudent to tell the Duke,
And tell him she had sworn, which the immodests,
And most professed Strumpet never wud:
What name of shame is to be given this woman,
That wud thus lewdly suffer the wild tongue,
Proclay me performance of so wild a deed,
And unto him she knew did love her so,
She might perhaps by her beauty and her tears,
Or both together stir compassion,
In many here, and in the Duke himself,
Bt when her crime shall be remembered,
A crime so beyond mercy being done,
Unto a Prince; and such a Prince as he is,
What can I less inspire me all ye powers?
That thought me worthy of authority
Then without pity to condemn this woman.
The case is too apparent.
Is it not grave Fathers.
Yes indeed it is, I was almost asleep.
Ye all do know, all ye that know the Law,
Who pardoned the offender doth commit,
An offence equal with him that doth punish,
The harmless innocent then she must dye,
I grieve to speak't and am so charitable,
To wish that her reproach may dye with her.
I thank thee for the last speech, it was well,
O that she now cud speak and clear her self.
But proceed, give sentence, if she stay long,
And I stand by a witness of her tears,
Sheele weep her self guiltless and innocent,
Therefore go on.
Stay.
Whose that?
I know not.
Whence come that voice.
Out of the clouds I think,
For no man dares own it.
Go forward and give sentence.
Stay I say.
It spoke again.
It came by my Ear.
The Court is troubled.
Hear me ye ministers of Justice,
And thou Patron of it and Truth,
That comes to you for succour, and for safety.
Keep your places, for let it be the Devil
I will hear him; and hearing shall determine
Whether he be a spirit of Truth or Lies.
The All preserver that guards Innocence,
And often lets it pine, but never perish,
Can raise a voice from stones, or trees, or winds,
To plead the cause that neds no Eloquence.
What hath this Lady done that here you bring her
Unto a Bar of shame? It first for being virtuous,
Because she hath bin constant to her Lord:
But some have called her chastity in question,
That never had a spark in their own Breasts,
And have possessed the Duke from his own thoughts,
That she must needs be bad because they are so.
Has every woman so much wit to hide
That fault especially? and had not she,
Who is the mirror of of her sex for that,
More then for Beauty? But she told the Duke
She had offended in an idle promise,
And that's objected to her for a crime;
A piece of impudence unparalleled.
When had she meant to have wronged her royal Lord,
She wud have locked the secret in her heart,
And set her face with smiles, beaten with kisses
Suspicion from his bosom; but she discovered
The guest, the giver, and the vow that bought it.
Who first not knows, dishonesty consists
In the deed done, not in the spoken word?
And she imagining the deed in which
She employed the doer, never to be done,
And so the wickedness. Let me not be thought tedions
Nor be offensive, if I bring to mind
The meeting of those two, how she revealed,
That you great Duke consented to the fact,
Encouraged her vnto't, and led her on,
If she had bin a villain to her death.
But he looking on her, and seeing in her eyes,
The image of fair Virtue how it wept,
Gave back her vows, and freed her from his heart,
In that shape first she stood, but again placed her
As his most roy all mistress, and your wife.
Excellent voice go on, for I could stand
A tedious winter but to hear thee talk.
So could not I without a rug Gown.
It hath bin still a maxim, she's not chaste
That hath not bin attempted, but she who hath stood
Temptation, and resisted. Gold is the purer
For being tried; and Virtue put in act,
Appears more glorious, when it hath wrought it self
Out of those troubles which would stifle it.
Heaven was assaulted by the Giants once,
Which showed Ioues power the greater: the pensive soul
Fighting with sin, the devil, and with death,
After the victory, triumphs and sings
Eternally amongst the blessed Angels,
Crowned with perpetual Peace and happiness:
But she for being virtuous must die,
For conquering her affections, for loving
Sincerely, and effectually, her Lord;
For having not the cunning to dissemble,
But for being Simple, Chaste, and Innocent,
Just, Noble, Beauteous, Excellent in all,
Save what no common woman wud have mist.
For this, and for this only she must die.
No, she must live; and all the world must die,
To me, before a hair of her shall perish.
O I have wronged thy goodness, now I see it;
who was before made blind with jealousy,
The heavens take thy part, and wunnot suffer
So much of worthiness to fall at once,
Lest nothing here but wickedness abound.
Sir, will you hear me,
Away, I will hear nothing but her Angels voice,
And that which spoke for her, which was no less,
It held such music in it, besides Truth.
Wipe from thine eyes those tears; let Messengers
Be sent to find the Earl my father forth,
And bring him back to the Court, there to receive
Of vs his dignities and favours trebled;
I am new framed again. Afflictions me,
And mingling with our joys, make them more sweet.
I donnot like this.
Nor I. (with you.
Fair one, pray stay, your brother wud speak
Sir, you may command me, and for his sake,
To th'vtmost of my power, I am bound to you.
O my dear brother, how you joy my soul
To see you up again, in health, and lusty?
Place your thanks here kind sister, for to his skill.
Next under Heaven, it must be attributed.
I do know it brother, and do thank him.
Heartily thank him, and the Duchess shall,
That owes him equally as much as we,
Thank him a better way.
No Lady, your thanks pays me really,
And I will never look for better pay,
Nor take, then comes from you; pray look upon me,
And see if you can fasten your affection
Upon a man so unworthy as my selse.
Sir you are worthy of a better choice,
But let me for your own sake thus advise you,
If you have entertained any such thought,
(As I hope you are wiser) to part with it;
For trust me, this poor heart I carry here,
Is not mine own; I do but walk with it,
And keep it for another: pray no more Sir,
Brother farewell, I shall be wanting to the Duchess.
Lost it, it cannot be.
Now talking with you, plucking off this glove,
It fell out of my hand.
Seek good Sir.
And do we see the golden days again?
Does honour once more Court vs? then look up.
Look up my friends I say, and see your Lord
Double and treble guilt; his happiness
Hatched, and inlaid, not to be worn out with Te.
What do you look for?
A Jewel we have lost.
A Jewel, let it be hanged, Isle give you every one
Jewels a piece, shall over value it,
There's not a friend I have, but shall have stones,
As fair and weighty as the Turk hath any,
And Concubines like him, though not so many.
Ye shall good Doctor, thou art so melancholy.
Come, let it alone.
How? let it alone.
Yes, for lost it cannot be, if any find it,
When I am pleased to have it, I will send
A messenger shall fetch it with a vengeance.
Prithee forbear, and let vs hear my Lord.
Gentlemen what will ye doe? will ye come to Court, and be graced by me, will you be Knights or Officers, Gentlemen ushers, or of the Bedchambe? speak what you'll be whilst I am in the giving vain, and you are so.
Weal waite on you tomorrow my good Lord.
You blew Bottle Basket hilt I talk not to you,
And the other two are stupid, now I think on it:
Dorilus you were best leave the Court; a man
Suspected once, is very seldom found
In his heart that suspects him to be sound:
There ye have a touch of my Policy, farewell.
Farewell my Lord.
Think on it.
Isle warrant you.
Whats this? A ring: that i'st and trust me,
A very pleasing one unto the eye,
Some Lady lost it, for whose sake isle wear it,
Until I find a challenger, it may he
It was lost a purpose and here dropped for me.
Am I mad or drunk or the people, both: and blind too I think. For let me come up to them never so near, talk never so loud, gripe them never so hard, they see me not stare and gape, as if I were in the air, and ask, where are you. If wee were out of favour, I should never wonder at it, but being Restored, and in greater grace then ever, it somewhat troubles me: zfoote, and a Lord cannot be acknowledgd, what will be come of poor Gentlemen: here come a couple, and sober as I take it, Isle try if they have not lost their eye-sight.
But that you justify ir so vehemently,
I shut not a believed it: Lost again.
Again, and sent to prison, her father
Banished the Court again, and all his honours,
Took again from him, and from his son,
And alls again as it was, and if not worse,
Nay then my admirations at an end. I remember no body wud know me last time. But these are a couple of honest fellows, and yet they serve a Lord, if any body have use of their eyes these will. By your leave Gentlemen, did you see the young Lord Frederick.
Wher's he that asked that question?
Zfoote I cannot see him, yet heard him plain,
The invisible voice is come again,
I believe so,
People are blind, thats certainlook how they stareI donnot think there was ever any such thing in the world as an eye, a seeing eye. I know Taylors needles have eyes, and Cheeses, but a discerning eye, that's the eye I wud encounter with.
It did me more good then my dinner, I protest, to see her transported to prison again.
And so it did me I protest, for her brothers sake my Lord Frederick Fadoudle.
I wonder he is not taken yet, heel Fadoudle at the Gallows, I believe when so ere he is, for I told the Duke what a saucy companion he was.
I will requite your kindness instantly,
How now, whats that?
Will you too Coxcombs never be uncoupled,
Who was that my Lord?
Nay, I know not:
Who was that then?
Who was that said, who was that?
Marry it was I Sir,
You, who are you?
One that'le bestow alittle pains with you,
Pray knock there no more my friend, thats the back gate, your best go about.
I will doe so, and wipe your Noses for you.
I'd rather you wud let it alone, unless you had a finer handkerche
Tic the spirit of some Porter, and wipes her with his Frock.
Soones Isle not endure this: Isle draw first.
And so will I.
Why do you not draw?
Hark, the voice asked why we do not draw.
I, I heard it, but Isle be hanged before Isle draw for that trick.
And so will I toSee yonders a compny of Gentlemen, lets fly to them for succour: Are you walking.
Yes Sir.
Weed be glad of your company.
Heers an invisible voice follows vs in the likeness of I know not what-
And plays upon vs like a Flute backward, and forward.
We hard a voice indeed but felt no touch of any thing.
No, It may be you are valiant and wud strike again, but we are tender hearted, and ten to one, but it knows as much.
Why if you'll walk our way, wee will guard you.
Yes sir, your way is ours now how ever.
Well I am lost I see, theres no hope that efor I shall be seen again of mortals; I walk in the clouds; But that the other two before these, and before them otheirs, could not perceive me, I should think I had with beating made the last pair cast a mist before their own eyes, Iubia and my Lord of mischief with his two Faces Winter and Summer.
Sweet Iulia kiss me.
Ah you old whooremaster is the sign in Scorepio with you.
Thou see my power, how with a breath I turn.
And wind the Duke any way I please,
In spite of all those words wasted in air:
I pluct the Dtchesse from his arms again,
The only star of court, more then a Duchess,
Which is to be my Mistress.
Say you so, Isle master you anon.
Prithee look up and smile upon me.
Pray away.
Come I have word sufficient nor will any longer be kept of thus weary of delay, I mean to work yu.
Lay ofy our wicked hands.
Adders and Scorpions shall as soon embrace me,
Shall my dear mistress that equally laments:
My adverse Fate, which hears if not about it.
And in her tears lies bathed, breaking her sigh:
Into as many pieces, as if she striud
To number up her sins, which are no more,
Then will make truth appear that she must sin,
And shall I throw away all thought of her,
That altogether thinks of Heaven and me,
Whom hourly she solicits and ascends,
And calls me along with her in her Prayers,
Shall I forget this Lady, and to lust
Prostrate my self to him that works her ruin.
First, may Heaven point me out, his mark or avengeance.
And I unable to avoid the stroke.
Be rent and torn as Thunder doth an Oak,
Stayyou are too wilful.
Is that all?
Here meI will speak what shall be liking to thee. Prithee come back; so well I doe perceive thou love the Duchess, that her affliction's thine.
They are.
Can thou cast off grief with her releasement?
If I shall bring her sound unto the Duke,
In every circumstance, and fix her sure:
Nay set her one stair higher then she was,
And make him honour what before he admired.
Wilt thou then make a passage for my love,
And open me away into thy heart?
I will.
Wilt th give me a kiss upon the premises.
Isle give you a kiss anon, in your good father the Devils name.
I hold heaven in my arms, and all the joys:
Wut thou be just to me?
As you are unto me; for if you prove
The master of your word, I will be over mine the mistress,
And though it be a jewel I esteem,
I never saw how I could part with it better.
Another kiss, and go and promise unto all thy friends, and to the Duchess self, her liberty.
You are a villain.
Ha.
You are damned.
What voice is that?
I heard none.
I will cut your throat.
Cut my throat.
I, your Weason pipe, your Gullet, this ungodly Gullet.
Swoons it pinched me by the throat.
Your best cry out murder.
This is another voice allied to that which pleaded for the Duchess, but not the same, and it is merely Witchcraft. I fear thee not Dinell, or Devils mate, friend or acquaintantance.
Who do you talk to?
A scurvy voice, I know not, nor do care for,
An yet it troubles me, I cannot see
The thing that sets it going. Be you
Careful and constant. In the afternoon
Come to my lodging, I will have the Duke there
And you shall be a witness of my wing.
And of the subtle proiects I have laid,
To execute your wishes, till then farewell.
Farewell.
A pox upon thee what so ere thou art.
Twill come home.
Show thy self and be the Prince of Devils,
Isle not fear thee.
No, the great Devil and you are all one, which shows I am no Devil; for if I were, I durst not thus abuse
What art? (thee.
A pleasant fellow Sir, and one of the noble Science, for look you Sir, ther's a Venue.
O, Swoons he has stabbed me.
No Sir no, I am a blunt fellow, &amp; so my weapon; nay I wonnot leave you thus.
Here's my sister, but very sad me thinks:
How now Iulia, why so disconsolate.
O brother we are undone: Ell's out of joint again
As much or rather more then ever.
How?
The Duke's in old fit, and the poor Princess
Clapped up close prisoner, look to your self
Or you are lost. (me
Be it so; for life is wearisome sister, do you love
Why shut you ask a question so frivolous.
Do you?
You know I do.
Show it then; for till you satisfy me in my request, I shall make doubt of it.
Pray speak it.
Here's a Gentleman to whom I owe,
More then my parents gave me, more then
If Fortune shut look up and smile,
Prove a prodigal in favours to me;
And I shut live to take 'hem with this hand,
And with this, pay it as due Tribute unto him
See how he languishes, can take no rest,
No food, but thoughts which nourish him,
And sighs again for you, drinks his own tears,
And weeps them forth again, yet does not cal you cruel,
Pray speak to him.
Why alas? brother I did tell this man
How hopeless I was, prayed him to desist,
And make some better choice.
You did Lady, but I must die first.
Why if you be so desperate a lover,
That you will die for me, think me the like,
That I can die as well for him I love.
You were good company to go to heaven with.
I, but if either of you go that way, you take
An ill course in your journey.
Have you then placed your heart on any man
Yes believe me, though I have made no noise
Wih sighs, able to blow up mountains.
What is he?
One that you praised your self into my heart,
Although his youth and feature need no Orator.
I praised! Iulia you wrong me.
By Cupids self I donnot.
Name him.
It is an unreasonable request in you,
But yet to show I am not ashamed of him,
It is young Bernard.
Who Lady? pray speak that name again.
Young Bernard.
Bernard la Vere.
The same.
I thank you.
Nay Sister, once you are caught.
But in no worse trap then her lovers Arms
Nor shall you ever be ashamed of him, nor yet
Repent you, for he will love as faithfully
As you, and live and die with you.
There is no giving back, welcome my love,
And in a time that I did wish for thee;
Yet I shall startle you and try your temper:
For since I have found away how to enfranchise
My poor afflicted mistress, Isle be pleasant.
I never thought before, a man might be
In heaven and not know it, as to have a dwelling
In your heart and be ignorant of the bliss, Is little less.
O but my Bernard, we do never meet
With any happiness, but some kind of mischief
Mingles still with it, yet tic more or less,
As you shall make of it, if you might take me now:
Why, I were worth your love, for I am yet;
(I did not lye much, if I said a Virgin)
But without blushing I dare say a Maid.
It is not to be doubted.
But it is to be lost.
That is not to be doubted neither.
But not on him, for so it is not lost,
To deal directly with you, I cannot bring,
That thing called maiden head, for it is promised.
And if you cannot love me without that,
Deal plainly then with me, as I with you,
And I will look out for another man:
Another handsome man a Citizen.
That shall make much of me, and not a whit,
Love me the worse for want of such a trifle.
I know sweet Iulia you were ever merry,
And not beyond a Maidens modesty.
But this is very strange,
But not so strange as true, I am a witness of it,
She has given away her maiden head to the Devil,
For an old whooremaster is little better.
That is Fredericks voice.
But as she said it is but a trifle: a cold Commodity
A man may buy at some time of the year
Like Cowcumbers, at any time for a small Ring,
A Purse, or a pair of Gloves, for so your country
Wenches part with them, your City for an Apple.
Ther's none if you see him.
Not I.
He has found the Ring.
Very likely.
Nay most certain, and let him keep it, for being ignorant in the virtue of it, it may be some sport to vs to hear him chase being lost to all mankind.
Doctor thou drop'st.
The devil what art thou, I see thee not.
No more, thou shalt him that does cucklod thee.
Thats true, whlst he enjoys the invisible Ring.
O you are a stout lover to be dejected thus, for such a vanity as a Maidenhead is, you'd ill endure to have your wife run away with another man two or three year together, and afterword brought home, and again accepted with Suppers and with Trumpets.
A plagy smart wench.
But since it is so estimate a Jewel,
Come my Barnard w'eele not part with it,
But lay our heads together how to preserve it.
Why but do you hear, shall I be lost thus
Will none of you acknowledge me, Iulia,
Doctor Dorilus.
Frederick by the voice.
And Frederick by flesh and blood as good as any man or woman wud desire, feel me else.
I do feel a hand.
And yet perceive no body.
Right.
Right, but by your leave all is not right; either your eyes are drawn aside, or my body is taken asunder, and nothing left certain of me but a hand and a voice, mas here comes Smirk, Isle try the strength of his eyesight.
I beseech you stay, here is a promise of some mirth.
Smirk well met.
Not so my friend, well overtaken you may say,
But I am in hast, therefore farewell.
What are there rubs in the air, it is some little dandiprat, that I overrun, and ten to one he has broke his Nose aagainst my Pipkin, Where art thou?
Here.
Here, where is that here.
What has he got trow there painting: that it is, since you know me not, Isle bestow a little pains to picture you, that the best friend you have, shall hardly take acquaintance of you.
A Pox of these Flies, theile never leave sweet Mutton, but my friend, my friend, hes gone poor fellfellow again.
Tic strange you know not me.
I shut know that voice.
You shut do so, if you wud call your self to mind
My young master Frederick and quondam Lord where are you?
Here man here.
Something plays with my Nose I believe tic my whisking Muschatus, now I am come in the wind.
What dost thou do with this painting Smirk?
Marry I mean to live by it and purpose to set up my old trade again. Fre. Thy old trade, what's that?
Why a Stainer, I have hired a Shop not far from Court. And I have painted the most horrible things that many men know not what to make of them, I drew Hercules a great while a go in the likeness of a man, and now every one says he looks like a Lion. Then I drew Action hunted with his own dogs, &amp; they say it is like a Citizen pursued with Seriants.
Why, but can thou draw any thing into proportion?
Can I draw any thing into proportion; why, I will presently draw you backward or forward, a limb, twoo'd do you good to behold it.
And thou be so good a workman, thou shalt draw my Picture.
I wud be glad to see your face in, if it please you to come out of the Cloud.
Well Smirk, pray for me, I am a man, but in this world I have small store of money, and therefore cannot reward thee as I wud, but hold thee, give me thy hand, I can see to take thee by it, ther's a Ring, twill yield thee somewhat.
I thank you sir, it will serve to exchange for a Corrall for my son and heir when I have him.
Now step out altogether and salute him.
Good Senior you are welcome to the light,
To the light: why, do you perceive me now?
As plain as the earth we tread on.
Whirs Smirk?
Here I am Sir.
Where, come near me, O the Ring, the Ring,
Give me my Ring again, I find the virtue,
Nay, soft, so play fools, nothing is surer then gift.
Come near me that I may touch thee.
I know what the Proverb says, touch me and take me, and therefore I will keep aloft, Zfoote hee is stricken put blind, hee gropes like a young Novice, the contrary way. What re these blind too?
Good Gentlemen help me to lay hold of him.
Lay hold of whom.
Of Smirk.
Smirk, why he is gone.
No, he is here, I smell the oily Rascal.
They are all blind, or else I walk invisible, Isle try that presently.
How now?
Nothing but a Flesh-flye forsooth lighted uppone your lips, the place is full of hemSome-bodie has sprinkled invisible Virgins water upon me for I doe go insensible. Here comes the two Eggs, I shall go near to crack their Crows, for the last abuse, but walking as I doe, I will find out a better revenge.
Sirrah I think it was much heereabout that we met with the taking voice that kicked vs?
It was indeed.
I wud kick you again, but that I have Corns on my Toes, I will only pencil you now. And because you have so much knavery and want colour sor't I will begin with Orange tawny.
What was that?
What,
Someting crossed my Nose.
A Door, a Door, the fields are full of them.
I'll give you the Door too.
There was another wiped me in the same place.
Cause you are a Knight, you shall bear a Cross
How now?
Zfoote I think some Bird has wried in my eye.
No tic nothing but the dew falls I think.
A Poxont, I am paid again.
There are some gadflies sure abroad, lets make away.
Another wipe first.
Ha, ha, ha.
Why do you laugh my Lord? ha, ha, ha.
Nay, Isle put in too, for my ha, ha, ha, ha.
This is a three mans laughter.
But why do you laugh my Lord? ha, ha.
ha, ha, Pray why do you laugh my Lord?
For nothing, for nothing, come prithee lets go.
I pray lets go, ha ha,
I am glad I have made you merry.
Where art thou? So dear I love thee for this piece of knavery that I could kiss thee, prithee let me kiss thee
No, no, kissing, I do bristle too much.
Isle give thee another Ring.
No no, no more Rings, I shall think my self an Alderman, and grow proud then.
Come let him alone with it.
If you know any Lady that deals in complexion you may doe me a kindness to acquaint her that Smirk the serving-man is turned a Painter.
How now Carolus, how do's my Lord?
Troth scurvily, as a Lord may do in his case.
Why how i'st man?
Wicked, wicked, extreme wicked, he cannot say his Prayers.
Why? is he speechless.
What a Pox is that to the purpose, has he made his will.
Yes, And in his will he doth will and command that you two shall be whipped, and that he has bequeathed you for your legacy.
Let him bestow it upon his friends, we can live without it.
But prithee sirrah, tell vs the manner of his sickness which was wondrous strange and sudden.
Why how shoud I know more then you, I am none of his Physician.
They say but be it spoken in private that a Rat hints him, is it so? thou can tell.
A Rat, a pox of a Rat, Zbloud I heard otherwise.
Well, lets hear what hast thou heard.
Marry Sir that the Neopolitan Canker has searched into his bones: and he lies buried in vleers, stincks so that without perfumes, nobody is able to abide him. But mum mum, not a word of this I speak, it is amongst felllowes and friends.
Tic well you do so, for otherwise your legacies wud be bestowed upon you, a yard or two of whipcord is no great cost, and the executors wud go to the charge, Zbloud what Rascals are you to utter this, you are the inuenters of it.
Not I by this hand, I heard mine at my Barbers,
And I heard mine at the Apothecaries.
Why heers the misery of great men, they cannot scope the slanders of their slaves look you yonder goes one of the Doctors, you were best (to be better satisfied) queer of him.
Not I, I love not to be inquisitue.
Wher's any of my Lords Gentlemen there.
Heir's a Leash of vs Sir.
One of you must instantly take horse, and ride to Doct or Lopes, and bring him hither with all speed that may be: his counsel is wanting, and it concerns your Lords life, therefore make hast, and tell him so to: Tell him the Duke will else be here before him; from whom, if so it happen, he will receive a check.
we shall sir, we shall.
The Duke, why is the Duke sent for?
Yes, &amp; has sent word he will be here immediately.
Ber Lady Sir, then tic to be thought the dangers more then every Ague brings, &amp; t'will go hard with him.
Why make not you more hast then to the doctors?
I make more hast, why do's not he or you?
I, why I was not bidden.
Nor I.
Why, nor I, more particular then you.
But you must go that answered.
Why you may go as well as I that answered.
By this Air not I.
By this Earth nor I.
By this Air, Earth, Fire and Water too, not I: zbloud I get no more then you, and why shut I then?
This is very well, suppose my Lord for want of this same Doctor now shall die.
Why, what can I help it. (you.
Why you may by fetching him.
And so may
And so may he.
And so may you.
I care not, nay do as you please.
Why, nor I neither.
Zfoote he shifts his Rome, Isle not be seen.
Bier Lady Sir nor I.
Who went for Lopes?
Ferdinand my Lord.
Is he not come yet?
No my Lord, nor gone yet I believe.
Oh, my blood boils, as if the Sun
Had darted all his beams into my entrails.
Short shot my soul, and like the shaft
Shot by great Hercules, fly till thou break,
Or else, strike through the body of the Sun,
And fix thy self in heaven a brighter Star.
What shall I do? Is there no power in Physic?
Swoons are you dumb, Doctors can you not talk,
Though you do nothing else?
Alas my Lord; we know not what to say.
Why then you might a said, that you can say,
That you know nothing, but your own
Privilege, to kill unpunished; yet are you apt
When Nature work her self, to assume it yours.
O my torment, when wut thou cease? get you gone,
Impostures as you are, and cousin people
That have faith in you; for I have found
No Art, but Voice among you.
A way Physicians, go; my Lord thinks ye are fools,
And so do I: Therefore begone, begone.
Is not the Duke come yet?
No my good Lord; but here are the Divines.
They as very welcome.
How does your Lordship?
Wondrous well satisfied in any point touching my salvation: only one burden on my conscience lies, for the Duke himself to take away.
The Duke is come.
Then all the rest I pray depart the room.
How is it man?
Cheerful, wondrous cheerful, all this whole day I felt not such a minute.
Be comforted good Raymond, me thinks I see another age of life yet shine in thee, your eye is quick and sprightly, death doth not show himself in any part.
Your grace is a good comforter, and your sight blows up this spark of life to such a light which is but as a twinkling before death.
Therefore I do beseech your Majesty,
As in this life and after death you'll stand,
In history to the last hour of Time,
A just religious Prince to which I know,
In your own inclination you aspire,
Even for the Dukedoms peace, Oyour pardon:
My breath I find will fail me,your pardon Duke.
And quickly speak it; or I shall not hear you.
What, what shall I pardon? good Raymond speak, I gather by thy speech thou would unfold, something of consequence; you must not part thus with me, therefore good Raymond speak, borrow a little time of death, and I will pay it back out of my life: dear Raymond donnot leave me thus unsatisfied, for if you doe, Isle follow you to learn it.
O I have wronged you.
Never, never good Raymond.
By that strong power which raises me I have,
And lends me breath to utter it; and this Lady,
Where is she and the Princess all of ye,
For when you first began your jealousy,
Upon a small presumption, I as apt.
And sudden as your self in fear to find,
The issue of a Prince which Heaven aduert,
So basely bastardise, held up your thought,
Told you of former and familiar tricks,
In the like nature I had seen between them,
Which I protest was then out of my care,
That such a thing might be, rather then any crime,
That ever I knew she was guilty of,
Send for her therefore, and condemn your rash
False suppositions, and pardon mine,
That grew but out of yours, but once being grown,
It spread into more branches then your own,
What is thy purpose.
Religious as the Churches which is,
To clear all doubts and present Truth,
In her own Garments, to protect innocence,
And from her white hand lift her out of slanders,
By which you wud infer my Duchess honest
By all the best hopes of a dying man,
This being a time not to jest breath away.
There does not live this day in Christedome,
A Queen nor any woman through the world,
More truly virtuous, and as I speak truth,
So may I fail or find it.
Whether my joys are sensual or immortal,
I cannot say but surely I do feel,
And stand on such a change as if my soul,
Were melted into blood, or my blood turned.
To soul which lights, me up fresh Tapers,
Whose instructive beams direct me to the Hart
Of my dear Duchess, where chastity I find,
Hath built her templewithin there.
My Lord.
Here, take my Signet, deliver it to
Lord Lodwicke, command him bring the Duchess,
And waite upon her hither, withal the speed
And diligence his duty can perform.
I shall my Lord, and as I'm one of the honest men I am glad to hear it.
O noble Lady, how shall I look thy mistress in the face, that blush at sight of thee? prithee stand by me, and embolden me, bee my Genius, prompt me what I shall say, or the Scion's spoiled; I shall be out, my tongue doth falrer for joy conceived of her great goodness, for grief of her much injury.
As in the fiction, Giants make war with heaven,
But are struck dead, so malice may strike at Virtue;
But at last, I see the blow will light where it began.
Welcome my Royal mistress, and I hope
Unto more comfort, then ever yet the Saxon
Court afforded, it bears the likeliest face
Upon vs now.
Why do you kneel to me? the slanderer
Ought to ask pardon of the slandered,
My own Law teaches it. Pray do you rise,
Or I will never think my self forgiven.
Nay now my Lord I fear you sent for me to mock me.
God and all good men at my greatest need
Requite me with a mock, if I mean any.
O let me now expire, and be the happy messenger
To sing this news to heaven, such and so great.
So happy reconcilements make the Angels,
Tread the bright ring, and from the ordered spheres,
Strikes heavenly music to all earthly ears:
Give me your royal pardon and remit me,
The hand of death lies cold and weighty on me,
And what is he but must sink under it,
Therefore go exercise your joys where grief,
May not be heard to express her self in tears,
For sorrow still sings loud unto our ears,
O my Lord,
Dear Princes speak no more, I know your hart,
But as you love my quiet, leave me to it,
For I do find an inclination to
Rest and sleep, and perhaps my last.
Come then lets leave him sickness is froward,
And one while company is pleasing to it,
Another while offensive, Raymond farewell,
Heaven to his mercy take or restore thee.
Good Duke I thank thee, let me kiss thy hand,
And yours best Duchess, and Lady yours,so
Now if you will be gone, you may,
Sickness knows no manners.
We'll trouble you no longer Raymond.
Why I thank you, and all good lighten on you.
But not stayCarolus.
My Lord.
Are they all forth the room?
Yes my Lord.
Active as fire I spring out of my grave then,
And will see some before me ever I dye,
That are more fit for Earth and Heaven then I,
Fetch me some water, and a cup of wine,
Isle drink my own health and my lust shall pledge it,
Do I bear earth about me, sure I donnot;
For in this ecstasy, I have no feeling,
No use of feet, but ride and rack in the Air,
Like a black Cloud, holding in his hand lightning,
And in this a tempest, give me, and go
And understand the cause of Iulias stay,
It puts me into doubts and she should go
Away now with the Queen and cheat my hopes,
I have made a sickmans plot of it,
But Iulia is Religious in her vows,
Knows what it is to swear, and what to break 'hem.
How now villain, why returned without her?
Why she is gone my Lord.
Be though on to then, and after her and fetchher,
And bring her to me, or lay down thy duty,
And let me never see it in a face,
Or an officious leg again presented,
Zoones are you scraping there when I forbid you.
Alas my Lord.
My Lord, my Loggerhead, begone.
O Madam, you come like to the Halcion, and bring fair weather with you.
Thou art my truth, and I will study thee,
No more shall misbeliefe enter my thoughts:
For thy Idea standing in my heart,
As in a Temple shall fright all false suggestions,
To the Tartars. Give me instead of Laurel,
For my deed, a sugared kiss, and crown my joys.
Away you are a villain, I came back to tell you so: And long life which is a blessing to others, unto thee's a curse: thou shame of such a reverence dost not see, to what a monster lust in thee is grown: at lest in men's imaginations.
A man as old in show as time himself,
Made up for counsel like another Nestor:
At least in men's imaginations,
To be so monstrous Goatishly inclined.
O fie my Lord! think with your self this ill,
Provokes not in the flesh, but in your will:
Your blood moves slow and cold and all the fire,
That strikes up any heat, is in desire:
I blush for you, think of it.
Yes i'll think of it, but you shall give me time,
And you and I will now go and consult of it.
Keep of.
Why you wonnot stab.
Yes to the hart believe it.
Why then a combat; look you, I am provided too
Will you yield now?
No.
This wud show handsome on a Stage,
An old man and a woman at the point:
Believe it i'll stab too.
Thy worst: for I will mine,
This is scurvy wooing, Iulia no more.
Farewell then, and repent,
Nay then you stir me, yield, or I will force thee.
And after pay, thy perjury with death,
Are you so mannish.
Desist wild ravisher.
Ha, the Duke, then rage rise high in me,
And add unto this wickedness a worse.
Villain, what wilt thou do, keep of.
O I am lost.
A gaurd.
Cease on the Traitor,O that those hairs,
Which are the badge of truth and as I thought,
The care of her shut shru'de such villainies,
So monstrously betraying and abusing:
Away with him to death.
To death.
Yes a cruel and a lasting.
I beseech your grace.
Wilt thou beg for him whom he so hath wronged
And which is more, made me the instrument?
Yes, good my Lord his pardon?
Prithee sweet no more, ask any thing but that,
Let Law be of no force then in my Land,
If I forgive such Traitors.
O where is Dorilus?
That innocent and excellent good man:
If he be living, let him be brought to me
That I may honour him, if dead lament,
And wash him with my tears, sit on his Hearst
And ask forgive of his gentle spirit,
Least it do haunt me being his murderer.
Justice, justice, my Sovereign.
What art thou come for justice?
One that under your authority performs it upon others.
Perform it upon me for I am a murderer.
My Lord.
A murderer of my friends, of virtuous men,
Virtue herself did very hardly scope me.
Good my Lord.
I must see Dorilus alive or dead,
To view how big the wound was that I gave him,
For I will have grief dig one in my breast,
As deep as it is, and as mortal too.
Why here is Dorrilus.
Prayers of Princes fall on thee, dost thou live
To tell me that my sword doth want an edge,
But when it strikes offenders, rise Dorilus:
And thus unto thy Mistress I present thee,
As the best Jewel that I have to give her,
For a true Servant is of that esteem.
Sir, I thank you, but I return him back,
As fittest for your service.
Hears giving and taking as if thei'd both be rid of him.
Why I thank thee, and I receive him gladly.
Now wher's he that wud have Justice?
Here my Liege.
Against whom wud'st thou have Justice?
Against the President of Wittembergh.
Who falling foul with the learned Landoff
Tutor unto my son, is thought by most
And of the wisest of the University,
To have by some treacherous plot made them away,
He nor my son having bin seen ere since.
Why here is Landoff sir, your poor friend in safety.
Landoff, where is my son?
Here sir, with a daughter to boot.
Now Gods blessing a'thy heart, if thou hast consen'd me thus.
Even thus Sir.
Rise with my blessing on you both.
So they are owned, no body calls upon me, nor reguards me, nor to say the truth, I regard nobody: the loss of my invisible Ring has broke my heart, now when I knew the virtue of it, to lose it, and to an idiot, an innocent, that deserves not to understand the virtue of it, what dainty devices might I have had in every Chamber of the Court, seen such a Lord kiss such a Lady the wrong way, such a Knight, lie with his Chambarmaid, and his Lady with her Groom, the Usher with the waiting-Gentlewoman, and the page with all. Phoebus himself must a come short of those things, I shut as soon, for one invisible Ring wud discover another.
How now, whats the cause of this? why kneel you al?
For that which I join with them too.
Lord Raymonds life, banish him the Court,
And let him be confined to his house in the country.
Thou must not ask twice what I shall deny,
Rise, it is granted you; see you have good friends,
And a gracious mistress.
I see it, and shame to see my self,
How had the Devil blinded me, I could not
See your rare virtues? O let my penitence,
Which if it be not zealous, just heavens strike,
That breath into my throat, again which forms,
The words I utter, and let 'hem strangle me:
Let my true penitence I say beget,
Another virtue in you, besides mercy,
Credulity that I am truly sorry,
For the bold mischiefs against you and my Prince:
A guilty conscience followed by despair,
Light on all Traitors to their Sovereign,
Wants to the extreamst sickness without succour,
Without all good mans pity and their prayers,
Fall on the slanderers of all your sex:
Diseases rot him living; dead no grave,
But ravenous Fowls, become his sepulchre,
His bones kicked up and down by his enemies,
And charitable men allow of it,
Hell and the Devils, plying him with torments:
Bast his black soul, that he may roar so loud:
As to the earth crying he heard may be,
Who slanders women, may be damned like men.
Will there be such Revels say you.
Yes, but no words, for it must be kept private.
Private, why there are gone out Proclamations, that whosoever can by device, or any quick conceits delight the Duchess, he shall have correspondent to his quality an Annual stipend besides the favour of the Duke for ever.
Such a thing was talked of, for the Duke now dotes far more on the Duchess then at first; and whatsoar is done, is to delight her.
It is a better hearing then the old Jealousies.
Whats your Lord confined to his house in the country.
Yes.
And how find you your new Lord.
Very noble, and so doth bear himself to every
man, hark, yonders such a coll with the Musirians, the Masquers, and the Dancers, who now are practising.
Is not the Poet amongst them.
Yes, and which is a miracle a Masquer,
The learned, Landoff, who now although he be
A professed Acamedian,
Has laid aside his graver weightier studdies,
To exercise his skill not yet forgotten,
Being brought up a Page at Court, and practised
Much in that qualityHark I must leave you,
I have a charge committed to me.
May I not under your protection,
Behold the sports.
I cannot tell, I will not promise you,
For my Lord's very strict, Isle do my best.
Why I thank you.
I donnot know how it comes about that I shut bee lost thus; villainous witchcraft will never bee left, I am fine to give over my shop, but I had broke; howsoefor my painting cloth was so rotten, it could not hold together, but the best is, I shall live like a Gentleman, because I walk invisible, nay I am not only invisible to other men, but to my self: I went this morning to a looking-Glasse, to be acquainted with this comely countnonce, the devil of countenance there was to be acquainted with; the Glass seemed to me like a deep water, that I began to feel with my hands for fear I might a been drowned: But finding my self aboue ground, and hunger tumbling like a Porpin in my Maw, and doing the Somerset in my Guts, I smelt a Sirloin of Beese hot from the Spit followed the train close, set in my foot,
drew my knife, sliced me off a Collop, clapped it upon a penny loaf, went me to a side Table, consumed it without any body saying much good do you, or the Devil choke you. Set my lips to a Flagon of Beer, drunk twice with a breath, set it down again, took it up again, and drunk it as dry as a Biscuit: so that I perceive I cannot starve. And for clothes, it is no matter how I go, no body sees me.
Pray give 'hem great charge at the outward doors
They admit none but such as are Courtiers,
The Hall must not be pestered. Wher's Ferdinand?
Here my Lord.
Pray have a care those lights be not offensive unto the Ladies, they hang suspiciously, and let the hangings be removed.
They shall my Lord, wher's Pedro?
Here Sir.
Look to those lights I pray, my Lord is very angry, fearing they might do trespass, and those hangings must be removed.
They shall sir,whore's any of the Grooms?
Here Sir.
Pray look to these lights, and let the hangings be removed, the Gentleman Usher has commanded it.
They shall sir, whore's the fellow here shut look unto these lights, things are done so untowardly.
No body sees me, I come in like the air, when Lords and Ladies stand waiting for this officer and tothere officer, country gentlemen their pates broke, &amp; cityzens wives thrust up and down in every corner, their husbands kept out with flame and Torch, glad to fetch a nap in the Cloisters.
Bear back there, bear back, room for my Lord Lodwicke.
Here Madame you shall face the Duke and Duchess, it is the best place to see in all the Hall.
I thank your honour.
Have a little patience, the Revels will begin immediately.
Room for my Lord, bear back, swoons whither wud you?
Well said, thou dost more good with thy oaths then all they with their Truncheons.
The Duke is coming.
Sports are intending which I will have crossed.
Add clouds to night, that pleasure may be lost.
Envy thou wound thy self in spite of thee,
This I break forth, out of obscurity.
This is the four winds driving of five
DevilsThis same Ring wud fine give
Me the slip, I must even pocket him, for
Fear of the worst.
How now sirrah, what make you here?
Why, do you see me?
See you, yes marry doe I: And get you gone quickly, or you shall feelI see you, go, begone this is no place for such as you.
Humh: Am I become a wretch again, and mortal?
I am got in again, and have found the trick of it, thanks my dear Gem; a man may have an inuisible Ring I see, and not know of it; I wondered that I grew palpable, now I perceive how the matter went: thanks my dear Gem, I say still, I will not lose this finger that I have my invisible Ring upon, for the best joint at the Bars.
Is this all the devices, sports, and delights, the Duke shall have for his money: the Proclamation promised reward for him that could show any varieties, and first all come to a dull Masque? Isle show his Grace some sport my self, with help of my invisible Ring, which now must off again. By your Majesties leave, and the rest of the Honourable
How now, what's he?
What's he? Why he is the miracle of your Kingdom.
How the Miracle!
I, and can doe wondersnow you see me you know me.
Yes Sir, I do know you.
And you know not me, you know no body.
But keep off my Lord.
Prithee keep off.
You see me you say, Duke I speak to thee.
Yes Sir, I see you.
And you all see me.
We doe all see you.
Very good, and I doe see all you: but what's that to the purpose?
Very little to purpose indeed,
Shall I demonstrate matter of Art.
And have nothing for my pains?
Yes marry shall you, does not the Proclaimtion tell you shall.
Proclamations may say what they list,
Something in hand doth well.
Some body give him something.
I, but no body hears not on that Ear, yet because Iwonnot doe Royalty wrong, in suspecting your bountyYou see me you say.
Yes we do see you.
You do. Who sees me now?
Trust me not I, he is invisible to me.
And me.
To all.
I shoud be sorry else; for, and my invisible Ring shoud not keep his old virtue, I wud hang my self directly.
Prithee appear again.
I will have Majesty call me first.
Why the Duke does call you.
Let me hear him vuia voce, Smirk is my name
A well beloved subject, once a Painter,
But now Esquire of the invisible Ring.
Smirk, and our well-beloved subject, once a Painter, but now Esquire of the invisible Ring.
I conjure thee to appear again.
See here I am, what wudst thou mighty monarch
I do command thee let me see the Ring.
By which thou walkst invisible.
I do command thee not to command me that,
For from my invisible Ring I will not part.
Lay hands upon him for a forcerer.
Assist me my dear Ring, no hands upon me,
For being invisible, I am a Prince,
And being a Prince no hands is to be laid on me;
Treason doth never prosper.
He is gone again.
You follow me by sent, but never find me by sight.
Isle warrant you.
Seize it and fly.
I am gone.
O, O, O.
How, who's that exclaims.
The cramps in my finger.
The Cramp.
O sir, now you are visible again.
My Ring is gone now, the devil go with it, for a my conscience he fetched it.
What have you lost your Ring.
I, I, and my middle finger, which served me for more use then all the rest.
Thats strange.
But what is become of the Ring.
Pardon me Liedge, that virtue that it held,
Came from my Art, and at some fitter time,
I will acquaint you with the passages,
How, and the cause for what it was intended:
Your gracious Duchess knows and felt the worth,
Thy knowledge in good arts is found Landoff,
Nor will we be inquisitive of more.
Then thou shalt think it fit to be reueal'd:
For all thy Actions have bin just and loyal,
What means this Trumpet,
Perhaps some new delights and rarer.
Thus was I bidden to my sovereign,
Fall on my face, now rise I up again
To render to the Ladies fair salutes,
And give them all their worthy attributes,
Wonder not that I resesolutely come,
Boldly thus daring press into this room,
For from a Lord and knight of eminent note,
I bring this challenge; such as can read may know it.
Very suceinct and peremptory.
For this day I am master of the Revels.
Bee it known unto all men that I,of the Court, of Saxonie, traveller, by degree a Lord, and a professed Champion for all Ladies in the lists of peace, doe challenge all Courtiers whatsoever, without exceptions, natiue or strangers, tocofer, court, orcoplement, in silence with discorsiue motion and true action of the face, hand, body, &amp; leg, &amp; afterword with the vollubily of thetong, to talk longest, fastest &amp; loudest, for sense I stand not vpo it, being seldom regarded by the party courted, therefore indeed belongs not to the Courtier: also bee it farther known that my assistants, Agents, or seconds, doth challenge likewise all Courtiers whatsoever, at the true compendious form of compiling Epistles, alias Loue-Letters, to Ladies or Mistresses, either in Prose or Verse, with Proverbs, or without Proverbs, with Sentences, or without Sentences, Figures, or any other matter, to be performed Extempore, or not Extempore, according as it shall please the Challenged, which is to say,
the Defendant to determine: All which, that beforesaid, as well as this now spoken of, shall be performed by the said Challengers instantly; who only staying to hear of any Opponents, are both ready to enter.
Here is unexpected Sport.
Let 'hem enter, they shall be answered; Smirk, thou shalt be my Second.
Shall I, that's some comfort yet, to put the loss of the Ring out of my thought.
Shall Ianswere the Epistoler?
I, marry shalt thou.
Isle Pestle and Pestle him, Isle warrant him, he was ne'er so pounded in his life, Isle scorn to begin after my hearty commendations with him.
Hark, they approach.
Which is my Antagonist?
I am he.
And who is mine?
Behold the man, with Pen and Ink provided.
Poor fool, thou wut but make thy self derided
So nimble in rime, Isle first break your head in Prose, and afterword whip you in Verse, Isle lambaste you in completes.
Nay I will not lose the honour of being the courted Lady.
When my talking time comes I will thank you Lady in language.
Mark how my challenge goes, it was not to talk sense only, but longest, fastest, loudest, and you our talk me that way, Isle give you my tongue and every tooth I have to make trorters on, for I was borne and
1 page duplicate
1 page duplicate
bred and nursed a talker, and of my quality, this Lady has had some small experience, for I did promise her to prove a talker, and for her sake do now profess, and practic't and tic in vain for any creature to contend with me,I have put down the Lawyers of all Nations, and all women, Gossips at Christnings, after they have drunk wine the Mid-wife being there, words flow out of my mouth like water from the Clouds, to make a deluge, to drown all voices but my own, which drums nor trumpets, nor a Sea flight can doe.
But a thump of the guts will.
O.
Tic excellent; sweet Lady to hear words,
Though they want matter, for silence does betray,
A bashfulness in man, unmeet for courtiers,
For he that has a bold tongue and a free,
Can never want th'affection of Ladies,
Nor is it fit he shut, for he can keep 'them,
Walking at midnight with a tedious tale,
And longer tic the better, because sleep
Being accounted as some use to call it,
Deaths image, other some his elder brother,
By how much we do use it, by so much less,
We live in this world and loose time and pleasure,
Which both to rich and poor is the chief treasure,
Why donnot you talk now.
Talk? If I have breath, enough to live, I care not.
Nay, and you give out, you have lost the day.
I had not fair play shew'ne me, (uersaires
Stratagems are to be allowed, against all ad.
Isle have Judgment on it.
I, I, lawful. lawful.
Lawful let it be then, but if ever I challenge a man of his hands, to a trial of skill with the tongue again, Isle forswear talking all days of my life, and that I wud be loath to doeIf I donnot feel the very breath that shut have been spent in words upwards, to twattle downward, I am avillaine.
I believe I smell the meaning, stand farther off, and give room to me and the Epistoler, you challenge all men to compose?
I do.
With figures or without figures, with sentences or without sentences.
Tic right,
Draw out your Pen and Inkehorne, I am for you.
Give 'hem room, and set a Table forth.
With expedition too, I put in that.
No, expedition belongs to Clarks, and not to Secretaries, celerity if you will.
I sir, Celerity, I mean so.
No more but so, a words enough.
But what's the subject?
Why each of vs is to indite an Epistle to our Mistress, is it not so?
Right.
Then write.
This will be good mirth I hope.
Ridiculous enough.
So it shut be, and yet my little Smirk here has conceit, he will have some flashes.
A couple of pretty scribes.
The challenger has the advantage, he might premeditate.
No matter, Smirks best at a start, his wit is like
your Hackney, all a gallop, to which hee says, Utter diligentia, nec sis tantus cessator &amp; calcoribus indigeas, which is clawing the Pole, as for example in your Challenger.
He has rubbed it out it seems.
Smirk goes on smoothly, without any rub,
Yet there he had one.
Hold bias, and a sentence then.
Scripsi.
Et scripsi.
Very good, now lotdings lend your cares.
I will read it first my self.
And good reason.
Fairest in the world, and sweetest upon earth.
So.
I remember my duty to you in black and white.
I wud it had been black and blew.
Peace.
For all colours else wave under the standard of your beauty.
I wonder what part of her, is Gooseurd greene: Thats a colour.
You are the mistress of beauty.
I wud a said the Queen or Empress.
And all other women are but your hand-maids.
O abominable barren.
Nay Smirk silence, you must not interrupt your adversary.
I can say nothing without saying too much, nor say too much without saying nothing.
I must say nothing, or else I wud say something, but here it is shall shame thee.
Me thinks when thou standst'd in the sun with thy Feather on thy head, and thy Fan in thy hand, thou look like the Phoenix of the East Indies, burning in spices, for Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs are in thy breath.
She wud make an excellent Wassell-Bole.
Again.
I have done.
The Apples of thy breast are like the Lemons of Arabia, which makes the vessel so sweet it can never smell of the Cask.
If she shut that might prove the Brewers fault.
Being come to your middle I must draw to an end, for my end is at the middle because of the Proverb. In Motion consistet virtus, and so I conclude: yours while mine own, and afterword if it were possible Marmaduke Ranoff.
Well now let me run on, judgment I crave.
Which thou shalt have.
Illustrious, bright shining, well spoken, and blood stirring Lady.
I, marry Sir.
If the Rope of my Capacity, could reach to the Belfry of your Beauty, these words of mine like silver Bells, might be worthy to hang in the ears of your favour but the Ladder of my Invention is to low to clime up to the Steeple of your Understanding.
Excellent Smirk.
If it were not, I shoud ring out my mind to you in a sweet Peal of most savoury conceits. For your face it is like the Sun, no man is able to endure it.
That's very good.
Your forehead which I will neither compare unto Alabaster, nor to the Lily, but it is as it is, and
so are both your eyes, for your Nose, it is a well arched Bridge, which for breuities sake I pass over: your Cheeks are like a good Comedy, worthy to bee clapped: your Lips, and your Teeth are incomparable; your Tongue like the instrument of Orpheus, able to tame the furies: to handle every part of you were too much, but some particular part, no man can sufficient.
Prithee let me give thee a box on the care, for that conceit.
No my good Lord, pray keep your bounties.
From top to toe you are a sweet vessel of delight, I dare not say a Barrel, for oftentimes with much ioulting, the Brewer beats out the Bunghole, and so the good liquor runs out, but you contain yours although not hooped about with the old fashioned farthingale, but after the new fashion ti'd up with points, to untruss at your pleasure, In which pleasure I leave you, fairest of a hundred, and wittiest of a thousand: resting in little rest, till I rest wholie yours, in the Downe-Bed of affection, where ever standing to my utmost, I rest all in all yours.
Could any man say more.
Your censures hereafter Gentlemen; now Sir I challenge you in verse, in praise of tall women, and little women, and choose your subject, which you refuse Isle take.
Why then Isle take your little women.
And I your lustyproceed.
I, here will be some sport now.
The Duke calls to see the Epistles.
And they are worth his perusal.
We must have Patience, for this verse wonnot
come of so roundly as your Prose.
Best have a song to entertain the time.
It were not a miss.
Music
Scripsi.
Sed non feci, Stay a little, here's a couple of lines, a halter on 'hem, they wonnot twist handsomely, go forward I have ended.
Attention.
Listen you tall and likewise you low man,
I sing the praises of a bouncing woman.
A full wellset bigge-bon'd and fairly jointed,
Fit to bid welcome men that are best appointed.
Excellent.
To your tall woman your little one is nothing,
No more then isa high thing to a low thing.
That's true.
For your small Dandiprat, I hope there's no man
That thinks her but a hobby horse to woman.
A thing to be forgot and never known,
But on a Holiday to the rout shown.
In wars the Basilisco is preferred
Before the Musket, and is louder heard.
There's an error little and loud my friend, but pass it.
In every triumph where there is excess,
The greater always puts down the less.
The Lioness is more admired at,
Then her Epitome, which is a Cat.
The fool grows serious.
He has stolen it certainly.
No faith, it may be his own, for I think his brain
a little crazed, and mad men shoot forth strange things.
But to weak understandings now I come,
Is your small Taber music to your Drum.
Hum Drum, hee has lightened within an Inch of a conceit of mine.
Or in instrument of peace, can there that trial
Be made upon a Kit as a base Viol.
Judge you my Masters, that on both have played,
It is but my opinion, and I have said.
Believe it he has said well, Smirk look to your self.
I warrant you. Give me audience.
Silence.
In praise of little women I begin.
And will maintain what I have entered in.
Is not your Parochit or Marmoset
In more request then your Baboon or Parrot.
Give but your little wench freely her liquor,
And to bed send her you will find her quicker;
Perter, nimbler, both to kiss and cog,
Then your great wench that'll lie like a log.
And he that all day at the Drum doth labour,
Wud at night gladly play upon a Taber.
I hope ther's no man, but of this belief,
That Voile's more sweet and nourishing then Beef:
Small meats is still preferred; for ask your glutton,
Heel always say, Lamb's sweeter then your Mutton.
Your Smelt then Whiting firmer is and sounder,
Nor must your Place compare with your neat Flounder.
Well said, now thou art in good victuals thou't never out.
In fish or flesh Isle prove it to each wight,
A Larks leg, then the body of a Kite
Is better far: our Bakers always make
The finest flower in the lesser Cake.
And Isle be judge by those that Roots do eat,
That your small Turnip's better then your great.
I am of thy mind too.
Who list to be resolved, let'hem both try;
In that boleefe I live, in that Isle die.
Incomparable Smirk, thou hast my voice: judgemeant.
A Smirk, a Smirk.
Loath to grow tedious, yet once more we would try
To give content out of variety.
With once dance more this night sports weal end,
Your pardon if with too much zeal we offend.
Landoff we thank thee, and wish if any be,
All that are here, be pleased as well as we.

