TAke every man his flagon: give the oath
To al you meet: I am this day, the state drun∣kard,
(I am sure against my will) And if you find
A man at ten, that's sober, hoe's a Traitor,
And in my name arrest him.
Very good Sir:
But say hee be a Sexton?
If the bells,
Ring out of tune, as if the street were burning,
And he cry'tis rare Music: bid him sleep,
It is a sign he has took his liquor; And if you meet
An officer preaching of sobriety,
Unless he read it in Geneua print,
Lay him by the heals.
But think you tic a fault
To be found sober?
It is Capital Treason,
Or if you Mitigate it, Let such pay
Forty Crowns to the poor; But give a pension
To all the magistrates, you find singing catches,
Or their Wives dancing; For the Courtiers reeling,
And the Duke himself, (I dare not say distempered,
But kind, and in his tottering chair carousing)
They doe the country service. If you meet,
One that eats bread, a child of Ignorance,
And bred up in the darkness of no drinking,
In the true posture, though he die in the taking
His drench, it skills not: What's a private man
For the public honour? we have nought else to think on.
And so dear friends, copartners in my travails
Drink hard; and let the health run through the City,
Until it reel again: and with me cry:
Long live the Duchess.
Here are two Lords; what think you?
Shall we give the oath to them?
Fie, no: I know them,
You need not swear 'em; your Lord, by his patent
Stands bound to take his rouse. Long line the Duchess.
The cause of this. But yesterday the court,
Wore the sad livery of distrust, and fear;
No smile, not in a buffon to bee seen,
Or common easter; The great Duke himself,
Had sorrow in his face: which waited on
By his mother, sister, and his fairest Duchess,
Dispersed a silent mourning through all Millaine:
As if some great blow had been given the State,
Or were at least expected.
Stephano,
I know, as you are noble, you are honest,
And capable of secrets, of more weight,
Then now I shall deliver. If that Sforza,
The present Duke, (though his whole life hath been,
But one continued pilgrimage, through dangers,
Affrights, and horrors: which, his Fortune, guided
By his strong Judgment, still hath overcome)
Appears now shaken, it deserves no wonder.
All that his youth hath laboured for: the harvest
Sown by his industry, ready to be reaped, to,
Being now at the stake; And all his hopes confirmed,
Or lost for ever.
I know no such hazard:
The people well affected; And so wisely
His provident care hath wrought: that though war rages
In most parts of our western world, there is
No enemy near vs.
Dangers that we see
To threaten ruin are with ease prevented:
But those strike deadly, that come unexpected;
The lightning is far off: yet soon as seen,
We may behold the terrible effects,
That it produces. But Isle help your knowledge,
And make his cause of fear familiar to you.
The war so long continued between
The Emperor Charles, and Francis the French King
Have interested in eiders cause, the most
Of the Italian Princes: Among which Sforza,
As one of greatest power, was sought by both,
But with assurance having one his friend,
The other lived his enemy.
Tic true,
And it was a doubtful choice.
But hee, well knowing,
And having too, (it seems) the Spanish pride,
Lent his assistance to the King of France:
Which hath so far incensed the Emperor,
That all his hopes, and honours are embarked,
With his great Patrons Fortune.
Which stands fair,
For ought I yet can hear.
But should it change,
The Dake's undone. They have drawn to the field
Two royal armies, full of fiery youth,
Of equal spirit to dare, and power to doe:
So near entrenched, that it is beyond all hope,
Of human council, they can ever be severed,
Until it be determined by the sword,
Who hath the better cause. For the success,
Concludes the victor innocent, and the vanquished
Most miserably guilty. How uncertain,
The Fortune of the war is, children know;
And, it being in suspense, on whose fair Tent,
Win'gd victory will make her glorious stand;
You cannot blame the Duke, though he appear,
Perplexed and troubled.
But why then,
In such a time when every knee should bend,
For the success, and safety of his person,
Are these loud triumphs? In my weak opinion,
They are unseasonable.
I judge so too;
But only in the cause to be excused.
It is the Duchess Birth-day: once a year
Solemnised, with all pomp, and ceremony:
In which, the Duke is not his own, but hers:
Nay, every day indeed, he is her creature,
For never man so doted; But to tell
The tenth part of his fondness, to a stranger,
Would argue me of fiction.
She's indeed,
A Lady of most exquisite form.
She knows it,
And how to prize it.
I ne'er heard her tainted,
In any point of honour.
On my life,
Shoe's constant to his bed, and well deserves
His largest Favours. But when beauty is
Stamped on great women, great in birth, and fortune,
And blown by flatterers greater then it is,
It is seldom unaccompanied with pride;
Nor is she, that-way free. Presuming on
The Dukes affection, and her own Desert,
She bears her self with such a Majesty,
Looking with scorn on all, as things be neath her:
That Sforzas mother, (that would loose no part
Of what, was once her own): Nor his fair Sister,
(A Lady too acquainted with her worth,
Will brooke it well; And howsoer'e, their hate,
Is smothered for a time, Tic more then feared,
It will at length break out.
Hee, in whose power it is,
Turn all to the best.
Come, let vs to the Court,
We there shall see, all bravery, and cost,
That art can boast of.
Isle bear you company.
I will not go, I scorn to be a spot
In her proud train.
Shall I, that am his mother,
Be so indulgent, as to waite on her,
That owes me duty?
Tic done to the Duke,
And not to her. And my sweet wife remember,
And Madam, if you please receive my council,
As Sforza is your son, you may command him,
And as a sister you may challenge from him,
A brothers love, and Favour: But this granted,
Consider hoe's the Prince, and you, his Subjects
And not to question, or contend with her,
Whom hee is pleased to honour; Private men
Prefer their wives: and shall hee being a Prince,
And blessed with one that is the Paradise
Of sweetness, and of beauty, to whose charge,
The stock of women's goodness is given up,
Not use her, like her self?
You are ever forward,
To sing her praises
Others are as fair,
I am sure as noble.
I detract from none,
In giving her, wha'ts due. Were she defor'md,
Yet being the Duchess, I stand bound to serve her,
But as she is, to admire her. Never wife,
Met with a purer heate her husbands fervor;
A happy pair, one in the other blessed:
She confident in her self, hoe's wholly hers,
And cannot seek for change: and he secure
That tic not in the power of man to tempt her.
And therefore, to contest with her that is
The stronger, and the better part of him,
Is more then folly; You know him of a nature,
Not to be played with: and should you forget
To 'obey him as your Prince, he will not remember,
The duty that he owes you.
Tic but truth:
Come clear our brows, and let vs to the banquet,
But not to serve his Idol.
I shall doe,
What may become the sister of a Prince,
But will not stoop, beneath it.
Yet be wise,
Sore not too high to fall, but stoop to rise.
Quick quick for loves sake, let the court put
Her choicest outside: Cost, and bravery on
Be only thought of.
All that may be had
To please the eye, the ear, taste, touch, or smell,
Are carefully provided.
Ther's a Masque,
Have you heard what's the invention?
No matter.
It is intended for the Duchess honour.
And if it give her glorious attributes,
As the most fair most virtuous, and the rest,
Twill please the Duke. They come.
All is in order.
You are the Mistress of the feast, sit here;
O my souls comfort: And when Sforza bows
Thus low to doe you honour, let none think
The meanest service they can pay my love,
But as a fair addition to those tytles,
They stand possessed of. Let me glory in
My happiness, and mighty Kings look pale
With envy, while I triumph in mine own.
O mother look on her, sister admire her:
And since this present age yields not a woman
Worthy to be her second, borrow of
Times past: and let imagination help
Of those canonised Ladies Sparta boasts of,
And, in her greatness, Rome was proud to owe
To fashion: and yet still you must confess,
The Phoenix of perfection ner'e was seen,
But in my fair Marcelia.
She's indeed
The wonder of all times.
Your excellence,
(Though I confess you give her but her own)
Enforces her modesty to the defence
Of a sweet blush.
It need not my Marcelia;
When most I strive to praise thee, I appear
A poor detractor: For thou art indeed
So absolute in body, and in mind,
That, but to speak the least part to the height,
Would ask an Angels tongue: and yet then end
In silent admiration!
You still court her,
As if she were a Mistress, not your wife.
A Mistress mother? she is more to me,
And every day, deserves more to be •••de too.
Such as are cloyed with those they have embraced,
May think their wooing done: No night to me,
But is a bridal one, where Himen lights
His torches fresh, and new: And those delights,
Which are not to be clothed in airy sounds,
•nioyd, beget desires, as full of heat,
And Jovial fervor, as when first I tasted
Her virgin fruit; Blessed night, and be it numbered
Amongst those happy ones, in which a blessing
Was by the full consent of all the Stars,
Conferred upon mankind.
My worthiest Lord,
The only object I behold with pleasure:
My pride, my glory, in a word my all;
Bear witness Heaven, that I esteem my self
In nothing worthy of the meanest praise,
You can bestow, unless it be in this,
That in my heart I love, and honour you.
And but that it would smell of arrogance,
To speak my strong desire, and zeal to serve you
I then could say, these eyes yet never saw
The rising Sun, but that my vows, and prayers,
Were sent to Heaven, for the prosperity
And safety of my Lord; Nor have I ever
Had other study, but how to appear
Worthy your favour: and that my embraces,
Might yield a fruitful Harvest of content,
For all your noble travail, in the purchase,
Ofher, that's still your servant; By these lips,
(Which pardon me, that I presume to kiss)
O swear, for ever swear.
I ne'er will seek
Delight, but in your pleasure: and desire,
When you are seated with all Earthly glories,
And age, and honours make you fit for Heaven,
That one Grave may receive vs,
It is belieu'd,
Belieu'd, my blessed One.
How she winds her self
Into his Soul!
Sit all: Let others feed
On those gross Cates, while Sforza banquets with
Immortal Viands, tan in at his Eyes.
I could live ever thus. Command the Eunuch
To sing the Ditty that I last composed,
In praise of my Marcelia. From whence?
From Pauie, my dread Lord.
Speak, is all lost?
The Letter will inform you.
How his Hand shakes,
As he receives it?
This is some allay
To his hot passion.
Though it bring death, isle read it.
May it please your Excellence to understand, that the ve∣rye hour I wrote this, I heard a bold defiance delivered by a Herald from the Emperor, which was cheerfully received by the King of France. The battles being ready to join, and the Vanguard committed to my charge, enforces me to end abrup••lie.
Ready to join, By this, then I am nothing,
Or my Estate secure.
My Lord.
To doubt,
Is worse then to have lost: And to despair,
Is but to antidate those miseries,
That must fall on vs. All my hopes depending
Upon this battles fortune; In my Soul
Me thinks there should be that Imperious power,
By supernatural, not usual means,
T'informe me what I am. The cause considered,
Why should I fear? The French are bold and strong,
Their numbers full, and in their counsels wise:
But then, the haughty Spaniard is all Fire,
Hot in his executions; Fortunate
In his attempts; Married to victors:
I, there it is that shakes me.
Excellent Lady:
This day was dedicated to your Honour:
One gale of your sweet breath will easily
Disperse these Clouds: And, but your self, ther's none
That dare speak to him.
I will run the hazard.
My Lord?
Ha: Pardon me Marcelia, I am troubled;
And stand uncertain, whether I am Master
Of ought that's worth the owning.
I am yours Sir;
And I have heard you swear, I being safe,
There was no loss could move you. This day Sir,
Is by your guest made mine: Can you revoke
A Grant made to Marcelia? Your Marcelia?
For whose love, nay, whose honour (gentle Sir)
All deep designs, and State affairs deserved:
Be, as you purposed, merry.
Out of my sight,
And all thoughts that may strangle mirth forsake me.
Fall what can fall, I dare the worst of Fate;
Though the Foundation of the Earth should shrink,
The glorions Eye of Heaven loose his Splendour:
Supported thus, I'll stand upon the ruins,
And seek for new life here. Why are you sad?
No other sports? By Heaven he's not my friend,
That wears one Furrow in his Face. I was told
There was a Masque.
They waite your Highness pleasure,
And when you please to have it.
Bid'em enter:
Come, make me happy once again. I am raped,
It is not to day, to morrow, or the next,
But all my days, and years shall be employed
To doe thee honour.
And my life to serve you.
A Horn.
Another Post? Go hang him, hang him I say,
I will not interrupt my present pleasures,
Although his message should import my Head:
Hang him I say.
Nay, good Sir, I am pleased,
To grant a little intermission to you;
Who knows, but he brings news, we wish to hear,
To heighten our delights.
As wise as fair.
From Gaspero?
That was, my Lord.
How, dead?
With the delivery of this, and prayers,
To guard your Excellence from certain dangers.
He ceased to be a Man.
All that my fears
Could fashion to me or my enemies wish
Is fallen upon me. Silence, that harsh music,
It is now unseasonable; A tolling Bell,
As a sad Harbinger to tell me, that,
This pampered lump of Flesh, must seast the Worms.
It is fitter for me, I am sick.
My Lord.
Sick to the death, Marcelia, Remove
These signs of mirth, they were ominous, and but ushered
Sorrow and ruin.
Bless vs Heaven!
My Son.
What sudden change is this?
All leave the room;
Isle bear alone the burden of my grief,
And must admit no partner. I am yet
Your Prince, wher's your obedience? Stay Marcelia
I cannot be so greedy of a sorrow,
In which you must not share.
And cheerfully,
I will sustain my part. Why look you pale?
Where is that wonted constancy, and courage,
That dared the worst of Fortune? Where is Sforza?
To whom all dangers that fright common men,
Appeared but Panicque terrors? Why doe you eye me
With such fixed looks? Love, counsel, duty, service,
May flow from me, not danger.
O Marcelia!
It is for thee I fear: For thee, thy Sforza
Shakes like a coward; For my self, vnmou'd:
I could have heard my troupes were cut in pieces,
My General slain; Ano' he; on whom my hopes
Of Rule, of State, of Life, had their dependence;
The King of France, my greatest friend, made prisoner
To so proud enemies.
Then you have inst cause
To show you are a Man.
All this were nothing,
Though I ad to it, that I am assured
For giving aid to this unfortunate King,
The Emperor licenced, lays his command
On his victorious Army, fleshed with spoil,
And bold of conquest, to march up against me,
And seas on my Estates: Suppose that done too,
The City tan, the Kennels running blood,
The ransick'd Temples, falling on their Saints:
My Mother in my sight, tossed on their Pikes,
And Sister ravished: And my self bound fast
In Chains, to grace their Triumph: Or what else,
An Enemies insolence could load me with,
I would be Sforza still; But when I think,
That my Marcelia (to whom, all these
Are but as Atoms to the greatest Hill)
Must suffer in my cause: And for me suffer
All Earthly torments; Nay, even those the damned
Howl for in Hell, are gentle strokes, compared
To what I feel Marcelia.
Good Sir, have patience:
I can as well partake your adverse fortune,
As I thus long have had an ample share,
In your prosperity. Tic not in the power
Of Fate to alter me: For while I am,
In spite of't, I am yours.
But should that will
To be so forced Marcelia? And I live
To see those Eyes I prize aboue mine own,
Dart favours (though compelled) upon another?
Or those sweet Lips (yielding Immortal Nectar)
Be gently touched by any but my self?
Think, think Marcelia, what a cursed thing
I were, beyond expression.
Doe not feed
Those jealous thoughts; The only blessing that
Heaven hath bestowed on vs, more then on beasts,
Is, that it is in our pleasure when to dye.
Besides, were I now in another power,
There are so many ways to let out life,
I would not live, for one short minute his;
I was borne only yours, and I will dye so.
Angels reward the goodness of this Woman:
All I can pay is nothing. Why uncalled for?)
It is of weight, Sir, that makes me thus press
Upon your privacies. Your constant friend
The Marquisse of Pescara, tired with hast,
Ha h business that concerns your life and fortunes,
And with speed to impart.
Waite on him hither;
And dearest to thy Closet: Let thy prayers
Assist my connsels.
To spare imprecations
Against my self; without you I am nothing.
The Marquisse of Pescara; A great Soldier:
And though he served upon the adverse party,
Ever my constant friend.
Yonder he walks,
Full of sad thoughts.
Blame him not good Francisco,
He hath much cause to grieve: Would I might end so,
And not ad this, to fear.
My dear Pescara:
A miracle in these times, a friend and happy,
Cleaves to a falling fortune.
If it were
As well in my weak power, in act to raise it,
As it is to bear a part of sorrow with you;
You then should have just cause to say, Pescara
Looked not upon your State, but on your Virtues,
When he made suit to be writ in the List
Of those you fauord. But my hast forbids
All complement. Thus then, Sir, to the purpose.
The cause that unattended brought me hither,
Was not to tell you of your loss, or danger;
For Fame hath many Wings to bring ill tidings,
And I presume you have heard it: But to give you such,
Such friendly counsel, as perhaps may make
Your sad disaster, less.
You are all goodness,
And I give up my selse to be disposed of,
As in your wisdom you think fit.
Thus then, Sir.
To hope you can hold out against the Emperor,
Were flattery in your self, to your undoing;
Therefore, the safest course that you can take,
Is, to give up your self to his discretion,
Before you be compelled. For rest assured,
A voluntary yielding may find grace,
And will admit defence, at least excuse:
But should you linger doubtful, till his Powers
Have seas'd your Person, and Estates perforce,
You must expect extremes.
I understand you,
And I will put your counsel into act,
And speedily; I only will take order
For some Domestic affairs, that doe
Concern me nearly, and with the next Sun
Ride with you; In the mean time, my best friend,
Pray take your rest.
Indeed, I have trauaild hard,
And will embrace your counsel.
With all care,
Attend my Noble friend. Stay you, Francisco,
You see how things stand with me?
To my griese:
And if the loss of my poor life could be
A Sacrifice, to restore them, as they were,
I willingly would lay it down.
I think so:
For I have cuer found you true, and thankful,
Which makes me love the building I have raised,
In your advancement: And repent no grace,
I have conferd upon you: And belecue me,
Though now I should repeat my favours to you,
The Titles I have given you, and the means
Suitable to your Honours, that I thought you
Worthy my Sister, and my Family,
And in my Dukedom made you next my self:
It is not to upbraid you: But to tell you
I find you are worthy of them in your love,
And service to me.
Sir, I am your Creature:
And any shape, that you would have me wear,
I gladly will put on.
Thus, then Francisco;
I now am to deliver to your trust,
A weighty secret: Of so strange a nature,
And twill I know appear so monstrous to you,
That you will tremble in the execution,
As much as I am tortured, to command it:
For it is a deed so horrid, that but to hear it,
Would strike into a Russian fleshed in murders,
Or an obdurate Hang-man, soft compassion;
And yet Francisco (of all Men the dearest,
And from me most deserving) such my state,
And strange condition is, that thou alone,
Must know the fatal service, and perform it.
These preparations, Sir, to work a stranger,
Or to one, unacquainted with your bounties,
Might appear useful: But to me, they are
Needless impertinances: For, I dare doc,
What ever you dare command.
But thou must swear it,
And put into thy Oath, all joys, or torments
That fright the wicked, or confirm the good:
Not to conceal it only, that is nothing;
But whensoe're my will shall speak, strike now:
To fall upon it like Thunder.
Minister
The Oath, in any way, or form you please,
I stand resolved to take it.
Thou must doe then,
What no malevolent Star will dare to look on,
It is so wicked: For which, Men will curse thee,
For being the Instrument: And the blessed Angels,
Forsake me at my need, for being the Author:
For it is a deed of Night, of Night Francisco,
In which the memory of all good Actions,
We can pretend too, shall be buried quick;
Or if we be remembered, it shall be
To fright posterity, by our example:
That have out-gone all presidents of Villains,
That were before vs: And such as succeed,
Though taught in hells black school, shall ne'er com ne'er vs.
Art thou not shaken yet?
I grant you move me:
But to a Man confirmed;
He try your temper:
What think you of my Wife?
As a thing Sacred:
To whose fair Name, and memory, I pay gladly
These signs of duty.
Is the not the abstract
Of all that's rare, or to be wished in Woman?
It were a kind of blasphemy to dispute it:
But to the purpose Sir.
Ad to her goodness,
Her tenderness of me, Her care to please me,
Her unsuspected chastity, ne'er equalled:
Her Innocence, her honour: O I am lost
In the Ocean of her virtues, and her graces,
When I think of them.
Now I find the end
Of all your conjurations: there's some service
To be done for this sweet Lady; If she have enemies
That she would have removed?
Alas Francisco,
Her greatest enemy is her greatest lover,
Yet in that hatred, her Idolater.
One smile of hers would make a savage tame;
One accent of that tongue would calm the Seas,
Though all the winds at once strove there for Empire.
Yet I, for whom she thinks all this too little,
Should I miscarry in this present journey,
(From whence it is all number to a cipher,
I ner'e return with honour) by thy hand
Must have her murdered.
Murdered? She that loves so,
And so deserves to be beloved again?
And I, (who sometimes you were pleased to favour)
Picked out the instrument?
Doe not fly off:
What is decreed, can never be recal'd;
It is more than love to her, that marks her out,
A wished companion to me, in both fortunes:
And strong assurance of thy zealous faith,
That gives up to thy trust a secret, that
Racks should not have forced from me. O Francisco:
There is no heaven without her: nor a hell,
Where she recides. I ask from her but justice,
And what I would have paid to her: had sickness,
Or any other accident divorced,
Her purer soul, from his unspotted body.
The slavish Indian Princes when they dye
Are cheerfully attended to the fire,
By the wife, and slave, that living they loved best,
To doe them service in another world:
Nor will I be less honoured, that love more.
And therefore trifle not, but in thy looks,
Express a ready purpose to perform,
What I command, or by Marcelias soul,
This is thy latest minute.
It is not fear
Of death, but love to you, makes me embrace it;
But for mine own security when it is done,
What warrant have I? If you please to sign one,
I shall, though with unwillingness and horror,
Perform your dreadful charge.
I will Francisco;
But still remember, that a Princes secrets
Are balm, concealed: but poison, if discovered.
I may come back; then this is but a trial,
To purchase thee, if it were possible,
A nearer place in my affection; but
I know thee honest.
It is a Character
I will not part with.
I may live to reward it.
How? left the Court?
Without guard or retinue
Fitting a Prince.
No enemy near, to force him?
To leave his own strengths, yet deliver up
Himself, as it were in bonds to the discretion
Of him that hates him? It is beyond example:
You never heard the motives that induced him,
To this strange course?
No, those are Cabinet councels,
And not to be communicated, but
To such as are his own, and sure; Alas,
We fill up empty places, and in public,
Are taught to give our suffrages to that,
Which was before determined: And are safe so;
Seignior Francisco (upon whom alone
His absolute power is with alstrength conferred,
During his absence) can with ease resolve you.
To me, they are Riddles.
Well, he shall not be,
My Oedipus, Isle rather dwell in darkness.
But my good Lord Tiberio, This Francisco,
Is, on the sudden, stran ely raised.
O Sir,
He took the thryuing course: He had a Sister,
A fair one too; With whom (as it is rumor'd;
The Duke was too familiar; But she cast off,
(What promises socuer past between them)
Upon the sight of this, forsook the Court,
And since was never seen; To smother this,
(As Honours never fail to purchase silence)
Francisco first was graced, and step by step,
Is raised up to this height.
But how is his absence borne?
Sadly, it seems
By the Duchess: For since he left the Court,
For the most part, she hath kept her private Chamber,
No visitants admitted; In the Church,
She hath been seen to pay her pure devotions,
Seasoned with tears: And sure her sorrow's ttue,
Or deeply counterfeited; Pomp, and State,
And bravery cast off: And she that lately
Riuald Poppy in her varied shapes,
Or the Egyptian Queen: Now, widow-like,
In Sable coluors (as, her Husbands dangers,
Strangled in her, the use of any pleasure)
Mourns for his absence.
It becomes her Virtue,
And does confirm, what was reported of her.
You take it right; But on the other side,
The darling of his Mother, Mariana,
As there were an Antipathy, between
Her, and the Duchess passions: And as
Sh'ad no dependence on her brothers fortune,
She ne'er appeared so full of mirth.
It is strange.
But see, her favourite: &amp; accompanied,
To your report.
You shall scrape, and Isle sing,
A scurvy Ditty, to a scurvy tune,
Rapine who dares.
But if we should offend,
The Duchess having silenced vs: &amp; these Lords,
Stand by to hear vs.
They, in Name are Lords,
But I am one in Power: And for the Duchess,
But yesterday we were merry for her pleasure,
We now'l be for my Ladies.
Seignior Graccho.
A poor Man, Sir, a Servant to the Princes:
But you, great Lords, and Councellors of State,
Whom I stand bound to reverence.
Come, we know
You are a Man in grace.
Fie, no: I grant,
I bear my fortunes patiently: Serve the Princess,
And have success at all times to her closet,
Such is my impudence: when your grave Lordships
Are masters of the modesty, to attend
Three hours, nay sometimes four; and then bid waite
Upon her the next morning.
He derides vs.
Pray you, what news is stirring? you know all.
Who, I? alas, I have no intelligence
At home, nor abroad: I only sometimes guess
The change of the times; I should ask of your Lordships
Who are to keep their Honours, who to loose 'em;
Who the Duchess smiled on last, or on whom frowned,
You only can resolve me: we poor waiters
Deal (as you see) in mirth, and foolish fiddles:
It is our element; and could you tell me,
What point of State it is, that I am commanded
To muster up this music: on mine honesty,
You should much befriend me.
Sir, you grow saucy.
And would be laid by the heals.
Not by your Lordships,
Without a special warrant; look to your own stakes;
Were I committed, here come those would bail me:
Perhaps we might change places too.
The Princess;
We must be patient.
There's no contending.
See, the informing rogue.
That we should stoop
To such a Mushrome.
Thou dost mistake; they durst not
Use the least word of scorn, although provoked,
To any thing of mine. Go, get you home,
And 〈…〉, servants, friends, and flatterers, number
How many descents you are noble; Look to your wives too,
The smooth-chin'd Courtiers are abroad.
No way, to be a Free-man?
Your Excellence, hath the best gift to dispatch,
These Arras pictures of Nobility,
I ever read of.
I can speak sometimes.
And cover so your bitter Pills, with sweetness
Of Princely language to forbid reply,
They are greedily swallowed.
But, the purpose Daughter,
That brings vs hither? Is it to bestow
A visit on this Woman? That, because
She only would be thought truly to grieve,
The absence, and the dangers of my Son,
Proclaims a general sadness?
If to vex her,
May be interpreted to doe her Honour,
She shall have many of 'em? Isle make use
Of my short Reign: my Lord, now governs all:
And she shall know, that her Idolater,
My Brother, being not by, now to protect her,
I am her equal.
Of a little thing,
It is so full of Gall: A Devil of this size,
Should they run for a wager to be spiteful,
Gets not a Hors-head of her.
On her Birth-day,
We were forced to be merry: &amp; now she's musty
We must be sad, on pain of her displeasure;
We will, we will. This is her private Chamber,
Where like an Hypocrite, not a true Turtle,
She seems to morn her absent Mate, her Servants
Attending her like Mutes: But Isle speak to her
And in a high Key too, play any thing
That's light and loud enough but to torment her,
And we will have rare sport.
Song. Marcelia aboue in black.
She frowns, as if
Her looks could fright vs.
May it please your greatness,
We heard that your late Physic hath not worked,
And that breed, Melancholy, as your Doctor tells vs:
To purge which, we that are born your Highness Vassals,
And are to play the fools to doe you service,
Present you with a sit of mirth: what think you
Of a new Antique?
I would show rare in Ladies.
Being intended for so sweet a creature,
Were she but pleased to grace it.
 •ye, she will,
Be it ne'er so mean: shoe's made of curtsy.
The Mistress of all hearts; one smile I pray you
On your poor servants, or a Fiddlers fee:
Coming from those fair hands, though but a Ducat,
We will enshrine it as a holy relic.
It is, Wormwood, and it works.
If I lay by
My fears, and griefs (in which you should be sharers)
If doting age could let you but remember,
You have a son; or frontlesse impudence,
You are a sister; and in making answer,
To what was most unfit for you to speak,
Or me to hear: borrow of my just anger.
A set speech on my life.
Penned by her Chaplain.
Yes, it can speak, without instruction speak;
And tell your want of manners, that you're rude,
And saucily rude, too.
Now the game begins.
You durst not else on any hire or hope,
(Remembering what I am, and whose I am)
Put on the desperate boldness, to disturb
The least of my retirements.
Note her now.
For both shall understand; though th'one presume
Upon the privilege due to a Mother,
The Duke stands now on his own legs, and needs
No nurse to lead him.
How, a Nurse?
A dry one,
And useless too: But I am merciful,
And dotage signs your pardon.
I defy thee,
Thee, and thy pardons, proud one.
For you, Puppet.
What, of me? Pine-tree.
Little you are, I grant,
And have as little worth, but much less wit,
You durst not else, the Duke being wholly mine,
His power and honour mine, and the allegiance,
You owe him, as a Subject, due to me.
To you?
To me: And therefore as a Vassal,
From this hour learn to serve me, or, you'll feel,
I must make use of my authority,
And as a Princess punish it.
A Princess?
I had rather be a Slave unto a Moore,
Than know thee for my equal.
Scornful thing,
Proud of a white Face.
Let her but remember
The Issue in her Leg:
The charge, she puts
The State too, for Perfumes.
And, howsoe're,
She seems, when she's made up: As she's her self,
She stinks aboue ground. O that I could reach you,
The little one you scorn so, with her nails,
Would tear your painted Face, &amp; scratch those Eyes out.
Doe but come down.
Were there no other way,
But leaping on thy Neck, to break mine own,
Rather than be outbrau'd thus.
Forty Dacats
Upon the little Hen: She's of the kind,
And will not leave the Pit.
That it were lawful
To me te her with a Poniard, and a Pistol;
But these weak hands shall show my spleen
Where are you? You Modicum, you Dwarf.
Here, Giantess, here.
A tumult in the Court?
Let her come on.
What wind hath raised this tempest?
Seuer'em, I command you. What's the cause?
Speak Martini.
I am out of breath;
But we shall meet, we shall. And doe you hear, Sir,
Or right me on this Monster (she's three foot
Too high for a Woman) or ne'er look to have,
A quiet hour with me.
If my Son were here,
And would endure this; May a Mothers curse
Pursue, and overtake him.
O forbear,
In me he's present, both in power, and will;
And Madam, I much grieve, that in his absence,
There should arise the least distaste to move you:
It being his principal, nay only charge,
To have you in his absence served, and honoured,
As when himself performed the willing Office.
This is fine, in faith.
I would I were well off.
And therefore, I beseech you Madam, frown not
(Till most unwittingly he hath deserved it)
On your poor Servant; To your Excellence,
I ever was, and will be such: And lay,
The Dukes authority, trusted to me,
With willingness at your feet.
O base.
We are like
To have an equal Judge.
But should I sinde
That you are touched in any point of Honour,
Or that the least neglect is fallen upon you,
I then stand up a Prince.
Without reward,
Pray you dismiss vs.
Would I were five Leagues hence.
I will be partial to none, not to my self,
Be you but pleased to show me my offence,
Or if you hold me in your good opinion,
Name those that have offended you.
I am one,
And I will justify it.
Thou art a base Fellow,
To take her part.
Remember, she's the Duchess.
But used with more contempt, than if I were
A Peasants Daughter: Baited, and hooted at
Like to a common Strumpet: With loud noises,
Fore'd from my prayers: And my private Chamber
(Which with all willingness I would make my Prison
During the absence of my Lord) denied me.
But if he ever return.
Were you an Actor,
In this lewd Comedy?
I marry was I,
And will be one again.
I'll join with her,
Though you rapine at it.
Think not then, I speak
(For I stand bound to honour, and to serve you).
But that the Duke, that lives in this great Lady,
For the contempt of him, in her, commands you
To be close Prisoners.
Prisoners?
Bear them hence.
This is your charge my Lord Tiberio.
And Stephano, this is yours.
I am not cruel,
But pleased they may have liberty.
Pleased, with a mischief.
I'll rather live in any loathsome Dungeon,
Than in a Paradise, at her entreaty:
And, for you upstart.
There is no contending.
What shall become of these?
See them well whipped,
As you will answer it.
Now Seignior Graccho,
What think you of your greatness?
I preach patience,
And must endure my fortune.
I was never yet
At such a hunts-vp, nor was so rewarded.
Let them first know themselves, &amp; how you are
To be served, and honoured: Which, when they confess,
You may again receive them to your favour:
And then it will show nobly.
With my thanks,
The Duke shall pay you his, If he return
To bless vs with his presence.
There is nothing
That can be added to your fair acceptance:
That is the prize, indeed: All else, are blanks,
And of no value. As in virtuous actions,
The vndertaker finds a full reward,
Although conferred upon unthankful Men;
So, any service done to so much sweetness,
(However dangerous, and subject to
An ill construction) in your favour finds
A wished, and glorious end.
From you, I take this
As loyal duty, but in any other,
It would appear gross flattery.
Flattery, Madam?
You are so rare, and excellent in all rhings,
And raised so high upon a Rock of goodness,
As that vice cannot reach you: who, but looks on
This Temple built by Nature to Perfection,
But must bow to it: and out of that zeal,
Not only learn to adore it, but to love it.
Whither will this fellow?
Pardon therefore Madam,
If an excess in me of humble duty,
Teach me to hope (and though it be not in
The power of Man to merit such a blessing)
My piety (for it is more than love)
May find reward.
You have it in my thanks:
And on my hand, I am pleased, that you shall take
A full possession of it. But take heed,
That you fix here, and feed no hope beyond it;
If you doe, twill prove fatal.
Be it death,
And death with torments, Tyrants never found out:
Yet I must say I love you.
As a Subject,
And twill become you.
Farewell circumstance:
And since you are not pleased to understand me,
But by a plain, and usual form of speech:
All superstitious reverence laid by,
I love you as a Man, and as a Man
I would enjoy you. Why do you start, and fly me?
I am no Monster, and you but a Woman:
A Woman made to yield, and by example
Told it is lawful; Favours of this nature,
Are, in our age, no miracles in the greatest:
And therefore Lady—
Keep of. O you Powers!
Libidinous Beast, and ad to that unthankful
(A crime, which Creatures wanting reason, fly from)
Are all the Princely bounties, favours, honours,
Which (with some prejudice to his own wisdom)
Thy Lord, and Rayser hath conferred upon thee,
In three days absence buried? Hath he made thee
(A thing obscure, almost without a name)
The envy of great Fortunes? Have I graced thee,
Beyond thy rank? And entertained thee, as
A Friend, and not a Servant? And is this,
This impudent attempt to taint mine Honour,
The fair return of both our ventured favours?
Hear my excuse.
The Devil may plead mercy,
And with as much assurance, as thou yield one.
Burns Lust so hot in thee? Or, is thy pride
Grown up to such a height, that, but a Princess,
No Woman can content thee? And ad to that,
His Wife, and Princess, to whom thou art ti'de
In all the bonds of Duty? Read my life,
And find one act of mine so loosely carried,
That could inuit a most selfe-louing-Foole,
Set of, with all that fortune could throw on him,
To the least hope to find way to my favour:
And (what's the worst mine enemies could wish me)
I'll be thy Strumpet.
It is acknowledged Madam,
That your whole course of life hath been a pattern
For chaste, and virtuous Women; In your beauty
(Which I first saw, and loved) as a fair Crystal,
I read your heavenly mind, clear and untainted;
And while the Duke did prize you to your value
(Could it have been in Man to pay that duty)
I well might envy him, but durst not hope
To stop you, in your full career of goodness:
But now I find, that he's fallen from his fortune,
And (howsoever he would appear doting)
Grown cold in his affection: I presume,
From his most barbarous neglect of you,
To offer my true service: Nor stand I bound,
To look back on the courtesies of him,
That, of all living Men, is most unthankful,
Vnheard-of impudence!
You'll say I am modest,
When I have told the Story. Can he tax me
(That have received some worldly trifles from him)
For being ungrateful? When, he that first tasted,
And hath so long enjoyed your sweet embraces
(In which, all blessings that our frail condition
Is capable of, is wholly comprehended)
As cloyed with happiness, contemns the giver
Of his felicity? And, as he reached not,
The master-peice of mischief, which he aims at,
Unless he pay those favours he stands bound to,
With fell and deadly hate? You think he loves you,
With vnexampled fervor: Nay, dotes on you,
As there were something in you more than Woman:
When on my knowledge, he long since hath wished,
You were among the dead: And I, you scorn so,
Perhaps, am your preserver.
Bless me good Angels,
Or I am blasted. Lies so false, and wicked,
And fashioned to so damnable a purpose,
Cannot be spoken by a humane tongue.
My Husband, hate me? Give thy self the Lye,
False, and accursed; Thy Soul (if thou hast any)
Can witness, never Lady stood so bound,
To the unfeigned affection of her Lord,
As I doe, to my Sforza. If thou would work
Upon my weak credulity, Tell me rather,
That the Earth moves; The Sun, and Stars, stand still;
The Ocean keeps nor Floods, nor Ebbes; Or that,
Ther's peace between the Lyon, and the Lamb;
Or that, the ravenous Eagle, and the Dove,
Keep in one Aerie, and bring up their young:
Or any thing that is averse to Nature:
And I will sooner credit it, than that
My Lord can think of me, but as a Jewel,
He loves more than himself, and all the World.
O Innocence, abused! Simplicity cozened!
It were a sin, for which we have no name,
To keep you longer in this wilful error.
Read his affection here; And then observe
How dear he holds you; It is his Character,
Which cunning yet, could never counterfeit.
It is his hand, I am resolved of't.
I'll try what the Inscription is.
Pray you doe so.
You know my pleasure, &amp; the hour of Marcelias death, which fail not to execute, as you will answer the contrary, not with your Head alone, but with the ruin of your whole Family. And this written with mine own Hand, and Signed with my privy Signet, shall be your suf∣ficient Warrant. Ludouico Sforza.
I doe obey it, every word's a Poynard,
And reaches to my Heart.
She swones.
What have I done?
Madam, for Heavens sake, Madam. O my Fate!
I'll bend her body: This is yet some pleasure,
I'll kiss her into a new life. Dear Lady:
She stirs: For the Dukes sake for Sforza's sake.
Sforzas? Stand off: Though dead, I will be his,
And even my Ashes shall abhor the touch
Of any other. O unkind, and cruel.
Learn Women, learn to trust in one another;
There is no faith in Man: Sforza is false,
False to Marcelia.
But I am true,
And live to make you happy. All the Pomp,
State, and observance you had being his,
Compared to what you shall enjoy when mine,
Shall be no more remembered. Loose his memory,
And look with cheerful beams on your new Creature
And know what he hath plotted for you good,
Fate cannot alter. If the Emperor,
Take not his life, at his return he dyes,
And by my Hand: My Wife, that is his Heir,
Shall quickly follow; Then we Reign alone,
For with this Arm I'll swim through Seas of blood,
Or make a Bridge, arched with the bones of Men,
But I will grasp my aims in you my dearest,
Dearest, and best of Women.
Thou art a Villain?
All attributes of Arch-Villaines made into one,
Cannot express thee. I prefer the hate
Of Sforza, though it mark me for the Grave,
Before thy base affection. I am yet
Pure, and unspotted, in my true love to him;
Nor shall it be corrupted, though he's tainted;
Nor will I part with Innocence, because
He is found guilty. For thy self, thou art
A thing, that equal with the Devil himself,
I doe detest, and scorn.
Thou then art nothing:
Thy life is in my power, disdainful Woman:
Think on it, and tremble.
No, though thou were now
To play thy hangmans part. Thou well may be
My Executioner, and art only fit
For such employment; But ne'er hope to have,
The least grace from me. I will never see thee,
But as the shame of Men: So, with my curses
Of horror to thy Conscience in this life;
And pains in Hell hereafter: I spit at thee,
And making hast to make my peace with heaven,
Expect thee as my Hangman.
I am lost,
In the discovery of this fatal secret.
Cursed hope that flattered me, that wrongs could make her
A stranger to her goodness; All my plots
Turn back upon mv self; But I am in,
And must go on: And since I have put off
From the Shore of Innocence, guilt be now my Pilot.
Revenge first wrought me, Murder's his Twin-brother,
One deadly sin then help to cure another.
The spoil, the spoil, it is that the soldior fights for;
Our victory as yet affords vs nothing,
But wounds, and empty honour. We have past
The hazard of a dreadful day, and forced
A passage with our Swords, through all the dangers,
That Page like waite on the success of war;
And now expect reward.
Hell put it in
The Enemies mind to be desperate, and hold out:
Yieldings, and compositions will undo vs;
And what is that way given, for the most part,
Comes to the Emperors Coffers, to defray
The charge of the great action (as it is rumor'd)
When usually, some Thing in Grace (that ne'er heard
The Canons roaring tongue, but at a Triumph)
Puts in, and for his intercession shares,
All that we fought for: The poor Soldior left
To starve, or fill up Hospitals.
But when
We enter Towns by force, and carve our selves,
Pleasure with pillage, and the richest Wines,
Open our shrunke-vp veins, and pour into 'em
New blood, and fervor.
I long to be at it;
To see these Chuffs, that every day may spend
A Soldiors entertainment for a year,
Yet make a third meal of a bunch of Raysons;
These Spunges, that suck up a Kingdoms sat
(Batning like Scarabs in the nung of Peace)
To be squeezed out by the rough hand of war;
And all that their whole lives have heaped together,
By cous'nage, perjury, or sordid thrift,
With one gripe to be ravished.
I would be towsing
Their saire Madona's, that in little Dogs,
Monkeys, and Paraquito's consume thousands;
Yet for the advancement of a noble action,
Rapine to part with a poor Peace of Eight:
Wars plagues vpon'em: I have seene'em stop
Their scornful noses first, then seem to swone
At sight of a buff Jerkin; if it were not
Perfumed, and hid with Gold; Yet these nice wantons,
(Spurt on by Lust, covered in some disguise,
To meet some rough Court Stalion, and be leaped)
Durst enter into any common Brothel,
Though all varieties of stink contend there;
Yet praise the entertainment.
I may live,
To see the tatteredst Raskals of my troupe,
Drag'em out of their Closets, with a vengeance:
When neither threatening, flattering, kneeling, howling,
Can ransom one poor Jewel, or redeem
Themselves, from their blunt wooing.
My maine hope is,
To begin the sport at Millaine: Ther's enough,
And of all kinds of pleasure we can wish for,
To satisfy the most covetous.
Every day
We look for a remove.
For Lodowick Sforza
The Duke of Millaine, I, on mine own knowledge,
Can say thus much; He is too much a Soldior,
Too confident of his own worth, too rich to;
And understands too well, the Emperor hates him,
To hope for composition.
On my life,
We need not fear his coming in.
On mine,
I doe not wish it: I had rather that
To show his valour, he'd put vs to the trouble
To fetch him in by the Ears.
The Emperor.
You make me wonder (Nay it is no council, You may partake it Gentlemen) who would have thought,
That he that scorned our proffered amity,
When he was sued to; should, ere he be summoned,
(Whither persuaded to it by base fear,
Or flattered by false hope, which, it is uncertain)
First kneel for mercy?
When your Majesty,
Shall please to instruct vs, who it is, we may
Admire it with you.
Who, but the Duke of Millaine,
The right Hand of the French: Of all that stand
In our displeasure, whom necessity
Compels to seek our favour, I would have sworn
Sforza had been the last.
And should be writ so,
In the list of those you pardon. Would his City
Had rather held vs out a Siege like Troy,
Then by a fein'd submission, he should cheat you
Of a just revenge: Or vs, of those fair glories
We have sweat blood to purchase.
With your honour
You cannot hear him.
The sack alone of Millaine
Will pay the Army.
I am not so weak,
To be wrought on as you fear; Nor ignorant,
That Money is the sinew of the War;
And what terms soever he seek peace,
It is in our power to grant it, or deny it.
Yet for our glory, and to show him that
We have brought him on his knees; It is resolved
To hear him as a Suppliant. Bring him in;
But let him see the effects of our just anger,
In the Guard that you make for him.
I am now
Familiar with the issue (all plagues on it)
He will appear in some dejected habit,
His countenance suitable; And for his order,
A Rope about his neck; Then kneel, and tell
Old Stories, what a worthy thing it is
To have power, and not to use it; Then ad to that
A Tale of King Tigranes, and great Pompey,
Who said (forsooth, and wisely) It was more honour
To make a King, then kill one: Which, applied
To the Emperor, and himself, a Pardons granted
To him, an Enemy; and we his Servants,
Condemned to beggary.
Yonder he corns,
But not as you expected.
He looks, as if
He would out-face his dangers.
I am cozened:
A suitor in the Devils name.
Hear him speak.
I come not (Emperor) to invade thy mercy,
By fawning on thy fortune; Nor bring with me
Excuses, or denials. I prosesse
(And with a good Mans confidence, even this instant,
That I am in thy power) I was thine enemy;
Thy deadly and vowed enemy; One that wished
Confusion to thy Person and Estates;
And with my utmost powers, and deepest counsels
(Had they been truly followed) furthered it:
Nor will I now, although my neck were under
The Hang mans Axe, with one poor syllable
Confess, but that I honoured the French King,
More then thy self, and all Men.
By Saint Iaques,
This is no flattery.
There is Fire, and Spirit in it;
But not long lived, I hope.
Now give me leave,
(My hate against thy self, and love to him
Freely acknowledged) to give up the reasons
That made me so affected. In my wants
I ever found him faithful; Had supplies
Of Men and Moneys from him; And my hopes
Quite sunk, were by his Grace, boyed up again:
He was indeed to me, as my good Angel,
To guard me from all dangers. I dare speak
(Nay must and will) his praise now, in as high
And loud a key, as when he was thy equal.
The benefits he sowed in me, met not
Unthankful ground, but yielded him his own
With fair increase, and I still glory in it.
And though my fortunes (poor, compared to his,
And Millaine weighed with France, appear as nothing)
Are in thy fury burnt: Let it be mentioned,
They served but as small Tapers to attend
The solemn flame at this great Funeral:
And with them I will gladly wast my self,
Rather then undergo the imputation,
Of being base or unthankful.
Nobly spoken.
I doe begin, I know not why, to hate him
Less then I did.
If that then to be grateful
For courtesies received; Or not to leave
A friend in his necessities, be a crime
Amongst you Spaniards (which other Nations
That like your aimed at Empire, loved, and cherished
Where ever they found it) Sforza brings his Head
To pay the forfeit; Nor come I as a Slave,
Piniond and setterd, in a squalid weed,
Falling before thy Feet, kneeling and howling,
For a forestalled remission; That were poor,
And would but shame thy victory: For conquest
Over base foes, is a captivity,
And not a triumph. I ne'er feared to dye,
More then I wished to live. When I had reached
My ends in being a Duke, I wore these Robes,
This Crown upon my Head, and to my side
This Sword was girt; And witness truth, that now
It is in another power when I shall part
With them and life together, I am the same,
My Veins then did not swell with pride; nor now,
They shrink for fear: Know Sir, that Sforza stands
Prepared for either fortune.
As I live,
I doe begin strangely to love this fellow;
And could part with three quarters of my share
In the promised spoil, to save him.
But if example
Of my fidelity to the French (whose honours,
Titles, and glories, are now mixed with yours;
As Brookes devoured by Rivers, loose their names)
Has power to inuit you to make him a friend,
That hath given evident proof, he knows to love,
And to be thankful; This my Crown, now yours,
You may restore me: And in me instruct
These brave Commanders (should your fortune change,
Which now I wish not) what they may expect,
From noble enemies for being faithful.
The charges of the war I will defray,
And what you may (not without hazard) force,
Bring freely to you: I'll prevent the cries
Of murdered Infants, and of ravished Maids,
Which in a City sacked call on Heavens justice,
And stop the course of glorious victories.
And when I know the Captains and the Soldiors,
That have in the late battle, done best service,
And are to be rewarded; I, my self
(According to their quality and merits)
Will see them largely recompensed. I have said,
And now expect my sentence.
By this light,
It is a brave Gentleman.
How like a block
The Emperor sits?
He hath delivered reasons,
Especially in his purpose to enrich
Such as fought bravely (I my self am one,
I care not who knows it) as, I wonder, that
He can be so stupid. Now he begins to stir,
Mercy an't be thy will.
Thou hast so far
Outgone my expectation, noble Sforza
(For such I hold thee) And true constancy,
Raised on a brave foundation, bears such palm,
And privilege with it; That where we behold it,
Though in an enemy, it does command vs
To love and honour it. By my future hopes,
I am glad, for thy sake, that in seeking favour,
Thou did not borrow of vice her indirect,
Crooked, and abject means: And for mine own,
(That since my purposes must now be changed
Touching thy life and fortunes) the world cannot
Tax me of levity, in my settled councels;
I being neither wrought by tempting bribes,
Nor servile flattery; but forced unto it,
By a fair war of virtue.
This founds well.
All former passages of hate be buried;
For thus with open arms I meet thy love,
And as a friend embrace it: And so far
I am from robbing thee of the least honour,
That with my hands, to make it sit the faster,
I set thy Crown once more upon thy head:
And doe not only stile thee, Duke of Millaine,
But vow to keep thee so: Yet not to take
From others to give only to my self,
I will not hinder your magnificence
To my Commanders, neither will I urge it,
But in that, as in all things else I leave you
To be your own disposer
May I live
To seal my loyalty, though with loss of life
In some brave service worthy Caesars fouor,
And I shall dye most happy. Gentlemen,
Receive me to your loves, and if henceforth
There can arise a difference between vs,
It shall be in a Noble emulation.
Who hath the fairest Sword, or dare go farthest,
To sight for Charles the Emperor?
We embrace you,
As one well read in all the points of honour,
And there we are your Scholars.
True, but such
As far out-strip the Master; we will contend
In love hereafter, in the mean time pray you,
Let me discharge my debt, and as in earnest
Of what's to corn, divide this Cabnet:
In the small body of it there are Jewels,
Will yield a hundred thousand Pistolets,
Which honour me to receive.
You bind vs to you.
And when great Charles commands me to his presence,
If you will please to excuse my abrupt departure,
Designs that most concern me next this mercy,
Calling me home, I shall hereafter meet you,
And gratify the favour.
In this and all things, we are your Servants.
A name I ever owe you.
So Sir, this tempest is well overblown,
And all things fall out to our wishes. But
In my opinion, this quick return,
Before you have made a party in the Court
Among the great ones (for these needy Captains
Have little power in peace) may beget danger,
At least suspicion.
Where true honour lives,
Doubt hath no being, I desire no pawn
Beyond an Emperors word for my assurance:
Besides, Pescara, to thy self of all men
I will confess my weakness, though my State
And Crown's restored me, though I am in grace
And that a little stay might be a step
To greater honours, I must hence. Alas,
I live not here, my wife, my wife Pescara,
Being absent I am dead. Prethe excuse,
And do not chide for friendship sake my fondness
But ride along with me, I'll give you reasons,
And strong ones, to plead for me.
Use your own pleasure,
I'll bear you company.
Farewell grief, I am stored with
Two blessings most desired in human life,
A constant friend, an unsuspected wife.
What I did, I had warrant for; you have tasted
My Office gently, and for those soft strokes,
Flea bitings to the Ierks I could have lent you,
There does belong a feeling.
Must I pay
For being tormented and dishonoured?
Fie no,
Your honours not impaired in it: What's the letting out
Of a little corrupt blood, and the next way too?
There is no Surgeon like me to take off
A Courtiers Itch that's rampant at great Ladies,
Or turns knave for preferment, or grows proud
Of their rich Cloaks, and Suits, though got by brokage,
And so forgets his betters.
Very good Sir,
But am I the first man of quality,
That ever came under your fingers?
Not by a thousand,
And they have said I have a lucky hand to,
Both men and women of all sorts have bowed
Under this sceptre. I have had a fellow
That could indite forsooth, and make fine meeters
To tinckle in the ears of ignorant Madams,
That for defaming of great Men, was sent me
Threadbare and lousy, and in three days after
Discharged by another that set him on, I have seen him
Cap a pe gallant, and his stripes washed of
With oil of Angels.
I was a foueraigne cure,
There was a Secretary to, that would not be
Conformable to the Orders of the Church,
Nor yield to any argument or reason,
But still rail at authority, brought to me.
When I had wormed his tongue, and trussed his honchos,
Grew a fine Pulpit man, and was beneficed.
Had he not cause to thank me?
There was physic
Was to the purpose.
Now for women,
For your more consolation, I could tell you
Twenty fine stories, but I'll end in one,
And it is the last that's memorable.
Prethe doe,
For I grow weary of thee.
There was lately
A fine she waiter in the Court, that doted
Extremely of a Gentleman, that had
His maine dependence on a Signiors favour
(I will not name) but could not compass him
On any terms. This wanton at dead midnight
Was found at the exercise behind the Arras
With the aforesaid Signior; he got clear off,
But she was seized on, and to save his honour,
Endured the lash; And though I made her often
Curuet and caper, she would never tell,
Who played at push-pin with her.
But what followed?
Prethe be brief.
Why this Sir, she delivered,
Had store of Crowns assigned her by her patron,
Who forced the Gentleman to save her credit,
To marie her, and say he was the party
Found in Lobs pound. So, she that before gladly
Would have been his whore, reigns o'er him as his wife,
Nor dares he grumble at it. Speak but truth then,
Is not my Office lucky?
Go, ther's for thee,
But what will be my fortune?
If you thrive not
After that soft correction, come again.
I thank you knave.
And then knave, I will fit you.
Whipped like a rogue? no lighter punishment strive
To balance with a little mirth: It is well,
My credit sunk for ever, I am now
Fit company, only for Pages and for foot boys,
That have perused the Porters Lodge.
See Iulio,
Yonder the proud slave is, how he looks now
After his castigation?
As he came
From a close sight at Sea under the Hatches,
With a she Dunckerke, that was shot before
Between wind and weather,
And he hath sprung a leake too, or I'm cozened.
Lets be merry with him.
How they stare at me? am I turned to an Owl?
The wonder Gentlemen?
I read this morning
Strange stories of the passive fortitude
Of men in former ages, which I thought
Impossible, and not to be believed.
But now I look on you, my wonder ceases.
The reason Sir?
Why Sir you have been whipped
Whipped signior Graccho. And the whip I take it,
Is to a Gentleman, the greatest trial
That may be of his patience.
Sir, I'll call you
To a strict account for this.
I'll not deal with you,
Unless I have a Beadle for my second.
And then I'll answer you.
Farewell poor Graccho.
Better and better still, If ever wrongs
Could teach a wretch to find the way to vengeance,
Hell now inspire me. How, the Lord Protector!
My Judge I thank him. Whether thus in private,
I will not see him.
If I am sought for,
Say I am indisposed, and will not hear,
Or suits, or suitors.
But Sir, if the Princes
Enquire, what shall I answer?
Say, I am rid
Abroad to take the ayre, but by no means
Let her know I am in Court.
So I shall tell her.
Within there, Ladies.
My good Lord, your pleasure?
Prethe let me beg thy favour for access
To the Duchess.
In good sooth my Lord I dare not,
She's very private.
Come ther's gold to buy thee
A new gown, and a rich one.
This will tempt me,
I once swore
If ever I lost my maiden-head, it should be
With a great Lord as you are, and I know not how,
I feel a yielding inclination in me,
If you have appetite.
Pox on thy maiden-head,
Where is thy Lady?
If you venture on her,
She's walking in the Gallery, perhaps
You will find her less tractable.
Bring me to her.
I fear you'll have cold entertainment, when
You are at your journeys end, and it were discretion
To take a snatch by the way.
Prethe leave fooling,
My page waits in the lobby, give him sweet meats,
He is trained up for his Masters ease,
And he will cool thee.
A brave discovery beyond my hope,
A plot even offered to my hand to work on,
If I am dull now, may I live and dye
The scorn of worms &amp; slaves, let me consider,
My Lady and her Mother first committed
In the favour of the Duchess, and I whipped,
That with an Iron pen is writ in brass
On my tough hart, now grown a harder metal,
And all his bribed approaches to the Duchess
To be concealed, good, good, This to my Lady,
Delivered as I'll order it, runs her mad.
But this may prove but courtship, let it be
I care not so it feed her Jealousy.
Believe thy tears or oaths? Can it be hoped,
After a practice so abhorred and horrid,
Repentance ever can find thee?
Dear Lady,
Great in your fortune, greater in your goodness,
Make a superlative of excellence,
In being greatest in your saving mercy.
I doe confess, humbly confess my fault,
To be beyond all pity; my attempt,
So barbarously rude, that it would turn
A saint-like patience, into savage fury:
But you that are all innocence and virtue,
No spleen or anger in you of a woman,
But when a holy zeal to piety fires you,
May, if you please, impute the fault to love,
Or call it beastly lust, for it is no better
A sin, a monstrous sin, yet with it, many
That did prove good men after, have bin tēpted,
And though I am crooked now, it is in your power
To make me straight again.
Is it possible
This can be cunning?
But if no submission,
Nor prayers can appease you, that you may know,
It is not the fear of death that makes me sue thus,
But a loathed detestation of my madness,
Which makes me wish to live to have your pardon.
I will not waite the sentence of the Duke
(Since his return is doubtful) but I my self
Will doe a fearful justice on my self,
No witness by but you, there being no more
When I offended: yet before I doe it,
For I perceive in you no signs of mercy,
I will disclose a secret, which dying with me,
May prove your ruin.
Speak it, it will take from
The burden of thy conscience.
Thus then Madam,
The warrant by my Lord signed for your death,
Was but conditional, but you must swear
By your unspotted truth, not to reveal it,
Or I end here abruptly.
By my hopes
Of joys hereafter, on.
Nor was it hate
That forced him to it, but excess of love,
And if I ever return, so said great Sforza,
No living man deserving to enjoy
My best Marcelia. With the first news
That I am dead, for no man after me
Might ever enjoy her, but till certain proof
Assure thee I am lost (these were his words)
Fail not to kill her
Observe and honour her as if the seal
Of women's goodness only dwelt in hers.
This trust I have abused and basely wronged,
And if the excelling pity of your mind
Cannot forgive it, as I dare not hope it,
Rather then look on my offended Lord,
I stand resolved to punish it.
Hold, it is forgiven,
And by me freely pardned. In thy fair life.
Hereafter study to deserve this bounty
With thy true penitence (such I believe it)
Against my resolution hath forced from me,
But that my Lord, my Sforza should esteem,
My life fit only as a page, to waite on
The various course of his uncertain fortunes,
Or cherish in himself that sensual hope
In death to know me as a wife, afflicts me,
Nor does his envy less deserve my anger,
Which though such is my love, I would not nourish,
Will stick the ardor that I had to see him
Return in safety
But if your entertainment
Should give the least ground to his jealousy,
To raise up an opinion I am false,
You then destroy your mercy. Therefore Madam
(Though I shall ever look on you as on
My lives preserver, and the miracle
Of human pity) would you but vouchsafe,
In company to doe me those fair graces
And favours which your innocence and honour
May safely warrant, it would to the Duke
(I being to your best self alone known guilty)
Make me appear most innocent.
Have your wishes,
And some thing I may doe to try his temper,
At least to make him know a constant wife,
Is not so slau'd to her husbands doting humours,
But that she may deserve to live a widow,
Her fate appointing it.
It is enough,
Shout, and Floursh
Nay all I could desire, and will make way
To my revenge, which shall disperse it self
On him, on her, and all.
What shout is that?
All happiness to the Duchess, that may flow
From the Dukes new and wished return.
He's welcome.
How coldly she receives it.
Observe their encounter.
Flourish.
What you have told me Graccho is believed,
And I'll find time to stir in it.
As you see cause,
I will not doe ill offices.
I have stood
Silent thus long Marcelia, expecting
When with more then a greedy hast thou would
Have flown into my arms, and on my lips
Have printed a deep welcome. My desire
To glaze my self in these fair eyes, have borne me
With more then human speed. Nor durst I stay
In any Temple, or to any saint
To pay my vows and thanks for my return,
Till I had seen thee.
Sir, I am most happy
To look upon you safe, and would express
My love and duty in a modest fashion,
Such as might suit with the behaviour
Of one that knows her self a wife, and how
To temper her desires, not like a wanton
Feared with hot appetite, nor can it wrong me
To love discreetly.
How, why can there be
A mean in your affections to Sforza?
Or any act though near so loose that may
Inuit or heighten appetite, appear
Immodest or uncomely. Doe not move me,
My passions to you are in extremes,
And know no bounds, come kiss me.
I obey you.
By all the joys of love, she does salute me
As if I were her grand-father. What witch,
With cursed spells hath quenched the amorous heat
That lived upon these lips? Tell me Marcellia,
And truly tell me, is it a fault of mine
That hath begot this coldness, or neglect
Of others in my absence?
Neither Sir,
I stand indebted to your substitute,
Noble and good Francisco for his care,
And fair observance of me: There was nothing
With which you being present could supply me,
That I dare say I wanted.
How!
The pleasures
That sacred Hymen warrants vs excepted,
Of which in troth you are too great a doter,
And there is more of beast in it then man.
Let vs love temperatly, things violent last not,
And too much dotage rather argues folly
Then true affection.
Observe but this,
And how she praised my Lords care and observance,
And then judge Madam if my intelligence
Have any ground of truth.
No more, I mark it.
How the Duke stands?
As he were routed there,
And had no motion.
My Lord, from whence
Grows this amazement?
It is more dear my friend,
For I am doubtful whether I have a being,
But certain that my lifes a burden to me,
Take me bake good Pescara, show me to Caesar,
In all his rage and fury I discliame
His mercy, to live now which is his guest,
Is worse then death, and with all studied torments.
Marcellia is unkind, nay worse, grown cold
In her affection, my excess of fervor,
Which it was never equalled, grown distasteful.
But have thy wishes woman, thou shalt know
That I can be my self, and thus shake off
The setters of fond dotage. From my sight
Without reply, for I am apt to doe
Something I may repent. O, who would place
His happiness in most accursed woman,
In whom obsequiousness engenders pride,
And harshness deadly. From this hour
I'll labour to forget there are such creatures;
True friends be now my mistresses. Clear your brows,
And though my heart-strings crack for it, I will be
To all, a free example of delight:
We will have sports of all kinds, and propound
Rewards to such as can produce vs new.
Vnsatisfiz'd though we surfeit in their store.
And never think of cursed Marcelia more.
And is it possible thou should forget
A wrong of such a nature, and then study
My safety and content?
Sir, but allow me
Only to have read the elements of Courtship
(Not the abstruse &amp; hidden acts to thrive there)
And you may please to grant me so much knowledge,
That injuries from one in grace, like you,
Are noble favours. Is it not grown common
In every sect, for those that want, to suffer
From such as have to give? Your Captain cast
If poor, though not thought daring, but approved so
To raise a coward into name, that's rich,
Suffers disgraces publicly, but receives
Rewards for them in private.
Well observed.
Put on, we will be familiar, and discourse
A little of this argument. That day,
In which it was first rumoured, then confirmed,
Great Sforza thought me worthy of his favour,
I found my self to be another thing,
Not what I was before. I passed then
For a pretty fellow, and of pretty parts too,
And was perhaps received so: but once raised,
The liberal Courtier made me Master of
Those virtues, which I ne'er knew in my self.
If I pretended to a jest, it was made one
By their interpretation. If I offered
To reason of Philosophy, though absurdly,
They had helps to save me, and without a blush
Would swear, that I by nature had more knowledge,
Then others could acquire by any labour.
Nay all I did indeed, which in another
Was not remarkable, in me showed rarely.
But then they tasted of your bounty.
True,
They gave me those good parts I was not borne too,
And by my intercession they got that,
Which (had I crossed them) they durst not have hoped for
All this is Oracle. And shall I then,
For a foolish whipping learn to honour him,
That holds the wheel of Fortune? No, that savours
Too much of th• ancient freedom: Since great men
Receive disgraces, and give thanks, poor knaves
Must have not spleen 〈…〉. Though I love
My limbs as well 〈◊〉 any man, 〈◊〉 you had now
A humour to kick me lame into an office,
Where I might sit in State, and undo others,
Stood I not bound to kiss the foot that did it?
Though it seem strange there have been such things seen
In the memory of man.
But to the purpose,
And then that service done, make thine own fortunes.
My wife thou say, is jealous, I am too
Familiar with the Duchess.
And incensed
For her commitment in her brothers absence,
And by her Mothers anger is spurred on
To make discoucrie of it. This her purpose
Was trusted to my charge, which I declined
As much as in me lay, but sinding her
Determinately bent to undertake it,
Though breaking my faith to her may destroy
My credit with your Lordship, I yet thought,
Though at my peril, I stood bound to reveal it.
I thank thy care, and will deserve this secret,
In making thee acquainted with a greater,
And of more moment. Come into my bosom,
And take it from me. Can thou think, dull Graccho,
My power, and honours, were conferred upon me,
And ad to them this form, to have my pleasures
Confined and limited? I delight in change,
And sweet variety, that's my heaven on earth,
For which I love life only. I confess,
My wife pleased me a day, the Duchess, two,
(And yet I must not say, I have enjoyed her)
But now I care for neither. Therefore Graccho,
So far I am from stopping Mariana
In making her complaint, that I desire thee
To urge her to it.
That may prove your ruin,
The Duke already being, as it is reported,
Doubtful she hath played false.
There thou art cozened,
His dotage like an ague keeps his course,
And now it is strongly on him. But I loose time,
And therefore know, whether thou wilt or no,
Thou art to be my instrument, and in spite
Of the old saw, that says, it is not safe
On any terms to trust a man that's wronged,
I dare thee to be false.
This is a language
My Lord, I understand not.
You thought, sir,
To put a trick on me for the relation
Of what I knew before, and having won
Some weighty secret from me, in revenge
To play the traitor. Know thou wretched thing,
By my command thou were whipped, &amp; every day
I'll have thee freshly tortured, if thou miss
In the lest charge that I impose upon thee,
Though what I speak, for the most part is true.
Nay, grant thou had a thousand witnesses
To be deposed they heard it, it is in me
With one word (such is Sforza's confidence
Of my fidelity not to be shaken)
To make all void, and ruin my accusers.
Therefore look to it, bring my wife hotly on
T'accuse me to the Duke (I have an end in it)
Or think, what it is makes man most miserable,
And that shall fall upon thee. Thou were a fool
To hope by being acquainted with my courses
To curb and awe me, or that I should live
Thy slave, as thou did saucily divine.
For prying in my councels, still live mine.
I am caught on both sides. This it is for a puny
In Policies Protean School, to try conclusions
With one that hath commenced &amp; gon out doctor.
If I discover, what but now he bragged of,
I shall not be believed. If I fall off
From him, his threats and actions go togeither.
And ther's no hope of safety, till I get
A plummet, that may sound his deepest counsels.
I must obey and serve him. Want of skill
Now makes me play the rogue against my will.
Command me from his sight, &amp; with such scorn
As he would rate his slave.
'T was in his fury.
And he repents it Madame.
Was I borne
To observe his humours, or, because he dotes,
Must I run mad?
If that your Excellence
Would please but to receive a feeling knowledge
Of what he suffers, and how deep the least
Unkindness wounds from you, you would excuse
His hasty language.
He hath payed the forfeit
Of his offence, I'm sure, with such a sorrow,
As, if it had been greater, would deserve
A full remission.
Why, perhaps he hath it,
And I stand more afflicted for his absence,
Then he can be for mine? So pray you, tell him.
But till I have digested some sad thoughts,
And reconciled passions that are at war
Within my self, I purpose to be private.
And have you care, unless it be Francisco,
That no man be admitted.
How Francisco!
He, that at every stage keeps livery Mi∣stresses,
The stallion of the State!
They are things aboue vs,
And so no way concern vs.
If I were
The Duke (I freely must confess my weakness)
I should wear yellow breeches. Here he comes.
Nay spare your labour, Lady, we know our exit,
And quit the room.
Is this her privacy?
Though with the hazard of a check, perhaps,
This may go to the Duke.
Your face is full
Of fears and doubts. The reason?
O best Madam,
They are not counterfeit. I your poor convert,
That only wish to live in sad repentance,
To morn my desperate attempt of you,
That have no ends, nor aims, but that your goodness
Might be a witness of my penitence,
Which seen would teach you, how to love your mercy,
Am robbed of that last hope. The Duke, the Duke,
I more then fear, hath found, that I am guilty.
By my unspotted honour, not from me,
Nor have I with him changed one syllable
Since his return, but what you heard.
Yet, malice
Is Eagle-ey'd, and would see that which is not.
And Iealousie's too apt to build upon
Unsure foundations.
Jealousy?
It takes.
Who dares but only think, I can be tainted!
But for him, though almost on certain proof,
To give it hearing, not belief, deserves
My hate for ever.
Whether grounded on
Your noble, yet chaste favours shown unto me,
Or her imprisonment, for her contempt
To you, by my command, my frantic wife
Hath put it in his head.
Have I then lived
So long, now to be doubted? Are my favours
The theames of her discourse? Or what I doe,
That never trod in a suspected path,
Subject to base construction? Be undaunted,
For now, as of a creature that is mine,
I rise up your protrectesse. All the grace
I hither to have done you, was bestowed
With a shut hand. It shall be now more free,
Open, and liberal. But let it not,
Though counterfeited to the life, teach you
To nourish saucy hopes.
May I be blasted
When I prove such a monster.
I will stand, then,
Between you, and all danger. He shall know,
Suspicion o're-turnes, what confidence builds,
And he that dares but doubt, when ther's no ground,
Is neither to himself, nor others sound.
So, let it work, her goodness, that denied,
My service branded with the name of Lust,
Shall now destroy it self. And she shall find,
When he's a suitor, that brings Cunning armed
With power to be his advocates, the denial
Is a disease as killing as the plague,
And chastity a clew, that leads to death.
Hold but thy nature, Duke, and be but rash,
And violent enough, and then at leisure
Repent. I care not.
And let my plots produce this long'd-for birth,
In my revenge I have my heaven on earth.
You promised to be merry.
There are pleasures
And of all kinds to entertain the time.
Your excellence vouchsafing to make choice
Of that, which best affects you.
Hold your prating.
Learn manners too, you are rude.
I have my answer,
Before I ask the question.
I must borrow
The privilege of a friend, and will, or else
I am, like these, a servant, or what's worse,
A parasite to the sorrow, Storza worships
In spite of reason.
Pray you use your freedom,
And so far, if you please, allow me mine,
To hear you only, not to be compelled
To take your moral potions. I am a man,
And though philosophy your mistress rage for it,
Now I have cause to grieve, I must be sad,
And I dare show it.
Would it were bestowed
Upon a worthier subject.
Take heed, friend.
You rub a sore, whose pain will make me mad,
And I shall then forget my self and you.
Lance it no further.
Have you stood the shock
Of thousand enemies, and out-fac'd the anger
Of a great Emperor, that vowed your ruin,
Though by a desperate, a glorious way,
That had no president? Are you returned with honour,
Loved by your subjects? Does your fortune court you,
Or rather say, your courage does command it?
Have you given proof to this hour of your life,
Prosperity (that searches the best temper)
Could never puff you up, nor adverse fate
Deject your valour? Shall I say, these virtues,
So many and so various trials of
Your constant mind, be buried in the frown
(To please you I will say so) of a fair woman?
Yet I have seen her equals.
Good Pescara,
This language in another were profane,
In you it is unmannerly. Her equal?
I tell you as a friend, and tell you plainly
(To all men else, my Sword should make reply)
Her goodness does disdain comparison,
And but her self admits no parallel.
But you will say she's cross, it is fit she should be
When I am foolish, for she's wise, Pescara,
And knows how far she may dispose her bounties,
Her honour safe: or if she were averse,
It was a prevention of a greater sin
Ready to fall upon me, for she's not ignorant
But truly understands how much I love her,
And that her rare parts doe deserve all honour,
Her excellence increasing with her years to,
I might have fallen into Idolatry,
And from the admiration of her worth,
Bin taught to think there is no power aboue her,
And yet I doe believe, had Angels sexes,
The most would be such women, and assume
No other shape, when they were to appear
In their full glory.
Well Sir, I'll not cross you,
Nor labour to diminish your esteem
Hereafter of her, since your happiness
(As you will have it) has alone dependence
Upon her favour, from my Soul, I wish you
A fair atonement.
Time, and my submission
May work her to it. O! you are well returned,
Say, am I blessed? hath she vouchfaf'd to hear you?
Is there hope left that she may be appeased?
Let her propound, and gladly I'll subscribe
To her conditions.
She Sir, yet is froward,
And desires respite, and some privacy.
She was harsh at first, but ere we parted, seemed not
Implacable.
Ther's comfort yet, I'll ply her
Each hour with new Ambassadors of more honours,
Titles, and eminence. My second self
Francisco, shall solicit her.
That a wise man,
And what is more, a Prince, that may command,
Should sue thus poorly, and treat with his wife,
As she were a victorious enemy,
At whose proud feet, himself, his State, and Country,
Basely begged mercy.
What is that you mutter?
I'll have thy thoughts.
You shall, you are too fond,
And feed a pride that's swollen too big already,
And surfeits with observance.
O my patience!
My vassal speak thus?
Let my head answer it
If I offend. She that you think a Saint,
I sear may play the Devil.
Well said old sellow.
And he that hath so long engrossed your favours,
Though to be named with reverence, Lord Francisco,
Who as you purpose, shall solicit for you,
I think's too near her.
Hold Sir, this is madness.
It may be they confer of winning Lordships,
I'm sure he's private with her.
Let me go,
I scorn to touch him, he deserves my pity,
And not my anger, dotard, and to be one
Is thy protection, else thou durst not think
That love to my Marcella hath left room
In my full heart for any Iealons thought,
That idle passion dwell with thick-skind Trades-men.
The undeserving Lord, or the unable,
Lock up thy own wife fool, that must take physic
From her young Doctor upon her back
Because thou hast the palsy in that part
That makes her active, I could smile to think
What wretched things they are that dare be jealous,
Were I matched to another Mescaline,
While I sound merit in my self to please her:
I should believe her chaste, and would not seek
To find out my own torment, but alas,
Enjoying one that but to me's a Dien,
I'm too secure.
This is a confidence
Beyond example.
There he is, now speak,
Or be for ever silent.
If you come
To bring me comfort, say, that you have made
My peace with my Marcelia.
I had rather
Waite on you to your funeral.
You are my mother,
Or by her life you were dead else.
Would you were,
To your dishonour, and since dotage makes you
Wilfully blind, borrow of me my eyes,
Or some part of my spirit. Are you all flesh?
A limb of patience only? No fire in you?
But doe your pleasure, here your Mother was
Committed by your servant (for I scorn
To call him husband) and my self your sister,
If that you dare remember such a name,
Mewed up to make the way open and free
For the Adulteress, I am unwilling
To say a part of Storza.
Take her head off,
She hath blasphemed, and by our Law must dye.
Blasphemed, for calling of a whore, a whore?
O hell, what doe I suffer?
Or is it treason
For me that am a subject, to endeavour
To save the honour of the Duke, and that
He should not be a Withal on record.
For by posterie twill be believed
As certainly as now it can be proved,
Francisco the great Minion, that sways all,
To meet the chaste embraces of the Duchess,
Hath leaped into her bed.
Some proof vile creature,
Or thou hast spoke thy last.
The public fame,
Their hourly private meetings, and even now
When under a pretence of grief or anger,
You are denied the joys due to a husband,
And made a stranger to her, at all times
The door stands open to him. To a Dutchman
This were enough, but to a right Italian,
A hundred thousand witnesses.
Would you have vs
To be her bawds?
O the malice
And envy of base women, that with horror
Knowing their own defects and inward guilt,
Dare lye, and swear, and damn, for what's most false,
To cast aspersions upon one untainted,
You're in your natures devils, and your ends
Knowing your reputation sunk for ever,
And not to be recovered, to have all,
Wear your black livery. Wretches, you have raised
A Monumental trophy to her pureness,
In this your studied purpose to deprave her,
And all the shot made by your foul detraction
Falling upon her sure-arm'd Innocence,
Return's upon your selves, and if my love
Could suffer an addition, I'm so far
From giving credit to you, this would teach me
More to admire &amp; serve her, you are not worthy
To fall as sacrifices to appease her,
And therefore live till your own envy burst you.
All is in vain, he is not to be moved.
She has bewitched him.
It is so past belief,
To me it shows a fable.
On thy life
Provide my horses, and without the Port
With care attend me.
I shall my Lord.
He's come.
What crack have we next?
Great Sir.
Francisco,
Though all the joys in woman are fled from me
In thee I doe embrace the full delight
That I can hope from man.
I would impart,
Please you to lend your care, a waightie-secret,
I am in labour to deliver to you.
All leave the room, excuse me good Pesc.
Ere long I will waite on you.
You speak Sir
The language I should use.
Be within call,
Perhaps we may have use of you.
We shall Sir.
Say on my comfort.
Comfort? No, your torment,
For so my fate appoints me, I could curse
The hour that gave me being.
What new monsters
Of misery stand ready to devour me?
Let them at once dispatch me.
Draw your sword then,
And as you wish your own peace, quickly kill me,
Consider not, but doe it.
Art thou mad?
Or if to take my life be too much mercy,
As death indeed concludes all human sorrows,
Cut off my nose and ears, pull out an eye,
The other only left to lend me light
To see my own deformities: Why was I borne
Without some mulct imposed on me by nature?
Would from my youth a loathsome leprosy
Had run upon this face, or that my breath
Had been infectious and so made me shunned
Of all societies: cursed be he that taught me
Discourse or manners, or lent any grace
That makes the owner pleasing in the eye
Of wanton women, since those parts which others
Value as blessings, are to me afflictions,
Such my condition is.
I am on the rack,
Dissolve this doubtful riddle.
That I alone (you,
Of all mankind that stand most bound to love
And study your content should be appointed,
Not by my will, but sourced by cruel fate
To be your greatest enemy, not to hold you
In this amazement longer, in a word,
Your Duchess loves me.
Loves thee?
Is mad for me,
Pursues me hourly:
Oh!
And from hence grew
Her late neglect of you.
O women! women!
I laboured, to divert her by persuasion,
Then urged your much love to her, &amp; the danger,
Deny d her, and with scorn.
It was like thy self.
But when I saw her smile, then heard her say,
Your love and extreme dotage as a Cloak
Should cover our embraces, and your power
Fright others from suspicion, and all favours
That should preserve her in her innocence,
By lust inuerted to be used as bawds,
I could not but in duty (though I know
That the relation kills in you all hope
Of peace hereafter, and in me twill show
Both base and poor to rise up her accuser)
Freely discover it.
Eternal plagues
Pursue and overtake her, for her sake
To all posterity may he prove a Cuckold,
And like to me a thing so miserable
As words may not express him, that gives trust
To all deceiving women, or since it is
The will of Heaven to preserve mankind,
That we must know, &amp; couple with these serpents,
No wiseman ever taught by my example
Hereafter use his wife with more respect
Then he would doe his Horse that do's him service,
Base woman being in her creation made
A slave to man, but like a village nurse
Stand I now cursing, and considering when
The tamest fool would doe? Within there, Stephane,
Tiberio, and the rest, I will be sudden,
And she shall know and feel love in extremes,
Abused knows no degree in hate.
My Lord.
Go to the Chamber of that wicked woman.
What wicked woman, Sir?
The devil my wife.
Force a rude entry, and if she refuse,
To follow you, drag her hither by the hair
And know no pity, any gentle usage
To her will call on cruelty from me
To such as show it, Stand you staring! Go,
And put my will in act.
Ther's no disputing.
But it is a tempest on the sudden raised,
Who durst have dreamt of?
Nay, since she dares damnation,
I'll be a fury to her.
Yet great Sir,
Exceed not in your fury, she's yet guilty
Only in her intent.
Intent Francisco?
It does include all sact, and I might sooner
Be won to pardon treason to my Crown,
Or one that killed my Father.
You are wise,
And know what's best to doe, yet if you please
To prove her temper to the height, say only
That I am dead, and then observe how far
She'll be transported. I'll remove a little,
But be within your call: now to the upshot,
How ever I'll shift for one.
Where is this Monster?
This walking tree of Jealousy, this dreamer,
This horned beast that would be? O are you here Sir?
Is it by your commandment or allowance,
I am thus basely used? Which of my virtues,
My labours, setuices, and cares to please you
(For to a man suspicious and unthankful,
Without a blush I may be mine own trumpet)
Invites this barbarous course? Dare you look on me
Without a seal of shame?
Impudence,
How ugly thou appear'st now? Thy intent
To be a whore, leaves thee not blood enough
To make an honest blush, what had the act done?
Returned thee the dishonour thou deserve
Though willingly I had given up my self
To every common lecher.
Your chief minion,
Your chosen favourite, your wooed Francisco,
Has dearly paid for it, for wretch, know he's dead,
And by my hand.
The bloodier villain thou,
But'tis not to be wondered at, thy love
Do's know no other object, thou hast killed then
A man I doe profess I loved, a man
For whom a thousand Queens might well be rivals,
But be (I speak it to thy teeth) that dares be
A Jealous fool, dares be a murderer,
And knows no end in mischief.
I begin now
stabs her.
In this my Justice.
Oh, I have fooled my self
Into my grave, and only grieve for that
Which when you know, you have slain an Innocent
You needs ds mast suffer.
An Innocent? Let once
Call in Francisco for he lives (vile creature)
To justify thy falsehood, and how often
With whorish flatteries thou hast tempted him,
I being only sit to live a stale,
A bawd and property to your wantonness.
Signior Francisco Sir, but even now
Took horse without the Ports.
We are both abused,
And both by him undone, stay death a little
Till I have cleared me to my Lord, and then
I willingly obey thee. O my Sforza,
Francisco was not tempted, but the Tempter,
And as he thought to win me showed the warrant
That you signed for my death.
Then I believe thee,
Believe thee innocent too.
But being contemned,
Upon his knees with tears he did beseech me
Not to reveal it, I soft-hearted fool
Judging his penitence true, was won unto it.
Indeed the unkindness to be sentenced by you
Before that I was guilty in a thought,
Made me put on a seeming anger towards you,
And now behold the issue, as I do,
May heaven forgive you. dyes.
Her sweet soul has left
Her beauteous prison.
Look to the Duke, he stands
As if he wanted motion.
Grief hath stopped
The organ of his speech.
Take up this body
And call for his Physicians.
O my heart-strings.
Why coldest thou think Eugenia that rewards,
Graces, or favours though strewed thick upon me
Could ever bribe me to forget mine honour?
Or that I tamely would sit down, before
I had dried these eyes still wet with showers of tears
By the few of my revenge? Look up my dearest
For that proud-faire that thiefe-like stepped between
Thy promised hopes, and robed thee of a fortune
Almost in thy possession, hath found
With horrid proof, his love she thought her
And assurance of all happiness, (glory
But hast'ned her sad ruin.
Doe not flatter
A grief that is beneath it, for how ever
The credulous Duke to me proved false &amp; cruel,
It is impossible he could be wrought
To look on her, but with the eyes of dotage,
And so to serve her.
Such indeed I grant
The stream of his affection was, and ran
A constant course, till I with cunning malice
(And yet I wrong my act, for it was Justice)
Made it turn back-wards, and hate in extremes
Love banished from his heart to fill the room,
In a word, know the fair Marcelia's dead.
Dead!
And by Sforza's hand, do's it not move you?
How coldly you receive it? I expected
The mere relation of so great a blessing
Borne proudly on the wings of sweet revenge
Would have called on a sacrifice of thanks,
And joy not to be bounded or concealed!
You entertain it with a look, as if
You wished it were undone!
Indeed I doe,
For if my sorrows could receive addition,
Her sad fate would increase, not lessen'em.
She never injured me, but entertained
A fortune humbly offered to her hand,
Which a wise Lady gladly would have kneeled for.
Unless you would impute it as a crime,
She was more fair then I, and had discretion
Not to deliver up her virgin fort
(Though straight besieged with flatteries, vows, &amp; tears)
Until the Church had made it safe &amp; lawful.
And had I been the mistress of her judgment
And constant temper, skilful in the knowledge
Of mans malitions falsehood, I had never
Upon his hell-deepe oaths to marry me,
Given up my fair name, and my maiden honour
To his foul lust, nor lived now being branded
In the forehead for his whore the scorn &amp; Shame
Of all good women.
Have you then no gall,
Anger, or spleen familiar to your sex?
Or is it possible that you could see
Another to possess what was your due,
And not grow pale with envy?
Yes of him
That did deceine me. Ther's no passion that
A maid so injured ever could partake of
But I have decrely suffered. These three years
In my desire, and labour of revenge,
Trusted to you, I have endured the throes
Of teeming women, and will hazard all
Fate can inflict on me but I will reach
Thy heart false Sforza. You have trifled with me
And not proceeded with that fiery zeal
I looked for from a brother of your spirit.
Sorrow forsake me, and all signs of grief
Farewell for ever; Vengeance armed with fury
Possess me wholly now.
The reason sister
Of this strange metamorphosis?
Ask thy fears,
Thy base unmanly fears, thy poor delays,
Thy dull forgetfulness equal with death,
My wrong else, and the scandal which can never
Be washed off from our house but in his blood,
Would have stirred up a coward to a deed
In which, though he had fallen, the brave intent
Had crowned it self with a fair monument
Of noble resolution. In this shape
I hope to get access, and then with shame
Hearing my sudden execution, judge
What honour thou hast lost in being transcended
By a weak woman.
Still mine own, and dearer,
And yet in this you but pour oil on fire,
And offer your assistance where it needs not,
And that you may perceive I lay not fallow,
But had your wrongs stamped deeply on my hart
By the Iron pen of vengeance, I attempted
By whoring her to cuckold him, that failing
I did begin his tragedy in her death,
To which it served as Prologue, and will make
A memorable story of your fortunes
In my assured revenge, only best sister
Let vs not loose our selves in the performance,
By your rash undertaking, we will be
As sudden as you could wish.
Upon those terms
I yield my self and cause to be disposed of
As you think fit.
Thy purpose?
Ther's one Graccho
That followed you it seems upon the tract,
Since you left Millaine, that's importunate
To have access, and will not be denied,
His hast he says concerns you.
Bring him to me,
Though he hath laid an ambush for my life,
Or apprehension, yet I will prevent him
And work mine own ends out.
Now for my whipping,
And if I now out-strip him not, and catch him,
And by a new and strange way to, hereafter
I'll swear there are worms in my brains.
Now my good Graccho,
We meet as it were by miracle!
Love, and duty,
And vigilance in me for my Lords safety,
First taught me to imagine you were here,
And then to follow you. Al's come forth my Lord
That you could wish concealed. The Duchess wound
In the Dukes rage put home, yet gave her leave
To acquaint him with your practises, which your flight
Did easily confirm.
This I expected,
But sure you come provided of good counsel
To help in my extremes.
I would not hurt you.
How? hurt me? Such another word's thy death,
Why dare thou think it can fall in thy will,
T'outliue what I determine?
How he awes me?
Be brief, what brought thee hither?
Care to inform you,
You are a condemned man pursued, and sought for,
And your head rated at ten thousand Ducats
To him that brings it.
Very good.
All passages
Are intercepted, and choice troops of horse
Scour o'er the neighbour plains, your picture sent
To every State considerate with Millaine.
That though I grieve to speak it, in my judgment
So thick your dangers meet, and run upon you,
It is impossible you should escape
Their curious search.
Why let vs then turn Romans,
And falling by our own hands, mock their threats,
And dreadful preparations.
It would show nobly,
But that the honour of our full revenge
Were lost in the rash action: No Eugenia,
Graccho is wise, my friend to, not my servant,
And I dare trust him with my latest secret.
We would (and thou must help vs to perform it)
First kill the Duke, then fall what can upon vs,
For injuries are writ in brass, kind Graccho.
And not to be forgotten.
He instructs me
What I should doe.
What's that?
I labour with
A strong desire t'assist you with my sernice,
And now I am delivered of t.
I told you.
Speak my oraculous Graccho,
I have heard Sir
Of men in debt, that laid for by their creditors
(In all such places where it could be thought
They would take shelter) chose for sanctuary,
Their lodgings underneath their creditors noses,
Or near that prison to which they were designed
If apprehended, confident that there
They never should be sought for.
It is a strange one!
But what infer you from it?
This my Lord,
That since all ways of your escape are stopped,
In Millaine only, or what's more, in the Court
(Whether it is presumed you dare not come)
Concealed in some disguise you may live safe.
And not to be discovered?
But by my self.
By thee? Alas I know thee honest Graccho,
And I will put thy counsel into act,
And suddenly. Yet not to be ungrateful
For all thy loving travel to preserve me,
What bloody end so ever my stars appoint,
Thou shalt be safe good Graccho. Who's within there?
In the devils name what means he? Ent. servants
Take my friend
Into your custody, and bind him fast,
I would not part with him.
My good Lord.
Dispatch,
It is for your good to keep you honest Graccho,
I would not have ten thousand Ducats tempt you
(Being of a soft and wax like disposition)
To play the traitor, nor a foolish itch
To be revenged for your late excellent whipping
Give you the opportunity to offer
My head for satisfaction. Why thou fool,
I can look through, &amp; through thee, thy intents
Appear to me as written in thy forehead
In plain and easy characters. And but that
I scorn a slaves base blood should rust that sword
That from a Prince expects a scarlet dye,
Thou now were dead, but live only to pray
For good success to crown my undertakings,
And then at my return perhaps I'll free thee
To make me further sport. Away with him,
I will not hear a syllable. We must trust
Our selves Eugenia, and though we make use of
The counsel of our servants, that oil spent,
Like snuffs that doe offend we tread them out.
But now to our last Scene, which we will so carry,
That few shall understand how it was begun,
Till all with half an eye may see it is don.
The like was never read of.
In my judgment
To all that shall but hear it, twill appear
A most impossible fable.
For Francisco,
My wonder is the less because there are
Too many Presidents of unthankful men
Raised up to greatness, which have after studied
The ruin of their makers.
But that melancholy,
Though ending in distraction, should work
So far upon a man as to compel him
To court a thing that has nor sense, nor being,
Is unto me a miracle.
'Troth I'll tell you,
And briefly as I can, by what degrees
He fell into this madness, When by the care
Of his Physicians he was brought to life,
As he had only passed a fearful dream,
And had not acted what I grieve to think on,
He called for fair Marcelia, and being told
That she was dead, he broke forth in extremes,
(I would not say blasphemed) &amp; cried that heaven
For all th'offences that mankind could doe,
Would never be so cruel as to rob it
Of so much sweetness, &amp; of so much goodness,
That not alone was secret in her self,
But did preserve all others innocent
That had but converse with her: Then it came
Into his fancy that she was accused
By his mother &amp; his sister, thrice he cursed 'em,
And thrice his desperate hand was on his sword
To have kill d'em both, but he restrained, &amp; they
Shunning his fury, spite of all prevention
He would have turned his rage upon himself,
When wisely his Physicians looking on
The Duchess wound, to stay his ready hand,
Cried out it was not mortal.
'T was well thought on.
He easily believing what he wished,
More then a perpetuity of pleasure
In any object else, flattered by hope
Forgetting his own greatness, he fell prostrate
At the doctors feet, implored their aid, &amp; swore,
Provided they recovered her, he would live
A private man, &amp; they should share his dukedom.
They seemed to promise fair, and every hour
Vary their judgements as they find his fit
To suffer intermission, or extremes.
For his behaviour since
As you have pity 
Support her gently.
Now be your own witnesses.
I am prevented.
Carefully I beseech you,
The gentlest touch torments her, &amp; then think
What I shall suffer. O you earthy gods,
You second natures, that from your great master
(Who joined the limbs of torn Hyppolytus,
And drew upon himself the Thunderers envy)
Are taught those hidden secrets that restore
To life death wounded men, You have a patient
On whom to'xpresse the excellence of art,
Will bind even heaven your debtor, though It pleases
To make your hands the organs of a work
The saints will smile to look on, &amp; good Angels
Clap their Celestial wings to give it plaudits.
How pale and wan she looks? O pardon me,
That I presume died o'er with bloody guilt,
Which makes me I confess, far, far unworthy
To touch this snow-white hand. How cold it is?
This once was Cupids fire-brand, and still
It is so to me. How slow her pulses beat to?
Yet in this temper she is all perfection,
And Mistress of a heat so full of sweetness,
The blood of virgins in their pride of youth
Are balls of Snow or Ice compared unto her.
Is not this strange?
O cross him not dear daughter,
Our conscience tells vs we have been abused,
Wrought to accuse the innocent, and with him
Are guilty of a fact -!
It is now past help.
With me? What is he?
He has a strange aspect,
A Jew by birth, and a Physician
By his profession as he says, who hearing
Of the Dukes frenzy, on the forfeit of
His life will undertake to render him
Perfect in every part. Provided that
Your Lordships favour gain him free access,
And your power with the Duke a safe protection,
Till' the great work be ended.
Bring me to him,
As I find cause I'll doe.
How sound she sleeps!
Heaven keep her from a lethargy; how long
(But answer me with comfort I beseech you.)
Do's your sure judgment tell you that these lids
That cover richer jewels then themselves
Li'ke envious night will bar these glorious suns
From shining on me?
We have given her Sir,
A sleepy potion that will hold her long,
That she may be less sensible of the torment,
The searching of her wound will put her to
She now feels little, but if we should make her,
To hear her speak would fright both vs and you,
And therefore dare not hasten it.
I am patient,
You see I doe not rage, but waite your pleasure.
What doe you think she dreams of now? for sure
Although her bodies organs are bound fast,
Her fancy cannot slumber
That Sir, looks on
Your sorrow for your late rash art with pity
Oh what you suffer for it, and prepares
To meet with free confession of your guilt
With a glad pardon.
She was ever kind
And her displeasure though called on, short lived
Upon the least submission. O you powers
That can conucy our thoughts to one another
Without the end of eyes, or ears, assist me,
Let her behold me in a pleasing dream,
Thus on my knees before her (yet that duty
In me is not sufficient) let her see me
Compel my mother (from whom I look life)
And this my sister, Partner of my being,
To bow thus low unto her, let her hear vs
In my acknowledgement freely confess
That we in a degree as high are guilty,
As she is innocent; bite your tongues, vile creatures,
And let your inward horror fright your souls
For having belide that pureness, to come near which
All women that posterity can bring forth
Must be, though striving to be good, poor Rivals.
And for that dog Francisco (that seduced me
In wounding her to raise a temple built
To Chastity and sweetness) let her know
I'll follow him to hell, but I will find him,
And there live a fourth fury to torment him.
Then for this cursed hand and arm that guided
The wicked steel, I'll have them joint by joint,
With burning irons seard of, which I will eat.
I being a vulture fit to taste such carrion,
Lastly.
You are too loud, Sir, you disturb
Her swear repose.
I am hushed, yet give vs leave
Thus prostrate at her feet, our eyes bent downwards,
Unworthy, and ashamed to look upon her,
T'expect her gracious sentence.
Hoe's past hope.
The body to, will putrefy, and then
We can no longer cover the imposture.
Which in his death will quickly be discovered
I can but weep his fortune.
Yet be careful,
You loose no minute to preserve him, time,
May lessen his distraction.
I am no God sir.
To give a new life to her, yet I'll hazard
My head, I'll work the senseless trunket' appear
To him as it had got a second being,
Or that the soul that's fled from it were called back,
To govern it again, I will preserve it
In the first sweetness, and by a strange viper
Which I'll infule into her mouth, create
A seeming breath, I'll make her veins run high to
As if they had true motion.
Doe but this,
Till we use means to win upon his passions
T'indure to hear shoe's dead with some small patience
And make thy own reward.
The art I use
Admits no looker on, I only ask
The sourth part of an hour to perfect that
I boldly undertake.
I will procure it.
What stranger's this?
Sooth me in all I say
There is a maine end in it.
Beware.
I am warned.
Look up Sir cheerfully, comfort in me
Flows strong lie to you.
From whence came that sound?
Was it from my Marcelia? if it were
I rise and joy will give me wings to meet it.
Nor shall your expectation be deferrd
But a few minutes, your Physicians are
Mere voice, and no performance, I have found
A man that can do wonders, do not binder
The Duchess wished recovery to inquire,
Or what he is, or to give thanks, but leave him
To work this miracle.
Sure, it is my good Angel,
I do obey in all things; be it death
For any to disturb him, or come near
Till he be pleasd' to call vs, ó be prosperous
And make a Duke thy Bondsman.
Tic my pupose
I• that to fall a long wished sacrifice
To my revenge can be a be•efit.
I'll first make fast the doors, so.
You amaze me
What follows now?
A full conclusion
Of all thy wishes, look on this Eugenia,
Even such a thing, the saire on earth
(For whose delight the elements are ransacked
And art with nature studies to preserve her,
Must be when she is summoned to appear
In the Court of death, but I loose time.
What mean you?
Disturb me not, your Ladyship looks pale
But I, your Doctor, have a ceruse for you,
See my Eugenia, how many faces
That are adored in Court borrow these helps,
And pass for excellence, when the bettet part
Of them are like to this, your mouth smells sour to,
But here is that shall take away the sent,
A precious antidote old Ladies use
When they would kiss, knowing their gummes are rotten:
These hands to, that disdaind' to take a touch
From any lip, whose honour •ri〈…〉t Lord
Are now but as the coursest ca••h •ut I
Am at the charge my bill not to be paid to
To give them seeming b•ae•y, so tic done
How do you like my workmanship?
I •mble
And thus to tirannize upon the dead
Is most inhumane.
Come we for revenge,
And can we think on pity? now to the upshot,
And as it proves applaud it. My lord the Duke
Enter with joy, and see the sudden chance
Your servants hand hath wrought.
I live again
In my full confidence that Marcelia may
Pronounce my pardon. Can the speak yet?
No,
You must not look for all your joys at once,
That will ask longer time.
Tic wondrous strange!
By all the dues of love I have had from her,
This hand seems as it was when first I kissed it,
These lips inuit to, I could ever feed
Upon these roses, they still keep their colour
And native sweetness, only the nectar's wanting
That like the morning dew in flowery May
Preserved them in their beauty.
Treason, treason.
Call up the guard.
Graccho! then we are lost.
I am got off, Sir Jew, a bribe hath done it
For all your serious charge; ther's no disguise can keep
You from my knowledge,
Speak.
I am out of breath,
But this is.
Spare thy labour fool, Francisco.
Monster of Men.
Give me all attributes
Of all you can imagine, yet I glory
To be the thing I was borne, I am Francisco,
Francisco that was raised by you,
And made the Minion of the time
The same Francisco,
That would have whored this trunk when it had life,
And after breathed a icalousie upon thee
As killing as those damps that belch out plagues,
When the foundation of the earth is shaken;
I made thee doe a deed heaven will not pardon
Which was to kill an innocent.
Call forth the tortures
For all that flesh can feel.
I dare the worst,
Only to yield some reason to the world
Why I pursud' this course, look on this face
Made old by thy base falsehood, it is Eugenia.
Eugenia.
Do's it start you Sir? my Sister,
Seduced and fooled by thee, but thou must pay
The forfet of thy falshod, do's it not work yet?
What ere becomes of me (which I esteem not)
'Thou art marked for the grave, I have given thee poison
In this cup, now observe me, with thy last
Carousing deeply of, made thee forget
Thy vowed, faith to Eugenia.
O damned villain!
How do you Sir?
Like one,
That learns to know in death what punishment;
Waits on the breath of faith, ô now I feel
An AEtna in my entrails, I have lived
A Prince, and my last breath shall be command
I burn, I burn, yet ever life be consumed
Let me pronounce upon this wretch all torture
That witty cruelty can invent.
Away with him.
In all things we will serve you.
Farewell sister,
Now I have kept my word, torments I scorn,
I leave the world with glory, they are men
And leave behind them name and memory,
That wronged doe right themselves before they die.
A desperate wretch.
I come death, I obey thee,
Yet I will not die raging, for alas,
My whole life was a frenzy. Good Eugenia
In death forgive me, As you love me bear her
To some religious house, there let her spend
The remnant of her life, when I am ashes
Perhaps she'll be appeared, and soar a prayer
For my poor soul. Bury me with Marcelia
And let our Epitaph be—
His speech is stopped.
Already dead.
It is in vain to labour
To call him back, we'll give him funeral,
And then determine of the state affairs
And learn from this example ther's no trust
In a foundation that is built on lust.

GOod day to your Lordship:
Thanks Adorn.
May I presume to ask if the Em∣bassador
Employed by Ferdinand, the Duke of Ur∣bin
Hath audience this morning?
It is uncertain,
For though a counsaylor of state, I am not
Of the Cabinet counsel. But ther's one if he please
That may resolve you.
I will move him Sr.
If you have a suite, •hew water, I am blind else.
A suite, y•t of a nature, not to prove
The quarry that you hawk for: If your words
Are not like Indian wares• and every scruple
To be weighed and rated, one poor syllable
Vouchsafed in answer of a fair demand,
Cannot deserve a fee.
It seems you are ignorant,
I neiher speak, nor hold my peace for nothing:
And yet for once, I care not if I answer
One single question, grati•.
I much thank you.
Hath the Ambassador audience Sir to day?
Yes.
At what hour?
I promised not so much.
A syllable you begged, my Charity gave it.
Move me no further.
This you wonder at?
With me it is usual.
Pray you Sr. what is he?
A Gentlemaan, yet no lord. He hath some drop•
Of the Kings blood running in his veins, derived
Some ten degrees off. His revenue lies
In a narrow compass, the Kings ear, and yields him
Every hour a fruitful harvest. Men may talk•
Of three croppes in a year in the fortunate Islands.
Or profit made by wool. But while there are suitors•
His sheep sheering, •ay •having to the quick
Is in every quarter of the Moon, and constant,
In the time of trussing a point, he can undo
Or make a man. His play or recreation
Is to raise •ihs up, o• pu•l down that, and though
He never yet took orders, makes more Bishops
In Sicilie, then the Pope himself.
Most strange!
The presence fills. He in the Malta hob•t
Is the natural brother of the King, a by blow.
I understand you.
Morrow to my Uncle.
And my late Guardian. But at length I have
The reigns in my own hands.
Pray you use 'em well,
Or you'll too late repent it.
With this Jewel
Presented to Camiola, prepare
This night a uisit for me. I shall have
Your company Gallants I perceive, if that
The King will hear of war.
Sr. I have horses
Of the best breed in Naples, fitter far
To break a rank, then crack a lance, and are
In their carer of such incredible swiftness
They out-strip swallows.
And such may bee useful
To run away with, should we be defeated.
You are well provided Signior
Sr. excuse me.
All of their race by instinct know a Coward.
And scorn the burden. They come on like lightning,
Foundered in a retreat.
By no means back 'em.
Unless you know your courage sympathize
With the daring of your horse.
My lord, this is •itter.
I will raise me a company of foot,
And when at push of pike I am to enter
A brea•h, to show my valour, I have bought me
An armour cannon proof
You will not leap then
Ore an out-worke in your shirt•
I do not like
Activity that way.
You had rather stand
A mark to try their muskets on?
If I doe
No good, I'll doe no hurt.
It is in you Sign•or
A Christian resolution, and becomes you,
But I will not discourage you.
You are Sr.
A knight of Malta, and as I have heard•
Have served aga•nst the Turk.
It is true.
Pray you show vs
The difference between the city valour.
And service in the field.
It is somewhat more
Then roaring in a t•verne, or a brothel,
Or to steal a Constable from a sleeping watch;
Then burn their halberds; or safe guarded by
Your tenants sons, to carry away a Maypole
From a neighbour village; you will not find there
Your Masters of Dependencies to take up
A drunken brawl, or to get you the names
Of valiant Cheivaleirs, fellows that will bee
For a clo•ke with thrice died velvet, and a cast suite
Kicked down the stairs. A knave with half a britch there,
And no shirt (being a thing superfluous,
And worn ou• of his memory) if you bear not
Your selves both in, and upright with a provant sword
Will slash your skarlets, and your plush a new way;
Or with the hilts thunder about your ears
Such music as will make your worships dance
To the doleful tune of La••ire•ma,
I must tell you,
In private, as you are my princely friend,
I doe not like such Fiddlers.
No? they are useful
For your imitation; I remember you
When you came first to the Court, and talked of nothing
But you rents, and your entradas; ever chiming
The golden bells in your pockets, you belieu'd
The taking of the wall, as a tribute due to
Your gaudy clothes; and could not walk at m•d-night
Without a causeless quarrel, as if men
Of courser outsides were in duty bound
To suffer your affronts: but when you had been
Cud•ell'd well, twice or thrice, and from the doctrine
Made profitable uses, you concluded
The sovereign means to teach irregular heirs
Civility, with conformity of manners,
Were two or three sound beatings.
I confess
They did much good upon me.
And on me—the principles that they read were sound.
You'll find
The like instructions in the Camp.
The King.
VVee sit prepared to hear.
Your Majesty
Hath been long since familiar, I doubt not,
With the desperate fortunes of my Lord, and pity
Of the much that your confederate hath suffered
(You being his last refuge) may persuade you
Not alone to compassionate, but to lend
Your royal aids to stay him in his fall
To certain ruin. Hee too late is conscious,
That his ambition to encroach upon
His neighbours territories, with the danger of
His liberty, nay his life, hath brough in question
Hi• own inheritance: but youth and heat
Of blood• in your interpretation, may
Both plead, and •idiot for him. I must grant it
An error in him, being denied the favours though
Of the fair Princess of Seen
He sought her in a noble way) t'andeavou•
To for•• affection, by surprise of
Her principal seat Seen.
Which now proves
The seat of his captivity• not triumph.
Heaven is still just.
And yet that justice is
To be with mercy tempered, which heau'•s Deputies
Stand bound to minister. The injured Duche•se
By reason taught, as nature, could not with
The reparation of her wrongs, but aim at
A brave revenge, and my Lord feels too late
That innocence will find friends. The great Gonzaga,
The honour of his Order, I must praise
Virtue, though in an enemy. Hee whose fights
And conquests hold one number, rallying up
Her scattered troops, before wee could get time
To victual, or to man the conquered City,
Sate down before it, and presuming that
It is not to be relieved, admits no parley,
Our s•eggs of truce hung out in vain, nor will hee
Lend an ear to composition, but exacts
With the rendering up the •own, the goods, and lines
Of all within the walls, and of all Sexes
To be at his discretion.
Since injustice
In your Duke, meets this correction, can you press us
With any seeming argument of reason,
In foolish pity to decline his dangers,
To draw 'em on our self? Shall we not be,
Warned by his harms? The league proclaimed between us.
Bound neither of us farther then to aid
Each other, if by foreign force invaded,
And so far in my honour I was tied.
But •ince without our counsel, or allowance,
He hath took arms, with his good leave, he must
Excuse us, if wee steer not on a rock
We see, and may avoid. Let other Monarchs
Contend to be made glorious by proud war,
And with the blood of their poor subjects purchase
Increase of Empire, and augment their cares
In keeping that which was by wrongs extorted;
Guilding unjust invasions with the trimne
Of glorious conquests; wee that would be known
The father of our people in our study,
And vigilance for their safety, must not change
Their plough-shares into swords, or force them from
The secure shade of their own vines to be
Scorched with the flames of war, or for our sport
Expose their lives to ruin.
Will you then
In his extremity forsake your friend?
No, but preserve our self:
Cannot the beams
Of honour thaw your icy fears?
VVho's that?
A kind of brother, Sir, how ever your subject,
Your father's Son, and one who blushes that
You are not heir to his brave spirit, and vigour,
As to his Kingdom.
How's this?
Sir, to be
His living Chronicle, and to speak his praise
Cannot deserve your anger.
VVhere's your warrant
For this presumption?
He•e, Sir, in my heart.
Let Sycopha•ts, that feed upon your favours,
Stile coldness in you caution, and prefer
Your ease before your honour; and conclude
To eat and s•up supinely, is the end
Of humane blessings: I must tell you Sir,
Virtue, if not in action, is a vice,
And when wee move not forward, we go backward;
Nor is this peace (the nurse of drones, and cowards)
Our health, but a disease.
Well urged my Lord.
Perfect what is so well begun.
And bind,
My Lord, your servant:
Hare-braind fool! what reason
Can thou infer to make this good?
A thousand
Not to be contradicted. But consider
Where your command lies? It is not, Sir, in France,
Spain, Germany, Portugal, but in Sicilie,
An Island, Sir. Here are no mines of gold,
Or silver to enrich you, no worm spinnes
Silk in her womb to make distinction
Between you, and a Peasant, in your habits.
No fish lives near our shores, who's blood can die
Scarlet, or purple; all that wee possess
With beasts, wee have in common: Nature did
Design us robe warriors, and to break through
Our ring the sea, by which we are environed;
And we by force must fetch in what is wanting,
Or precious to us. Add to this, wee are
A populous nation, and increase so fast,
That if we by our providence, are not sent
Abroad in colonies, or fall by the sword,
Not Sicilie (though now, it were more fruitful,
Then when it was styled the granary of great Rome•)
Can yield our numerous fry bread, we must starve,
Or eat up one another.
The King hears
With much atten•ion.
And seems moved with what
Bertoldo hath delivered.
May you live long, Sir,
The King of peace, so you deny not us
The glory of the war; let not our nerves
Shrincke up with •loath, nor for want of employment
Make younger brothers theves; it is their swords, Sir,
Must sow and re•pe their harvest; if examples
May move you more then arguments, look on England,
The Empress of the European Isles,
And unto whom alone ours yields procedence,
When did she flourish so, as when she was
The Mistress of the Ocean. Her navies
Putting a girdle round about the world,
When the Iberian quaked, her worthies named;
And the fair flower Deluc• grew pale, set by
The red Rose and the white: let not our armour
Hung up, or our unrig'd Armada make us
Ridiculous to the late poor snakes our neighbours
VVarm'd in our bosoms, and to whom again
We may be terrible: while wee spend our hours
Without variety, confined to drink,
Dice, Cards, or whores. Rowze us, Sir, from the sleep
Of idleness, and redeem our mortgaged honour•.
Your birth, and justly, claims my fathers Kingdom;
But his Heroic mind descends to me,
I will confirm so much.
In his looks he seems
To break op Ianu• Temple.
How these younglings
Take fire from him!
It works an alteration
Upon the King.
I can forbear no longer:
War, war, my Sovereign.
The King appears
Resolved, and do•s prepare to speak.
Think not
Our counsel's built upon so weak a base,
As to be overturned, or shaken with
Tempestuous winds of words. As I, my Lord,
Before resolved you, I will not engage
My person in this quarrel; neither press
My Subjects to maintain it: yet to show
My rule is gentle, and that I have feeling
Of your Masters sufferings, since these Gallants weary
Of the happiness of peace, desire to taste
The bitter sweets of war, wee doe consent
That as Adventures, and Volunteers
(No way compelled by us) they may make trial
Of their boasted valours.
Wee desire no more.
It is well, and but my grant in this, expect not
Assistance from me. Govern as you please
The Province you make choice of, for I vow.
By all things sacred, if that thou miscarry
In this rash undertaking, I will hear it
No otherwise then as a sad disaster,
Fallen on a stranger: nor will I esteem
That man my Subject, who in thy extremes
In purse or person aids thee. Take your fortune:
You know me, I have said it. So my Lord
You have my absolute answer.
My• Prince pays
•n me his duty.
Follow me, Fulgentio,
And you, Astutio.
What a frown he threw
At his departure, on you.
Let him keep
His smiles for his state Catamite, I care not.
Shall wee aboard to night?
Your speed, my Lord,
Doubles the benefit.
I have a business
Requires dispatch, some two hours hence I'll meet you.
Nay Signior• this is too much ceremony in my own house.
VVhat's gracious abroad, must be in private practised.
For your mirth-sake
Let him alone, he has been all this morning
In practice with a perugd Gentleman usher,
To teach him his true amble and his postures,
When he walks before a Lady
You may, Madame,
Perhaps, believe that I in this use art,
To make you dote upon me by exposing
My more then most rare features to your view.
But I as I have ever done, deal simply,
A mark of sweet simplicity ever noted
In the family of the Sillies. Therefore Lady,
Look not with too much contemplation on me,
If you doe, you are in the suds.
You are no Barber?
Fie no, not I, but my good parts have drawn
More loving hearts out of fair Ladies bellies,
Then the whole trade have done teeth.
Is it possible?
Yes, and they live too, marry much condoling
The scorn of their Narcissus, as they call me,
Because I love my self.
Without a rival;
What philtres or love-powders doe you use
To force affection? I see nothing in
Your person, but I dare look on, yet keep
My own poor heart still.
You are warned, be armed,
And doe not lose the hope of such a husband
In being too soon enamoured.
Hold in yo•r head,
Or you must have a martingale.
I have sworn
Never to take a wife, but such a one
(O may your Ladyship prove so strong) as can
Hold out a month against me.
Never fear it,
Though your best taking part, your wealth were trebl'd
I would not woo you. But since in your pity
You please to give me caution, tell me what
Temp•ations I must fly from?
The first is
That you n•ver hear me sing, for I am a Sire.
If you observe, when I warble, the dogs howl
As ravished with my D•tties, and you will
run m•d to hear me.
I will stop my ears,
And •e•pe me little wits.
Next when I dance
And come aloe•t thus, cast not a sheep eye
Upon the quivering of my calfe.
Proceed, Sir,
But on no la•es, for it is a •aine point, drea•e not
Of the strength of my back, though it will bear a burden
With any porter.
I mean not to ride you,
Nor I your little Ladyship, 'till you have
Performed the Covenants. Be not taken with
My pretty spider fingers, nor my eyes,
That twinckle on both sides.
Was there ever such
A piece of motley heard of! who's that? you may spare
The Catalogue of my dangers.
No good Madam,
I have not told you half.
Enough good Signior,
If I ••te more of such sweet meats, I shall surfeit.
Who is it?
The brother of the King.
Nay start not,
The brother of the King! is he no more?
Were it the King himself, I'll give him leave
To speak his mind to you, for I am not jealo•s,
And to assure your Ladyship of so much,
I'll usher him in, and that done, hide my self.
Camiola if ever, now be constant
This is indeed a suitor, whose sweet presence,
Cou•tship and loving language would have staggered
The chaste Penelope. And to increase
The wonder, did not modesty forbid it
I should ask that from him, he sues to •e for;
And yet my reason like a tyrant, tells •e
I must nor give, nor take it.
I must tell you
You loose your labour. It is enough to prove i•,
Signior Silly came before you, and you know
First come first served yet you ••all have my countenance
To parley with her and In• take special care
That none shall interru•t you
You are courteous.
Come wench wilt thou hear wisdom?
Yes from you Sr.
If forcing this sweet favour from your lips
Fair Madam, argue me of too much boldness
When you are pleased to understand, I take
A parting kiss, if not excuse, at least
Twill qualify the offence.
A parting kiss Sr.?
What Nation envious of the happiness
Which Sicilie enjoys in your sweet presence,
Can buy you from her? or what Climate yield
Pleasures transcending those which you enjoy here,
Being both beloved and honoured. The North-star
And guitar of all hearts, and to sum up
Your full account of happiness, in a word,
The brother of the King.
Doe you alone,
And with an unexampled cruelty,
Enforce my absence, and deprive me of
Those blessings, which you with a polished phrase
Seem to insinuate, that I doe possess,
And yet tax me as being guilty of
My wilful exile? what are Titles to me?
Or popular suffrage? or my nearness to
The King in blood? or fruitful Sicilie,
Though it confessed no Sovereign but my self,
When you that are the essence of my being,
The anchor of my hopes; the real substance
Of my felicity, in your disdain
Turn all to fading and deceiving shadows?
You tax me without cause.
You must confess it.
But answer love with love, and seal the contract
In the uniting of our souls, how gladly
(though now I were in action, and assured,
Following my fortune; that plumed victory
Would make her glorious stand upon my tent)
Would I put off my armour, in my heate
Of conquest, and like Anthony pursue
My Cleopatra! will you yet look on me
With an eye of Favour?
Truth bear witness for me,
That in the Judgment of my Soul, you are
A man so absolute, and circular
In all those wish'd-for rarities, that may take
A Virgin captive, that though at this instant
All sceptr'd Monarchs of our Western world
Were rivals with you, and Camiola worthy
Of such a competition, you alone
Should wear the ghirlond.
If so, what diverts
Your Favour from me?
No mulct in your self,
Or in your person, mind or fortune.
What then?
The Consciousness of mine own wants. Alas Sr.
We are not parallels, but like lines divided
Can ne'er meet in one Centre, your Birth Sir
(Without addition) were an ample Dowry
For one of fairer Fortunes, and this shape,
Were you ignoble, far above all value;
To this, so clear a mind, so furnished with
Harmonious faculties, moulded from heaven,
That though you were Thersites in your features
Of no descent, and Irus in your fortunes,
Vlisses like you would force all eyes, and ears
To love, but seen, and when heard, wonder at
Your matchless story. But all these bound up
Together in one Volume, give me leave
With admiration to look upon 'em,
But not presume in my own flattering hopes,
I may or can enjoy 'em.
How you ruin
What you would seem to build up. I know no
Disparity between vs, you are an heir
Sprung from a noble family, fair, rich, young.
And every way my equal.
Sir excuse me•
One aerie with proportion, ne'er discloses
The eagle and the wren tissue, and freeze
In the same garment monstrous: But suppose
That what's in you excessive, were diminished•
And my desert supplied, the strongest bar,
Religion stops our Entrance, you are Sir
A Knight of Malta, by your order bound
To a single life, you cannot marry me,
And I assure my self you are too noble
To seek me (though my frailty should consent)
In a base path.
A dispensation Lady
Will easiely absolve me.
O take heed Sr.
When, what is vowed to heaven, is dispensed with,
To serve our ends on earth, a curse must follow,
And not a blessing.
Is there no hope left me?
Nor to my self, but is a neighbour to
Impossibility: true love should walk
On equal feet, in vs it does not Sir.
But rest assured, excepting this, I shall be
Devoted to your service.
And this is your
Determinate sentence?
Not to be revoked.
Far•well then fairest cruel. All thoughts in me
Of Women perish. Let the glorious light
Of noble war extinguish loves damn taper
That only lends me light to see my folly;
Honour, be thou my everliving Mistress,
And sond affection as thy bond-slave serve thee.
How soon my Sun is set: He being absent,
Never to rise again! what a fierce battle
Is fought between my passions! me thinks
We should have kissed at parting.
I perceive•
He has his answer, now must I step in
To comfort her, you have found, I hope, sweet Lady,
Some diff•rinse between a youth of my pitch•
And this bug-beare Bertoldo, men are men,
The Kings brother is no more: good parts will doe it,
When Titles fail, despair not, I may be
In time entreated.
Be so now to leave me,
Lights for my chamber, O my heart!
She now
I know is going to bed to ruminate
Which way to glut her self upon my person,
But for my o•th-sake I will keep her hungry,
And to grow full my self, I'll straight to supper.
Embarked to night doe you say?
I saw him aboard, Sir,
And withou• taking of his leave?
It was strange!
Are we grown so contemptible?
It is far from me Sir, to add fuel to your anger,
That in your ill opinion of him, burns
Too hot already, else I should affirm
It was a gross•e neglect.
A wilful scorn
Of duty and allegiance, you give it
Too fair a name. But we shall think on it: can you
Guess what the numbers were that followed him
In his desperate action?
More then you think, Sir.
All ill affected spirits in Palermo,
Or to your government, or person, with
The turbulent sword-men, such whose poverty forced 'em
To wish a change, are gone along with him;
Cry•uric devoted to his undertakings
In right or wrong, and to express their zeal,
And readiness to serve him, ere they went
Profanely took the sacrament on their knees,
To live and dye with him.
O most impious! their loyalty to us forgot?
I fear so.
Unthankful as they are.
Yet this deserves not
One troubled thought in you, Sir, with your pardon
I hold that their remove from hence makes more
For your security, then danger.
True; and as I'll fashion it, they shall feel it too•
Astutio, you shall presently be dispatched
With letters writ, and signed with our own hand,
To the Duchess of Sie•a, in excuse
Of th•se •orces sent against her. If you spare
An oath to give it credit, that, wee never
Con•ented to it, swearing for the King,
Though false, it is no perjury.
I know it.
They are not fit to be state agents, Sir,
That without scruple of their conscience, cannot
Be prodigal in such trifles.
Right, Astutio.
You must beside from us take some instructions
To be imparted, as you judge 'em useful,
To the General Gonzaga. Instantly
Pr•pare you for your journey.
With the wings
Of loyalty and duty.
I am bold to put your Majesty in mind.
Of my promise,
And aids, to further you in your amorous project
To the fair, and rich Camiola: there's my ring
Whatever you shall say that I entreat
Or can command by power, I will make good.
Ever your Majesties creature.
Venus prove propitious to you.
All sorts to my wishes:
B•rtoldo was my hindrance. Hee removed,
I now will court her in the conquerous stile,
Come, see, and overcome. Boy.
Sir, your pleasure.
Haste to Camiola, bid her prepare
An entertainment suitable to a fortune,
She could not hope for. Tell her, I vouchsafe
To honour her with a visit
It is a favour
Will make her proud.
I know it
I am gone, Sir.
Entreaties fit not me, a man in grace,
May challenge awe, and privilege by his place,
SO melancholy say you?
Never given
To such retirement.
Can you guess the ca•se?
If it hath not it's birth, and being from
The brave Bertoldo's absence, I confess
It is passed my apprehension.
You are wide,
The whole field wide. I in my understanding
Pity your ignorance: yet if you will
Swear to conceal it, I will let you know
Where her shoe rings her.
I vow, Signior,
By my virginity.
A perilous oath
In a waiting-woman of fifteen, and is indeed
A Kind of nothing.
I'll take one of something
If you please to minister it.
Nay, you shall not swear,
I had rather take your word, for should you vow:
Damn me, I'll doe this, you are sure to break•
I thank you Signior, but resolve us.
Know then,
Here walks the cause. She dar•s not look upon me,
My beauties are so terrible, and enchanting,
She cannot endure my sight.
There I believe you.
But the time will come, be comforted, when I will
Put off this visor of unkindness to her,
And show an amorous, and yielding face:
And until then, though Hercules himself
Desire to see her, hee had better eat
His club then pass her threshold, for I'll be
Her Cerberus to guard her.
A good dog.
Worth twenty porters.
Keep you open house here?
No groom to attend a Gentleman? O, I spy one.
Hee means not me, I am sure.
You sirrha; Sheepes-head,
With a face cut on a cat-sticke, Doe you hear?
You yeoman phewterer, conduct me to
The Lady of the mansion, or my poniard
Shall disemboge thy soul.
O terrible!
Disemboge! I talk of Hercules, and here is one
Bound up in decimo sext•.
Answer wretch.
Pray you little gentleman, be not so furious,
The Lady keeps her chamber.
And we present?
Sent in an Embassy to her? But here is
Her gentlewoman, Sirrah hold my cloak,
While I take a leap at her lips, do it and neatly;
Or having first tripped up thy heals, I'll make
Thy back my footstool.
Tamberlaine in little!
Am I turned Turk! what an office am I put to!
My Lady, gentle youth is indisposed.
Though she were dead and buried, only tell her,
The great man in the Court, the brave Fulgentio
Descends to v••it her, and it will raise her
Out of the grave for joy.
Here comes another!
The devil I fear in his holi-day clothes.
So soon,
My part is at an end then, cover my shoulders,
When I grow great, thou shalt serve me.
Are you Sirrah
An •mplement of the house?
Su•e he will make
A joynes-stoole of me!
Or if you belong
To the Lady of the place, command her hither.
I do not wear her livery, yet acknowledge
A duty to her. And as little bound
To serve your peremptory will, as she is
To obey your summons. Twill become you Sir,
To waite her leisurue, then her pleasure known
You may present your duty.
Duty? Slave,
I'll teach you manners.
I am past learning, make not
A tumult in the house.
Shall I be braved thu••
O I am dead! and now I sown.
Help, murder!
Recover Sirrah, the Ladies here.
Nay then
I am alive again, and I'll be valiant.
What insolence is this? Adorn, hold,
Hold I command you.
Saucy groom.
Not so Sir,
However in his life, he had dependence
Upon my Father, He is a gentleman
As well borne as your self. Put on your hat.
In my presence, without leave?
He has mine Madam?
And I must tell you Sir, and in plain language,
How ever your glittering out-side promise gentry,
The rudeness of your carriage and behaviour
Speaks you a couser thing.
She means a clown S•.
I am her interpreter for want of a better.
I am a Queen in mine own house, nor must you
Expect an Empire here.
Sure I must love her
Before the day, the pretty Solo's so valiant.
What are you? and what would you with me?
Proud one,
When you know what I am, and what I came for,
And may on your submission proceed •o,
You in your reason must repent the coursenesse
Of my entertain•meant.
Why fine man? what are you?
A kinsman of the Kings.
I cry you mercy,
For his sake, not your own. But grant you are so,
It is not impossible, but a king may have
A fool to his kinsman, no way meaning you Sir.
You have heard of Fulgen.
Long since Sir,
A suit-broker in Court. He has the worst
Report among good men I ever heard of,
For bribery and extortion. In their prayers
Widows and Orphans curse him for a canker,
And caterpill•r in the state. I hope Sir,
You are not the man, much less employed by him
As a smocke-agent to me.
I reply not
As you deserve, being assured you know me,
Pretending ignorance of my person, only
To give me a •ast of your wit; It is well and courtly,
I like a sharpe wit well.
I cannot endure it,
Nor any of the Silly•s.
More I know too,
This harsh induction must serve as a foil
To the well tuned observance and respect,
You will hereafter pay me, being made
Familiar with my credit with the King,
And that, contain your joy, I deign to love you.
Love me? I am not raped with it.
Hear't again.
I love you honestly, now you admire me.
I doe indeed, it being a word so seldom
Heard from a courtiers mouth. But pray you deal plainly,
Since you find me simple. what might be the motives
Inducing you to leave the freedom of
A bachelors life, on your so•t neck to wear
The stubborn yoke of marriage? And of all
The beauties in Palerm•, to choose me,
Poor me? that is the maine point you must treat of.
Why I will tell you. Of a little thing
You are a prattle peat, indifferenly fair too;
And like a new-rigg'd ship both tight, and you're
Well trussed to bear. Virgins of Giant size
Are •luggards at the sport: but for my pleasure,
Give me a near well •imbred gamester like you,
S•ch need no sp•rres, the quickens of your eye
Assures an active spirit.
You are pleasant Sir,
Yet I presume, that there was one thing in me
Unmentioned yet, that took you more then all
Those parts you have remembered.
What?
My wealth Sir.
You are in the right, without that beauty is
A flower worn in the morning, at night trod on•
But beauty, youth, and fortune meeting in you,
I will vouchsafe to marry you.
You speak well,
And in return excuse me Sir, if I
Deliver reasons why upon no terms
I'll marry you, I fable not.
I am glad
To hear this, I began to have an ague.
Come• your wise reasons.
Such as they are, pray you take them.
First I am doubtful whether you are a man,
Since for your shape trimmd up in a Ladies dressing
You might pass for a woman: now I love
To deal on certainties. And for the fairness
Of your complexion, which you think will take me,
The colour I must tell you in a man
Is weak and fa•ned, and never will hold out
If put to labour, give me the lovely browne.
A thick curled hair of the same dye; broad shoulders,
A brawny arm full of veins, a leg without
An artificial calfe, I suspect yours,
But let that pass.
She means me all this while,
For I have every one of those good parts,
O Silly, fortunate Silly!
You are moved Sir.
Fie no, go on.
Then as you are a courtier;
A gr•c'd one too, I fear you have been too forward,
And so much for your person. Rich you are,
Devilish rich, as it is reported, and sir• have
The aides of Satins little fiends to get it,
And what is got upon his back, must be
Spent you know where, the proverb's sta'e, one word more
And I have done.
I'll •as you of the trouble,
Coy, and disdainful.
Save me, or else he'll beat me.
No, your own folly shall, and since you put me
To my last charm, look upon this, and tremble.
At the sight of a fair ring? the Kings, I take it.
I have seen him wear the like; if he hath sent it
as a favour to me.
Yes, it is very likely,
His dying mothers gift, prized at his crown,
By this hee does command you to be mine,
By his gift you are so: you may yet redeem all.
You are in a wrong account still. Though the King may
Dispose of my life and goods, my mind's mine own,
And shall be never yours. The King (Heaven bless him)
Is good and gracious, and being in himself
Abstemious from base and goatish looseness,
Will not compel against their wills, cha•te Medians,
To dance in his magnious circles. I believe
Forgetting it, when he washed his hands, you stole it
With an intent to awe me. But you are coozin'd,
I am still my self, and will be.
A proud haggard,
And not to be reclaimed, which of your grooms,
Your coach-man, fool, or foot-man, ministers
Night phisicque to you?
You are soule-mouth'd,
Much fairer
Then thy black soul, and so I will proclaim thee.
Were I a man, thou durst not speak this.
Heaven
So prosper me, as I resolve to doe it
To a•l men, and in every place, scorned by
A tit of pen-pence?
Now I begin to be valiant
Nay, I will draw my sword. O for a butch•!
Doe a friends part, pray you carry him the length of't.
I give him three years, and a day to match my •oledo,
And then we'll fight like Dragons.
Pray have patience.
I may live to have vengeance; My Bertoldo
Would not have heard this.
Madam.
'Pray you spare
Your language; Prithee fool, and make me merry:
That is my Office ever.
I must doe,
Not talk, this glorious gallant shall hear from me.
IS the breach made assaultable?
Yes, and the moat
Filled up, the Canonier hath don his parts,
We may enter six a breast.
There's not a man
Dares •hew himself upon the wall•
Deceit not
The soldiers hop'd-for spoil.
If you, Sir,
Delay the assault, and the City be given up
To your discretion, you in honour cannot
Use the extremity of war, but in
Compassion to 'em, you to us prove cruel.
And an enemy to your self.
A hindrance to
The brave revenge you have vowed
Temper your heat,
And loose not by too sudden rashness, tha
Which be but patient, will be offered to you
Security ushers ruin; proud contempt
Of an enemy three parts vanquished with desire
And greediness of spoil, have often wrested
A certain victory from the Conquerors gripe.
Discretion is the tutor of the war,
Valour the pupil, and when we command
With lenity and your directions followed
With cheerfulness, a prosperous end must crown
Our works well undertaken.
Ours are finished
If we make use of fortune.
Her false smiles
Deprive you of your judgements. The condition
Of our affairs exacts a double care,
And like bifronted Ianus, wee must look
Backward, as forwards: though a flattering calm
Bids us urge on, a sudden tempest raised,
Not feared, much less expected, in our rear
May foully fall upon us, and distract us
To our confusion. Our scout! what brings
Thy ghastly looks, and sudden speed?
Th'assurance
Of a new enemy.
This I fore-saw• and feared.
What are they, know it thou?
They are by their colours
Sicilians, brave•lie mounted, and the brightne•••
Of their rich armours doubly gilded with
Reflection of the Sun.
From Sicilie?
The King in league•! no war• proclaimed • it is foul•
But this must be prevented, not disputed
Ha, how is this? your Ostrich plumes, that but
Even now like quills of Porcupines seemed to threaten
The sty••es, drop at the •umor of a sh•were?
And like to captive colours sweep the earth?
Bear up, but in great dangers, greater minds
Are never proud. Shall a few loose troops untrained
But in a customary oftentatiou,
P••scented as a sacrifice to your valours
Cause a dejection in you?
No dejection.
However startled, where you lead, we'll follow
It is bravely said. We will not stay their charge,
But meet'•m man to man, and horse to horse.
Pierio in our absence hold our place,
And with our foot-men, and those sickly troupes,
Prevent a sally. I in mine own person,
With part of the cavallery, will bid,
These hunters welcome to a bloody breakfast,
But I lose time.
I'll to my charge.
And wee
To ours. I'll bring you on.
If we come off
It is not amiss, if not, my state is settled
NO aids from Sicilie? Hath hope forsook us?
And that vain comfort to affliction, pity
By our vowed friend denied us? we can nor live,
Nor die with honour: like beasts in a toil
Wee waite the leisure of the bloody hunter,
Who is not so far reconciled u•to us,
As in one death to give a period
To our calamities, but in delaying
The fate wee cannot fly from, starved with wants,
Wee die this night to live again to morrow,
And suffer greater torments.
There is not
Three days provision for every soldier,
At an ounce of bread a day left in the City.
To dye the beggars death with hunger, made
Anatom es while we live, cannot but crack
Our heart-strings with vexation.
Would they would break,
Break altogether, how willingly like Cato
Could I tear out my bowels, rather then
Look on the conquerors insulting face,
But that religion, and the horrid dream
To be suffered in the other world denies it. 
What news with thee?
From the turret of the fort
By the rising clouds of dust, through which, like lightning
The spendor of bright arms sometimes brake through,
I did descry some forces making towards us,
And from the camp, as emulous of their glory,
The General, (for I know him by his horse)
Tnd bravely seconded. encountered 'em.
Their greetings were to rough for friends, their swords
And not their tongues exchanging courtesies.
By this the maine Battalias are joined,
And if you please to be spectators of
The horrid issue, I will bring you where
As in a Theater you may see their fates
In purple gore presented.
Heaven. If yet
Thou art appeased for my wrong done to Aurelia,
Take pity of my miseries. Lead the way, friend.
WE have 'em yet, though they cost vs deer. This was
Charged home, and bravely followed. Be to your¦selves
True mirrors to each others worth, and looking
W•th noble Emulation on his wounds,
(•he glorious Livery of t•iumphant war)
Imagine these with equal grace appear
Upon your self. The bloody •wsat you have suffered
In this laborious, nay toilsome harvest,
Yields a rich crop of conquest, and the spoil
Most precious balsum to a souldies hue••s
Will •as and cure 'em. Let me look up•n
T•e prisoners faces. O how much transformed
From what they were. O Mars! were the•e toys fashioned
To undergo the burden of thy service?
The weight of their defe•sive armour bruised
Their weak, effe•inate limbs, and would have forc'd'em
In a hot day without a blow to yield.
This insultation shows not manly in you.
To men I had for•orne it, you are women,
Or at the best loose carpet knights, what fury
Seduced you to exchange your •as in Court
For labour in the field? Perhaps you thought.
To charge through dust, and blood, an armed foe,
Was but like graceful running at the ring
For a want on mistress glove, and the encounter
A soft impression on her lips. But you
A•e gawdi• butterflies, and I wrong my self
In parling with you.
Vae victis. Now we prove it.
But here's one fashioned in another mould,
And made of tougher mettle.
True, I owe him
For this wound bravely given.
O that mountains
Were heaped upon me, that I might expire
A wretch no more remembered.
Look up Sr.
To be overcome deserves no shame. If you
Had fallen ingloriously, or could accuse
Your want of courage in resistance, it were
To be lamented: But since you performed
As much as could be hoped for from a man,
(Fortune his enemy) you wrong your self
In this direction• I am honoured in
My victory ore you: but to have these
My prisoners, is in my true judgement rather,
Captivity then a triumph; you shall find
Fair quarter from me, and your many wounds
(Which I hope are not mortal) with such care
Looked to, and cured, as if your nearest friend
Attended on you.
When you know me better,
You will make void this promise: Can you call me
Into your memory.
The brave Bertoldo!
A brother of our order! By Saint Iohn,
(our holy patron) I am more amazed,
Nay thunderstrooke, with thy Apostasy,
And praecipice from the most solemn vows
Made unto heaven, when this, the glorious badge
Of our redeemer was conferred upon thee,
By the great master, then if I had seen
A reprobate Jew, •n Atheist, Turk, or Tartar
Bop••zed in our religion.
This I looked for,
And am resolved to suffer.
Fellow Soldiers•
Behold this man, and taught by his example
Know that it is safer far to play with lightning,
Then trifle in things sacred. In my rag
I shed these at the funeral of his virtue,
Faith and r•legion; why I will tell you
He was a gentleman, so trained up, and fashioned
For noble uses, and his youth did promise
Such c•rt•inties, more then hopes, of great achievements,
As if the Christian world had stood opposed
Against the Ottoman race to try the fortune
Of one encounter, this Bertoldo had been
For his knoweldge to direct, and matchless courage
To execute, without a rival, by
The votes of good men chosen general,
As the prime soldier, and most deserving,
Of all that wear the cross, which now in justice
I thus tear from him.
Let me dye with it,
Upon my breast.
No, by this thou were it sworn
On all occasions, as a knight to guard
Weak Ladies from oppression, and never
To draw thy sword against 'em, where as thou
In hope of gain or glory, when a Princess
And such a Princess as Aurelia is,
Was dispossessed by violence, of what was
Her true inheritance, against thine oath,
Hast to thy uttermost laboured to •phold
Her falling enemy. But thou shalt pay
A heavy forfeiture, and learn too la•e,
Valour, employed in an ill quarrel, turns
To cowardice, and virtue then puts on
Foul vices vizard. This is that which cancels
All friendsh•ps bands between vs Bear 'em off
I will hear no reply. And let the ransom
Of these, for they are yours, be highly rated.
In this I doe but right, and let it be
Styled justice, and not wilful cruelty.
what I have done Sr by the law of arm•
I can, and will make good.
I have no commission
To expostulate the act. These letters speak
The King my Masters love to you, and his
vowed service to the Duchess, on who•e person
I am to give attendance.
At this instant.
Shoe's at Pienza; you may sp•re the trouble
Of riding thither: I have advertised her
Of our success, and on what humble terms
Seen stands: though presently I can
Possess it I defer it, that she may
Enter her own, and as she please dispose of
The prisoners and the spoil.
I thank you, Sir.
In the mean time, if I may have your licence,
I have a Nephew, and one once my ward
For whose liberties and ransoms, I would gladly
Make composition.
They are, as I take it,
Called Gasparo, and Anthonio,
The same, Sir,
For them you must treat with these, but for Bertoldo,
He is mine own, if the King will ransom him,
He pays down fifty thousand crowns, if not
He lives, and dies my slave,
Pray you a word.
The King will rather thank you •o ••taine him,
Then give one crown to free him.
At his pleasure.
I'll send the p•••oners under guard• my business
Ca•l• me another way.
My service waits you,
Now Gentlemen do not deal like Merchants with me,
But noble Captains, you know in great minds
Posse, &amp; nolle no••le.
Pray you speak
Our language.
I find not in my commission
An officers bound to speak or understand
More then his Mother tongue.
If hee speak that
After midnight it is remarkable.
In plain terms then,
Anthonio is your prisoner. Gasparo yours
You are in the right.
At what sum doe you rate
Their several ransoms.
I must make my market
As the commodity cost me.
As it cost you?
You did not buy your Captainship? your desert
I hope advanced you.
How? it well appears
You are no soldier. Desert in these days?
Desert may make a Sergeant to a Colonel,
And it may hinder him from rising higher,
But if it ever get a company,
• company, pray you mark me, without money
Or private service done for the Generals Mistress,
With a commendatory Epistle from her,
I will turn Lansprizadoe.
Pray you observe, Sir:
I served two prenticeships, just fourteen year,
Trailing the puissant pike; and half so long
Had the right hand file, and I fought well, it was said too:
But I might have served, and fought, and served ti•doomsday
And never have carried a •lag, but for the legacy
A buxsome widow of threescore, bequeathed me,
And that too, my back knows, I labour hard for,
But was better paid.
You are merry with your selves
But this is from the purpose.
To the point then.
Prisoners are not tan every day, and when
We have 'em we must make the best use of 'em.
Our pay is little to the part we should bear,
And that so long a coming, that it is spent
Before we have it, and hardly wipes off scores
At the Tavern, and the Ordinary.
You may add to
Our sport took up on trust.
Peace, thou smo•ke vermin.
Discover commanders, secrets! In a word, Sir,
We have required, and find our prisoners rich:
Two thousand crowns a piece, our companies cost vs,
And so much each of us will have, and that
In present pay.
It is too little; yet
Since you have said the word, I am content,
But will not go a gazette less.
Since you are not
To be brought lower, there is no evading•
I'll be your pay-master.
Wee desire no better.
But not a word of what's agreed between us,
'Till I have schooled my gallants.
I am dumb, Sir.
And where removed now? hath the Tyrant found out
Worse usage for us?
VVorse it cannot be.
My grewhound has fresh straw, and scraps in his kennel,
But wee have neither.
Did I ever think
To wear such garters on silk stockings? or
That my too curious appetite, that turned
At the sight of godwits, pheasant, partidge, quases
Larks, wood-cocks, caluerd sammon, as course diet,
Would leap at a mouldy crust?
And go without it;
So of• as I doe, O how have I jeered
The City entertainment. A huge shoulder
Of glorious fat Ram Mutton, seconded
With a pair of taine cats, or cones, a crab tart
With a worthy loin of veale, and valiant Capon,
Mortified to grow tender. These I scorned
From their plentiful horn of abu•dance, though invited:
But now I could carry my own stool to a tripe,
And call their chitterlings charity, and bless the founder.
O that I were no farther sensible
Of my miseries then you are! you like beasts
F•eel only stings of hung•, and complain not
But when you are empty: but your narrow souls
(If you have any) cannot comprehend
How insupportable the torments are,
Which a free and •oble soul made capti•e, suffers:
Most miserable men! and what am I then,
That envy you? Fetters though made of gold,
Express base thraldom and all delicates
Prepared by Median cooks for Epicures,
When not our own, are bitter quilts filled high
With gossamer and roses, cannot yield
The body soft repose, the mind kept waking
With anguish and affliction.
My good Lord.
This is no time, nor place for flattery Sir,
Pray you stile me as I am, a wretch forsaken
Of the world, as my self.
I would it were
In me to help you.
I if that you want power Sir,
Lip comfort cannot cure me, pray you leave me
To mine own private thoughts.
My valiant Nephew!
And my more then warlike-ward! I am glad to see you
After your glorious conquests. Are these chains
Reward for your good service? If they are
You should wear 'em on your no•ks (since they are massy)
Like Aldermen of the war.
You jeer us to!
Good uncle name not (as you are a man of honour)
That fatal word of war, the very sound of't
Is more dreadful then a Cannon.
But redeem us
From this Captivity, and I'll vow hereafter
Never to wear a sword, or cut my meat
With a knife, that has an edge or point. I'll starve first
I will cry broom or cats meat in Pal•rm•;
Turn porter, carry burdens; any thing,
Rather then live a soldier.
This should have
Been thought upon before. At what price think you
Your two wise heads are rated?
A calves head is
More worth then mine, I am sure it had more brains in it
Or I had never come here.
And I will eat it
With bacon, if I have not speedy ransom.
And a little garlic too, for your own sake Sir
I will boyle in your stomach else.
Beware of mine
Or the horns may choke you. I am married Sir.
You shall have my row of houses near the palace
And my vile•a all.
All that we have.
Well, have more wit hereafter
For this time you are ransomed.
Off with their irons.
Do do• If you are ours again, you know your price.
Pray you dispatch us: I shall ne'er believe
I am a freeman, till I set my foot
In Sicilie again, and drink Palermo,
And in Palermo too.
The wind fits fair,
You shall aboard to night with the rising Sun
You may touch upon the coast. But take your leaves
Of the late General first.
I will be brief.
And I, my lord heaven keep you.
Yours to use
In the way of peace, but as your soldiers never.
A pox of war no more of war.
Have you
Authority to loose their bonds, yet leave
The brother of your King, whose worth disdains
Comparison with such as these, in irons?
If ransom may redeem them, I have lands,
A patrimony of mine own assigned me,
By my deceased sire to satisfy
What ere can be demanded for my freedom.
I wish you had Sir, but the king who yields•
No reason for his will, in his displeasure
Hath seas'd on all you had; nor will Gonzaga,
Whose prisoner now you are, accept of less
Then fifty thousand crowns.
I find it now
That misery ne'er comes alone. But grant
The King is yet inexorable, time
May work him to a feeling of my sufferings.
I have friends, that swore their lives and fortunes were
At my devotion, and among the rest
Your self my lord, when forfeited to the Law
For a foul murder, and in cold blood done,
I made your life my gift, and reconciled you
To this incensed king, and got your pardon.
Beware ingratitude. I know you are rich
And may pay down the Sum.
I might my lord,
But pardon me.
And will Astutio prove then
To please a passionate man, the kings no more,
False to his maker and his reason? which
Commands more then I ask? ô summer friendship,
Whose flattering leaves that shadowed us in
Our prosperity, with the least gust drop off
In th'Autumne of adversity! How like
A prison is to a grave! when dead we are
With solemn Pomp brought thither, and our heirs,
(Masking their joy in false dissembled tears)
Weep ore the hearse, but earth no sooner covers
The earth brought thither, but they turn away
With inward smiles, the dead no more remembered.
So entered in a prison.
My occasions
Command me hence my lord.
Pray you leave me, doe;
And tell the cruel king, that I will wear
The•e •etters 'till my flesh, and they are one
Incorporated substance. In my self,
As in a glass, I'll look on humane frailty,
And curse the height of Royal blood: since I
In being borne near to Jove, am near his thunder.
Cedars once shaken with a storm, their own
Weight gr•b• their roots out. Le•d me where you please;
I am his, not fortunes martyr, and will dye
The great example of his cruelty.
HE undergoes my challenge, and contemns it,
And threatens me with the late Edict made
Against duellists, then altar cowards fly to.
But I that am engaged, and nourish in me
A higher aim then fair Camiola dreams of,
Must not sit down thus. In the court I dare not
Attempt him; and in public, hoe's so guarded
With a heard of Parasites, Clients, fools and suitors,
That a musket cannot reach him, my designs
Admit of no delay. This is her birth-day,
Which with a fit and due solemnity
C•miola celebrates; and on it, all such
As love or serve her, usually present
A tributary duty. I'll have something
To give, if my intelligence prove true,
Shall find acceptance. I am told, near this grove
Fulgentio very morning makes his makets
With his petitioners. I may present him
With a sharpe petition. H•, it is he• my sate
Be ever blessed for it.
Command such as waite me
Not to presume at the least for half an hour
To pre••e on my retirements.
I will say, Sir, you are at your prayers•
That will not find belief,
Courtiers have something else to do, be gon, Sir,
Ghalleng'd • it is well I and by a grome! still better •
Was this shape made to •ight? I have a tongue yet,
How ever no sword to kill him, and what way
This morning, I'll resolve of.
I shall cross
Your resolution, or suffer for you.
what are all these?
Savants with serverall presents,
And rich ones too.
With her best wishes, Madam,
Of many such days to you, the Lady Petula
Presents you with this fan.
This Diamond
From your Aunt Honoria.
This piece of plate
From your Uncle, old Vincentio, with your arms
Graven upon it.
Good friends they are too.
Munificent in their love, and favour to me.
Out of my cabinet return such jewels
As this directs you, for your pains; and yours;
Nor must you be forgotten. Honour me
With the drinking of a health.
Gold on my life!
She scorns to give base silver.
Would she had been
Borne every month in the year!
Month? every day.
Show such another maid.
All happiness wait you.
I'll fee your will done.
How, Adorny wounded?
A scratch got in your service, else not worth
Your observation; I bring not Madame
In honour of your birth-day, anticque plate,
Or pearl, for which the savage Indian dives
Into the bottom of the Sea; nor Diamonds
Hewn from steep rocks with danger: Such as give
To those that have what they themselves want, aim at
A glad return with profit: yet despise not
My offering at the altar of your favour;
Nor let the lowness of the giver lessen
T•e height of whats presented. Since it is
A precious jewel, almost forfeited,
And dimn'd with clouds of infamy redeemed
And in in its natural splendour, with addition,
Restored to the true owner.
How is this?
Not to hold you in suspense, I bring you, Madame,
Your wounded reputation cured, the sting
Of virulent malice, festring your fair name,
Plucked out and trod on. That proud man, that was
Denied the honour of your bed, yet durst
With his untrue reports, •trumpet your •am,
Compelled by me, hath given himself the lye,
And in his own blood wrote it, you may r••d
Fulgentio subscribed.
I am amazed!
It does deserve it, Madam. Common service
Is fit for hinds, and the reward proportioned
To their conditions. Therefore look not on me
As a follower of your fathers fortunes, or
One that subsists on yours, you frown I my service
Merits not this aspect.
Which of my savo•rs,
I might say bounties, hath begot, and nourished
This more then rude presumption? since you had
An itch to try your desperate valour, wherefore
Went you not to the war? could thou suppose
My innocence could ever fall so low,
As to have need of thy rash sword to guard it
Against malicious slander? O how much
Those Ladies are deceived and cheated, when
The clearness and integrity of their actions
Doe not defend themselves, and stand secure
On their own bases? Such as in a colour
Of seeming service give protection to 'em,
Betray their own strengrhes. Malice scorned, puts out
It self, but argued, gives a kind of credit
To a false accusation. In this
This your most memorable service, you believed
You did me right, but you have wronged me more
In your defence of my undoubted honour,
Then false Fulgentio could.
I am sorry, What
Was so well intended, is so ill received,
Yet under your correction you wished
Bertoldo had been present.
True I did:
But he and you, Sir, are not parallels,
Nor must you think your self so.
I am what
You'll please to have me.
If Bertoldo had
Punished Fugentio's insolence, it had shown
His love to her, whom in his judgement hee
Vouchsafe to make his wife. A height I hope
Which you dare not aspire to. The same actions
Suit not all men alike: but I perceive
Repentance in your looks. For this time leave me
I may forgive, perhaps forget your folly,
Conceal yourself till this storm be blown over.
You will be sought for, yet for my estate
Can hinder it, shall not suffer in my sevice.
This is something yet, tho I mist the mark I shot at.
This Gentleman is of a noble temper.
And I too harsh, perhaps in my reproof,
Was I not Clarinda?
I am not to censure
Your actions Madame: but there are a thousand
Ladies, and of good fame, in such a cause.
Would be proud of such a servant.
It may be;
Let me offend in this kind. Why uncalled for?
The Signiors, Madame, Gasparo and Anthonio,
(Selected friends of the renowned Bertoldo)
Pu• a shore this morning.
Without him?
I think so.
Never think more then.
They have been at Court.
Kissed the Kings hand; and there first duties done
To him, appear ambitions to tender
To you their second service.
Waite 'em hither.
Fear doe not rack me, reason, now if ever,
Haste with thy aid, and tell me such a wonder,
As my Bertoldo is, with such care fashioned,
Must not, nay cannot, in heavens providence,
So soon miscarry; pray you forbear, ere you
Take the privilege, as strangers to salute me,
(Excuse my manners) make me first not•rstaud,
How it is with Bertoldo?
The relation
Will not I fear deserve your thanks.
I wish
Some other should inform you.
•he dead?
You see, though with some fear, I dare enquire it.
Dead! Would that were the worst, • debt were paid then,
Kings in their birth owe nature.
Is there ought
More terrible then death?
Yes to a spirit
Like his. Cruel imprisonment, and that
Without the hope of freedom.
You abuse me,
The royal King cannot in love to virtue,
(Though all springs of affection were dri'd up)
But pay his ran•ome.
When you know what it is
You will think otherwise; No less will do it
Then fifty thousand crowns.
A pretty sum,
The price weighed, with the purchase, 50. thousand?
To the King it is nothing. He that can spare more
To his minion for a masque, cannot but ransom
Such a brother at a million, you wrong
The Kings magnificence.
In your opinion,
But it is most certain. He does not alone
In himself refuse to pay it, but forbids
All other men.
Are you sure of this?
You may read
The edict to that purpose, published by him,
That will resolve you.
Possible! pray you stand off,
I• I doe not mutter treason to my self
My heart will break; yet I will not curse him,
He is my king. The news you have delivered,
Makes me weary of your company, we'll salu•e
When we meet next. I'll bring you to the door.
Nay pray yo• no more •complements.
One thing more
And that's substantial. Let your Adorn.
Look to himself.
The king is much incensed
Against him for Fulgentio.
As I am
For yuor slowness to depart
Farewell swoet Lady.
O more then impious times! when not alone
Subordinate Ministers of justice are
Corrupted, and seduced, but kings themselves,
(The greater wheels by which the le•ser move)
Are broken or disjonted; could it be else
A king, to sooth his politic ends, should so far
Foe•sake his honour, as at once to break
Th'Adamant chains of nature and religion,
To bind up Atheism, as a defence
To his dark counsels? will it ever be
That to deserve too much is dangerous,
And virtue, when too eminent a crime?
Must she serve fortune still? or when stripped of
Her gay, and glorious favours, loose the beauties
Of her own natural shape? O my Bertoldo!
Thou only Sun in honours Sphere, how soon
Art thou eclipsed and darkened! not the nearness
Of blood prevailing on the king; nor all
The benefits to the general good dispensed
Gaining a retribution! But that
To owe a curtsy to a simple Virgin
Would take from the deserving, I find in me
Some sparks of fire, which fanned with honours breath
Might rise into a flame, and in men darken
Their usurped splendour. H•! my aim is high,
And for the honour of my sex to fall so,
Can never prove inglorious. It is resolved:
Call in Adorn.
I am happy in
Such employment, Madam.
Hoe's a man,
I know that at a reverend distance loves me,
A•d such are ever faithful: What a Sea
Of melting ice I walk on! what strange censures
Am I to undergo! but good intent•
Deride all future rumours.
I obey
Your summons, Madam.
Leave the place Clarinda,
One woman, in a secret of such weight,
Wisemen may think too much, nearer Adorn.
I warrant it with a smile.
I cannot ask
Safer protection, what's your will?
To doubt
Your ready desire to serve me, or prepare you
With the repetition of former merits,
Would in my diffidence wrong you. But I will
And without circumstance, in the trust that I
Impose upon you, free you from suspicion.
I foster none of you.
I know you do not.
You are Adorn by the love you owe me.
The surest conjuration.
Take me with you,
Love borne of duty, but advance no further,
You are Sir as I laid to do me service,
To undertake a task, in which your faith,
•udgement, discretion, in a word, your all
That's good, must be engaged, nor must you study
In •he execution, but what may make
For the ends I aim at.
They admit no rivals.
You answer well, you have heard of Bertoldo's
Cap•ivity? and the kings neglect? the greatness
Of his ransom, fifty thousand crowns, Adorn,
Two parts of my estate.
To what tends this?
Yet I so love the gentleman (for to you
I will confess my weaknesses) that I purpose
Now, when he is forsaken by the king,
And his own hopes to ransom him, and receive him
Into my bosom as my lawful husband,
Why change you colour
It is in wonder of
Your virtue, Madam.
You must therefore to
Si•na for me, and pay to Gonzaga
This ransom for his liberty, you shall
Have bills of exchange along with you. Let him swear
A solemn contract to me, for you must be
My principal witness, if he should. But why
Do I entertain these jealousies? you will do this?
Faithfully, Madam. But not live long after
One thing I had forgot. Besides his freedom
He may want accommodations, furnish him
According to his birth. And from Camiola
Deliver this kiss, printed on your lips
Sealed on his hand! you shall not see my blush•,
I'll instantly dispatch you.
I am half
Hanged out of the way already, was there ever
Poor lover so employed against himself
To make way for his rival? I must doe it,
Nay more, I will. If loyalty can find
Recompense beyond hope, or imagination
Let it fall on me in the other world,
As a reward, for in this I dare not hope it.
YOu have seized upon the Citadel, and dis∣armed
All that could make resistance
Hunger had
Done that before wee came; nor was the soldier
Compel•'d to seek for prey the famished wretches,
In hope of mercy, as a sacrifice offered
All that was worth the taking.
You proclaimed,
On pain of death, no violence should be off•'d
To any woman.
But it needed not,
For famine had so humbled 'em and took off
The care of their sexes honour, that there was not
So coy a bea••y in the town, but would
For half a mouldy biscuit sell her self
To a poor besognion, and without shrieking
Where is the Duke of •rbin.
Under guard,
As you directed
See the Soldiers set.
In rank, and file, and as the Du•chess passes
Bid 'em veil their ensigns, and charge 'em on their lives
Not to cry whores.
The devil cannot fright 'em
From their military licence, though they know
They are her subjects, and will part with being,
To do her service; yet since she is a woman,
They will touch at her britch with their tongues, and that is all
That they can hope for.
O the devil! they are at it.
Hell, stop, their bawling throats; again! make up
And cudgel them into jelly.
To no purpose,
Though their mouths were there,
They would have the same name for 'em.
I Doe beseech your high•esse not to ascribe
To the want of discipline, the barbarous rudeness
Of the souldie• in his profanation of
Your sacred name, and virtues
No, Lord General,
I have heard my father say oft, it was a custom,
Usual in the camp, nor are they to be punished
For words, that have in fact deserved so well.
Let the one excuse the other.
Excellent Princess!
But for these aids from Sicily sent against us
To blast our •pring of conquest in the bud:
I cannot find, my Lord Ambassador,
How we should entertaine't but as a wrong.
With purpose to detain us from our own.
How ever the King endeavours in his letters
To mitigate the affront.
Your grace hereafter
May hear from me such strong assurances
Of his unlimited desires to serve you,
As will, I hope, drown in forgetfulness
The memory of what's past.
Wee shall take time
To search the depth of't further, and proceed
As our counsel shall direct vs.
Wee present you
With the keys of the City, all lets are removed,
Your way is smooth and easy, at your feet
Your proudest enemy falls.
Wee thank your valoures
A victory without blood is twice achieved,
And the disposure of it to us tendered,
The greatest honour, worthy captains thanks.
My love extends it self to all
Make way there.
Tic here determined (great examples armed
With arguments produced to make it good)
That neither tyrants, nor the wrested laws;
The peoples •ranticke rage, sad ex•le, want,
Nor that which I endure, captivity,
Can doe a wise man any injury:
Thus Seneca, when he wrote it, thought. But then
Fecliity courted him; his wealth exceeding
A private man's happy in the em•races
Of his chaste wife Pauline,; his house •ull
Of children, enclyents, servants, flattering friends
Soothing his lip-positions, and created
Prince of the Senate, by the general voice,
As his pupil news suffrage: then no doubt
H• held, and did believe this• But no sooner
The Princes frowns, and iealosies had throw'n him
Out of securities lap, and a centurion
Had off•red him what choice of death he pleased,
But told him dye he must: when straight the armour
Of his so boasted fortitude, fell off
Complaining of his frailty. Can it then
Be censured womanish weakness in me, if
Thus clogged with irons, and the period
To close up all calamities, denied me,
(Which was presented Senica) I wish
I ne'er had being, at least, never knew
What happiness was, or argue with heavens justice?
Tea•ing my locks, and in defiance throwing
Dust in the ayre? or falling on the ground, thus
With my nails, and teeth to dig a grave or rend
The bowels of the earth, my stepmother,
And not a natural parent? or thus practise
To dye, and as I were insensible,
Believe I had no motion
There he is:
Isle not enquire by whom his ransome's paid
I am satisfied that I have it: nor allege
One reason to excuse his cruel usage,
As you may interpret it, let it su•fice
It was my will to have it so, he is yours now,
Dispose of him as you please
How ever I hate him,
As one preferred before me, being a man,
He does deserve my pity. Sir, he sl•epes:
Or is he dead? would hee were a Saint in heaven;
It is is all the hurt I wish him. But was not
Borne o such happiness. No he breaths, come near,
A•d if '• be possi•le, without his f•ealing
T•ke off his irons• so, now leave •s private
He does begin to stir, and as transported
With a joyful dream, how he stares! and feels his leg•s,
As yet uncertain, whether it can be
True or fantastical.
Ministers of mercy
Mock not calamity. Ha! it is no vision!
Or if it be, the happiest that ever
Appeared to sinful flesh! who's here! His face
Speaks him Adorn! but some glorious Angel
Concealing its divinity in his shape,
Hath done this miracle, it being not an act
For wolfish man. Resolve me, if thou look for
Bent knees in adoration?
O forbear Sir,
I am Adorn, and the instrument
Of your deliverance; but the benefit
You owe another.
If he has a name,
As soon as spoken, it is writ on my heart,
I am his bond•man.
To the shame of men,
This great act is a women's.
The whole sex
For her s•ke must be deified. How I wander
In my imagination, yet cannot
Guess who this Phoenix should be!
It is Camiola.
Pray you sp•ake't again, there's music in her name
Once more I pray you Sir.
Camiola,
The Maid of honour,
Cursed Atheist that I was,
Only to doubt it could be any other,
Since she alone in the abstract of her self,
Tha• small, but ravishing substance comprehends
What ever 〈◊〉, or can be wished, in the
I•dea of a woman. O what service,
Or sacrifice of duty can I pay her!
I• not to live, and dye her charities slave,
Which is resolved already.
She expects not
Such a dominion ore you: yet ere I
Deliver her demands, give me your hand:
On this, as she enjoined me, with my lips
I print her love and service by me sent you,
I am orewhelm'd with wonder!
You must now
(Which is the sum of all that she desires)
By a solemn contract bind your self, when she
Requires it as a debt, due for your freedom
To marry her.
This does engage me further,
A payment! an increase of obligation!
To marry her! it was my uil ultra ever!
The end of my ambition! O that now
The holy man, she present, were prepared
To join our hands, but with that speed, my heart
Wishes, mine eyes might see her.
You must swear this.
Swear it? Collect all oaths, and imprecations
Whose least breach is damnation, and those
Ministered to me in a form more dreadful,
Set heaven, and hell before me, I will take 'em:
False to Camiola? Never. Shall I now
Begin my vows to you?
I am no Church-man,
Such a one must file it on record, you are free,
And that you may appear like to your self
(For so she wished) her's gold with which you may
Redeem your trunks and servants, and what ever
Of late you lost. I have found out the Captain
Whose spoil they were. His name is Roderigo.
I know him.
I have done my parts.
So much Sir
As I am ever yours for it, now me thinks
I walk in ayre! divine Camiola,
But words cannot express thee. I'll build to thee
An altar in my soul, on which I'll offer
A still increasing sacrifice of duty.
What will become of me now is apparent!
Whether a poniard, or a halter be
The nearest way to hell (for I must thither,
After I have killed my self) is somewhat doubtful?
This Roman resolution of selfe-murther,
Will not hold water, at the high Tribunal,
When it comes to be argued; my good Genius
Prompts me to this consideration. He
That kills himself, to avoid mis•rye, fears it,
And at the best shows but a bastard valour,
This lifes a fort co•meted to my trust,
Which I must not yield up, till it be forced,
Nor will I: Hoe's not valiant that dares die,
But he that boldly bears calamity.
A Seat here for the Duke. It is our glory
To overcome with courtesies, not rigour;
To Lordly Roman, who held it the height
Of humane happiness, to have kings and Queens
To wait by his triumphant chariot wheels
In his insulting pride, deprived himself
Of drawing near the nature of the gods,
Best known for such, in being merciful,
Yet give me leave, but still with gentle language,
And with the freedom of a •riend to tell you,
To seek by force, what courtship could not win,
was not harsh, and never taught in loves mild school.
Wise Poets fine that Venus coach is draw'n
By doves, and sparrows, not by bears, and tigers.
I spare the application.
In my fortune,
Heavens justice hath confirmed it, yet great Lady,
Since my offence grew from excess of love,
And not to be resisted, having paid too,
With the loss of liberty, the forfeiture
Of my presumption, in your clemency
It may find pardon
You shall have just cause
To say it hath. The charge of the long siege
Defraid, and the loss my subjects have sustained
Made good, since so far I must deal with caution,
You have your liberty
I could not hope for gentler conditions.
My Lord Gonzaga.
Since my coming to Seen, I have heard much
Of your prisoner; brave Bert•ldo.
Such •n one, Madam, I had.
And have still, Sir, I hope.
Your hopes deceive you. He is ransomed• Madame,
By whom, I pray you, Sir.
You had best enquire
Of your intelligencer. I am no informer.
I like not this.
He is, as it is reported,
A goodly gentleman, and of noble parts,
A brother of your order.
Hee was, Madam,
Till he against his oath wronged you, a princess,
Which his religion bound him from.
Great minds
For trial of their valours oft maintain
Quarrels that are unjust, yet without malice,
And such a fair construction I make of him.
I would see that brave enemy;
My duty
Commands me to seek for him.
Pray you doe:
And bring him to our presence.
I must blast
His entertainment; may it please your excellence,
He is a man debauched, and for his riots
Cast off by the King my Master, and that, I hope, is
A crime sufficient
To you his subjects,
That like as your king likes
But not to us;
We must weigh with our own scale. This is he, •are!
How soon mine eye had found him! what a port
He bears! how well his bravery becomes him!
A prisoner! nay, a princly suitor rather!
But I am too sudden.
Madame, it was his suite,
Unsent for, to present his service to you,
Ere his departure.
With what Majesty
He bears himself!
The devil I think supplies him,
Ransomed, and thus rich too!
You ill deserve
The favour of our hand; we are no• well,
Give us more ayre.
What sudden qualm is this?
That lifted yours against me.
Thus once more,
I sue for pardon
Sure his lips are poisoned,
And through th•se veins, force passage to my heart
Which is already •eased upon.
I wait, Madam,
To know what your commands are; my designs
Exact me in another place.
Before
You have our licence to depart; if manners,
Civility of manners cannot teach you
T'attend our leisure, I must tell you, Sir,
That you are still our prisoner, •or had you
Commission to free him.
How's this, Madam?
You were my substitute, and wanted power
Without my warrant to dispose of him.
I will pay back his ransom ten times over,
Rather then quit my interest.
This is
Against the law of arms.
But not of love:
Why, hath your entertainment, Sir, been such
In your restraint, that with the wings of fear
You would fly from it?
I know no man, Madame,
Enamoured of his fetter•, or delighting
In cold or hunger, or that would in reason
Prefer straw in a d•ngeon, before
A down bed in a Palace.
How, come nearer;
Was his usage such?
Yes, and it had been worse,
Had I foreseen this.
O thou mis-sh•p'd monster!
In thee it is confirmed, that such as have
No share in na•uric bounties, know no pity
To such as have 'em• Look on him with my eyes,
And answer then, whether this were a man,
Whose •hooks of lovely fullness should be made
A prey to meagre famine? or these eyes
Whose every glance store Cupids emptied quiver,
To be dimmed with tedious watching? or these lips,
These rudie lips, of whose fresh colour, cherries
And roses were but copies, should grow pale
For want of Nectar? or these legs that bear
A burden of more worth, then is supported
By Atla• wearied shoulders, should be cramped
With the weight of iron? O I could dwell ever
On this description!
Is this in di•ision
Or pity of me?
In your charity
Believe me innocent. Now you are my prisoner
You shall have fairer quarter, you will shame
The place where you have been, should you now leave it
Before you are recovered. I'll conduct you
To more convenient lodgings, and it shall be
My care to cherish you. Rapine who dare;
It is our will. You'll follow me?
To the centre,
Such a Sybilla guiding me.
Who speaks first?
We stand, as we had seen Medusas head!
I know not what to think, I am so amazed!
Amazed! I am thunderstrooke!
Wee are enchanted,
And this is some illusion.
Heaven forbid!
In dark despair, it shows a beam of hope.
Contain thy joy, Adorn.
Such a Princess,
And of so long experienced reservedness
Break forth, and on the sudden, into flashes
Of more then doubted looseness.
They come again,
Smiling, as I live: His arm circ•ing her wast:
I shall run mad: Some fury hath possessed her.
If I speak, I may be blasted. H•, I'll •u•bl•
A prayer or two, and cross my self, and then
Though the devil fart fire, have at him.
Let not, Sir,
The violence of my passions nourish in you
An ill opinion; or grant my carriage•
Out of the rode, and ga•be of private women,
It is still done with decorum. As I am
A Princess, what I doe, is aboue cens•re,
And to be imitated.
Gracious Madam,
Vouchsafe a little pause, for I am so r•pt
Beyond my self, that 'till I have collected
My scattered faculties, I cannot tender
My resolution.
Consider of it,
I will not be long from you,
Pray I cannot!
This cursed object strangles my devotion!
I must speak, or I burst. Pray you fair Lady,
If you can in curtsy, direct me to
The cha•te Aurelia.
Are you blind•? who are we•?
Another kind of thing. Her blood was governed
By her discretion, and not ruled her reason•
The reverence and Maj•sty of June•
Shined in her looks, and coming to the camp,
Appeared a second Palla•. I can see
No such divinities in you. If I
Without offence may speak my thoughts, you are,
As it were, a wanton H•len.
Good, ere long
You shall know me better.
Why, if you are Aurelia•
How shall I dispose of the Soldier?
May it please you
To hasten my dispatch?
Prefer your s•ites
Unto Bertoldo, we will give him hearing,
And you'll find him your best advocate.
This is rare!
What are we come to?
Grown up in a moment
A favourite!
He does take state already.
No, no, it cannot be, yet but Ca•i•la,
There is no stop between me and a crown,
Then my ingratitude! a sin in which
All sins are comprehended! Aide me virtue,
Or I am lost.
May it please your excellence
Second me, Sir.
Then m• so horrid oaths,
And hell. deep i•precations made against it.
The king your brother will thank you for t•advāc∣meant
Of his affairs
And yet who can hold out
Against such batteries, as her power and greatness•
Raise up against my weak defences!
Sir,
Doe you dream waking, Slight, shoe's here again.
Walks she on woollen fee•e!
You dwell too long
In your deliberation, and come
With a cripples pace to that which you should •lie to
It is confessed, yet why should I to win
From you, that hazard all to my poor nothing,
By false play send you o•f a looser from me?
I'am already too too much engaged
To the king my brothers anger; and who knows
But that his doubts, and politic fears, should you
Make me his equal, may draw war upon
Your ••rritories, were that breach made up
I should with joy embrace, what now I fear
To touch but with due reverence.
That hind•rance
Is easily removed. I owe the king
For a royal visit• which I straight will pay him,
And having first reconciled you to his favour,
A dispensation shall meet with us,
I am wholly yours.
On this book seal it.
What hand and lip too, then the barge•ne's sure,
You have no employment for me?
Yes Gonzaga,
Provide a royal ship.
A ship? Saint Iohn,
Whither are we bound now?
You shall know hereafter,
My lord your pardon, for my too much trenching upon your patience.
Camiola.
How doe you
Indisposed, but I attend you.
The heavy curse that waits on perjury,
And foul ingratitude, pursue thee ever.
Yet why from me this? In this breach of faith
My loyalty finds few•rd! what poisons him
Proves Mithridate to me! I have performed
All she commanded punctually, and now
In the clear mirror of my truth, she may
Behold his fall•ehood. O that I had wings
To b•are me to Palermo! This once known,
Must change her love into a just disdain,
And work her to compassion of my pain.
Undone! undone! poor I that meanwhile was
The top and ridge of my house, am on the sudden
Turned to the pitifullest animal
Of the lineage of the Silly••!
What's the matter?
The king! break girdle, break!
Why? what of him?
Hearing how far you doted on my person,
Growing envio•s of my happiness, and knowing
His brother, nor his favourite Fulgentio,
Could get a sheep• eye from you, I being present,
Is come himself a suitor, with the awl
Of his authority to bore my nose,
And take you from me, Oh, oh, oh.
Do not roar so;
The king!
The king! yet loving Silly is not
So sorry for his own, as your misfortune,
If the king should carry you, or you bear him,
What a looser should you be? He can but make you
A queen, and what a simp•e thing is that
To the being my lawful spouse. The world can never
Afford you such a hue•band.
I believe you,
But how are you sure the king is so inclined?
Did not you dream this?
With these eyes I saw him
Dismiss his train, and lightn•g from his co•ch,
Whispering Fulgentio in the ear•.
If so
I guess the business
It can be no other
But to give me the bob, that being a matter
Of maine importance, yonder they a•e, I dare not
Be seen, I am so desperate, if you forsake me,
Send me word that I may provide a willow ghyrlond
To wear when I drown my self. O Silly, ô Silly!
It will be wo•th your pains Sir to observe
The constancy and brave•rye of her spirit,
Though great men tremble at your frowns, I dare
Hazard my head, your majesty set off
With terror, cannot fright her.
May she answer
My expectation.
There she is.
My knees thus
Bent to the ear•• (while my vows are sent upward
For the safety of my Sover•igne) pay the duty
Due for so great an honour, in this favour
Done to your humblest hand-maid.
You mistake me,
I come not (Lady) that you may report,
T•e king to do you honour, made your house
(He being there) his court, but to correct
Your stubborn disobedience. A pardon
For that, could you obtain it, were well purchased
With this humility.
A pardon Sir?
'Till I am conscio•s of an offence.
I will not wrong •y innocence to beg one,
What is my crime Sir?
Look on him I favour,
By you sco•n'd and negelected.
Is that all Sr.
No minion, though that were too much. How can you
Answer the setting on your desperate bravo
To murder him?
With your leave, I must not kneel Sir.
Whi•e I reply to this: But thus rise up
In my defence, and tell you as a man
(since when you are •njust, the deity
Which you may challenge as a King, part• from yo•
It was never read in holy writ, or moral,
That subject• on their loyalty were obliged
To love their Sovereigns vices, your grace, Sir,
To such an undeserver is no virtue.
What •think you now Sir?
Say you should love wine,
You being the King, and c••se I am your subject,
Must I beaver dr•nke? Tyrants, not King•
By violence, from humble vassails force
The liberty of their s••les. I co•lt not love him•
And to compel a••action, as I take it,
Is not found in your prer••ative.
Excellent virgin!
How I admire her confidence•
He complains
Of wrong done him: but •e no mo•• a King,
Unless you do me right. Bu•no yo•r decrees,
And of •••r laws and statutes make a fire
To th•we•e froze•• nu••e••e of deli•quent•,
If he escape unpun•shed. Doe your •dicts
Call it death in any man that break• into
Another house to rob hi•, though of trifles•
And shall Fulg•••••• y•ur Fulgentio live?
Who hath committed more then sacrilege
In the pollution of my clear fame
By his malicious slanders•
Have you done this?
Answer truly on your life.
In the heat of blood
Some such thing I reported.
Out of my sight,
For I vow, if by t•ue pen•t•nce thou win n••
This injured L•die to sue out thy pardon•,
Thy g••ve is dug already.
By my own folly
I have made a fair hand of't,
You shall know Lady
While I w•••e a crown, justice •hall use her sword
To cut offenders o•f, though nearest to •s.
I, now you sh•w whose Deputy you are,
I now I bath your fe•t with tears, it cannot
Be censured superstition.
You must rise.
Rise in our favour, and protection ever:
Happy are •u•jests• when the prince is s•ill
Guided by justice, not his passionate will.
YOu see how tender I am of the q•jet
And peace of your a•fection, and what great ones
I put off •n y••r f•four.
Yo• doe wisely.
Exceeding wisely! and when I have said,
I thank you for'•, be happy•
And good reason,
In having such a blessing.
When yo• h•ve it,
Bat the bait is not yet ready. Stay •he time,
While I triumph by my self, King, by your leave,
I have wiped your royal nose, without a napkin,
You may cry willow, willow, for your brother,
I'll only say go by; for my fine favourite,
He may gre••, where b• 〈◊〉, •is 〈◊〉 may wate•
Like a puppies ore a 〈◊〉 p•t, while Silly
Out of his •wo-leav'd cherry-stone dish drinks Nectar•
I cannot hold out any longer; he•v'n forgive me,
It is not tho first oath, I have broke, I must take
A little for a preparative.
By no means.
If you forswear your self we shall not prosper.
I'll rather loose my longing.
Pret•y soul!
How c•r••ull it is of •e! let m• b•sse yet
Thy little dai•tie foot •or't: that I •m sure
Is out of my oath.
Why, if thou can dispense with it
So fa••e, I'll not be scrupulous; such a favour
My amorous shoomak•r ste•les•
O most rare leather!
I doe begin at the lowest, but in time
I may g•ow higher.
Fie, you dwell too long there•
Rise, preth•• rise•
O I am up already.
How I abuse my hours! what news with thee now?
Off with that gown, it is mine, mine by your pro∣mise
Signior Adore. is r•turned! now upon entrance;
Off with it, off with it, Madam.
Be not so hasty,
Wh•n I go to bed it is thine.
You have my grant too;
But doe you hear Lady, though I give way to this,
You must her•after ask my leave b•fore
You part with things of moment.
Very good,
When I am yours, I will be governed.
Sweet obedience!
You are well returned.
I wish that the success
Of my service had deserved it.
Lives Bertoldo?
Yes, and •eturn'd with safety.
It is not then
In the power of fate to •dti •o, or take from
My perfect happiness: and yet he shoe•lt
Have made me his first visit. Adore. So I think too
But he
D•rst not appear, I being present,
That's his excuse, I warrant you.
Speak, where is he?
With whom? who hath d••erv'd mo•e from him? o•
Can be of equal merit? I in this
Doe not except the King.
Hoe's at the Palace
With the Du••hesse o• Seen. One co•ch brought 'em hither.
Without a third. Hoe's very gracious with h•r,
You may conceive the rest.
My jealous fears
Make me to apprehend.
Pray you dismiss
Signior wisdom, and i'll make relation to yo•
Of the particulars.
Servant, I would have you
To haste unto the Court.
I will out-runne
A foote-man for your pleasure.
There observe
The Duchess train and entertainment.
Fear not,
I will discover all that is of w•ight
To the liveries of her Pages, and her foe•temen.
This is fit employment for me.
Gracious with
The Duchess! sure you said so?
I will use
All possible brevity to inform you, Madam,
Of what was trusted to me, and discharged
With faith and loyal duty.
I believe it•
Yo• ransomed him, and supplied his wants imagine
That is already spoken; and-what vows
Of service he made to me is apparent;
His joy of me, and wonder too perspicuous;
Does not your •••rye end so?
Would the end
Had answered the beginning, in a word,
Ingratitude, and perjury at the height
Cannot express him.
Take heed.
Truth is armed
And can defend it self. It must out, Madam.
I saw, the presence full, the amorous Duchess
Kiss and embrace him, on his part accepted
With equal ardor, and their willing hands
No sooner joined, but a remove was published,
And put in execution.
The proofs are
Too pregnant. O Bertoldo!
Hoe's not worth
Your sorrow, Madam.
Tell me, when you saw this
Did not you grieve as I do now to hear it?
His precipice from goodness raising mine,
And serving as a foil to set my faith off,
I had little reason.
In this you confess
The devilish malice of your disposition.
As you were a man, you stood bound to lament it,
And not in flattery of false your hopes
To glory in it: when good men pursue
The path marked out by virtue, the blessed Saints
With joy look on it, and Seraphique Angels
Clap their celestial wings in heavenly plaudits,
To be a scene of grace so well presented,
The fiends and men made up of envy mourning;
Where as now on the contrary as far
As their divinity can partake of passion,
With me they weep, beholding a fair Temple
Built in Bertoldo's loyalty turned to ashes
By the flames of his inconstancy, the damned
Rejoicing in the object: It is not well
In you Adorn.
What a temper dwells
In this rare Virgin, can you pity him
That hath shown none to you?
I must not be
Cruel by his example, you perhaps,
Expept now I should seek recovery
Of what I have lost by tears, and with bent knees
Beg his compassion. No; my towering virtue
From the assurance of my merit scorns
To stoop so low. I'll take a nobler course,
And confident in the justice of my cause,
The King his brother, and new M•stress, judges,
Ravish him from her arms, you have the contract
In which he swore to marry her?
It is here Madam.
He shall be then against his will my husband,
And when I have him, I'll so use him, doubt not,
But that your honesty being unquestioned,
This writing with your testimony clears all.
And buries me in the dark mists of error.
I'll presently to Court, pray you give order
For my caroch.
A ca•t for me were sitter
To hurry me to the gallows
O false men!
Inconstant! perjured! my good Angel help me
In these my extremities!
If you ever will see brave sight,
Lose it not now. Bertoldo, and the Duchess
Are presently to be married. There's such pomp
And preparation.
If I marry, it is
This day or never.
Why with all my heart,
Though I break this, I'll keep the next oath I make
A•d then it is quit.
Follow me to my Cabinet,
You know my confessor, Father Paulo?
Yes. Shall he
Doe the feat for us?
I will give in writing
Directions to him, and attire my self
Like a Virgin-bride, and something I will doe
That shall deserve men's praise, and wonder too.
And I to make all know, I am not shallow
Will have my points of Cuechineale and yellow.
HAd our division been greater, Madam,
Your clemency, the wrong being done to you
In pardon of it, l•ke the rod of concord
Must make a perfect union, once more
With a brotherly affection we receive you
Into our favour. Let it be your study
Hereafter to deserve this blessing, far
Beyond your merit.
As the Princess grace
To me is without limit, my endeavours
With all obsequiousness to serve her pleasures
Shall know no bounds, nor will I being made
Her husband, forget the duty that
I owe her as a servant.
I expect not
But fair equality, since I well know
If that superiority be d•e
It is not to me, When you are made my consor•
All the prerogatives of my high birth cancelled
I'll practise the obedience of a wis•,
And freely pay it. Queens themselves, if they
Make choice of their inferiors, only aiming
To feed their sensual appetites, and to reign
Over their husbands, in some kind commit
Authorised whoredom, nor will I be guilty
In my intent of such a crime.
This done,
As it is promised, Madam, may well stand for
A president to great women: but when once
The griping h•nger of desire is cloyed,
(And the poor fool advanced, brought on his kn••
Most of your Eagle breed, I'll not say all
(Ever excepting you) challenge again,
What in hot blood they parted from.
You are ever.
An enemy of our sex, but you I hope Sir
Have better thoughts.
I dare not entertain
An ill one of your goodness.
To my power
I will enable him to prevent all danger
Envy can raise against your choice. One word m•re
Touching the Articles.
In you alone
Lie all my hopes, you can or kill or save me,
But pity in you, will become you better,
(Though I confess in justice it is denied me)
Then too much rigour.
I will make your peace
As far as it lies in me, but must first
Labour to ri•ht my self.
Or add or alter
What you think fit. In him I have my all,
Heaven make me thankful for him.
On to the Temple
Stay royal Sir, and as you are a King
Erect one here, in doing justice to
An injured maid.
How's this?
O I am blasted!
I have given so• proof, sweet Lady, of my prompt∣nes
To doe you right, you need not therefore doubt me,
And rest assured, that this great work dispatched,
You shall have audience and satisfaction
To all you can demand.
To doe me justice
Exacts your present care, and can admit
Of no delay. If ever my cause be heard
In favour of your brother, you go• on Sir,
Your sceptre cannot right me. Hoe's the man,
The guilty man, whom I accuse, and you
Stand bound in duty, as you are Supreme,
To be impartial. Since you are a Judge,
As a Delinquent, look on him, and not
As on a brother; justice painted blind
Infers, her Ministers a•e obliged to hear
The cause and truth, the I•dge determine of it,
And not swayed, or by favour, or affection,
By a false gloss, or wrested comment alter
The true intent, and letter of the law.
Nor will I Madam,
You seem troubled, Sir,
His colour changes too.
The alteration
Grows from his guilt. The goodness of my cause
Begets such confidence in me, that I bring
No hired tongue to plead for me, that with gay
Rhetorical flourishes may palli••e
That, which stripped naked, will appear deformed.
I stand here, mine own advocate; and my •ruth
Delivered in the plainest language, will
Make good it self, nor will I, if the King
Give suffrage to it, but admit of you,
My greatest enemy, and this stranger Prince,
To sit assistants with him.
I ne'er wronged you.
In your knowledge of the injury, I believe it,
Nor will you in your justice, when you are
Acquainted with my interest in this man
Which I lay claim to.
Let us take our seats,
What is your title to him?
By this contract
Sealed solemnly before a reveren'd man,
I challenge him for my husband.
Ha. was I
Sent for the Friar, for this? O Silly! Silly!
Some cordial, or I faint.
This writing is
Authentical.
But done in heat of blood,
(Charmed by her flatteries, as no doubt he was)
To be dispensed with.
Add this, if you please,
The distance and disparity between
Their births and fortunes.
What can inocence hope for
When such as sit her jugdes, are corrupted!
D•sparity of birth, or fortune urge you?
Or •yren charms? or at his best in me,
Wants to deserve him? Call some few days back,
And as he was, consider him, and you
Must grant him my inferior. Imagine
You saw him now in fetters with his honour,
His liberty lost; with her black wings despair
Circling his miseries, and his Gonzaga.
Trampling on his afflictions; the great sum
Proposed for his redemption; the King
Forbidding payment of it; this near kinsmen,
With his protesting followers, and friends,
Falling off from him; by the whole world forsaken;
Dead to all hope, and buried in the grave
Of his calamities, and then weigh duly
What she deserved (whose merits now are doubted)
That as his better Angel in her bounties
Appeared unto him, his great ransom pa••d,
His wants, and with a prodigal hand supplied,
Whether then being my manumised slave,
Hee owed not himself to me?
Is this true?
In his silence it is acknoledg'd
If you want
A witne••e to this purpose, I'll depose it:
If I have dwell• too long on my deserving•
To this unthankful man, pray you pardon me,
The cause required it. And though now I add
A little in my painting to the life
His barbarous ingratitude, to deter,
Others from imitation, let it meet with
A fair interpretation. This se•pent,
Frozen to numnesse, was no sooner warmed
In the bosom of my pity, and compassion,
But in return, he ruined his preserver
The prints the irons had made in his flesh
Still ulcerous; but all that I had done
(My benefits in sand, or water written)
As they had never been, no more remembered.
And on what ground; but his ambitious hopes
To gain this Duchess favour,
Yes, the object,
Look on it better (Lady) may excuse
The charge of his affection.
The object
In when•? forgive me, modesty, if I say
You look upon your form in the false glass
Of flattery, and self• love, and that dece•ves you,
That you were a Duchess, as I take it, was not
Character'd on your face, and that not seen,
For other feature, make all these that are
Experienced in women, judges of 'em,
And if they are not Parasites, they must grant
For beauty without art, though you storm at it,
I may take •he righ hand file.
Well said i'faith;
I see fair women on no terms will yield
Priority in beauty.
Down proud heart!
Why doe I rise up in defence of that,
Which, in my cherishing of it hath undone me.
No Madam, I recant, you are all beauty,
Goodness, and virtue, and poor I not worthy
As a soil to set you off; enjoy your conquest
But doe not tyrannize. Yet as I am
In my lowness from your height, you may look on me,
And in your suffrage to me, make him know
That though to all men else I did appear
The shame and scorn of women, hee stands bound
To hold me as her master-piece.
By my life
You have show'n your self of such an abject temper,
So poor, and low conditiou'd, as I grieve for
Your nearness to me.
I am changed in my
Opinion of you Lady, and profess
The virtues of your mind, an ample fortune
For an absolute Monarch.
Since you are resolved
To damn your self, in your forsaking of
Your noble order for a woman, doe it
For this. You may search through the world, and meet not
With such another P•oenix.
On the sudden
I feel all fires of love quenched in the water
Of compassion, make your peace; you have
My free consent; for here I doe disclaim
All interest in you: and to further your
Desires, fair Maid, composed of worth and honour,
The dispensation procured by me,
Fr•eing Bertoldo from his vow, makes way
To your embraces.
Oh, how have I strayed,
And wilfully, out of the noble tract
Marked me by virtue! 'Till now, I was never
Truly a prisoner; to excuse my late
Captivity, I might allege the malice
Of fortune; you that conquered me confessing
Courage in my defence was no way wanting
But now I have surrendered up my strengths
Into the power of vice, and on my forehead
Branded with mine own hand in capital letters
D•sloyall, and Ungrateful, though barred from
Humane society, and hissed into
Some desert ne'er yet haunted with the curses
Of men and women, sitting as a judge
Upon my guilty self, I must confess
It justly falls upon me, and one tear
Shed in compassion of my sufferings more.
Then I can hope for.
This compunc•ion
For the wrong that you have done me, though you should
Fix h•re, and your true sorrow move no further,
Will in respect I loved once, make these eyes
Two springs of sorrow for you.
In your pity
My cruelty shows more monstrous, yet I am not,
Though most ingratfull, grown to such a height
Of impudence, as in my wishes only
To ask your pardon. If as now I fall
Prostrate before your feet, you will vouchsafe
To act your own revenge, treading upon me
As a viper eating through the bowels of
Your benefits, to whom with liberty
I owe my being, twill take from the burden
That now is insupportable.
Pray you rise,
As I wish peace, and quiet to my soul
I do forgive you heartily, yet excuse me:
Though I deny my self a blessing that
By the favour of the Duchess seconded,
With your submission is offered to me
Let not the reason I allege for it grieve you,
You have been false once. I have done. And if
When I am married (as this day I will be)
As a perfect sign of your atonement with me
You wish •e joy, I will •eceive it for
Full satisfaction of all obligations
In which you stand bound to me.
I will doe it,
And what's more, in despite of sorrow, live
To see my self undone, beyond all hope
To be made up again.
My blood begins
To come to my heart again.
Pray you Signior Syl.
Call in the holy Friar. Hoe's prepared
For finishing the work.
I knew I was
The man. Heaven make me thankful
Who is this?
His Father was the banker of Palermo,
And this the heir of his great wealth, his wisdom
Was not hereditary.
Though you know me not,
Your Majesty owes me a round Sum, I have
A se•le, or two to witness, yet if you please
To wear my colours, and dance at my wedding•
I'll never sue you.
And I'll grant yo•r suite,
Gracio•s Maddona, Noble, General,
Brave Captains and my quondam rivals we•r 'em
Since I am confident you dare not harbour
A thought, but that way currant.
For my part
I cannot guess the issue.
Do your duty,
And with all speed you can, you may despatch us.
Thus as a principal ornament to the Church
I sea•e her.
How.
So young and so religious.
She has forsook the world.
And Silly too,
• shall run mad.
Hence with the fool, proceed Sir
Look on this maid of honour now
Truly honoured in her vow
She pays to heaven, vain delight
By day, or pleasure of, the night,
She no more thinks of this fair hair
(Favours for great kings to wear)
M•w now be shorn. Her rich array
Changed into a homely gray.
The dainties with which she was fed
And her proud flesh pampered,
Must not be tasted, from the spring,
For wine• cold water we will bring
And with fasting mortify
The feasts of sensuali•y.
Her jewels, beads, and she must look
Not in a glass, but holy book;
To teach her the ne'er erring way
To immortality. O may
She as she purposes to be
A Child new borne to piety,
Persevere in in it, and good men
With Saints and Angels say Amen
This is the marriage! this the port! to which
My vows must steer me, fill my spreading sails
With the pure wind of your devotions for me,
That I may touch the secure haven, where
Eternal happiness keeps her reside n•e,
Temptations to frailty never entering.
I am dead to the world, and thus dispose
Of what I leave behind me, and d•viding
My state into three parts, I thus bequeath it.
The ••rst to the fair Nunnery, to which
I dedicate the last, and better part
Of my frail life; a second portion
To pious uses; and the third to thee
Adorn, for thy true and faithful service.
And ere I mytake lu•• farewell with hope
To find a gran•, may suite to you is that
You wou•d for my sake pardon this young man
And to his merits love him, and no further.
I thus confirm it.
And as ere you hope
Like me to be made happy, I conjure you
To resume your order; and in fighting
Bravely against the enemies of our faith
Redeem your mortgaged honour.
I restore this
Once more brothers in arms,
I'll live and die so.
To you my pious wishes. And to end
All differences, great Sir I beseech you
To be an arbitrator, and compound
The quarrel, long continuing between
The Duke and Duchess.
I'll take it into
My special care.
I am then at rest, now father
Conduct me where you please.
She well deserves
Her name, t•e Maid of Honour! Mny she stand
To all posterity, a fair example,
For noble Maids to imitate. Since to live
In wealth and pleasure is common; but to part with
Such poisoned baits is rare, there being nothing
Upon this S•oge of life to be commended,
Though well begun, till it be fully ended.

On Monday and Tuesday in Easter week, 1620. the first Entertainment, at the house of the right worthy, Sr. William Co∣keen then L. Mayor: Which on the Saturday following was fashioned into service for the Lords of his Majesties most Hoble. Privy Coun∣cell; upon which day, that noble Marriage was celebrated betwixt the Right Hoble. Charles L. Howard Baron of Essingham, and Mary, eldest Daughter of the said St. William Cokaine, then L. Mayor of London, and L. General of the Military forces.
Room, room, make room,
You Friends to Fame,
Officers of worth and Name,
Make room, make room,
Behold the Bird of State doth come,
Make room,
Clear the place,
O doe it all the grace;
It is the King of Birds, whose chanting,
And early morning Crowing,
So quick and strongly flowing,
Doe's make the King of Beasts lye panting;
How worthy then to be brought in with Honour,
That daunts the proudest in that humble manner.
TWo powers at strife about conceived wrong,
To whom this Bird should properly belong,
Were reconciled by Harmony: First, the Sun
Called it his Bird, cause still when day begun
To op her modest Eye, this Creature then,
Proclaims his glory to the world again;
Minerua next, Goddess of Arms and Art,
Claimed it for hers (not without just desert)
He, like the Morning being the Muses friend,
And then for courage, it is his life, his end;
Without wrong then those properties related,
To both, hee may be justly consecrated:
But, Worthy Lord, how properly to you,
Whose place partakes of both; it is so true
An Emblem of your worth, charge, power, &amp; state,
None, Nobler can express a Magistrate;
For all that is in this Bird, Quality,
Is in you Virtue, Justice, Industry,
What do's his early morning note imply?
But in you, early care and vigilance;
A Duty that begets Duty to you,
So Virtue still pays, and receives her due:
What do's the striking of his wings import,
Ere to his Neighbour hee his sounds retort?
But the dear labours and incessant pains
Of a just Magistrate, that even constrains
His Nerues, to give more Virtue to his word,
And beat in sense into the most absurd:
The Sharpest is the easiest to apply,
For his quick Spur, Laws sword doth signify;
The execution of your Charge and Place,
To cut off all crimes that are bold and base:
``Virtues should be with kind embraces, heaped,
``But with a Sword, Sins harvest must be reaped.
My reverence next to you, to you, that are
The Fathers of this City; by whose care,
Wisdom &amp; watchfulness, the good cause thrives,
You that are Lights and Presidents in Lives,
Noble Examples, Honours t'Age and Time,
This is the Top which your good cares must climb,
``A ceaslesse labour Virtue hath imposed,
``Upon all those, whom Honour hath enclosed;
And such are you, selected from the rest,
Works then that are most choice become you best;
Place before all your Actions and Intents,
The rare gifts of that Bird, this but presents:
Behold the very shape and Figure, now,
Serves for a Noble Welcome, turned into
A Cup of Bounty, and to adorn the Feast,
Laden with love comes to each worthy Guest;
And but observe the manner, there's in that,
Freeness expressed, humility, yet State;
First you take off his head, to taste his heart,
Which shows at this time power is laid apart,
And bounty fills the place; then he goes round;
To show a Welcome of an equal Sound,
To every one a free one, through the Board,
So plain hee speaks the goodness of his Lord,
Take then respectful Notice through the Hall,
That here the noble Health begins to All.
THe Health's begun,
In the Bird of the Sun,
pledge it round pledge it round,
With hearty welcome it comes crowned,
O pledge it round:
Th• Ceremonies due
Forget not as they were begun to you,
When you are drank to, you're by duty led,
First to kiss your hand, then take off the head,
You cannot miss it then,
To put it on and kiss it again;
The next to whom the Health doth flow,
It taught to honour your Pledge so,
So round, round, round, round, let it go,
As aboue, so below;
For Bounty did intend it always so.
WHy this is nobly done, to come to grace
A Sport, so well becomes the Time &amp; Place,
Old Time made much on it, &amp; it thought no praise
Too dear for it, nor no honour in those days,
Not only Kings ordained Laws to defend it,
But shined the first Examples to commend it,
In their own Persons honoured it so far,
A Land of Peace showed like a field of War;
But chiefly Henry, (Memories Fame) the Eight,
And the Sixth Edward; gave it worth and weight,
By Act and favour, (not without desert)
It being the comliest and the Manliest Art,
And whereas meaner Crafts took their first form
From humble Things, as Twisting from a worm,
And Weaving from the Spiders limber frame;
Music and Archery from Apollo came:
He calls himself great Moister of this Sport,
In whose bright name fair Wisdom keeps her Court:
Well may this Instrument be first in Fame,
Aboue all others that have got a Name,
In war or peace; when Heaven it self doth show,
``The Covenant of Mercy, by a Bow:
And as each Creature, nay, each senseless Thing▪
Is made a Glass to see Heavens goodness in;
So though this be a mere delight, a Game,
Justice may see here something she may claim,
(Without wrong done to State) and call it her own,
Since the greatst power is oft through weakness known.
What are Reproofs? with thē I first begin,
But Arrows shot against the Breast of Sin;
Who hits Vice home, &amp; cleaves a wrong in twain,
So that it never comes to close again,
Shows not he noble Archery? Isle pray ever,
He may be followed, mended he can never:
And as a cunning Bowman marks his ground,
And frō light things (which being tossed up) is found
Where the wind sits (for his advantage best)
Before he let his Arrow pass his Breast;
So the grave Magistrate, discreetly wise,
Makes use of light occasions that arise,
To lead him on to weightier, winds a Cause,
Frō things but weakly told, much substance draws
And will the state of Truth exactly try,
Before he let the Shaft of Judgment fly:
Then in this Art, there's Virtue still expressed,
For every man desires here to be Best,
Their Aim is still Perfection, to outreach,
And go beyond each other; which do's teach
A Noble Strife in our more serious Deeds,
Assuring Glory to him best exceeds:
And where some sports seek corners for their shame
Day-light and open Place, commends this Game;
Much like an Honest Cause, it appears Bold
In public Court, for all Eyes to behold;
On then, Apolloes Scholars, You ne'er found
Nobler Spectators compassed in this Ground;
To whom I wish (worthy their Virtuous Ways)
Peace to their Hearts, long Health, &amp; Blessed days.
Ho? let me clear mine Eyes, me thinks I see
Comforts approach, as if They came to me;
I am not used to i'm; I ha been long without,
How comes the Virtue of the Times about?
He's Ancient Custom yet a Friend? of Weight?
So many? rare I Goodness is waked alate
Out of her long Sleep sure; that he's lain still
Many a dear Day, charmed with Neglect and Will,
I thought I'd been forsaken, quite forsook,
For none these 7. years, he's bestowed a Look
Upon my watery Habitation here;
I mean, of Power, that ought to see Me clear,
For yon'd fair Cities health, which Sweetness bless
And Virtue in full Strength, ever possess;
Well fare thy Visitation, Noble Lord,
And this most Grave Assembly; that accord
In ways of Charity and Care with Thee;
Joys visit You, as Your Loves visit Me:
The Water stands so full now in mine Eyes
I cannot choose but weep; but the Tears rise
From Gladness, not from Sorrow, for that's lost
Now I see you, Unkindness yet he's cost
Many a dear Drop, since I beheld the Face
Of the last Magistrate, in Power and Place;
I h'a done good Service; it is no boasting part
In one forgot, to speak her own desert:
I grant my kind and loving Sisters both
Chadwell and Amwell, have expressed no Sloth
In their Pipe-Pilgrimage, but fairly proved
Most excellent Servants, housed, and well-beloved;
And have, when hard Necessity requires,
Given happy Quench to many merciless Fires;
Therefore am I neglected? An old Friend?
The Head? that to the Heart a'th City send
My best and clearest Service, take Delight
To be at hand, make your Dames Pure and White;
Who for their civil Neatness, are proclaimed
Mirrors of women, through all Kingdoms famed;
Can I be so forgot? and daily hear
The noise of Water-bearers din your care?
Those are my Alms folks, trotting in a Ring,
And live upon the bounty of my Spring,
Yet like dull worms that have no sense at all,
Lick up the Dews, ne'er look from whēce they fall,
The head's not minded, whēce the goodness flows:
So with the worlds condition right it goes;
``Blessings are swallowed with a greedy love,
``But Thanks fly slowly to yon'd place Aboue,
From whence the Euerliuing Waters spring,
Which to your souls eternal comforts bring:
The Dews of Heaven fall on you, prosperous Fates
Like fruitful Rivers, flow into your States.
WHy here's my wish, the Joy I live upon,
Wisdom and Valour when both meet in one,
Now tic a Field of Honour, Fems true Sphere,
Me thinks I could eternally dwell here;
Why here's persection, tic a place for me,
Pallas delights in such community;
This Bird of Courage, (Enemy to Fear)
Whose Figure on my Helmet now I wear,
And have done ever from my Birth in Heaven
Is consecrate to Me, as to Thee given,
Our Crest's alike, and fits both war and peace,
The Virtues are, Valour and Watchfulness,
And both shine clear now in thy present State,
Field-Generall, and City-Magistrate:
As I from Arts and Arms derive my name;
So thou supply two Offices, with Fame:
Why here the Ancient Roman Honour dwells,
A Praetor, General; Senators, Colonels;
Captains, grave Citizens; so richly inspired,
They can assist in Council, if required,
And set Court-Causes in as fair a Form,
As they doe Men, here, without Rage or Storm:
Lieuetenants, Ensigners, Seriants of Bands,
Of worthy Citizens the Army stands,
Each in his place deserving fair respect;
I can complain of nothing but Neglect,
That such a noble Cities Armed Defence
Should be so seldom seen; I could dispense
With great occasions, but alas, whole years
To put off exercise, gives cause of fears;
``In getting wealth all care should not be set,
``But some, in the defending what you get:
There's few but have their providence so pure,
(Blessed with a fair estate) to make it sure,
By strength of writings, and in good men's hands
Putting their Coin, secured by Lifes and Lands,
This is the common Fort to which all fly,
Every man labours for Security;
But what's all this? (I speak in Truths behalf)
If neither Men, City, nor Deeds be safe
Whore's now Security of State? that day,
When life stands doubtful of her house of clay;
A ruin, which neglect of glorious Arms
He has brought on many a Kingdom, rocked with charms
Of lazy dullness, by vnpractis'd men
Fit for no service; I resolve you then;
This is Security, if you'll rightly know,
And do's Secure that Word which you call so:
Let not a small pecuniary Expense
(Which is but drossy dotage) keep you hence,
You lose all that you save, after that manner,
What i'st to rise in riches, fall in honour?
Nay to your Safeties to commit selfe-treason,
Which every thing provides for, blessed with reason,
Let this grave Lord's Example, (in its Prime)
Who perfects all his Actions with his Time,
Makes even with the Years, to his fair Fame,
Gives His Accounts up with a Glorious Name
In Field and Court, move all men to discharge
Their manly Offices and pains at large;
Let every Year (at least) once in his Round,
See you like Sons of Honour tread this Ground;
And Heaven that both gives, &amp; secures just wealth,
The City bless with Safety, You with Health.
IMagine now, each apprehensive Guest
The Year departed; this his Funeral Feast,
I, a chief Mourner, this a sad Pageant, here,
Set with the Orphans Sigh, the Widows Tear,
All seem to morn, as locked from their reliefs,
Till the New Sun of Justice dry their griefs;
And as there is no Glorious thing that ends,
But leaves a Fame behind it, that commends
Or disapproues the Progress of his Acts:
So in this Epitaph, sad Truth contracts
A spacious Story, which spread forth at large,
Might instruct All, built up for Power &amp; Charge
HEre ends a Year that never misspent day,
Through Fems celestial Signs made his own way,
By discrete judgment all his time still led,
Which is the only Sign governs the Head,
Mercy to wants, and Bounty to Desert,
The special Sign that rules the noble Heart,
A Year of goodness, and a Year of right,
In which the honest cause sued with delight.
A Year wherein nothing that's good, was dull,
Began at Moons Increase, and ends at Full;
Full cup, full welcome: adding the Suns gift,
Who nearer his declining, the more swift
In his illustrious course, more bright, more clear,
Such is the glorious setting of this Year,
His beamy substance shines even through his shroud
As the fair Sun shoots splendour through his cloud;
May every Year succeeding this, still have
No worse an Epitaph to deck his Grave,
And so my last farewell (this Tear for me)
Wishing that many may conclude like Thee.
The property, to which this Speech especially hath Respect, was a device like a made Dish, expressing Two naked Arms brea∣king through a Cloud, supporting a wreath of Laurel, being part of the Haberdashers Arms.
The First Entertainment, at his first Great Feast prae∣pard to give Welcome to his Own Noble Fraternity, the Company of Haberdashers.
FRee Love, full welcome, bounty fair, &amp; clear,
Even as it flows from Heaven, inhabit here,
And with your Liberal Virtues bless the year,
Make this thy Palace thou smooth youth of Feasts,
Comus! and put Joy into all the Guests,
That they may truly taste in fewest words,
The Abundant welcome yon'd Kind Lord affords,
Especially to You, aboue the rest,
Of all most worthy to be First and Best;
You challenge two Respects, in Brotherhood, one,
Which had desert enough came it alone,
Without a second Virtue, but to add
Unto Your Worthiness, Your Love was clad
With Honour, Cost, and Care, and how applied,
The late triumphant Day best testified,
Stands in no need of my applause and praise,
Your Worth can of it self, it self best raise;
So much for Noble Action in your Right,
Which I presume his goodness will require:
Now for Himself, (not far to wade or swim)
I borrow of your Honours to fit him,
Which both preserves me in my first bounds still,
And may agree best with his Love and Will:
Behold in this rare Symbol of Renown,
The Emblem of all Justice, and the Crown
The fair reward for it, ever fresh and greene;
Which imitates those Joys Eye hath not seen;
These Arms, that for their nakedness resemble
Even Truth it self, no covering, to dissemble,
Nor shift for Bribe, but open, plain, and bare,
Shows, Men of Power should keep their conscience
And were their Acts transparēt, without veil (fair
Disguise or Vizard, and such never fail;
Observe this more, tic not one Arm alone
That bears this Laurel, but two joined in one,
Mercy and Justice, the two Props of State,
They must be both fixed in the Magistrate;
If wanting either, subject to much harm,
For he that he's but one, he's but one Arm;
Judge then the Imperfection; mark again,
They break both through a Cloud; which in∣structs Men
How they should place their Reverence and their Love,
Seeing all lawful power, comes from Aboue;
And as the Laurel (which is now your due)
Bring due to Honour, therefore most to you▪
Fears no injurious Weather the Year brings,
But spite of Storms looks ever greene and springs,
Apolloes Tree, which Lightnings never blast,
So (Honoured Lord) should burning Malice cast,
Her pitchy Fires at your Triumphant State;
You are Apolloes Tree, a (Magistrate,)
Which no foul Gust of Envy can offend,
Nor may it ever to your Lordships End,
Health and a Noble Courage bless your Days;
To this your worthy Brotherhood, fame and praise
WHy well said, thus should Christmas be
Lightsome, Iocond, blithe and free,
Now it looks like Bounties Palace,
Where every Cup he's his full Ballace,
Drown Cares with Juice that Grapes have bled,
And make Times cheek look fresh and red,
Let nothing now but Healths go round,
And no sooner off, but crowned
With sparkling Liquors, bounding up,
Quick in Pallet, as in Cup:
To be heavy, to be dull,
Is a fault so pitiful,
We bar it from the course of Reason,
Care must not peep abroad this Season,
Nor a sad look dare appear
Within ten Mile of Christmas cheer;
Sighs are banished ten leagues farther,
Either Cellar, Hall or Larder;
To be Jovial then and blithe
Is truly to pay (Christmas) Tithe,
And where free Mirth is and impartial,
Christmas there he has made me Marshiall.
Why how now? know you where you are? rude thing;
Bold and unmannered Licence, dare you bring
Your free Speech hither, before me begin?
Who let this Skittish thing of Lightness in?
Some call the Porter hither, yet stay, stay,
I'ue power in words to chase this toy away;
I wonder that the Musique suffers thee
To come into their room?
Why Nicety?
Believe me honest Me (what ever yoube)
She's able to spoil all your Harmony,
Corrupt your airs with Lightness.
Oh fie, fie,
How ill you blaze my Coat, Severity?
Is this a place for you? can Lightness here
Under the Hazard of her Shame appear?
Why thou dull lumpish Thing, void of all fashion,
Mirths poison, Enemy to Recreation,
Thou Melancholy wretch, so filed with spite
Thou eat'st thy heart, when others take delight,
I must be merry, tic my nature—
Fool.
Dull dogbolt.
Skit.
What? this a Scolding School,
How now? so hie got? and so loud withal?
Whose doing wa'st plac'st you two there to brawl?
Pray mark the Assembly, look upon i'm well,
Think where you are, and let that rude thought quell
Your unbeseeming difference, tic not here
As at a Pit, here's Reverence, Worth, and Fear.
She says this place and season suites not me.
She says but right in that,
O Levity,
No, nor you neither,
You may be gon too,
You're Both Extremes, therefore no place for you,
Lightness becomes not, nor Severity,
It must me between both, and I am She,
Too Light, is bad, and too Severe as Wild,
But both well tempered, makes the mixture mild,
As I stand now between you, so it makes
A perfect Virtue up, when it partakes
Of each, and comes no nearer then I doo,
And Virtue made, We have no need of you,
Vanish, be gon.
I give glace willingly
To You, but not to Her.
Nor I to Thee,
So, Thus things should have their be∣coming grace,
For Temperance fits the Reverence of this place:
Grave Senators, in goodness still increased!
Long may you Live to celebrate this Feast,
This blessed Season of true Joy compiled
In which fair Heaven and Man were reconcilde▪
Musique? thou modest Servant to this place,
Raise chaste Delight, to doe this Season grace.
Echo! Echo! by thy love once to Narcissus,
I now conjure thee not to miss vs,
But make thy Sound
Upon the Woods rebound
And Mountains—Ecch: And moun∣taines,
And to thy neighbouring Sisters cal,—Sisters cal,
Lodged in Cave or hollow Wall
And those resounding near fair Fountains
Ecch: Near fair Fountains,
Let i'm call to one another—To one another
—one another—
And one Sister raise up tother
Ecch.—up tother—
Let it go from me to you—From me to you
—Me▪ To you,
From you to them, be just and true
—Just and True
Never cease your Voices Flight,
Till you raise up chaste Delight
——Up chaste Delight,
Delight—Who calls me from my Cave
It was I—It was I, It was I;
This is no Time in silence now to lye
Delight—Who I?
O I;
This is a Season of all I oy compiled,
In which fair Heaven and Man were reconcilde
Ecch—Heaven and Man were reconcilde,
Ecch-Reconcilde,
Behold how many a worthy Guest
Are met to celebrate this Feast.
Delight—I see it plain, O blame me then,
I ne'er will show such Sloth again;
For whose delight am I now raised?
Oh for the Cities!
Delight—How? for the Cities?
Ecch—For the Cities:
Del. To fail a Mistress so renowned it were a thou∣sand pities,
Ecch—Thousand pities.
Those are her Honoured Sons you now behold,
Del. Heaven bless them all, with Graces manifold.
Temp. So!
Tic thankfully accepted, you've expressed,
Your service well and fully to this Feast:
Adorned and honoured in each happy part,
With those most reverend Patrons to Desert:
Joy never fail your meetings, good success
All your Endeavours, and your Fortunes bless,
Gladness of heart dwell ever in your Breasts,
And Peace of fair Works bring you glorious Rests.
At the House of the Right Ho∣norable SIR Francis Ihones, L. Mayor. For the solemn feast of Easter last, upon the Times of that blessed and laudable Custom of Celebrating the memory of Pious works in this City, at Saint Mary Spittle.

FLora, Flora!
We call thee here,
We call thee here,
From forth thy fragrant Bower,
Thou Queen of every laughing Flower,
Appear!
Appear to vs,
To vs appear:
Thou Banquet of the Year,
Or if a Name may be more sweet, more dear.
Hark, Summer hark,
Mark, Autumn, mark,
How coughing Winter mourns to see
This smiling Hour,
Would it were nipped for me,
But soft I feel no such decay
But I may live to kiss fair May,
And in the Morn and Evening hours,
Leave my cold sweats upon the Flowers.
Alas poor Mumps, at thy weak power We laugh,
—Oh—Oh—O—
He's struck cold
At Floras first appearing,
Look, in a Sound,
Will drop to'th ground.
Help, help, help, he wants your cheering.
Oh I confess
Field Empress,
The Beauty of thy power amazes,
I am content to join
With those three Friends of thine,
And help to chant thy praises;
Now all the Seasons of the Year agree
To give, (Fair Flora) the prime place to Thee.
Whore's Hyacinth! the Boy Appollo loud,
And turned into a Flower?
Here, Queen of sweetness.
Atones! thou that for thy beauteous chastity,
Were turned into the chastest of all Flowers,
(The closse-infolded Rose) blown into Blushes
It is so mayden-modest,
What's thy pleasure
Fair Empress of sweet Odours,
Willing Servants!
I have Employment for you both, and speedy,
We waite with much Joy to receive the charge on it;
Hast, to the two Assisting Magistrates,
Those worthy City Consuls,
Bear our sweet wishes to i'm, and speak Joy
From vs, to both their Feasts,
And to that part of their Graue-worthy Guess
Which here we miss to day, though here be those
Whom we ought more especially to Honour,
Say though we cannot there our self appear,
Because we owe our greater service here,
Yet that they shall not fail of all their due,
We send the wishes of our Heart by you.
Which shall be faithfully tendered,
Tic presumed;
But to this fair Assembly present now
I, and these yielding Sweets all their heads bow
In honour of this Feast, of the Day, chief,
Made solemn by the works of your Relief,
Your Cares, your Charities, the holy Use
Of pious exercise; all which infuse
Blessings into your Fortunes, you abound
In temporal things, cause blessed fruits are found
Upon the Stocks you graft on, mark the Increase;
You plant poor Orphans in a ground of Peace,
And carefully provide, when fruit time comes,
You gather Heavens Joys for it, in infinite Summer;
This day you viewed the Garden of those Deeds,
That bless the Founders; and all those succeeds
In Zeal and Imitation; you saw there,
Virtues true Paradise, dressed with your Care;
(Your most religious Care) and those Blew Sets,
They are the Cities Bank of Violets
That smells most sweet to Heaven; never cease then
You worthy Praesidents for Times and Men,
Till Charity spring, (by your Examples given)
As thick on Earth, as Rewards stand in Heaven;
If there were sloth or faintness tow'ard good works;
(As blessed be Heaven there is not) Time instructs,
The Season of the Year, for as the Ground,
The heaviest and dul'st Creature can be found,
Yet now begins both in her Meads and Bowers
To offer up her Sacrifice, in Flowers,
How much more ought that Earth with a Soul blessed,
Which is of every of you here possessed,
To spring forth Works of Piety and Love,
To gratify those Dews fall from Aboue;
And as the humblest Flower that ever grew,
He's not his Sent alone, but Virtue too,
Good for Mans griefs; so tic not Mans full Fame
To have a Christian Savour, or a Name,
An empty voice of Charity and Relief,
He must apply Ease to his Brothers grief;
Faith is the Sent and Odour of the Flower,
'But Work's the Virtue, that makes good the pow∣er;
Tic like the Tincture of those Robes you wear,
In which clear Vesture you to me appear
Like Borders of fair Roses; and worn hie
Upon the Cities forehead; that rich Dye
As it is reverend, honourable, grave,
So it is precious, wholesome; which doth crave
A double Virtue at the Wearers hands,
Justice and Mercy; by which goodness stands:
Thus Honour still claims Virtue for his Due,
And may both ever lay just claim to you:
What? the four Seasons of the Year struck dumb?
I looked for a kind Welcome, now Im'e come.

WElcome, O welcome, Queen of sweetness
welcome, in the noblest manner,
With all thy Flowers, thy sweet breath't Maids of Honour;
Flower guntle! I begin with Thee,
Fair Flower of Crystal! that's for me,
Apples of Love! there sweetness dwells;
Puh, give me Canterbury Bells;
Fair double-Gold cups, griefs expelling,
Agnus Cactus, all excelling,
Venus Bath! the loveliest pride of June,
Give me that Flower, called, Go to bed at noon,
Blessed Thistle, famed for good,
Shepherds Pouch, for stanching blood,
Fair yellow Knight-wort, for a foul relapse,
And Ladies▪ Mantle, good for Maidens Paps,
Tuft Hyacinth! that crowns the Bower,
Called of some, the Virgins Flower;
Take that for me, more good I feel
In Ruffling Robin, and Larks Heel.
There is a Sweet, Unnamed yet,
The root is white, the Mark of pure Delight,
Bearing his Flowers fair and hie,
The colour like a purple Dye:
What is the name tic blessed withal?
Liue-long! it so the Shepherds call;
Liue-long? tic Virtues promised Due
And may it Long remain with You
Honoured Patrons,
Virtuous Matrons,
Whose Lifes and Acts this City graces,
Daily striving,
And reviving
Works worthy your renown and places.
So ya're confirmed; from your harmonious Closes
May Sweetness drop, as Hony-Dew from Roses,
A blessed Health possess you, and a long,
That in this latter Spring of your grave years,
You may be greene in Virtues, and grow strong
In works of Grace, which souls to Heaven endeers;
your good Cares, here, Justice, and well spent hours
Crown you hereafter with eternal Flowers.
THe goddess Flora, Empress of the Spring,
Choosing (this Feast) her Flowery Sojourning,
Under the Roof of the chief Magistrate,
Whose power lays just claim to the greatest state,
Hath sent me forth, not meanest in her Grace,
To breath forth her sweet wishes to this place;
First to the Master of this bounteous Feast,
To speak her joy; next, to each worthy Guest;
And though she cannot now her Self appear,
Because she owes her greater Service there,
Yer her Hearts Love to every one I bring,
To whom sh'as sent a Present of the Spring.
Then false into the former speech of Flora, making
Use of her divine instructions.
Here follows the worthy and Noble Entertainments of the Lords of his Ma∣jests most Honourable Privy Council; at the Houses of the Lord Mayor, and Sheriffs.
The first Entertainment upon Thursday in Easter week being the fifth of April, 1621. And upon the sixeteenth of the same Month those Persons of Honour received their second Noble welcome, in a free and Generous Entertainment, at the house of the Right Worshipful, Mr. Sheriff Allen; Flora the Person used before, thus prepared for them.
Floe.
AM I so happy to be blessed again?
With These! the choice of many thousand
For Royal Trust selected, and a Care
That makes you Sacred; may the world compare men,
A Confidence with yours? from so complete
And excellent a Master? Or so great
And free a Love can any Nation show
In Subject to the Sovereign, then doth flow
From this most thankful City? Waives of Love
Ee'n overwhelm each other, as they move,
All striving to be first, they run in one
To'th Oceans Breast! (the Kings Affection.)
And you of Honour! that doe oft appear
In presence of a Majesty so clear,
So mighty in Heavens blessings, be so kind
To grace with Words what He shall ever find,
And tic a glorious Truth, and well beseems
Places and Persons of your fair Esteems,
Not all the Kingdoms of the Earth, contain
A City freer to her Sovereign,
More faithful, and more careful; observe here
His Highness excellent Trial; Love and Fear
Make up a Subjects duty, to his King,
As Justice and sweet Mercy makes up Him;
So two fold Virtue two-fold Duty, cheers,
He knew their lones, now came &amp; touched their fears
To try their Temper, (O blessed Heaven) he found
It was the Fear he looked for, had it's ground
Upon Religion, Reverence, sweet Respect,
Love looked not Lovelier, nor Diuinelier decked,
Each reprehensiue word He did impart
Flew, and cleaude fast to their obedient Heart,
It was fire within their bosom, 'could not rest,
Till in some serious manner, they'de expressed
Their duteous Care, with all speed put in Act
Their Sovereigns sacred pleasure, to coast
Where manners failed, and force, as with a Pill
From Humours rude, the Venom of the Ill;
He Kings own Admonition, against Crimes,
'Is Physic to the Body of the Times.
And herein did He Imitate the Highest,
(To whom it best becomes Him to be nighest)
To chasten, where he loves, it is the Seal
Of the Almighties favour, He doth deal
So with his Chosen, doe not languish then,
Thou Prince of Cities, cause the King of Men
Divinely did reprove thee, Know, tic Love,
Thou art his Chosen City, and wilt prove
(As thou hast ever been) faithful and free,
The Chamber of his sweet Security:
Then in a Health of loy your Hearts express,
Whilst I breath welcome to those Noble Guess.
A Trust of Honour, and a Noble Care
Still to discharge that Trust, Keep your Fems fair,
You have proceeded carefully; go on,
And a full Praise Crown your Progression.
The last Entertainment full as Noble and worthy as the former, upon the Saturday ensuing, being the 21. of the same Month, at the House of the equally Generous and bounteous, the Right Worshipful, Master Sheriff Duty.
GOod Heaven
Fie, this is usurpation merely,
Speak thrice together? there's no right in this:
What's that?
I have the juster cause to take exceptions,
This is the place I served in, lately served in,
And by her own appointmēt, my wrong's greatest.
Here's a strange sudden boldness a' both sides a' me,
Wa'st not sufficient grace for you to speak
At the chief Magistrates house, there, where that Bower
Was first erected, but to shift your seat
From place to place, pull down, and then set up,
I wonder how she scopes Informers, trust me.
Believe me so doe I, sh'as favour shown her.
So, this becomes you well,
There's right in all things,
We might have kept our places as we held i'm,
There's little Conscience in your dealing, thus,
You might have left the Lower Books for vs,
For our poor service.
Thus I answer you,
Taking my President from the just care
Of those clear Lights of Honour, shining fair
To their Works End; you see before your Eyes
The Trust that was committed to their wise
And discreet Powers (for his Highness Use)
They put not off to others, with excuse
Of weariness, or pains; as they begun,
In their own Noble Persons see all done:
So, by their sweet Example, I that am
Your Queen and Mistress, and may rightly blame,
And tax the boldness of your ruder blood,
I doe not think, or hold my self too good
In mine own Person, to commend their Cares
That have so justly served their King, in Theirs,
Now you pull in your Heads.
Pardon sweet Queen.
Yet why should Anger in my brow be seen
They came but to show duty to the Time,
Contention to doe Service was their Crime,
That's no ill looking fault; but it is still known,
They that give Honour, love to do it alone,
It brookes no Partnership:—To give this last
Duty her Due, as others before past,
Though it came now from men of meaner Rank,
Where wealth was ne'er known to oreflow the bank
Like Spring-Tides of the Rich, that swell more hie,
Yet tak't for Truth, it comes as cheerfully,
All smiling Givers; and well may it come
With smooth and loving Faces, the small Sum
That they return, is thousand times repaid
In Peace and Safety, besides Sovereign Aid
For each Hearts Grievance, (to its full content)
By this high Synod of the Parliament;
Before whose fair, clear, and Unbribed Eyes,
(When it appears) Corruption sincks and dies,
Secure Oppression once, comes trembling thither
(Stead of her hard heart knoks her knees together
This Benefit is purchased, this Reward
To which all Coin is dross to be compared:
But, the fair Works concluded, on all parts,
Your Care, which I place first of all deserts,
And it becomes it, it is been nobly Just,
You have discharged with Honour your hie Trust:
The Cities Love, I must remember next,
And faithful Duty, both devoutly mixed;
And (as the State of Court sets last, the Best,)
His boundless Goodness, not to be expressed,
That is your King and Master, Blessings fall
Upon His Actions; Honour, on you All.

SIrha, you know I have rid hard; Stir my Horse well,
And let him want no Litter.
I am sure I have run hard,
Would some body would walk me, &amp; see me Litterd;
For I think my fellow-Horse, cannot in reason
Desire more rest, nor take up his Chamber before me,
But we are the Beasts now, and the Beasts are our Masters,
When you have don, step to the Ten-Crown Ordinary.
With all my heart, Sir, For I have Twenty Crown-stomach.
And there bespeak a dinner.
Yes Sir, presently.
For whom, I beseech you, Sir?
For my self, I take it Sir.
In truth ye shall not take it, it is not meant for you,
Ther's for your Provender: Bespeak a Dinner
For Monsieur Mirabell, and his Companions,
They'll be in Town within this hour. When you have don, Sirha,
Make ready all things at my Lodging, for me,
And wait me there.
The Ten-Crown Ordinary?
Yes Sir, if you have not forgot it.
I'll forget my feet first;
It is the best part of a Foot-mans faith.
These youths
For all they have been in Italy, to learn thrift,
And seem to wonder at men slavish ways,
Yet they cannot rub off old friends, their French ytches;
They must meet sometimes to disport their Bodies
With good Wine, and good Women; and good store too.
Let'em be what they will, they are Armed at all points
And then hang saving. Let the Sea grow high,
This Ordinary can fit'em of all Sizes
They must salute their Country with old-customes.
Brother.
My dearest sister.
Welcome, welcome:
Indeed ye are welcome home, most welcome.
Thank ye,
You are grown a handsome woman Oriana,
(Blush at your faults) I am wondrous glad to see ye.
Monsieur La-Castre: Let not my Affection
To my fair Sister, make me held unmannerly:
I am glad to see ye well, to see ye lusty,
Good health about ye, and in fair company,
Believe me, I am proud—
Fair Sir, I thank ye:
Monsieur de Guard, you are welcome from your journey,
Good men, have still good welcome: give me your hand, Sir.
Once more, you are welcome home: you look still younger.
Time has no leisure to look after us,
We wander, every where: Age cannot find us.
And how does all?
All well, Sir; and all lusty.
I hope my Son be so, I doubt not Sir,
But you have often seen him in your journeis,
And bring me some fair News.
Your Son is well, Sir,
And grown a proper Gentleman: he is well, and lusty,
Within this eight hours, I took leave of him,
And over-eyd him, having some flight business
That forced me out of the way: I can assure you
He will be here to night.
Ye make me glad Sir,
For of my faith, I almost long to see him,
Me thinks he has been away —
It is but your tenderness;
What are three years? a love-sick wench will allow it?
His friends that went out with him are come back too;
Beleure, and young Pinac: he bid me say little,
Because he means to be his own glad Messenger.
I thank ye for this news, Sir, he shall be welcome,
And his friends too: Indeed I thank you heartily:
And how (for I dare say, you will not flatter him)
Has Italy wrought on him? he's he mewed yet,
His wild fantastic Toys? they say that Climate
Is a great purger of those humorous Fluxes.
How is he improved, I pray ye?
No doubt Sir, well.
He has born himself a full, and noble Gentleman,
To speak him farther, is beyond my Charter,
I am glad to hear so much good: Come, I see
You long to enjoy your Sister: yet I must entreat ye
Before I go, to sup with me to night
And must not be denied.
I am your servant.
Where you shall meet fair, merry, and noble Company.
My neighbour Natolet, and his two fair daughters.
Your supper's seasoned well, Sir. I shall wait upon ye.
Till then I'll leave ye: and y〈…〉 are once more welcome.
I thank ye, noble Sir. Now Oriana,
How have ye done since I went? Have ye had your health well?
And your mind free?
You see I am not bated;
Merry, and eat my meat.
A good preservative.
And how have you been used? You know Oriana,
Upon my going out, at your request,
I left your Portion in La-Castres hands,
(The main Means you must stick to) for that reason
(And it is no little one) I ask ye, Sister,
With what humanity he entertains ye,
And how ye find his courtesy?
Most ready.
I can assure you, Sir, I am used most nobly.
I am glad to hear it: But I prithee tell me,
(And tell me true) what end had you Oriana,
In trusting your money here? He is no Kinsman,
Nor any tie upon him of a Guardian;
Nor dare I think ye doubt my prodigality.
No, certain, Sir, none of all this provoked me;
Another private reason.
It is not private,
Nor carried so: it is common (my fair Sister)
Your love to Mirabell; your blushes tell it:
It is too much known, and spoken of too largely;
And with no little shame I wonder at it.
Is it a shame to love?
To Love undiscreetly:
A Virgin should be tender of her honour,
Close, and secure.
I am as close as can be,
And stand upon as strong and honest guards too,
Unless this Warlike Age need a Portcullis:
Yet I confess, I love him.
Hear the people.
Now I say hang the people: He that dares
Believe what they say, dares be mad, and give
His Mother, nay his own Wife up to Rumour;
All grounds of truth they build on, is a Tavern,
And their best censure's Sack, Sack in abundance:
For as they drink, they think: they ne'er speak modestly
Unless the wine be poor, or they want money.
Believe them? believe Amadis de Gaul,
The Knight of the Sun, or Palmerin of England;
For these, to them, are modest, and true stories.
Pray understand me; if their tongues be truth,
And if in Vino veritas be an Oracle,
What woman is, or has been ever honest?
Give 'em but ten round cups, they'll swear Lucretia
Died not for want of power to resist Tarquine,
But want of Pleasure, that he stayed no longer:
And Portia, that was famous for her Piety
To her loved Lord, they'll face ye out, died of the pox.
Well, there is something, Sister.
If there be, Brother,
It is none of their things, it is not yet so monstrous;
My thing is Marriage: And at his return
I hope to put their squint-eyes right again.
Marriage? it is true: his father is a rich man;
Rich both in land and money: he his heir,
A young and handsome man, I must confess too;
But of such qualities, and such wild flings,
Such admirable imperfections, Sister,
(For all his travail, and bought experience)
I should be loath to own him for my brother:
Me thinks a rich mind in a state in different
Would prove the better fortune.
If he be wild,
The reclaming him to good, and honest (brother)
Will make much for my honour; which, if I prosper,
Shall be the study of my love, and life too.
Ye say well; would he thought as well, and loved too.
He mary? he'll be hanged first: he knows no more
What the conditions and the ties of Love are,
The honest purposes and grounds of Marriage,
Nor will know, nor be ever brought to endeavour,
Than I do how to build a Church; he was ever
A loose and strong defier of all order,
His Loves are wanderers, they knock at each door,
And taste each dish, but are no residents:
Or say he may be brought to think of Marriage
(As 't will be no small labour) thy hopes are strangers.
I know there is a laboured match, now followed,
(Now at this time, for which he was sent for home too)
Be not abused, Natolet has two fair daughters,
And he must take his choice.
Let him take freely;
For all this I despair not: my mind tells me
That I, and only I, must make him perfect;
And in that hope I rest.
Since y' are so confident
Prosper your hope: I'll be no adversary:
Keep your self fair and right, he shall not wrong ye.
When I forget my virtue, no man know me.
Welcome to Paris once more, Gentlemen:
We have had a merry, and a lusty Ord'nary,
And wine, and good meat, and a bouncing Reckoning;
And let it go for once; It is a good physic:
Only the wenches are not for my diet,
They are too lean and thin; their embraces brawn-fall'n.
Give me the plump Venetian, fat, and lusty,
That meets me soft and supple; smiles upon me,
As if a cup of full wine leaped to kiss me;
These slight things I affect not.
They are ill built;
Pin-buttockt, like your dainty Barberries,
And weak in the pasterns; they'll endure no hardness.
There's nothing good, or handsome, bred amongst us;
Till we are travailed, and live abroad, we are coxcombs:
Ye talk of France, a slight, unseasoned Country;
Abundance of gross food, which makes us block-heads:
We are fair set-out indeed, and so are fore-horses.
Men say we are great Courtiers, men abuse us:
We are wise, and valiant too, non credo Signior:
Our women the best Linguists, they are Parrots;
Of this side the Alps they are nothing but mere Drolleries:
Ha Rome la Santa, Italy for my money:
Their policies, their customs; their frugalities,
Their courtesies so open, yet so reserved too,
As when ye think y' are known best, ye are a stranger;
Their very pick-teeth speak more man than we do,
And season of more salt.
It is a brave Country;
Not pestered with your stubborn precise puppies,
That turn all useful, and allowed contentments
To scabs and scruples; hang'em Capon-worshippers.
I like that freedom well, and like their women too,
And would fain do as others do; but I am so bashful,
So naturally an Ass: Look ye, I can look upon 'em,
And very willingly I go to see 'em,
(There's no man willinger) and I can kiss 'em,
And make a shift—
But if they chance to flout ye,
Or say ye are too bold; fie Sir remember;
I pray sit farther off;—
It is true, I am humbled,
I am gone, I confess ingenuously I am silenced,
The spirit of Amber cannot force me answer.
Then would I sing and dance.
You have wherewithal, Sir.
And charge her up again.
I can be hanged first:
Yet where I fasten well, I am a tyrant.
Why, thou dare fight?
Yes, certainly, I dare fight;
And fight with any man, at any weapon,
Would the other were no more; but, a pox on it,
When I am sometimes in my height of hope,
And reasonable valiant that way, my heart hardened;
Some scornful jest or other, chops between me
And my desire: What would ye have me to do then, Gentlemen?
Belvere, ye must be bolder: Travel three years,
And bring home such a baby to betray ye
As bashfulness? a great fellow, and a soldier?
You have the gift of impudence, be thankful;
Every man has not the like talent: I will study
And if it may be revealed to me.
Learn of me,
And of Pinac: no doubt you'll find employment;
Ladies will look for Courtship.
It is but fleshing,
But standing one good brunt or two: hast thou any mind to ma∣riage?
We'll provide thee some soft-natur'd wench, that's dumb too.
Or an old woman that cannot refuse thee in charity.
A dumb woman, or an old woman, that were eager,
And cared not for discourse, I were excellent at.
You must now put on boldness, there's no avoiding it;
And stand all hazards; fly at all games bravely;
They'll say you went out like an Ox, and returned like an Ass else.
I shall make danger sure.
I am sent for home now,
I know it is to mary, but my father shall pardon me,
Although it be a witty ceremony,
And may concern me hereafter in my gravity;
I will not lose the freedom of a Traveller;
A new strong lusty Bark cannot ride at one anchor;
Shall I make divers suits to show to the same eyes?
It is dull, and home-spun: Study several pleasures,
And want employments for'em? I'll be hanged first;
Tie me to one smock? make my travels fruitless?
I'll none of that: For every fresh behaviour,
By your leave, father, I must have a fresh Mistress,
And a fresh favour too.
I like that passingly;
As many as you will, so they be willing;
Willing, and gentle, gentle.
There's no reason
A Gentleman, and a Traveller, should be clapped up,
For it is a kind of Baeboes to be married
Before he manifest to the world his good parts:
Tug ever like at a rascal at one oar?
Give me the Italian liberty.
That I study;
And that I will enjoy: Come, go in Gentlemen,
There mark how I behave my self, and follow.
You and your beauteous daughters are most welcome,
Beshrew my blood they are fair ones; welcome Beauties,
Welcome sweet birds.
They are bound much to your courtesies.
I hope we shall be nearer acquainted.
That's my hope too.
For certain, Sir, I much desire your Alliance.
You see 'em, they are no Gipseies; for their breeding,
It has not been so coarse, but they are able
To rank themselves with women of fair fashion;
Indeed they have been trained well.
Thank me.
Fit for the heirs of that state I shall leave 'em;
To say more, is to sell 'em. They say your son
Now he has travailed must be wondrous curious,
And choice in what he takes: These are no coarse ones;
Sir, here's a merry wench, let him look to himself,
(All heart, y'faith) may chance to startle him;
For all his care and travailed caution,
May creep into his eye; if he love Gravity,
Affect a solemn face, there's one will fit him.
So young, and so demure?
She is my daughter,
Else I would tell you, Sir, she is a Mistress
Both of those manners, and that modesty,
You would wonder at: She is no often speaker,
But when she does, she speaks well; Nor no Reveller,
Yet she can dance, and has studied the Court Elements,
And sings, as some say, handsomely; if a woman,
With the decency of her sex, may be a Scholar,
I can assure ye, Sir, she understands too.
These are fit Garments, Sir.
Thank them that cut 'em:
Yes, they are handsome women; they have handsome parts too;
Pretty becoming parts.
It is like they have, Sir.
Yes, yes, and handsome Education they have had too:
Had it abundantly; they need not blush at it;
I taught it, I'll avouch it.
Ye say well, Sir.
I know what I say, Sir, and I say but right, Sir.
I am no trumpet of their commendations
Before their father; else I should say farther.
Pray ye, what's this Gentleman?
One that lives with me, Sir;
A man well bred and learned, but blunt and bitter,
Yet it offends no wise man; I take pleasure in it:
Many fair gifts he has, in some of which
That lie most easy to their understandings,
Has handsomely bred up my girls, I thank him.
I have put it to 'em, that's my part, I have urged it,
It seems they are of years now to take hold on it.
He's wondrous blunt.
By my faith I was afraid of him:
Does he not fall out with the Gentlewomen sometimes?
No, no; he's that way moderate, and discreet, Sir.
If he did, we should be too hard for him.
Well said Sulphur:
Too hard for thy husbands head, if he wear not armour.
Many of these bickrings, Sir.
I am glad they are no Oracles:
Sure, as I live, he beats them, he's so puissant.
Well, if ye do forget—
Prithee hold thy peace;
I know thou art a pretty wench; I know thou love me,
Preserve it till we have a fit time to discourse on it,
And a fit place: I'll ease thy heart, I warrant thee:
Thou see I have much to do now.
I am answered, Sir:
With me ye shall have nothing on these conditions.
Your father, and your friends.
You are welcome home, Sir;
'Bless ye, ye are very welcome.
'Pray know this Gentleman,
And these fair Ladies.
Monsieur Mirabell,
I am much affected with your fair return, Sir:
You bring a general joy.
I bring you service,
And these bright beauties, Sir.
Welcome home, Gentlemen,
Welcome, with all my heart.
We thank ye, Sir.
Your friends will have their share too.
Sir, we hope
They'll look upon us, though we show like strangers.
Monsieur de-Gard, I must salute you also,
And this fair Gentlewoman: you are welcome from your Travel too.
All welcome, all.
We render ye our loves, Sir;
The best wealth we bring home: By your favours, Beauties,
One of these two: you know my meaning.
Well Sir;
They are fair and handsome, I must needs confess it;
And let it prove the worst, I shall live after it,
Whilst I have meat &amp; drink, Love can not starve me;
For if I dye of the first fit, I am unhappy,
And worthy to be buried with my heels upward.
To mary, Sir?
You know I am an old man,
And every hour declining to my grave,
One foot already in, more sons I have not,
Nor more I dare not seek whilst you are worthy,
In you lies all my hope, and all my name,
The making good or wretched of my memory,
The safety of my state.
And you have provided
Out of this tenderness this handsome Gentlewoman,
Daughters to this rich man, to take my choice of?
I have, dear son.
It is true, ye are old, and feebled;
Would ye were young again, and in full vigour;
I love a bounteous fathers life, a long one,
I am none of those that when they shoot to ripeness,
Do what they can to break the boughs they grew on:
I wish ye many years, and many riches,
And pleasures to enjoy 'em: But for Marriage,
I neither yet believe in it, nor affect it,
Nor think it fit.
You will render me your reasons?
Yes, Sir, both short and pithy; and these they are:
You would have me mary a Maid?
A Maid? what else?
Yes, there be things called Widows, deadmen's Wills,
I never loved to prove those; nor never longed yet
To be buried alive in another mans cold Monument.
And there be Maids appearing, and Maids being:
The appearing, are fantastic things, mere shadows;
And if you mark 'em well, they want their heads too;
Only the world, to cousin misty eyes,
Has clapped 'em on new faces. The Maids being,
A man may venture on, if he be so mad to mary;
If he have neither fear before his eyes, nor fortune;
And let him take heed how he gather these too;
For look ye, father, they are just like Melons,
Musk-Melons are the Emblems of these Maids;
Now they are ripe, now cut 'em, they taste pleasantly,
And are a dainty fruit, digested easily:
Neglect this present time, and come to morrow,
They are so ripe they are rotten gon, their sweetness
Run into humour, and their taste to surfeit.
Why these are now ripe son.
I'll try them presently,
And if I like their taste—
'Pray ye please your self, Sir.
That liberty is my due, and I'll maintain it.
Lady, what think you of a handsome man now?
A wholesome too, Sir.
That's as you make your bargain.
A handsome, wholesome man then, and a kind man,
To cheer your heart up, to rejoice ye, Lady?
Yes, Sir, I love rejoicing.
To lie close to ye?
Close as a cockle? keep the cold nights from ye?
That will be looked for too, our bodies ask it.
And get two Boys at every birth?
That's nothing,
I have known a Cobbler do it, a poor thin Cobbler;
A Cobbler out of mouldy cheese perform it,
Cabbage, and coarse black bread: me thinks a Gentleman
Should take foul scorn to have a Nawl out-name him.
Two at a birth? why every House-dove has it:
That man that feeds well, promises as well too,
I should expect indeed something of worth from.
Ye talk of two?
She would have me get two dozen,
Like Buttons, at a birth.
You love to brag, Sir.
If you proclaim these offers at your Marriage,
Ye are a pretty timbered man, take heed,
They may be taken hold of, and expected,
Yes, if not hoped for at a higher rate too.
I will take heed, and thank ye for your counsel:
Father, what think ye?
It is a merry Gentlewoman;
Will make, no doubt, a good wife.
Not for me:
I mary her, and happily get nothing;
In what a state am I then? Father, I shall suffer
For any thing I hear to the contrary, more majorum,
I were as sure to be a Cuckold, Father,
A Gentleman of Antler.
Away, away fool.
As I am sure to fail her expectation,
I had rather get the pox than get her babies.
Ye are much too blame; if this do not affect ye,
Pray try the other; she is of a more demure way.
That I had but the audacity to talk thus!
I love that plain-spoken Gentlewoman admirably,
And certain I could go as near to please her,
If down-right doing— she has a per'lous countenance,
If I could meet one that would believe me,
And take my honest meaning without circumstance.
You shall have your will, Sir, I will try the other,
But twill be to small use. I hope, fair Lady
(For methinks in your eyes I see more mercy)
You will enjoin your Lover a less penance;
And though I'll promise much, as men are liberal,
And vow an ample sacrifice of service,
Yet your discretion, and your tenderness,
And thriftiness in Love, good housewives carefulness
To keep the stock entire—
Good Sir, speak louder,
That these may witness too ye talk of nothing,
I should be loath alone to bear the burden
Of so much indiscretion.
Hark ye, hark ye;
Od's-bobs, you are angry, Lady.
Angry? no, Sir;
I never owned an anger to lose poorly.
But you can love, for all this, and delight too,
For all your set-austeritie, to hear
Of a good husband, Lady?
You say true, Sir:
For by my troth, I have heard of none these ten year,
They are so rare, and there are so many, Sir,
So many longing-women on their knees too,
That pray the dropping down of these good husbands,
The dropping down from heaven: for they are not bred here,
That you may guess at all my hope, but hearing—
Why may not I be one?
You were near 'em once, Sir,
When ye came ore the Alps; those are near heaven:
But since ye mist that happiness, there's no hope of ye.
Can ye love a man?
Yes, if the man be lovely;
That is, be honest, modest: I would have him valiant,
His anger slow, but certain for his honour;
Travailed he should be, but through himself exactly;
For it is fairer to know manners well, than Countries;
He must be no vain talker, nor no Lover
To hear himself talk, they are brags of a wanderer,
Of one finds no retreict for fair behaviour;
Would ye learn more?
Yes.
Learn to hold your peace then,
Fond girls are got with tongues, women with tempers.
Women, with I know what; but let that vanish:
Go thy way good-wife Bias; sure thy husband
Must have a strong Philosophers stone, he will ne'er please thee else.
Heir's a starcht piece of Austerity: do you hear, father?
Do you hear this moral Lecture?
Yes, and like it.
Why there's your judgment now; there's an old bolt shot:
This Thing must have the strangest observation,
Do you mark me (father?) when she is married once,
The strangest custom too of admiration
On all she do's and speaks, twill be past sufferance;
I must not lie with her in common language,
Nor cry, have at thee Kate, I shall be hist then;
Nor eat my meat without the sauce of Sentences,
Your powdered beef, and problems, a rare diet;
My first son, Monsieur Aristotle, I know it,
Great Master of the Metaphysics, or so;
The second Solon, and the best Law-setter;
And I must look Egyptian God-fathers,
Which will be no small trouble: My eldest daughter
Sapho, or such a fiddling kind of Poetess,
And brought up, invita Minerva, at her needle.
My dogs must look their names too, and all Spartan,
Lelaps, Melampus: no more Fox and Baudiface.
I married to a sullen set of Sentences?
To one that weighs her words and her behaviours
In the Gold-weights of discretion? I'll be hanged first.
Prithee reclaim thy self.
'Pray ye give me time then;
If they can set me any thing to play at,
That seems fit for a Gamester, have at the fairest
Till I see more, and try more.
Take your time then,
I'll bar ye no fair liberty: Come Gentlemen,
And Ladies, come; to all once more a welcome,
And now let's in to supper.
How dost like 'em?
They are fair enough, but of so strange behaviors.
Too strange for me; I must have those have mettle,
And mettle to my mind: Come lets be merry.
'Bless me from this woman: I would stand the Cannon
Before ten words of hers.
Do you find him now?
Do you think he will be ever firm?
I fear not.
Ne'er tel me of this happiness, it is nothing;
The state they bring with being sought to scurvy,
I had rather make mine own play, and I will do.
My happiness is in mine own content,
And the despising of such glorious trifles,
As I have done a thousand more. For my humour
Give me a good free fellow, that sticks to me,
A jovial fair companion; there's a Beauty:
For women, I can have too many of them;
Good women too, as the Age reckons 'em,
More than I have employment for.
You are happy.
My only fear is, that I must be forced
Against my nature, to conceal my self.
Health, and an able body are two jewels.
If either of these two women were offered to me now,
I would think otherwise, and do accordingly:
Yes, and recant my heresies, I would Sir;
And be more tender of opinion,
And put a little off my travailed Liberty
Out of the way, and look upon 'em seriously.
Me-thinks this grave-carried wench.
Me-thinks the other,
The home-spoken Gentle-woman, that desires to be fruitful,
That treats of the full manage of the matter,
For there lies all my aim; that wench, me-thinks
If I were but well set-on; for she is a fable,
If I were but hounded right, and one to teach me;
She speaks to the matter, and comes home to the point:
Now do I know I have such a body to please her,
As all the kingdom cannot fit her with, I am sure on it,
If I could but talk my self into her favour.
That's easily done.
That's easily said, would it were done;
You should see then how I would lay about me;
If I were virtuous, it would never grieve me,
Or any thing that might justify my modesty,
But when my nature is prone to do a charity,
And my calfs-tongue will not help me.
Will ye go to 'em?
They cannot but take it courteously.
I'll do my part,
Though I am sure 'twil be the hardest I ever plaid yet,
A way I never tried too, which will stagger me,
And if it do not shame me, I am happy.
Win 'em, and wear 'em, I give up my interest.
What say ye, Mousieur Bellure?
Would I could say,
Or sing, or any thing that were but handsome,
I would be with her presently.
Yours is no venture;
A merry ready wench.
A vengeance squibber;
She'll fleer me out of faith too.
I'll be near thee;
Pluck up thy heart, I'll second thee at all brunts;
Be angry if she abuse thee, and beat her a little,
Some women are won that way.
Pray be quiet,
And let me think: I am resolved to go on;
But how I shall get off again —
I am persuaded
Thou wilt so please her, she will go near to ravish thee.
I would it were come to that once: Let me pray a little.
Now for thine honour Pinac; board me this modesty〈…〉
Warm but this frozen snow-ball, twill be a conquest
(Although I know thou art a fortunate Wencher,
And hast done rarely in thy days) above all thy ventures.
You will be ever near?
At all necessities,
And take thee off, and set thee on again, Boy;
And cherish thee, and stroke thee.
Help me out too?
For I know I shall stick in the mire: if ye see us close once,
Be gone, and leave me to my fortune, suddenly,
For I am then determined to do wonders.
Farewell, and fling an old shoe: how my heart throbs?
Would I were drunk: Farewell Pinac; heaven send us
A joyful and a merry meeting, man.
Farewell,
And cheer thy heart up; and remember Bellure
They are but women.
I had rather they were Lyons.
About it; Ill be with you instantly.
Shall I ne'er be at rest? no peace of conscience?
No quiet for these creatures? Am I ordained
To be devoured quick by these she-Canibals?
Here's another they call handsome, I care not for her,
I ne'er look after her: When I am half tippled
It may be I should turn her, and peruse her,
Or in my want of women, I might call for her;
But to be haunted when I have no fancy,
No maw to the matter— Now, why do you follow me?
I hope, Sir, it is no blemish to my virtue,
Nor need you (out of scruple) ask that question,
If you remember ye, before your Travel
The contract you tied to me: it is my love, Sir,
That makes me seek ye, to confirm your memory,
And that being fair and good, I cannot suffer:
I come to give ye thanks too.
For what prithee?
For that fair piece of honesty ye showed, Sir,
That constant nobleness.
How? for I am short headed.
I'll tell ye then; for refusing that free offer
Of Monsieur Nantolets; those handsome Beauties,
Those two prime Ladies, that might well have pressed ye,
If not to have broken, yet to have bowed your promise.
I know it was for my sake, for your faith sake,
You slipped 'em off: your honesty compelled ye.
And let me tell ye, Sit, it showed most handsomely.
And let me tell thee, there was no such matter:
Nothing intended that way of that nature;
I have more to do with my honesty than to fool it,
Or venture it in such leak barks as women;
I put 'em off, because I loved 'em not,
Because they are too queasy for my temper,
And not for thy sake, nor the Contract sake,
Nor vows, nor oaths, I have made a thousand of 'em,
They are things indifferent, whether kept or broken;
Mere venial slips, that grow not near the Conscience;
Nothing concerns those tender parts; they are trifles;
For, as I think, there was never man yet hoped for
Either constancy, or secrecy, from a woman,
Unless it were an Ass ordained for sufferance;
Nor to contract with such can be a T〈…〉all;
So let them know again; for it is a Justice,
And a main point of civil policy,
Whatever we say or swear, they being Reprobates,
Out of the state of faith, we are clear of all sides,
And it is a curious blindness to believe us.
You do not mean this sure?
Yes sure, and certain,
And hold it positively, as a Principle,
As ye are strange things, and made of strange fires and fluxes,
So we are allowed as strange ways to obtain ye,
But not to hold; we are all created Errant.
You told me other tales.
I not deny it;
I have tales of all sorts for all sorts of women,
And protestations likewise of all sizes,
As they have vanities to make us coxcombs;
If I obtain a good turn, so it is,
I am thankful for it: if I be made an Ass,
The mends are in mine own hands, or the Surgeons,
And there's an end on it.
Do not you love me then?
As I love others, heartily I love thee,
When I am high and lusty, I love thee cruelly
After I have made a plenteous meal, and satisfied
My senses with all delicates, come to me,
And thou shalt see how I love thee.
Will not you mary me?
No, certain, no, for any thing I know yet;
I must not lose my liberty, dear Lady,
And like a wanton slave cry for more shackles.
What should I mary for? Do I want any thing?
Am I an inch the farther from my pleasure?
Why should I be at charge to keep a wife of mine own,
When other honest married men will ease me?
And thank me too, and be beholding to me:
Thou think I am mad for a Maiden-head, thou art cozened;
Or if I were addicted to that diet
Can you tell me where I should have one? thou art eighteen now,
And if thou hast thy Maiden-head yet extant,
Sure it is as big as Cods-head: and those grave dishes
I never love to deal withal: Dost thou see this book here?
Look over all these ranks; all these are Women,
Maids, and pretenders to Maiden-heads; these are my conquests,
All these I swore to mary, as I swore to thee,
With the same reservation, and most righteously,
Which I need not have don neither, for alas they made no scruple,
And I enjoyed 'em at my will, and left 'em:
Some of 'em are married since, and were as pure maids again,
Nay of my conscience better than they were bred for;
The rest fine sober women.
Are ye not ashamed, Sir?
No by my troth, Sir; there's no shame belongs to it;
I hold it as commendable to be wealthy in pleasure,
As others do in rotten sheep, and pasture.
Are all my hopes come to this? is their no faith?
No troth? nor modesty in men?
How now Sister,
Why weeping thus? did I not prophecy?
Come tell me why—.
I am not well; 'pray ye pardon me.
Now Monsieur Mirabeli, what ails my Sister?
You have been playing the wag with her.
As I take it,
She is crying for a codpiece; is she gone?
Lord, what an Age is this? I was calling for ye,
For as I live I thought she would have ravished me.
Ye are merry Sir.
Thou know this book, de Guard, this Inventory.
The Debt-book of your Mistresses, I remember it.
Why this was it that angered her; she was stark mad
She found not her name here, and cried down-right,
Because I would not pity her immediately,
And put her in my list.
Sure she had more modesty.
Their modesty is anger to be over-done;
They'll quarrel sooner for precedence here,
And take it in more dudgeon to be slighted,
Than they will in public meetings; it is their natures:
And alas I have so many to dispatch yet,
And to provide my self for my affairs too,
That in good faith—
Be not too glorious foolish;
Sum not your Travails up with vanities,
It ill becomes your expectation:
Temper your speech, Sir; whether your loose story
Be true, or false (for you are so free, I fear it)
Name not my Sister in it; I must not hear it;
Upon your danger name her not: I hold her
A Gentlewoman of those happy parts and carriage,
A good mans tongue may be right proud to speak her.
Your Sister, Sir? do ye blench at that? do ye cavil?
Do you hold her such a piece, she may not be played withal?
I have had an hundred handsomer and nobler,
Has sued to me too for such a courtesy:
Your Sister comes i'th'rear: since ye are so angry,
And hold your Sister such a strong Recusant,
I tell ye I may do it, and it may be will too,
It may be have too; there's my free confession;
Work upon that now.
If I thought ye had, I would work,
And work such stubborn work, should make your heart ache;
But I believe ye, as I ever knew ye,
A glorious talker, and a Legend maker
Of idle tales, and trifles; a depraver
Of your own truth; their honours fly about ye;
And so I take my leave, but with this caution,
Your sword be surer than your tongue, you'll smart else.
I laugh at thee, so little I respect thee;
And I'll talk louder, and despise thy Sister;
Set up a Chamber-maid that shall out-shine her,
And carry her in my Coach too, and that will kill her.
Go get thy Rents up, go.
Ye are a fine Gentleman.
Now have at my two youths, I'll see how they do,
How they behave themselves, and then I'll study
What wench shall love me next, and when I'll loose her.
Art thou her servant, say thou?
Her poor creature,
But servant to her horse, Sir.
Can thou show me
The way to her chamber? or where I may conveniently
See her, or come to talk to her?
That I can, Sir;
But the question is whether I will or no.
Why I'll content thee.
Why I'll content thee then; now ye come to me.
There's for your diligence.
There's her chamber, Sir;
And this way she comes out; stand ye but here, Sir,
You have her at your prospect, or your pleasure.
Is she not very angry?
You'll find that quickly:
May be she'll call ye saucy scurvy fellow,
Or some such familiar name: may be she knows ye,
And will fling a Piss-pot at ye, or a Pantofle,
According as ye are in acquaintance: if she like ye,
May be she'll look upon ye, may be no,
And two months hence call for ye.
This is fine.
She is monstrous proud then?
She is a little haughty;
Of a small body, she has a mind well mounted.
Can ye speak Greek?
No certain.
Get ye gon then;
And talk of stars, and firmaments, and fire-drakes,
Do you remember who was Adams School-master,
And who taught Eve to spin? she knows all these,
And will run ye over the beginning of the world
As familiar as a Fiddler.
Can ye sit seven hours together, and say nothing?
Which she will do, and when she speaks speak Oracles;
Speak things that no man understands, nor her self neither.
Thou make me wonder.
Can ye smile?
Yes willingly:
For naturally I bear a mirth about me.
She'll ne'er endure ye then; she is never merry;
If she see one laugh, she'll swooned past Aquavitae:
Never come near her, Sir; if ye chance to venture,
And talk not like a Doctor, you are damned too;
I have told ye enough for your Crown, and so good speed ye.
I have a pretty task, if she be thus curious,
As sure it seems she is; if I fall off now,
I shall be laughed at fearfully; if I go forward,
I can but be abused, and that I look for,
And yet I may hit right, but it is unlikely.
Stay, in what mood and figure shall I attempt her?
A careless way? no, no, that will not waken her;
Besides, her gravity will give me line still,
And let me lose my self; yet this way often
Has hit, and handsomely. A wanton method?
I, if she give it leave to sink into her consideration;
But there's the doubt: if it but stir her blood once,
And creep into the crannies of her fancy,
Set her a gog: but if she chance to slight it,
And by the power of her modesty fling it back,
I shall appear the arrantst Rascal to her,
The most licentious knave, for I shall talk lewdly.
To bear my self austerely? rate my words,
And fling a general gravity about me,
As if I meant to give Laws? but this I cannot do,
This is a way above my understanding;
Or if I could, it is odds she'll think I mock her;
For serious and sad things are ever still suspicious.
Well, I'll say something.
But learning I have none, and less good manners,
Especially for Ladies; well, I'll set my best face;
I hear some coming; this is the first woman
I ever feared yet, the first face that shakes me.
Give me my hat Petella, take this veil off,
This sullen cloud, it darkens my delights;
Come wench be free, and let the Music warble,
Play me some lusty measure.
This is she sure,
The very same I saw, the very woman,
The Gravity I wondered at: Stay, stay,
Let me be sure; ne'er trust me, but she dances,
Summer is in her face now, and she skipped:
I'll go a little nearer.
Quicker time fellows,
I cannot find my legs yet, now Petella.
I am amazed, I am foundered in my fancy.
Ho, say ye so; is this your gravity?
This the austerity ye put upon ye?
I'll see more o'this sport.
A Song now;
Call in for a merry, and a light Song,
And sing it with a liberal spirit.
Yes, Madam.
And be not amazed sirha, but take us for your own company.
Let's walk our selves; come wench, would we had a man or two.
Sure she has spied me, and will abuse me dreadfully,
She has put on this for the purpose; yet I will try her.
Madam, I would be loath my rude intrusion,
Which I must crave a pardon for—
O ye are welcome,
Ye are very welcome, Sir, we want such a one;
Strike up again: I dare presume ye dance well:
Quick, quick, Sir, quick, the time steals on.
I would talk with ye.
Talk as ye dance.
She'll beat him off his legs first.
This is the finest Masque.
Now how do ye, Sir?
You have given me a shrewed heat.
I'll give ye a hundred.
Come sing now, sing; for I know ye sing well.
I see ye have a singing face.
A fine Modesty!
If I could she'd never give me breath,
Madam would I might sit and recover.
Sit here, and sing now,
Let's do things quickly, Sir, and handsomely,
Sit close wench, close, begin, begin.
I am lesson'd.
It is very pretty y'faith, give me some wine now.
I would fain speak to ye.
You shall drink first, believe me:
Here's to ye a lusty health.
I thank ye Lady.
Would I were off again; I smell my misery;
I was never put to this rack; I shall be drunk too.
If thou be not a right one, I have lost mine aim much:
I thank heaven that I have escaped thee: To her Pinac;
For thou art as sure to have her, and to groan for her—
I'll see how my other youth does; this speeds trimly:
A fine grave Gentlewoman, and worth much honour.
Now? how do ye like me, Sir?
I like ye rarely.
Ye see, Sir, though sometimes we are grave and silent,
And put on sadder dispositions,
Yet we are compounded of free parts, and sometimes too
Our lighter, airy, and our fiery mottles
Break out, and show themselves; and what think you of that Sir?
Good Lady sit, for I am very weary;
And then I'll tell ye.
Fie, a young man idle:
Up, and walk; be still in action.
The motions of the body are fair beauties,
Besides it is cold; ods-me Sir, let's walk faster.
What think ye now of the Lady Felicia?
And Bella-fronte the Dukes fair daughter? ha?
Are they not handsome things? there is Duarta,
And brown Olivia.
I know none of'em.
But brown must not be cast away, Sir; if young Lily
Had kept her self till this day from a husband,
Why what a Beauty, Sir? you know Ismena
The fair Jem of Saint Germins?
By my troth I do not.
And then I know you must hear of Brisac,
How unlike a Gentleman—
As I live I have heard nothing.
Strike me another Galliard.
By this light I cannot;
In troth I have sprained my leg, Madam.
Now sit ye down, Sir,
And tell me why ye came hither, why ye chose me out?
What is your business? your errant? dispatch, dispatch;
May be ye are some Gentleman's man, and I mistook ye,
That have brought me a Letter, or a haunch of Venison,
Sent me from some friend of mine.
Do I look like a Carrier?
You might allow me what I am, a Gentleman.
Cry 'ye mercy, Sir, I saw ye yesterday,
You are new come out of Travail, I mistook ye;
And how do's all our impudent friends in Italy?
Madam, I came with duty, and fair courtesy,
Service, and honour to ye.
Ye came to jeer me:
Ye see I am merry, Sir, I have changed my copy:
None of the Sages now, and 'pray ye proclaim it,
Fling on me what aspersion you shall please, Sir,
Of wantonness, or wildness, I look for it;
And tell the world I am an hypocrite
Mask in a forced and borrowed shape, I expect it;
But not to have you believed; for mark ye, Sir,
I have won a nobler estimation,
A stronger tie by my discretion
Upon opinion (how ere you think I forced it)
Than either tongue or art of yours can slubbber,
And when I please I will be what I please, Sir,
So I exceed not Mean; and none shall brand it
Either with scorn or shame, but shall be slighted.
Lady, I come to love ye.
Love your self, Sir.
And when I want observers, 'll send for ye:
Heigh, ho; my fit's almost off, for we do all by fits, Sir:
If ye be weary, sit till I come again to ye.
This is a wench of a dainty spirit; but hang me if I know yet
Either what to think, or make of her; She had her will of me,
And baited me abundantly, I thank her.
And I confess I never was so blurted,
Nor never so abused; I must bear mine own sins;
Ye talk of Travails, here's a curious Country,
Yet I will find her out, or forswear my faculty.
Ne'er vex your self, nor grieve; ye are a fool then.
I am sure I am made so: yet before I suffer
Thus like a girl, and give him leave to triumph—
You say right; for as long as he perceives ye
Sink under his proud scornings, he'll laugh at ye:
For me, secure your self; and for my Sister,
I partly know her mind too: howsoever
To obey my Father we have made a tender
Of our poor beauties to the travailed Mousieur;
Yet two words to a bargain; he slights us
As skittish things, and we shun him as curious.
May be my free behaviour turns his stomach,
And makes him seem to doubt a loose opinion.
I must be so sometimes, though all the world saw it.
Why should not ye? Are our minds only measured?
As long as here ye stand secure.
Ye say true;
As long as mine own conscience makes no question,
What care I for Report: That woman's miserable
That's good or bad for their tongues sake: Come let's retire.
And get my veil wench: By my troth your sorrow,
And the consideration of men's humorous maddings,
Have put me into a serious contemplation.
Come'faith, let's sit and think.
That's all my business.
Why standst thou peeping here? thou great slug, forward.
She is there, peace.
Why standst thou here then,
Sneaking, and peaking, as thou would steal linen?
Hast thou not place and time?
I had a rare speech
Studied, and almost ready, and your violonce
Has beat it out of my brains.
Hang your rare speeches,
Go me on like a man.
Let me set my Beard up.
How has Pinac performed?
He has won already:
He stands not thrumming of caps thus.
Lord, what should I ail?
What a cold I have over my stomach; would I had some Hum.
Certain I have a great mind to be at her:
A mighty mind.
On fool.
Good words, I beseech ye;
For I will not be abused by both.
Adieu, then,
I will not trouble you, I see you are valiant,
And work your own way.
Hist, hist, I will be ruled
I will y'faith, I will go presently:
Will ye forsake me now and leave me in the suds:
You know I am false-hearted this way; I beseech ye;
Good sweet Mirabell; I'll cut your throat if ye leave me,
Indeed I will sweet heart.
I will be ready,
Still at thine elbow; take a mans heart to thee,
And speak thy mind: the plainer still the better.
She is a woman of that free behaviour,
Indeed that common courtesy, she cannot deny thee;
Go bravely on.
Madam—keep close about me,
Still at my back. Madam, sweet Madam.
Ha;
What noise is that, what saucy sound to trouble me?
What said she?
I am saucy.
It is the better.
She comes; must I be saucy still?
More saucy.
Still troubled with these vanities? heaven bless us;
What are we born to? would ye speak with any of my people?
Go in, Sir, I am busy.
This is not she sure:
Is this two children at a Birth? I'll be hanged then:
Mine was a merry Gentlewoman, talked daintily,
Talked of those matters that befitted women;
This is a parcell-pray'r-book; I'm served sweetly;
And now I am to look too; I was prepared for the other way.
Do you know that man?
Sure I have seen him, Lady.
Me-thinks it is pity such a lusty fellow
Should wander up and down and want employment.
She takes me for a Rogue: you may do well Madam,
To stay this wanderer, and set him a work, forsooth,
He can do something that may please your Ladyship.
I have heard of women that desire good breedings,
Two at a birth, or so.
The fellow's impudent.
Sure he is crazed.
I have heard of men too that have had good manners;
Sure this is want of grace; indeed it is great pity
The young man has been bred so ill; but this lewd Age
Is full of such examples.
I am foundered,
And some shall rue the setting of me on.
Ha? so bookish, Lady, is it possible?
Turned holy at the heart too? I'll be hanged then:
Why this is such a feat, such an activity,
Such fast and loose: a veil too for your knavery?
O dio, dio!
What do you take me for, Sir?
An hypocrite, a wanton, a dissembler,
How ever ye seem, and thus ye are to be handled.
Mark me Bellure, and this you love, I know it.
Stand off, bold Sir.
You wear good clothes to this end,
Jewels, love Feasts, and Masques.
Ye are monstrous saucy.
All this to draw on fools? and thus, thus Lady,
Ye are to be lulled.
Let her alone, I'll swinge ye else,
I will y'faith; for though I cannot skill o'this matter
My self, I will not see another do it before me,
And do it worse.
Away, ye are a vain thing;
You have travailed far Sir, to return again
A windy and poor Bladder: you talk of women,
That are not worth the favour of a common one;
The grace of her grew in an Hospital:
Against a thousand such blown fooleries
I am able to maintain good women's honours,
Their freedoms, and their fems, and I will do it.
She has almost struck me dumb too.
And declaim
Against your base malicious tongues; your noises;
For they are nothing else: You teach behaviours?
Or touch us for our freedoms? teach your selves manners,
Truth and sobriety, and live so clearly
That our lives may shine in ye; and then task us:
It seems ye are hot, the suburbs will supply ye,
Good women scorn such Gamesters; so I'll leave ye.
I am sorry to see this; faith Sir live fairly.
This woman, if she hold on, may be virtuous,
It is almost possible: we'll have a new day.
Ye brought me on, ye forced me to this foolery;
I am shamed, I am scorned, I am flurted; yes, I am so:
Though I cannot talk to a woman like your worship,
And use my phrases, and my learned figures,
Yet I can fight with any man.
Fie.
I can, Sir,
And I will fight.
With whom?
With you, with any man;
For all men now will laugh at me.
Prithee be moderate.
And I'll beat all men. Come.
I love thee dearly.
I beat all that love, Love has undone me;
Never tell me, I will not be a History.
Thou art not.
'Sfoot I will not; give me room,
And let me see the proudest of ye jeer me,
And I'll begin with you first.
Prithee Bellure;
If I do not satisfy thee —
Well, look ye do:
But now I think on it better, it is impossible;
I must beat some body, I am mauled my self,
And I ought in Justice—
No, no, no, ye are cozened;
But walk, and let me talk to thee.
Talk wisely,
And see that no man laugh upon no occasion;
For I shall think then it is at me.
I warrant thee.
Nor no more talk of this.
Dost think I am maddish?
I must needs fight yet; for I find it concerns me,
A pox on it, I must fight.
Y'faith thou shalt not.
I Know ye are a Scholar, and can do wonders.
There's no great Scholarship belongs to this, Sir;
What I am, I am; I pity your poor Sister,
And heartily I hate these Travellers,
These Gimcracks, made of Mops, and Motions:
There's nothing in their houses here but humings;
A Bee has more brains. I grieve, and vex too
The insolent licentious carriage
Of this out-facing fellow, Mirabell,
And I am mad to see him prick his plumes up.
His wrongs you partly know.
Do not you stir, Sir,
Since he has begun with wit, let wit revenge it;
Keep your sword close, we'll cut his throat a new way.
I am ashamed the Gentlewoman should suffer
Such base lewd wrongs.
I will be ruled, he shall live,
And left to your revenge.
I, I, I'll fit him:
He makes a common scorn of handsome women;
Modesty, and good manners are his May-games:
He takes up Maidenheads with a new Commission;
The Church, warrant's out of date: follow my Counsel
For I am zealous in the Cause.
I will, Sir;
And will be still directed: for the truth is
My Sword will make my sister seem more monstrous:
Besides there is no honour won on Reprobates.
You are in the right: The slight he has showed my Pupils
Sets me a fire too: go Isle prepare your Sister,
And as I told ye.
Yes all shall be sit, Sir.
And seriously, and handsomely.
I warrant ye.
A little council more.
It is well.
Most stately.
See that observed; and then.
I have ye every way.
Away then and be ready.
With all speed Sir.
We'll learn to travel too, may be beyond him
Good day, Fair beauties.
You have beautified us.
We thank ye Sir, ye have set us off most gallantly
With your grave precepts.
We expected Husbands
Out of your Documents, and taught behaviours;
Excellent Husbands, thought men would run starck mad on us
Men of all Ages, and all States: we expected
An Inundation of desires, and Offers,
A Torrent of trym Suitor: all we did,
Or said, or purposed to be Spells about us,
Spells to provoake.
Ye have provoak'd us finely,
We followed your directions, we did rarely,
We were Stately, Coy, Demure, Careless, Light, Giddy,
And played at all points: This you swore would Carry.
We made Love, and Contemned Love. Now seemed holy
With such a reverent put-on Reservation
Which could not miss according to your Principles,
Now gave more hope again. Now close, Now public,
Still up and down, we beat it like a Billow;
And ever those Behaviours you read to us,
Subtle, and new. But all this will not help us.
They help to hinder us of all Acquaintance,
They have frighted off all Friends: what am I better
For all my Learning, if I love a Dunce,
A handsome dunce? to what use serves my Reading,
You should have taught me what belongs to Horses,
Dogs, dice, Hawks, Banquets, masks, free and fair Meetings
To have studied Gowns and Dressings.
Ye are not mad sure,
We shall be if we follow your encouragements;
I'll take mine own way now:
And I my Fortune.
We may live Maids else till the Moon drop Milstones;
I see your modest Women are tak'en for Monsters,
A Dowry of good breeding is worth nothing.
Since ye take it so to the heart, pray'ye give me leave yet
And ye shall see how I'll convert this Heretic;
Mark how this Mirabell.
Name him no more:
For, though I long for a husband, I hate him,
And would be married sooner to a Monkey,
Or to a Jack of Straw, then such a Juggler.
I am of that mind too; he is too nimble,
And plays at fast and loose too learnedly
For a plain-meaning Woman; thats the truth on it.
Here's one too, that we love well, would be angry;
And reason why: No, no, we will not trouble ye
Nor him, at this time: may he make you happy.
We'll turn our selves loose now, to our fair Fortunes,
And the down-right way.
The winning-way we'll follow,
We'll bait, that men may bite fair, and not be frighted;
Yet we'll not be carried so cheap neither: we'll have some sport,
Some mad-Morrysse or other for our money (Tutor.)
It is like enough: prosper your own Devices;
Ye are old enough to Choose: But for this Gentlewoman
So please her, give me leave.
I shall be glad Sir,
To find a Friend, whose pity may direct me.
Isle doe my best, and faithfully deal for ye;
But then ye must be ruled.
In all, I vow to ye.
Doe, doe: he has a lucky hand sometimes, Isle assure ye:
And hunts the recovery of a lost Lover deadly.
You must away straight.
Yes.
And Isle instruct ye:
Here ye can know no more.
By your leave, sweet Ladies,
And all our Fortunes, arrive at our own wishes.
Amen, Amen.
I must borrow your man.
'Pray take him;
He is within: to doe her good, take any thing,
Take us, and all.
No doubt ye may find Takers;
And so we'll leave ye to your own disposes.
Now which way, Wench.
We'll go a brave way; fear not:
A safe, and sure way too: and yet a by-way,
I must confess I have a great mind to be married.
So have I too, a grudging of good-will that way;
And would as fain be dispatched. But this Monsieur Quicksilver.
No, no: we'll bar him, by, and Mayne: Let him trample;
There is no safety in his Surquedrie:
An Army-Roiall of Women, are too few for him,
He keeps a Journal of his Gentleness,
And will go near to print his fair Dispatches,
And call it his Triumph over Time and Women:
Let him pass out of memory: what think ye
Of his two Companions?
Pinac methinks is reasonable;
A little Modesty he has brought home with him,
And might be taught in time some handsome duty.
They say he is a Wencher too.
I like him better:
A free light Touch or two becomes a Gentleman,
And sets him seemly off: so he exceed not,
But keep his Compass, clear he may be looked at;
I would not marry a man that must be taught,
And conjured up with Kisses; the best Game
Is plaid still by the best Gamesters.
Fie upon thee!
What talk hast thou?
Are not we alone, and merry?
Why should we be ashamed to speak what we think? thy Gentleman
The tall fat-Fellow; he that came to see thee.
Is'〈…〉 not a goodly man?
A wondrous goodly!
'Has weight enough I warrant thee: Mercy upon me;
What a Serpent wilt thou seem under such a St George.
Thou art a Fool; give me a man brings Mettle.
Brings substance with him; needs no Broths to Lare him:
These little Fellows show like Fleas in boxes,
Hop up and down, and keep a stir to vex us;
Give me the puissant Pike, take you the small Shot.
Of a great thing I have not seen a Duller,
Therefore methinks, sweet Sister-
Peace: he's modest:
A bashfulness, which is a point of grace, Wench:
But when these Fellows come to moulding, Sister,
To heat, and handling: as I live, I like him;
And methinks I could form him.
Peace: the Fire-drake.
'Bless ye sweet Beauties: sweet incomparable Ladies:
Sweet wits: sweet humours: 'Bless you, Learned Lady,
And you, most holy Nun; 'Bless your Devotions,
And 'bless your brains, Sir, your most pregnant brains, Sir,
They are in Travail, may they be delivered
Of a most hopeful Wild-Goose.
'Bless your manhood:
They say ye are a Gentleman of Action,
A fare accomplished man; and a rare Engineer,
You have a trick to blow-up Maidenheads,
A subtle trick, they say abroad.
I have Lady.
And often glory in their Ruins.
Yes forsooth;
I have a speedy trick: please you to try it:
My Engine will dispatch ye instantly.
I would I were a Woman, Sir, fit for ye,
As there be such, no doubt, may Engine you too;
May with a Counter-mine blow up your valour:
But in good faith, Sir, we are both too honest;
And the plague is, we cannot be persuaded:
For, look ye: if we thought it were a glory
To be the last of all your lovely Ladies.
Come, come; leave prating: this has spoiled your Market;
This pride, and pufft-up heart, will make ye fast (Ladies)
Fast, when ye are hungry too.
The more our pain, Sir.
The more our health, I hope too.
Your behaviours
Have made men stand amazed; those men that loved ye;
Men of fair States and parts; your strange conventions
Into I know not what, nor how, nor wherefore;
Your scorns of those that came to visit ye;
Your studied Whim-whams; and your fine set Faces:
What have these got ye? proud, and harsh opinions:
A Travail'd-Mensieur, was the strangest Creature,
The wildest Monster to be wondered at:
His Person made a public Scoff, his Knowledge,
(As if he had been bred amongst Bears or Bandoggs)
Shunned and avoided: his conversation snuffed at.
What Harvest brings all this?
I pray ye proceed, Sir.
Now ye shall see in what esteem a Travailer,
An under standing Gentleman, and a Monsieur
Is to be held, and to your griefs confess it,
Both to your griefs, and gaules.
In what I pray ye, Sir?
We would be glad to understand your Excellence
Go on, (sweet Ladies) it becomes ye rarely
For me, I have blessed me from ye, scoff on, seriously,
And note the Man ye mocked: you, (Lady Learning)
Note the poor Traveller, that came to visit ye,
That flat unfurnished Fellow: note him thoroughly,
You may chance to see him anon.
It is very likely
And see him Courted, by a Travelled Lady,
Held deer, and honoured by a virtuous virgin,
May be a Beauty, not far short of yours, neither
It may be, clearer.
Not unlikely
Younger:
As killing eyes as yours: a wit as poignant
May be, a State to that may top your Fortune
Enquire how she thinks of him, how she holds him;
His good parts; in what precious price already;
Being a stranger to him, how she courts him,
A stranger to his Nation too: how she dotes on him:
Enquire of this; be sick to know: Curse, Lady,
And keep your Chamber: cry, and curse, a sweet one,
A thosand in yearly land; well bred; well friended:
Travelled, and highly followed for her fashions.
'Bless his good Forture, Sir.
This scurvy fellow;
I think they call his name Pinac, this serving-man
That brought ye Venison, as I take it, Madam;
Note but this Scab; it is strange that this course creature,
That has no more set off, but his jugglings,
His travelled tricks.
Good, sir, I grieve not at him,
Nor envy not his Fortune: yet I wonder,
He's handsome; yet I see no such perfection
Would I had his Fortune: for tic a woman
Of that sweet tempered nature, and that judgment,
Besides her state, that care, clear understanding,
And such a wife to bless him.
Pray ye whence is she?
Of England and a most accomplished Lady,
So modest that men's eyes are frighted at her,
And such a noble carriage. How now Sirrah?
Sir, the great English Lady.
What of her, sir?
Has newly left her Coach, and coming this way,
Where you may see her plain: Mousieur Pinac,
The only man that leads her.
He is much honoured;
Would I had such a favour: now vex Ladies,
Envy, and vex, and rail.
Ye are short of us, Sir.
'Bless your fair Fortune, sir.
I Nobly thank ye.
Is she married, friend?
No, no.
A goodly Lady;
A sweet and delicate Aspect: mark, mark, and wonder.
Hast thou any hope of her?
A little.
Follow close then:
Loose not that hope.
To you, Sir.
Gentle Lady.
She is fair indeed.
I have seen a fairer, yet
She is well.
Her clothes sit handsome too.
She dresses prettily.
And by my faith she is rich; she looks still sweeter.
A well-bred woman, I warrant her.
Do you hear, Sir;
May I crave this Gentlewoman's name?
Mariana, Lady.
I will not say I ow ye a quarrel Monsieur
For making me your stale: a noble Gentleman
Would have had more courtesy; at least, more faith,
Then to turn of his mistress at first trial:
You know not what respect I might have showed ye;
I find ye have worth.
I cannot stay to answer ye;
Ye see my charge: I am beholding to ye
For all your merry tricks ye put upon me,
Your bobs, and base accounts: I came to love ye,
To woo ye, and to serve ye; I am much indebted to ye
For dancing me off my legs; and then for walking me;
For telling me strange tales I never heard of,
More to abuse me; for mistaking me,
When ye both know I was a Gentleman,
And one deserved as rich a match as you are.
Be not so bitter, Sir.
You see this Lady:
She is young enough, and fair enough to please me,
A woman of a loving mind, a quit,
And one that weighs the worth of him that loves her,
I am content with this, and bless my Fortune,
Your curious Wits, and Beauties.
Faith see me once more.
I dare not trouble ye.
May I speak to your Lady?
I pray ye content your self: I know ye are bitter,
And in your bitterness, ye may abuse her;
Which if she comes to know, (for she understands ye not)
It may breed such a quarrel to your kindred,
And such an indiscretion fling on you too;
For she is Nobly friended.
I could eat her.
Rest as ye are, a modest noble Gentlewoman,
And afford your honest neighbours some of your prayers.
What think you now?
Faith she's a pretty Whiting;
She has got a pretty catch too.
You are angry;
Monstrous angry now; grievously angry;
And the pretty heart does swell now.
No in troth, sir.
And it will cry anon; a pox upon it:
And it will curse it self: and eat no meat, Lady;
And it will fight.
Indeed you are mistaken;
It will be very merry.
Why, sir, do you think
There are no more men living, nor no handsomer
Then he, or you; By this light there be ten thousand
Ten thousand thousand: comfort your self, dear Monsieur,
Faces, and Bodies, Wits, and all Habiliments
There are so many we regard 'em not.
That such a noble Lady, I could burst now.
So far above such trifles.
You did laugh at me,
And I know why ye laughed.
I pray ye be satisfied;
If we did laugh, we had some private reason,
And not at you.
Alas, we know you not, sir.
I'll make you know me; set your faces soberly;
Stand this way, and look sad; I'll be no May-game;
Sadder; demurer yet.
What's the matter?
What ails this Gentleman?
go off now backward, that I may behold ye;
And not a simper on you lives.
He's mad sure.
Do you observe me too?
I may look on ye.
Why do you grin? I know your mind.
You do not.
You are strangely humorous: Is there no mirth, nor pleasure,
But you must be the object?
Mark, and observe me;
Where ever I am named;
The very word shall raise a general sadness,
For the disgrace this scurvy woman did me;
This proud pert thing; take heed ye laugh not at me;
Provoke me not, take heed.
I would fain please ye;
Do any thing to keep ye quiet.
Hear me,
Till I receive a satisfaction
Equal to the disgrace, and scorn ye gave me:
Ye are a wretched woman; till thou woo'st me,
And I scorn thee as much, as, seriously,
Gear, and abuse thee; ask what Gill thou art;
Or any baser name; I will proclaim thee;
I will so sing thy virtue; so be-paint thee,
Nay, good sir, be more modest.
Do you laugh again?
Because ye are a woman ye are lawless,
And out of compass of an honest anger.
Good sir, have a better belief of me.
Away dear sister.
Is not this better now, this seeming madness,
Then falling out with your friends.
Have I not frighted her?
Into her right wits, I warrant thee: follow this humour,
And thou shalt see how prosperously 'twil guide thee.
I am glad I have found a way to woo yet, I was afraid once
I never should have made a civil Suitor.
Well, I'll about it still.
Doe, doe, and prosper.
What sport do I make with these fools? What pleasure
Feeds me, and fats my sides at their poor innocence?
Wooing and wiving, hang it: give me mirth,
Witty and dainty mirth: I shall grow in love sure
With mine own happy head. Who's this? To me, Sir?
What youth is this?
Yes, Sir, I would speak with you,
If your name be Monsieur Mirabel.
Ye have hit it:
Your business, I beseech ye.
This it is, Sir.
There is a Gentlewoman hath long time affected ye,
And loved ye dearly.
Turn over, and end that story,
It is long enough: I have no faith in women, Sir.
It seems so, Sir: I do not come to woo for her,
Or sing her praises, though she well deserve 'em.
I come to tell ye, ye have been cruel to her,
Unkind and cruel, falser of faith, and careless,
Taking more pleasure in abusing her,
Wresting her honour to your wild disposes,
Then noble in requiting her affection.
Which, as ye are a man, I must desire ye
(A Gentleman of rank) not to persist in,
No more to load her fair name with your injuries.
Why, I beseech ye, Sir?
Good Sir, I'll tell ye.
And I'll be short: I'll tell ye, because I love ye,
Because I would have you shun the shame may follow,
There is a noble man, new come to Town, Sir,
A noble and a great man that affects her,
A Countryman of mine, a brave Save〈…〉yan,
Nephew to th'Duke, and so much honours her,
That twill be dangerous to pursue your old way,
To touch at any thing concerns her honour,
Believe, most dangerous: her name is Oriana,
And this great man will marry her: take heed, Sir;
For howsoev'r her brother, a staid Gentleman,
Lets things pass upon better hopes, this Lord, Sir,
Is of that fiery, and that poignant metal,
(Especially provoked on by affection)
That twill be hard: but you are wise.
A Lord, sir?
Yes, and a noble Lord.
'Send her good fortune.
This will not stir her Lord; a Baroness,
Say ye so; say ye so: by'r Lady, a brave title;
Top, and top gallant now; 'save her great Ladyship.
I was a poor servant of hers, I must confess, Sir,
And in those days, I thought I might be jovy,
And make a little bold to call into her:
But Basto, now; I know my rules and distance;
Yet, if she want an Usher; such an implement;
One that is thoroughly paced; a clean made gentleman;
Can hold a hanging up; with approbation
Plant his Hat formally, and wait with patience
I do beseech you, sir.
Sir, leave your scoffing;
And as ye are a Gentleman, deal fairly:
I have given ye a friends council, so I'll leave ye.
But hark ye, hark ye, sir; is it possible
I may believe what you say?
You may choose, sir.
No Baits? No Fish-hooks, sir? No Gins? No Nooses?
No Pitfals to catch Puppies?
I tell ye certain;
You may believe; if not, stand to the danger.
A Lord of Save〈…〉y says he? The Dukes Nephew?
A man so mighty? By Lady a fair marriage;
By my faith, a handsome Fortune: I must leave prating;
For to confess the truth, I have abused her,
For which I should be sorry; but that will seem scurvy;
I must confess, she was ever since I knew her
As modest, as she was fair: I am sure she loved me;
Her means good; and her breeding excellent;
And for my sake she has refused fair matches:
I may play the fool finely. Stay who are these?
It is she, I am sure; and that the lord it should seem,
He carries a fair Port; is a handsome man too:
I do begin to feel, I am a Coxcomb.
Good my Lord, choose a nobler: for I know
I am so far below your rank and Honour,
That what ye can say this way, I must credit,
But spoken to beget your self sport: Alas, Sir,
I am so far off, from deserving you,
My Beauty so unfit for your Affection,
That I am grown the scorn of common Railers,
Of such injurious Things, that when they cannot
Reach at my person, lie with my reputation:
I am poor besides.
Ye are all wealth and goodness;
And none but such as are the scum of men,
The Ulcers of an honest State; Spight-weavers,
That live on poison only, like swollen Spiders,
Dare once profane such excellence, such sweetness.
This man speaks loud indeed.
Name but the men, Lady;
Let me but know these poor, and base depravers;
Lay but to my revenge their persons open,
And you shall see how suddenly, how fully
For your most Beauteous sake, how direfully
I'll handle their despights. Is this thing one?
Be what he will.
Sir.
Dare your malicious tongue, sir?
I know you not; nor what ye mean.
Good my Lord.
If he, or any he.
I beseech your Honour.
This Gentleman's a stranger to my knowledge,
And no doubt, sir, a worthy man.
Your mercy;
But had ye been attained of your Honour;
A blaster of those beauties reign within ye;
But we shall find a fitter time: dear Lady,
As soon as I have freed ye from your Guardian,
And done some honoured offices unto ye,
I'll take ye with those faults the world flings on ye;
And dearer then the whole world I'll esteem ye.
This is a thundering Lord; I am glad I escaped him:
How lovingly the wench disclaimed my villainy?
I am vexed now heartily that he shall have her;
Not that I care to marry, or to lose her;
But that this Bilbo-Lord shall reap that Maiden-head
That was my due; that he shall rig and top her;
Id give a thousand Crowns now, he might miss her.
Nay, if I bear your blows, and keep your council,
You have good luck, Sir; I'll teach ye to strike lighter.
Come hither, honest Fellow; can thou tell me
Where this great Lord lies? This Savoy Lord? Thou met him;
He now went by thee certain.
Yes, he did, Sir;
I know him; and I know you are fooled.
Come hither.
Here's all this, give me truth.
Not for your money;
(And yet that may do much) but I have been beaten:
And by the worshipful Contrivers beaten; and I'll tel ye;
This is no Lord, no Savoy Lord.
Go forward.
This is a Trick, and put upon ye grossly
By one Lugier; the Lord is Monsieur De-Gard, Sir;
An honest Gentleman, and a neighbour here;
Their ends you understand better then I, sure.
Now I know him.
Know him now plain.
I have discharged my Colours; so God by ye, sir.
What a purblind Puppy was I; now I remember him.
All the whole cast on's face, though it were umber'd,
And masked with patches: what a dunder-whelp
To let him domineer thus: how he strutted,
And what a load of Lord he clapped upon him?
Would I had him here again, I would so bounce him,
I would so thank his Lordship for his lewd plot:
Do they think to carry it away, with a great band made of bird pots.
And a pair of pin-buttockt breeches? Ha! It is he again
He comes, he comes, he comes; have at him.
My Savoy Lord, why dost thou frown on me?
And will that favour never sweeter be?
Wilt thou I say, for ever play the fool?
De-Gard, be wise, and Savoy go to School.
My Lord De-Gard, I thank ye for your Antic,
My Lady bright, that will be sometime Frantic;
You worthy Train, that wait upon this Pair,
'Send you more wit, and they a bouncing Baire;
And so I take my humble leave of your honours.
We are discovered, there's no remedy;
Lily, Biancha's man upon my life,
In stubbornness, because Lugier corrected him.
(A shameless Slaves-plague on him for a Rascal.)
I was in a perfect hope; the bane on it is now;
He will make mirth on mirth, to persecute us.
We must be patient; I am vexed to the proof too.
I'll try once more; then if I fail: Hear's one speaks.
Let me be lost, and scorned first.
Well, we'll consider.
Away, and let me shift; I shall be hooted else.
FAint not; but do as I direct ye, trust me;
Believe me too, for what I have told ye, (Lady)
As true as you are Lily, is Authentic;
I know it; I have found it; it is a poor courage
Flies off for one repulse; these Travellers
Shall find before we have done, a home-spun wit,
A plain French understanding may cope with 'em;
They have had the better yet, thank your sweet Squire, here;
And let 'em brag: You would be revenged?
Yes surely.
And married too?
I think so.
Then be Counselled;
You know how to proceed: I have other Irons
Heating as well as yours: and I will strike
Three blows with one Stone home, be ruled, and hapie;
And so I leave ye. Now is the time.
I am ready.
If he doe come to do me.
Will ye stand here,
And let the people think, ye are God knows what, Mistress;
Let Boys, and Prentices presume upon ye.
Prithee hold thy peace.
Stand at his door, that hates ye?
Prithee leave prating.
'Pray ye go to the Tavern. Isle give ye a Pint of wine there;
If any of the Mad-cap Gentlemen should come by
That take up women upon special warrant,
You were in a wise case now.
Give me the Garland,
And wait you here.
She is here to seek thee, Sirrah.
I told thee what would follow; she is mad, for thee;
Show, and advance. So early stirring Lady,
It shows a busy mind; a fancy troubled:
A willowgh Garland too. Is it possible,
It is pity so much Beauty should lie musty,
But it is not to be helped now.
The more's my Misery
Good fortune to ye (Lady) you deserve it:
To me: too late Repentance; I have sought it:
I doe not envy, though I grieve a little,
You are Mistress of that happiness, those Joys
That might have bin, had I bin wise: but fortune.
She understands ye not, 'pray ye doe not trouble her;
And do not cross me like a Hare thus, it is as ominous.
I come not to upbraid, your Levity.
Though ye made show of Love, and though I liked ye
To claim an Interest; we are yet both Strangers,
But what we might have bin, had you persevered, Sir,
To be an eye-sore to your loving Lady;
This garland shows, I give my self forsaken;
(Yet She must pardon me, it is most unwillingly:)
And all the power and interest I had in ye?
As I persuade my self, somewhat ye Loved me;
Thus patiently I render up, I offer
To her that must enjoy ye: and so bless ye;
Only, I heartily desire this Curtsy,
And would not be denied: to wait upon ye
This day, to see ye tide, then no more trouble ye.
It need not, Lady.
Good, Sir, grant me so much.
It is private, and we make no Invitation.
My presence, sir, shall not proclaim it public.
May be it is not in Town.
I have a Coach, sir.
And a most ready will to do you service.
Strike now or never; make it sure: I tell thee,
She will hang her self; if she have thee not.
'Pray ye, sir,
Entertain my noble mistress: only a word or two
With this importunate woman, and I'll relieve ye.
Now ye see what your flings are, and your fancies,
Your States, and your wild stubbornes, now ye find
What it is to gird and kick at men's fair services,
To raise your pride to such a pitch, and glory
That goodness shows like Gnats, scorned under ye,
It is ugly, nought, a self will in a woman,
Chained to an over-weening thought, is Pestilent,
Murders fair Fortune first; Then fair opinion?
There stands a Pattern, a true patient Pattern,
Humble, and sweet.
I can but grieve my ignorance.
Repentance some say too, is the best Sacrifice;
For sure, Sir, if my chance had been so happy,
(As I confess I was mine own destroyer)
As to have arrived at you; I will not prophecy,
But certain, as I think, I should have pleased ye;
Have made ye as much wonder at my courtesy,
My love, and duty, as I have disheartened ye,
Some hours we have of youth, and some of folly;
And being free-born Maids, we take a liberty,
And to maintain that, sometimes we strain highly.
Now ye talk reason.
But being yoked, and governed,
Married, and those light vanities purged from us;
How fair we grow, how gentle, and how tender
We twine about those loves that shoot-up with us?
A sullen woman fear, that talks not to ye;
She has a sad and darkened soul, loves dully:
A merry and a free wench, give her liberty;
Believe her in the lightest form she appears to ye;
Believe her excellent, though she despise ye;
Let but these fits and flashes pass, she will show to ye;
As Jewels rubbed from dust, or Gold new burnished:
Such had I been, had you believed.
Is it possible.
And to your happiness, I dare assure ye
If True love be accounted so; your pleasure,
Your will, and your command had tied my Motions:
But that hopes gone; I know you are young, and giddy,
And till you have a Wife can govern with ye,
You sail upon this world-Sea, light and empty;
Your Bark in danger daily; it is not the name neither
Of Wife can steer ye; but the noble nature,
The diligence, the Care, the Love, the Patience,
She makes the Pilot, and preserves the Husband,
That knows, and reckons every Rib, he is built on;
But this I tell ye, to my shame.
I admire ye,
And now am sorry, that I aim beyond ye.
So, so, so: fair and softly. She is thine own (Boy)
She comes now, without Lure.
But that it must needs
Be reckoned to me as a wantonness,
Or worse, a Madness, to forsake a Blessing,
A Blessing of that hope.
I dare not urge ye;
And yet dear, Sir.
It is most certain, I had rather,
If it were in mine own Choice, for you are my Country-woman,
A Neighbour here borne by me, She a Stranger;
And who knows how her Friends?
Doe as you please, Sir,
If ye be fast: not all the world: I love ye,
It is most true: and clear, I would persuade ye;
And I shall love ye still.
Go, get before me:
So much ye have won upon me: doe it presently:
Here's a Priest ready: Isle have you.
not now, Sir,
No, you shall pardon me: advance your Lady,
I dare not hinder your most high preferment,
It is honour enough for me, I have unmasked ye.
How's that.
I have caught ye, Sir; alas, I am no States woman,
Nor no great Traveller, yet I have found ye,
I have found your Lady too: your beauteous Lady;
I have found her Birth, and Breeding too: her discipline:
Who brought her over, and who kept your Lady:
And when he laid her by, what virtuous Nunnery
Received her in: I have found all these: are ye blank now,
Methinks such travelled wisdoms should not fool thus:
Such excellent Indiscretions.
How could she know this?
It is true she is English borne: but most part French now,
And so I hope you will find her, to your comfort,
Alas, I am ignorant of what, She cost ye:
The price of these hired Clothes I doe not know Gentlemen;
Those Jewels are the Brokers, how ye stand bound for'em.
Will you make this good?
Yes, yes, and to her face, Sir,
That she is an English whore, a kind of fling dust
One of your London Light o'Loves: a right one,
Came over in thin Pumps; and half a Petcicote,
One faith, and one Smock, with a broken Haberdasher;
I know all this, without a Conjurer:
Her name is Jumping-Ione, an ancient Sin-Weaver;
She was first a Ladies Chamber-maid, there slipped
And broke her leg above the knee: departed
And set up shop her self. Stood the fierce Conflicts
Of many a furious Term; there lost her Colours,
And last shipped over hither.
We are betrayed.
Doe you come to fright me with this Mystery?
To stir me with a stink none can endure, Sir?
I pray ye proceed, the Wedding will become ye,
Who gives the Lady? you? an excellent Father:
A careful man, and one that knows a Beauty,
'Send ye fair shipping, Sir, and so Isle leave ye;
Be wise and manly, then I may chance to love ye.
As I live I am ashamed, this wench has reached me,
Monstrous ashamed, but there's no remedy,
This skew'd-eyde Carren.
This I suspected ever,
Come, come, uncase, we have no more use of ye;
Your Clothes, must back again.
Sir, ye shall pardon me:
It is not our English use to be degraded:
I〈…〉 you will visit me and take your venture,
You shall have pleasure for your properties;
And so sweet heart.
Let her go, and the Devil go with her:
We have never better luck with these preludiums:
Come, be not daunted: think she is but a woman,
And let her have the devils wit, we'll reach her.
Ye have now redeemed my good opinion (Tutor)
And ye stand fair again.
I can but labour,
And sweat in your Affairs: I am sure Bellure:
Will be here instantly, and use his Anger
His wonted harshness.
I hope he will not beat me.
No sure; he has more manners: be you ready.
Yes, yes, I am: and am resolved to fit him,
With patience to out-doe all he can offer;
But how do's Oriana?
Worse, and worse still:
There is a sad house for her: she is now
Poor Lady, utterly distracted.
Pity:
Infinite pity: it is a handsome Lady,
That Mirabel's a Beast, worse then a Monster.
If this affliction work not.
Are ye ready?
Bellure is coming on, here, hard behind me,
I have no leisure to relate my Fortune.
Only I wish you may come off as handsomely,
Upon the sign you know what.
Well, well, leave me.
How now?
Ye are welcome, sir.
It is well ye have manners:
That Curtsy again, and hold your Countenance staidly;
That looks too light; take heed: so, sit ye down now,
And to confirm me that your gall is gone,
Your bitterness dispersed, for so I'll have it;
Look on me steadfastly; and whatsoever I say to ye,
Move not, nor alter in your face, ye are gon then;
For if you do express the least distaste,
Or show an angry wrinkle; mark me, woman,
We are now alone, I will so conjure thee:
The third part of my Execution
Cannot be spoke.
I am at your dispose, sir.
Now rise, and woo me a little, let me hear that faculty;
But touch me not; nor do not lie, I charge ye.
Begin now.
If so mean and poor a Beauty
May ever hope the grace.
Ye Cog, ye flatter
Like a lewd thing, ye lie: may hope that grace?
Why, what grace can thou hope for? Answer not,
For if thou dost, and lie again, I'll swindge thee;
Do not I know thee, for a pestilent woman?
A proud at both ends? Be not angry;
Nor stir not of your life?
I am counseld, sir.
Art thou not now, (confess, for I'll have the truth out)
As much unworthy of a man of merit,
Or any of ye all? Nay of mere man?
Though he were crooked, cold, all wants upon him;
Nay of any dishonest thing, that bears that figure;
As Devils are of mercy?
We are unworthy.
Stick to that truth, and it may chance to save thee;
And is it not our bounty that we take ye?
That we are troubled, vexed, or tortured with ye?
Our mere, and special bounty?
Yes.
Our pity,
That for your wickedness we swindge ye soundly;
Your stubbornness and stout hearts, we be-labour ye?
Answer, to that?
I do confess your pity.
And dost not thou deserve in thine own person?
(Thou Impudent, thou Pert; do not change countenanance?)
I dare not, sir.
For if ye do.
I am settled.
Thou Wag-tail, Peacock, Puppy; look on me:
I am a Gentleman.
It seems no less, sir.
And dare thou in thy Surquedry?
I beseech ye.
It was my weakness, sir; I did not view ye;
I took not notice of your noble parts;
Nor called your person, nor your proper fashion.
This is some amends yet.
I shall mend, sir, daily.
And study to deserve.
Come a little nearer:
Can thou repent thy Villainy?
Most seriously.
And be ashamed?
I am ashamed.
Cry.
It will be hard to do, sir.
Cry now instantly;
Cry monstrously, that all the Town may hear thee;
Cry seriously; as if thou had lost thy Monkey;
And as I like thy Tears.
Now.
How? How? do ye jeer me?
Have ye broke your bounds again Dame?
Yes, and laugh at ye;
And laugh most heartily.
What are these, Whirl-winds?
Is Hell broke loose, and all the Furies fluttered?
Am I greased once again?
Yes indeed are ye;
And once again ye shall be, if ye quarrel:
Do you come to vent your fury on a Virgin?
Is this your manhood, sir?
Let him do his best:
Let's see the utmost of his indignation:
I long to see him angry: come, proceed, sir.
Hang him, he dares not stir; a man of Timber.
Come hither to fright Maids, with thy Bul-faces?
To threaten Gentlewomen? Thou a man? A May-pole.
A great dry Pudding.
Come, come, do your worst, sir;
Be angry if thou dare.
The Lord deliver me.
Do but look scurvily upon this Lady,
Or give us one foul word. We are all mistaken;
This is some mighty Dairy-Maid in mans clothes.
I am of that mind too.
What will they do to me?
And hired to come and abuse us; a man has manners;
A Gentleman, Civility, and Breeding:
Some Tinkers Trull with a beard glued on.
Let's search him;
And as we find him.
Let me but depart from ye,
Sweet Christian women.
Hear the Thing speak, Neighbours.
It is but a small request: if ere I trouble ye,
If ere I talk again of beating Women,
Or beating any thing that can but turn to me;
Of ever thinking of a handsome Lady
But virtuously and well: of ever speaking
But to her honour: This I'll promise ye,
I will take Rhubarb; and purge Choler mainly,
Abundantly Isle purge.
Isle send ye Broths, Sir.
I will be laughed at, and endure it patiently,
I will doe any thing.
Isle be your Bail then:
When ye com next to woo, 'pray ye com not boistrously
And furnished like a Bear-ward.
No in truth, forsooth.
I scented ye long since.
I was to blame, sure;
I will appear a Gentleman.
It is the best for ye,
For a true noble Gentleman's a brave thing;
Upon that hope we quit ye: You fear seriously?
Yes truly do I; I confess I fear ye,
And honour ye, and any thing.
Farewell then.
And when ye come to woo next bring more mercy.
A Dary-Maid? A Tinkers〈…〉Trull: Heaven bless me:
Sure if I had provoked 'em, they had quartered me.
I am a most ridiculous Ass, now I perceive it:
A Coward, and a Knave too.
It is the mad Gentleman.
Let's set our Faces right.
No, no, laugh at me;
And laugh aloud.
We are better mannered, sir.
I do deserve it; call me Patch, and Puppy,
And beat me if you please.
No indeed: We know ye.
'Death, do as I would have ye.
Ye are an Ass then;
A Coxcomb, and a Calf.
I am a great Calf:
Kick me a little now: Why, when? Sufficient:
Now laugh aloud, and scorn me; so good buy'ye;
And ever when ye meet me laugh.
We will, sir.
Your Patience, Gentlemen; why do ye bait me?
Is it not a shame you are so stubborn-hearted,
So stony and so dull to such a Lady,
Of her Perfections, and her Misery?
Does she not love ye? does not her distraction
For your sake only, her most pitied Lunacy
Of all but you, show ye? does it not compel ye?
Soft and fair, Gentlemen, pray ye proceed temperately.
If ye have any feeling, any sense in ye,
The least touch of a noble heart.
Let him alone;
It is his glory that he can kill Beauty,
Ye bear my Stamp, but not my Tenderness;
Your wild unsavoury Courses set that in ye!
For shame be sorry, though ye cannot Cure her,
Show something of a Man, of a fair Nature.
Ye make me Mad.
Let me pronounce this to ye,
You take a strange felicity in slighting
And wronging Women; which my poor sister feels now,
Heavens hand be gentle on her: Mark me, Sir,
That very hour she dyes; there's small hope otherwise,
That minute you and I must grapple for it;
Either your life or mine.
Be not so hot, Sir,
I am not to be wrought on by these Policies;
In truth I am not; Nor do I fear the Tricks,
Or the high sounding Threats of a Savoyen:
I glory not in Cruelty; ye wrong me;
Nor grow up watered with the Tears of Women;
This let me tell ye, howsoe're I show to ye
Wilde, as you please to call it; or self-will'd;
When I see cause, I can both doe, and suffer,
Freely, and feelingly, as a true Gentleman.
O pity, pity; thousand thousand pities!
Alas, poor soul! she will die; she is grown senseless;
She will not know, nor speak now.
Die for Love,
And Love of such a Youth? I would die for a Dog, first.
He that kills me, Isle give him leave to eat me;
Isle know men better ere I sigh for any of 'em.
Ye have don a worthy act, Sir; a most famous;
Ye have kilt a Maid the wrong way; ye are a conqueror.
A Conqueror? a Cobbler; hang him Sowter;
Go hid thy self for shame; go lose thy Memory;
Live not amongst Men; thou art a Beast, a Monster;
A Blatant Beast.
If ye have yet any honesty,
Or ever heard of any; take my Counsel;
Off with your Garters; and seek out a Bough,
A handsome Bough; (for I would have ye hang like a Gentleman;)
And write some doleful matter to the world,
A warning to hard-hearted men.
Out Kitlings:
What Catterwalling's here? what gibing?
Do you think my heart is softened with a black Santis;
Show me some Reason.
Here then, here is a reason.
Now, if ye be a man, let this sight shake ye.
Alas poor Gentlewoman! do ye know me Lady?
How she looks up and stares.
I know ye very well:
You are my Godfather; and that's the Monsieur.
And who am I?
You are Amadis de Gaul, Sir.
Oh, oh, my heart! were you never in love, sweet Lady?
And do you never dream of Flowers and Gardens;
I dream of walking Fires: take heed, It comes now,
Who's that? pray stand away, I have seen that face sure;
How light my head is.
Take some rest.
I cannot.
For I must be up to morrow, to go to Church:
And I must dress me, put my new Gown on,
And be as fine to meet my Love: Heig ho!
Will not you tell me where my Love lies buried?
He is not dead: beshrew my heart she stirs me.
He is dead to me.
Is it possible my Nature
Should be so damnable, to let her suffer;
Give me your hand.
How soft you feel; how gentle?
Isle tell ye your fortune, Friend.
How she stares on me?
You have a flattering face; but it is a fine one;
I warrant you may have a hundred Sweet-hearts:
Will ye pray for me? I shall die to morrow;
And will ye ring the Bells?
I am most unworthy;
I doe confess unhappy; doe you know me?
I would I did.
Oh fair tears; how ye take me.
Do you weep too? you have not lost your Lover?
You mock me: Isle go home and pray.
Pray ye pardon me:
Or if it please ye to consider justly,
Scorn me; for I deserve it: Scorn, and shame me:
Sweet Oriana.
Let her alone; she trembles.
Her fits will grow more strong, if ye provoke her;
Certain she knows ye not, yet loves to see ye
How she smiles now:
Where are ye? oh, why doe not ye laugh: come laugh at me;
Why a devil, art thou sad, and such a subject,
Such a ridiculous subject, as I am
Before thy face?
Prithee put off this Lightness,
This is no time for mirth, nor place: I have used too much on it:
I have undone my self and a sweet Lady,
By being too Indulgent to my Foolery
Which truly I repent: look here.
What ails she.
Alas she is mad.
Mad.
Yes, too sure for me too.
Dost thou wonder at that? by this good light, they are all so;
They are coz'ning mad, they are brawling mad, they are proud mad.
They are all, all mad: I came from a world of mad women,
Mad as march Hairs: get'em in Chains, then deal with'em.
There's one that's mad: she seems well, but she is dog mad:
Is she dead, dost think?
Dead? heaven forbid.
Heaven further it.
For till they be key-cold dead, there's no trusting of'em
What ere they seem, or howsoever they carry it,
Till they be chap-falne, and their Tongues at peace,
Nailed in their Coffins sure, Isle ne'er beleeve'em,
Shall I talk with her.
No, deer friend, be quiet;
And be at peace a while.
Isle walk a side,
And come again anon: But take heed to her
You say she is a woman?
Yes.
Take great heed:
For if she doe not Cozen thee, then hang me:
Let her be mad, or what she will, she'll cheat thee
Away wild Fool: how wild this shows in him now?
Now take my faith, before ye all I speak it,
And with it, my repentant Love.
This seems well.
Were but this Lady 〈…〉leer again, whose sorrows
My very hart melts for; were she but perfect
(For thus to marry her, would be two Miseries,)
Before the richest, and the noblest Beauty,
France, or the world could show me; I would take her
As she is now, my Tears, and praires shall wed her.
This makes some small amends.
She beckons to ye.
To us too, to go off.
Let's draw aside all.
Oh my best friend: I would fine.
What? she speaks well,
And with another voice.
But I am fearful,
And shame a little, stops my tongue.
Speak boldly.
Tell ye, I am well, I am perfect well. 'pray ye mock not;
And that I did this to provoke your Nature,
Out of my infinite, and restless Love,
To win your pity: pardon me.
Go forward;
Who set ye on?
None, as I live, no Creature.
Not any knew, or ever dreamt, what I meant:
Will ye be mine?
It is true, I pity ye;
But when I marry ye, ye must be wiser;
Nothing but Tricks? devises?
Will ye shame me?
Yes, marry will I: Come near, Come near, a Miracle,
The Women's well: she was only mad for Marriage,
Stark mad to be stoned to death; give her good Council,
Will this world never mend? are ye caught, Damsel?
How goes it now?
Thou art a kind of Prophet,
The woman's well again; and would have gulled me,
Well, excellent well: and not a Taint upon her.
Did not I tell ye? Let'em be what can be;
Saints, Devils, any thing, they will abuse us;
Thou were an Ass to believe her so long: a Coxcomb;
Give'em a minute, they'll abuse whole Millions.
And am not I a rare Physician, Gentlemen?
That can cure desperate mad Minds?
Be not insolent.
Well, go thy ways: from this hour, I disclame thee,
Unless thou hast a Trick above this: then Isle love thee.
Ye owe me for your Cure; pray have a Care of her,
For fear she fall into Relapse; Come Bellure
We'll set up Bills, to Cure diseased virgins.
Shall we be merry?
Yes.
But Isle no more projects;
If we could make 'em mad, it were some Mastery.
I am glad she is well again.
So am I, certain
Be not ashamed.
I shall never see a man more.
Come ye are afoole: had ye but told me this Trick,
He should not have gloried thus.
He shall not long neither.
Be ruled, and be at peace: ye have my Consent,
And what power I can work with.
Come, leave blushing;
We are your Friends; an honest way compelled ye;
Heaven will not see so true a love unrecompenc'd;
Come in, and slight him too.
The next shall hit him.
Twill be discovered.
That's the worst can happen:
If there be any way, to reach, and work upon him;
Upon his nature suddenly, and catch him: That he loves,
Though he dissemble it, and would show contrary,
And will at length relent: I'll lay my Fortune,
Nay more, my life.
Is she won?
Yes, and ready,
And my designments set.
They are now for Travel,
All for that Game again: they have forgot wooing.
Let 'em; we'll travel with 'em.
Whore's his Father?
Within; he knows my mind too, and allows it;
Pities your Sisters Fortune most sincerely;
And has appointed, for our more assistance,
Some of his secret Friends.
'Speed the plough.
Well said;
And be you serious too.
I shall be diligent.
Let's break the Ice for one, the rest will drink too
(Believe me, sir) of the same Cup; my young Gentlewomen
Wait but who sets the Game a foot; though they seem stubborn,
Reserved, and proud now, yet I know their hearts,
Their pulses, how they beat, and for what cause, Sir;
And how they long to venture their Abilities
In a true Quarrel; Husbands they must, and will have,
Or Nunneries, and thin Collations
To cool their bloods; Let's all about our business,
And if this fail, let Nature work.
Ye have armed me.
Will ye be wilful then?
'Pray, sir, your pardon,
For I must Travel: lie lazy here;
Bound to a Wife; Chained to her subtleties,
Her humours, and her wills, which are mere Fetters;
To have her today pleased, to morrow peevish,
The third day mad, the fourth rebellious;
You see, before they are married, what Moriscoes,
What Masques, and Mummeries they put upon us,
To be tied here, and suffer their Lavalto's?
It is your own seeking.
Yes, to get my freedom;
Were they as I could wish 'em.
Fools, and Meacocks,
To endure what you think fit to put upon 'em:
Come, change your mind.
Not before I have changed air (Father)
When I know women worthy of my company,
I will return again and wait upon 'em;
Till then (dear Sir) I'll amble all the world over,
And run all hazards, misery, and poverty,
So I escape the dangerous Bay of Matrimony.
Are ye resolved?
Yes certain; I will out again.
We are for ye, sir; we are your savants once more;
Once more we'll seek our fortune in strange Countries;
Ours is too scornful for us.
Is there ne'er a Land
That ye have read, or head of, (for I care not how far it be,
Nor under what Pestiferous Star it lies)
A happy Kingdom, where there are no Women?
Nor have been ever? Nor no mention
Of any such lewd Things, with lewder qualities?
For thither would I Travel; where it is Felony
To confess he had a Mother: a Mistress, Treason?
Are you for Travel too?
For any thing;
For living in the Moon, and stopping hedges,
Ever I stay here to be abused, and baffell'd.
Why did ye not break your minds to me? They are my daughters;
And sure I think I should have that command over 'em?
To see 'em well bestowed: I know ye are Gentlemen,
Men of fair Parts and States; I know your Parents;
And had ye told me of your fair Affections:
Make but one Trial more; and let me second ye.
No I'll make Hob-nailes first, and mend old Kettles:
Can ye lend me an Armour of high proof, to appear in,
And two or three field pieces to defend me?
The Kings Guard are mere Pigmeys.
They will not eat ye.
Yes, and you too, and twenty fatter Monsieurs,
If their high stomachs hold: They came with Chopping-knives,
To cut me into Rands, and Sirloins, and so powder me.
Come, shall we go?
You cannot be so discourteous
(If ye intend to go) as not to visit 'em,
And take your leaves.
That we dare do, and civilly,
And thank 'em too.
Yes, sir, we know that honesty.
I'll come in the Rear, forty foot off, I'll assure ye,
With a good Gun in my hand; I'll no more Amazous,
I mean, no more of their frights; I'll make my three legs,
Kiss my hand twice; and if I smell no danger;
If the interview be clear, may be I'll speak to her;
I'll ware a privy coat too; and behind me,
To make those parts secure, a Bandog.
You are a merry Gentleman.
A wary Gentleman; I do assure ye,
I Have been warned, and must be armed.
Well, Son,
These are your hasty thoughts, when I see you are bent to it,
Then I'll believe, and join with ye; So we'll leave ye:
There's a Trick will make ye stay.
I hope so.
We have won immortal Fame now, if we leave 'em.
You have, but we have lost.
Pinac, Thou art cozened;
I know they Love ye; and to gain ye handsomely,
Not to be thought to yield, they would give millions;
Their Fathers willingness, that must needs show ye.
If I thought so.
Ye shall be hanged, ye Recreant,
Would ye turn Renegade no?
No lets away, Boys,
Out of the Air, and tumult of their Villainies;
Though I were married to that Grasshopper,
And had her fast by the legs I should think she would cozen me.
Monsieur Mirabel, I take it?
You're in the right, sir.
I am come to seek ye, sir; I have been at your Fathers,
And understanding you were here.
Ye are welcome:
May I crave your name?
Fosse, Sir, and your servant;
That you may know me better; I am Factor
To your old Merchant, Leverdure.
How do's he?
Well, sir, I hope: he is now at Orleans,
About some business.
You are once more welcome.
Your Master's a right honest man; and one
I am much beholding too, and must very shortly
Trouble his love again.
You may be bold, sir.
Your business if you please now?
This it is, sir.
I know ye well remember in your Travel
A Genoa Merchant.
I remember many.
But this man, sir, particularly; your own benefit
Must needs imprint him in ye: one Alberto;
A Gentleman you saved from being Murdered
A little from Bollonia,
I was then myself in Italy, and supplied ye,
Though happily, you have forgot me now.
No, I remember ye,
And that Alberto too: a noble Gentleman:
More to remember, were to thanck myself, Sir.
What of that Gentleman?
He is dead:
I am sorry.
But on his death bed, leaving to his Sister.
All that he had beside some Certain Jewels,
Which with a Ceremony, he bequeathd to you,
In grateful memory: he commanded strictly
His Sister, as she loved him and his peace,
To see those Jewels safe, and true delivered;
And with them, his last Love. She, as tender
To observe this will, not trusting friend, nor Servant,
With such a weight, is come her self to Paris
And at my Masters House.
You tell me a wonder.
I tell ye a truth, Sir: She is young, and handsome,
And well attended: of much State, and Riches;
So loving, and obedient to her Brother;
That on my Conscience, if he had given her also,
She would most willingly have made her tender.
May not I see her?
She desires it heartily.
And presently?
She is now about some Business,
Passing Accounts of some few debts here owing,
And buying Jewels of a Merchant,
Is she wealthy.
I would ye had her, Sir, at all adventure.
Her Brother had, a main State.
And fair too?
The prime of all those parts of Italy,
For Beauty, and for Courtesy.
I must needs see her.
It is all her Business, Sir. Ye may now see her,
But to morrow will be fitter for your visitation;
For she is not yet prepared.
Only, her 〈…〉ight, Sir.
And when you shall think fit for further visit.
Sir, ye may see her; and Isle wait your Coming.
And Isle be with ye instantly: I know the house,
Mean time, my love, and thanks, Sir.
Your poor Servant
Thou hast the strangest Luck: What was that Alberto?
An honest noble Merchant, it was my chance
To rescue from some Rogues had almost slain him;
And he in kindness to remember this.
Now we shall have you:
For all your protestations, and your forwardness,
Find out strange Fortunes in this Ladies eyes,
And new entirements to put off your journey;
And who shall have honour then?
No, no, never fear it:
I must needs see her, to receive my Legacy.
If it be tide up in her smock, Heaven help thee:
May not we see too?
Yes, before we go:
I must be known my self ever I be able
To make thou welcome: would thou see more women?
I thought you had been out of love with all:
I may be,
I find that with the least encouragement:
Yet I desire to see whether all Countries
Are naturally possessed with the same spirits;
For if they be, I'll take a Monastery,
And never Travel; for I had rather be a Friar,
And live mewed up, then be a fool, and flouted:
Well, well, I'll meet ye anon; then tell you more, Boys;
How ever, stand prepared, pressed for our journey;
For certain, we shall go, I think, when I have seen her.
And viewed her well.
Go, go, and we'll wait for ye;
Your fortune directs ours.
You shall find us in the Tavern,
Lamenting in Sack and Sugar for our losses;
If she be right Italian, and want servants,
You may prefer the properest man.
How I could worry a woman now?
Come, come, leave prating;
Ye may have enough to do, without this boasting
This is the last adventure.
And the happiest,
As we hope too.
We should be glad to find it.
Who shall conduct us thither?
Your man is ready.
For I must not be seen; no, nor this Gentleman;
That may beget suspicion: all the rest
Are people of no doubt; I would have ye, Ladies,
Keep your old liberties, and as we instruct ye:
Come, look not pale; you shall not lose your wishes;
Nor beg 'em neither: but be your selves, and happy.
I tell ye true, I cannot hold off longer,
Nor give no more hard language.
You shall not need.
I love the Gentleman, and must now show it;
Shall I beat a proper man out of heart?
There's none advises ye.
Faith I repent me too.
Repent, and spoil all.
Tell what ye know, ye had best.
I'll tell what I think;
For if he ask me now, if I can love him,
I'll tell him yes, I can: The man's a kind man;
And out of his true honesty affect me;
Although he plaid the fool, which I requited;
Must I still hold him at the staves end?
You are two strange woman.
We may be, if we fool still.
Dare ye believe me?
Follow but this advice I have set you in now,
And if ye lose: would ye yield now so basely?
Give up without your honours saved?
Fie, Ladies.
Preserve your freedom still.
Well, well, for this time.
And carry that full state.
That's as the wind stands:
If it begin to chop about, and scant u〈…〉;
Hang me, but I know what Isle do: come direct us,
I make no doubt, we shall do handsomely:
Some part of the way, we'll wait upon ye, Ladies;
The rest your man supplies:
Do well, I`ll honour ye.
Look ye, Sir, there she is, you see how busy;
Methinks you are infinitely bound to her, for her journey.
How gloriously she shows? She is a tall woman.
Of a fair Size, sir. My Master not being at home,
I have been so out of my wits, to get her company:
I mean, sir, of her own fair Sex, and fashion.
A far off, she is most fair too.
Near, most Excellent.
At length, I have entreated two fair Ladies,
And happily you know 'em: the young daughters
Of Monsieur Nantolet.
I know 'em well, sir.
What are those? Jewels?
All.
They make a rich show?
There is a matter of ten thousand pounds too
Was owing here: you see those Merchants with her;
They have brought it in now.
How handsomely her shape shows?
Those are still neat: your Italians are most curious〈…〉
Now she looks this way.
She has a gooly presence.
How full of courtesy? Well, sir, I'll leave ye.
And if I may be bold to bring a friend or two;
Good noble Gentlemen.
No doubt, ye may, sir.
For you have most command.
I have seen a wonder.
Is he gon?
Yes.
How?
Taken to the utmost.
A wonder dwells about him.
He did not guess at me?
No, be secure; ye show another woman.
He is gone to fetch his friends.
Where are the Gentlewomen?
Here, here, now they are come,
Sit still, and let them see ye.
Pray ye, whore's my friend, Sir?
She is within, Ladies, but here's another Gentlewoman;
A stranger to this Town: so please you visit her,
Twill be well taken.
Where is she?
There, Above; Ladies.
'Bless me: what Thing is this? two Pinnacles,
Upon her pate! Is it not a glode to catch Wood-cocks?
Peace, ye rude, knave.
What a bouncing Bum she has too?
There's Sail enough for a Carrack.
What is this Lady?
For as I live, she's a goodly woman.
Guess, guess.
I have not seen a nobler Presence.
It is a lusty wench: now could I spend my forty-pence,
With all my heart, to have but one fling at her;
To give her but a washing blow.
Ye Rascal.
I that's all a man has, for's goodwill: 'twil be long enough,
Before ye cry come Anthony, and kiss me.
Isle have ye whipped.
Has my friend seen this Lady?
Yes, yes, and is well known to her.
I much admire her Presence.
So do I too:
For I protest, she is the handsomest,
The rarest, and the newest to mine eye
That ever, I saw yet.
I long to know her;
My friend shall doe that kindness.
So she shall Ladies.
Come, pray ye come up.
O, me,
Hang me if I knew her:
Were I a man my self, I should now love ye;
Nay, I should dote.
I dare not, trust mine eyes;
For as I live ye are the strangest altered
I must come up to know the truth.
So must I, Lady;
For I am a kind of unbeliever too.
Get ye gon, Sirrah;
And what ye have seen, be secret in: you are paid else;
No more of your long tongue.
Will ye go in Ladies,
And talk with her. These venturers will come strait:
Away with this fellow.
There, Sirrah, go, disport ye.
I would the Trunck-hos'd woman, would go with me.
Is she so glorious handsome?
You would wonder:
Our Women look like Gipsies, like Gills to her:
Their Clothes and fashions beggarly, and Bankrupt:
Base, old, and scurvy.
How looks her face?
Most heavenly:
And the becoming-motion of her Body
So sets her off.
Why then we shall stay.
Pardon me:
That's more then I know: if she be that Woman,
She appears to be.
As it is impossible.
I shall then tell ye more.
Did ye speak to her?
No, no, I only saw her: She was busy
Now I go for that end: And mark her (Gentlemen)
If she appear, not to ye, one of the sweetest,
The handsomest: the fairest, in behaviour,
We shall meet the two wenches there too, they come to visit her,
To wonder, as we doe.
Then we shall meet'em.
I had rather meet two Bears.
There you may take your leaves, dispatch that business,
And as ye find their humours.
Is your Love there too?
No certain, she has no great heart to set out again.
This is the house, Isle usher ye?
Isle bless me,
And take a good heart if I can:
Come, nobly
They are come in: Sit you two off, as Strangers,
There Lady: whore's the Boy? be ready, Sirrha
And clear your Pipes, the Music now: they enter.
What a State she keeps? how far off they sit, from her?
How rich she is, I marry, this shows bravely.
She is a lusty wench: and may allure a good man,
But if she have a Tongue, Isle not give two pence for her:
There fits my Fury: how I shake to see her.
Madam this is the Gentleman.
How sweet she kisses?
She has a Spring dwells on her lips: a paradise
This is the Legacy.
From the honoured dead I bring
Thus his love and last offering〈…〉
From a faith &amp;c.
Take it nobly, it is your due,
From a friendship ever true.
Most noble, Sir.
This from my now dead Brother, as his love,
And grateful memory of your great benefit:
From me my thanks, my wishes, and my Service,
Till I am more acquainted I am silent.
Only I dare say this, you are truly noble.
What should I think?
Think ye have a handsome fortune,
Would I had such another.
Ye are well met Gentlemen,
We hear ye are for Travel?
Ye hear true, Lady,
And come to take our Leaves.
We'll along with ye,
We see you are grown so witty by your Journey,
We cannot choose but step out too: This Lady,
We mean to wait upon as far as Italy.
I'll travel into Wales, amongst the Mountains;
I hope they cannot find me.
If you go further;
So good, and free society we hold ye,
We'll jog along too.
Are ye so valiant Lady?
And we'll be merry, Sir, and laugh.
It may be
We'll go by Sea.
Why it is the the only voyage;
I love a Sea〈…〉 voyage, and a blustering Tempest;
And let all split.
This is a dainty Damosel:
I think twill tame ye: can ye ride post?
'O excellently: I am never weary that way:
A hundred mile a day is nothing with me.
I'll travel under ground: do you hear (sweet Lady?)
I find it will be dangerous for a woman.
No danger, sir, I warrant; I love to be under.
I see she will abuse me all the world over:
But say we pass through Germany, and drink hard?
We'll learn to drink and swagger too.
She'll beat me.
Lady, I'll live at home.
And I'll live with thee;
And We'll keep house together.
I'll keep hounds first;
And those I have tight heartily.
I go for Turkey,
And so it may be up into Persia.
We cannot know to much, I'll travel with ye.
And you'll abuse me?
Like enough.
It is dainty.
I will live in a bawdy-house.
I dare come to ye.
Say, I am disposed to hang my self?
There I'll leave ye:
I am glad I know how to avoid ye.
May I speak yet?
She beckons to ye.
Lady, I could wish, I knew to recompense,
Even with the service of my life, those pains,
And those high favours you have thrown upon me;
Till I be more desertful in your eye;
And till my duty shall make known I honour ye:
Noblest of Women, do me but this favour,
To accept this back again, as a poor testimony.
I must have you too with 'em; else the Will,
That says they must rest with ye, is infringed, sir,
Which pardon me, I dare not do.
Take me then;
And take me with the truest love.
It is certain,
My Brother loved ye dearly, and I ought
As dearly to preserve that love. But, Sir;
Though I were willing; these are but your Ceremonies.
As I have life, I speak my soul.
I like ye.
But how you can like me, without I have Testimony,
A Stranger to ye.
I'll marry ye immediately.
A fair State, I dare promise ye.
Yet she'll cozen thee.
Would some fair Gentlemen durst promise for ye.
By all that's good
And we'll make up the rest, Lady.
Then Oriana takes ye; nay, she has caught ye;
If ye start now let all the World cry shame on ye:
I have out Travelled ye.
did not I say she would cheat thee?
I thank ye, I am pleased, ye have deceived me;
And willingly I swallow it, and joy in it;
And yet perhaps I know ye: whose plot was this?
He is not ashamed that cast it: he that executed
Followed your Fathers will.
What a world's this, nothing but craft, and cozenage?
Who begun, sir.
Well; I do take thee upon mere Compassion;
And I do think, I shall love thee. As a Testimony,
I'll burn my book, and turn a new leaf over.
But these fine clothes you shall wear still.
I obey you, sir, in all.
And how! How, daughters! What say you to these Gentlemen?
What say ye, Gentlemen, to the Girls?
By my troth—if she can love me.
—How long?
Nay, if once ye love.
Then take me,
And take your chance.
Most willingly, ye are mine, Lady:
And if I use ye not, that ye may love me.
A Match y' faith.
Why now ye travel with me.
How that thing stands?
It will, if ye urge it.
'Bless your five wits.
Nay, prithee stay, I'll have thee.
You must ask me leave first.
Wilt thou use me kindly;
And beat me but once a week?
If ye deserve no more.
And wilt thou get me with child?
Dost thou ask me seriously?
Yes indeed do I.
Yes, I will get thee with child: Come presently,
And 't be but in revenge, I'll do thee that courtesy.
Well, if thou wilt fear God, and me; have at thee.
I'll love ye, and I'll honour ye:
I am pleased then.
This Wild-Goose-Chase is done, we have won of both sides.
Brother, your love: and now to Church of all hands;
Let's lose no time.
Our Travelling, lay by.
No more for Italy; for the Low-Countries.

HOw ere th'intents and appetites of men
Are different as their faces, how and when
T'employ their actions, yet all without strife
Meet in this point, Any thing for a Quiet Life.
Nor is there one I think that's hither come
For his delight, but would find Peace at home
On any terms. The Lawyer does not cease
To talk himself into a sweat with pain,
And so his Fees buy Quiet, it is his gain:
The poor man does endure the scorching Sun,
And feels no weariness his day-labor done,
So his Wife entertain him with a smile,
And thank his travail, though she slept the while:
This being in men of all conditions true,
Does give our Play a Name; and if to you
It yield Content, and usual Delight,
For our parts we shall sleep secure to night.
AWay, I am ashamed of your proceedings, and seri∣ously you have in this one act overthrown the repu∣tation the world held of your wisdom.
Why Sir?
Can you not see your error? that having buried so good a wife not a month since; one that, to speak the truth, had all those excellencies which our books have only feigned to make a complete Wife, most exactly in her in practice, and to marry a Girl of fifteen; one bred up in the Court, that by all consonance of reason, is like to cross your estate: why, one new Gown of hers when it is paid for, will eat you out the kee∣ping of a bountiful Christmas. I am ashamed of you, for you shall make too dear a proof of it, I fear; that in the election of a Wife, as in a project of War, to err but once, is to be undone for ever.
Good my Lord, I do beseech you let your better judge∣meant go along with your reprehension.
So it does, and can find nought to extenuate your fault, but your dotage: you are a man well sunk in years, and to graft such a young blossom into your Stock, is the next way to make every carnal eye bespeak your injury. Troth I pity her too, she was not made to wither and go out by painted fires, that yields her no more heat, then to be lodged in some bleak Banquetting-house in the dead of Winter, and what follows then? your shame, and the ruin of your children, and there's the end of a rash bargain.
With your pardon, that she is young is true; but that Discretion he's gone beyond her years▪ and overtone those of ma∣turer age, does more improve her goodness. I confess she was bred at Court, but so retiredly, that (as still the best in some place is to be learnt there) so her life did rectify it self more by the Court Chapel, then by the Office of the Revels: best of all virtues are
to be found at Court, and where you meet with writings contrary to this known truth, they are framed by men that never were so happy to be planted there to know it: for the difference between her youth and mine, if you will read a Matrons sober staidness in her eye, and all the other grave demeanour fitting the Governess of a House, you'll then confess there's no disparity between us.
Come, come, you read  what you would have her to be, not what she is. Oh Mr. Water Chamlet, you are welcome.
I thank your Lordship.
And what news stirring in Cheapside?
Nothing new there my Lord, but the Standard.
Oh that's a Monument your wives take great delight in; I do hear you are grown a mighty Purchaser, I hope shortly to find you a continual resident upon the North Isle of the Exchange.
Where? with the Scotch-men?
No Sir, with the Aldermen.
Believe it, I am a poor Commoner.
Come, you are warm, and blessed with a fair Wife.
There's it, her going brave, has the only virtue to improve my credit in the Subsidy-book.
But I pray, how thrives your New Plantation of Silk∣worms, those I saw last Summer at your garden?
They are removed sir.
Whether?
This winter my wife has removed them home to a fair Chamber, where divers Courtiers use to come and see them, and my wife carries them up; I think shortly, what with the store of Visitants, they'll prove as chargeable to me as the morrow after Simon and Jude, only excepting the taking down and setting up again of my Glass-windows.
That a man of your estate should be so gripple-minded, and ripening at his wives bounty!
There are no such ridiculous things in the world, as those love money better then themselves; for though they have under∣standing to know riches, and a mind to seek them, and a wit to find them, and policy to keep them, and long life to possess them; yet commonly they have withal such a false sight, such bleard-eyes, all their wealth when it lies before them, does seem poverty, and such a one are you.
Good sir Francis, you have had sore eyes too, you have
been a Gamester, but you have given it o'er, and to redeem the vice belonged to it, now you entertain certain farcels of silenced Mi∣nisters, which I think will equally undo you▪ yet should these waste you but lenatively, your devising new Water-mill for recovery of drowned Land, and certain dreams you have in Alchemy to find the Philosophers-Stone, will certainly draw you to'th bottom: I speak freely sir, and would not have you angry, for I love you.
I am deeply in your Books for furnishing my late VVed∣ding; have you brought a Note of the particulars?
No sir, at more leisure.
What comes the sum to?
For Tissue, Cloth of Gold, Velvets and Silks, about fife∣teen hundred pounds.
Your money is ready.
Sir, I thank you.
And how does my two young children, whom I have put to board with you?
Have you put forth two of your children already?
It was my wives discretion to have it so.
Come, tic the first principle in a Mother-in-law's Chop-Logick, to divide the Family, to remove from forth your sight the Object, that her cunning knows would dull her insinuation: had you been a kind father, it would have been your practice every day to have preached to these two young ones carefully, your late Wives Funeral Sermon. L'as poor souls, are they turned so soon a grazing?
My Lord, they are placed where they shall be respected as mine own.
I make no question of it, good Mr. Cham∣let. See here your eldest son, Frank Cressingham!
You have displeased and grieved your Mother in Law, and till you have made submission and procured her pardon, Isle not know you for my son.
I have wrought her no offence sir, the difference grew about certain Jewels which my Mother (by your consent) lying upon her Death-bed, bequeathed to her three Children; these I demanded, and being denied these, thought this sin of hers to violate so gentle a Request of her Predecessor, was an ill fore∣going of a Mother in Laws harsh nature.
Sir, understand my will moved in her denial: You have Jewels to pawn, or sell them! Sirrah, I will have you as obedient to this woman as to my self, till then you are none of mine.
Oh Mr. George, be ruled, do any thing for a quiet Life, your Fathers peace of Life moves in it too. I have a Wife, when she is in the Sullens, like a Cooks dog that you see turn a wheel, she will be sure to go and hide her self out of the way Dinner and Supper: and in these Fits Bowe-bell is a still Organ to her, when we were married first, I well remember, her railing did appear but a vision, till certain scratches on my hand and face, assured me it was substantial. She's a creature uses to way lay my faults, and more desires to find them out, then to have them amended: She has a Book, which I may truly nominate her Black∣book, for she remembers in it in short Items all my misdemea∣nors: As, Item such a day I was got foxed with foolish Metheglin, in the company of certain Welsh Chapman. Item, such a day be∣ing at the Artillery-Garden, one of my neighbours in curtsy to salute me with his Musket, set a fire my Fustian and Apes Bree∣ches. Such a day I lost fifty pound in hugger mugger, at Dice at the Quest-house. Item I lent money to a Sea-Captain, on his bare Confound-him he would pay me again the next morning, and such like; for which she railed upon me when I should sleep, and that's, you know, intolerable; for indeed twill tame an Elephant.
Tic a shrewd vexation, but your discretion sir, does bear it out with a months sufferance.
Yes, and I would wish you to follow mine example.
Here's small comfort George from your Father. Here's a Lord whom I have long depended upon for employment, I will see if my suit will thrive better. Please your Lordship, you know I am a younger brother, and my Fate throwing me upon the late ill-starr'd Voyage to Guiana; failing of our golden hopes, I and my Ship addressed our selves to serve the Duke of Florence.
Yes, I understood so.
Who gave me both Encouragement and Means, to do him some small service against the Turk; being settled there both in his Pay and Trust, your Lordship minding to rigg forth a Ship to trade for the East-Indies, sent for me, and what your pro∣mise was, if I would leave so great a fortune to become your ser∣vant, your Letters yet can witness.
Yes, what follows?
That for ought I perceive, your former purpose is
quite forgotten; I have stayed here two months, and find your intended Voyage but a Dream, and the Ship you talk of as image∣nary, as that the Astronomers point at in the clouds. I have spent two thousand Ducats since my arrival; men that have command, my Lord, at Sea, cannot live a shore without money.
Know sir, a late Purchase which cost me a great sum, has diverted me from my former purpose, besides Suits in Law do every Term so trouble me by Land, I have forgot going by Wa∣la. If you please to rank your self among my followers, you shall be welcome, and Isle make your means better than any Gentle∣mans I keep.
Some twenty Mark a year! will that maintain Scarlet and Gold-lace, play at th▪ Ordinary, and Beavers at the Tavern?
I had thought to prefer you to have been Captain of a Ship that's bound for the Red-sea.
What hinders it?
Why certainly the Mer∣chants are possessed you have been a Pirate.
Say I were one still, if I were past the Line once, why methinks I should do them better service.
Pray forbear: here's a Gentleman whose business must in∣gross me wholly.
What's he, dost thou know him?
A pox upon him, a very knave and rascal, that goes a hunting with the penal Statutes; and good for nought but to per∣swade their Lords to rack their Rents, and give o'er House-keep∣ing; such Caterpillars may hang at their Lords ears, when better men are neglected.
What's his name?
Knaves-bee.
Knaves-bee!
One that deals in a tenth share about Projections: he and his partners when they have got a Suit once past the Seal, will so wrangle about partition, and sometimes they fall to'th ears about it, like your Fencers, that cudgel one another by Patent; you shall see him so terribly bedasht in a Michaelmas Term coming from Westminster, that you would swear he were lighted from a Horse-race: Hang him, hang him, he's a scurvy Informer, has more cousinage in him, then is in five travelling Lotteries. To feed a Kite with the carrion of this Knave when he's dead, and re∣claim her, oh she would prove an excellent Hawk for talon: has
a fair Creature to his Wife too, and a witty rogue it is, and some men think this knave will wink at small faults; but honest George, what shall become of us now?
Faith I am resolved to set up my rest for the Low-Countreys.
To serve there?
Yes certain.
There's thin commons, besides they have added one day more to'th Week then was in the Creation; Art thou valiant? Art thou valiant, George?
I may be, and I be put too't.
O never fear that, thou can not live two hours after thy Landing without a quarrel. Thou must resolve to fight, or like a Sumner, thou'lt be bastinadoed at every Towns end. You shall have Gallants there as ragged as the Fall of the Leaf, that live in Holland, where the finest Linen's made, and yet wear ne'er a Shirt: These will not only quarrel with a new-commer when they are drunk, but they will quarrel with any man has means to be drunk before them: Follow my council, George, thou shalt not go o'er, we'll live here in the City.
But how?
How? why, as other Gallants do that feed high, and play copiously, yet brag they have but nine pound a year to live on: these have wit to turn rich Fools and Gulls into Quarter-days, that bring them in certain payment. I have a Project reflects upon y'on Mercer, Mr. Chamlet, shall put us into money.
What is it?
Nay, I will not stale it afore-hand, it is a new one: Nor cheating amongst Gallants may seem strange, Why a reaching Wit goes currant on th'Exchange.
O my Lord, I remember you and I were Students together at Cambridge; but believe me you went far beyond me.
When I studied there, I had so fantastical a brain, that like a Phelphare, frighted in winter by a Birding-piece, I could setle no where; here and there a little of every several Art, and away.
Now my wit, though it were more dull, yet I went slowly on, and as divers others, when I could not prove an excel∣lent Scholar by a plodding patience, I attained to be a Petty Law∣yer; and I thank my dullness for it, you may stamp in Lead any fi∣gure, but in Oil or Quick-silver nothing can be imprinted, for
they keep no certain station.
O, you tax me well of irresolution; but say worthy friend, how thrives my weighty Suit which I have trusted to your friendly bosom? is there any hope to make me happy?
Tic yet questionable, for I have not broke the ice to her; an hour hence come to my house, and if it lye in man, be sure, as the Law Phrase says, I will create you Lord Paramount of your wishes.
O my best friend, and one that takes the hardest course in the world, to make himself so. Sir, now Isle take my leave.
Nay good my Lord, my Wife is co∣ming down.
Pray pardon me, I have business so importunes me of the sudden, I cannot stay; deliver mine excuse, and in your ear this. Let not a fair woman make you forget your children.
What? are you taking leave too?
Yes, good Madam.
The rich Stuff which my Husband bought of you, the works of them are too common: I have got a Dutch Painter to draw Patterns, which Isle have sent to your Factors; as in Italy, at Florence and Ragusa, where these Stuffs are woven, to have pieces made for mine own wearing of a new invention.
You may Lady, but twill be somewhat chargeable.
Chargeable! what of that? if I live another year, Isle have my Agents shall lye for me at Paris, and at Venice, and at Validolet in Spain, for intelligence of all new Fashions.
Do Sweetest, thou deserve to be exquisite in all things.
The two Children to which you are Mother in Law, would be repaired too, it is time they had new clothing.
I pray fir, do not trouble me with them; they have a Father indulgent and careful of them.
I am sorry you made the motion to her.
I have done: He has run himself
Into a pretty dotage, Madam, with your leave;
He's tied to a new Law, and a new Wife,
Yet to my old Proverb, Any thing for a quiet Life.
Good friend, I have a suit to you.
Dearest Self▪ you most powerfully sway me.
That you would give o'er this fruitless, if I may not say this idle, Study of Alchemy; why half your house looks like a
Glass-house.
And the smoke you make is a worse enemy to good House-keeping, then Tobacco.
Should one of your glasses break, it might bring you to a Dead Palsy.
My Lord, your Quicksilver has made all your more so∣lid gold and silver fly in fume.
Isle be ruled by you in any thing.
Go Saunder, break all the Glasses.
I fly to it.
Why noble friend, would you find the true Philoso∣phers-stone indeed, my good Housewifery should do it. You under∣stand I was bred up with a great Courtly Lady, do not think all women mind gay clothes and riot, there are some Widows living have improved both their own fortunes and their childrens: would you take my counsel, I'd advise you to sell your Land.
My Land!
Yes, and the Manor House up n't, tic rotten: Oh the new fashioned Buildings brought from the Hague! it is stately. I have intelligence of a Purchase, and the Title sound, will for half the money you may sell yours for, bring you in more Rent then yours now yields you.
If it be so good a pennyworth, I need not sell my Land to purchase it, Isle procure money to do it.
Where sir?
Why, Isle take it up at Interest.
Never did any man thrive that purchased with use-mony.
How come you to know these thrifty Principles?
How? Why my Father was a Lawyer, and died in the Commission, and may not I by a natural instinct, have a reaching that way: there are on mine own knowledge some Divines daugh∣ters infinitely affected with reading Controversies, and that some think has been a means to bring so many Suits into the Spiritual Court. Pray be advised, sell your Land, and purchase more: I knew a Peddler by being Merchant this way, is become Lord of many Manors: we should look to lengthen our Estates  as we do our Lives; and though I am young, yet I am confident your able constitution of body when you are past fourscore, shall keep you fresh till I arrive at the neglected year that I am past Childe-bearing, and yet ever there quickening our faint heats in a soft embrace, and kindling divine flames in fervent prayers, we
may both go out together, and one Tomb quit our Executors the rites of two.
Oh you are so wise, and so good in every thing, I move by your direction.
She has caught him!
HAve you drunk the Eggs and Muskadine I sent you?
No, they are too fulsome.
Away, you're a fool, how shall I begin to break the matter to her? I do long, wife.
Long, sir!
Long infinitely. Sit down, there is a penitential motion in me, which if thou wilt but second, I shall be one of the happiest men in Europe.
What might that be?
I had last night one of the strangest Dreams; me thought I was thy Confessor, thou mine, and we revealed between us pri∣vately how often we had wronged each others Bed since we were married.
Came you drunk to bed? there was a Dream with a witness.
No, no witness; I dreamt no body heard it but we two. This Dream wife, do I long to put in act, let us confess each other, and I vow what ever thou hast done with that sweet corps in the way of natural frailty, I protest most freely I will pardon.
Go sleep again; was there ever such a motion?
Nay sweet woman, and thou wilt not have me run mad with my desire, be persuaded to it.
Well, be it your pleasure.
But to answer truly.
O most sincerely.
Begin then; examine me first.
Why, I know not what to ask you.
Let me see, your father was a Captain; Demand of me how many dead Pays I am to answer for in the Muster-book of Wedlock, by the martial fault of borrowing from my neighbours?
Troth I can ask no such foolish questions
Why then open Concession I hope dear wife, will merit freer pardon: I sinned twice with my Laundress, and last Circuit there was at Banbury a She-chamberlain that had a spice of purity,
but at last I prevailed over her.
O, you are an ungra∣cious husband.
I have made a vow never to ride abroad but in thy company; Oh a little drink makes me clamber like a Monkey: now sweet wife, you have been an out-lyer too, which is best feed in the Forest, or in the Purlewes?
A foolish mind of you in this.
Nay sweet Love, confess freely, I have given you the ex∣ample.
Why you know I went last year to Sturbidge-Fair.
Yes.
And being in Cambridge, a hand∣some Scholar, one of Emanuel College, fell in love with me.
O you sweet-breath'd Monkey.
Go hang, you are so boisterous.
But did this Scholar show thee his Chamber?
Yes.
And did thou like him?
Like him! oh he had the most enticingst straw-colour'd Beard, a woman with black eyes would have loved him like Jet: he was the finest man with a formal wit; and he had a fine dog that sure was whelped in the College, for he understood Latin.
Pue wawe, this is nothing, till I know what he did in's Chamber.
He burnt Wormwood in it, to kill the Fleas in the Rushes.
But what did he to thee there?
Some five and twenty years hence I may chance tell you. Fie upon you, what tricks? what crotchets are these? have you placed any body behind the Arras to hear my Confession? I heard one in England got a Divorce from his wife by such a trick; were I disposed now, I would make you as mad. You shall see me play the Changeling.
No, no wife, you shall see me play the Changeling: had thou confessed, this other Suit Isle now prefer to thee, would have been dispatcht in a trice.
And what's that sir?
Thou wilt wonder at it four and twenty years longer then nine days.
I would very fain hear it.
There is a Lord of the Court, upon my credit a most dear, honourable Friend of mine, that mustlye with thee. Do you laugh? it is not come to that, you'll laugh when you know who it is.
Are you stark mad?
On my Religion I have past my word for it, it is the Lord Beaufort, thou art made happy for ever, the generous and bounti∣full Lord Beaufort: you being both so excellent, it were pity if such
rare Pieces should not be conferred, and sampled together.
Do you mean seriously?
As I hope for prefer∣meant.
And can you loose me thus?
Loose you! I shall love you the better: why, what's the viewing any Wardrobe, or Jewel-house, without a companion to confer their likings? yet now I view thee well, methinks thou art a rare Monopoly, and great pity one man should enjoy thee.
This is pretty.
Let's divorce our selves so long, or think I am gone to'th' Indies, or lye with him when I am asleep, for some Familists of Amsterdam will tell you may be done with a safe conscience: Come you wanton, what hurt can this do to you? I protest nothing so much as to keep company with an old woman has sore eyes: no more wrong then I do my Beaver when I try it thus. Look, this is all; smooth, and keeps fashion still.
You are one of the basest fellows.
I looked for chiding, I do make this a kind of fortitude the Romans never dreamt of, and it were known, I should be spoke and writ of when I am rotten, for it is beyond example.
But I pray resolve me: suppose this done, could you ever love me after?
I protest I never thought so well of thee, till I knew he took a fancy to thee; like one that has variety of choice meat be∣fore him, yet has no stomach to 't until he hear another praise: Hark, my Lord is coming.
Possible.
And my preferment comes along with him; be wise, mind your good, and to confute all reason in the world which thou can urge against it when it is done, we will be married again wife, which some say is the only Supersedes about Limehouse, to remove Cuc∣koldry.
Come, are you ready to attend me to the Court?
Yes my Lord.
Is this fair one, your wife?
At your Lordships service; I will look up some Writings, and return presently.
To see and the base fellow do not leave's alone too!
Tic an excellent habit this, where were you born, Sweet?
I am a Suffolk woman, my Lord.
Believe it, every Country you breath on, is the sweeter for you: Let me see your hand. The Case is loath to part with the Jewel: Fairest one, I have skill in Palmistry.
Good my Lord, what do you find there?
In good earnest I do find written here, all my good for∣tune lies in your hand.
You'll keep a very bad House then, you may see by the smallness of the Table.
Who is your Sweet-heart?
Sweet-heart!
Yes, come, I must sift you to know it.
I am a Sieve too course for your Lordships Manchet.
Nay, pray you tell me, for I see your husband is an un∣handsome fellow.
Oh my Lord, I took him by weight, not fashion: Gold∣smiths Wives taught me that way of bargain, and some Ladies swerve not to follow the example.
But will you not tell me who is your private friend?
Yes, and you'll tell me who is yours.
Shall I show you her?
Yes, when will you?
Instantly, look you there you may see her.
Isle break the glass, it is now worth nothing.
Why?
You have made it a flattering one.
I have a Summer-house for you; a fine place to flatter solitariness: will you come and lye there?
No my Lord.
Your husband has promised me: will you not?
I must wink I tell you, or say nothing.
So, Isle kiss you and wink too,
Midnight is Cupids Holiday.
By this time it is concluded: Will you go my Lord?
I leave with you my best wishes till I see you.
This now (if I may borrow our Lawyers phrase) is my Wives Imparlance, at her next appearance she must answer your Declaration.
You follow it well, sir.
Did I not know my Husband of so base contemptible na∣ture, I should think it were but a trick to try me; but it seems they are both in wicked earnest; and methinks upon the sudden I have a great mind to loath this scurvy unhandsome way my Lord has tan to compass me: why it is for all the world as if he should come
to steal some Apricots my Husband kept for's own Tooth, and climb up upon his head and shoulders. Isle go to him, he will put me into brave Clothes, and rich Jewels; it were a very ill part in me not to go, his Mercer and his Goldsmith else might curse me; and what Isle do there, a my troth yet I know not; Women though puzzled with these subtle deeds, May, as in the Spring, pick Physic out of weeds.
What first you lack, you lack, you lack?
Stuffs for the Belly, or the Back?
Silk-Grograns, Satins, Velvet fine,
The Rosie-colour'd Carnadine;
Your Nutmeg hue, or Gingerline,
Cloth of Tissue, or Tobine,
That like beaten Gold will shine
In your Amorous Ladies eyne,
Whilst you their softer Silks do twine: 
What first you lack, you lack, you lack?
I do lack Content Sir, Content I lack: have you or your worshipful Master here, any Content to sell?
If Content be a Stuff to be sold by the Yard, you may have content at home, and never go abroad for it.
Do, cut me three yards, Isle pay for 'em.
There's all we have in the Shop; we must know what you'll give for 'em first.
Why Rachel, sweet Rachel, my bosom Rachel, how did thou get forth? thou were here sweet Rac. within this hour, even in my very heart.
Away, or stay still, Isle away from thee, one Bed shall never hold us both again, nor one roof cover us: did thou bring home
What first you lack, you lack, you lack?
Peace Bandog, Bandog, give me leave to speak, or I'll
Shall I not follow my Trade? I'm bound to it, and my Master bound to bring me up in it.
Peace, good George, give her anger leave, thy Mistress will be quiet presently.
Quiet! I defy thee and quiet too: Quiet thy Bastards thou hast brought home.
What first you lack, you lack? &amp;c.
Death, give me an Ell, has one bawling Cur raised up an∣other? two dogs upon me, and the old Bear-ward will not succour me, I'll stave 'em off my self: give me an Ell, I say.
Give her not an Inch, Master, she'll take two Ells if you do.
Peace George and Ralph, no more words I charge you; and Rachel, sweet Wife, be more temperate, I know your tongue speaks not by the rule and guidance of your heart, when you pro∣claim the pretty children of my virtuous and noble Kinswoman, whom in life you knew above my praises reach, to be my bastards; this is not well, although your Anger did it, pray chide your An∣ger for it.
Sir, sir, your gloss of Kinswoman cannot serve turn, it is stale, and smells too rank, though your shop wares you vent with your deceiving lights, yet your Chamber Stuff shall not pass so with me; I say, and I will prove.
What first you lack?
Why George, I say.
Lecher I say, I'll be divorc't from thee, I'll prove 'em thy bastards, and thou insufficient.
What said my angry Cousin to you sir? that we were ba∣starts?
I hope she meant not us.
No, no, my pretty Cousins, she meant George and Ralph; rage will speak any thing, but they are ne'er the worse.
Yes indeed forsooth she spoke to us, but chiefly to Ralph, because she knows he has but one stone.
No more of that if you love me, George, this is not the way to keep a quiet house.
Truly Sir, I would not for more treasure then ever I saw yet, be in your house a cause of discord.
And do you think I would, Sister?
No indeed, Ned.
Why did you not speak for me with you then, and said we could not have done so?
No more sweet Cousins now: Speak George, Customers approach.
Is the Barber prepared?
With ignorance enough to go through with it, so near I am to him, we must call Cousins, would thou were as sure to hit the Taylor.
If I do not steal away handsomely, let me never play the Taylor again.
What first you lack? &amp;c.
Good Satins sir.
The best in Europe, sir; here's a piece worth a Piece every yard of him, the King of Naples wears no better Silk; mark his gloss, he dazzles the eye to look upon him.
Is he not gummed?
Gummed! he has neither mouth nor tooth, how can he be gummed?
Very pretty.
An especial good piece of Silk, the Worm never spun a finer thread, believe it, sir.
Gascoyn, you have some skill in it.
Your Taylor, sir?
Yes sir.
A good piece, sir; but let's see more choice.
Taylor, drive thorough, you know your bribes.
Mum: he bestows forty pounds, if I say the word.
Strike through, there's poundage for you then.
I marry! I like this better, what say thou, Gascoyn?
A good piece indeed, sir.
The Great Turk has worse Satin it's elbow, then this sir.
The price?
Look on the mark, George.
O. Souse and P, by my facks, sir.
The best sort then, sixteen a yard, nothing to be bated.
Fie sir, fifteen's too high, yet so, for how many yards will serve for my Suit, sirrah?
Nine yards, you can have no less, Sir Andrew.
But I can sir, if you please to steal less; I had but eight in my last Suit.
You pinch us too near in faith, Sir Andrew.
Yet can you pinch out a false pair of Sleeves to a Freezado Doublet.
No sir, some Purses and Pin-pillows per∣haps: A Taylor pays for his kissing that ways.
Well sir, eight yards, eight fifteens I give, and cut it.
I cannot truly, sir.
My Master must be no Subsidy-man sir, if he take such fifteens.
I am at highest sir, if you can take money.
Well sir, I'll give you the buying once, I hope to gain it in your custom: want you nothing else, sir?
Not at this time, sir.
Indeed but you do, Sir Andrew, I must needs deliver my Ladies Message to you, she enjoined me by Oath to do it, she commanded me to move you for a New Gown.
Sirrah, Isle break your head, if you motion it again.
I must endanger my self for my Lady, sir: you know she's to go to my Lady Trenchmores Wedding, and to be seen there without a New Gown, she'll have ne'er an eye to be seen there, for her fingers in 'em: Nay by my fack, sir, I do not think she'll go, and then the cause known, what a discredit 't will be to you!
Not a word more, Goodman Snip-snapper for your ears: What comes this to, sir?
Six pound, sir.
There's your money: will you take this, and be gone, and about your business presently?
Troth Sir, Isle see some Stuffs for my Lady first, Isle tell her at least I did my good will; a fair piece of Cloth of Silver, pray you now.
Or Cloth of Gold if you please sir, as rich as ever the Sophie wore.
You are the arrantest villain of a Taylor, that ever sat cross-leg'd: what do you think a Gown of this Stuff will come to?
Why say it be forty pound sir: what's that to you? three thousand a year I hope will maintain it.
It will sir, very good, you were best be my Overseer: say I be not furnished with money, how then?
A very fine excuse in you, which place of ten now will you send me for a hundred pound, to bring it presently?
Sir, sir, your Taylor persuades you well, it is for your credit, and the great content of your Lady.
Tic for your content sir, and my charges: Never think Goodman False-stitch to come to the Mercers with me again; pray will you see if my Cousin Sweetball the Barber (he's nearest hand) be furnished, and bring me word instantly.
I fly, sir.
You may fly sir, you have clipped some bodies wings for it to piece out your own; An arrant thief you are.
Indeed he speaks honestly and justly, sir.
You expect some gain sir, there's your cause of love.
Surely I do a little, sir.
And what might be the price of this?
This is thirty a yard; but if you'll go to forty, here's a Non pareile.
So, there's a matter of forty pound for a Gown Cloth.
Thereabouts, sir; why sir, there are far short of your means that wear the like.
Do you know my means, sir?
By over-hearing your Taylor, sir, three thousand a year: but if you'd have a Petticoat for your Lady, here's a stuff.
Are you another Taylor, Sirrah? here's a knave, what are you?
You are such another Gentleman; but for the Stuff Sir, it is L. SS. and K; for the turn stripped a purpose, a yard and a quarter broad too, which is the just depth of a women's Petticoat.
And why stripped for a Petticoat?
Because if they abuse their Petticoats, there are abuses stripped, then it is taking them up, and they may be stripped and whipped too.
Very ingenious.
Then it is likewise stripped standing, between which is dis∣covered the open part, which is now called the Placket.
Why, was it ever called otherwise?
Yes: while the word remained pure in his original, the Latin tongue, who have no Ks, it was called the Placate, a Placendo, A thing, or place, to please.
Better and worse still: Now sir, you come in haste, what says my Cousin?
Protest sir, he's half angry, that either you should think him unfurnished, or not furnished for your use, there's a hun∣dred pound ready for you; he desires you to pardon his coming, his folks are busy, and his wife trimming a Gentleman, but at your first approach the money wants but telling.
He would not trust you with it: I con him thanks, for that he knows what Trade you are of: well sir, pray cut him pat∣terns, he may in the mean time know my Ladies liking, let your man take the Pieces whole, with the lowest prices, and walk with me to my Cousins.
With all my heart, sir: Ralph, your Cloak, and go with the Gentleman, look you give good measure.
Look you carry a good yard with you.
The best in the shop sir, yet we have none bad: you'll have the Stuff for the Petticoat too?
No sir, the Gown only.
By all means sir: Not the Petticoat? that were Holy-day upon Working-day in faith.
You are so forward for a knave, sir.
It is for your credit and my Ladies both, I do it sir.
Your man is trusty sir?
O sir, we keep none but those we dare trust sir. Ralph, have a care of light gold.
I warrant you sir, Isle take none.
Come sirrah: Fare you well sir.
Pray know my shop another time, sir.
That I shall sir, from all the shops in the Town; it is the Lamb in Lomberd-street.
A good mornings work, sir; if this Custom would but last long, you might shut up your shop and live privately.
O George. But here's a grief that takes away all the gains and joy of all my thrift.
What's that, sir?
Thy Mistress, George: her frowardness sours all my comfort.
Alas sir, they are but Squibs and Crackers, they'll soon die; you know her flashes of old.
But they fly so near me, that they burn me; George they are as ill as Muskets charged with Bullets.
She has discharged her self now sir, you need not fear her.
No man can love without his affliction, George.
As you cannot without my Mistress.
Right, right, there's harmony in Discords: this Lamp of Love while any Oil is left, can never be extinct, it may (like a snuff) wink and seem to die, but up he will again and show his head; I cannot be quiet George, without my wife at home.
And when she's at home, you're never quiet I'm sure, a fine life you have on it: well sir, Isle do my best to find her, and bring her back if I can.
Do honest George, at Knaves-bee's house, that Varlots, there's her haunt and harbour, who enforces a Kinsman on her, and calls him Cousin:
Restore her George, to ease this heart that's vexed,
The best new Suit that ever thou wore'st is next.
I thank you afore-hand sir.
Were it of greater moment then you speak of (noble Sir)
I hope you think me sufficient, and it shall be effectually performed.
I could wish your wife did not know it, Cousin. Women's tongues are not always tuneable, I may many ways requite it.
Believe me, she shall not sir, which will be the hardest thing of all.
Pray you dispatch him then.
With the celerity a man tells Gold to him.
He hits a good comparison! give my Waste-good your Stuffs, and go with my Cousin sir, he'll presently dispatch you.
Yes Sir.
Come with me youth, I am ready for you in my more private chamber.
Sirrah go you show your Lady the Stuffs, and let her choose her colour, away, you know whether: Boy, prithee lend me a Brush in the mean time: Do you tarry all day now.
That I will sir, and all night too, ever I come again.
Here's a Brush sir.
A good child.
What Toby.
Anon sir.
Why when, goodman Picklock?
I must attend my Master, sir: I come.
Do pretty Lad: so, take water at Cole-harbor, An easy Mercer, and an innocent Barber.
So friend, Isle now dispatch you presently: Boy, reach me my Dismembering Instrument, and let my Cauterise be ready; and hark you Snipsnap.
I Sir.
See if my Luxinium, my Fomentation be provided first, and get my Rollers, Bolsters, and Pleggets armed.
Nay good sir dispatch my business first; I should not stay from my shop.
You must have a little patience sir, when you are a Patient; if Prepusium be not too much perished, you shall loose but little by it, believe my Art for that.
What's that sir?
Marry if there be exulceration between Prepusium and Glance, by my faith the whole Penis may be endan∣ger'd as far as Os pubes.
What's this you talk on, sir?
If they be gangrened once, Testiculi, Vesica, and all may run to mortification.
What a pox does this Barber talk on?
O fie youth, Pox is no word of Art, Morbus Gallicus, or No∣politanus had bin well: Come friend, you must not be nice; open
your griefs freely to me.
Why sir, I open my grief to you, I want my money.
Take you no care for that, your worthy Cousin has given me part in hand, and the rest I know he will upon your recovery, and I dare take his word.
's Death, whore's my Ware?
Ware! that was well, the word is cleanly, though not artful; your Ware it is that I must see.
My Tobine, and Cloth of Tissue?
You will neither have Tissue nor Issue, if you linger in your malady: better a Member cut off, then endanger the whole Microcosm.
Barber, you are not mad?
I do begin to fear you are subject to Subeth, unkindly sleeps, which have bred opilations in your brain; take heed, the Simptoma will follow, and this may come to Frenzy: begin with the first cause, which is the pain of your Member.
Do you see my Yard, Barber?
Now you come to the purpose, it is that I must see indeed.
You shall feel it sir: Death, give me my fifty pounds, or my Ware again, or I'll measure out your Anatomy by the yard.
Boy, my Cauterizing-Iron red hot.
It is here, sir.
If you go further, I take my Dismembering Knife.
Whore's the Knight your Cousin? the Thief, and the Taylor with my Cloth of Gold and Tissue?
The Gentleman that sent away his man with the Stuffs, is gone a pretty while since, he has carried away our new Brush.
O that Brush hurts my hearts side: Cheated! cheated! he told me that your Virga had a Burning-feaver.
Pox on your Virga, Barber.
And that you would be bashful, and ashamed to show your head.
I shall so hereafter, but here it is, you see yet my head, my hair, and my wit, and here are my heels that I must show to my Master, if the Cheaters be not found; and Barber, provide thee Plasters, I will break thy head with every Basin under the Pole.
Cool the Luxinium, and quench the Cauterizer,
I am partly out of my wits, and partly mad:
My Razor's at my heart: these storms will make
My Sweet-balls stink, my harmless Basins shake.
YOu're welcome Mistress (as I may speak it) but my Lord will give it a sweeter Emphasis: Isle give him knowledge of you.
Good sir stay, methinks it sounds sweetest upon your tongue, Isle wish you to go no further for my welcome.
Mine! it seems you never heard good Music, that com∣mend a Bag-pipe: hear his harmony.
Nay good now, let me borrow of your patience, Isle pay you again before I rise to morrow, if it please you.
What would you forsooth?
Your company sir.
My attendance you should have Mistress, but that my Lord expects it, and it is his due.
And must be paid upon the hour! that's too strict, any time of the day will serve.
Alas it is due every minute, and paid, it is due again, or else I forfeit my recognisance, the Cloth I wear of his.
Come, come, pay it double at another time, and 'twil be quited, I have a little use of you.
Of me, forsooth, small use can be made of me: if you have suit to my Lord, none can speak-better for you then you may your self.
Oh, but I am bashful.
So am I in troth, Mistress.
Now I remember me, I have a toy to deliver your Lord that's yet unfinished, and you may further me, pray you your hands, while I unwind this Skein of Gold from you, twill not detain you long.
You wind me into your service prettily; with all the haste you can, I beseech you.
If it tangle not, I shall soon have done.
No, it shall not tangle if I can help it, forsooth.
If it do I can help it, fear not, this thing of long length you shall see I can bring you to a bottom.
I think so too, if it be not bottomless, this length will reach it
It becomes you finely, but I forewarn you, and re∣member it your enemy gain not this advantage of you, you are his prisoner then; for look you, you are mine now, my captive ma∣nacled,
I have your hands in bondage.
It is a good Lesson, Mistress, and I am perfect in it, another time I'll take out this, and learn another, pray you release me now.
I could kiss you now spite of your teeth, if it please me.
But you could not, for I could bite you with the spite of my teeth, if it plea∣ses me.
Well, I'll not tempt you so far, I show it but for rudiment.
When I go a wooing, I'll think on it again.
In such an hour I learnt it, say I should (in recompense of your hands curtsy) make you a fine Wrist∣favour of this Gold, with all the letters of your Name embossed on a soft Tress of Hair, which I shall cut from mine own Fillet, whose ends should meet and close in a fast True-love-knot, would you wear it for my sake, sir?
I think not, truly Mistress, my Wrists have enough of this Gold already, would they were rid on it yet: pray yuo have done, in troth I'm weary.
And what a virtue is here expressed in you, which had lain hid but for this trial; weary of Gold, sir! Oh that the close Engrossers of this Treasure could be so free to put it off of hand, what a new mended world would here be! It shows a generous condition in you, in sooth I think I shall love you dearly for it.
But if they were in prison, as I am, they would be glad to buy their freedom with it.
Surely no, there are that rather then release this dear companion, do lye in prison with it, yes, and will die in prison too.
It were pity but the hangman did enfranchise both.
Selenger, where are you?
Even here, my Lord. Mistress, pray you my liberty, you hinder my duty to my Lord.
Nay sir, one curtsy shall serve us both at this time; you're busy I perceive, when your leisure next serves you I would employ you.
You must pardon me, my Lord, you see I am entangled here: Mistress I protest Isle break prison, if you free me not, take you no notice?
Oh cry your Honour mercy, you are now at liberty, sir.
And I'm glad on it, I'll ne'er give both my hands at once again to a women's command, I'll put one finger
in a hole rather.
Leave us.
Free leave have you, my Lord, so I think you may have: filthy Beauty, what a white witch thou art!
Lady, you're welcome.
I did believe it from your Page, my Lord. Beau. Your husband sent you to me.
He did my Lord, with duty and commends unto your Honour, beseeching you to use me very kindly, by the same token your Lordship gave him grant of a New Lease of Threescore pounds a year, which he and his should forty years enjoy.
The token's true, and for your sake Lady, it is likely to be bettered, not alone the Lease, but the Fee-simple may be his and yours.
I have a suit unto your Lordship too, on∣lie my self concerns.
'T will be granted sure, though it out-value thy husbands.
Nay, it is small charge, only your good will, and good word, my Lord.
The first is thine confirmed, the second then cannot stay long behind.
I love your Page, sir.
Love him! for what?
Oh, the great wisdoms that our Grandsires had! do you ask me reason for it? I love him, because I like him, sir.
My Page!
In mine eye, hoe's a most delicate youth, but in my heart a thing that it would bleed for.
Either your eye is blinded, or your remembrance broken: call to mind wherefore you came hither, Lady.
I do my Lord, for love, and I am in profoundly.
You trifle sure, do you long for unripe fruit? twill breed diseases in you.
Nothing but worms in my belly, and there's a Seed to expel them; in mellow falling fruit I find no relish.
It is true, the youngest Vines yields the most Clusters, but the old ever the sweetest Grapes.
I can taste of both sir; but with the old I am the so∣nest cloid: the green keep still an edge on appetite.
Sure you are a common creature.
Did you doubt it, wherefore came I hither else? Did you think that honesty only had bin immured for you, and I should bring it as an Offertory unto your shrine of Lust? As it was, my Lord, it was meant to you, had not the slippery Wheel of Fancy turned when I beheld your Page; nay had I seen another before
him in mine eyes better grace, he had bin forestalled; but as it is, (all my strength cannot help) beseech you your good will, and good word, my Lord, you may command him, sir; if not affection, yet his body, and I desire but that, do it, and I'll command my self your prostitute.
You're a base strumpet, I succeed my Page!
Oh that's no wonder, my Lord, the ser∣vant oft tastes to his Master of the daintiest Dish he brings to him; beseech you, my Lord.
You're a bold Mischief, and to make me your Spokes-man; your procurer to my Servant.
Do you shrink at that? why, you have done worse without the sense of ill, with a full free conscience of a Libertine: Judge your own sin, was it not worse with a damned Broking-fee to a corrupt Husband, state him a Pander to his own wife, by virtue of a Lease made to him and your Bastard issue, could you get 'em: what a degree of baseness call you this? It is a poor Sheep-steal provoked by want, compared unto a Capital Traitor; the Master to his servant may be recompenc't, but the husband to his wife never.
Your husband shall smart for this.
Hang him, do, you have brought him to deserve it, bring him to the punishment, there I'll join with you: I loath him to the Gallows, hang your Page too, one Mourning-Gown shall serve for both of them: This trick hath kept mine honesty secure, best Soldiers use policy, the Lions skin Becomes not the body when it is too great, But then the Foxes may sit close, and neat.
Now Flesh-hook, use thy talon, set upon his right shoulder; thy Sergeant Counter-buff at the left, grasp in his Jugulars, and then let me alone to tickle his Diaphragma.
You are sure he has no protection, sir?
A protection to cheat and cozen! there was never any granted to that purpose.
I grant you that too, sir, but that use has hen made of 'em.
Marry has there sir, how could else so many broken Bankrupts play up and down by their Creditors noses, and we dare not touch 'em?
That's another Case, Counter buff, there's privilege to cozen; but here cozenage went before, and there's no privilege
for that; to him boldly, I will spend all the Scissors in my shop, but I'll have him snapped.
Well sir, if he come within the length of large Mace once, we'll teach him to cozen.
Marry hang him, teach him no more cozenage, he's too perfect in it already; go gingerly about it, lay your Mace on gin∣gerly, and spice him soundly.
He's at the Tavern, you say?
At the Man in the Moon, above stairs, so soon as he comes down, and the Bush left at his back, Ralph is the dog behind him: he watches to give us notice, be ready then my dear Blood-hounds, you shall deliver him to Newgate, from thence to the Hang-man; his body I will beg of the Sheriffs, for at the next Lecture I am likely to be the Master of my Anatomy, then will I vex every vein about him, I will find where his Disease of Cozenage lay, whether in the Vertebrae, or in Oscox▪Index, but I guess I shall find it descend from Humour, through the Thoric, and lye just at his fin∣gers ends.
Be in readiness, for hoe's coming this way, alone too; stand to it like Gentleman and Yeoman, so soon as he is in sight, I'll go fetch my Master.
I have had a Conquassition in my Cerebrum ever since the disaster, and now it takes me again, if it turn to a Megrum, I shall hardly abide the sight of him.
My Action of Defamation shall be clapped on him too, I will make him appear to it in the shape of a white Sheet all embroi∣dered over with Peccavi's: look about, I'll go fetch my Master.
I Arrest you, sir.
Ha queen va la, que pence vous fair Messieurs, me voles vous derober, ie nay point d'argent: Je suis un pour Gentile∣homme Francois.
Whoop! pray you sir speak English you did when you bought Cloth of Gold at six Nihils a yard, when Ralphs Preputium was exulcerated.
Que voles vous, me voles vous tuer; Le Francois no sont point enemis: voile ma bource, que voles vous d'avantage.
Is not your name Franklin, sir?
Je na'y point de Joiaux que cestui ci; et cest a Monsieur L'ambasadeur, il m'en voie a ces afaires et vous enpaiches mon ser∣vice.
Sir, we are mistaken for ought I perceive.
So, so, you have caught him, that's well: how do you sir?
Vous sembles astra un homme courtois, Je vous pry en∣tends mes affairs: il y a ici deux ou erois Quenailles queen m'ont asseige un pour estranger, queen no lour ay feet null mal, ny donner mauuaisse parole, ny terror mon espied; l'un me print par vne es∣paule, et me frape deux Liure peisant; L'autre me tire par le bras, il par le ie no scay quoy: Je lour ay donne ma bource, et si no me veuleut point Laiser aller; que feray ie Monsieur?
This is a French-man it seems, sirs.
We can find no other in him, sir, and what that is we know not.
He's very like the man we seek for, else my lights go false.
In your shop they may sir, but here they go true: this is he.
The very same sir, as sure as I am Ralph, this is the Ras∣cal.
Sir, unless you will absolutely challenge him the man, we dare not proceed further.
I fear we are too far already.
I know not what to say to it.
Bon jour, bon jour, Gentilhommes.
How now! more News from France?
Ceste famine ici est de mon pais, Madame ie vous pry Lour dire mon pais, il mont retarge Je no scay pour quoy.
Acts vous de France Monsieur?
Madame vii est, que ie les ay tromps, et suis arrest, et n'ay null moien de chapter queen chansant mon Language▪ aides moi en cest affair: Je vous cognois bien, ou vous tenes un Bordeau; vous et les vostre en seres de mieulx.
Laises fair a moi; Este vous de Lion dites vous.
De Lion, ma chere Damme.
Ma Cozin! Je suis bien aise de vous voire en bonne disposition?
Man Cozin!
This is a French-man sure.
If he be, it is the likest an English-man that ever I saw, all
his dimensions, proportions! had I but the dissecting of his heart, in capsule cords, could I find it now; for a French-mans heart is more quassitive and subject to tremor, then an English-mans.
Stay, we'll further enquire of this Gentlewoman. Mi∣stress, if you have so much English to help us with (as I think you have, for I have long seen you about London) pray tell us, and truly tell us, Is this Gentleman a natural French-man, or no?
Ey begar, de French-man, borne a Lyon, my Cozin.
Your Cousin? if he be not your Cousin, he's my Cousin, sure.
Ey konoshe his Pere, what you call his Fadre? he sell Poisons.
Sell poisons, his father was a Potycarry then.
No, no, Poisons, what you call, Fish, fish?
Oh, he was a Fishmonger.
Oy, oy.
Well, well, we are mistaken I see, pray you so tell him, and request him not to be offended; an honest man may look like a knave, and be ne'er the worse for it, the error was in our eyes, and now we find it in his tongue.
Je saieray encore vne foes Monsieur Cozin, pour vostre sauuete, ales vous en; vostre Liberty est sufisant: Je gaineray le rest pour mon devoir, et vous aures vostre part a mon Escole: J'ay vne filly queen parley un pave Francois, elle conversera avec vous a la Fleur de Lice en Turnbull-street: Mon Cozin eyes soin de vous mesme, et tromps ces Ignorance.
Cozin pour L'amour de vous, et principallement pour moi, ie suis content de m'en aller, Je trouueray vostre Escole, et si voz Escoliers me sont agreeable, ie tireray a L'espe' seule, et si d'auenture ie le romp, Je paiera diz souls et pour ce vieulx Foal, ee ce deux Quenailles, ce Poullens Snip snap, et L'autre bonnet rond, Je les voiray pendre premier que ie les voie.
So, so, she has got him off; but I perceive much anger in his countenance still: and what says he, Madam?
Mooch, mooch anger, but ey conosh here Lodging, shall cool him very well, Dere is a Kinse-womans can mooch allay here heat and here spleen, she shall do for my saka, and he no trobla you.
Look, there is earnest, but thy reward's behind: Come to my shop, the Holy Lamb in Lombard-street, thou hast one friend more then ever thou had.
Tanck u Monsieur, shall visit u: ey make all pacisie:
a vostre service treshumbement, tree, four, five fool of u.
What's to be done now?
To pay us for our pains sir, and better reward us, that we may be provided against further danger that may come upon's for false imprisonment.
All goes false I think: what do you neighbor Sweetball?
I must Phlebotomize sir, but my Almanac says the Sign is in Taurus; I dare not cut my own throat, but if I find any pre∣sident that ever Barber hanged himself, Isle be the second example.
This was your ill Luxinium, Barber, to cause all to be cheated.
What say you to us, sir?
Good friends, come to me at a calmer hour, my sorrows lye in heaps upon me now; what you have, keep, if further trow∣ble follow Isle take it on me; I would be pressed to death.
Well sir, for this time we will leave you.
I will go with you, Officers, I will walk with you in the open street though it be a scandal to me; for now I have no care of my credit, a Cacokenny is run all over me.
What shall we do now, Ralph?
Faith I know not, sir: here comes George, it may be he can tell you.
And there I look for more disaster still, yet George ap∣pears in a smiling countenance. Ralph, home to the shop, leave George and I together.
I am gone, sir.
Now George, what better News Eastward? all goes ill to'ther way.
I bring you the best news that ever came about your ears in your life, sir.
Thou putst me in good comfort, George.
My Mistress, your wife, will never trouble you more.
Ha? never trouble me more: of this, George, may be made a sad construction, that phrase we sometimes use when death makes the separation, I hope it is not so with her, George?
No sir, but she vows she 'l never come home again to you, so you shall live quietly, and this I took to be very good news, sir.
The worst that could be this, candid poison; I love her, George, and I am bound to do so, the tongues bitterness must not separate the united souls: it were base and cowardly for all to yield
to the small Tongues assault: the whole building must not be ta∣ken down, for the repairing of a broken window.
I but this is a Principal, sir: the truth is, she will be di∣vorc't, she says, and is laboring with her Cousin Knave (what do you call him?) I have forgotten the latter end of his name.
Knaves-bee, George.
I Knave, or Knaves-bee, one I took it to be.
Why neither rage, nor envy, can make a cause, George.
Yes sir, not only at your person, but she shoots at your shop too, she says you vent Ware that is not warrantable, braided Ware, and that you give not London measure: women you know look for more then a bare yard: and then you keep children in the name of your own, which she suspects came not in at the right door
She may as well suspect immaculate Truth to be cursed Falsehood.
I but if she will, she will, she's a woman sir.
It is most true, George: well, that shall be redressed, my Cousin Cressingham must yield me pardon, the children shall home again, and thou shalt conduct 'em, George.
That done, Isle be bold to venture once more for her re∣covery, since you cannot live at liberty; but because you are a rich Citizen, you will have your Chain about your neck; I think I have a device will bring you together bi'th years again, and then look to 'em as well as you can.
Oh George, amongst all my heavy Troubles, this is the groaning weight; but restore my Wife.
Although you ne'er lead hour of quiet life.
I will endeavor't George, I'll lend her Will A power and rule to keep all hushed and still; Eat we all Sweet-meats we are soonest rotten.
A Sentence! pity 't should have bin forgotten. Exeunt.
Whore's Mr. Steward?
Within: what are you, sir?
A Surveyor, sir.
And an Almanac-maker, I take it: Can you tell me what foul weather
is toward?
Marry the foulest weather is, that your Land is flying away.
A most terrible prognostication! All the resort, all the business to my house is to my Lady and Mr. Steward; whilst Sir Francis stands for a Cipher: I have made away my self and my power, as if I had done it by Deed of Gift: here comes the Comp∣troller of the Game.
What, are you yet resolved to translate this unneces∣sary Land into ready money?
Translate it?
The Conveyances are drawn, and the money ready: my Lady sent me to you, to know directly if you meant to go through in the Sale; if not, she resolves of another course.
Thou speak this cheerfully methinks, whereas faithful servants were wont to mourn when they beheld the Lord that fed and cherished them, is by cursed enchantment removed into another blood. Cressingham of Cressingham has continued many years, and must the Name sink now?
All this is nothing to my Ladies resolution, it must be done, or she'll not stay in England: she would know whether your son be sent for, that must likewise set his hand t'oth' Sale; for other∣wise the Lawyers say there cannot be a sure Conveyance made to the Buyer.
Yes, I have sent for him: but I pray thee think what a hard task 't will be for a Father to persuade his son and heir to make away his inheritance.
Nay for that, use your own Logic: I have heard you talk at the Sessions terribly against Deer-stealers, and that kept you from being put out of the Commission.
I do live to see two miseries, one to be commanded by my Wife, the other to be censured by my slave.
That which I have wanted long, and has bin cause of my irregular courses, I beseech you let raise me from the ground
Rise George, there's a hundred pounds for you, and my Blessing, with these, your mothers favour: but I here your studies are become too licentious of late.
He has heard of my cozenage.
What's that you are writing?
Sir, not any thing.
Come, I hear there's something coming
forth of yours, will be your undoing.
Of mine?
Yes of your writing; somewhat you should write, will be dangerous to you. I have a suit to you.
Sir, my obedience makes you commander in all things.
I pray suppose I had committed some fault, for which my Life and sole Estate were forfeit to the Law, and that some great Man near the King should labour to get my pardon, on condition he might enjoy my Lordship, could you prize your Fathers Life above the grievous loss of your inheritance?
Yes, and my own Life at stake too.
You promise fair, I come now to make trial of it: You know I have married one whom I hold so dear, that my whole life is nothing but a mere estate depending upon her will, and her affections to me: she deserves so well, I cannot longer merit then durante been placita, it is her pleasure, and (her wisdom moves in it too) of which Isle give you ample satisfaction hereafter, that I sell the Land my Father left me: You change colour! I have promised her to do it, and should I fail, I must expect the remainder of my life as full of trouble and vexation, as the Suit for a Divorce; it lies in you by setting of your hand unto the Sale, to add length to his life that gave you yours.
Sir, I do now ingeniously perceive why you said lately, somewhat I should write would be my undoing, meaning (as I take it) setting my hand to this Assurance: Oh good Sir, shall I pass away my Birth-right? Oh remember there is a malediction denounced against it in Holy Writ: will you for her pleasure, the Inheritance of Desolation leave to your posterity? think how com∣passionate the creatures of the field that only live on the wilde be∣nefits of Nature, are unto their young ones; think likewise you may have more children by this woman, and by this act you undo them too: it is a strange president this, to see an obedient son laboring good counsel to the father! But know Sir, that the spirits of my Great-Grandfather and your Father moves at this present in me, and what they bequeathed you, on your Death-bed they charge you not to give away in the dalliance of a women's bed: Good Sir, let it not be thought presumption in me, that I have continued my speech unto this length, the cause sir, is urgent, and believe it you shall find her Beauty as malevolent unto you, as a red morning
that doth still foretell a foul day to follow: Oh Sir, keep your Land, keep that to keep your Name immortal, and you shall see All that her Malice and proud Will procures,
Shall show her ugly heart, but hurt not yours.
Oh I am distracted, and my very soul sends blushes into my cheeks.
See here an Object to beget more compassion.
O Sir Francis, we have a most lamentable house at home, nothing to be heard in it but Separation and Divorces, and such a noise of the Spiritual Court, as if it were a Tenement upon London-Bridge, and built upon the Arches.
What's the matter?
All about Boarding your children, my Mistress is departed. Cress. Dead?
In a sort she is, and laid out too, for she is run away from my Master.
Whither?
Seven miles off, into Essex, she vowed never to leave Barking while she lived, till these were brought home again.
Oh they shall not offend her. I am sorry for it.
I am glad we are come home sir, for we lived in the unquietest house!
The angry woman me thought grutcht us our victuals: our new Mother is a good Soul, and loves us, and does not frown so like a Vixen as she does.
I am at home now, and in heaven me thinks: what a comfort it is to be under your wing!
Indeed my mother was wont to call me your Nestle∣cock, and I love you as well as she did.
You are my pretty souls.
Does not the prattle of these move you?
Look you Sir, here's the Conveyance and my Ladies So∣licitor, pray resolve what to do, my Lady is coming down. How now George, how does thy Mistress that sits in a Wainscot Gown, like a Citizens Lure to draw in Customers? oh she's a pretty Mous∣trap!
She's ill baited though to take a Welch-man, she cannot away with Cheese.
And what must I do now?
Acknowledge a Fine and Recovery of the Land, then for possession the course is common.
Carry back the Writings sir, my mind is
changed.
Changed! do not you mean to seal?
No Sir, the Tide's turned.
You must temper him like wax, or he'll not seal.
Are you come back again? How now, have you done?
How do you, Lady Mother?
You are good children; bid my woman give them some Sweet-meats.
Indeed I thank you: Is not this a kind Mother?
Poor fools, you know not how dear you shall pay for this Sugar.
What, have not you dispatcht?
No Sweetest, I am dissuaded by my son from the Sale of the Land.
Dissuaded by your son!
I cannot get his hand to it.
Whore's our Steward? cause presently that all my Beds and Hangings be taken down; provide Carts, pack them up, I'll to my House in the Country, have I studied the way to your preferment and your childrens, and do you cool in the upshot?
With your pardon, I cannot understand this course a way to any preferment, rather a direct path to our ruin.
Oh sir, you are young sighted: show them the project of the Land I mean to buy in Ireland, that shall out-value yours three thousand in a year.
Look you sir, here is Clangibbon, a fruitful country, and well wooded.
What's this, Marsh ground?
No, these are Bogs, but a little Cost will drain them. This upper part (Map▪ that runs by the black water, is the Cossacks Land, a spacious coun∣trey, and yields excellent profit by the Salmon, and fishing for Her∣ring: here runs the Kernes-dale, admirable feed for cattle, and here about is St. Patrick's Purgatory.
Purgatory! shall we purchase that too?
Come, come, will you dispatch the other business, we may go through with this?
My son's unwilling.
Upon my soul sir, I'll no∣ver bed with you till you have sealed.
Thou hear her: on thy blessing follow me to'th' Court, and seal.
Sir, were it my death, were it to'th' loss of my estate, I vow to obey you in all things; yet with it remember there are two young ones living that may curse you: I pray dispose part of the money, on their generous Educations.
Fear no you sir: The Caroche there, when you have dispatcht, you shall find
me at the Scriveners where I shall receive the money.
She'll devour that mass too.
How likest thou my power over him?
Excellent.
This is the height of a great Ladies sway,
When her night service makes her rule in the day.
Not yet Sib? my Lord keeps thee so long, you are welcome I see then, and pays sweetly too: a good wench Sib you are, to obey thy husband. She's come: a hundred mark a year, how fine and easy it comes into mine arms now! Welcome home, what says my Lord, Sib?
My Lord says you are a Cuckold.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, I thank him for that Bob in faith, Isle afford it him again at the same price a month hence, and let the commodity grow as scarce as it will. Cuckold says his Lordship! ha, ha, I shall burst my sides with laughing that's the worst, name not a hundred year, for then I burst. It smarts not so much as a fillip on the fore∣head by five parts: what has his dalliance taken from thy lips? it is as sweet as ere it was, let me try else: buss me Sugar-candy.
Forbear, you presume to a Lords pleasure!
How's that! not I Sib?
Never touch me more, Isle keep the noble Stamp upon my lip, no under baseness shall de∣face it now; you taught me the way, now I am in, Isle keep it, I have kissed Ambition, and I love it, I loath the memory of every touch my lip hath tasted from thee.
Nay but sweet Sib, you do forget your self.
I will forget all that I ever was, and nourish new sirrah, I am a Lady.
Lord bless us Madam.
I have enjoyed a Lord, that's real possession, and daily shall, the which all Ladies have not with their Lords.
But with your patience Madam, who was it that preferred you to this Ladyship?
It is all I am beholding to thee for, you have brought me out of ignorance into light, simple as I was, I thought thee a man till I found the difference by a man: thou art a beast, a horned beast, an Ox.
Are these Ladies terms?
For thy Pandors Fee it shall be laid under the Candlestick, look for it, Isle leave it for thee.
A little lower, good your Ladyship, my Cousin Chamlet is in the house, let these things go no further.
It is for mine own credit if I forbear, not thine, thou bugle-browd beast thou.
Bidden, bidden, bidden, bidden; so, all these are past: but here's as large a walk to come, if I do not get it up at the feast, I shall be leaner for bidding the Guests I'm sure.
How now! who's this?
Doctor Glister, et; what word's this? fuxor, oh Uxor, the Doctor and his wife: Mr. Body et uxor of Bow-lane, Mr. Knaves-bee et uxor.
Ha, we are in, what soever the matter is.
Here's forty couple more in this quarter; but there the Provision bringing in, that puzzels me most: One Ox, that will hardly serve for Beef too; five Mut∣tons, ten Lambs, poor innocents, they'll be devoured too; three gross of Capons.
Mercy upon us! what a Slaughter-house is here!
Two bushels of small Birds, Plovers, Snipes, Woodcocks, Partridge, Larks; then for Bak'd-meats.
George, George, what Feast is this? it is not for St. George's day?
Cry you mercy sir, you and your wife are in my Roll: my Master invites you his Guests to morrow dinner.
Dinner say thou? he means to feast a month sure.
Nay sir, you make up but a hundred couple.
Why, what Ship has brought an India home to him, that he's so bountiful? or what friend dead (unknown to us) has so much left to him of arable Land, that he means to turn to pasture thus?
Nay, it is a vessel sir, a good estate comes all in one boat∣tom to him, and it is a question whether ever he find the bottom or no; a thousand a year, that's the uppermost.
A thou∣sand a year!
To go no further about the Bush sir, now the Bird is caught; my Master is to morrow to be married, and amongst the rest invites you a Guest, at his Wedding-Dinner the second.
Married!
There is no other remedy for flesh and blood, that will have leave to play whether we will or no, or wander into forbidden pastures.
Married! why he is married, man; his wife is in my house now, thy Mistress is alive, George.
She that was, it may be sir, but dead to him, she plaid a little too rough with him, and he has discarded her, he's divorced sir.
He divorced! then is her labour saved; for she was laboring a Divorce from him.
They are well parted then sir.
But wilt thou not speak with her? in faith invite her to 't.
It is not in my Commission, I dare not, fare you well sir, I have much business in hand, and the time is short.
Nay but George, I prithee stay, may I report this to her for a certain truth?
Wherefore am I employed in this Invitation sir?
Prithee what is she, his second Choice?
Truly a goodly presence, likely to bear great children, and great store, she never saw five and thirty Summers together in her life by her appearance, and comes in her French-hood, by my fecks a great Match it is like to be; I am sorry for my old Mistress but cannot help it: pray you excuse me now sir, for all the business goes through my hands, none employed but my self.
Why here is news that no man will believe, but he that sees.
This, and your Cuckoldry, will be digestion through∣out the City dinners and suppers, for a month together, there will need no Cheese.
No more of that Sib: Isle call my Cousin Chamlet, and make her partaker of this sport; she's come already. Cousin, take it at once, you're a free woman, your late husband's to be married to morrow.
Married! to whom?
To a French-hood birlakins, as I understand, great cheer prepared, and great Guests invited, so far I know.
What a cursed wretch was I to pare my Nails to day, a Friday too; I looked for some mis∣chief.
Why, I did think this had accorded with your best liking, you sought for him what he has songht for you, a Se∣paration, and by Divorce too.
Isle Divorce 'em? Is he to be married to a French-hood? I'll dress it the English fashion; ne'er a Coach to be had with six horses to strike fire in the streets as we go?
Will you go home then?
Good Cousin, help me to whet one of my knives, while I sharp the t'other, give me a sour apple to set my teeth an edge, I would give five pound for the paring of my nails again: have you ere a Bird-spit in the house, I'll dress one dish to the wedding.
This violence hurts your self the most.
I care not who I hurt; oh my heart, how it beats a both sides; will you run with me for a wager into Lombard-street now?
I'll walk with you Cousin a sufficient pace; Sib. shall come softly after, I'll bring you thorough Bearbinder-lane.
Bearbinder-lane cannot hold me, I'll the nearest way
over St. Mildreds Church, if I meet any French-hoods by the way, I'll make black patches enough for the rheum.
So it is to my wish, Master Knavesbee,
Help to make peace abroad, here you'll find wars,
I'll have a divorce too, with locks and bars.
Madam, but stay here a little, my Master comes in∣stantly, I heard him say he did ow you a good turn, and now's the time to take it, Isle warrant you a sound reward ever you go.
Ey Tank u de bon cour Monsieur.
Look he's here already, now would a skilful Navigator take in his Sails, for sure there is a storm towards.
Oh Madam I perceive in your countenance (I am be∣holding to you) All is peace? Mar. All quiet, goor frendsheep, ey mooch a doe, ey strive wid him: give goor worda for you; no more speak a de matra, all es undone u no more trobla.
Look, there's the price of a fair pair of Gloves, and wear 'em for my sake.
Oh, oh, oh, my hearts broke out of my ribs.
Nay a little patience.
Ey tank u artely, shall no bestow en gloves, shall put mooch more to does, an bestow your shop; Regard does stofa my petticoat u no soosh anodre; shall deal wid u for mooch; take in your hand.
I see it Mistress, it is good stuff indeed, it is a Silk rash, I can pattern it.
Shall he take up her coats before my face? Oh beastly creature; French-hood, French∣hood, I will make your hair grow thorough.
My wife returned! oh welcome home, sweet Rachel.
I forbid the Banes, Lecher and strumpet, thou shalt bear children without noses.
O pardon moi, by my trat ey mean u no hurt: wat u meant by does?
I will have thine eyes out, and thy Bastards shall be as blind as Puppies.
Sweet Rachel, good Cousin help to pacify.
I forbid the Banes, Adulterer.
What means she by that sir?
Good Cousin forbid your rage a while, unless you hear, by what sense will you receive satisfaction?
By my hands and my teeth
sir, give me leave, will you bind me whiles mine enemy kills me?
Here all are your friends sweet wife.
Will it have two wives? Do and by hanged Forni∣cator, I forbid the Banes; give me the French-hood, I'll tread it under feet in a pair of Pantophles.
Begar shall save hood head and all; shall come no more heer, ey warren u.
Sir, the truth is, Report spoke it for truth, you were to morrow to be married.
I forbid the Banes.
Mercy deliver me, if my grave embrace me in the bed of death, I would to Church with willing ceremony; but for my wedlock-fellow, here she is the first and last that ere my thoughts looked on.
Why law you Cousin, this was nought but er∣roar or an assault of mischief.
Whose report was it?
Your man Georges, who invited me to the wedding.
George? And was he sober? Good sir call him.
It needs not sir, I am here already.
Did you report this George?
Yes sir I did.
And wherefore did you so?
For a new suit that you promised me sir, if I could bring home my Mistress, and I think she's come with a mischief.
Give me that villains ears.
I would give ear, if I could hear you talk wisely.
Let me cut off his ears.
I shall hear worse of you hereafter then, limb for limb, one of my ears, for one of your tongues, and Isle lay out for my Master.
It was knavery with a good purpose in it, sweet Rachel, this was even Georges meaning, a second marriage twixt thy self and me, and now I woo the to it, a quiet night will make the Sun like a fresh Bridegroom rise, and kiss the chaste echeek of the rosy morn which we will imitate, and like him creat Fresh buds of love, fresh spreading arms, fresh fruit, Fresh wedding robes, and Georges fresh new suit.
This is fine stuff, have you much on it to sell?
A remnant of a yard.
Come, come, ell's well, sir, you must sup, instead of to morrows dinner.
I follow you; no: it is another way,
My Lords reward calls me to better cheer
Many good meals a hundred marks a year;
my wives transformed a Lady, tush, she'll come to her shape again,
my Lord rides the circuit,
If I rid along with him, what need I grutch
I can as easy sit, and speed as much.
SIr, your sons death which has apparelled you in this darker wearing, is a loss wherein I have ample share; he was my friend.
He was my nearest and dearest enemy, and the perpetual fear of a worse end had he continued his former dissolute course, makes me weigh his death the lighter.
Yet sir, with your pardon, if you value him every way as he deserved, it will appear your scanting of his means, and the Lord Beauforts most un-lordly breach of promise to him, made him fall upon some courses, to which his nature and mine own, (made desperate likewise by the cruelty of a Mother in Law) would else have bin as strange, as insolent greatness is to distressed virtue.
Yes, I have heard of that too; your defeat made upon a Mercer, I style't modestly, the Law intends it plain cozen∣age.
It was no less, but my penitence and resti∣tution, may come fairly off from it; it was no Impeachment to the Glory won at Agencourts great Battle, that the Achiever of it in his youth had bin a Purse-taker, this with all reverence to'th great Example. Now to my business, wherein you have made such no∣ble trial of your worth, that in a world so dull as this, where faith is almost grown to be a miracle, I have found a friend so worthy as your self, to purchase all the Land my Father sold at the pursue∣zion of a riotous woman, and charitable to reserve it for his use, and the good of his three children; this I say, is such a deed shall style you our Preserver, and ow the memory of your worth, and pay it to all posterity.
Sir, what I have done, looks to the end of the good deed it self, no other way in the world.
But would you please out of a friendly reprehension,
to make him sensible of the weighty wrong he has done his i will∣drone, yet I would not have it too bitter, for he undergoes already such torment in a women's naughty pride, too harsh reproof would kill him.
Leave you that to my discretion: I have made my self my sons Executor, and am come up on purpose to collect his Creditors, and where I find his pennyworth conscion∣able, Isle make them in part satisfaction:
Oh this fellow was born near me, and his trading here in the City may bring me to the knowledge of the men my son ought money to.
Your Worship's welcome to London, and I pray how does all our good friends in the Country?
They are well, George: how thou art shot up since I saw thee? what, I think thou art almost out of thy Time?
I am out of my wits sir, I have lived in a kind of Bedlam these four years, how can I be mine own man then?
Why, what's the matter?
I may turn Soap-boyler, I have a loose body: I am turned away from my Master.
How! turned away! Indenture.
I am gone sir, not in drink, and yet you may behold my Indentures: Oh the wicked wit of woman, for the good turn I did bringing her home, she ne'er left sucking my Masters breath, like a Cat, kissing him I mean, till I was turned away!
I have heard she's a terrible woman.
Yes, and the miserablest! her sparing in House-keeping has cost him somewhat, the Dagger-pyes can testify: she has stood in's light most miserably, like your Fasting-days before Red letters in the Alma∣nack: saying, the pinching of our bellies would be a mean to make him wear Scarlet the sooner. She had once persuaded him to have bought Spectacles for all his servants, that they might have worn 'em dinner and supper.
To what purpose?
Marry, to have made our Victuals seem bigger than 't was: she shows from whence she came, that my Winde-collick can witness.
Why, whence came she?
Marry from a Courtier, and an Officer too, that was up and down I know not how often.
Had he any great place?
Yes, and a very high one, but he got little by it; he was one that blew the Organ in the Court Chapel, our Puri∣tans, especially your Puritans in Scotland, could ne'er away with him.
Is she one of the Sect?
Faith I think not,
for I am certain, she denies her husband the supremacy.
Well George, your difference may be reconciled. I am now to use your help in a business that concerns me: here's a Note of men's names here in the City, unto whom my son ought money, but I do not know their dwelling?
Let me see sir: fifty pound taken up at use of Mr. Water Thin the Brewer.
What's he?
An obstinate fellow, and one that denied payment of the groats, till he lay by the heels for it; I know him: Item, fourscore pair of provant Breeches'ath' new fashion, to Pinch buttock a Hosier in Burchen-lane, so much.
What the devil did he with so many pair of breeches?
Supply a Captain sir, a friend of his went over to the Palatinate.
Item, to my Tailor Mr. Wetherwise, by St. Clements-church.
Who should that be? it may be it is the new Prophet, the Astrological Tailor.
No, no, no sir, we have no∣thing to do with him.
Well, I'll read no further, leave the note to my discretion, do not fear but I'll enquire them all.
Why, I thank thee.
Sir, rest assured I shall in all your business be faithful to you, and at better leisure find time to imprint deeply in your father, the wrong he has done you,
You are worthy in all things?
Is my father stirring?
Yes, sir, my Lady wonders you are thus chargeable to your father, and will not direct your self unto some gainful study, may quit him of your dependence.
What study?
Why the Law, that Law that takes up most 'ath' wits in the kingdom, not for most good, but most gain, or Divinity; I have heard you talk well, and I do not think but you'd prove a singular fine Church-man.
I should prove a plural better, if I could attain to fine benefices.
My Lady now she has money, is studying to do good works, she talked last night what a goodly act it was, of a Countess (Northampton-shire breed belike, or thereabouts) that to make Coventry a Corporation, rode through the City naked, and by day light.
I do not think, but you have Ladies living would discover as much in private, to advance but some member of a Corporation.
Well sir, your wit is still goaring at my Ladies projects:
here's your father.
Thou come to chide me, hear∣ing how like a ward I am handled, since the sale of my Land.
No sir, but to turn your eyes into your own bosom.
Why, I am become my wives pensioner; am confined to a hundred mark a year, t'one suit, and one man to attend me.
And is not that enough for a private Gentleman?
Peace sirrah, there is nothing but knave speaks in thee, and my two poor children must be put forth to prentice.
Ha! to prentice: sir, I do not come to grieve you, but to show how wretched your estate was that you could not come to see order, until foul disorder pointed the way to it, so in∣considerate, yet so fruitful still is dotage to beget its own destruction.
Surely I am nothing, and desire to be so, pray thee fellow entreat her only to be quiet, I have given her all my estate on that condition.
Yes sir, her Coffers are well lined believe me.
And yet she is not contented; we obe∣serve the Moon is ne'er so pleasant, and so clear as when she is at the full.
You did not use my mother with this observance, you are like the Frogs, who weary of their quiet King, consented to the election of the Stork, who in the end devoured them.
You may see how apt man is to forfeit all his judgement upon the instant of his fall.
Look up sir.
O my hearts broke; weighty are injuries that come from an enemy, but those are dead∣lie that come from a friend, for
we see commonly those are tan most to heart: she comes.
What a terrible eye she darts on us.
Oh most natural, for lightning to go before the thun∣der.
What? Are you in council? are ye levying faction against us.
Good friend.
Sir, sir, pray come hither, there is winter in your looks, a latter winter, do you complain to your kindred? I'll make you fear extremely, to show you have any cause to fear: Are the bonds sealed for the six thousand pounds I put forth to use?
Yes Madam.
The bonds were made in my uncles name.
Yes.
It is well.
It is strange though.
Nothing strange, you'll think the allowance I have put you to as strange, but your
judgement cannot reach the aim I have in it: you were pricked last year to be High Sheriff, and what it would have cost you I under∣stand now, all this charge and the other by the sale of your Land, and the money at my dispose, and your pension so small, will settle you in quiet, make you Master of a retired life, and our great ones may think you a politic man, and that you are aiming at some strange business, having made all over.
I must leave you, man is never truly awake till he be dead.
What a dream have you made of my father?
Let him be so, and keep the proper place of dreams; his bed, until I raise him.
Raise! him not unlikely, it is you have ruined him.
You do not come to quarrel?
No certain, but to persuade you to a thing, that in the virtue of it, nobly carries its own commendation, and you shall gain much honour by it, which is the recompense of all virtuous actions, to use my father kindly.
Why? does he com∣plain to you sir?
Complain: why should a King complain for any thing, but for his sins to heaven, the prerogative of husband is like to his, over his wife.
I am full of business sir, and will not mind you.
I must not leave you thus; I tell you mother it is dangerous to a woman, when her mind raises her to such height, it makes her only capable of her own merit; nothing of duty! oh, it was a strange unfortunate o're-prising your beauty, brought him, (otherwise discreet) into the fatal neglect of his poor children: what will you give us of the late sum you received?
Not a penny; away, you are troublesome and saucy.
You are too cruel: denials even from Princes who may do what they list, should be supplied with a gracious verbal usage, that though they do not cure the sore, they may abate the sense of't; the wealth you seem to command over, is his, and he I hope will dispose of't to our use.
When he can com∣mand my will?
Have you made him so miserable, that he must take a Law from his wife?
Have you not had some Lawyers forced to groan under the burden?
Oh! but the greater the women, the more visible are their vices.
So sir, you have been so bold; by all can
bind an oath, and I'll not break it, I will not be the woman to you hereafter you expected.
Be not; be not your self, be not my fathers wife, be not my Lady Cressingham, and then I'll thus speak to you, but you must not answer in your own per∣son.
A fine Puppet play!
Good Madam, please you pity the distress of a poor Gentleman, that is undone by a cruel Mother in Law, you do not know her, nor does she deserve the knowledge of any good one, for she does not know her self, you would sigh for her that ere she took you sex, if you but heard her qualities.
This is a fine Crotchet.
Envy and Pride, flow in her painted breasts, she gives no other suck; all her attendants do not belong to her husband, his money is hers, marry his debts are his own, she bears such sway, she will not suffer his Religion be his own, but what she please to turn it to.
And all this while, I am the woman you libel against.
I remember ever the Land was sold, you talked of going to Ireland, but should you touch there, you would die presently.
Why Man?
The country brookes no poison: go, You'll find how difficult a thing it is, to make a settled or assured Estate of things ill gotten: when my fa∣ther's dead, the curse of Lust and Riot follow you, marry some young gallant that may rifle you; yet add one blessing to your needy age, that you may die full of repentance.
Ha, Ha, Ha.
Oh! shoe's lost to any kind of goodness.
Sirrah, be gone, you're base.
Base, my good Lord? it is a ground part in Music, trebles, means, all his but sidling, your Honour bore a part as my wife says, my Lord.
Your wives a Strumpet.
Ah ha, is she so? I am glad to hear it, open confession, open payment, the wagers mine then, a hundred a year my Lord, I said so before, and staked my head against it, thus after darksome night, the day is come, my Lord.
Hence, hide thy branded head, let no day see thee, nor thou any but thy execution day.
That's the day after washing day, once a week, I see it at home my Lord.
Go home and see thy prostituted wife (for sure it is so) now folded in a Boys adultery, my Page; on whom the hot-rain'd harlot dotes, this night he hath been her attendant, my house he's
fled from, and must no more return, go, and make haste sir, lest your reward be lost for want of looking to.
My reward lost; is there nothing due for what is past, my Lord?
Yes Pander, Wittoll, Macrio, basest of knaves, thou Bole∣ster-bawd to thine own infamy! go, I have no more about me at this time, when I am better stored thou shalt have more where ever I meet thee.
Pander, Wittoll, Macrio, base knave, bole∣ster bawd; here is but five mark toward a hundred a year: this is poor payment, if Lords may be trusted no better then thus! I will go home and cut my Wives Nose off, I will turn over a new Leaf, and hang up the Page; lastly I will put on a large pair of Wet∣leather Boots and drown my self, I will sink at Queen-hive, and rise again at Charing-cross contrary to the Statute in Edwardo primo.
Good health to your Lordship.
Mr. Frank∣lin, I heard of your arrival, and the cause of this your sad appear∣ance.
And it is no more then as your Honour says, indeed appearance, it has more form then feeling sorrow Sir, I must confess, there's none of these Gentlemen (though Aliens in blood) but have as large cause of grief as I.
No, by your fa∣for sir, we are well satisfied; there was in his life a greater hope, but less assurance.
Sir, I wish all my debts of no bet∣la promise to pay me thus, fifty in the hundred comes fairly home∣wards.
Considering hard Bargains and dead Commodities, sir.
Thou say true, friend, and from a dead Debtor too.
And so you have compounded and agreed all your sons riotous Debts?
There's behind but one cause of worse condition, that done, he may sleep quietly.
Yes sure my Lord, this Gentleman is come a wonder to us all, that so fairly with half a loss could satisfy those debts were dead, even with his son, and from whom we could have nothing claimed.
I showed my reason; I would have a good name live after him, because he bore my Name.
May his tongue perish first (and that will spoil his trade) that first gives him a syllable of ill.
Why this is friendly.
My Lord!
Mr. Chamlet! very welcome.
Mr. Franklin, I
take it, these Gentlemen I know well: good Mr. Pennystone, Mr. Phillip, Mr. Cheyney! I am glad I shall take my leave of so many of my good friends at once; your hand first, my Lord, fare you well sir, nay I must have all your hands to my Pass.
Will you have mine too sir?
Yes, thy two hands George, and I think two honest hands of a Trades-man, George, as any be∣tween Cornhil and Lombard-street.
Take heed what you say sir, there's Birchen-lane between 'em.
But what's the cause of this, Mr. Chamlet?
I have the cause in handling, now my Lord; George, honest George is the cause, yet no cause of Georges, George is turned away one way, and I must go an∣other.
And whither is your way sir?
Even to seek out a Quiet Life, my Lord: I do hear of a fine peaceable Island.
Why it is the same you live in.
No, it is so famed, but we th'inhabitants find it not so; the place I speak of has bin kept with thunder, with frightful light∣nings, amazing Noises, but now (th'inchantment broke) it is the Land of Peace, where Hogs and Tobacco yield fair increase.
This is a little wilde methinks.
Gentlemen, fare you well, I am for the Bermudas.
Nay, good sir stay, and is that your only cause, the loss of George?
The loss of George, my Lord! make you that no cause? why but examine, would it not break the stout heart of a Noble∣man to loose his George, much more the tender bosom of a Citizen.
Fie, fie, I'm sorry your gravity should run back to light∣nos thus: you go to the Bermothes!
Better to Ireland Sir.
The Land of Ire, that's too near home, my wife will be heard from Hellbree to Divellin.
Sir, I must of necessity a while detain you: I must acquaint you with a benefit that's coming towards you. You were cheated of some goods of late, come, I'm a Cunning-man, and will help you to the most part again, or some reasonable satisfaction.
That's another cause of my unquiet Life, sir; can you do that, I may chance stay another Tide or two: My wife! (I must speak more private with you) by forty foot pain of death, I dare not reach her: No words of me sweet Gentlemen.
I had need hide too.
Oh, my Lord, I have scarce tongue enough yet to tell you; my husband, my hus∣band's gone from me, your warrant good my Lord, I never had such need of your warrant; my husband's gone from me.
Going he is, it is true; has tan his leave of me, and all these Gentlemen, and it is your sharp tongue that whips him for∣wards.
A warrant, good my Lord.
You turn away his servants, such on whom his estate de∣pends he says, who know his books, his debts, his customers; the form and order of all his affairs you make orderless, chiefly his George you have banished from him.
My Lord, I will call George again.
Call George again.
Why hark you, how high voiced you are, that raise an Echo from my Selleridge which we with modest loudness cannot.
My Lord, do you think I speak too loud?
Too loud.
Why hark, your own tongue answers you, and rever∣berates your words into your teeth.
I will speak lower all the days of my life: I never found the fault in my self till now, your warrant good my Lord, to stay my husband.
Well, well, it shall o'retake him, ere he pass Gravesend, provided that he meet his quietness at home, else he's gone again.
And withal to call George again.
I will call George again.
Call George again.
See, you are raised again, the Echo tells you.
I did forget my self indeed, my Lord: this is my last fault, I will go make a silent enquiry after George, I will which∣per half a score Porters in the ear, that shall run softly up and down the City to seek him. Bewy ye my Lord, buoy all Gentlemen. Exit
George, your way lies before you now, cross the street, and come into her eyes, your Masters Journey will be staid.
Isle warrant you bring it to better subjection yet.
These are fine flashes: how now Mr. Chamlet?
I had one ear lent to you-ward, my Lord, and this of the to'ther side, both sounded sweetly: I have whole recovered my late losses sir, th'one half paid, the to'ther is forgiven.
Then your Journey is staid?
Alas my Lord, that was a trick of age, for I had left no∣ver
a trick of youth like it, to succour me.
How now? what new Object's here!
The next man we meet shall judge us.
Content, though he be but a Common-Council-man.
The one's a knave, I could know him at twelve score distance.
And to'ther 's a Bar∣ber-Surgeon, my Lord.
Isle go no further, here is the honourable Lord, that I know will grant my request; My Lord—
Peace, I will make it plain to his Lordship: My Lord, a Covenant by Jus Jurandum is between us, he is to suffocate my Re∣spiration by his Capistrum, and I to make incision so far as mortify∣cation by his Jugulars.
This is not altogether so plain neither, sir.
I can speak no plainer my Lord, unless I wrong mine art.
I can my Lord, I know some part of the Law, I am to take him in this place where I find him, and lead him from hence to the place of Execution, and there to hang him till he dies; he in equal curtsy is to cut my throat with his Ra∣zor, and there's an end of both on's.
There is the end my Lord, but we want the beginning: I stand upon it to be strangled first, before I touch either his Gula or Ceruix.
I am against it, for how shall I be sure to have my Throat cut after he's hanged.
Is this a Con∣dition betwixt you?
A firm Covenant, signed and sealed by oath and handfast, and wants nothing but Agreement.
A little pause: what might be the cause on either part?
My passions are grown to putrefaction, and my griefs are gangrened; Mr. Chamlet has scarified me all over, besides the loss of my new Brush.
I am kept out of mine own Castle, my Wife keeps the Hold against me: your Page my Lord, is her Champion; I summoned a Parley at the window, was answered with Defiance: they confess they have lain together, but what they have done else I know not.
Thou can have no wrong that deserves pity, thou art thy self so bad.
I thank your Honour for that, let me have my throat cut then.
Sir, I can give you a better remedy then his Capistrum; your ear a little.
I come with a bold innocence to answer the best and worst that can accuse me here.
Your husband.
He's the worst, I dare his
worst.
Your Page, your Page.
We lay toge∣there in bed, it is confessed; you, and your ends of Law makes worcester∣ser of it, I did it for reward.
Isle hear no more of this, come Gentlemen will you walk?
My Lord, a little stay; you'll see a sight that neigh∣bore amity will be much pleased with, it is come already, my Father sir.
There must be cause certain for this good change: Sir, you are bravely met, this is at the best I ever saw you.
My Lord, I am amazement to my self; I slept in pover∣tie, and am awake into this wonder; how I can thus brave, my dreams did not so much as tell me of; I am of my kind sons new making up, it exceeds the pension much, that yesternight allowed me, and my pockets centupled, but I am my sons child, sir, he knows of me more then I do my self.
Sir, you yet have but earnest of your happiness, a Pinnace fore-riding a goodly vessel, by this near Anchor-bulkt like a Castle, and with Jewels fraught, (Joys above Jewels sir,) from deck to keel, make way for the receipt, empty your bosom of all griefs and troubles, leave not a sigh to beat her back again, she is so stored ye'ad need have room enough, to take her lading.
If one Commodity be wanting now, all this is nothing.
Tush, that must out too, there must be no remembrance, not the thought that ever youth in woman did abuse you, that ever your children had a step∣mother, that you sold Lands to please your punishment, that you were circumscribed and taken in, abridged the large extendure of your grounds, and put into the pinfold that belonged to it, that your son did cheat for want of maintenance; that he did beg, you shall remember only, for I have begged off all these troubles from you.
This was a good weeks labour.
Not an hours my Lord, but it was a happy one; see sir, a new day shines on you.
Oh sir, your son has robed me.
Ha! that way I instructed?
Nay, hear her sir.
Of my good purpose sir, he hath forced out of me, what lay concealed, ripened my pity with his dews of duty, for∣give me sir, and but keep the number of every grief that I have pained you with, I'll ten-fold pay with fresh obedience.
Oh, that my wife were here to learn this lesson.
Your state is not abated, what was yours, is still your own, and take the cause withal of my harsh seeming usage; it was to reclaim faults in your self, the swift consumption of many large revenues, Gaiming, that of not much less speed, burning up house and land, not casual but cunning fire, which though it keeps the Chimney, and outward shows like Hospitality, is only de∣vourer on it, Consuming Chemistry; there I have made you a flat banquet-out; all your Stillatories and laboring Minerals are de∣molish'd, that part of Hell in your house is extinct, put out your desire with them, and then these feet shall level with my hands, un∣till you raise my stooped humility to higher grace, to warm these lips with love, and duty do to every silver hair, each one shall be a Senator to my obedience.
All this I know before, who ever of you that had but one ill thought of this good woman, you owe a knee to her, and she is merciful if she forgive you.
That shall be private penance sir, we will all joy in public with you.
On the conditions I tell you, not else.
Sweet George, dear George, any conditions.
My wife!
Peace, George is bringing her to conditions.
Good ones, good George.
You shall never talk your voice above the key, sol, sol, sol.
Sol, sol, sol, I George.
Say welcome home honest George, in that pitch.
Welcome home honest George.
Why this is well now.
That's well indeed, George.
Rogue, nor Rascal must never come out of your mouth.
They shall never come in, honest George.
Nor I will not have you call my Master plain husband, that's too course, but as your Gentlewomen in the Country use, and your persons wives in the Town, it is comely, and shall be customed in the City, call him Master Chamlet at every word.
At every word, honest George.
Look you, there he is, salute him then.
Welcome home, good Mr. Chamlet.
Thanks, and a thousand sweet Wife; I may say honest George.
Yes sir, or Bird, or Chuck, or Hearts ease,
or plain Rachel, but call her Rac no more, so long as she is quiet.
God-a-mercy, shall it have thy new suit a Sunday George.
George shall have two new suits, Mr. Chamlet.
God-a-mercy, in faith Chuck.
Mr. Chamlet, you and I are friends, all even betwixt us?
I do acquit thee, neighbor Sweetbal.
I will not be hanged then, Knares-bee do thy worst; nor I will not cut thy throat.
I must do it my self.
If thou come to my shop, and usurp my chair of maintenance, I will go as near as I can, but I will not do it.
No, it is I must cut Knaves-bees throat, for slande∣ring a modest Gentlewoman, and my wife in shape of your Page, my Lord, in her own I durst not place her so near your Lordship.
No more of that sir, if your ends have acquired their own events, crown 'em with your own Joy.
Down a your knees Knaves-bee, to your wife, she's too honest for you.
Down, down, before you are hanged, it will be to late after∣wards, and long thou can not scope it.
You'll play the Pander no more, will you?
Oh, that's an inch into my throat.
And let out your wife for her?
Oh sweet wife, go no deeper.
Dare any be bail for your better behaviour?
Yes, yes I dare, he will mend one day.
And be worse the next.
Hang me the third then, dear merciful wife,
I will do Any thing for a quiet Life.
All then is reconciled?
Only my brush is lost, my dear new brush.
I will help you to satisfaction for that too sir.
Oh, Sperm Coat, I feel it heal already.
Gentlemen, I have fully satisfied my dead sons debts?
All pleased, all paid sir.
Then once more here I bring him back to life, from my servant to my son, nay, wonder not; I have not dealt by fallacy with any, my son was dead, who ever out lives his virtues is a dead man, for when you hear of spirits that walk in real bodies, to the amaze and cold astonishment of such as meet 'em, and all would shun; those are men of vices, who nothing have but what is visi∣ble, and so by consequence they have no souls, but if the soul re∣turn
but if the Soul return he lives again,
Created newly; such my Son appears
By my blessing rooted, growing by his tears.
You have beguiled us honestly sir.
And you shall have your brush again.
My basins shall all ring for joy
Why this deserves a Triumph, and my cost shall begin a feast to it, to which I do invite you all; such happy reconcilements must not be past without a health of joy,
Discorded friends atoned, men and their wives
This hope proclaims your after quiet Lives.
I Am sent to enquire your Censure, and to know
How you stand affected? whither we do owe
Our service to your Favours, or must strike
Our Sails (though full of hope) to your dislike:
How ever be pleased to think we purposed well,
And from my fellows thus much I must tell,
Instruct us but in what we went astray,
And to redeem it, we'll take any way.

THy sight was never yet more precious to me;
Welcome with all the affecti∣on of a Mother,
That comfort can express from natural love:
Since thy birth-joy, a Mothers chiefest gladness.
After sh'as undergone her curse of sorrows,
Thou was it not more dear to me, then this hour
Presents thee to my heart. Welcome again.
Alas poor affectionate Soul, how her joys speak to me!
I have observed it often, and I know it is
The fortune commonly of knavish Children
To have the lovingst Mothers.
What's this Gentlewoman?
Speak low sweet Mother; you are able to spoil as many
As come within the hearing: If it be not
Your fortune to mar all, I have much marvel.
I pray do not you teach her to rebel,
When she's in a good way to obedience,
To rise with other women in commotion
Against their husbands, for six Gowns a year,
And so maintain their cause, when they are once up,
In all things else that require cost enough.
They are all of 'em a kind of spirits soon raised,
But not so soon laid (Mother) As for example,
A women's belly is got up in a trice,
A simple charge ere it be laid down again:
So ever in all their quarrels, and their courses,
And I'm a proud man, I hear nothing of 'em,
They are very still, I thank my happiness,
And sound asleep; pray let not your tongue wake 'em.
If you can but rest quiet, she's contented
With all conditions, that my fortunes bring her to;
To keep close as a wise that loves her husband;
To go after the rate of my ability,
Not the licentious swindg of her own will,
Like some of her old school-fellows, she intends
To take out other works in a new Sampler,
And frame the fashion of an honest love,
Which knows no wants; but mocking poverty
Brings forth more children, to make rich men wonder
At divine Providence, that feeds mouths of Infants,
And sends them none to feed, but stuffs their rooms
With fruitful bags, their beds with barren wombs.
Good Mother, make not you things worse then they are,
Out of your too much openness; pray take heed on it;
Nor imitate the envy of old people,
That strive to mar good sport, because they are per∣fit.
I would have yoū more pitiful to youth,
Especially to your own flesh and blood.
I'll prove an excellent husband, here's my hand,
Lay in provision, follow my business roundly,
And make you a Grand-mother in forty weeks.
Go, pray salute her, bid her welcome cheerfully.
Gentlewoman, thus much is a debt of curtsy
Which fashionable strangers pay each other
At a kind meeting; then there's more then one
Due to the knowledge I have of your nearness:
I am bold to come again, and now salute you
By th'name of daughter, which may challenge more
Then ordinary respect.
Why this is well now,
And I think few Mothers of threescore will mend it.
What I can bid you welcome to, is mean;
But make it all your own; we are full of wants,
And cannot welcome worth.
Now this is scurvy,
And spake as if a woman lacked her teeth.
These old folks talk of nothing but defects,
Because they grow so full of 'em themselves.
Kind Mother, there is nothing can be wanting
To her that does enjoy all her desires.
Heaven send a quiet peace with this mans love,
And I am as rich, as Virtue can be poor;
Which were enough after the rate of mind,
To erect Temples for content placed here;
I have forsook Friends, Fortunes, and my Country,
And hourly I rejoice in it. Here's my Friends,
And few is the good number; thy successes
How ere they look, I will still name my fortunes,
Hopeful or spiteful, they shall all be welcome:
Who invites many guests, has of all sorts,
As he that trafficks much, drinks of all fortunes,
Yet they must all be welcome, and used well.
I'll call this place the place of my birth now,
And rightly too; for here my love was born,
And that's the birth-day of a women's joys.
You have not bid me welcome since I came.
That I did questionless.
No sure, how was it?
I have quite forgot it.
Thus.
Oh Sir, it is true;
Now I remember well: I have done thee wrong,
Pray tak't again Sir.
How many of these wrongs
Could I put up in an hour? and turn up the Glass
For twice as many more.
Wilt please you to walk in daughter?
Thanks sweet Mother;
The voice of her that bare me, is not more pleasing.
Though my own care, and my rich Masters trust,
Lay their commands both on my Factorship,
This day and night, I'll know no other business
But her and her dear welcome. It is a bitterness
To think upon to morrow, that I must leave her
Still to the sweet hopes of the weeks end,
That pleasure should be so restrained and curbed
After the course of a rich Work-master,
That never pays till Saturday night.
Marry it comes together in a round sum then,
And do's more good you'll say: Oh fair eyed Floe∣rinse!
Did thou but know, what a most matchless Jewel
Thou now art Mistress of, a pride would take thee,
Able to shoot destruction through the bloods
Of all thy youthful Sons; but it is great policy
To keep choice treasures in obscurest places:
Should we show Thieves our wealth, it would make 'em bolder;
Temptation is a Devil will not stick
To fasten upon a Saint; take heed of that;
The Jewel is cased up from all men's eyes.
Who could imagine now a Gem were kept,
Of that great value under this plain roof?
But how in times of absence? what assurance
Of this restraint then; yes, yes? there's one with her.
Old Mothers know the world; and such as these,
When Sons lock Chests, are good to look to Keys.
What has your daughter seen him yet? know you that?
No matter, she shall love him.
Nay let's have fair play,
He has been now my Ward some fifteen year,
And it is my purpose (as time calls upon me)
By custom seconded, and such moral virtues,
To tender him a wife; now Sir, this wife
I'd fain elect out of a daughter of yours.
You see my meaning's fair; if now this daughter
So tendered (let me come to your own phrase Sir)
Should offer to refuse him, I were hassled.
Thus am I fain to calculate all my words,
For the Meridian of a foolish old man,
To take his understanding: What do you answer Sir?
I say still she shall love him.
Yet again?
And shall she have no reason for this love?
Why do you think that women love with reason?
I perceive Fools are not at all hours fool∣each,
No more then wisemen wise.
I had a wife,
She ran mad for me; she had no reason for it,
For ought I could perceive: What think you Lady Sister?
It was a fit match that,
Being both out of their wits: A loving wife, it seemed
She strove to come as near you as she could.
And if her daughter prove not mad for love too,
She takes not after her, nor after me;
If she prefer reason before my pleasure,
Your an experienced widow. Lady Sister,
I pray let your opinion come amongst us.
I must offend you then, if truth will do it,
And take my Nieces part, and call it injustice
To force her love to one she never saw.
Maids should both see, and like; all little enough;
If they love truly after that, it is well.
Connting the time, she takes one man till death,
That's hard task, I tell you; but one may
Enquire at three years end, amongst young wives,
And mark how the game goes.
Why, is not man
Tide to the same observance, Lady Sister,
And in one woman?
It is enough for him;
Besides he tastes of many sundry dishes
That we poor wretches never lay our lips to;
As Obedience forsooth, Subjection, Duty, and such Kickshaws,
All of our making, but served in to them;
And if we lick a finger, then sometimes
We are not too blame: Your best Cooks use it▪
You are a sweet Lady, Sister, and a witty—
A witty! Oh the bud of commendation
Fit for a Girl of sixteen; I am blown man,
I should be wise by this time; and for instance,
I have buried my two husbands in good fashion,
And never mean more to marry.
No, why so Lady?
Because the third shall never bury me:
I think I am more then witty; how think you Sir?
I have paid often fees to a Counsellor
Has had a weaker brain.
Then I must tell you,
Your money was soon parted.
Light her now Brother.
Where is my Niece? let her be sent for straight.
If you have any hope, twill prove a wedding;
It is fit y'faith she should have one sight of him,
And stop upon it, and not be joined in haste,
As if they went to stock a new found Land.
Look out her Uncle, and you're sure of her,
Those two are nev'r asunder, they've been heard
In Argument at midnight, Moon-shine nights
Are Noon days with them; they walk out their sleeps;
Or rather at those hours, appear like those
That walk in 'em, for so they did to me.
Look you, I told you truth; they're like a chain,
Draw but one link, all follows.
Oh affinity,
What piece of excellent workmanship art thou?
It is work clean wrought, for there's no lust, but love in it,
And that abundantly: when in stranger things,
There is no love at all, but what lust brings.
On with your Mask, for it is your part to see now,
And not be seen: Go too, make use of your time;
See what you mean to like; nay, and I charge you,
Like what you see: Do you hear me? there's no dal∣lying:
The Gentleman's almost twenty, and it is time
He were getting lawful heirs, and you a breeding on 'em.
Good Father!
Tell not me of tongues and rumours.
You'll say the Gentleman is somewhat simple,
The better for a husband, were you wise;
For those that marry fools, live Ladies lives.
On with the Mask, I'll hear no more, he's rich;
The fool's hid under Bushels.
Not so hid neither;
But here's a foul great piece of him methinks;
What will he be, when he comes altogether?
Beat him?
I beat him out of the field with his own Cat-stick,
Yet gave him the first hand.
Oh strange!
I did it,
Then he set Jacks on me.
What, my Ladies Tailor?
I, and I beat him too.
Nay that's no wonder,
He's used to beating.
Nay, I tickel'd him
When I came once to my tippings.
Now you talk on 'em;
There was a Poulterers wife made a great complaint of you last night to your Gardianer, that you struck a bump in her childes head, as big as an Egg.
An Egg may prove a Chicken then in time; the Poulterers wife will get by it. When I am in game, I am furious; came my Mothers eyes in my way, I would not lose a fair end: No, were she alive, but with one tooth in her head, I should venture the striking out of that. I think of no body, when I am in play. I am so earnest. Coads-me, my Gardianer! Prithee lay up my Cat and Cat-stick safe.
Where Sir, in the Chimney-corner?
Chimney Corner!
Yes Sir, your Cats are always safe in the Chim∣ney Corner,
Unless they burn their Coats.
Marry, that I am afraid on▪
Why, then I will bestow your Cat in the Gutter,
And there she's safe I am sure.
If I but live
To keep a house, I'll make thee a great man,
If meat and drink can do it. I can stoop gallantly,
And pitch out when I list: I'm dog at a hole,
I mar'l my Guardianer do's not seek a wife for me;
I protest I'll have a bout with the Maids else,
Or contract my self at midnight to the Larder-wo∣man,
In presence of a Fool, or a Sack-posset.
Ward.
I feel my self after any exercise
Horribly prone: Let me but ride, I'm lusty,
A Cock-horse straight y'faith.
Why Ward. I say.
I'll forswear eating Eggs in Moon-shine nights;
There's nev'r a one I eat, but turns into a Cock
In four and twenty hours, if my hot blood
Be not took down in time, sure twill crow shortly.
Do you hear Sir? follow me, I must new School you.
School me? I scorn that now, I am past schooling.
I am not so base to learn to write and read;
I was born to better fortunes in my Cradle.
How do you like him Girl? this is your husband.
Like him, or like him not wench, you shall have him,
And you shall love him.
Oh soft there Brother! though you be a Justice,
Your Warrant cannot be served out of your liberty,
You may compel out of the power of Father,
Things merely harsh to a Maids flesh and blood;
But when you come to love, there the soil alters;
You're in an other Country, where your Laws
Are no more set by, then the cacklings
Of Geese in Romes great Capitol.
Marry him she shall then.
Let her agree upon love afterwards.
You speak now Brother like an honest more∣tal
That walks upon th'earth with a staff;
You were up in the Clouds before, you'd command love,
And so do most old folks that go without it.
My best and dearest Brother, I could dwell here;
There is not such another seat on earth,
Where all good parts better express themselves.
You'll make me blush anon.
It is but like saying grace before a Feast then,
And that's most comely; thou art all a Feast,
And she that has thee, a most happy guest.
Prithee cheer up that Niece with special Counsel▪
I would it were fit to speak to her what I would; but
It was not a thing ordained, Heaven has forbid it,
And it is most meet, that I should rather perish
Then the Decree Divine receive least blemish:
Feed inward you my sorrows, make no noise,
Consume me silent, let me be stark dead
Ere the world know I'm sick. You see my honesty,
If you befriend me, so.
Marry a Fool!
Can there be greater misery to a woman
That means to keep her days true to her husband,
And know no other man! so virtue wills it.
Why; how can I obey and honour him,
But I must needs commit Idolatry?
A Fool is but the Image of a man,
And that but ill made neither: Oh the heart-break∣ings
Of miserable Maids, where love's enforced!
The best condition is but bad enough;
When women have their choices, commonly
They do but buy their thraldoms, and bring great portions
To men to keep 'em in subjection,
As if a fearful prisoner should bribe
The Keeper to be good to him, yet lies in still,
And glad of a good usage, a good look
Sometimes by'r Lady; no misery surmounts a wo∣mans.
Men buy their slaves, but women buy their masters;
Yet honesty and love makes all this happy,
And next to Angels, the most blessed estate.
That Providence, that he has made every poison
Good for some use, and sets four warring Elements
At peace in man, can make a harmony
In things that are most strange to humane reason.
Oh but this marriage! What are you sad too Un∣cle?
Faith then there's a whole household down together:
Where shall I go to seek my comfort now
When my best friend's distressed? what is it afflicts you Sir?
Faith nothing but one grief that will not leave me,
And now it is welcome; every man has something
To bring him to his end, and this will serve
Joined with your fathers cruelty to you,
That helps it forward.
Oh be cheered sweet Uncle!
How long has't been upon you, I nev'r spied it:
What a dull sight have I, how long I pray Sir?
Since I first saw you Niece, and left Bologna
And could you deal so unkindly with my heart,
To keep it up so long hid from my pity?
Alas, how shall I trust your love hereafter?
Have we past through so many arguments,
And missed of that still, the most needful one?
Walked out whole nights together in discourses,
And the main point forgot? We are too blame both;
This is an obstinate wilful forgetfulness,
And faulty on both parts: Let's lose no time now,
Begin good Uncle, you that feel it; what is it?
You of all creatures Niece must never hear on it,
It is not a thing ordained for you to know.
Not I Sir! all my joys that word cuts off;
You made profession once you loved me best;
It was but profession!
Yes, I do it too truly,
And fear I shall be chid for it: Know the worst then:
I love thee dearlier then an Uncle can.
Why so you ever said, and I believed it.
So simple is the goodness of her thoughts,
They understand not yet th'unhallowed language
Of a near sinner: I must yet be forced
(Though blushes be my venture) to come nearer.
As a man love's his wife, so love I thee.
What's that?
Methought I heard ill news come toward me,
Which commonly we understand too soon,
Then over-quick at hearing, I'll prevent it,
Though my joys fare the harder; welcome it:
It shall nev'r come so near mine ear again.
Farewell all friendly solaces and discourses,
I'll learn to live without ye, for your dangers
Are greater then your comforts; what's become
Of truth in love, if such we cannot trust,
When blood that should be love, is mixed with lust.
The worst can be but death, and let it come,
He that lives joyless, every day's his doom.
Methinks I'm even as dull now at depar∣ture,
As men observe great Gallants the next day
After a Revels; you shall see 'em look
Much of my fashion, if you mark 'em well.
It is even a second Hell to part from pleasure,
When man has got a smack on it: As many holidays
Coming together makes your poor heads idle
A great while after, and are said to stick
Fast in their fingers ends; even so does game
In a new married couple for the time,
It spoils all thrift, and indeed lies a Bed
To invent all the new ways for great expenses. 
See, and she be not got on purpose now
Into the Window to look after me
I have no power to go now, and I should be hanged:
Farewell all business, I desire no more
Then I see yonder; let the goods at Key
Look to themselves; why should I toil my youth out?
It is but begging two or three year sooner,
And stay with her continually; is it a match?
O fie, what a Religion have I leaped into!
Get out again for shame, the man loves best
When his care's most, that shows his zeal to love.
Fondness is but the Idiot to Affection,
That plays at Hot-cockles with rich Merchants wives;
Good to make sport withal when the Chest's full,
And the long Ware house cracks. It is time of day
For us to be more wise; it is early with us,
And if they lose the morning of their affairs,
They commonly lose the best part of the day,
Those that are wealthy, and have got enough:
It is after Sun-set with 'em, they may rest,
Grow fat with ease, banquet, and toy and play,
When such as I enter the heat of the day,
And I'll do it cheerfully.
I perceive Sir
You're not gone yet, I have good hope you'll stay now.
Farewell, I must not.
Come, come, pray return
To morrow; adding but a little care more,
Will dispatch all as well; believe me twill Sir.
I could well wish my self where you would have me;
But love that's wanton, must be ruled a while
By that that's careful, or all goes to ruin,
As fitting is a Government in Love,
As in a Kingdom; where it is all mere Lust,
It is like an insurrection in the people
That raised in Self-wil, wars against all Reason:
But Love that is respective for increase,
Is like a good King, that keeps all in peace.
Once more farewell.
But this one night I prithee.
Alas I'm in for twenty, if I stay,
And then for forty more, I have such luck to flesh:
I never bought a horse, but he bore double▪
If I stay any longer, I shall turn
An everlasting spend-thrift; as you love
To be maintained well, do not call me again,
For then I shall not care which end goes forward:
Again farewell to thee.
Since it must, farewell too.
Faith daughter, you're too blame, you take the course
To make him an ill husband, troth you do,
And that disease is catching, I can tell you,
•, and soon taken by a yongmans blood,
And that with little urging: Nay fie, see now,
What cause have you to weep? would I had no more,
That have lived threescore years; there were a cause
And it were well thought on; trust me you're too blame,
His absence cannot last five days at utmost.
Why should those tears be fetched forth? cannot love
Be even as well expressed in a good look,
But it must see her face still in a Fountain,
It shows like a Country Maid dressing her head
By a dish of water: Come it is an old custom
To weep for love.
Now they come, now they come.
The Duke.
The State.
How near Boy?
In the next street Sir, hard at hand.
You sir, get a standing for your Mistress,
The best in all the City.
I hav't for her Sir,
It was a thing I provided for her over night,
It is ready at her pleasure.
Fetch her to it then, away Sir.
What's the meaning of this hurry,
Can you tell Mother.
What a memory
Have I! I see by that years come upon me.
Why it is a yearly custom and solemnity,
Religiously observed by th'Duke and State
To St. Marks Temple, the fifteenth of April.
See if my dull brains had not quite forgot it,
It was happily questioned of thee, I had gone down else,
Sat like a drone below, and never thought on it.
I would not to be ten years younger again,
That you had lost the sight; now you shall see
Our Duke, a goodly Gentleman of his years.
Is he old then?
About some fifty five.
That's no great age in man, he's then at best
For wisdom, and for judgment.
The Lord Cardinal
His noble Brother, there's a comely Gentleman,
And greater in devotion then in blood.
He's worthy to be marked.
You shall behold
All our chief states of Florence, you came fortunately
Against this solemn day.
I hope so always:
I hear 'em near us now, do you stand easily?
Exceeding well, good Mother.
Take this stool.
I need it not I thank you.
Use your will then.
How like you Daughter?
It is a Noble State.
Methinks my soul could dwell upon the reverence
Of such a solemn and most worthy custom.
Did not the Duke look up? me-thought he saw us.
That's every one's conceit that sees a Duke,
If he look steadfastly, he looks strait at them,
When he perhaps, good careful Gentleman,
Never minds any; but the look he casts,
Is at his own intentions, and his object
Only the public good.
Most likely so.
Come, come, we'll end this Argument be∣low.
A Strange affection (Brother) when I think on it!
I wonder how thou came by it.
Even as easily,
As man comes by destruction, which oft-times
He wears in his own bosom.
Is the world
So populous in Women, and Creation,
So prodigal in Beauty, and so various?
Yet do's love turn thy point to thine own blood?
It is somewhat too unkindly; must thy eye
Dwell evilly on the fairness of thy kindred,
And seek not where it should? it is confined
Now in a narrower prison then was made for it?
It is allowed a stranger, and where bounty
Is made the great mans honour, it is ill husbandry
To spare, and servants shall have small thanks for it.
So he Heavens bounty seems to scorn and mock,
That spares free means, and spends of his own stock.
Never was mans misery so soon sowed up,
Counting how truly.
Nay, I love you so,
That I shall venture much to keep a change from you
So fearful as this grief will bring upon you.
Faith it even kills me, when I see you faint
Under a reprehension, and I'll leave it,
Though I know nothing can be better for you:
Prithee (sweet Brother) let not passion waste
The goodness of thy time, and of thy fortune:
Thou keep the treasure of that life I love,
As dearly as mine own; and if you think
My former words too bitter, which were ministered
By truth and zeal; it is but a hazarding
Of grace and virtue, and I can bring forth
As pleasant Fruits, as Sensuality wishes
In all her teeming longings: This I can do.
Oh nothing that can make my wishes per∣fact!
I would that love of yours were pawned to it Brother,
And as soon lost that way, as I could win.
Sir I could give as shroud a lift to Chastity,
As any she that wears a tongue in Florence.
Sh'ad need be a good horse-woman, and sit fast,
Whom my strong argument could not fling at last.
Prithee take courage man; though I should counsel
Another to despair, yet I am pitiful
To thy afflictions, and will venture hard;
I will not name for what, it is not handsome;
Find you the proof, and praise me.
Then I fear me,
I shall not praise you in haste.
This is the comfort,
You are not the first (Brother) has attempted
Things more forbidden, then this seems to be:
I'll minister all Cordials now to you,
Because I'll cheer you up Sir.
I am past hope.
Love, thou shalt see me do a strange cure then,
As ever was wrought on a disease so mortal,
And near akin to shame; when shall you see her?
Never in comfort more.
You're so impatient too.
Will you believe death, sh'has forsworn my company,
And sealed it with a blush.
So, I perceive
All lies upon my hands then; well, the more glory
When theworks finished—How now Sir, the news!
Madam, your Niece, the virtuous Isabela,
Is lighted now to see you.
That's great fortune
Sir, your Stars bless; you simple, lead her in.
What's this to me?
Your absence gentle Brother,
I must bestir my wits for you.
I, to great purpose.
Beshrew you, would I loved you not so well:
I'll go to Bed, and leave this deed undone:
I am the fondest where I once affect;
The carefull'st of their healths, and of their ease for∣sooth,
That I look still but slenderly to mine own.
I take a course to pity him so much now,
That I have none left for modesty and my self.
This it is to grow so liberal; you've few sisters
That love their Brothers ease 'bove their own honesties:
But if you question my affections,
That will be found my fault. Niece, your love's well∣come.
Alas what draws that paleness to thy cheeks,
This enforced marriage towards?
It helps good Aunt
Amongst some other griefs; but those I'll keep
Locked up in modest silence; for they are sorrows
Would shame the Tongue, more then they grieve the thought:
Indeed the Ward is simple.
Simple! that were well:
Why one might make good shift with such a hus∣band.
But he's a fool entailed, he halts down-right in it:
And knowing this, I hope it is at your choice
To take or refuse Niece.
You see it is not.
I loath him more then beauty can hate death
Or age her spiteful neighbor.
Let's appear then.
How can I being born with that obedience,
That must submit unto a fathers will?
If he command, I must of force consent.
Alas poor soul! be not offended prithee,
If I set by the name of Niece a while,
And bring in pity in a stranger fashion:
It lies here in this Breast, would cross this match.
How, cross it Aunt?
I, and give thee more liberty
Then thou hast reason yet to apprehend.
Sweet Aunt, in goodness keep not hid from me
What may befriend my life.
Yes, yes, I must,
When I return to reputation,
And think upon the solemn Vow I made
To your dead Mother, my most loving Sister;
As long as I have her memory twixt mine eye lids,
Look for no pity now.
Kind, sweet, dear Aunt.
No, it was a secret, I have took special care of,
Delivered by your Mother on her death bed,
That's nine years now, and I'll not part from it yet,
Though nev'r was fitter time, nor greater cause for it.
As you desire the praises of a Virgin:
Good sorrow! I would do thee any kind∣nos,
Not wronging Secrecy, or Reputation.
Neither of which (as I have hope of frûit∣nos)
Shall receive wrong from me.
Nay it would be your own wrong,
As much as any's, should it come to that once.
I need no better means to work persuasion then.
Let it suffice, you may refuse this fool,
Or you may take him, as you see occasion
For your advantage; the best wits will do it;
You've liberty enough in your own will,
You cannot be enforced; there grows the flower
If you could pick it out, makes whole life sweet to you.
That which you call your Fathers comment's no∣thing;
Then your obedience must needs be as little.
If you can make shift here to taste your happiness,
Or pick out ought that likes you, much good do you:
You see your cheer, I'll make you no set dinner.
And trust me, I may starve for all the good
I can find yet in this: Sweet Aunt, deal plainlier.
Say I should trust you now upon an oath,
And give you in a secret that would start you,
How am I sure of you, in faith and silence?
Equal assurance may I find in mercy,
As you for that in me.
It shall suffice.
Then know, how ever custom he has made good
For reputations sake, the names of Niece
And Aunt, twixt you and I, w'are nothing less.
How's that?
I told you I should start your blood.
You are no more allied to any of us,
Save what the courtesy of opinion casts
Upon your Mothers memory, and your name,
Then the meer'st stranger is, or one begot
At Naples, when the husband lies at Rome;
There's so much odds betwixt us. Since your know∣ledge
Wished more instruction, and I have your oath
In pledge for silence; it makes me talk the freelier.
Did never the report of that famed Spaniard,
Marquess of Coria, since your time was ripe
For understanding, fill your ear with wonder?
Yes, what of him? I have heard his deeds of honour
Often related when we lived in Naples.
You heard the praises of your Father then.
My Father!
That was he: But all the business
So carefully and so discreetly carried,
That Fame received no spot by it, not a blemish;
Your Mother was so wary to her end,
None knew it, but her Conscience, and her friend,
Till penitent confession made it mine,
And now my pity, yours: It had been long else,
And I hope care and love alike in you,
Made good by oath, will see it take no wrong now:
How weak his commands now, whom you call Fa∣there?
How vain all his inforcements, your obedience?
And what a largeness in your will and liberty,
To take, or to reject, or to do both?
For fools will serve to father wisemens children:
All this you've time to think on. O my Wench!
Nothing o'rthrows our Sex but indiscretion,
We might do well else of a brittle people,
As any under the great Canopy:
I pray forget not but to call me Aunt still;
Take heed of that, it may be marked in time else,
But keep your thoughts to your self, from all the world,
Kindred, or dearest friend, nay, I entreat you,
From him that all this while you have called Uncle;
And though you love him dearly, as I know
His deserts claim as much even from a stranger,
Yet let not him know this, I prithee do not,
As ever thou hast hope of second pity,
If thou should stand in need on it, do not do it.
Believe my oath, I will not.
Why well said:
Who shows more craft t'undo a Maidenhead,
I'll resign my part to her; she's thine own, go.
Alas, fair flattery cannot cure my sorrows:
Have I past so much time in ignorance,
And never had the means to know my self
Till this blessed hour? Thanks to her virtuous pity
That brought it now to light; would I had known it
But one day sooner, he had then received
In favours, what (poor Gentleman) he took
In bitter words; a slight and ha••• reward
For one of his deserts.
There seems to me now
More anger and distraction in her looks.
I'm gone, I'll not endure a second storm;
The memory of the first, is not past yet.
Are you returned, you comforts of my life?
In this mans presence, I will keep you fast now,
And sooner part eternally from the world,
Then my good joys in you: Pret hee forgive me,
I did but chide in jest; the best loves use it
Sometimes, it sets an edge upon affection.
When we invite our best friends to a feast,
It is not all sweet-meats that we set before them,
There's somewhat sharp and salt, both to whet Ap∣petite,
And make 'em taste their Wine well: So me thinks
After a friendly, sharpe and favory chiding,
A kiss tastes wondrous well; and full of the Grape.
How think thou, dost not?
It is so excellent,
I know not how to praise it, what to say too't:
This marriage shall go forward.
With the Ward,
Are you in earnest?
It would be ill for us else
For us? how means she that?
Troth I begin
To be so well me thinks, within this hour,
For all this match able to kill ones heart.
Nothing can pull me down now; should my Father
Provide a worse fool yet (which I should think
Were a hard thing to compass) I'd have him either;
The worse the better, none can come amiss now,
If he want wit enough: So Discretion love me,
Desert and Judgment, I have content sufficient.
She that comes once to be a house-keeper,
Must not look every day to fare well Sir,
Like a young waiting Gentlewoman in service,
For she feeds commonly as her Lady does;
No good bit passes her, but she gets a taste on it;
But when she comes to keep house for her self,
She's glad of some choice Cates then once a week,
Or twice at most, and glad if she can get 'em:
So must Affection learn to fare with thankfulness.
Pray make your Love no stranger Sir; that's all,
Though you be, one your self, and know not on it,
And I have sworn you must not.
This is beyond me!
Never came joys so unexpectedly
To meet desires in man; how came she thus?
What has she done to her can any tell?
It is beyond Sorcery this, Drugs, or Love-powders;
Some Art that has no name sure, strange to me
Of all the wonders I ere met withal
Throughout my ten years travels, but I'm thankful for it.
This marriage now must of necessity forward;
It is the only vail Wit can devise
To keep our acts hid from sin-peircing eyes.
How Sir, a Gentlewoman, so young, so fair,
As you set forth, spied from the Widows window!
She!
Our Sunday-dinner woman?
And thursday Supper-woman, the same still.
I know not how she came by her, but I'll swear
She's the prime gallant for a face, in Florence;
And no doubt other parts follow their Leader:
The Duke himself first spied her at the window;
Then in a rapture, as if admiration
Were poor when it were single, beck'ned me,
And pointed to the wonder warily,
As one that feared she would draw in her splendour
Too soon, if too much gazed at: I nev'r knew him
So infinitely taken with a woman,
Nor can I blame his Appetite, or tax
His Raptures of slight folly; she's a Creature
Able to draw a State from serious business,
And make it their best piece to do her service:
What course shall we devise? he has spoke twice now.
Twice?
It is beyond your apprehension.
How strangely that one look has caught his heart!
It would prove but too much worth in wealth and sa∣for
To those should work his peace.
And if I do it not,
Or at least come as near it, (if your Art
Will take a little pains, and second me)
As any wench in Florence of my standing.
I'll quite give o'er, and shut up shop in cunning.
It is for the Duke, and if I fail your pur∣pose,
All means to come, by riches or advancement,
Miss me, and skip me over.
Let the old woman then
Be sent for with all speed, then I'll begin.
A good conclusion follow, and a sweet one
After this stale beginning with old ware. Within there!
Sir, do you call?
Come near, list hither.
I long my self to see this absolute Creature.
That wins the heart of love, and praise so much.
Go Sir, make haste.
Say I entreat her company;
Do you hear Sir?
Yes Madam.
That brings her quickly.
I would it were done, the Duke waits the good hour,
And I wait the good Fortune that may spring form't.
I have had a lucky hand these fifteen year
At such Court Passage with thee Dice in a Dish. Seignior Fabritio!
Oh Sir, I bring an alteration in my mouth now.
An alteration! no wise Speech I hope;
He means not to talk wisely, does he trow?
Good! what's the change I pray Sir?
A new change.
Another yet! faith there's enough already.
My daughter loves him now.
What does she Sir?
Affects him beyond thought, who but the Ward forsooth!
No talk but of the Ward; she would have him
To choose 'bove all the men she ever saw.
My Will goes not so fast, as her consent now;
Her duty gets before my command still.
Why then Sir, if you'll have me speak my thoughts,
I smell twill be a match.
I, and a sweet young couple,
If I have any judgment.
Faith that's little:
Let her be sent to morrow before noon,
And handsomely tricked up; for about that time
I mean to bring her in, and tender her to him.
I warrant you for handsome, I will see
Her things laid ready, every one in order,
And have some part of her tricked up to night.
Why well said.
It was a use her Mother had,
When she was invited to an early wedding;
She'd dress her head o'er night, sponge up her self,
And give her neck three lathers.
Ne'er a halter?
On with her chain of Pearl, her ruby Bracelets,
Lay ready all her tricks, and Jiggam-bobs.
So must your daughter.
I'll about it straight Sir.
How he sweats in the foolish zeal of Father∣hood,
After six ounces an hour, and seems
To toil as much as if his cares were wise ones!
You've let his folly blood in the right vein, Lady.
And here comes his sweet Son-in-law that shall be;
They're both allied in wit before the marriage;
What will they be hereafter, when they are nearer?
Yet they can go no further then the Fool:
There's the worlds end in both of 'em.
Now young heir!
What's the next business after Shuttlecock now?
To morrow you shall see the Gentlewo∣man
Must be your wife.
There's even an other thing too
Must be kept up with a pair of Battledoors.
My wife! what can she do?
Nay that's a question you should ask your self, Ward,
When you're alone together.
That's as I list.
A wife's to be ask anywhere I hope;
I'll ask her in a Congregation, if I have a mind to it, and so save a Licence: My Guardiner has no more wit then an Herb-woman that sells away all her sweet Herbs and Nose-gays, and keeps a stink∣ing breath for her own Pottage:
Let me be at the choosing of your beloved,
If you desire a woman of good parts.
Thou shalt sweet Sordido.
I have a plaguy guess, let me alone to see what she is; if I but look upon her—way, I
know all the faults to a hair, that you may refuse her for.
Dost thou! I prithee let me hear 'em Sordido:
Well, mark 'em then; I have 'em all in rime.
The wife your Guardiner ought to tender,
Should be pretty, straight and slender;
Heir hair not short, her foot not long,
Her hand not huge, nor too too loud her tongue:
No pearl in eye, nor ruby in her nose,
No burn or cut, but what the Catalogue shows.
She must have teeth, and that no black ones,
And kiss most sweet when she does smack once:
Her skin must be both white and plump,
Her body straight, not hopper rumped,
Or wriggle side-ways like a Crab;
She must be neither Slut nor Drab,
Nor go too splay-foot with her shoes,
To make her Smock lick up the dews.
And two things more, which I forgot to tell ye
She neither must have bump in back, nor belly:
These are the faults that will not make her pass.
And if I spy not these, I am a rank Ass.
Nay more; by right Sir, you should see her naked,
For that's the ancient order.
See her naked?
That were good sport y'faith: I'll have the Books turned over;
And if I find her naked on Record,
She shall not have a rag on: But stay, stay,
How if she should desire to see me so too,
I were in a sweet case then, such a fowl skin:
But you've a clean shirt, and that makes a∣mends Sir.
I will not see her naked for that trick though.
Then take her with all faults, with her clothes on!
And they may hide a number with a bum-roll.
Faith choosing of a Wench in a huge Farthingale,
Is like the buying of ware under a great Pent-house,
What with the deceit of one,
And the false light of the other, mark my Speeches,
He may have a diseased Wench in's Bed,
And rotten stuff in's Breeches.
It may take handsomely:
I see small hind'rance:
How now, so soon returned?
She's come.
That's well.
Widow, come, come, I have a great quarrel to you,
Faith I must chide you, that you must be sent for!
You make your self so strange, never come at us;
And yet so near a neighbor, and so unkind;
Troth you're too blame, you cannot be more well∣come
To any house in Florence, that I'll tell you.
My thanks must needs acknowledge so much Madam:
How can you be so strange then? I sit here
Sometime whole days together without company,
When business draws this Gentleman from home,
And should be happy in society,
Which I so well affect, as that of yours.
I know you're alone too; why should not we
Like two kind neighbours, then supply the wants
Of one another, having tongue discourse,
Experience in the world, and such kind helps
To laugh down time, and meet age merely?
Age (Madam) you speak mirth; it is at my door,
But a long journey from your Ladyship yet.
My faith I'm nine and thirty, every stroke Wench,
And it is a general observation
Amongst Knights, Wives, or Widows, we ac∣count
Our selves then old, when young men's eyes leave looking it's:
It is a true rule amongst us, and ne'er failed yet
In any but in one, that I remember;
Indeed she had a friend at nine and forty;
Marry she paid well for him, and in th'end
He kept a Queen or two with her own money,
That robbed her of her plate, and cut her throat.
She had her punishment in this world (Ma∣dam)
And a fair warning to all other women,
That they live chaste at fifty.
I, or never Wench:
Come, now I have thy company I'll not part with it
Till after supper.
Yes, I must crave pardon (Madam)
I swear you shall stay supper; we have no strangers, woman,
None but my sojourners and I; this Gentleman
And the young heir his Ward; you know our com∣pany.
Some other time, I will make bold with you Madam.
Nay pray stay Widow,
Faith, she shall not go;
Do you think I'll be forsworn?
It is a great while
Till supper time; I'll take my leave then now (Ma∣dam)
And come again in the evening! since your Ladyship
Will have it so.
In the evening by my troth Wench,
I'll keep you while I have you; you have great busi∣nos sure,
To sit alone at home; I wonder strangely
What pleasure you take in it! were it to me now
I should be ever at one Neighbours house
Or other all day long; having no charge.
Or none to chide you, if you go, or stay,
Who may live merrier, I, or more at hearts-ease?
Come, we'll to Chess, or Draughts; there are an hundred tricks
To drive out time till Supper, never fear't Wench.
I'll but make one step home, and return straight (Madam)
Come, I'll not trust you; you use more ex∣cuses
To your kind friends then ever I knew any.
What business can you have, if you be sure
You've locked the doors? and that being all you have
I know you're careful on it: one afternoon
So much to spend here! say I should entreat you now
To lie a night or two, or a week with me,
Or leave your own house for a month together,
It were a kindness that long Neighbourhood
And friendship might well hope to prevail in:
Would you deny such a request? y'faith,
Speak truth, and freely:
I were then uncivil Madam.
Go too then, set your men; we'll have whole nights
Of mirth together, ere we be much older, Wench▪
As good now tell her then, for she will know it;
I have always found her a most friendly Lady.
Why Widow, whore's your mind?
Troth even at home Madam.
To tell you truth, I left a Gentlewoman
Even sitting all alone, which is uncomfortable,
Especially to young bloods.
Another excuse!
No, as I hope for health, Madam, that's a truth;
Please you to send and see:
What Gentlewoman? pish.
Wife to my son indeed, but not known (Madam)
To any but yourself.
Now I beshrew you;
Could you be so unkind to her and me,
To come and not bring her? Faith it is not friendly.
I feared to be too bold.
Too bold? Oh what's become
Of the true hearty love was wont to be
Amongst Neighbours in old time?
And she's a stranger (Madam).
The more should be her welcome; when is curtsy
In better practice, then when it is employed
In entertaining strangers? I could chide y'Faith.
Leave her behind, poor Gentlewoman, alone too!
Make some amends, and send for her betimes, go.
Please you command one of your Servants Madam.
Within there.
Madam.
Attend the Gentlewoman.
It must be carried wondrous privately
From my Sons knowledge, he'll break out in storms else.
Hark you Sir.
Now comes in the heat of your part.
True, I know it (Lady) and if I be out,
May the Duke banish me from all employments,
Wanton, or serious.
So, have you sent Widow?
Yes (Madam) he's almost at home by this.
And faith let me entreat you, that hence forward,
All such unkind faults may be swept from friend∣ship,
Which does but dim the lustre; and think thus much
It is a wrong to me, that have ability
To bid friends welcome, when you keep 'em from me,
You cannot set greater dishonour near me;
For Bounty is the credit and the glory
Of those that have enough: I see you're sorry,
And the good mends is made by it.
Here she's Madam:
I wonder how she comes to send for me now?
Gentlewoman, you're most welcome, trust me you're,
As courtesy can make one, or respect
Due to the presence of you.
I give you thanks, Lady.
I heard you were alone, and 't had ap∣pear'd
An ill condition in me, though I knew you not,
Nor ever saw you, (yet humanity
Thinks every case her own) to have kept your com∣pany
Here from you, and left you all solitary:
I rather ventured upon boldness then
As the least fault, and wished your presence here;
A thing most happily motioned of that Gentle∣man,
Whom I request you, for his care and pity
To honour and reward with your acquaintance,
A Gentleman that Ladies rights stands for,
That's his profession.
It is a noble one, and honours my acquaint∣ance.
All my intentions are servants to such Mistresses.
It is your modesty
It seems, that makes your deserts speak so low Sir.
Come Widow, look you Lady, here's our business;
Are we not well employed think you! an old quar∣rel
Between us, that will never be at an end.
No, and methinks there's men enough to part you (Lady):
Ho! but they set us on, let us come off
As well as we can, poor souls, men care no farther.
I pray sit down forsooth, if you have the patience
To look upon two weak and tedious Gamesters.
Faith Madam, set these by till evening,
You'll have enough on it then; the Gentlewoman
Being a stranger, would take more delight
To see your rooms and pictures:
Marry, good Sir,
And well remembered, I beseech you show 'em her;
That will beguile time well; pray heartily do Sir,
I'll do as much for you; here take these keys,
Show her the Monument too, and that's a thing
Every one sees not; you can witness that Widow.
And that's worth sight indeed, Madam.
Kind Lady,
I fear I came to be a trouble to you.
Oh nothing less forsooth.
And to this courteous Gentleman,
That wears a kindness in his Breast so noble
And bounteous to the welcome of a stranger.
If you but give acceptance to my service,
You do the greatest grace and honour to me
That courtesy can merit.
I were too blame else,
And out of fashion much. I pray you lead Sir.
After a game or two, w'are for you Gentle folks:
We wish no better seconds in Society
Then your discourses, Madam, and your partners there.
I thank your praise, I listened to you Sir;
Though when you spoke, there came a paltry Rook
Full in my way, and chokes up all my game:
Alas poor Widow, I shall be too hard for thee.
You're cunning at the game, I'll be sworn (Madam).
It will be found so, ere I give you over:
She that can place her man well,
As you do (Madam):
As I shall (Wench) can never lose her game;
Nay, nay, the black King's mine.
Cry you mercy (Madam).
And this my Queen.
I see it now.
Here's a Duke
Will strike a sure stroke for the game anon;
Your pawn cannot come back to relieve it self.
I know that (Madam.)
You play well the whilst;
How she belies her skill▪ I hold two ducats,
I give you Check and Mate to your white King:
Simplicity it self, your Saintish King there.
Well, ere now Lady
I have seen the fall of Subtlety: Jest on.
I but Simplicity receives two for one.
What remedy but patience!
Trust me Sir,
Mine eye nev'r met with fairer Ornaments.
Nay, livelier, I'm persuaded, neither Floe∣rinse
Nor Venice can produce.
Sir, my opinion
Takes your part highly.
There's a better piece
Yet then all these:
Not possible Sir!
Believe it
You'll say so when you see it: Turn but your eye now
You're upon it presently.
Oh Sir.
He's gone Beauty!
Pish, look not after him: He's but a vapor,
That when the Sun appears, is seen no more.
Oh treachery to honour!
Prithee tremble not;
I feel thy breast shake like a Turtle panting
Under a loving hand that makes much on it;
Why art so fearful? as I'm friend to brightness,
There's nothing but respect and honour near thee:
You know me, you have seen me; here's a heart
Can witness I have seen thee:
The more's my danger.
The more's thy happiness: Pish strive not Sweet;
This strength were excellent employed in love now,
But here's it is spent amiss; strive not to seek
Thy liberty, and keep me still in prison.
'Y faith you shall not out, till I'm releast now;
We'll be both freed together, or stay still by it;
So is captivity pleasant.
Oh my Lord.
I am not here in vain; have but the leisure
To think on that, and thou'lt be soon resolved:
The lifting of thy voice, is but like one
That does exalt his enemy, who proving high,
Lays all the plots to confound him that raised him.
Take warning I beseech thee; thou seem to me
A creature so composed of gentleness,
And delicate meekness; such as bless the faces
Of figures that are drawn for Goddesses,
And makes Art proud to look upon her work:
I should be sorry the least force should lay
An unkind touch upon thee.
Oh my extremity!
My Lord, what seek you?
Love.
It is gone already,
I have a husband.
That's a single comfort,
Take a friend to him.
That's a double mischief,
Or else there's no Religion.
Do not tremble
At fears of thine own making.
Nor great Lord,
Make me not bold with death and deeds of ruin
Because they fear not you; me they must fright;
Then am I best in health: Should thunder speak,
And none regard it, it had lost the name,
And were as good be still▪ I'm not like those
That take their soundest sleeps in greatest tempests,
Then wake I most, the weather fearfullest,
And call for strength to virtue.
Sure I think
Thou know the way to please me. I affect
A passionate pleading, 'bove an easy yielding,
But never pitied any, they deserve none
That will not pity me: I can command,
Think upon that; yet if thou truly knew
The infinite pleasure my affection takes
In gentle, fair entreatings, when loves businesses
Are carried courteously twixt heart and heart,
You'd make more haste to please me.
Why should you seek Sir,
To take away that you can never give?
But I give better in exchange; wealth, honour:
She that is fortunate in a Dukes favour,
Lights on a Tree that bears all women's wishes:
If your own Mother saw you pluck fruit there,
She would commend your wit, and praise the time
Of your Nativity, take hold of glory.
Do not I know you've cast away your life
Upon necessities, means merely doubtful
To keep you in indifferent health and fashion.
(A thing I heard too lately, and soon pitied)
And can you be so much your Beauties enemy,
To kiss away a month or two in wedlock,
And weep whole years in wants for ever after?
Come play the wife wench, and provide for ever;
Let storms come when they list, they find thee shell∣ter'd:
Should any doubt arise, let nothing trouble thee;
Put trust in our love for the managing
Of all to thy hearts peace. We'll walk together,
And show a thankful joy for both our fortunes.
Did not I say my Duke would fetch you over (Widow)?
I think you spoke in earnest when you said it (Madam).
And my black King makes all the haste he can too.
Well (Madam) we may meet with him in time yet.
I have given thee blind mate twice.
You may see (Madam)
My eyes begin to fail.
I'll swear they do, Wench.
I can but smile as often as I think on it,
How prettily the poor fool was beguiled:
How unexpectedly; it's a witty age,
Never were finer snares for women's honesties
Then are devised in these days; no Spiders web
Made of a daintier thread, then are now practised
To catch loves flesh-fly by the silver wing:
Yet to prepare her stomach by degrees
To Cupids feast, because I saw it was queasy,
I showed her naked pictures by the way;
A bit to stay the appetite. Well, Advancement!
I venture hard to find thee; if thou come
With a greater title set upon thy Crest,
I'll take that first cross patiently, and wait
Until some other comes greater then that.
I'll endure all.
The game's even at the best now; you may see Widow
How all things draw to an end.
Even so do I Madam.
I pray take some of your neighbours along with you.
They must be those are almost twice your years then,
If they be chose fit matches for my time, Madam.
Has not my Duke bestirred himself?
Yes faith Madam; he has done me all the mischief in this Game.
He has showed himself in's kind.
In's kind, call you it?
I may swear that.
Yes faith, and keep your oath.
Hark, list, there's some body coming down; it is she.
Now bless me from a blasting; I saw that now,
Fearful for any women's eye to look on:
Infectious mists, and mill-dews hang it's eyes:
The weather of a doomsday dwells upon him.
Yet since mine honours Leprous, who should I
Preserve that fair that cause the Leprosy?
Come poison all at once: Thou in whose base∣nos
The bane of Virtue broods, I'm bound in Soul
Eternally to curse thy smooth browed treachery,
That wore the fair vail of a friendly welcome,
And I a stranger; think upon it, it is worth it.
Murders piled up upon a guilty spirit,
At his last breath will not lie heavier
Then this betraying Act upon thy Conscience:
Beware of offering the first-fruits to sin;
His weight is deadly, who commits with strum∣pets,
After they have been abased, and made for use;
If they offend to th'death, as wise men know,
How much more they then that first make 'em so?
I give thee that to feed on; I'm made bold now,
I thank thy treachery; sin and I'm acquainted,
No couple greater; and I'm like that great one,
Who making politic use of a base villain,
He likes the Treason well, but hates the Traitor;
So I hate thee slave.
Well, so the Duke love me,
I fare not much amiss then; two great Feasts
Do seldom come together in one day;
We must not look for 'em.
What at it still Mother?
You see we sit by it; are you so soon re∣turned?
So lively, and so cheerful, a good sign that.
You have not seen all since sure?
That have I Mother,
The Monument and all: I'm so beholding
To this kind, honest, courteous Gentleman,
You'd little think it (Mother) showed me all,
Had me from place to place, so fashionably;
The kindness of some people, how't exceeds?
Faith, I have seen that I little thought to see,
In the morning when I rose.
Nay, so I told you
Before you saw't, it would prove worth your sight.
I give you great thanks for my daughter Sir,
And all your kindness towards her.
O good Widow!
Much good may do her; forty weeks hence, y'faith.
Now Sir.
May it please you Madam to walk in,
Supper's upon the Table?
Yes, we come;
Wilt please you Gentlewoman?
Thanks virtuous Lady,
(You're a damned Baud) I'll follow you forsooth,
Pray take my Mother in, an old Ass go with you;
This Gentleman and I vow not to part.
Then get you both before.
There lies his art.
Widow I'll follow you; is it so, Damned Baud?
Are you so bitter? It is but want of use;
Her tender modesty is Sea-sick a little,
Being not accustomed to the breaking billow
Of Women's wavering Faith, blown with tempta∣tions.
It is but a qualm of honour, twill away,
A little bitter for the time, but lasts not.
Sin tastes at the first draught like Worm-wood Water,
But drunk again, it is Nectar ever after.
I Would my Son would either keep at home,
Or I were in my grave; she was but one day abroad, but ever since
She's grown so cutted, there's no speaking to her:
Whether the sight of great cheer at my Ladies,
And such mean fare at home, work discontent in her,
I know not; but I'm sure she's strangely altered.
I'll nev'r keep daughter-in-law in the house with me
Again, if I had an hundred: When read I of any
That agreed long together, but she and her mother
Fell out in the first quarter! nay, sometime
A grudging of a scolding the first week by'r Lady;
So takes the new disease methinks in my house;
I'm weary of my part, there's nothing likes her;
I know not how to please her, here elate;
And here she comes.
This is the strangest house
For all defects, as ever Gentlewoman
Made shift withal, to pass away her love in▪
Why is there not a Cushion-cloth of Drawn work,
Or some fair Cut-work pined up in my Bed∣chamber▪
A silver and gilt-casting Bottle hung by it?
Nay, since I am content to be so kind to you,
To spare you for a silver Basin and Ewre,
Which one of my fashion looks for of duty;
She's never offered under, where she sleeps:
She talks of things here my whole state's not worth.
Never a green silk quilt is there in the house Mother,
To cast upon my Bed?
No by troth is there,
Nor orange tawny neither.
Here's a house
For a young Gentlewoman to be got with child in.
Yes, simple though you make it, there has been three
Got in a year in it, since you move me to it;
And all as sweet faced children, and as lovely,
As you'll be Mother of; I will not spare you▪
What cannot children be begot think you,
Without gilt casting Bottles? Yes, and as sweet ones.
The Millers daughter brings forth as white boys,
As she that bathes her self with Milk and Bean flower.
It is an old saying, One may keep gook cheer
In a mean house; so may true love affect
After the rate of Princes in a Cottage.
Troth you speak wondrous well for your old house here;
Twill shortly fall down at your feet to thank you,
Or stoop when you go to Bed, like a good child
To ask you blessing. Must I live in want,
Because my fortune matched me with your Son?
Wives do not give away themselves to husbands,
To the end to be quite cast away; they look
To be the better used, and tendered rather,
Highlier respected, and maintained the richer;
They're well rewarded else for the free gift
Of their whole life to a husband. I ask less now
Then what I had at home when I was a Maid,
And at my Fathers house, kept short of that
Which a wife knows she must have, nay, and will;
Will Mother, if she be not a fool born;
And report went of me, that I could wrangle
For what I wanted when I was two hours old,
And by that copy, this Land still I hold.
You hear me Mother.
I too plain methinks;
And were I somewhat deafer when you spake,
It were nev'r awhit the worse for my quietness:
It is the most sudden'st, strangest alteration,
And the most subtilest that ev'r wit at threescore
Was puzzled to find out: I know no cause for it; but
She's no more like the Gentlewoman at first,
Then I am like her that nev'r lay with man yet,
And she's a very young thing where ere she be;
When she first lighted here, I told her then
How mean she should find all things; she was pleased forsooth,
None better: I laid open all defects to her,
She was contented still; but the Devil's in her,
Nothing contents her now: To night my Son
Promised to be at home, would he were come once,
For I'm weary of my charge, and life too:
She'd be served all in silver by her good will,
By night and day; she hates the name of Pew∣terer,
More then sickmen the noise, or diseased bones
That quake at fall of the Hammer, seeming to have
A fellow-feeling with it at every blow:
What course shall I think on? she frets me so.
How near am I now to a happiness,
That Earth exceeds not? not another like it;
The treasures of the deep are not so precious,
As are the concealed comforts of a man,
Locked up in women's love. I sent the air
Of Blessings when I come but near the house;
What a delicious breath Marriage sends forth!
The Violet-beds not sweeter. Honest wedlock
Is like a Banquetting-house built in a Garden,
On which the Springs chaste flowers take de∣light
To cast their modest odors; when base Lust
With all her powders, paintings, and best pride,
Is but a fair house built by a Ditch side.
When I behold a glorious dangerous Strumpet,
Sparkling in Beauty and Destruction too,
Both at a twinkling, I do liken straight
Her beautified body to a goodly Temple
That's built on Vaults where Carcasses lie rot∣ting,
And so by little and little I shrink back again,
And quench desire with a cool Meditation,
And I'm as well methinks: Now for a well∣come
Able to draw men's envies upon man:
A kiss now that will hang upon my lip,
As sweet as morning dew upon a Rose,
And full as long; after a five days fast
She'll be so greedy now, and cling about me;
I take care how I shall be rid of her,
And here't begins.
Oh Sir, you're welcome home.
Oh is he come, I am glad on it.
Is that all?
Why this? as dreadful now as sudden death
To some rich man, that flatters all his sins
With promise of Repentance, when he's old,
And dies in the midway before he comes to it.
Sure you're not well, Branch! How dost prithee?
I have been better then I am at this time.
Alas, I thought so.
Nay, I have been worse too,
Then now you see me Sir.
I'm glad thou mendst yet,
I feel my heart mend too: How came it to thee?
Has any thing disliked thee in my absence?
No certain, I have had the best content
That Florence can afford.
Thou make the best on it,
Speak Mother, what's the cause? you must needs know.
Troth I know none Son, let her speak her self;
Unless it be the same 'gave Lucifer a tumbling cast; that's pride.
Methinks this house stands nothing to my mind;
I'd have some pleasant lodging in the high street Sir,
Or if it were near the Court Sir, that were much bet∣la;
It is a sweet recreation for a Gentlewoman,
To stand in a Bay-window, and see gallants.
Now I have another temper, a mere stran∣ger
To that of yours, it seems; I should delight
To see none but your self.
I praise not that:
Too fond is as unseemly as too churlish;
I would not have a husband of that proneness,
To kiss me before company, for a world:
Beside it is tedious to see one thing still (Sir)
Be it the best that ever heart affected;
Nay, were it your self, whose love had power you know
To bring me from my friends, I would not stand thus,
And gaze upon you always: Troth I could not Sir;
As good be blind, and have no use of sight
As look on one thing still: What's the eyes treasure,
But change of objects? You are learned Sir,
And know I speak not ill; 'till full as virtuous
For women's eye to look on several men,
As for her heart (Sir) to be fixed on one.
Now thou come home to me; a kiss for that word.
No matter for a kiss Sir, let it pass,
It is but a toy, we'll not so much as mind it,
Let's talk of other business, and forget it.
What news now of the Pirats, any stirring?
Prithee discourse a little:
I am glad he's here yet
To see her tricks himself; I had lied monst'rously,
If I had told 'em first.
Speak what's the humour (Sweet)
You make your lip so strange? this was not wont.
Is there no kindness betwixt man and wife,
Unless they make a Pigeon-house of friendship,
And be still billing; it is the idlest fondness.
That ever was invented, and it is pity
Its grown a fashion for poor Gentlewomen;
There's many a disease kissed in a year by it,
And a French curse made to it: Alas Sir,
Think of the world, how we shall live, grow seri∣os;
We have been married a whole fortnight now.
How? a whole fortnight! why is that so long?
It is time to leave off dalliance; it is a doctrine
Of your own teaching, if you be remembered,
And I was bound to obey it.
Here's one fits him;
This was well caught y'faith Son, like a fellow
That rids another Country of a Plague,
And brings it home with him to his own house 
Who knocks?
Who's there now? withdraw you Bran∣cha,
Thou art a Jem no strangers eye must see,
How ev'r thou pleased now to look dull on me. 
You're welcome Sir; to whom your business, pray?
To one I see not here now.
Who should that be Sir?
A young Gentlewoman, I was sent to.
A young Gentlewoman?
I Sir, about sixteen; why look you wildly Sir?
At your strange error: You've mistook the house Sir.
There's none such here, I assure you.
I assure you too.
The man that sent me, cannot be mistook.
Why, who is it sent you Sir?
The Duke.
The Duke?
Yes, he entreats her company at a Ban∣quet
At Lady Levee's house.
Troth shall I tell you Sir,
It is the most erroneous business
That ere your honest pains was abused with;
I pray forgive me, if I smile a little,
I cannot choose y'faith Sir, at an error
So Comical as this (I mean no harm though)
His grace has been most wondrous ill informed,
Pray so return it (Sir). What should her name be?
That I shall tell you straight too, Branch Capella.
How Sir, Branch? What do you call the other.
Capella; Sir, it seems you know no such then?
Who should this be? I never heard of the name.
Then it is a sure mistake.
What if you enquired
In the next street Sir? I saw Gallants there
In the new houses that are built of late.
Ten to one, there you find her.
Nay no matter,
I will return the mistake, and seek no further.
Use your own will and pleasure Sir, you're welcome.
What shall I think of first? Come forth Branch,
Thou art betrayed I fear me.
Betrayed, how Sir?
The Duke knows thee▪
Knows me! how know you that Sir?
Has got thy name.
I, and my good name too,
That's worse of the twain.
How comes this work about?
How should the Duke know me? can you guess Mother?
Not I with all my wits, sure we kept house close.
Kept close! not all the Locks in Italy
Can keep you women so; you have been gadding,
And ventured out at twilight, to the Court-green yonder,
And met the gallant Bowlers coming home;
Without your Masks too, both of you, I'll be hanged else;
Thou hast been seen Branch by some stranger;
Never excuse it.
I'll not seek the way Sir;
Do you think you've married me to mew me up
Not to be seen; what would you make of me?
A good wife, nothing else:
Why, so are some
That are seen every day, else the Devil take 'em.
No more then I believe all virtuous in thee,
Without an argument; it was but thy hard chance
To be seen somewhere, there lies all the mischief;
But I have devised a rid dance.
Now I can tell you Son,
The time and place.
When, where?
What wits have I?
When you last took your leave, if you remember,
You left us both at Window.
Right, I know that.
And not the third part of an hour after,
The Duke past by in a great solemnity,
To St. Marks Temple, and to my apprehension
He looked up twice to the Window.
Oh there quick'ned
The mischief of this hour!
If you call it mischief,
It is a thing I fear I am conceived with:
Looked he up twice, and could you take no warning!
Why once may do as much harm Son, as a thousand;
Do not you know one spark has fired an house,
As well as a whole Furnace?
My heart flames for it,
Yet let's be wise, and keep all smothered closely;
I have bethought a means; is the door fast?
I locked it my self after him.
You know Mother,
At the end of the dark Parlour there's a place
So artificially contrived for a Conveyance,
No search could ever find it: When my Father
Kept in for man-slaughter, it was his Sanctuary;
There will I lock my lifes best treasure up.
Branch?
Would you keep me closer yet?
Have you the conscience? you're best even choke me up Sir?
You make me fearful of your health and wits,
You cleave to such wilde courses, what's the mat∣la?
Why, are you so insensible of your dan∣ger
To ask that now? the Duke himself has sent for you
To Lady Levee's, to a Banquet forsooth.
Now I beshrew you heartily, has he so!
And you the man would never yet vouchsafe
To tell me on it till now: You show your loyalty
And honesty at once, and so farewell Sir.
Branch, whether now?
Why to the Duke Sir.
You say he sent for me.
But thou dost not mean to go, I hope.
No? I shall prove unmannerly,
Rude, and uncivil, mad, and imitate you.
Come Mother come, follow his humour no longer,
We shall be all executed for treason shortly.
Not I y'faith; I'll first obey the Duke,
And taste of a good Banquet, I'm of thy mind.
I'll step but up, and fetch two Handerchiefs
To pocket up some Sweet-meats, and o'er take thee;
Why here's an old Wench would trot into a Baud now,
For some dry Sucket, or a Colt in March-pain.
Oh thou the ripe time of mans misery, wedlock;
When all his thoughts like over laden Trees,
Crack with the Fruits they bear, in cares, in jea∣louses.
Oh that's a fruit that ripens hastily,
After it is knit to marriage; it begins
As soon as the Sun shines upon the Bride
A little to show colour. Blessed Powers!
Whence comes this alteration! the distractions,
The fears and doubts it brings are numberless,
And yet the cause I know not: What a peace
Has he that never marries! if he knew
The benefit he enjoyed, or had the fortune
To come and speak with me, he should know then
The infinite wealth he had, and discern rightly
The greatness of his treasure by my loss:
Nay, what a quietness has he 'bove mine,
That wears his youth out in a strumpets arms,
And never spends more care upon a woman,
Then at the time of Lust; but walks away,
And if he find her dead at his return,
His pity is soon done, he breaks a sigh
In many parts, and gives her but a piece on it!
But all the fears, shames, jealousies, costs and trow∣bless,
And still renewed cares of a marriage Bed,
Live in the issue, when the wife is dead.
A good perfection to your thoughts.
The news Sir?
Though you were pleased of late to pin an error on me,
You must not shift another in your stead too:
The Duke has sent me for you.
How for me Sir?
I see then it is my theft; w'are both betrayed:
Well, I'm not the first he has stolen away a Maid,
My Countrymen have used it: I'll along with you Sir.
Take you especial note of such a Gentle∣woman,
She's here on purpose, I have invited her,
Her Father, and her Uncle, to this Banquet;
Mark her behaviour well, it does concern you;
And what her good parts are, as far as time
And place can modestly require a knowledge of,
Shall be laid open to your understanding.
You know I'm both your Guardian, and your Uncle,
My care of you is double, Ward and Nephew,
And I'll express it here.
Faith, I should know her
Now by her mark among a thousand women:
A little pretty deft and tidy thing you say:
Right.
With a lusty sprouting sprig in her hair.
Thou goosed the right way still; take one mark more,
Thou shalt nev'r find her hand out of her Uncles,
Or else his out of hers, if she be near him:
The love of kindred, never yet stuck closer
Then their's to one another; he that weds her,
Marries her Uncles heart too.
Say you so Sir,
Then I'll be asked in the Church to both of them:
Fall back, here comes the Duke.
He brings a Gentlewoman,
I should fall forward rather.
Come Branch,
Of purpose sent into the world to show
Perfection once in woman; I'll believe
Hence forward they have every one a Soul too
Against all the uncurteous opinions
That mans uncivil rudeness ever held of 'em:
Glory of Florence light into mine arms!
Yon comes a grudging man will chide you Sir;
The storm is now in's heart, and would get nearer,
And fall here if it durst, it powers down yonder,
If that be he, the weather shall soon clear.
List, and I'll tell thee how.
A kissing too?
I see it is plain Lust now; Adultery boldened;
What will it prove anon, when it is stuffed full
Of Wine and Sweet-meats, being so impudent Fast∣ing?
We have heard of your good parts Sir, which we honour
With our embrace and love; is not the Captainship
Of Roans Citadel, since the late deceased,
Suppli' by any yet?
By none my Lord.
Take it, the place is yours then, and as faithfulness
And desert grows, our favour shall grow with it:
Rise now the Captain of our Fort at Roans.
The service of whole life give your Grace thanks.
Come sit Branch.
This is some good yet,
And more then ev'r I looked for, a fine bit
To stay a Cuckolds stomach: All preferment
That springs from sin and lust, it shoots up quickly,
As Gardeners crops do in the rotten'st grounds;
So is all means raised from base prostitution,
Even like a Sallet growing upon a dunghill:
I'm like a thing that never was yet heard of,
Half merry, and half mad, much like a fellow
That eats his meat with a good appetite,
And wears a plague-sore that would fright a Coun∣try;
Or rather like the barren hardened Ass,
That feeds on Thistles till he bleeds again;
And such is the condition of my misery.
Is that your Son widow?
Yes, did your Ladyship never know that till now?
No trust me did I,
Nor ever truly felt the power of love,
And pity to a man, till now I knew him;
I have enough to buy me my desires,
And yet to spare; that's one good comfort. Hark you?
Pray let me speak with you Sir, before you go.
With me Lady? you shall, I am at your ser∣vice:
What will she say now trow, more goodness yet?
I see her now I'm sure; the Ape's so little,
I shall scarce feel her; I have seen almost
As tall as she, sold in the Fair for ten pence.
See how she simpers it, as if Marmalade
Would not melt in her mouth; she might have the kindness y'faith
To send me a gilded Bull from her own Trencher,
A Ram, a Goat, or somewhat to be nibbling▪
These women when they come to sweet things once,
They forget all their friends, they grow so greedy;
Nay, oftentimes their husbands.
Here's a health now Gallants,
To the best beauty at this day in Florence.
Who ere she be, she shall not go unpledg'd Sir.
Nay, your excused for this.
Who I my Lord?
Yes by the Law of Bacchus; plead your benefit,
You are not bound to pledge your own health Lady.
That's a good way my Lord to keep me dry.
Nay, then I will not offend Venus so much,
Let Bacchus seek his mends in another Court,
Here's to thy self Branch.
Nothing comes
More welcome to that name then your Grace.
So, so;
Here stands the poor thief now that stole the trea∣sure,
And he's not thought on, ours is near kin now
To a twin-misery born into the world.
First the hard conscienc'd▪worldling, he hoards wealth up,
Then comes the next, and he feasts all upon it;
One's damned for getting, the other for spending on it.
Oh equal Justice, thou has't met my sin
With a full weight, I'm rightly now oppressed,
All her friends heavy hearts lie in my Breast.
Methinks there is no spirit amongst us Gal∣lants,
But what divinely sparkles from the eyes
Of bright Branch; we sat all in darkness,
But for that Splendour: Who was it told us lately
Of a match making right, a marriage tender?
It was I my Lord.
It was you indeed: Where is she?
This is the Gentlewoman.
My Lord, my Daughter.
Why here's some stirring yet.
She's a dear child to me.
That must needs be; you say she is your Daughter.
Nay, my good Lord, dear to my purse I mean
Beside my person, I nev'r reckoned that.
She has the full qualities of a Gentlewoman;
I have brought her up to Music, Dancing, what not,
That may commend her Sex, and stir her husband?
And which is he now?
This young Heir, my Lord.
What is he brought up too?
To Cat and Trap.
My Lord, he's a great Ward, wealthy, but simple;
His parts consist in Acres.
Oh Wise-acres.
You've spoke him in a word Sir:
'Lass poor Gentlewoman,
She's ill bestead, unless sh'as dealt the wiselier,
And laid in more provision for her youth▪
Fools will not keep in Summer.
No, nor such wives
From whores in winter.
Yea, the voice too Sir!
I, and a sweet Breast too my Lord, I hope,
Or I have cast away my money wisely;
She took her pricksong earlier, my Lord,
Then any of her kindred ever did:
A rare child, though I say it, but I'd not have
The Baggage hear so much, it would make her swell straight:
And Maids of all things must not be puffed up.
Let's turn us to a better Banquet then,
For Music bids the soul of a man to a Feast,
And that's indeed, a noble entertainment,
Worthy Brancha's self; you shall perceive Beauty,
Our Florentine Damsels are not brought up idly.
They'are wiser of themselves, it seems my Lord,
And can take gifts, when goodness offers 'em.
True, and damnation has taught you that wisdom,
You can take gifts too. Oh that Music mocks me!
I am as dumb to any language now▪
But Loves, as one that never learned to speak:
I am not yet so old, but he may think of me;
My own fault, I have been idle a long time;
But I'll begin the week, and paint to morrow,
So follow my true labour day by day.
I never thrived so well, as when I used it.
WHat harder chance can fall to woman,
Who was born to cleave to some∣man▪
Then to bestow her time, youth, beauty,
Life's observance, honour, duty,
On a thing for no use good,
But to make Physic work, or blood force fresh
In an old Ladies cheek, she that would be
Mother of fools, let her compound with me▪
Here's a tune indeed; Pish I had rather hear one Ballad sung in the Nose now, of the lamentable drowning of fat Sheep and Oxen, then all these simon∣pering tunes plaid
upon Cats-guts, and sung by little Kitlings.
How like you her Breast now my Lord?
Her Breast?
He talks as if his daughter had given suck
Before she were married, as her betters have;
The next he praises sure, will be her Nipples.
Methinks now, such a voice to such a hus∣band,
Is like a Jewel of unvalued worth,
Hung at a Fools ear
May it please your Grace
To give her leave to show another Quality.
Marry as many good ones as you will Sir,
The more the better welcome.
But the less
The better practised: That soul's black indeed
That cannot commend Virtue; but who keeps it!
The Extortioner will say to a sick beggar,
Heaven comfort thee, though he give none himself:
This good is common.
Will it please you now Sir,
To entreat your Ward to take her by the hand,
And lead her in a dance before the Duke?
That will I Sir, it is needful; hark you Nephew▪
Nay, you shall see young heir, what you've for your money,
Without fraud or imposture.
Dance with her!
Not I sweet Gardiner, do not urge my heart to it,
It is clean against my Blood; dance with a stranger!
Let who's will do it, I'll not begin first with her.
No fear't not fool, sh'as took a better order.
Why who shall take her then?
Some other Gentleman;
Look, there's her Uncle, a fine timbered Reveller,
Perhaps he knows the manner of her dancing too,
I'll have him do it before me, I have sworn Gardiner,
Then may I learn the better.
Thou'lt be an ass still.
I, all that Uncle, shall not fool me out.
Pish, I stick closer to my self then so.
I must entreat you Sir, to take your Niece
And dance with her; my Ward's a little wilful,
He would have you show him the way.
Me Sir?
He shall command it at all hours, pray tell him so.
I thank you for him, he has not wit him∣self Sir.
Come my life's peace, I have a strange of∣fice on it here,
It is some mans luck to keep the joys he likes
Concealed for his own bosom; but my fortune
To set 'em out now, for another liking,
Like the mad misery of necessitous man,
That parts from his good horse with many praises,
And goes on foot himself; need must be obeyed
In every action, it mars man and maid.
Signior Fabritio, you're a happy Father,
Your cares and pains are fortune∣nate you see,
Your cost bears noble fruits. Hip∣polito thanks.
Here's some amends for all my charges yet. She wins both prick and praise, where ere she comes.
How lik'st Branch?
All things well, my Lord:
But this poor Gentlewoman's fortune, that's the worst.
There is no doubt Branch, she'll find leisure
To make that good enough; he's rich and simple.
She has the better hope of the upper hand indeed,
Which women strive for most.
Do it when I bid you Sir.
I'll venture but a Horn-pipe with her Gar∣diner,
Or some such married mans dance.
We'll venture something Sir.
I have time for what I do.
But little reason, I think.
Plain men dance the Measures, the Sinqua∣pace, the Gay:
Cuckolds dance the Horn-pipe; and Farmers dance the Hay:
Your Soldiers dance the Round, and Maidens that grow big:
You Drunkards, the Canaries; you Whore and Baud, the Jig.
Here's your eight kind of Dancers, he that finds the ninth, let him
Pay the Minstrels.
Oh here he appears once in his own person;
I thought he would have married her by Attorney,
And lain with her so too.
Nay, my kind Lord,
There's very seldom any found so foolish
To give away his part there.
Bitter scoff;
Yet I must do it; with what a cruel pride! 
The glory of her sin strikes by my afflictions.
This thing will make shift (Sirs) to make a hus∣band,
For ought I see in him; how thinks't Branch?
Faith an ill-favored shift my Lord, me∣thinks;
If he would take some voyage when he's married,
Dangerous, or long enough, and scarce be seen
Once in nine year together, a wife then
Might make indifferent shift to be content with him.
A kiss; that wit deserves to be made much on:
Come, our Caroch.
Stands ready for your Grace.
My thanks to all your loves: Come fair Branch,
We have took special care of you, and provided
Your lodging near us now.
Your love is great, my Lord.
Once more our thanks to all.
All blessed Honours guard you.
Oh hast thou left me then Branch, utter∣lie!
Branch! now I miss thee; Oh return!
And save the faith of woman; I nev'r felt
The loss of thee till now; it is an affliction
Of greater weight, then youth was made to bear;
As if a punishment of after-life
Were fallen upon man here; so new it is
To flesh and blood, so strange, so insupportable
A torment, even mistook, as if a body
Whose death were drowning, must needs therefore suffer it in scalding oil.
Sweet Sir!
As long as mine eye saw thee,
I half enjoyed thee.
Sir?
Can thou forget
The dear pains my love took, how it has watched
Whole nights together, in all weathers for thee,
Yet stood in heart more merry then the tempests
That sung about mine ears, like dangerous flatterers
That can set all their mischief to sweet tunes;
And then received thee from thy fathers window,
Into these arms at midnight, when we embraced
As if we had been Statues only made for it,
To show arts life, so silent were our comforts,
And kissed as if our lips had grown together!
This makes me madder to enjoy him now.
Can thou forget all this? And better joys
That we met after this, which then new kisses
Took pride to praise.
I shall grow madder yet, Sir:
This cannot be but of some close Bawds working:
Cry mercy Lady. What would you say to me?
My sorrow makes me so unmannerly,
So comfort bless me, I had quite forgot you.
Nothing but even in pity too, that passion
Would give your grief good counsel.
Marry, and welcome Lady,
It never could come better.
Then first Sir,
To make away all your good thoughts at once of her,
Know most assuredly, she is a strumpet.
Ha: Most assuredly! Speak not a thing
So wild so certainly, leave it more doubtful.
Then I must leave all truth, and spare my knowledge,
A sin which I too lately found and wept for.
Found you it?
I with wet eyes.
Oh perjurious friendship!
You missed your fortunes when you met with her Sir.
Young Gentlemen, that only love for beauty,
They love not wisely; such a marriage rather
Proves the destruction of affection;
It brings on want, and wont's the Key of whoredom.
I think you'd small means with her.
Oh not any Lady.
Alas poor Gentleman, what meant thou Sir,
Quite to undo thy self with thine own kind heart?
Thou art too good and pitiful to woman:
Marry Sir, thank thy Stars for this blessed fortune
That rids the Summer of thy youth so well
From many Beggars that had lain a sunning
In thy beams only else, till thou had wasted
The whole days of thy life in heat and labour.
What would you say now to a Creature found
As pitiful to you, and as it were
Even sent on purpose from the whole Sex general,
To requite all that kindness you have shown to it?
What's that Madam?
Nay, a Gentlewoman, and one able
To reward good things, I, and bears a conscience to it;
Could thou love such a one, that (blow all for∣tunes)
Would never see thee want?
Nay more, maintain thee to thine enemies envy,
And shalt not spend a care for it, stir a thought,
Nor break a sleep, unless loves music waked thee;
No storm of fortune should look upon me,
And know that woman:
Oh my life's wealth Branch!
Still with her name? will nothing wear it out?
That deep sigh went but for a strumpet Sir.
It can go for no other that loves me.
He's vexed in mind; I came too soon to him;
Whore's my discretion now, my skill, my judgment?
I'm cunning in all arts but my own, love:
It is as unseasonable to tempt him now
So soon, as a widow to be courted
Following her husbands coarse, or to make bargain
By the grave side, and take a young man there:
Her strange departure stands like a hearse yet
Before his eyes; which time will take down shortly:
Is she my wife till death? yet no more mine;
That's a hard measure; then what's marriage good for?
Me thinks by right, I should not now be living,
And then it were all well: What a happiness
Had I been made of, had I never seen her;
For nothing makes mans loss grievous to him,
But knowledge of the worth of what he loses;
For what he never had, he never misses:
She's gone for ever; utterly there is
As much redemption of a soul from Hell,
As a fair women's body from his palace.
Why should my love last longer then her truth?
What is there good in woman to be loved,
When only that which makes her so, has left her?
I cannot love her now, but I must like
Her sin, and my own shame too, and be guilty
Of Laws breach with her, and mine own abusing;
All which were monstrous: Then my safest course
For health of mind and body, is to turn
My heart, and hate her, most extremely hate her;
I have no other way: Those virtuous powers
Which were chaste witnesses of both our troths,
Can witness she breaks first, and I'm rewarded
With Captainship of the Fort; a place of credit
I must confess, but poor; my Factorship
Shall not exchange means with it: He that died last in it,
He was no drunkard, yet he died a beggar
For all his thrift; besides the place not fits me;
It suits my resolution, not my breeding:
I have tried all ways I can, and have not power▪
To keep from sight of him: How are you now Sir?
I feel a better ease Madam.
Thanks to blessedness.
You will do well I warrant you, fear it not Sir;
Join but your own good will to it; he's not wise
That loves his pain or sickness, or grows fond
Of a disease, whose property is to vex him,
And spitefully drink his blood up: Out upon it Sir,
Youth knows no greater loss; I pray let's walk Sir.
You never saw the beauty of my house yet,
Nor how abundantfy Fortune has blessed me
In worldly treasure; trust me I have enough Sir
To make my friend a rich man in my life,
A great man at my death; your self will say so
If you want any thing, and spare to speak,
Troth I'll condemn you for a wilful man Sir.
Why sure this can be but the flattery of some dream.
Now by this kiss, my love, my soul and riches,
It is all true substance.
Come you shall see my wealth, take what you list,
The gallanter you go, the more you please me:
I will allow you too, your Page and Footman,
Your race horses, or any various pleasure
Exercised youth delights in; but to me
Only Sir wear your heart of constant stuff:
Do but you love enough, I'll give enough.
Troth then, I'll love enough, and take e∣nough.
Then we are both pleased enough.
Now Nephew, here's the Gentlewoman again.
Mass here she's come again; mark her now Sordido.
This is the Maid, my love and care has chose
Out for your wife, and so I tender her to you;
Your self has been eye witness of some qualities
That speak a courtly breeding, and are costly.
I bring you both to talk together now,
It is time you grew familiar in your tongues;
To morrow you join hands, and one Ring ties you,
And one Bed holds you (if you like the choice)
Her Father and her friends are in the next room,
And stay to see the contract ere they part;
Therefore dispatch good Ward, be sweet and short;
Like her, or like her not, there's but two ways;
And one your body, the other your purse pays.
I warrant you Gardiner, I'll not stand all day thruming,
But quickly shoot my bolt at your next coming.
Well said: Good fortune to your birding then.
I never missed mark yet.
Troth I think Master, if the truth were known,
You never shot at any but the Kitchin-wench,
And that was a she-woodcock, a mere innocent,
That was oft lost, and cried at eight and twenty.
No more of that meat Sordido, here's Eggs of the spit now,
We must turn gingerly, draw out the Catalogue
Of all the faults of women.
How, all the faults! have you so little reason to think so much Paper will lie in my breeches? why ten carts will not carry it, if you set down but the Bawds; all the faults? pray let's be content with a few of 'em; and if they were less, you would find 'em enough I warrant you: Look you Sir.
But that I have th'advantage of the fool,
As much as women's heart can wish and joy at,
What an infernal torment it were to be
Thus bought and sold, and turned and pried into; when alas
The worst bit is too good for him? and the comfort is
He has but a Caters place on it, and provides
All for another table; yet how curious
The Ass is, like some nice professor on it,
That buys up all the daintiest food in the Markets,
And seldom licks his lips after a taste on it!
Now to her, now you've scand all her parts over.
But at end shall I begin now Sordido?
Oh ever at a women's lip, while you live Sir, do you ask that question?
Methinks Sordido, sh'as but a crabbed face to begin with.
A crabbed face? that will save money.
How! save money Sordido?
I Sir: For having a crabbed face of her own, she'll eat the less Verjuyce with her Mutton; twill save Verjuyce at years end Sir.
Nay and your jests begin to be saucy once,
I'll make you eat your meat without Mustard.
And that in some kind is a punishment.
Gentlewoman, they say it is your pleasure to be my wife, and you shall know shortly whether it be mine or no, to be your husband; and thereup∣on thus I first enter upon you. Oh most delicious scent! Methinks it tasted as if a man had stepped into a Comfit-makers shop to let a Cart go by; all the while I kissed her: It is reported Gentlewoman you'll run mad for me, if you have me not.
I should be in great danger of my wits Sir,
For being so forward, should this Ass kick backward now.
Alas poor Soul! And is that hair your own?
Mine own, yes sure Sir, I ow nothing for it.
It is a good hearing, I shall have the less to pay when I have married you: Look, does her eyes stand well.
They cannot stand better
Then in her head, I think, where would you have them?
And for her Nose, it is of a very good last.
I have known as good as that has not lasted a year though.
That's in the using of a thing; will not any strong bridge fall down in time, if we do nothing but beat at the bottom: A Nose of Buff would not last always Sir, especially if it came in to th'Camp once.
But Sordido, how shall we do to make her laugh, that I may see what Teeth she has; for I'll
not bate her a tooth, nor take a black one into the bargain:
Why do but you fall in talk with her, you cannot choose but one time or other, make her laugh Sir.
It shall go hard, but I will: Pray what qua∣lites have you beside singing and dancing, can you play at Shuttlecock forsooth?
I, and at Stool-ball too Sir; I have great luck at it:
Why can you catch a Ball well?
I have caught two in my lap at one game.
What have you woman? I must have you learn
To play at trap too, then you're full and whole:
Any thing that you please to bring me up too,
I shall take pains to practise.
Twill not do Sordido, we shall never get her mouth opened wide enough.
No Sir; that's strange! then here's a trick for your learning. 
Look now, look now; quick, quick there.
Pox of that scurvy mannerly trick with Handkerchief,
It hindered me a little, but I am satisfied.
When a fair woman gapes, and stops her mouth so,
It shows like a Cloth-stopple in a Cream-pot,
I have fair hope of her Teeth now Sordido.
Why then you've all well Sir, for ought I see
She's right and straight enough, now as she stands;
They'll commonly lie crooked, that's no matter: Wise Gamesters
Never find fault with that, let 'em lie still so.
I'd fain mark how she goes, and then I
have all: For of all creatures I cannot abide a splay∣footed Woman, she's an unlucky thing to meet in a morning; her heels keep together so, as if she were beginning an Irish dance still; and he wrigling of her Bum, playing the tune to it: But I have bethought a cleanly shift to find it; dab down as you see me, and peep of one side, when her back's toward you; I'll show you the way.
And you shall find me apt enough to peep∣ing,
I have been one of them has seen mad sights
Under your Scaffolds.
Will it please you walk forsooth,
A turn or two by your self? you are so pleasing to me,
I take delight to view you on both sides.
I shall be glad to fetch a walk to your love Sir;
Twill get Affection, a good stomach Sir,
Which I had need have, to fall to such course victu∣else.
Now go thy ways for a clean treading Wench,
As ever man in modesty peep't under:
I see the sweetest sight to please my Master.
Never went Frenchman righter upon ropes
Then she on Florentine rushes.
It is enough forsooth.
And how do you like me now Sir?
Faith so well, I never mean to part with thee Sweet-heart,
Under some sixteen children, and all Boys.
You'll be at simple pains, if you prove kind,
And breed 'em all in your teeth.
Nay by my Faith, what serves your belly for? it would make my cheeks look like blown Bag∣pipes.
How now Ward and Nephew,
Gentlewoman and Niece! speak, is it so or not?
It is so, we are both agreed Sir.
Into your kindred then;
There's friends, and Wine, and Music waits to well∣come you.
Then I'll be drunk for joy.
And I for company,
I cannot break my Nose in a better action.
HOw go••▪ your Watches Ladies? what's a clock now?
By mine full nine.
By mine a quarter past:
I set mine by St. Marks.
St. Anthonies they say goes truer.
That's but your opinion Madam,
Because you love a Gentleman of the name.
He's a true Gentleman then.
So may he be
That comes to me to night, for ought you know:
I'll end this strife straight: I set mine by the Sun,
I love to set by th'best, one shall not then
Be troubled to set often:
You do wisely in it.
If I should set my Watch as some Girls do
By every clock in the Town, it would nev'r go true;
And too much turning of the Dials point,
Or tampering with the Spring, might in small time
Spoil the whole work too, here it wants of nine now.
It does indeed forsooth; mine's nearest truth yet.
Yet I have found her lying with an Ad∣vocate, which showed
Like two false clocks together in one Parish.
So now I thank you Ladies, I desire
A while to be alone.
And I am no body,
Methinks, unless I have one or other with me.
Faith my desire and hers, will nev'r be sisters.
How strangely women's fortune comes about,
This was the farthest way to come to me,
All would have judged, that knew me born in Venice
And there with many jealous eyes brought up,
That never thought they had me sure enough;
But when they were upon me, yet my hap
To meet it here, so far off from my birth-place,
My friends, or kindred, it is not good in sadness,
To keep a maid so strict in her young days,
Restraint breeds wandering thoughts, as many fasting days
A great desire to see flesh stirring again:
I'll nev'r use any Girl of mine so strictly,
How ev'r they're kept, their fortunes find 'em out,
I see it in me, if they be got in Court,
I'll never forbid 'em the Country, nor the Court,
Though they be born i'ch' Country, they will come to it,
And fetch their falls a thousand mile about,
Where one would little think on it.
I long to see how my despiser looks,
Now she's come here to Court; these are her lodge∣ings,
She's simply now advanced: I took her out
Of no such window, I remember first,
That was a great deal lower, and less carved.
How now? What Silk worm's this, i'ch' name of pride,
What, is it he?
A bow in the ham to your greatness;
You must have now three legs, I take it, must you not?
Then I must take another, I shall want else
The service I should have; you have but two there.
You're richly placed.
Methinks you're wondrous brave Sir.
A sumptuous lodging.
You've an excellent Suit there.
A Chair of Velvet.
Is your cloak lined through Sir.
You're very stately here.
Faith something proud Sir.
Stay, stay, let's see your Cloth of silver Slippers?
Who's your Shoemaker, he has made you a neat Boot.
Will you have a pair,
The Duke will lend you Spurs.
Yes, when I ride.
It is a brave life you lead.
I could nev'r see you
In such good clothes in my time.
In your time?
Sure I think Sir
We both thrive best asunder.
You're a whore.
Fear nothing Sir.
An impudent spiteful strumpet.
Oh Sir, you give me thanks for your Cap∣tainship;
I thought you had forgot all your good manners.
And to spite thee as much, look there, there read,
Vex, gnaw, thou shalt find there I am not love∣starved.
The world was never yet so cold, or pitiless,
But there was ever still more charity found out,
Then at one proud fools door; and it were hard faith,
If I could not pass that: Read to thy shame there;
A cheerful and a beauteous Benefactor too,
As ev'r erected the good works of love.
Lady Livia!
Is it possible? Her worship was my Pandress,
She dote, and send and give, and all to him!
Why here's a Baud plagued home; you're simply hap∣pie Sir,
Yet I'll not envy you.
No Court-Saint, not thou!
You keep some friend of a new fashion;
There's no harm in your Devil, he's a suckling,
But he will breed teeth shortly, will he not?
Take heed you play not then too long with him.
Yes, and the great one too: I shall find time
To play a hot religious bout with some of you,
And perhaps drive you and your course of sins
To their eternal Kennels; I speak softly now,
It is manners in a noble Women's lodgings,
And I well knew all my degrees of duty.
But come I to your everlasting parting once,
Thunder shall seem soft music to that tempest.
It was said last week there would be change of weather,
When the Moon hung so, and belike you heard it?
Why here's sin made, and nev'r a conscience put to it;
A Monster with all Forehead, and no Eyes.
Why do I talk to thee of Sense or Virtue,
That art as dark as death? and as much madness
To set light before thee, as to lead blind folks
To see the Monuments, which they may smell as soon
As they behold; Marry oft-times their heads
For want of light, may feel the hardness of 'em.
So shall thy blind pride my revenge and anger,
That can not see it now; and it may fall
At such an hour, when thou least see of all;
So to an ignorance darker then thy womb,
I leave thy perjured soul: A plague will come.
Get you gone first, and then I fear no greater,
Nor thee will I fear long; I'll have this sauciness
Soon banished from these lodgings, and the rooms
Perfumed well after the corrupt air it leaves:
His breath has made me almost sick in troth,
A poor base start up! Life! because has got
Fair clothes by foul means, comes to rail, and show 'em.
Who's that?
Cry you mercy Sir.
Prithee who's that?
The former thing my Lord, to whom you gave
The Captainship; he eats his meat with grudging still.
Still!
He comes vaunting here of his new love,
And the new clothes she gave him; Lady Livia.
Who but she now his Mistress?
Lady Livia?
Be sure of what you say.
He showed me her name Sir,
In perfumed Paper, her Vows, her Letter,
With an intent to spite me; so his heart said,
And his threats made it good; they were as spite∣full
As ever malice uttered, and as dangerous,
Should his hand follow the copy.
But that must not;
Do not you vex your mind, prithee to Bed, go
All shall be well and quiet.
I love peace Sir.
And so do all that love; take you no care for it,
It shall be still provided to your hand: Who's near us there.
My Lord.
Seek out Hippolito,
Brother to Lady Livia, with all speed.
He was the last man I saw, my Lord.
Make haste.
He is a blood soon stirred, and as he's quick
To apprehend a wrong, he's bold, and sudden
In bringing forth a ruin: I know likewise
The reputation of his Sisters honour:
As dear to him as life-blood to his heart;
Beside I'll flatter him with a goodness to her,
Which I now thought on, but nev'r meant to pra∣ctise.
(Because I know her base) and that wind drives him.
The ulcerous reputation feels the poise,
If lightest wrongs, as sores are vexed with flies:
He comes, Hippolito welcome.
My loved Lord.
How does that lusty Widow, thy kind Sister▪;
Is she not sped yet of a second husband?
A bed-fellow she has, I ask not that,
I know she's sped of him.
Of him my Lord:
Yes of a bed-fellow; is the news so strange to you?
I hope it is so to all.
I wish it were Sir;
But it is confessed too fast, her ignorant pleasures
Only by Lust instructed, have received
Into their services, an impudent Boaster,
One that does raise his glory from her shame,
And tells the midday Sun, what's done in darkness;
Yet blinded with her appetite, wastes her wealth,
Buys her disgraces at a dearer rate,
Then bounteous house-keepers purchase their honour.
Nothing sad me so much, as that in love
To thee, and to thy blood, I had picked out▪
A worthy match for her, the great Vincentio,
High in our favour, and in all men's thoughts.
Oh thou destruction of all happy fortunes,
Unsated blood! know you the name my Lord
Of her abuser?
One Leantio.
He's a Factor.
He nev'r made so brave a voyage by his own talk.
The poor old widows son;
I humbly take my leave.
I see it is done:
Give her good counsel, make her see her error,
I know she'll hearken to you.
Yes my Lord,
I make no doubt, as I shall take the course,
Which she shall never know till it be acted;
And when she wakes to honour, then she'll thank me for it.
I'll imitate the pities of old Surgeons.
To this lost limb, who ere they show their art,
Cast one asleep, then cut the diseased part.
So out of love to her I pity most,
She shall not feel him going till he's lost,
Then she'll commend the cure.
The great cure's past;
I count this done already; his wrath's sure,
And speaks an injury deep; farewell Leantio.
This place will never hear thee murmur more.
Our noble Brother welcome!
Set those lights down:
Depart till you be called.
There's serious business
Fixed in his look, nay, it inclines a little
To the dark colour of a discontentment.
Brother, what is it commands your eye so power∣fully?
Speak, you seem lost.
The thing I look on seems so
To my eyes lost for ever.
You look on me.
What a grief it is to a religious feeling,
To think a man should have a friend so goodly,
So wise, so noble, nay, a Duke, a Brother,
And all this certainly damned?
How!
It is no wonder,
If your great sin can do it; dare you look up
For thinking of a veng'ance? dare you sleep
For fear of never waking, but to death,
And dedicate unto a strumpets love
The strength of your affections, zeal and health?
Here you stand now; can you assure your pleasures,
You shall once more enjoy her, but once more?
Alas you cannot; what a misery it is then
To be more certain of eternal death,
Then of a next embrace? nay, shall I show you
How more unfortunate you stand in sin,
Then the love private man; all his offences,
Like enclosed grounds, keep but about himself,
And seldom stretch beyond his own souls bounds;
And when a man grows miserable, it is some comfort
When he's no further charged, then with himself;
It is a sweet ease to wretchedness: But great man,
Every sin thou commit, shows like a flame
Upon a Mountain, it is seen far about,
And with a big wind made of popular breath,
The sparkles fly through Cities: Here one takes,
Another catches there, and in short time
Waste all to cinders: But remember still
What burnt the Valleys first, came from the Hill;
Every offence draws his particular pain,
But it is example proves the great mans bane.
The sins of mean men, lie like scattered parcels
Of an imperfect bill; but when such fall,
Then comes example, and that sums up all:
And this your reason grants, if men of good lives,
Who by their virtuous actions stir up others
To noble and religious imitation,
Receive the greater glory after death,
As sin must needs confess; what may they feel
In height of torments, and in weight of veng'ance,
Not only they themselves, not doing well,
But sets a light up to show men to Hell?
If you have done, I have, no more sweet Brother.
I know time spent in goodness, is too tedi∣os;
This had not been a moments space in Lust now;
How dare you venture on eternal pain,
That cannot bear a minutes reprehension?
Methinks you should endure to hear that talked of
Which you so strive to suffer. Oh my Brother!
What were you, if you were taken now,
My heart weeps blood to think on it, it is a work
Of infinite mercy, (you can never merit)
That yet you are not death-struck, no not yet:
I dare not stay you long, for fear you should not
Have time enough allowed you to repent in.
There's but this Wall betwixt you and destruction,
When you're at strongest, and but poor thin clay.
Think upon it Brother, can you come so near it,
For a fair strumpets love, and fall into
A torment that knows neither end nor bottom
For beauty; but the deepness of a skin,
And that not of their own neither: Is she a thing
Whom sickness dare not visit, or age look on,
Or death resist, does the worm shun her grave?
If not (as your soul knows it) why should Lust
Bring man to lasting pain, for rotten dust?
Brother of spotless honour, let me weep
The first of my repentance in thy bosom,
And show the blessed fruits of a thankful spirit;
And if I ere keep woman more unlawfully,
May I want penitence, at my greatest need.
And wisemen know there is no barren place,
Threatens more famine, then a dearth in grace.
Why here's a conversion, is at this time Brother
Sung for a Himn in Heaven; and at this instant
The powers of darkness groan, makes all Hell sorry.
First, I praise Heaven, then in my work I glory.
Who's there attends without?
My Lord:
Take up those lights; there was a thicker darkness,
When they came first: The peace of a fair Soul
Keep with my noble Brother.
Joys be with you Sir:
She lies alone to night for it, and must still,
Though it be hard to conquer, but I have vowed
Never to know her as a strumpet more,
And I must save my oath; if Fury fail not,
Her husband dies to night, or at the most,
Lives not to see the morning spent to morrow;
Then will I make her lawfully mine own,
Without this sin and horror. Now I'm chidden,
For what I shall enjoy then unforbidden,
And I'll not freeze in Stoves; it is but a while,
Live like a hopeful Bridegroom, chaste from flesh;
And pleasure then will seem new, fair and fresh.
The morning so far wasted, yet his baseness
So impudent? See if the very Sun do not blush at him!
Dare he do thus much, and know me alive!
Put case one must be vicious, as I know my self
Monstrously guilty, there's a blind time made for it,
He might use only that, it were conscionable:
Art, silence, closeness, subtlety, and darkness,
Are fit for such a business; but there's no pity
To be bestowed on an apparent sinner,
An impudent day-light Lecher; the great zeal
I bear to her advancement in this match
With Lord Vincentio, as the Duke has wrought it,
To the perpetual honour of our house,
Puts fire into my blood, to purge the air
Of this corruption, fear it spread too far,
And poison the whole hopes of this fair fortune.
I love her good so dearly, that no Brother
Shall venture farther for a Sisters glory,
Then I for her preferment.
Once again
I'll see that glistering Whore, shines like a Serpent,
Now the Court Sun's upon her: Page!
Anon Sir!
I'll go in state too; see the Coach be ready.
I'll hurry away presently.
Yes you shall hurry,
And the Devil after you; take that at setting forth.
Now, and you'll draw, we are upon equal terms Sir.
Thou took advantage of my name in honour,
Upon my Sister▪ I nev'r saw the stroke
Come, till I found my reputation bleeding;
And therefore count it I no sin to valour
To serve thy lust so: Now we are of even hand,
Take your best course against me. You must die.
How close sticks Envy to mans happiness?
When I was poor, and little cared for life,
I had no such means offered me to die,
No mans wrath minded me: Slave, I turn this to thee,
To call thee to account, for a wound lately
Of a base stamp upon me.
'T was most fit
For a base mettle. Come and fetch one now
More noble then, for I will use thee sairer
Then thou hast done thine soul, or our honour;
And there I think it is for thee.
Help, help, Oh part 'em.
False wife! I feel now th'hast pried heartily for me;
Rise Strumpet by my fall, thy Lust may reign now;
My heart-string, and the marriage knot that tied thee,
Breaks both together.
There I heard the sound on it,
And never like'd string better.
It is my Brother,
Are you hurt Sir?
Not any thing.
Blessed fortune,
Shift for thy self; what is he thou hast killed?
Our honours enemy.
Know you this man Lady?
Leantio? My loves joy? wounds stick upon thee
As deadly as thy sins; art thou not hurt?
The Devil take that fortune, and he dead,
Drop plagues into thy bowels without voice,
Secret, and fearful: Run for Officers,
Let him be apprehended with all speed,
For fear he scope away; lay hands on him.
We cannot be too sure, it is wilful murder;
You do Heavens veng'ance, and the Law just service.
You know him not as I do, he's a villain,
As monstrous as a prodigy, and as dreadful:
Will you but entertain a noble patience,
Till you but hear the reason worthy Sister!
The reason! that's a jest Hell falls a laugh∣ing at:
Is there a reason found for the destruction
Of our more lawful loves? and was there none
To kill the black Lust twixt thy Niece and thee,
That has kept close so long?
How's that good Madam?
Too true Sir, there she stands, let her deny it;
The deed cries shortly in the Midwifes arms,
Unless the parents sins strike it still-born;
And if you be not deaf, and ignorant,
You'll hear strange notes ere long: Look upon me Wench!
It was I betrayed thy honour subtly to him
Under a false tale; it lights upon me now;
His arm has paid me home upon thy breast,
My sweet beloved Leantio!
Was my judgment
And care in choice, so dev'llishly abused,
So beyond shamefully—All the world will grin at me.
Oh Sordido, Sordido, I'm damned, I'm damned!
Damned, why Sir!
One of the wicked; dost not see it, a Cuckold, a plain rebrobate Cuckold.
Nay; and you be damned for that! be of good cheer Sir,
You've gallant company of all professions; I'll have a wife
Next Sunday too, because I'll along with you my self.
That will be some comfort yet.
You Sir, that bear your load of injuries,
As I of sorrows, lend me your grieved strength
To this sad burden; who in life wore actions,
Flames were not nimbler: We will talk of things▪
May have the luck to break our hearts together.
I'll list to nothing, but revenge and anger,
Whose counsels I will follow.
A wife quoth'a!
Here's a sweet Plumb-tree of your Gardener's graf∣fing!
Nay there's a worse name belongs to this
fruit yet, and you could hit on it, a more open one: For he that marries a whore, looks like a fellow bound all his life time to a Medler-tree, and that's good stuff; it is no sooner ripe, but it looks rotten; and so do some Queens at nineteen. A pox on it, I thought there was some knavery a broach, for something stirred in her belly, the first night I lay with her.
What, what Sir!
This is she brought up so courtly, can sing, and dance, and tumble too, methinks, I'll never marry wife again, that has so many qualities.
Indeed they are seldom good Master; for likely when they are taught so many, they will have one trick more of their own finding out. Well, give me a wench but with one good quality, to lye with none but her husband, and that's bringing up enough for any woman breathing.
This was the fault, when she was tend'red to me; you never looked to this.
Alas, how would you have me see through a great Farthingale Sir! I cannot peep through a Mil∣stone, or in the going, to see what's done in the bottom.
Her father praised her Breast, sh'ad the voice forsooth;
I marvelled she sung so small indeed, being no Maid.
Now I perceive there's a young Chorister in her Belly:
This breeds a singing in my head I'm sure.
It is but the tune of your wives Sinquapace, Danced in a Featherbed; Faith, go lye down Master—but take heed your Horns do not make holes in the Pillowbers.—I would not batter brows with him for a Hogshead of Angels, he would prick my skull as full of holes as a Scriveners Sand-Box.
Was ever Maid so cruelly beguiled
To the confusion of life, soul, and honour,
All of one women's murd'ring! I'd fain bring
Her name no nearer to my blood. then woman,
And it is too much of that; Oh shame and horror!
In that small distance from you man to me,
Lies sin enough to make a whole world perish.
It is time we parted Sir, and left the sight
Of one another, nothing can be worse
To hurt repentance; for our very eyes
Are far more poisonous to Religion,
Then Basilisks to them; if any goodness
Rest in you, hope of comforts, fear of judgments,
My request is, I nev'r may see you more;
And so I turn me from you everlastingly,
So is my hope to miss you; but for her,
That durst so dally with a sin so dangerous,
And lay a snare so spitefully for my youth,
If the least means but favour my revenge,
That I may practise the like cruel cunning
Upon her life, as she has on mine honour,
I'll act it without pity.
Here's a care
Of reputation, and a Sisters fortune
Sweetly rewarded by her: Would a silence,
As great as that which keeps among the graves,
Had everlastingly chained up her tongue;
My love to her has made mine miserable.
If you can but dissemble your hearts griefs now,
Be but a woman so far.
Peace! I'll strive Sir:
As I can wear my injuries in a smile;
Here's an occasion offered, that gives anger
Both liberty and safety to perform
Things worth the fire it holds, without the fear
Of danger, or of Law; for mischief's acted
Under the privilege of a marriage-triumph
At the Dukes hasty Nuptial's, will be thought
Things merely accidental; ell's by chance,
Not got of their own natures.
I conceive you Sir,
Even to a longing for performance on it;
And here behold some fruits. Forgive me both,
What I am now returned to Sense and Judgment.
Is not the same Rage and distraction
Presented lately to you? that rude form
Is gone for ever. I am now my self,
That speaks all peace, and friendship; and these tears
Are the true springs of hearty penitent sorrow▪
For those foul wrongs, which my forgetful fury
Sland'red your virtues with: This Gentleman
Is well resolved now.
I was never otherways,
I knew (alas) it was but your anger spake it,
And I nev'r thought on it more.
Pray rise good Sister.
Here's even as sweet amends made for a wrong now,
As one that gives a wound, and pays the Surgeon;
All the smart's nothing, the great loss of blood,
Or time of hind'rance: Well, I had a Mother,
I can dissemble too: What wrongs have slipped
Through angers ignorance (Aunt) my heart for∣gives.
Why thus tuneful now!
And what I did Sister,
Was all for honours cause, which time to come
Will approve to you.
Being awaked to goodness,
I understand so much Sir, and praise now
The fortune of your arm, and of your safety;
For by his death you've rid me of a sin
As costly as ev'r woman doted on:
T'has pleased the Duke so well too, that (behold Sir)
Has sent you here your pardon, which I kissed
With most affectionate comfort; when it was brought,
Then was my fit just past, it came so well me thought
To glad my heart.
I see his Grace thinks on me.
There's no talk now but of the preparation
For the great marriage.
Does he marry her then?
With all speed, suddenly, as fast as cost
Can be laid on with many thousand hands.
This Gentleman and I, had once a purpose
To have honoured the first marriage of the Duke
With an invention of his own; it was ready
The pains well past, most of the charge bestowed on it;
Then came the death of your good Mother (Niece)
And turned the glory of it all to black:
It is a device would fit these times so well too,
Art's treasury not better; if you'll join
It shall be done, the cost shall all be mine:
You've my voice first, twill well approve my thankfulness
For the Dukes love and favour.
What say you Niece?
I am content to make one.
The plot's full then;
Your pages Madam, will make shift for Cupids.
That will they Sir.
You'll play your old part still.
What, is it good? troth I have even forgot it.
Why Iuno Pronuba, the Marriage-God∣dess.
It is right indeed.
And you shall play the Nymph,
That offers sacrifice to appease her wrath.
Sacrifice good Sir?
Must I be appeased then?
That's as you list your self, as you see cause.
Methinks it would show the more state in her deity,
To be Incensed▪
It would, but my Sacrifice
Shall take a course to appease you, or I'll fail in it,
And teach a sinful Baud to play a Goddess.
For our parts, we'll not be ambitious Sir;
Please you walk in, and see the project drawn,
Then take your choice.
I weigh not, so I have one.
How much ado have I to restrain fury
From breaking into curses! Oh how painful it is
To keep great sorrow smothered! sure I think
It is harder to dissemble Grief, then Love:
Leantio, here the weight of thy loss lies,
Which nothing but destruction can suffice.
Cease, cease; Religious Honours done to sin,
Disparage Virtues reverence, and will pull
Heavens thunder upon Florence; holy Ceremonies
Were made for sacred uses, not for sinful.
Are these the fruits of your Repentance Brother?
Better it had been you had never sorrowed,
Then to abuse the benefit, and return
To worse then where sin left you.
Vowed you then never to keep Strumpet more,
And are you now so swift in your desires,
To knit your honours, and your life fast to her!
Is not sin sure enough to wretched man,
But he must bind himself in chains to it? Worse!
Must marriage, that immaculate robe of honour,
That renders Virtue glorious, fair, and fruitful
To her great Master, be now made the Garment
Of Leprosy and Foulness? is this Penitence
To sanctify hot Lust? what is it otherways
Then worship done to Devils? is this the best
Amends that sin can make after her riots?
As if a Drunkard, to appease Heavens wrath,
Should offer up his surfeit for a Sacrifice:
If that be comely, then Lust's offerings are
On Wedlocks sacred Altar.
Here you're bitter
Without cause Brother: what I vowed I keep,
As safe as you your Conscience, and this needs not;
I taste more wrath in it, then I do Religion;
And envy more then goodness; the path now
I tread, is honest, leads to lawful love,
Which virtue in her strictness would not check:
I vowed no more to keep a sensual woman:
It is done, I mean to make a lawful wife of her.
He that taught you that craft,
Call him not Master long, he will undo you.
Grow not too cunning for your soul good Bro∣there,
Is it enough to use adulterous thefts,
And then take sanctuary in marriage?
I grant, so long as an offender keeps
Close in a privileged Temple, his life's safe;
But if he ever venture to come out,
And so be taken, then he surely dies for it:
So now you're safe; but when you leave this body,
Mans only privileged Temple upon Earth,
In which the guilty soul takes sanctuary,
Then you'll perceive what wrongs chaste vows en∣dure,
When Lust usurps the Bed that should be pure.
Sir, I have read you over all this while
In silence, and I find great knowledge in you,
And severe learning, yet amongst all your virtues
I see not charity written, which some call
The first-born of Religion, and I wonder
I cannot see it in yours▪ Believe it Sir,
There is no virtue can be sooner missed,
Or later welcomed; it begins the rest,
And sets 'em all in order; Heaven and Angels
Take great delight in a converted sinner.
Why should you then a Servant and Professor,
Differ so much from them? If every woman
That commits evil, should be therefore kept
Back in desires of goodness, how should virtue
Be known and honoured? From a man that's blind,
To take a burning Taper, it is no wrong,
He never misses it: But to take light
From one that see's, that's injury and spite.
Pray whether is Religion better served,
When lives that are licentious are made honest,
Then when they still run through a sinful blood.
It is nothing Virtues Temples to deface;
But build the ruins, there's a work of Grace.
I kiss thee for that spirit; thou hast praised thy wit
A modest way: On, on there.
Lust is bold,
And will have veng'ance speak, er't be controlled.
SPeak, hast thou any sense of thy abuse?
Dost thou know what wrong's done thee?
I wear an Ass else.
I cannot wash my face, but I am feeling on it.
Here take this Galtrop, then convey it se∣cretly
Into the place I showed you; look you Sir,
This is the trap-door to it.
I know it of old Uncle, since the last tri∣umph; here rose up a Devil with one eye I remember, with a company of fire-works it's tail.
Prithee leave squibbing now, mark me, and fail not; but when thou hear me give a stamp, down with it: The villain's caught then.
If I miss you, hang me; I love to catch a villain, and your stamp shall go currant I warrant you: But how shall I rise up, and let him down too? All at one hole! that will be a horrible puzzle. You know I have a part in it, I play Slander.
True, but never make you ready for it.
No, my clothes are bought and all, and a foul Fiends head with a long contumelious tongue
in the chaps on it, a very fit shape for Slander in the out-parishes.
It shall not come so far, thou understandst it not.
Oh, oh!
He shall lie deep enough ere that time,
And stick first upon those▪
Now I conceive you Gardiner.
Away, list to the privy stamp, that's all thy part:
Stamp my Horns in a Mortar if I miss you, and give the powder in White-wine to sick Cuckolds, a very present remedy for the head-ach.
If this should any way miscarry now,
As if the fool be nimble enough, it is certain,
The Pages that present the swift winged Cupids,
Are taught to hit him with their shafts of love,
Fitting his part, which I have cunningly poisoned;
He cannot escape my fury; and those ills
Will be laid all on Fortune, not our Wills,
That's all the sport on it; for who will imagine,
That at the celebration of this night
Any mischance that hap's, can flow from spite?
Now our fair Duchess, your delight shall witness,
How you're beloved and honoured; all the glories
Bestowed upon the gladness of this night,
Are done for your bright sake.
I am the more
In debt my Lord, to loves and courtesies,
That offer up themselves so bounteously
To do me honoured Grace, without my merit.
A goodness set in greatness; how it spar∣kles
Afar off like pure Diamonds set in Gold!
How perfect my desires were, might I witness
But a fair noble peace, twixt your two spirits!
The reconcilement would be more sweet to me,
Then longer life to him that fears to die.
Good Sir!
I profess Peace, and am content:
I'll see the Seal upon it, and then it is firm.
You shall have all you wish.
I have all indeed now.
But I have made surer work; this shall not blind me;
He that begins so early to reprove,
Quickly rid him, or look for little love;
Beware a Brothers envy, he's next heir too▪
Cardinal you die this night, the plot's laid surely:
In time of sports Death may steal in securely; then it is least thought on▪
For he that's most religious, holy Friend,
Does not at all hours think upon his end;
He has his times of frailty, and his thoughts
Their transportations too, through flesh and blood,
For all his zeal, his learning, and his light,
As well as we, poor soul, that sin by night.
What's this Fabritio?
Marry, my Lord, the model
Of what's presented.
Oh we thank their loves;
Sweet Duchess take your seat, list to the Argue∣meant. 
THere is a Nymph that haunts the Woods and Springs,
In love with two at once, and they with her;
Equal it runs; but to decide these things,
The cause to mighty Juno they refer,
She being the Marriage-Goddess; the two Lovers
They offer sighs, the Nymph a Sacrifice,
All to please Juno, who by signs discovers,
How the event shall be, so that strife dies:
Then springs a second; for the man refused
Grows discontent, and out of love abused,
He raises Slander up, like a black Fiend,
To disgrace the other, which pays him in the end.
In troth, my Lord, a pretty pleasing Argue∣meant,
And fits th'occasion well; Envy and Slander
Are things soon raised against two faithful Lovers;
But comfort is, they are not long unrewarded.
This music shows they're upon entrance now.
Then enter all my wishes:
To thee fair Bride Hymen offers up
Of nuptial joys this the Celestial Cup.
Taste it, and thou shalt ever find
Love in thy Bed, peace in thy mind.
We'll taste you sure, it were pity to disgrace
So pretty a beginning.
It was spoke nobly.
Two Cups of Nectar have we begged from Jove;
Hebe give that to Innocence, I this to love.
Take heed of stumbling more, look to your way;
Remember still the Via Last.
Well Ganymed, you have more faults, though not so known;
I spil'd one Cup, but you have filtch'd many a one.
No more, forbear for Hymens sake;
In love we met, and so let's part▪
But soft! here's no such persons in the Are∣gument,
As these three, Hymen, Hebe, Ganymed.
The Actors that this model here discovers,
Are only four, Juno, a Nymph, two Lovers.
This is some Antemask belike, my Lord,
To entertain time; now my peace is perfect.
Let sports come on a pace, now is their time, my Lord. 
Hark you, you hear from 'em!
The Nymph indeed.
IUno Nuptial-Goddess, thou that rul'st o'er coupled bodies,
Ty'st man to woman, never to forsake her, thou only powerful marriage-maker,
Pity this amazed affection; I love both, and both love me,
Nor know I where to give rejection, my heart likes so equally,
Till thou set right my Peace of life,
And with thy power conclude this strife.
Now with my thanks depart you to the Springs;
I to these Wells of Love: Thou sacred Goddess,
And Queen of Nuptials, Daughter to great Saturn,
Sister and Wife to Jove, Imperial Juno,
Pity this passionate conflict in my Breast,
This tedious War, twixt two Affections;
Crown me with victory, and my heart's at peace.
Make me that happy man, thou mighty God∣dess.
But I live most in hope, if truest love
Merit the greatest comfort.
I love both
With such an even and fair affection,
I know not which to speak for, which to wish for,
Till thou great Arbitress, twixt lovers hearts,
By thy auspicious Grace, design the man;
Which pity I implore.
We all implore it.
And after sighs, contritions, truest odors, 
I offer to thy powerful Deity,
This precious Incense, may it ascend peacefully;
And if it keep true touch, my good Aunt Juno,
Twill try your immortality er't belong:
I fear you'll never get so nigh Heaven again,
When you're once down.
Though you and your affections
Seem all as dark to our illustrious brightness
As nights inheritance Hell, we pity you,
And your requests are granted: You ask signs;
They shall be given you, we'll be gracious to you.
He of those twain which we determine for you,
Loves Arrows shall wound twice, the later wound
Betokens love in age; for so are all
Whose love continues firmly all their life time,
Twice wounded at their marriage; else affection
Dies when youth ends: This favour overcomes me.
Now for a sign of wealth and golden days,
Bright-ey'd Prosperity, which all couples love,
I, and makes love take that: Our Brother Jove
Never denies us of his burning treasure,
T'express bounty.
She falls down upon it,
Whas's the conceit of that?
As over-joy'd be like:
Too much prosperity overjoys us all,
And she has her lapful, it seems my Lord.
This swerves a little from the Argument though: Look you my Lords.
Ell's fast; now comes my part to toll him hither;
Then with a stamp given, he's dispatched as cunning∣lie.
Stark dead: Oh treachery! cruelly made away! how's that?
Look, there's one of the Lovers dropped away too.
Why sure this plot's drawn false, here's no such thing.
Oh I am sick to the death, let me down quickly;
This fume is deadly: Oh 't'has poisoned me!
My subtlety is sped, her art he has quited me;
My own ambition pulls me down to ruin.
Nay, then I kiss thy cold lips, and applaud
This thy revenge in death.
Look, Juno's down too: 
What makes she there? her pride should keep aloft.
She was wont to scorn the Earth in other shows:
Methinks her Peacocks Feathers are much pulled:
Oh death runs through my blood; in a wilde flame too:
Plague of those Cupids; some lay hold on 'em.
Let 'em not escape, they have spoiled me; the shaft's deadly.
I have lost my self in this quite.
My great Lords, we are all confounded.
How?
Dead; and I worse.
Dead? my Girl dead? I hope
My Sister Juno has not served me so.
Lust, and forgetfulness has been amongst us,
And we are brought to nothing: Some blessed Cha∣rity
Lend me the speeding Pity of his Sword
To quench this fire in blood. Leantio's death
Has brought all this upon us; now I taste it,
And made us lay plots to confound each other;
The event so proves it, and mans understanding
Is riper at his fall, then all his life time.
She in a madness for her lovers death,
Revealed a fearful Lust in our near bloods,
For which I am punished dreadfully and unlooked for;
Proved her own ruin too, Veng'ance met Avenge∣ance,
Like a set match; as if the plague of sin
Had been agreed to meet here altogether.
But how her fawning partner fell, I reach not,
Unless caught by some spring of his own setting:
(For on my pain, he never dreamed of dying)
The plot was all his own, and he had cunning
Enough to save himself; but it is the property
Of guilty deeds to draw your wisemen downward.
Therefore the wonder ceases.—Oh this torment!
Our Guard below there!
My Lord▪
Run and meet death then,
And cut off time and pain.
Behold my Lord, he has run his Breast upon a weapons point.
Upon the first night of our nuptial honours,
Destruction play her triumph, and great mischiefs
Mask in expected pleasures, it is prodigious!
They're things most fearfully ominous: I like 'em not.
Remove these ruined bodies from our eyes.
Not yet, no change? when falls he to the Earth?
Please but your Excellence to peruse that Paper,
Which is a brief confession from the heart
Of him that fell first, ere his soul departed;
And there the darkness of these deeds speaks plainly.
It is the full scope, the manner, and intent;
His Ward, that ignorantly let him down,
Fear put to present flight at the voice of him.
Nor yet?
Read, read; for I am lost in sight and strength.
My noble Brother!
Oh the curse of wretchedness!
My deadly hand is saln upon my Lord:
Destruction take me to thee, give me way;
The pains and plagues of a lost soul upon him,
That hinders me a moment.
My heart swells bigger yet; help here, break't op,
My breast flies open next.
Oh with the poison,
That was prepared for thee, thee, Cardinal!
It was meant for thee.
Poor Prince!
Accursed Error!
Give me thy last breath, thou infected bosom,
And wrap two spirits, in one poisoned vapor.
Thus, thus, reward thy murderer, and turn death
Into a parting kiss: My soul stands ready at my lips,
Even vexed to stay one minute after thee.
The greatest sorrow and astonishment
That ever struck the general peace of Florence;
Dwells in this hour.
So my desires are satisfied,
I feel deaths power within me.
Thou hast prevailed in something (cursed poison)
Though thy chief force was spent in my Lords by∣some;
But my deformity in spirit's more foul;
A blemished face best fits a leprous soul.
What make I here? these are all strangers to me,
Not known but by their malice; now you are gone;
Nor do I seek their pities.
O restrain
Her ignorant wilful hand!
Now do; it is done.
Now I feel the breach of marriage
At my heart-breaking: Oh the deadly snares
That Women set for Women, without pity
Either to soul or honour! Learn by me
To know your foes: In this belief I die;
Like our own Sex, we have no Enemy, no Enemy!
See my Lord
What shift sh'as made to be her own destruction.
Pride, Greatness, Honours, Beauty, Youth, Ambition,
You must all down together, there's no help for it:
Yet this my gladness is, that I remove,
Tasting the same death in a cup of love.
Sin, what thou art, these ruins show too piteously.
Two Kings on one Throne cannot sit together,
But one must needs down, for his Titles wrong;
So where lust reigns, that Prince cannot reign long.

THe Town of Edmonton hath lent the Stage
A Devil and a Witch, both in an age.
To make comparisons it were uncivil,
Between so even a pair, a Witch and Devil.
But as the year doth with his plenty bring
As well a latter as a former Spring;
So has this Witch enjoyed the first, and reason
Presumes she may partake the other season:
In Acts deserving name, the Proverb says,
Once good, and ever; Why not so in Plays?
Why not in this? since (Gentlemen) we flatter
No Expectation: here is Mirth and Matter.
COme, Wench; why here's a business soon dispatched.
Thy heart I know is now at ease: thou need not
Fear what the tattling Gossips in their cups
Can speak against thy fame: thy child shall know
Who to call Dad now.
You have discharged the true part of an honest man;
I cannot request a fuller satisfaction
Then you have freely granted: yet methinks
It is an hard case, being lawful man and wife,
We should not live together.
Had I failed
In promise of my truth to thee, we must
Have then been ever sundried; now the longest
Of our forbearing eiders company,
Is only but to gain a little time
For our continuing thrift, that so hereafter
The Heir that shall be born may not have cause
To curse his hour of birth, which made him feel
The misery of beggary and want;
Two Devils that are occasions to enforce
A shameful end. My plots aim but to keep
My father's love.
And that will be as difficult
To be preserved, when he shall understand
How you are married, as it will be now,
Should you confess it to him.
Fathers are
Won by degrees, not bluntly as our masters,
Or wronged friends are: and besides, I'll use
Such dutiful and ready means, that ere
He can have notice of what's past, the inheritance
To which I am born Heir, shall be assured:
That done, why let him know it; if he like it not,
Yet he shall have no power in him left
To cross the thriving of it.
You who had
The conquest of my Maiden-love, may easily
Conquer the fears of my distrust. And whither
Must I be hurried?
Prithee do not use
A word so much unsuitable to the constant
Affections of thy Husband: thou shalt live
Near Waltham Abbey, with thy Uncle S•lman:
I have acquainted him with all at large:
He'll use thee kindly: thou shalt want no pleasures,
Nor any other fit supplies whatever
Thou can in heart desire.
All these are nothing
Without your company.
Which thou shalt have
Once every month at least.
Once every month!
Is this to have an Husband?
Perhaps oftner:
That's as occasion serves.
I, I, in case
No other Beauty tempt your eye, whom you
Like better, I may chance to be remembered,
And see you now and then. Faith, I did hope
You'd not have used me so: it is but my fortune.
And yet, if not for my sake, have some pity
Upon the child I go with, that's your own.
And, less you'll be a cruel hearted Father,
You cannot but remember that.
Heaven knows how.
To quit which fear at once,
As by the ceremony late performed,
I plighted thee a faith, as free from challenge,
As any double thought; Once more in hearing
Of Heaven and thee, I vow, that never henceforth
Disgrace, reproof, lawless affections, threats,
Or what can be suggested against our Marriage,
Shall cause me falsify that Bridal-Oath
That binds me thine. And, Winnifride, when ever
The wanton heat of youth by subtle baits
Of beauty, or what women's Art can practice,
Draw me from only loving thee; let Heaven
Inflict upon my life some fearful ruin.
I hope thou dost believe me.
Swear no more;
I am confirmed, and will resolve to do
What you think most behoofeful for us.
Thus then; make thy self ready: at the furthest house
Upon the Green, without the Town, your Uncle
Expects you. For a little time farewell.
Sweet,
We shall meet again as soon as thou can possibly?
We shall. One kiss. Away.
Frank Thorny.
Here Sir.
Alone? then must I tell thee in plain terms, thou hast wronged thy Master's house basely and lewdly.
Your house, Sir?
Yes, Sir, if the nimble devil
That wantoned in your blood, rebelled against
All rules of honest duty. You might, Sir,
Have found out some more fitting place then here,
To have built a Stews in. All the Country whispers
How shamefully thou hast undone a Maid,
Approved for modest life, for civil carriage,
Till thy prevailing perjuries enticed her
To forfeit shame. Will you be honest yet?
Make her amends and marry her?
So, Sir,
I might bring both my self and her to beggary;
And that would be a shame worse then the other.
You should have thought on this before, and then
Your reason would have overswayed the passion
Of your unruly lust. But that you may
Be left without excuse, to salve the infamy
Of my disgraced house, and because you are
A Gentleman, and both of you my servants,
I'll make the Maid a portion.
So you promised me
Before, in case I married her. I know
Sir Arthur Clarington deserves the credit
Report hath lent him; and presume you are
A Debtor to your promise: but upon
What certainty shall I resolve? Excuse me
For being somewhat rude.
It is but reason.
Well Frank, what think thou of 200 l.
And a continual friend?
Though my poor fortunes
Might happily prefer me to a choice
Of a far greater portion; yet to right
A wronged Maid, and to preserve your favour,
I am content to accept your proffer.
Art thou?
Sir, we shall every day have need to employ
The use of what you please to give.
Thou shalt have it.
Then I claim your promise.
We are man and wife.
Already?
And more then so, I have promised her
Free entertainment in her Unkle's house,
Near Waltham Abbey, where she may securely
So journe, till time and my endeavours work
My fathers love and liking.
Honest Frank.
I hope, Sir, you will think I cannot keep her
Without a daily charge.
As for the money,
It is all thine own; and though I cannot make thee
A present payment, yet thou shalt be sure
I will not fail thee.
But our occasions.
Nay, nay, talk not of your occasions, trust my boun∣tie: it shall not sleep. Hast married her, in faith Frank?
It is well, it is passing well: then Winnifride,
Once more thou art an honest woman. Frank,
Thou hast a Jewel. Love her; she'll deserve it.
And when to Waltham?
She is making ready.
Her Uncle stays for her.
Most provident speed.
Frank, I will be friend, and such a friend.
Thou'lt bring her thither?
Sir, I cannot: newly
My father sent me word I should come to him.
Marry, and do: I know thou hast a wit
To handle him.
I have a suit t'ye.
What is it?
Any thing, Frank, command it.
That you'll please,
By Letters to assure my Father, that
I am not married.
How?
Some one or other
Hath certainly informed him that I purposed
To marry Winnifride; on which he threatened
To dis-inherit me, to prevent it,
Lowly I crave your Letters, which he seeing
Will credit; and I hope ere I return,
On such conditions as I'll frame, his Lands
Shall be assured.
But what is that to quit
My knowledge of the marriage?
Why you were not
A witness to it.
I conceive: and then,
His Land confirmed, thou wilt acquaint him thoroughly
With all that's past.
I mean no less.
Provided,
I never was made privy to it.
Alas, Sir,
Am I a talker?
Draw thy self the Letter,
I'll put my hand to it. I commend thy policy
You are witty, witty Frank; nay, nay, it is fit,
Dispatch it.
I shall write effectually.
Go thy way Cuckoo; have I caught the young man?
One trouble then is freed. He that will feast
At others cost, must be a bold faced guest.
I have heard the news, all now is safe.
The worst is past.
Thy lip, wench: I must bid
Farewell, for fashions sake; but I will visit thee
Suddenly, Girl. This was cleanly carried:
Ha! was it not Win?
Then were my happiness,
That I in heart repent I did not bring him
The Dower of a Virginity. Sir, forgive me;
I have been much to blame. Had not my Laundress
Given way to your immoderate waste of Virtue,
You had not with such eagerness pursued
The error of your goodness.
Dear, dear Win.
I hug this Art of thine, it snows how cleanly
Thou can beguile in case occasion serve,
To practice. It becomes thee, now we share
Free scope enough, without control or fear,
To interchange our pleasures; we will surfeit
In our embraces, Wench. Come, tell me, when
Wilt thou appoint a meeting?
What to do?
Good, good, to con the lesson of our loves,
Our secret game.
O blush to speak it further!
As y' are a noble Gentleman, forget
A sin so monstrous: it is not gently done,
To open a cured wound. I know you speak
For trial; troth you need not.
I for trial?
Not I, by this good Sun-shine.
Can you name
That syllable of good, and yet not tremble,
To think to what a foul and black intent,
You use it for an Oath? Let me resolve you,
If you appear in any Visitation
That brings not with it pity for the wrongs
Done to abused Thorny, my kind husband;
If you infect mine ear with any breath
That is not thoroughly perfumed with sighs
For former deeds of lust: May I be cursed
Even in my prayers, when I vouchsafe
To see or hear you. I will change my life,
From a loose whore, to a repentant wife.
Wilt thou turn monster now? art not ashamed
After so many months to be honest at last?
Away, away, fie on it.
My resolution
Is built upon a Rock. This very day
Young Thorny vowed with Oaths not to be doubted,
That never any change of love should cancel
The bonds in which we are to either bound,
Of lasting truth. And shall I then for my part
Unfile the sacred Oath set on Record
In Heaven's Book? Sir Arthur, do not study
To add to your lascivious lust, the sin
Of Sacrilege: for if you but endeavour
By any unchaste word to tempt my constancy,
You strive as much as in you lies to ruin
A Temple hallowed to the purity
Of holy Marriage. I have said enough:
You may believe me.
Get you to your Nunnery,
There freeze in your old Cloister. This is fine.
Good Angels guide me. Sir, you'll give me leave
To weep and pray for your co••ersion.
Yes, away to Waltham. Pox on your honesty.
Had you no other trick to fool me? Well,
You may want money yet.
None that I'll send for
To you, for hire of a damnation.
When I am gone, think on my just complaint:
I was your Devil, O be you my Saint!
Go, go thy ways, as changeable a baggage
As ever cozened Knight. I'm glad I'm rid of her.
Honest? marry hang her. Thorny is my Debtor,
I thought to have paid him too: but fools have fortune.
You offer Mr. Carter, like a Gentleman,
I cannot find fault with it, it is so fair.
No Gentleman, I, Mr. Thorny; spare the Mastership, call me by my name, John Carter; Master is a title my Father, nor his before him, were acquainted with. Honest Hertforshire Yeo∣men, such an one am I; my word and my deed shall be proved one at all times. I mean to give you no security for the Marriage∣money.
How? no security? although it need not, so long as you live; yet who is he has surety of his life one hour? Men, the Proverb says, are mortal: else, for my part, I distrust you not, were the sum double.
Double, treble, more or less; I tell you, Mr. Thor∣ney, I'll give no security. Bonds and Bills are but Tarriers to catch Fools, and keep lazy Knaves busy; my security shall be pre∣sent payment. And we here, about Edmonton, hold present pay∣meant as sure as an Alderman's Bond in London, Mr. Thorny.
I cry you mercy, Sir, I understood you not.
I like young Frank well, so does my Susan too. The Girl has a fancy to him, which makes me ready in my Purse. There be other Suitors within, that make much noise to little purpose. If Frank love Sue, Sue shall have none but Frank. It is a man∣nearly Girl, Mr. Thorny, though but an homely man's Daughter. There have worse Faces looked out of black Bags, Man.
You speak your mind freely and honestly. I mar∣vel my Son comes not: I am sure he will be here sometime to day.
To day or to morrow, when he comes he shall be well∣come to Bread, Beer and Beef, Yoeman's fare; we have no Kick∣shaws: full Dishes, whole belly-fulls. Should I diet three days at one of the slender City-Suppers, you might send me to Barber-Sur∣goons Hall the fourth day, to hang up for an Anatomy.—Here come they that—
How now Girls? every day play-day with you?  Valentine's day too, all by couples? Thus will young folks do when we are laid in our Graves, Mr. Thorny. Here's all the care they take. And how do you find the VVenches, Gentlemen? have they any mind to a loose Gown and a strait Shoe? VVin'em, and wear'em. They shall choose for themselves by my consent.
You speak like a kind Father. Sue, thou hear the liberty that 's granted thee. What say thou? wilt thou be mine?
Your what, Sir? I dare swear, never your wife.
Can thou be so unkind? considering how dearly I af∣fact thee; nay, dote on thy perfections.
You are studied too Scholar-like in words: I understand not. I am too course for such a Gallants love as you are.
By the honour of Gentility.
Good Sir, no swearing: yea and nay with us
Prevails above all oaths you can invent.
By this white hand of thine.
Take a false oath? Fie, fie, flatter the wise: fools not regard it; and one of these am I.
Dost thou despise me?
Let 'em talk on, Mr. Thorny. I know Sue's mind. The Fly may buzz about the Candle, he shall but singe his Wings when all 's done. Frank, Frank is he has her heart.
But shall I live in hope, Kate?
Better so, then be a desperate man.
Perhaps thou think it is thy Portion
I level at: were thou as poor in Fortunes,
As thou art rich in Goodness; I would rather
Be Suitor for the Dower of thy Virtues,
Then twice thy Father 's whole Estate; and prithee
Be thou resolved so.
Mr. Somerton, it is an easy labour to deceive
A Maid that will believe Men's subtle promises:
Yet I conceive of you as worthily
As I presume you do deserve.
Which is
As worthily in loving thee sincerely,
As thou art worthy to be so beloved.
I shall find time to try you.
Do, Kate, do:
And when I fail, may all my joys forsake me.
Warbeck and Sue are at it still. I laugh to my self, Mr. Thorny, to see how earnestly he beats the Bush, while the Bird is flown into another bosom. A very unthrift, Mr. Thorny; one of the Country roaring Lads: we have such as well as the City, and as arrant Rake-hells as they are, though not so nimble at their prizes of wit. Sue knows the Raskal to an hairs breadth, and will fit him accordingly.
What is the other Gentleman?
One Somerton, the honester man of the two, by 5 l. in every stone-weight. A civil Fellow. He has a fine convenient E∣state of land in West-ham by Essex. M. Ranges that dwells by Enfield, sent him hither. He likes Kate well. I may tell you, I think she likes him as well. If they agree, I'll not hinder the match for my part. But that Warbeck is such another—. I use him kindly for Mr. Somerton's sake: for he came hither first as a Companion of his. Honest men, Mr. Thorny, may fall into Knaves company, now and then.
Three hundred a year Jointure, Sue.
Where lies it, by Sea or by Land? I think by Sea.
Do I look like a Captain?
Not a whit, Sir.
Should all that use the Seas be reckoned Captains,
There 's not a Ship should have a Scullion in her
To keep her clean.
Do you scorn me, Mrs. Susan▪
Am I a subject to be jeered at?
Neither
Am I a property for you to use
As stale to your fond wanton loose discourse.
Pray Sir be civil.
Wilt be angry, VVasp?
God-a-mercy, Sue. She'll firk him on my life, if he fumble with her.
Mr. Francis Thorny, you are welcome indeed.
Your Father expected your coming. How does the right worship∣full Knight, Sir Arthur Clarington, your Master?
In health this morning. Sir, my duty.
Now
You come as I could wish.
Frank Thorny, ha!
You must excuse me.
Virtuous. Mrs Susan.
Kind Mrs. Katherine. Gentlemen, to both
Good time of the day.
The like to you.
It is he.
A word, Friend. On my life, this is the Man
Stands fair in crossing Susan's love to me.
I think no less. Be wise, and take no notice on it.
He that can wi• her, best deserves her.
Marry
A Serving-man? mew.
Prithee Friend no more.
Gentlemen all, there's within a slight Dinner ready, if you please to taste of it: Mr. Thorny, Mr. Francis, Mr. Somer∣ton. Why Girls? what, Housewives, will you spend all your fore∣noon in tittle-tattles? away: It's well in faith. Will you go in, Gentlemen?
VVe'll follow presently: my Son and I
Have a few words of business.
At your pleasure.
I think you guess the reason, Frank, for which
I sent for you.
Yes, Sir.
I need not tell you.
With what a labyrinth of dangers daily
The best part of my whole Estate's encumbered:
Nor have I any Clew to wind it out,
But what occasion proffers me. Wherein
If you should falter, I shall have the shame,
And you the loss. On these two points rely
Our ha•pines or ruin. If you marry
With wealthy Carter's Daughter, there's a Portion
Will free my Land: all which I will instate
Upon the marriage to you. Otherwise.
I must be of necessity enforced
To make a present sale of all: and yet,
For oug•t I know, live in as poor distress,
Or worse, then now I do. You hear the sum:
I told you thus before. Have you considered on it?
I have, Sir. And however I could wish
To enjoy the benefit of single Freedom,
For that I find no disposition in me
To undergo the burden of that care
That Marriage brings with it; Yet to secure
And settle the continuance of your Credit,
I humbly yield to be directed by you
In all commands.
You have already used
Such thriving protestations to the Maid.
That she is wholly yours. And speak the truth,
You love her, do you not?
It were pity, Sir,
I should deceive her.
Better y had been unborn.
But is your love so steady that you mean,
Nay, more, desire to make her your Wife?
Else, Sir,
It were a wrong not to be righted.
True,
It were: and you will marry her?
Heaven prosper it:
I do intend it.
O thou art a Villain!
A Devil like a Man. Wherein have I
Offended all the Powers so much, to be
Father to such a graceless godless Son?
To me, Sir, this? O my cleft heart!
To thee,
Son of my curse. Speak truth, and blush, thou monster,
Hast thou not married Winnifride? a Maid
Was fellow-servant with thee.
Some swift spirit
Has blown this news abroad. I must out-face it.
Do you study for excuse? why all the country
Is full on it.
With your license, it is not charitable,
I am sure it is not fatherly, so much
To be o'resway'd with credulous conceit
Of mere impossibilities. But Fathers
Are privileged to think and talk at pleasure.
Why can thou yet deny thou hast no wise?
What do you take me for? an Atheist?
One that nor hopes the blessedness of life
Hereafter, neither fears the vengeance due
To such as make the Marriage-bed an Inn,
Which Travellers day and night,
After a toilsome lodging leave at pleasure?
Am I become so insensible of losing
The glory of Creations work? My soul!
O I have lived too long.
Thou hast, dissembler;
Dare thou persevere yet? and pull down wrath
As hot as flames of hell, to strike thee quick
Into the Grave of horror? I believe thee not.
Get from my sight.
Sir, though mine innocence
Needs not a stronger witness then the clearness
Of an unperish'd conscience; yet for that
I was informed, how mainly you had been
Possessed of this untruth, To quit all scruple
Please you peruse this Letter: it is to you.
From whom?
Sir Arthur Clarington my Master.
Well, Sir.
On every side I am distracted: Am waded deeper into mischief, then virtue can avoid. But on I must: Fate leads me: I will follow. There you read what may confirm you.
Yes, and wonder at it. Forgive me, Frank. Credulity abused me. My tears express my joy: and I am sorry I injured in∣nocence.
Alas! I knew your rage and grief proceeded from your love to me: so I conceived it.
My good Son, I'll bear with many faults in thee here∣after. Bear thou with mine.
The peace is soon concluded.
Why Mr. Thorny, do ye mean to talk out your din∣ner? the Company attends your coming. What must it be, Mr. Frank▪ or Son Frank? I am plain Dunstable.
Son, Brother, if your Daughter like to have it so.
I dare be confident, she's not altered
From what I left her at our parting last:
Are you, fair Maid?
You took too sure possession
Of an engaged heart.
Which now I challenge.
Marry and much good may it do thee, Son. Take her to thee. Get me a brace of Boys at a burden, Frank. The nur∣sing shall not stand thee in a pennyworth of Milk. Reach her home and spare not. VVhen's the day?
To morrow, if you please. To use ceremony
Of charge and custom, were to little purpose:
Their loves are married fast enough already.
A good motion. VVe'll even have an household Din∣ner; and let the Fiddlers go scrape. Let the Bride and Bridegroom dance at night together: no matter for the Guests. To morrow, Sue, to morrow. Shall's to Dinner now?
We are on all sides pleased, I hope.
Pray Heaven I may deserve the blessing sent me.
Now my heart is settled.
So is mine.
Your Marriage-money shall be received before your
VVedding-shooes can be pulled on. Blessing on you both.
No Man can hide his shame from Heaven that views him.
In vain he flees, whose destiny pursues him.
ANd why on me? why should the envious world
Throw all their scandalous malice upon me?
Because I am poor, deformed and ignorant,
And like a Bow buckled and bent together,
By some more strong in mischiefs then my self?
Must I for that be made a common sink,
For all the filth and rubbish of Men's tongues
To fall and run into? Some call me Witch;
And being ignorant of my self, they go
About to teach me how to be one: urging,
That my bad tongue (by their bad usage made so)
Forespeaks their Cattle, doth bewitch their Corn,
Themselves, their Servants, and their Babes at nurse.
This they enforce upon me: and in part
Make me to credit it. And here comes one
Of my chief Adversaries.
Out, out upon thee, Witch.
Dost call me Witch?
I do, Witch, I do: and worse I would, knew I a name more hateful. What make thou upon my ground?
Gather a few rotten sticks to warm me.
Down with them when I bid thee, quickly;
I'll make thy bones rattle in thy skin else.
You-won't, Churl. Cut-throat, Miser: there they be. Would they stuck cross thy throat, thy bowels, thy maw, thy midriff.
Say thou me so? Hag, out of my ground.
Dost strike me▪ slave? curmudgeon now thy bones aches, thy joints cramps, and convulsions stretch and crack thy sinews.
Cursing, thou Hag! take that, and that.
Strike, do, and withered may that hand and arm
Whose blows have lamed me, drop from the rotten Trunk.
Abuse me! beat me! call me Hag and Witch!
What is the name? where and by what Art learned?
What spells, what charms, or invocations?
May the thing called Familiar be purchased?
A new head for the Tabor, and silver tipping for the Pipe. Remember that, and forget not five lesh of new Bells.
Double Bells: Crooked Lane ye shall have 'em straight in.
Crooked Lane: double Bells all, if it be possible.
Double Bells? double Coxcombs; Trebles: buy me Trebles, all Trebles: for our purpose is to be in the Altitudes.
All Trebles? not a Mean?
Not one: The Morris is so cast, we'll have neither Mean nor Base in our company, Fellow Rowland.
What? nor a Counter?
By no means, no hunting Counter; leave that to En∣vile Chase-Men: all Trebles, all in the Altitudes. Now for the disposing of Parts in the Morris, little or no labour will serve.
If you that be minded to follow your Leader, know me, an ancient Honour belonging to our house, for a Fore-horse, team, and for gallant in a Morris: my Father's Stable is not unfurnished.
So much for the Fore-horse: but how for a good Hobby-horse?
For a Hobby-horse? Let me see an Almanac. Midsummer-Moon, let me see ye. When the Moon's in the full, then's wit in the wane. No more. Use your best skill. Your More∣rice will suffer an Eclipse.
An Eclipse?
A strange one.
Strange?
Yes, and most sudden. Remember the For• gallant, and forget the Hobby-horse. The whole body of your Morris will be darkened. There be of us. But it is no matter. Forget the Ho•by-horse.
Cuddy Banks, have you forgot since he paced it from Anvil Chase to Edmonton? Cuddy, honest Cuddy, cast thy stuff.
Suffer may ye all. It shall be known, I can take mine ease as well as another Man. Seek your Hobby-horse where you can get him.
Cuddy, honest Cuddy, we confess, and are sorry for our neglect.
The old Horse shall have a new Bridle.
The Caparisons new painted.
The Tail repaired.
The Snaffle and the Bosses new saffron'd o'er.
Kind:
Honest:
Loving, ingenious:
Affable Cuddy.
To show I am not flint; but affable, as you say, very well stuffed, a kind of warm Dow or Puff-paste, I relent, I connive, most affable Jack: let the Hobby-horse provide a strong back, he shall not want a belly when I am in 'em. But Uds me, Mother Sawyer.
The old Witch of Edmonton. If our mirth be not crossed.
Bless us, Cuddy, and let her curse her tother eye out. What dost now?
Ungirt, unblessed, says the Proverb. But my Girdle shall serve a riding knit: and a fig for all the VVitches in Chri∣stendom. What would thou?
The Devil cannot abide to be crossed.
And scorns to come at any man's whistle.
Away
With the Witch.
Away with the Witch of Edmonton.
Still vexed? still tortured? That Curmudgeon Banks
Is ground of all my scandal. I am shunned
And hated like a sickness: made a scorn
To all degrees and sexes. I have heard old Beldams
Talk of Familiars in the shape of Mice,
Rats, Ferrets, VVeasels, and I wot not what,
That have appeared, and sucked, some say, their blood.
But by what means they came acquainted with them,
I'm now ignorant: would some power good or bad
Instruct me which way I might be revenged
Upon this Churl, I'd go out of my self,
And give this Fury leave to dwell within
This ruined Cottage, ready to fall with age:
Abjure all goodness: be at hate with prayer;
And study Curses, Imprecations,
Blasphemous speeches, Oaths, detested Oaths,
Or any thing that's ill; so I might work
Revenge upon this Miser, this black Cur,
That barks, and bites, and sucks the very blood
Of me, and of my credit. It is all one,
To be a Witch, as to be counted one.
Vengeance, shame, ruin, light upon that Canker.
Ho! have I found thee cursing? now thou art mine own.
Thine? what art thou?
He thou hast so often importuned to appear to thee, the Devil.
Bless me! the Devil?
Come, do not fear, I love thee much too well
To hurt or fright thee. If I seem terrible,
It is to such as hate me. I have found
Thy love unfeigned; have seen and pitied
Thy open wrongs, and come out of my love
To give thee just revenge against thy foes.
May I believe thee?
To confirm't, command me
Do any mischief unto Man or Beast,
And I'll effect it, on condition,
That uncompelled thou make a deed of Gift
Of Soul and Body to me.
Out, alas!
My Soul and Body?
And that instantly,
And seal it with thy blood: if thou deny,
I'll tear thy body in a thousand pieces.
I know not where to seek relief: But shall I
After such Covenants sealed, see full revenge
On all that wrong me?
Ha, ha, silly woman!
The Devil is no liar to such as he loves.
Did ever know or hear the Devil a liar
To such as he affects?
When I am thine, at least so much of me,
As I can call mine own.
Equivocations?
Art mine or no? speak, or I'll tear.
All thine.
Seal't with thy blood.
See, now I dare call thee mine;
For proof, command me, instantly I'll run,
To any mischief, goodness can I none.
And I desire as little. There's an old Churl, one Banks—
That wronged thee: he lamed thee, called thee Witch.
The same: first upon him I'd be revenged.
Thou shalt: Do but name how.
Go, touch his life.
I cannot.
Hast thou not vowed? Go, kill the slave.
I wonnot.
I'll cancel then my gift.
Ha, ha!
Dost laugh?
Why wilt not kill him?
Fool, because I cannot.
Though we have power, know, it is circumscribed,
And ti'd in limits: though he be cursed to thee,
Yet of himself he is loving to the world,
And charitable to the poor. Now Men
That, as he, love goodness, though in smallest measure,
Live without compass of our reach. His Cattle
And Corn, I'll kill and mildew: but his life
(Until I take him, as I late found thee,
Cursing and swearing) I have no power to touch.
Work on his corn and cattle then.
I shall.
The Witch of Edmonton shall see his fall.
If she at least put credit in my power,
And in mine only; make Orisons to me,
And none but me.
Say how, and in what manner?
I'll tell thee, when thou wish ill;
Corn, Man or Beast, would spoil or kill,
Turn thy back against the Sun,
And mumble this short Orison:
If thou to death or shame pursue 'em,
Sanctibicetur nomen tuum.
If thou to death or shame pursue 'em,
Sanctibecetur nomen tuum.
Perfect. Farewell. Our first-made promises
We'll put in execution against Banks.
Contaminetur nomen tuum. I'm an expert Scholar;
Speak Latin, or I know not well what Language,
As well as the best of 'em. But who comes he•e?
The Son of my worst Foe. To death pursue 'em,
Et sanctabecetur nomen tuum.
What 's that she mumbles? the Devils Pater noster?
Would it were else. Mother Sawyer, Good morrow.
Ill morrow to thee, and all the world, that flout a poor old woman. To death pursue 'em, and sanctabacetur nomen tuum.
Nay, good Gimmal Sawyer, what ever it pleases my
Father to call you, I know you are
A Witch.
A Witch? would you were else in faith.
Your Father knows I am by this.
I would he did.
And so in time may you.
I would I might else. But Witch or no Witch, you are a motherly woman: and though my Father be a kind of God bless us, as they say, I have an earnest suit to you; and if you'll be so kind to call me one good turn, I'll be so courteous as to kob you another.
VVhat's that? to spurn, beat me, and call me Witch, as your kind Father doth?
My Father? I am ashamed to own him. If he has hurt the head of thy credit, there's money to buy thee a Plaster: and a small curtsy I would require at thy hands.
You seem a good young Man, and I must dissemble, the better to accomplish my revenge. But for this silver, what would have me do? bewitch thee?
No, by no means; I am bewitched already. I would
have thee so good as to unwitch me, or witch another with me for company.
I understand thee not. Be plain, my Son.
As a Pike-staff, Mother: you know Kate Carter.
The wealthy Yeomans Daughter. What of her?
That same Party has bewitched me.
Bewitched thee?
Bewitched me, Hiss auribus. I saw a little Devil fly out of her eye like a Burbolt, which sticks at this hour up to the Feathers in my heart. Now my request is, to send one of thy what do ye call 'ems, either to pluck that out, or stick another as fast in hers. Do, and here's my hand, I am thine for three lives.
We shall have sport. Thou art in love with her.
Up to the very hilts, Mother.
And thou'ldst have me make her love thee too.
I think she'll prove a Witch in earnest. Yes, I could find in my heart to strike her three quarters deep in love with me too.
But dost thou think that I can do it, and I alone?
Truly, Mother Witch, I do verily believe so: and when I see it done, I shall be half persuaded so too.
It's enough. What Art can do, be sure of: turn to the West, and whatsoever thou hear or see, stand silent, and be not afraid.
Afraid, Mother Witch? turn my face to the West? I said I should always have a back-friend of her; and now it's out. And her little Devil should be hungry, come sneaking behind me, like a cowardly Catchpole, and clap his Talents on my Haunches. It is woundy cold sure. I dudder and shake like an Aspen-leaf e∣very joint of me.
To scandal and disgrace pursue 'em,
Et sanctabicetur nomen tuum.
How now, my Son, how is it?
Scarce in a clean life, Mother Witch. But did your Goblin and you spout Latin together?
A kind of Charm I work by. Did thou hear me?
I heard I know not the Devil what mumble in a scurvy
base tone, like a Drum that had taken cold in the head the last Muster. Very comfortable words: what were they? and who taught them you?
A great learned Man.
Learned Man? learned Devil it was as soon? But what? what comfortable news about the Party?
Who? Kate Carter? I'll tell thee, thou know the Style at the West-end of thy Father's Pease-Field, be there to morrow∣night after Sun-set; and the first live thing thou see, be sure to follow, and that shall bring thee to thy Love.
In the Pease-field? Has she a mind to Codlings al∣ready? The first living thing I meet, you say, shall bring me to her.
To a sight of her, I mean. She will seem wantonly coy, and flee thee: but follow her close, and boldly: do but embrace her in thy arms once, and she is thine own.
At the Style, at the West-end of my Father's Peas∣land, the first live thing I see, follow and embrace her, and she shall be thine. Nay, and I come to embracing once, she shall be mine; I'll go near to make at Eaglet else.
A ball well bandied: now the set 's half won:
The Father's wrong I'll wreak upon the Son.
How now Gentlemen, cloudy? I know Mr. Warbeck, you are in a fog about my Daughters marriage.
And can you blame me, Sir?
Nor you me justly. VVedding and hanging are tied up both in a Proverb; and Destiny is the Juggler that unties the knot. My hope is, you are reserved to a richer fortune then my poor Daughter.
However, your promise.
Is a kind of debt, I confess it.
Which honest men should pay.
Yet some Gentlemen break in that point, now and then, by your leave, Sir.
I confess thou hast had a little wrong in the Wench: but patience is the only salve to cure it. Since Thorny has won the Wench, he has most reason to wear her.
Love in this kind admits no reason to wear her.
Then love's a fool, and what wise man will take exception?
Come, frolic Ned, were every man master of his own for∣tune, Fate might pick straws; and Destiny go a wool-gathering.
You hold yours in a string though. It is well: but if there be any equity, look thou to meet the like usage ever long.
In my love to her Sister Katherine? Indeed, they are a pair of Arrows drawn out of one Quiver, and should fly at an even length, if she do run after her Sister.
Look for the same mercy at my hands, as I have received at thine.
She'll keep a surer compass. I have too strong a confi∣dence to mistrust her.
And that confidence is a wind, that has blown many a married Man ashore at Cuckolds Haven, I can tell you: I wish yours more prosperous though.
VVhate're you wish, I'll master my promise to him.
Yes, as you did to me.
No more of that, if you love me. But for the more as∣surance, the next offered occasion shall consummate the Marriage: and that once sealed,
Leave the manage of the rest to my care. But see, the Bridegroom and Bride comes; the new pair of Sheffeild-Knives fitted both to one sheath.
The Sheath might have been better fitted, if some body had their due. But—
No harsh language, if thou love me. Frank Thorny has done—
No more then I, or thou, or any man, things so standing, would have attempted.
Good morrow Mr. Bridegroom.
Come, give thee joy. May thou live long and happy in thy fair choice.
I thank ye Gentlemen. Kind Mr. Warbeck, I find you loving.
Thorny, that creature, (much good do thee with her)
Virtue and beauty hold fair mixture in her.
She's rich no doubt in both. Yet were she fairer,
Thou art right worthy of her. Love her, Thorny,
It is nobleness in thee, in her but duty.
The match is fair and equal: the success
I leave to censure. Farewell, Mrs. Bride:
Till now elected, thy old scorn deride.
Good, Mr. Thorny.
Nay, you shall not part till you see the Barrels run a-tilt, Gentlemen.
Why change you your face, sweet-Heart?
Who? I? For nothing.
Dear, say not so: a Spirit of your constancy cannot endure his change for nothing. I have observed strange variations in you.
In me?
In you, Sir. Awake: you seem to dream, and in your sleep •ou utter sudden and distracted accents, like one at enmity with •eace. Dear loving Husband, if I may dare to challenge any •nterest in you, give me the reason fully: you may trust my breast as •afely as your own.
With what? you half amaze me, prithee.
Come, you shall not; indeed, you shall not shut me from partaking the least dislike that grieves you. I am all yours.
And I all thine.
You are not, if you keep the least grief from me: but I find the cause; it grew from me.
From you?
From some distaste in me or my behaviour: you are not kind in the concealment. Alas, Sir, I am young, silly, and plain; more strange to those contents a wife should offer. Say but in what I fail, I'll study satisfaction.
Come, in nothing.
I know I do. Knew I as well in what, you should not long be sullen. Prithee Love, if I have been immodest or too bold, speak't in a frown: if peevishly too nice, show it in a smile. Thy liking is the glass by which I'll habit my behaviour.
Wherefore dost weep now?
You, Sweet, have the power to make me passionate as an April-day: now smile, then weep; now pale, then crimson red. You are the powerful Moon of my bloods Sea, to make it ebb or flow into my face, as your looks change.
Change thy conceit, I prithee:
Thou art all perfection: Diana her self
Swells in thy thoughts, and moderates thy beauty.
Within thy left eye amorous Cupped fits
Feathering Love-shafts, whose golden heads he dipped
—In thy chaste breast. In the other lies
Blushing Atones scarfed in modesties.
And still as wanton Cupped blows Love-fires,
Atones quenches our unchaste desires.
And from these two I briefly do imply
A perfect Emblem of thy modesty.
Then, prithee Dear, maintain no more dispute,
For where thou speak, it's fit all tongues be mute.
Come, come, those golden strings of flattery
Shall not tie up my speech, Sir; I must know
The ground of your disturbance.
Then look here;
For here, here is the fen in which this Hydra
Of discontent grows rank.
Heaven shield it: where?
In mine own bosom: here the cause has root;
The poisoned Leeches twist about my heart,
And will, I hope, confound me.
You speak Riddles.
Take it plainly then: it was told me by a woman
Known and approved in Palmistry,
I should have two wives.
Two wives? Sir, I take it exceeding likely. But let not conceit hurt you: you are afraid to bury me?
No, no, my Winnifride.
How say you? Winnifride? you forget me.
No, I forget my self, Susan.
In what?
Talking of wives, I pretend Winnifride,
A Maid that at my Mothers waited on me
Before thy self.
I hope, Sir, she may live to take my place. But why should all this move you?
The poor Girl, she has't before thee, and that's the Fiend torments me.
Yet why should this raise mutiny within you? such presages prove often false: or say it should be true?
That I should have another wife?
Yes, many; if they be good, the better.
Never any equal to thee in goodness.
Sir, I could wish I were much better for you;
Yet if I knew your fate
Ordained you for another, I could wish
(So well I love you, and your hopeful pleasure)
Me in my grave, and my poor virtues added
To my successor.
Prithee, prithe, talk not of death or graves; thou •rt so rare a goodness, as Death would rather put it self to death, •hen murder thee. But we, as all things else, are mutable and hanging.
Yet you still move in your first sphere of discontent. Sweet, chase those clouds of sorrow, and shine clearly on me.
At my return I will.
Return? ah me! will you then leave me?
For a time I must: but how? as Birds their young, or loving Bees their Hives, to fetch home richer dainties.
Leave me? Now has my fear met its effect. You shall not, cost it my life, you shall not.
Why? your reason?
Like to the Lap-wing have you all this while with your false love deluded me? pretending counterfeit senses for your dis∣content, and now at last it is by chance stole from you.
What? what by chance?
Your pre-appointed meeting of single combat with young Warbeck.
Ho!
Even so: dissemble not; it is too apparent. Then in his look I read it: deny it not; I see it apparent: cost it my undoing, and unto that my life, I will not leave you.
Not until when?
Till he and you be Friends.
Was this your cunning? and then flame me off
With an old Witch, two VVives, and Winnifride?
You're not so kind indeed as I imagined.
And you more fond by far then I expected.
It is a virtue that attends thy kind.
But of our business within: and by this kiss,
I'll anger thee no more; troth Chuck I will not.
You shall have no just cause,
Dear Sue, I shall not.
NAy, Cuddy, prithee do not leave us now: if we part all this night, we shall not meet before day.
I prithee, Banks, let's keep together now.
If you were wise, a word would serve: but as you are, I must be forced to tell you again, I have a little private business, an hours work; it may prove but an half hours, as luck may serve; and then I take horse and along with you. Have we ever a Witch in the Morris?
No, no; no women's part, but Maid-marian, and the Hobby-horse.
I'll have a Witch; I love a Witch.
Faith, VVitches themselves are so common now a days, that the counterfeit will not be regarded. They say we have three or four in Edmonton, besides Mother Sawyer.
I would she would dance her part with us.
So would not I; for if she comes, the Devil and all comes along with her.
Well, I'll have a Witch: I have loved a Witch ever since I played at Cherry-pit. Leave me, and get my horse dressed: give him Oats; but water him not till I come. Whither do we foot it first?
To Sir Arthur Clarington's first, then whither thou wilt.
Well, I'am content: but we must up to Carter's, the rich Yeoman. I must be seen on Hobby-horse there.
O, I smell him now: I'll lay my ears Banks is in love, and that's the reason he would walk melancholy by himself.
Ho! who was that said I was in love?
Not I.
Not I.
Go to: no more of that. When I understand what you speak, I know what you say: believe that.
Well, it was I, I'll not deny it: I meant no hurt in it. I have seen you walk up to Carter's of Chessum. Banks, were not you there last Shrovetide?
Yes, I was ten days together there the last Shrovetide.
How could that be, when there are but seven days in the week?
Prithee peace, I reckon stila nova, as a Traveller: thou understand as a fresh-water Farmer, that never saw a week beyond Sea. Ask any Soldier that ever received his pay but in the Low Countries, and he'll tell thee there are eight days in the week there, hard by. How dost thou think they rise in high Ger∣many, Italy, and those remoter places?
I, but simply there are but seven days in the week yet.
No, simply as thou understand. Prithee, look but in the Lover's Almanac, when he has been but three days absent; Oh, says he, I have not seen my Love these seven yeets: there's a long cut. When he comes to her again, and embraces her, O, says he, now methinks I am in Heaven; and that's a pretty step: he that can get up to Heaven in ten days, need not repent his journey. You may ride a hundred days in a Caroch, and be further off then when you set forth. But I pray you, good Morrice-mates, now leave me. I will be with you by midnight.
Well, since he will be alone, we'll back again, and trouble him no more.
But remember, Banks.
The Hobby-horse shall be remembered. But hark you: get Poldavis, the Barber's Boy for the Witch; because he can show his Art better then another.
Well, now to my walk. I am near the place where I should meet
I know not what: say I meet a Thief, I must follow him, if to the Gallows: say I meet a Horse, or Hare, or Hound, still I must follow; some slow-pac'd Beast, I hope: yet Love is full of light∣nos in the heaviest Lovers. Ha! my Guide is come. A VVater-Dog. I am thy first man, Sculler: I go with thee: ply no other but my self: away with the Boat: land me but at Katherine's Dock, my sweet Katherine's Dock, and I'll be a Fare to thee. That way? nay, which way thou wilt, thou know the way better then I. Fine gentle Cur it is, and well brought up, I warrant him. We go a ducking, Spaniel; thou shalt fetch me the Ducks, pretty kind Rascal.
Thus throw I off mine own essential horror,
And take the shape of a sweet lovely Maid
Whom this Fool dotes on. We can meet his folly,
But from his Virtues must be Run-aways.
We'll sport with him: but when we reckoning call,
We know where to receive: the Witch pays for all.
I? is that the watch-word? She's come. Well, if ever we be married, it shall be at Barking-Church, in memory of thee. Now come behind, kind Cur.
And have I met thee, sweet Kate?
I will teach thee to walk so late.
O see, we meet in Metre. What? dost thou trip from me? Oh that I were upon my Hobby-horse, I would mount after thee so nimble. Stay, Nymph, stay, Nymph, singed Apollo: tarry and kiss me; sweet Nymph stay: tarry and kiss me, Sweet. We will to Chessum-street, and then to the house stands in the high-way. Nay, by your leave, I must embrace you. Oh help, help, I am drowned, I am drowned.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
This was an ill night to go a wooing in; I find it now in Pond'• Almanac: thinking to land at Katherine's Dock, I was almost at Gravesend. I'll never go to a Wench in the Dog-days again; yet it is cool enough. Had you never a paw in this Dog-trick? a mangy take that black hide of yours: I'll throw you in at Limehouse in some Tanner's Pit or other.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
How now? who's that laughs at me? Hist to him.  Peace, peace; thou did but thy kind neither. It was my own fault.
Take heed how thou trust the Devil another time.
How now? who's that speaks? I hope you have not your reading Tongue about you.
Yes, I can speak.
The Devil you can. You have read Esop's Fables then: I have played one of your parts then; the Dog that caught at the shadow in the water. Pray you, let me catechise you a little: What might one call your name, Dog?
My Dame calls me Tom.
It is well; and she may call me Ass: so there's an whole one betwixt us, Tom-Ass. She said, I should follow you, indeed. Well, Tom, give me thy fist; we are Friends: you shall be mine Ingle: I love you; but I pray you let's have no more of these ducking devices.
Not, if you love me. Dogs love where they are beloved. Cherish me, and I'll do any thing for thee.
Well, you shall have Jowls and Livers: I have Butchets to my Friends that shall bestow 'em: and I will keep Crusts and Bones for you, if you'll be a kind Dog, Tom.
Any thing: I'll help thee to thy Love.
Wilt thou? That promise shall cost me a brown Loaf, though I steal it out of my Father's Cupboard. You'll eat stolen Goods, Tom, will you not?
Oh best of all. The sweetest bits, those.
You shall not starve, Ningle Tom; believe that, if you love Fish, I'll help you to Maids and Soles. I'm acquainted with a Fishmonger.
Maids and Soles? Oh, sweet bits! Banqueting stuff, those.
One thing I would request you, Ningle, as you have played the Knavish Cur with me a little, that you would mingle amongst our Morrice-Dancers in the morning. You can dance?
Yes, yes, any thing: I'll be there, but unseen to any but thy self. Get thee gone before: fear not my presence. I have work to night. I serve more Masters, more Dames then one.
He can serve Mammon and the Devil too.
It shall concern thee, and thy Loves purchase:
There's a gallant Rival loves the Maid;
And likely is to have her. Mark what a mischief
Before the Morris ends, shall light on him.
On sweet Ningle, thy nous once again. Friends must part for a time: farewell, with this remembrance; shalt have bread too when we meet again. If ever there were an honest Devil, twill be the Devil of Edmonton, I see. Farewell Tom. I prithee dog me as soon as thou can.
I'll not miss thee, and be merry with thee.
Those that are joys denied, must take delight
In sins and mischiefs, it is the Devil's right.
Prithee no more: those tears give nourishment
To weeds and briers in me, which shortly will
O'regrow and top my head: my shame will sit
And cover all that can be seen of me.
I have not shown this check in company,
Pardon me now: thus singled with your self,
It calls a thousand sorrows round about.
Some going before, and some on either side;
But infinite behind: all chained together.
Your second adulterous Marriage leads;
That's the sad Eclipse, the effects must follow.
As, plagues of shame, spite, scorn, and obloquy.
Why? hast thou not left one hours patience
To add to all the rest? One hour bears us
Beyond the reach of all these Enemies.
Are we not now set forward in the flight,
Provided with the Dowry of my sin,
To keep us in some other Nation?
While we together are, we are at home
In any place.
It is fowl ill gotten coin,
Far worse then Usury or Extortion.
Let my Father then make the restitution,
Who forced me take the bribe: it is his gift
And patrimony to me; so I receive it.
He would not bless, not look a Father on me,
Until I satisfied his angry will.
When I was sold, I sold my self again
(Some Knaves have done it in Lands, and I in Body)
For money, and I have the hire. But, sweet, no more,
It is hazard of discovery, our discourse;
And then prevention takes off all our hopes.
For only but to take her leave of me,
My Wife is coming.
Who coming? your Wife?
No, no, thou art here: the woman; I knew
Not how to call her now: but after this day
She shall be quite forgot, and have no name
In my remembrance. See, see, she's come.
Co lead the horses to the hills top, there I'll meet thee.
Nay, with your favour, let him stay a little.
I would part with him too, because he is
Your sole Companion; and I'll begin with him,
Reserving you the last.
I, with all my heart.
You may hear, if it please you, Sir.
No, it is not fit.
Some rudiments, I conceive, they must be,
To overlook my slippery footings. And so.
No, indeed, Sir.
Tush, I know it must be so, and it is necessary.
On, but be brief.
What charge so'ere you lay upon me, Mistress,
I shall support it faithfully (being honest)
To my best strength.
Believe 't shall be no other. I know you were
Commended to my husband by a noble Knight.
Oh Gods! Oh, mine eyes!
How now? what ailst thou, Lad?
Something hit mine eye, it makes it water still,
Even as you said, Commended to my Husband.
Some door I think it was. I was, forsooth,
Commended to him by Sir Arth•r Clarington.
Whose Servant once my Thorny was himself.
That title methinks should make you almost Fellows,
Or at the least much more then a Servant;
And I am sure he will respect you so.
Your love to him then needs no spur for me,
And what for my sake you will ever do;
It is fit it should be bought with something more
Then fair entreats. Look here's a Jewel for thee,
A pretty wanton Label for thine ear;
And I would have it hang there, still to whisper
These words to thee, Thou hast my Jewel with thee.
It is but earnest of a larger bounty,
When thou returnst, with praises of thy service,
Which I am confident thou wilt deserve.
Why, thou art many now, besides thy self:
Thou moist be Servant, Friend, and Wife to him.
A good Wife is then all. A Friend can play
The Wife and Servants part, and shift enough.
No less the Servant can the Friend and Wife.
It is all but sweet society, good counsel,
Interchanged loves; yes, and counsel-keeping.
Not done yet?
Even now, Sir.
Mistress, believe my vow, your severe eye
Were it present to command; your bounteous hand,
Were it then by to buy or bribe my service,
Shall not make me more dear or near unto him,
Then I shall voluntary. I'll be all your charge,
Servant, Friend, Wife to him.
Wilt thou?
Now blessings go with thee for it: courtesies
Shall meet thee coming home.
Pray you say plainly, Mistress,
Are you jealous of him? if you be,
I'll look to him that way too.
Say thou so?
I would thou had a women's bosom now.
We have weak thoughts within us. Alas,
There's nothing so strong in us as suspicion:
But I dare not, nay, I will not think
So hardly of my Thorny.
Believe it, Mistress,
I'll be no Pander to him; and if I find
Any loose lubrick scopes in him, I'll watch him,
And at my return, protest I'll show you all.
He shall hardly offend without my knowledge.
Thine own diligence is that I press,
And not the curious eye over his faults.
Farewell: if I should never see thee more,
Take it for ever.
Prithee take that along with thee,
And haste thee to the hills top; I'll be there instantly.
No haste I prithee, slowly as thou can.
Pray let him obey me now: it is happily his last
Service to me. My power is even a going out of sight.
Why would you delay? we have no other
Business now but to part.
And will not that, sweet heart, ask a long time?
Methinks it is the hardest piece of work
That ever I took in hand.
Fie, fie, why look,
I'll make it plain and easy to you: Farewell.
Ah, alas! I am not half perfect in it yet.
I must have it read over an hundred times.
Pray you take some pains, I confess my dullness.
What a Thorne this Rose grows on? parting were sweet.
But what a trouble twill be to obtain it?
Come, again and again, farewell. Yet wilt return?
All questions of my journey, my stay, employment,
And revisitation, fully I have answered all.
There's nothing now behind, but nothing.
And that nothing is more hard then any thing,
Then all the every things. This Request.
What is it?
That I may bring you through one pasture more
Up to you knot of trees: amongst those shadows
I'll vanish from you, they shall teach me how.
Why, it is granted: come, walk then.
Nay, not too fast.
They say slow things have best perfection:
The gentle shower wets to fertility.
The churlish storm may mischief with his bounty.
The baser beasts take strength, even from the womb:
But the Lord Lion's whelp is feeble long.
Now for an early mischief and a sudden:
The minde's about it now. One touch from me
Soon sets the body forward.
Your request is out: yet will you leave me?
What? so churlishly? you'll make me stay for ever,
Rather then part with such a sound from you.
Why you almost anger me. Pray you be gone.
You have no company, and it is very early;
Some hurt may betide you homewards.
Tush, I fear none.
To leave you, is the greatest hurt I can suffer:
Besides, I expect your Father and mine own,
To meet me back, or overtake me with you.
They began to stir when I came after you:
I know they'll not be long.
So, I shall have more trouble.
Thank you for that. Then I'll ease all at once.
It is done now: what I ne'er thought on. You shall not go back.
Why? shall I go along with thee? sweet music!
No, to a better place.
Any place, I:
I'm there at home, where thou please to have me.
At home? I'll leave you in your last lodging.
I must kill you.
Oh fine! you'd fright me from you.
You see I had no purpose: I'm unarmed. It is this minutes decree, and it must be. Look, this will serve your turn.
I'll not turn from it, if you be erst, Sir. Yet you may tell me wherefore you'll kill me.
Because you are a whore.
There's one deep wound already: a whore?
It was ever further from me then the thought
Of this black hour: a whore?
Yes, I'll prove it,
And you shall confess it. You are my whore,
No wife of mine. The word admits no second.
I was before wedded to another, have her still.
I do not lay the sin unto your charge,
It is all mine own. Your marriage was my theft.
For I espoused your dowry, and I have it:
I did not purpose to have added murder;
The Devil did not prompt me: till this minute
You might have safe returned; now you cannot:
You have dogged your own death.
And I deserve it.
I'm glad my fate was so intelligent.
It was some good Spirits motion. Die? oh, it was time!
How many years might I have slept in sin?
Sin of my most hatred too, Adultery?
Nay, sure it was likely that the most was past;
For I meant never to return to you
After this parting.
Why then I thank you more,
You have done lovingly, leaving your self,
That you would thus bestow me on another.
Thou art my Husband, Death, and I embrace thee
With all the love I have. Forget the stain
Of my unwitting sin: and then I come
A Crystal Virgin to thee. My Soul's purity
Shall with bold Wings ascend the Doors of Mercy;
For Innocence is ever her Companion.
Not yet mortal? I would not linger you,
Or leave you a tongue to blab.
Now heaven reward you ne'er the worse for me.
I did not think that death had been so sweet;
Nor I so apt to love him. I could ne'er die better,
Had I staid forty years for preparation:
For I'm in charity with all the World.
Let me for once be thine example, Heaven;
Do to this man as I him free forgive.
And may he better die, and better live.
It is done; and I am in: once past our height,
We scorn the deepst Abyss. This follows now,
To heal her Wounds by dressing of the Weapon:
Arms, thighs, hands, any place; we must not fail,
Light scratches giving such deep ones. The best I can
To bind my self to this Tree. Now's the storm,
Which if blown o'er, many fair days may follow.
So, so, I'm fast; I did not think I could
Have done so well behind me. How prosperous
And effectual mischief sometimes is? Help, help;
Murder, murder, murder.
Ha! Whom tolls the Bell for?
Oh, oh!
Ah me! the cause appears too soon: my Child, my Son.
Susan, Girl, Child. Not speak to thy Father? Ho!
O lend me some assistance to o'retake this hapless woman.
Let's o'retake the murderers. Speak whilst thou can; anon may be too late. I fear thou hast deaths mark upon thee too.
I know them both; yet such an Oath is passed,
As pulls damnation up if it be broke;
I dare not name 'em: think what forced men do.
Keep oath with murderers? that were a conscience to hold the Devil in.
Nay, Sir, I can describe 'em;
Shall show them as familiar as their names.
The Taller of the two at this time wears
His Satten-doublet white, but Crimson lined;
Hose of black Satin, Cloak of Scarlet.
Warbeck, Warbeck, Warbeck: Do you list to this, Sir?
Yes, yes, I listen you: here's nothing to be heard.
The others Cloak branched Velvet black, Velvet lined his Suit.
I have 'em already: Somerton, Somerton.
Binal revenge, all this. Come, Sir, the first work
Is to pursue the Murderers, when we have removed
These mangled bodies hence.
Sir, take that Carcase there, and give me this.
I'll not own her now; she's none of mine.
Bob me off with a dumb show? No, I'll have life.
This is my Son too, and while there's life in him,
It is half mine; take you half that silence for 't.
When I speak, I look to be spoken to: forgetful Slut?
Alas! what grief may do now?
Look, Sir, I'll take this load of sorrow with me.
I, do, and I'll h•re this. How do you, Sir?
O, very ill, Sir.
Yes, I think so; but it is well you can speak yet.
There's no music but in sound, sound it must be.
I have not wept these twenty years before,
And that I guess was ever that Girl was born:
Yet now methinks, if I but knew the way,
My heart's so full, I could weep night and day.
Come, Gentlemen, we must all help to grace
The nimble-footed youth of Edmonton, that are so kind
To call us up to day with an high Morris.
I could wish it for the best, it were the worst now.
Absurditie's in my opinion ever the best Dancer in a Morris.
I could rather sleep then see 'em.
Not well, Sir?
Faith not ever thus leaden; yet I know no cause for 't.
Now am I beyond mine own condition highly disposed to mirth.
Well, you may have yet a Morris to help both;
To strike you in a dump, and make him merry.
Come, will you set your selves in Morrice-ray? the fore-Bell, second Bell, Tenor and great Bell; Maid-marion for the same Bell. But whore's the Weather-cock now? the Hobby-horse?
Is not Banks come yet? What a spite it is?
When set you forward, Gentlemen?
We stay but for the Hobby-horse, Sir: all our Footmen are ready.
It is marvel your Horse should be behind your Foot.
Yes, Sir: he goes further about: we can come in at the
VVicket, but the broad Gate must be opened for him.
Oh, we staid for you, Sir.
Only my Horse wanted a Shoe, Sir: but we shall make you amends ever we part.
I? well said, make 'em drink ever they begin.
A bowl, I prithee, and a little for my Horse, 
he'll mount the better. Nay, give me, I must drink to him, he'll not pledge else. Here Hobby.  I pray you: No? not drink? You see, Gentlemen, we can but bring our horse to the Water; he may choose whether he'll drink or no.
A good Moral made plain by History.
Strike up, Father Sawgut, strike up.
Even when you will, Children. Now in the name of the best foot forward. How now? not a word in thy Guts? I think, Children, my Instrument has caught cold on the sudden.
My Ningle's knavery: black Tom's doing.
Why what mean you, Father Sawgut?
Why what would you have him do? You hear his Fid∣dl is speechless.
I'll lay mine Ear to my Instrument, that my poor Fiddle is bewitched. I played The Flowers in May, even now, as sweet as a Violet; now twill not go against the hair: you see I can make no more Music then a Beetle of a Cow-turd.
Let me see, Father Sawgut, say, once you had a brave Hob∣by-horse, that you were beholding to. I'll play and dance too. Ningle, away with it.
I marry, Sir!
Away with jollity, it is too sad an hour.
Sir Arthur Clarington, your own assistance,
In the Kings Name, I charge, for apprehension
Of these two Murderers, Warbeck and Somerton.
Ha! flat Murderers?
Ha, ha, ha, this has awakened my melancholy.
And struck my mirth down flat. Murderers?
The accusation is flat against you, Gentlemen.
Sir, you may be satisfied with this. I hope
You'll quietly obey my power;
Twill make your cause the fairer.
Oh! with all our hearts, Sir.
There's my Rival taken up for Hang-man's meat. Tom told me he was about a piece of Villainy. Mates and Morris∣men, you see here's no longer piping, no longer dancing. This news of Murder has slain the Morris. You that go the foot∣way,
fare ye well: I am for a Gallop. Come, Ningle.
 I? Nay and my Fiddle be come to himself again, I care not. I think the Devil has been abroad amongst us to day. I'll keep thee out of thy fit now if I can.
These things are full of horror, full of pity.
But if this time be constant to the proof,
The guilt of both these Gentlemen I dare take
Upon mine own danger; yet howsoever, Sir,
Your power must be obeyed.
Oh most willingly, Sir.
It is a most sweet affliction. I could not meet
A joy in the best shape with better will.
Come, fear not, Sir; nor Judge, nor Evidence,
Can bind him o'er, who's freed by conscience.
Mine stands so upright to the middle Zone,
It takes no shadow to it, it goes alone.
MY Horse this morning runs most piteously of the Glaunders, whose nose yesternight was as clean as any Man's here now coming from the Barbers; and this I'll take my death upon it is long of this Jadish Witch, Mother Sawyer.
I took my Wife and a Serving-man in our Town of Edmonton, thrashing in my Barn together, such Corn as Country-VVenches carry to Market; and examining my Polecat why she did so, she swore in her conscience she was bewitched: and what Witch have we about us, but Mother Sawyer?
Rid the Town of her, else all our Wives will do nothing else but dance al out other Country May-poles.
Our Cattle fall, our Wives fall, our Daughters fall, and Maid-servants fall; and we our selves shall not be able to stand, if this Beast be suffered to graze amongst us.
Burn the Witch, the Witch, the Witch, the Witch.
What hast got there?
A handful of Thatch plucked off a Hovel of hers: and they say, when it is burning, if she be a Witch, she'll come run∣ning in.
Fire it, fire it: I'll stand between thee and home for any danger.
Diseases, Plagues; the curse of an old Woman follow and fall upon you.
Are you come, you old Trot?
You hot VVhore, must we fetch you with fire in your tail?
This Thatch is as good as a Jury to prove she is a Witch.
Out Witch; beat her, kick her, set fire on her.
Shall I be murdered by a bed of Serpents? help, help!
Hang her, beat her, kill her.
How now? Forbear this violence.
A crew of Villains, a knot of bloody Hang-men set to torment me I know not why.
Alas, neighbour Banks, are you a Ring-leader in mischief:
Fie, to abuse an aged woman!
Woman? a She-hell-cat, a Witch: to prove her one, we no sooner set fire on the Thatch of her House, but in she came running, as if the Devil had sent her in a Barrel of Gun-powder; which trick as surely proves her a Witch, as the Pox in a snuffling nose, is a sign a Man is a Whore-master.
Come, come; firing her Thatch? ridiculous: take heed Sirs what you do: unless your proofs come better armed, instead of turning her into a Witch, you'll prove your selves stark Fools.
Fools?
Arrant Fools.
Pray, Mr. Justice what do you call 'em, hear me but in one thing: This grumbling Devil owes me I know no good will ever since I fell out with her.
And brakedst my back with beating me.
I'll break it worse.
Wilt thou?
You must not threaten her: it is against Law. Go on.
So, Sir, ever since, having a Dun-Cow tied up in my Back-side, let me go thither, or but cast mine eye at her, and if I should be hanged, I cannot choose, though it be ten times in an hour, but run to the Cow, and taking up her tail, kiss (saving your Worship's Reverence) my You behind; That the whole Town of Edmonton has been ready to be-piss themselves with laughing me to scorn.
And this is long of her?
Who the Devil else? for is any man such an Ass, to be such a Baby, if he were not bewitched?
Nay, if she be a Witch, and the harms she does end in such sports, she may scope burning.
Go, go; pray vex her not: she is a Subject, and you must not be Judges of the Law to strike her as you please.
No, no, we'll find cudgel enough to strike her.
I, no lips to kiss but my Cows—?
Rots and foul maladies eat up thee and thine.
Here's none now, Mother Sawyer, but this Gentleman, my self and you; let us to some mild Questions, have you mild Answers? Tell us honestly, and with a free confession, (we'll do our best to wean you from it) are you a Witch, or no?
I am none.
Be not so furious.
I am none. None but base Curs so bark at me. I am none. Or would I were: if every poor old Woman be trod on thus by staves, reviled, kicked, beaten, as I am daily, she to be re∣veng'd had need turn Witch.
And you to be revenged have sold your Soul to th'Devil.
Keep thine own from him.
You are too saucy, and too bitter.
Saucy? by what commission can he send my Soul on the Devil's Errand, more then I can his? is he a Landlord of my Soul, to thrust it when he list out of door?
Know whom you speak to.
A Man: perhaps, no Man. Men in gay clothes, whose Backs are laden with Titles and Honours, are within far more crooked then I am; and if I be a Witch, more VVitch-like.
Y' are a base Hell-hound. And now, Sir, let me tell you, Far and near she's bruited for a woman that maintains a Spirit that sucks her.
I defy thee.
Go, go, I can, if need be, bring an hundred voices even here in Edmonton, that shall loud proclaim thee for a secret and pernicious Witch.
Ha, ha!
Do you laugh? why laugh you?
At my name: the brave name this Knight gives me, Witch.
Is the Name of Witch so pleasing to thine Ear?
Pray, Sir, give way, and let her Tongue gallop on.
A Witch? who is not?
Hold not that universal Name in scorn then.
What are your painted things in Princes Courts?
Upon whose Eye-lids Lust sits blowing fires
To burn Men's Souls in sensual hot desires:
Upon whose naked Paps, a Lechers thought
Acts Sin in fouler shapes then can be wrought.
But those work not as you do.
No, but far worse:
These, by Enchantments, can whole Lordships change
To Trunks of rich Attire: turn Ploughs and Teams
To Flanders Mares and Coaches; and huge trains
Of servitors, to a French butterfly.
Have you not City-witches who can turn
Their husbands wares, whole standing shops of wares,
To sumptuous Tables, Gardens of stolen sin?
In one year wasting, what scarce twenty win.
Are not these Witches?
Yes, yes, but the Law
Casts not an eye on these.
Why then on me,
Or any lean old Beldam? Reverence once
Had wont to wait on age. Now an old woman
Ill favoured grown with years, if she be poor,
Must be called Bawd or Witch. Such so abused
Are the course VVitches: t'other are the fine,
Spun for the Devil's own wearing.
And so is thine.
She on whose tongue a whirlwind sits to blow
A man out of himself, from his soft pillow,
To lean his head on Rocks and fighting waves,
Is not that Scold a Witch? The Man of Law
Whose honeyed hopes the credulous Client draws,
(As Bees by tinkling Basins) to swarm to him,
From his own Hive, to work the VVax in his;
He is no Witch, not he.
But these Men-VVitches
Are not in trading with Hells Merchandise,
Like such as you are, that for a word, a look,
Denial of a Coal of fire, kill Men,
Children and Cattle.
Tell them, Sir, that do so:
Am I accused for such an one?
Yes, twill be sworn.
Dare any swear I ever tempted Maiden
With golden hooks flung at her chastity,
To come and lose her honour? and being lost,
To pay not a Denier for it? Some slaves have done it.
Men-witches can without the Fangs of Law,
Drawing once one drop of blood, put counterfeit pieces
Away for true Gold.
By one thing she speaks,
I know now she's a Witch, and dare no longer
Hold conference with the Fury.
Let's then away:
Old woman, mend thy life, get home and pray.
For his confusion.  My dear Tom-boy welcome.
I am torn in pieces by a pack of Curs
Clapped all upon me, and for want of thee:
Comfort me: thou shalt have the Teat anon.
Bough wough: I'll have it now.
I am dri'd up
With cursing and with madness; and have yet
No blood to moisten these sweet lips of thine.
Stand on thy hind-legs up. Kiss me, my Tommy,
And rub away some wrinkles on my brow,
By making my old ribs to shrug for joy
Of thy fine tricks. What hast thou done? Let's tickle.
Hast thou struck the horse lame as I bid thee?
Yes, and nipped the sucking-childe.
Ho, ho, my dainty,
My little Pearl. No Lady loves her Hound,
Monkey, or Parakeet, as I do thee.
The Maid has been churming Butter nine hours; but it shall not come.
Let 'em eat Cheese and choke.
I had rare sport
Among the Clowns in the Morris.
I could dance
Out of my skin to hear thee. But my Curl-pare,
That Jade, that foul-tongu'd whore, Nan Ratcliff,
Who for a little Soap licked by my Sow,
Struck, and almost had lamed it; Did not I charge thee,
To pinch that Queen to the heart?
Bough, wough, wough: Look here else.
See, see, see; the Man in the Moon has built a new Wind-mill, and what running there's from all quarters of the City to learn the Art of Grinding!
Ho, ho, ho! I thank thee, my sweet Mongrel.
Hoyda! a-pox of the Devil's false Hopper! all the gol∣den Meal runs into the rich Knaves purses, and the poor have no∣thing but Bran. Hey derry down! Are not you Mother Sawyer?
No, I am a Lawyer.
Art thou? I prithee let me scratch thy Face; for thy Pen has fleaed off a great many men's skins. You'll have brave doings in the Vacation; for Knaves and Fools are at variance in every Village. I'll sue Mother Sawyer, and her own Sow shall give in evidence against her.
Touch her.
Oh my Ribs are made of a paynd Hose, and they break. There's a Lancashire Horn-pipe in my throat: hark how it tickles it, with Doodle, Doodle, Doodle, Doodle. Welcome Sergeants: welcome Devil. Hands, hands; hold hands, and dance around, around, around.
She's here; alas, my poor wife is here.
Catch her fast, and have her into some close Chamber: do, for she's as many VVives are, stark mad.
The witch, Mother Sawyer, the witch, the devil. [Car. her off.
O my dear VVife! help, Sirs!
You see your work, Mother Bumby.
My work? should she &amp; all you here run mad, is the work mine?
No, on my conscience, she would not hurt a Devil of two yeers old.
How now? what's become of her?
Nothing: she's become nothing, but the miserable trunk of a wretched woman. We were in her hands as Reeds in a mighty Tempest: spight of our strengths, away she brake; and no∣thing in her mouth being heard, but the Devil, the VVitch, the VVitch, the Devil; she beat out her own brains, and so died.
It's any Man's case, be he never so wise, to die when his brains go a wool-gathering.
Masters, be rul'd by me; let's all to a Justice. Hag, thou hast done this, and thou shalt answer it.
Banks, I defie thee.
Get a VVarrant first to examine her, then ship her to Newgate: here's enough, if all her other villanies were pardon'd, to burn her for a VVitch. You have a Spirit, they say, comes to you in the likeness of a Dog; we shall see your Cur at one time or other: if we do, unless it be the Devil himself, he shall go how∣ling to the Goal in one chain, and thou in another.
Be hang'd thou in a third, and do thy worst.
How, Father? you send the poor dumb thing howling to th'Goal? He that makes him howl, makes me roar.
VVhy, foolish Boy, dost thou know him?
No matter, if I do or not. He's baylable I am sure by Law. But if the Dog's word will not be taken, mine shall.
Thou Bayl for a Dog?
Yes, or a Bitch either, being my Friend. I'll lie by the heels my self, before Puppison shall: his Dog-days are not come yet, I hope.
VVhat manner of Dog is it? didst ever see him?
See him? yes, and given him a bone to gnaw twenty times. The Dog is no Court foysting Hound, that fills his belly
full by base wagging his tayl; neither is it a Citizens VVater-Spaniel, enticing his Master to go a-ducking twice or thrice a week, whilst his VVife makes Ducks and Drakes at home: this is no Paris-Garden Bandog neither, that keeps a Bough, wough, woughing, to have Butchers bring their Curs thither; and when all comes to all, they run away like Sheep: neither is this the black Dog of New-gate.
No, Good-man Son-fool, but the Dog of Hell-gate.
I say, Good-man Father-fool, it's a lye.
He's bewitch'd.
A gross lye as big as my self. The Devil in St. Dunstan's will as soon drink with this poor Cur, as with any Temple-Bar-Laundress, that washes and wrings Lawyers.
Bough, wough, wough, wough.
O the Dog's here, the Dog's here.
It was the voice of a Dog.
The voice of a Dog? if that voice were a Dog's, what voice had my Mother? so am I a Dog: bough, wough, wough: it was I that bark'd so, Father, to make Cocks-combs of these Clowns.
However, we'll be Cocks-comb'd no longer: away therefore to th' Justice for a Warrant; and then, Gammer Gur∣ton, have at your Needle of VVitch-craft.
And prick thine own eyes out. Go, peevish Fools.
Ningle, you had like to have spoyl'd all with your Boughings. I was glad to put 'em off with one of my Dog-tricks, on a sudden, I am bewitch'd, little Cost-me-nought, to love thee—a Pox, that Morrice makes me spit in thy mouth. I dare not stay. Fare∣wel, Ningle; you whoreson Dogs-nose. Farewel Witch.
Bough, wough, wough, wough.
Minde him not, he's not worth thy worrying: run at a fairer Game: that fowl-mouth'd Knight, scurvy Sir Arthur, flie at him, my Tommy; and pluck out's throat.
No, there a Dog already biting's conscience.
That's a sure Blood-hound. Come, let's home and play.
Our black work ended, we'll make holiday.
Brother, Brother! So sound a sleep? that's well.
No, not I, Sister: he that's wounded here,
As I am; (all my other hurts are bitings
Of a poor flea) but he that here once bleeds,
Is maim'd incurably.
My good sweet Brother,
(For now my Sister must grow up in you)
Though her loss strikes you through, and that I feel
The blow as deep, I pray thee be not cruel
To kill me too, by seeing you cast away
In your own helpless sorrow. Good Love, sit up:
And if you can give Physick to your self,
I shall be well.
I'll do my best.
I thank you. What do you look about for?
Nothing, nothing; but I was thinking, Sister.
Dear heart, what?
Who but a fool would thus be bound to a bed,
Having this Room to walk in?
Why do you talk so? would you were fast asleep.
No, no, I'm not idle:
But here's my meaning: being rob'd as I am,
VVhy should my Soul, which married was to hers,
Live in divorce, and not flie after her?
VVhy should not I walk hand in hand with death
To finde my Love out?
That were well, indeed.
Your time being come, when death is sent to call you,
No doubt you shall meet her.
Why should not I go without calling?
Yes, Brother, so you might, were there no place
To go to when y'are gone, but onely this.
Troth, Sister, thou sayst true:
For when a man has been an hundred yeers,
Hard travelling o're the tottering bridge of age,
He's not the thousand part upon his way.
All life is but a wandring to finde home:
When we are gone, we are there. Hapyy were man,
Could here his Voyage end; he should not then
Answer how well or ill he steer'd his Soul,
By Heaven's or by Hell's Compass; how he put in
(Loosing bless'd Goodness shore) at such a sin;
Nor how life's dear provision he has spent:
Nor how far he in's Navigation went
Beyond Commission. This were a fine Raign,
To do ill, and not hear of it again.
Yet then were Man more wretched then a Beast:
For, Sister, our dead pay is sure the best.
'Tis so, the best or worst. And I wish Heaven
To pay (and so I know it will) that Traytor,
That Devil Somerton (who stood in mine eye
Once as an Angel) home to his deservings.
What Villain but himself, once loving me,
With Warbeck's Soul would pawn his own to Hell,
To be reveng'd on my poor Sister?
Slaves! a pair of merciless Slaves!
Speak no more of them.
I think this talking hurts you.
Does me no good, I'm sure,
I pay for't everywhere.
I have done then.
Eat, if you cannot sleep: you have these two days
Not tasted any food. Jane, is it ready?
What's ready? what's ready?
I have made ready a rosted Chicken for you.
Sweet, wilt thou eat?
A pretty stomach on a sudden—yes—
There's one in the house can play upon a Lute:
Good Girl, let's hear him too.
You shall, dear Brother.
VVould I were a Musician, you should hear
How I would feast your ear.
Stay, mend your Pillow, and raise you higher.
I am up too high: am I not, Sister, now?
No, no; 'tis well: fall to, fall to. A Knife: here's ne∣ver a Knife, Brother, I'll look out yours.
Sister, O Sister, I am ill upon a sudden; and can eat no∣thing.
In very deed you shall. The want of Food makes you so faint. Ha! here's none in your pocket. I'll go fetch a Knife.
Will you? 'Tis well, all's well.
What art thou?
A lost Creature.
So am I too.
Ah, my She-Page!
For your sake I put on a shape that's false; yet do I wear a heart true to you as your own.
VVould mine and thine were Fellows in one house. Kneel by me here: on this side now? How dar'st thou come to mock me on both sides of my bed?
VVhen?
But just now: out-face me, stare upon me with strange postures: turn my Soul wilde by a face in which were drawn a thou∣sand Ghosts leap'd newly from their Graves, to pluck me into a winding-Sheet.
Believe it, I came no neerer to you then you place, at your beds-feet; and of the house had leave, calling my self your Horse∣boy, in to come, and visit my sick Master.
Then 'twas my Fancy. Some Wind-mill in my brains for want of sleep.
VVould I might never sleep, so you could rest.
But you have pluck'd a Thunder on your head.
VVhose noise cannot cease suddainly: why should you
Dance at the wedding of a second wife?
VVhen scarce the Musick which you heard at mine
Had tane a farewel of you. O this was ill!
And they who thus can give both hands away,
In th' end shall want their best Limbs.
Winnifride, the Chamber door fast?
Yes.
Sit thee then down;
And when th'ast heard me speak, melt into tears:
Yet I to save those eyes of thine from weeping,
Being to write a Story of us two,
In stead of Ink, dip'd my sad Pen in blood.
VVhen of thee I took leave, I went abroad
Onely for Pillage, as a Freebooter,
VVhat Gold soere I got, to make it thine.
To please a Father, I have Heaven displeas'd.
Striving to cast two wedding Rings in one,
Through my bad workmanship I now have none.
I have lost her and thee.
I know she's dead: but you have me still.
Nay, her this hand murdered; and so I lose thee too.
Oh me!
Be quiet, for thou my evidence art,
Jurie and Judge: sit quiet, and I'll tell all.
I have run madding up and down to find you, being laden with the heaviest News that ever poor Daughter carried.
VVhy? is the Boy dead?
Dead, Sir! O Father, we are cozen'd: you are told the Mur∣therer sings in Prison, and he laughs here.
This Villaine kil'd my Sister: see else, see,
A bloody Knife in's Pocket.
Bless me, patience!
The Knife, the Knife, the Knife!
VVhat Knife?
To cut my Chicken up, my Chicken; be you my Car∣ver, Father.
That I will.
How the Devil steels our brows after doing ill!
My stomack and my sight are taken from me; all is not well within me.
I believe thee, Boy: I that have seen so many Moons clap their Horns on other mens Foreheads to strike them sick, yet mine to scape, and be well! I that never cast away a Fee upon Urinals, but am as sound as an honest mans Conscience when hee's dying, I should cry out as thou dost, All is not well within me, felt I but the Bag of thy imposthumes. Ah poor Villaine! Ah my wounded Ras∣cal! all my grief is, I have now small hope of thee.
Do the Surgeons say, My wounds are dangerous then?
Ye, yes, and there's no way with thee but one.
Would he were here to open them.
Ile go to fetch him: Ile make an holiday to see thee as I wish.
A wondrous kinde old man.
Your sins the blacker, so to abuse his goodness. Master, how do you?
Pretty well now, boy: I have such odd qualms come cross my stomack! Ile fall too: boy, cut me.
You have cut me, I'm sure, a Leg or Wing, Sir.
No, no, no: a Wing? would I had Wings but to soar up you Tower: but here's a Clog that hinders me. What's that?
That? what? O now I see her; 'tis a young Wench, my Daughter, Sirrah, sick to the death: and hearing thee to be an ex∣cellent Rascal for letting blood, she looks out at a Casement, and crys, Help, help, stay that man; him I must have, or none.
For pities sake, remove her: see, she stares with one broad open eye still in my face.
Thou puttest both hers out, like a Villaine as thou art; yet see, she is willing to lend thee one againe to finde out the Mur∣therer, and that's thy self.
Old man, thou liest.
So shalt thou i'th' Goal. Run for Officers.
O thou merciless Slave! she was (though yet above ground) in her Grave to me, but thou hast torn it up againe. Mine eyes too
much drown'd, now must feel more raine.
Fetch Officers.
For whom?
For thee, sirrah, sirrah: some knives have foolish Posies upon them, but thine has a villanous one; look, Oh! it is enam∣meld with the Heart-Blood of thy hated Wife, my beloved Daugh∣ter. What saist thou to this evidence? is't not sharp? does't not strike home? thou canst not answer honestly, and without a trem∣bling heart, to this one point, this terrible bloody point.
I beseech you, Sir, strike him no more; you see he's dead already.
O, Sir! you held his Horses, you are as arrant a Rogue as he: up, go you too.
As y'are a man, throw not upon that Woman your loads of tyrannie, for she's innocent.
How? how? a woman? is't grown to a fashion for wo∣men in all Countries to wear the Breeches?
I am not as my disguise speaks me, Sir, his Page; but his first onely wife, his lawful wife.
How? how? more fire i'th' Bed-straw?
The wrongs which singly fell on your Daughter, on me are multiplyed: she lost a life, but I, an Husband and my self must lose, if you call him to a Bar for what he has done.
He has done it then?
Yes, 'tis confess'd to me.
Dost thou betray me?
O pardon me, dear heart! I am mad to lose thee, and know not what I speak: but if thou didst, I must arraigne this Father for two sins, Adultery and Murther.
Sir, they are come.
Arraigne me for what thou wilt, all Middlesex knows me better for an honest man, then the middle of a Market place knows thee for an honest woman: rise, Sirrah, and don your Tacklings, rig your self for the Gallows, or I'll carry thee thither on my back: your Trull shall to th' Goal go with you; there be as fine New-gate birds as she, that can draw him in. Pox on's wounds.
I have serv'd thee, and my wages now are paid, Yet my worst punishment shall, I hope, be staid.
STill wrong'd by every Slave? and not a Dog
Bark in his Dames defence? I am call'd Witch,
Yet am my self bewitched from doing harm.
Have I given up my self to thy black lust
Thus to be scorn'd? not see me in three days?
I'm lost without my Tomalin: prithee come,
Revenge to me is sweeter far then life;
Thou art my Raven, on whose cole - black wings
Revenge comes flying to me: O my best love!
I am on fire, (even in the midst of Ice)
Raking my blood up, till my shrunk knees feel
Thy curl'd head leaning on them. Come then, my Darling,
If in the Aire thou hover'st, fall upon me
In some dark Cloud; and as I oft have seen
Dragons and Serpents in the Elements,
Appear thou now so to me. Art thou i'th' Sea?
Muster up all the Monsters from the deep,
And be the ugliest of them: so that my bulch
Shew but his swarth cheek to me, let earth cleave,
And break from Hell, I care not: could I run
Like a swift Powder-Mine beneath the world,
Up would I blow it, all to finde out thee,
Though I lay ruin'd in it. Not yet come!
I must then fall to my old Prayer:
Sanctibiceter nomem tuum.
Not yet come! worrying of Wolves, biting of mad Dogs, the Manges and the—
How now! whom art thou cursing?
Thee. Ha! No, 'tis my black Cur I am cursing, for not attending▪ on me.
I am that Cur.
Thou liest: hence, come not nigh me.
Baugh, waugh.
VVhy dost thou thus appear to me in white, as if thou wert the Ghost of my dear love?
I am dogged, list not to tell thee, yet to torment thee: my whiteness puts thee in minde of thy winding Sweet.
Am I near death?
Yes, if the Dog of Hell be near thee. VVhen the De∣vil comes to thee as a Lamb, have at thy Throat.
Off, Cur.
He has the back of a Sheep, but the belly of an Otter: de∣vours by Sea and Land. VVhy am I in white? didst thou not pray to me?
Yes, thou dissembling Hell-hound: why now in white more then at other times?
Be blasted with the News; whiteness is days Foot-boy, a forerunner to light, which shews thy old rivel'd face: Villaines are strip't naked, the Witch must be beaten out of her Cock-pit.
Must she? she shall not; thou art a lying Spirit:
Why to mine eyes art thou a Flag of truce?
I am at peace with none; 'tis the black colour
Or none, which I fight under: I do not like
Thy puritan-paleness: glowing Furnaces
Are far more hot then they which flame outright.
If thou my old Dog art, go and bite such as I shall set thee on.
I will not.
I'll sell my self to twenty thousand Fiends, to have thee orn in pieces then.
Thou canst not: thou art so ripe to fall into Hell, that no note of my Kennel will so much as bark at him that hangs thee.
I shall run mad.
Do so, thy time is come, to curse, and rave and die.
The Glass of thy sins is full, and it must run out at Gallows.
It cannot, ugly Cur, I'll confess nothing;
And not confessing, who dare come and swear
have bewitched them? I'll not confess one mouthful.
Chuse, and be hang'd or burn'd.
Spight of the Devil and thee, I'll muzzle up my Tongue from telling Tales.
Spight of thee and the Devil, thou'lt be condemn'd.
Yes, when?
And ere the Executioner catch thee full in's Claws, thou'lt confess all.
Out Dog!
Out Witch! Thy tryal is at hand:
Our prey being had, the Devil does laughing stand.
She's here; attach her: Witch, you must go with us.
Whither? to Hell?
No, no, no, old Crone; your Mittimus shall be made thither, but your own Jaylors shall receive you. Away with her.
My Tommie! my sweet Tom-boy! O thou Dog! dost thou now fly to thy Kennel and forsake me? Plagues and Consum∣ptions—
Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Let not the World, VVitches or Devils condemn,
They follow us, and then we follow them.
I would fain meet with mine Ingle once more; he has had a Claw amongst 'um: my Rival that lov'd my VVench, is like to be hang'd like an innocent; a kinde Cur, where he takes; but where he takes not, a dogged Rascal. I know the Villaine loves me: no. [Barks.] Art thou there? that's Toms voice, but it is not he: this is a Dog of another hair: this? bark and not speak to me? not Tom then: there's as much difference betwixt Tom and this, as be∣twixt white and black.
Hast thou forgot me?
That's Tom again: prithee Ningle speak, is thy name Tom?
Whilst I served my old Dame Sawyer, it was: I'm gone from her now.
Gone? away with the Witch then too: she'll never thrive if thou leave her; she knows no more how to kill a Cow, or a Horse, or a Sow, without thee, then she does to kill a Goose.
No, she has done killing now, but must be killed for what she has done: she's shortly to be hanged.
Is she? in my conscience if she be, it is thou hast brought her to the Gallows, Tom.
Right: I served her to that purpose, it was part of my VVages.
This was no honest Servants part, by your leave Tom: this remember, I pray you, between you and I; I entertained you ever as a Dog, not as a Devil.
True; and so I used thee doggedly, not devilishly.
I have deluded thee for sport to laugh at.
The Wench thou seek after, thou never spoke with,
But a Spirit in her form, habit and likeness. Ha, ha!
I do not then wonder at the change of your garments, if you can enter into shapes of Women too.
Any shape, to blind such silly eyes as thine; but chiefly those course Creatures, Dog or Cat, Hare, Ferret, Frog, Toad.
Louse or Flea?
Any poor Vermin.
It seems you Devils have poor thin souls, that you can bestow your selves in such small bodies: but pray you Tom, one question at parting, I think I shall never see you more; where do you borrow those Bodies that are none of your own? the garment∣shape you may hire at Brokers.
Why would thou know that? fool, it avails thee not.
Only for my minds sake, Tom, and to tell some of my Friends.
I'll thus much tell thee: Thou never art so distant
From an evil Spirit, but that thy Oaths,
Curses and Blasphemies pull him to thine Elbow:
Thou never telst a lie, but that a Devil
Is within hearing it; thy evil purposes
Are ever haunted; but when they come to act,
As thy Tongue slandering, bearing false witness.
Thy hand stabbing, stealing, cozening, cheating,
He's then within thee: thou play, he bets upon thy part;
Although thou lose, yet he will gain by thee.
I? then he comes in the shape of a Rook.
The old Cadaver of some selfe-strangled wretch
We sometimes borrow, and appear humane.
The Carcase of some disease-slain strumpet,
We varnish fresh, and wear as her first Beauty.
Did never hear? if not, it has been done.
An hot luxurious Lecher in his Twines,
When he has thought to clip his Dalliance,
There has provided been for his embrace
A fine hot flaming Devil in her place.
Yes, I am partly a witness to this, but I never could em∣brace her: I thank thee for that, Tom; well, again I thank thee, Tom, for all this counsel, without a Fee too; there's few Lawyers of thy mind now: certainly Tom, I begin to pity thee.
Pity me? for what?
Were it not possible for thee to become an honest Dog yet? it is a base life that you lead, Tom, to serve VVitches, to kill innocent Children, to kill harmless Cattle, to stroy Corn and Fruit, &amp;c. it were better yet to be a Butcher, and kill for your self.
Why? these are all my delights, my pleasures, fool.
Or Tom, if you could give your mind to ducking, I know you can swim, fetch and carry, some Shop-keeper in London would take great delight in you, and be a tender master over you: or if you have a mind to the Game, either at Bull or Bear, I think I could prefer you to Mal-Cutpurse.
Ha, ha! I should kill all the Game, Bulls, Bears, Dogs, and all, not a Cub to be left.
You could do, Tom, but you must play fair, you should be staved off else: or if your stomach did better like to serve in some Noble Mans, Knights or Gentleman's Kitchen, if you could brook the wheel, and turn the spit, your labour could not be much; when they have Rost-meat, that's but once or twice in the week at most, here you might lick you own Toes very well: Or if you could translate your self into a Ladies Arming-puppy, there you might lick sweet lips, and do many pretty Offices; but to creep un∣der an old VVitches Coats, and suck like a great Puppy, Fie upon it! I have heard beastly things of you, Tom.
Ha, ha! The worse thou heard of me, the better it is.
Shall I serve thee, Fool, at the self-same rate?
No, I'll see thee hanged, thou shalt be damned first; I know thy qualities too well, Isle give no suck to such VVhelps; therefore henceforth I defy thee; out and avaunt.
Nor will I serve for such a silly Soul.
I am for greatness now, corrupted greatness;
There I'll shug in, and get a noble countenance:
Serve some Briarean Footcloth-strider,
That has an hundred hands to catch at Bribes,
But not a Fingers nayl of Charity.
Such, like the Dragons Tail, shall pull down hundreds
To drop and sink with him: I'll stretch my self,
And draw this Bulk small as a Silver-wire,
Enter at the least pore Tobacco fume
Can make a breach for: hence silly fool,
I scorn to prey on such an Atom soul.
Come out, come out, you Cur; I will beat thee out of the bounds of Edmonton, and to morrow we go in Procession, and af∣la thou shalt never come in again: if thou goosed to London, I'll make thee go about by Tiburn, stealing in by Thieving Lane: if thou can rub thy Shoulder against a Lawyers Gown, as thou possessed by Westminster-Hall, do; if not, to the Stairs amongst the Bandogs, take water, and the Devil go with thee.
Sir Arthur, though the Bench hath mildly censured your Errors, yet you have indeed been the Instrument that wrought all their mis-fortunes: I would wish you paid down your Fine speedi∣lie and willingly.
I'll need no urging to it.
If you should, it were a shame to you; for if I should speak my conscience, you are worthier to be hanged of the two, all things considered; and now make what you can of it: but I am glad these Gentlemen are freed.
We knew our innocence.
And therefore feared it not.
But I am glad that I have you safe.
How now! what noise is that?
Young Frank is going the wrong way: Alas, poor youth! now I begin to pity him.
Here let our sorrows wait him: to press nearer
The place of his sad death, some apprehensions
May tempt our grief too much, at height already.
Daughter, be comforted.
Comfort and I
Are too far separated to be joined
But in eternity. I share too much of him that's going thither.
Poor woman, it was not thy fault: I grieve to see
Thee weep for him that hath my pity too.
My fault was lust, my punishment was shame;
Yet I am happy that my soul is free
Both from consent, fore-knowledge and intent
Of any Murder, but of mine own Honour.
Restored again by a fair satisfaction, and since not to be wounded.
Daughter, grieve not for what necessity forces; rather resolve to conquer it with patience. Alas, she faints!
My griefs are strong upon me: my weakness scarce can bear •hem.
Away with her! hang her, Witch!
The Witch, that instrument of mischief! did not she witch the Devil into my Son-in-law, when he killed my poor Daughter? do you hear, Mother Sawyer?
What would you have? cannot a poor old woman have your leave to die without vexation?
Did not you bewitch Frank to kill his wife? he could no∣ver have don't without the Devil.
Who doubts it? but is every Devil mine?
Would I had one now whom I might command
To tear you all in pieces: Tom would have don't before he left me.
Thou did bewitch Anne Ratcliff to kill her self.
Churl, thou lie; I never did her hurt: would you were all as near your ends as I am, that gave evidence against me for it.
I'll be sworn, Mr. Carter, she bewitched Gimmal Wa••∣bowls Sow, to cast her Pigs a day before she would have ferried; et they were sent up to London, and sold for as good Westminster Dog-Pigs, at Bartholomew Fair, as ever great bellied Ale-wife longed for.
These Dogs will mad me: I was well resolved
To die in my repentance; though it is true.
I would live longer if I might: yet since
I cannot, pray torment me not; my conscience
Is settled as it shall be, all take heed
How they believe the Devil, at last he will cheat you.
Th'adst best confess all truly.
Yet again?
Have I scarce breath enough to say my Prayers?
And would you force me to spend that in bawling?
Bear witness, I repent all former evil▪
There is no damned Conjurer like the Devil.
Away with her, away!
Here's the sad Object which I yet must meet
With hope of comfort, if a repentant end
Make him more happy then mis-fortune would
Suffer him here to be.
Good Sire, turn from me;
You will revive affliction almost killed
With my continual sorrow.
O Frank, Frank!
Would I had sunk in mine own wants, or died
But one bare minute ere thy fault was acted.
To look upon your sorrows, executes me before my Exe∣cution.
Let me pray you, Sir.
Thou much wronged woman, I must sigh for thee,
As he that's only loath to leave the World,
For that he leaves thee in it unprovided,
Unfriended; and for me to beg a pity
From any man to thee when I am gone,
Is more then I can hope; nor to say truth,
Have I deserved it: but there is a payment
Belongs to goodness from the great Exchequer
Above, it will not fail thee, Winnifride;
Be that thy comfort.
Let it be thine too,
Untimely lost young man.
He is not lost,
Who bears his peace within him: had I spun
My VVeb of life out at full length, and dreamed
Away my many years in lusts, in surfeits,
Murders of Reputations, gallant fins
Commended or approved; then though I had
Died easily, as great and rich men do,
Upon my own Bed, not compelled by Justice,
You might have mourned for me indeed; my miseries
Had been as everlasting, as remediless:
But now the Law hath not arraigned, condemned
With greater rigour my unhappy Fact,
Then I my self have every little sin
My memory can reckon from my Child-hood:
A Court hath been kept here, where I am found
Guilty; the difference is, my impartial Judge
Is much more gracious then my Faults
Are monstrous to be named; yet they are monstrous.
Here's comfort in this penitence.
It speaks
How truly you are reconciled, and quickens
My dying comfort, that was near expiring
With my last breath: now this Repentance makes thee
As white as innocence; and my first sin with thee,
Since which I knew none like it, by my sorrow,
Is clearly cancelled: might our Souls together
Climb to the height of their eternity,
And there enjoy what earth denied us, Happiness:
But since I must survive, and be the monument
Of thy loved memory, I will preserve it
With a Religious care, and pay thy ashes
A VVidows duty, calling that end best,
Which though it stain the name, makes the soul blessed
Give me thy hand, poor woman: do not weep:
Farewell. Thou dost forgive me?
It is my part
To use that Language
Oh that my Example
Might teach the World hereafter what a curse
Hangs on their heads, who rather choose to marry
A goodly Portion, then a Dowr of Virtues!
Are you there, Gentlemen? there is not one
Amongst you whom I have not wronged: you most;
robed you of a Daughter; but she is
In Heaven; and I must suffer for it willingly.
I, I, she's in Heaven, and I am glad to see
Thee so well prepared to follow her:
I forgive thee with all my heart; if thou
Had not had ill counsel, thou would not have
Done as thou did: the more shame for them.
Spare your excuse to me, I do conceive
What you would speak: I would you could as easily
Make satisfaction to the Law, as to my wrongs.
I am sorry for you.
And so am I, and heartily forgive you.
I will pray for you, for her sake, who, I am sure, did love you dearly.
Let us part friendly too: I am ashamed of my part in thy wrongs.
You are all merciful, and send me to my Grave in peace. Sir Arthur, Heavens send you a new heart. Lastly to you, Sir; and though I have deserved not to be called your Son, yet give me leave upon my knees, to beg a blessing.
Take it: let me wet thy Cheeks with the last
Tears my griefs have left me. O Frank, Frank, Frank!
Let me beseech you, Gentlemen, to
Comfort my old Father; keep him with ye;
Love this distressed VVidow; and as often
As you remember what a graceless man
I was, remember likewise that these are
Both free, both worthy of a better Fate,
Then such a Son or Husband as I have been.
All help me with your prayers. On, on, it is just
That Law should purge the guilt of blood and lust.
Go thy ways: I did not think to have shed one tear for thee, but thou hast made me water my plants spite of my heart. M. Thorny, cheer up, man; whilst I can stand by you, you shall not want help to keep you from falling. We have lost our Children both on's the wrong way, but we cannot help it: better or worse, it is now as it is.
I thank you, Sir, you are more kind then I have cause to hope or look for.
Mr. Somerton, is Kate yours or no?
We are agreed,
And, but my Faith is passed, I should fear to bemarried Husbands are so cruelly unkind: excuse me that I am thus troubled.
Thou shalt have no cause.
Take comfort Mistress Winnifride. Sir Arthur,
For his abuse to you, and to your Husband,
Is by the Bench enjoined to pay you down
A thousand Marks.
Which I will soon discharge.
Sir, it is too great a sum to be employed upon my Funeral.
Come, come, if luck had served, Sir Arthur, and every ma• had his due, somebody might have tottered ere this, without pay¦ing Fines: like it as you list. Come to me Winnifride, shalt be well come: make much of her, Kate, I charge you: I do not think bu• she's a good Wench, and hath has wrong as well as we. So let' every man home to Edmonton with heavy hearts, yet as merry a we can, though not as we would.
Join Friends in sorrow; make of all the best:
Harms past may be lamented, not redressed.
I Am a Widow still, and must not sort
A second choice, without a good report;
Which though some Widows find, and few deserve,
Yet I dare not presume, but will not swerve
From modest hopes. All noble tongues are free;
The gentle may speak one kind word for me.

