Tlmes eldest Daughter (Truth) presents our Play;
And, from forgotten Monuments of Clay,
Calls up th'Heroicke Spirits of old Times,
Famed then as well for Virtues as black Crimes;
And with Her own Tongue, and own Phrase, to tell
The Actions they have done; or ill, or well.
IOSEPHVS th'ancient Writer, with a Pen
Lent by the Muses, gives new life to Men;
Who breathed such Tragic Accents forth to the Ear
Of Hebrew Armies, which you now shall hear;
Please you to sit attentive: Wit hath run
In a Zodaicall Circle, like the Sun,
Through all Invention; which is grown so poor
She can show nought, but what has been before:
Yet Reverend History, which upon the Stage
Hath oft been heard sp•…ache; hopes, even for Her Age,
Your strong hands will support Her; She must live
Now by no heate, but what your beams doe give:
To gain which (though Her Scoenes seem grave and hie)
She here and there with a loose wing doth fly;
Striving to make you merry: No other Baize
She reaches at, but this; your Loves, your Praise.
O My thrice Princely Son; thou hast forgot
That Time's our Moister, and wee can dispo•…
But merely of the instant.
Madam true:
Nor have I lost a moment; yet I know,
No diligence appears to those, whose hearts
Doe both desire and waite.
Enough, enough;
Come let's away, my heart is winged with haste
That out-flies thought or motion; Egypt (sweet)
Hath safety in it, not Jerusalem.
I doe confess it; yet this dangerous way
Of our escape, hath many fears about it.
There's pregnant reason for it, and our lives
Are marks that Herod shoots at: Who but sees
The woeful state of sad Jerusalem,
And how this Tyrant (like an angry Boar)
Roots up the goodly Pines should cover him?
Hath he not slain Antigonus, destroyed
Thy Father and thy Grandsire: (O my Lords,
My dear loved Lords, my Father and my Husband;)
Worthy Hircanus, noble Alexander;
And at this instant lies hee not in waite
For our destructions? Beldam that I am
To prate at such a season; (holy Sweet)
Come let's away, our flight is so secure,
No Art can undermine it; any pause
Opens our graves before vs: fly, O fly.
I doe attend your Highness.
Hark, I hear
The steps of some pursues vs; prithee come,
Let Egypt and not Iuda be our Tomb.
Is this the diligence your duty shows,
To run this slothful pace? By all I love,
You're worthy of blame in high terms.
Princely Antipater
You're too improvident, and this neglect
Will draw your life in hazard; understand,
They are Lyons and not Lambs you cope withal:
The Mother-Queene is s•…btile, and her Son
Of high and noble spirit; should they scope,
You fix a Ram to batter down the life
Both of the King and Kingdom.
Gracious Sir,
Fear not my care; for nothing you can wish
Is able to outstrip my diligence.
I but awake the duty which you owe
Unto your King and Country; when that moves,
Children are strangers, Fathers are unknown,
And where our Princes health is questioned,
The lives we either borrow or doe lend
Must bee forgot and made ridiculous:
You understand me, go, dispatch, away.
With faith great as your longings.
So, why so;
Thus have I started bravely, and maintained
My race with full speed to ambition;
Much of my way is smoothed by the deaths
Of proud Antigonus and Alexander,
But chiefly of Hircanus, till hee went
My torch could never kindle; could I now
But damp the high Priest Aristobulus,
(As there's much water towards) and in it
Drown his old politic Mother, half my way
Lies as my thoughts would wish it; and how ere
By birth I am a Bastard, yet my wit
Shall bear me above the true-borne; for it is found,
Power makes all things lawful, all things sound.
Who sits on the Tribunal, sits on thorne,
And dangers doe surround him; for at it
Envy stands ever gazing, and with darts
Headed with lightning strikes unto the heart
Of every noble action: What can Kings
Doe, that the rude not censure and pervert
To wild interpretations? Nay, although
Justice and mercy guard them; though men's faults
Are grown so odious, that even Cruelty
Is a commended goodness, mere Distrust
A reasonable virtue; Secrecy,
Important and most needful; and Suspect,
A worthy truth, which needs no witnesses:
Yet, in this case, (where men cannot err twice)
What shall we doe, that shall scope Infamy?
Fine dissimulation!
O it is a hell to think on, that how ere
Our natures are inclined to pity, yet
Our actions must be cruel (or so thought)
To guard our lives from danger; wicked men
With their sins so transform vs. O my Love,
This unto thee I speak, whose tender heart
I know hath bitter thoughts, when it records
Thy Fathers and thy Grand-fathers mishaps:
It is true, I cause them dye; but (gentle Sweet)
Necessity, thy safety, mine, nay all the Lands,
Were my most just assistants; and the act
Was noble, how ere blamed of Cruelty.
My dearest Lord, doe not mistake my temper,
My Grand-father, and Father, when they fell,
How ever Nature taught mine eyes to weep,
Yet in my love to you I buried them;
They were rich Jewels once, but, set by you,
They have nor price, nor lustre; it is mine eye
That pities them, my heart doth honour you.
O you're a goodness past equality,
And all the blessed times which are to come
Shall with more admiration then belief
Receive th'incredible, but undoubted truth,
Of your rare mildness, faith and temperance.
It shall indeed; and be this kiss a seal
Of our perpetual loue-knot; yet (my Queen)
There are new Treasons hatching, which (believe)
Will stretch thy patience higher: Ioseph, read
That strange and cunning Letter.
I write short ALEXANDRA, for fear of interception; that Harrods cruelty extended to the death of thy Husband, and im∣prisonment of thy self, I lament: aid I cannot send thee; but if by flight thou can escape, Egypt shall receive thee: I am glad thy Son Aristobulus is high Priest, let him accompany thy Journey: If I should deal for thee by force, I raise two mighty enemies, Rome and Iuda; thou art wise, fare as my self: Thine CLEOPATRA, Q. of Egypt.
These are miraculous Treasons.
Subtle plots.
Strange interwinding mischiefs,
Say not so,
Give them a gentler title; nothings read
That doth accuse my Mother or my Brother.
Indeed it is but an invitation
Of others Love, not their confederacy.
The Egyptian Queen persuades, but their consent
Is not conceived here.
Dear wife and Sons,
Love hath a blindfold judgment; would their hearts
Were harmless as your wishes; but here comes
The man will reconcile vs: Captain, speak,
Whore's Alexandra? Whore's Aristobulus?
Sir, they are fled.
Fled! do not speak it; better thou had sunk
To hell, then bring that mischief.
O the Devil!
This was your hackney pace
By all that's true,
I have not slackt a minute; they were gone
Ere I had my commission, and so fast,
My speed could not outstrip them; yet I took
This luggage and their Servants, whence (no doubt)
Your Majesty may gather new instructions.
Whence I may gather my despair and grief;
Villain, thou hast betrayed me; in their loss,
I'm lost to fate an danger: Silly Snail;
Could Sloth have crept so slowly? Why, thy way
Was smooth as glass, and thou might have surprised
Them easier then to speak it. O you Gods,
What plummets hang at Vassals heals; and how
Doth sleep and dullness cease them! But I vow,
Thy life shall pay thy forfeit.
Gracious Sir:
Talk thou of grace; and in this act hast lost,
All things that's like, or near it? Did not scorn
Hold me, my hand should kill thee.
Good Sir, think—
That you're too rude to offer thus to thrust
Twixt me and my resolution.
Not a word;
It is death t'outface this lightening.
Lost, and fled, and gone, and all my hope
Turned topsy turuie downward? Ioseph, hark.
Blessed be the God of Iuda, which hath brought
My royal Mother, and my Brother safe,
Out of the hands of sad Captivity.
O, I will offer Sacrifice each day,
And make that hour a Sabbath, which doth bring
Them safe from threatening danger.
Madam, Amen;
With that prayer Isle join ever, and invoke
Prosperity to guard them;—but (in heart)
Wish that damnation, like a Thunder-bolt,
Would beat them into cinders.
It is resolved,
Force shall compel what virtuously I would
Have sought from mild entreaty; for those Trunks,
Go throw them into Silo, let that Lake
Devour them and their treasures.
Not so good,
You may, by that means, blind-fold cast away
What you would after purchase with your blood;
But cannot then recall it: Sir, conceive;
There may be Complots, Letters, Stratagems,
And things we cannot dream of.
Nay, perhaps
Some new negotiations.
Pa•…er tongues,
That may discover strange dissemblers.
True,
You have prevailed, break up those rotten Tombs,
Lets see what Ghosts they harbour. Ha, whats this?
O me, my Mother and my Brother! Eyes
Drop out and see not their destruction.
Unhappy chance.
Unfortunate young-man.
It is fate not to be shunned.
Woe the time.
What's here: the high Priest like a Juggler?
Are these his holy Garments; this his Robe,
His Brest-plate and his Ephod, his rich Coat,
His Meter and his Girdle? Can it be,
That this was once Queen of Jerusalem?
O you immortal Gods, to what disguise
Will Treachery transform vs!
Rather think,
How sharpe a plague is Tyranny: O King,
Remember it is the fiercest Beast, of all
That are accounted savage; yet delights
In Flattery, which is the worst of them
That are tame and domestic: With these Fiends
My life can find no pleasure; doe not then
Blame me to seek my freedom.
Mighty Sir,
If Life bee th'onely Jewel Heaven can lend,
And that in the Creation was not made
A thing of equal purchase; how can wee
Offend, that but preserve it? You may say,
It hath deceived vs; yet Sir, I will think
How ere it finish here, it is but a stroke
To draw it forth unto eternity.
It is a good resolution; for (believe)
Your days on earth are finished; treacherous plots
Like these, shall not ore take me.
But your Tyranny
Shall out-runne all example: Sir, Despair
Arms me with truth and boldness; I dare now
Tell you, of Kings, you are the wickedest;
And I, th•…in the ruins of my blood,
Read your destroying nature, and collect
Into a short brief many Tragedies,
Acted upon our family; what hope
Is left, that can assist vs?
You are plain.
Truth hath no need of figures: was it not you
That did betray Hircanus in his flight
To the Arabian Monarch; and when laid
In harmless sleep then slew him? Did not you
Hire the bloody Cassius to cut off
My fathers head, (the loved Antigonus?)
Have you not kilt my Husband, trod my Sons
Into the mire, that you might safely walk
Over their heads unto Ambition?
And can you hope, that wee have any hope
In you, but desolation?
Your despair
Turn temperance into folly; Charity
Would more become the dying.
Tic confessed;
Nor is it lost in this sad Argument:
We know our lives are forfeit, take them Sir;
To dye, is the first contract that was made
Twixt Mankind and the World; tic a debt,
For which there's no forgiveness, th'onely cause
For which we were created; and, indeed,
To die's mans nature, not his punishment;
What folly then would shun it? Boldly Sir,
Use what your power hath conquered.
So I will;
Your own lips are your Judges; and these hands,
Armed with these two Stilettos at one blow,
Shall thus drive all fears from me; but unite
Two friends in mine embraces; happy ones,
Exceediug happy ones; let not your fears
Draw to your eyes false figures, or make me
Appear that which I am not: come, I love you,
Dearly I love you; all that I have done
Constraint, and not my nature perfitted:
Be henceforth free for ever; Egypt, nor
The World shall safelier guard you; as you stan•…
Thus shall you still support me; Holiness
Upon my right hand; Mother you shall sit
Ever upon my left hand; both shall be
Mine Armour, Counsel, and prosperity.
This grace is past example; Herod's a God.
It is but their first step to felicity:
Antipater, your ear.
Mother, the King is gracious.
Past belief,
Nor shall the memory lose me; this not feigned,
Isle fix my prayers upon him.
You shall doe
Wrong to your royal nature to suspect him.
Sir, it is true;
I hold his word a rock to build upon.
The sport is excellent, the wager firm,
My person shall maintain it.
So shall mine.
And if I shrink, make me a weather-cocke.
How soon a foul day's cleared: Now to make
Your happiness more constant; Brother, know,
The Temple of King Solomon which I
The other day defaced and threw down
Low as the earth it stood on; once again
I will erect with double excellence.
Ioseph, my Brother, to your noble charge
I give that holy building; see it framed
To th'height of Art and wonder; spare no gold,
Jewels, nor rich imbosture; I have mines,
And all shall be exhausted; that the world
May boast, King Herod out-went Solomon.
Sir, you've engaged me where my heart desired;
Doubt not my diligence.
Tic known too well:
How now, what news Centurion? How stands fate
Between Augustus and Mark Anthony?
O royal Sir, deadly unfortunate;
For, never was so sad a day before
Seen to ore-couer Egypt: To be brief
Augustus hath the Conquest; Anthony
Lies buried in the blood his warlike hand
Struck from his royal bosom; the sad Queen
Oretakes him with like fury, and now both
Are turned to dust and ashes.
Thou hast spoke
Much sorrow in a few words.
But hold still
Far greater to unburden: Soon as chance
Had made Augustus happy, and orethrowne
Fair Cleopatra, and her Anthony;
Hee views his spoils, and amongst them finds the aide
Y'ad sent to interpose him: Now hee frowns,
Bends his enraged forehead, and protests,
That Iuda and Jerusalem shall curse
They ever heard the name of Anthony:
And this hee spake with such an Emphasis,
As shook my heart within me; yet gave wings
Unto my faith to tell you.
Sir, no more,
You have split me with thy Thunder; I have made
Rome and the world my mortal enemies;
Yet virtue did transport me; but that guard
Is no guard now: Tell me, Centurion,
Where did you leave Augustus?
Sir, in Rhodes.
Tic a fair easy Journey, I'm resolved;
Nor shall persuasion change me; hence Isle go,
And as a Hermit throw at Caesars feet
My Crown and person; if hee pity them,
My peace is made; if otherwise,
My fault flies not beyond me.
O my Son,
This is a desperate hazard.
Nay tic more;
A tempting of your fortune.
Be content,
Mother and Sister, nothing alters me;
Nor doe they love me, that would draw my will
To any other compass: Ioseph, to you
I leave the Realms protection, and the care
Or building up the Temple: Nay, no tears,
They prophecy my death, which doe but show
A low dejected countnance; if I have
Power in your hearts, this day I challenge you
To give them unto pastime, that the world
May see, we dread not fortune.
Tic resolved;
And Isle be first to show obedience.
Sir, twixt my Princely Brothers and my self,
I'ue made a match of Swimming, if you please
But to allow the Contract.
How is it made?
That I and th'high Priest Aristobulus,
Will swim more swift, more comely, and more ways,
Then can my Princely Brothers.
Are all agreed?
All, if your Majesty consent thereto.
For those young men it skils not; but Sir, you,
I'm curious of your danger.
There's no fear.
Tic a brave recreation.
A fit skill
For Princes to delight in.
Gracious Sir,
Let me consort my Brothers.
Be your will
Your own director; I am satisfied.
Why tic a match then.
Yet look well to your safeties; for my self,
Rhodes is mine object: Dearest Love, farewell;
This kiss seal my remembrance; Mothers, let
Your only prayers assist me; for the rest,
Despair not till my downfall; go, away,
Reply not, if you love me; only Antipater,
Stay and attend me further. Princely youth,
Of all the hopes that doe attend my life,
Thy Greatness is my greatest; nor would I
Imba•…que me in this desperate vessel thus,
Were it not to raise thy fortunes: But tic now
No time for Courtship; only, I must leave
Two sad commandments with thee.
Speak them Sir,
Without exception, you cannot devise
What Isle not execute.
Tic nobly said:
Thou see the high Priest Aristobulus,
And know how like a heavy weight he hangs,
Pressing our fortunes downward; if hee live
Our lives have no assurance.
Tic resolved,
Hee never sees to morrow; soon at night,
When we doe swim our wager, Isle so teach
His Holiness to dive, that on the earth
He ne'er shall tread to hurt vs.
Thou hast hit
The object that I looked at.
(But shot wide
Of goodness, and all good thoughts.)
This performed,
There yet remains another thing to doe,
Which neerelier doth concern me.
Speak it Sir;
Your pleasure is mine Armour.
Briefly thus,
If through my fortune, or Augustus wrath,
I perish in this Journey; by that love,
Which na•…re, favour, or my best deserts
Can kindle in thy bosom; I conjure
And bind thee on the first intelligence,
By poison, sword, or any violent means,
To kill my Wife Miriam; let no man
But Herod taste her sweetness; which performed,
My soul in death shall love thee.
Think tic done;
By heaven the hour which tells me of your death,
Is th'oure of her destruction; I have sworn,
And there's no fate can change me.
Be thy self,
Constant and vnremoued; so farewell.
Two fiends like these were never spit from Hell.
Go Herod, happy King; nay Herod, go,
Unhappy, cause so happy; happy King,
Whilst you are a King; unhappy when no King:
Hangs then mishap or hap upon a King, or no King?
Then Herod, be no King; Antipater be King:
And what's a King? a God: and what are Gods, but Kings?
Jove, Prince of Gods, was petty King of paltry Create;
Men subject are to Kings and Gods; but of the twain,
Their Gods than Kings commands, they rather disobey;
Kings greater then; nay, better then, then Gods:
Then but a King or God, nought with Antipater;
And rather King then God; no God; a King, a King.
When I complain to Echo but head-aking; it cries, a King:
When I, in mirth, am musique making; it sounds, a King:
Each sight, when I am waking; presents a King:
When I my rest am taking; I see a King.
Last night I saw, or seemed to see; nay, sure I saw
A Crown hang ore my head; &amp; through the Crown a Sword:
I saw, I sighed, I cried, O when? O when?
Fall Crown; yea fall with Sword; fall both, so one may fall:
But why dream I of falling, that must rise;
Nay run, nay leap, nay fly unto a Crown?
Giants heap hills on hills, to scale high Heaven;
I, heads on heads, to climb a Kingdoms Sky:
But oh, I am a Son; a Sun, O happy name;
A Sun must shine alone, obscuring Moon, and Stars:
I, but I am a Bastard; what of that?
Men base by birth, in worth are seldom base;
And Natures Out-casts, still are Fortunes Darlings:
Bacchus, Apollo, Mercury; Bastards, yet bravest Gods:
Then, why not I a God, a Demi-God, or Worthy?
You Gods, you Demi-Gods, you Worthies then assist me;
That, as our birth was like, our worth may bear like price:
If they refuse; come Devils, and befriend me;
My breast lies open; come; come Furies and possess it;
Hatch here some monstrous brood, worthy of you and me;
Which all Posterities may know, but none believe;
Whereat the Sun may not go back, as once it did,
At Atreus tyranny; but fall and dye for ever:
Whereat the Heavens may quake, Hell blush, &amp; Nature trem∣ble;
And men (half mad) may stand amazed. So, so, it works, it works;
My breast swells to a Mountain; and I breed
A Monster, past description; to whose birth,
Come Furies, and bee Mid-wiues. Hark! O hark!
So shall it be; shall it? no shalls; tic done, dispatcht:
Who can resolve, can doe; who can dispose, can better:
My way, seven single persons, and two houses cross;
Supported by a many headed beast:
O, had they all one head, or all their heads one neck,
Or all their necks one body, which one blow might broach;
But had they Hydra's heads, Gerions bodies; Hercules,
By making them away, would make his way to Heaven:
But as an hunger-starued Tiger, between two Heifers,
Here yawns, there gapes, in doubt where first to fasten;
So doubt I where to set my paws, but care not where;
My Father shall be first, that order be observed;
Whose death I wish, not work, lest piety be wanting;
Rome will I hope ease me of that disturbance:
Herod is come Augustus, friend to thy foe, and so thy foe;
Keep him Augustus, nay kill him Augustus, or Jove kill him &amp; thee;
Pass he by Land or Sea, or Hell, or under Heaven:
O Earth; food unto him, or none, or noisome give:
O Sea; his ships or sink in sands, or drink in waives:
O Heaven; or stop his breath, or lend contagious breath:
O Hell; for kindness, call him in thy womb: In sum,
Gape Earth, swell Seas, fall Heaven, Hell swallow him:
But, let me see; what say my hellish Counsellors?
Egystus woos, and wins, and wears a Crown: a Queen
Receives with love (false love) the Victor King; una•…med,
She clothes him in her handiwork, a shirt,
Which had no head or arms to issue out;
Entangled thus they slew him: let me see,
What have they left? thus Clitemnestra writes;
Per scelera semper sceleribus tutum est iter;
Fond is the stay of sin; sin safest way to sin;
Egystus leaves this axiom;
Nec regna scotium far, nec tedae sciunt;
None, or alone; Kings can endure no Rivals;
I understand you well; and so will work;
Whetting against my Father both his Wife,
His Sister and her Husband; some by Fear,
Some by Belief, and some by Jealousy:
Thus rise I on their heads, and with their hands
Rip up their natural Bowels: Tic decreed,
The Plot is laid, Parts must bee played,
No time delayed.
Tic a good handsome Plot, and full of Art;
But how like you my Model for the Timber-worke?
Pretty, pretty, if the seats be not too spacious.
O, tic much the better, and fitter for the Scribes &amp;
Pharisies to sleep upon: but here comes the Lord Ioseph.
Well said my masters, and how mounts the brave Temple? may a man stand on the top of it and orelooke the Sun?
The Sun is very high Sir; yet there is never an Almanacke-maker, but may lie on his back and behold Capricorn.
Tut, any foolish Citizen may doe that which hath his wife for his moister: but stay; what's hee?
Come away Disease, and hang up these my trophies,
Whilst I with gentle ayre, beat upon the ears of passengers.
At hand Sir, and here is your Ensign; as for your Drugs, there is not one of them but is able to send a man to God or the Devil in an instant.
Come will you buy, for I have here
The rarest Gummes that ever were;
Gold is but dross and Features dye,
Else Aesculapius tells a lie:
But I,
Come will you buy,
Have Medicines for that Malady.
What's hee?
O Sir, it is one that undertakes to know more Simon∣ples, then ever grew in Paradise; tic Rabbi Achitophel.
What, the famous Mountebank?
The same Sir.
Is there a Lady in this place,
Would not bee masked, but for her face;
O doe not blush, for here is that
Will make your pale cheeks plump and fat.
Then why
Should I thus cry,
And none a Scruple of me buy.
Reverend Jew; I hear you're famed for many rarities;
As Sculpture, Painting, and the setting forth
Of many things that are inscrutable;
Besides you are a learned rare Physician.
I know as much as ere Sambashaw did,
That was old Adams Schoolmaster; for, look you Sir:
Here is a rare Mercurian Pill,
An Anodine helps every ill;
The Dissenterea, and the Gout,
And cures the sniueling in the Snout.
The Sick,
Or any Crick,
Straight cures this Diaphoreticke.
I shall have employment for you.
The Jew is all your Creature, and his skill
He will willingly bestow upon your gooduesse.
O Sir, you shall not.
Yes Sir, my Moister will willingly give you his skill;
Yet, with this Memorandum, you must pay for his good will.
I am no niggard, Sir.
Besides, my Lord, there's never a Pebble in Iordan, but my Moister is able to make the Philosophers Stone of it.
O wonderful! as how I pray you Sir?
Why by extraction, solution, reverberation, coagu∣lotion, fixation, viuiuication, mortification, &amp; multi alia.
Peace knave, I say, these pearls must not feed Porkets.
How, doe you make Swine of vs? I tell you we are as arrand Jaws as your self.
No more, you're all for mine employment; you for stone,
You for Painting, you for Timber-worke;
No man shall want his merit: Go, away,
Apply your labours, there's a largess for you.
O brave Lord Ioseph.
Come to me Gallants you whose need,
The common Surgeons cannot reed;
Here is a Balm will cure all sores,
Got in Broils, or unwholesome whores.
Come away,
For why the day,
Is past, and here I cannot stay.
O cease my Miriam, tears can doe no good;
This Murder's past example; to be drowned,
Drowned in a shallow murmur where the stones
Chid the faint water for not covering them.
O, it was a plot beyond the Devil sure;
Man could not have that malice.
Madam yes,
And it was some great one too that had his fist
Thrust in the blood of Aristobulus.
For which blood Isle have vengeance, &amp; my tears
Shall never dry till it bee perfited.
Madam, forbear complaining; would this were
The worst of Mischiefs journey.
Know you worse?
I dare not speak my knowledge, though my heart
Leaps twixt my lips to utter Mysteries.
Note you that Salumith?
Yes. it hath pinched her on the petticoat.
Sir, as you're noble, whatsoere you know
Of these mishaps, with freedom utter it.
Utter it;
For Heavens sake utter it, noble, worthy Lord.
Madam, I dare not.
As you love virtue speak it; let my tears
Win so much from thy goodness; noble Sir,
Soul of thy Generation, thou honestest' amongst men:
O speak it, speak it.
Note you this Courtship?
Yes, tic Sorcery.
Good Sweet, unlock these counsels.
By all the bonds of Chastity and truth,
It shall proceed no further.
You have laid
Such strong Commandments on me I must yield:
Hark, your ears.
Are they not kissing Madam?
Yes; may poison flow between them.
Antipater; he drown him!
Nay, be still; you shall hear greater mischief.
Poison me, if he perish! O you Gods,
What Treason lurks in Greatness; this hath made
Wounds in my heart, through which his love and name,
Is fled from me for ever!
Tic a fault
Which asks your deepest wisdom: come, let's in;
Isle tell you stranger Stories.
Yet I fear,
None that can draw more vengeance or despair.
Awaken Madam, they are vanished.
Not from mine outrage, that shall like a storm
Follow them and confound them; I will make
The world in blood, text down my crew•…ltie.
I cannot blame you, tic strange impudence.
Isle be revenged; by all my hopes I will,
Highly and deeply; shallow fool, no more;
Still waters drown, the shallow doe but roar.
Isle not be far behind, but help to send
All unto hell; tic for a Crown I stand,
And Crowns are oft the ruins of a Land.
Thus have we quilt Rebellion; thus (like smoke)
Vanishes hence the name of Anthony:
Only some Props remain yet; which Isle rend
Up by the roots and scatter: amongst which
Ungrateful Herod is a Principal;
On whom Isle shower my vengeance.
Gracious Sir; the King of Iuda, like a Supplicant,
Desires access unto your Majesty.
Who, Herod?
Sir, the same.
Tic a strange ouer-daring.
An attempt wisdom would hardly run to.
Call him in;
Hee dares not come to brave vs; Rome hath power
To shake a stronger building; and his fears
Are glasses of his danger: no man look
On Iuda, but with hatred.
Mighty Sir; to you, as him of whom I first received.
The Crown of Iuda, humbly I return it;
And thus arise. Know now (the great'st'mongst men)
Tic not for Life I plead, but Honesty,
For Virtue, Valour, Honour, Prowess, Grace,
And all good men's acquaintance: I confess,
I aided Anthony; if for that I fall,
A true friends tears shall bee my Funeral.
Tic a rare Gratulation.
I'm afraid
New fear will alter it.
Observe the Emperor.
Tic true (great Sir) your sacred hand was first
Invested me in Iuda; gave me that
I can forsake with comfort: keep it still;
Who from a Crown is rid, is free from cares;
I prize the worth, less then two flaxen tears.
This is a kind of braving.
Hear me forth;
And when you've heard; this, for extremity:
Since first the time I wore the sorrowful Wreath,
(For Crowns and Sorrows are incorporate,
And hang like links, one wreathed in another)
Since first the Crown I wore, you knew my grieves;
But ne'er relieved me by Person or by Deputy;
No, not when Asia and the Africa strands
Joined both to ouer-throw me: only, then
The euer-prais'd (now lost) Mark Anthony
Thrust forth his hand and staid me; he kept firm
My foot that then was sliding; I, for this,
Sent him not aid, but rent long purchased.
O (gracious Sir) view mine oblidgements well,
And you shall see virtue did govern me.
Why, did his life yet lie within my hands,
Thus would I straddle ore him as I stand;
Mine arms disseuer'd like two Rhodian Props;
And ere I bent, my Trunk should be the Base
For his dread foes to build Ambition on:
This would I doe; and, if this bee a Crime,
It is so good an one, I scorn my breath:
Who lives the lives the longest still must end in death;
And so must I.
Thou art thine own Judge Herod: call a Slave,
A desperate Slave; amongst all our Prisoners,
Choose him that hath least mercy: you shall find,
Your Friendship had a false ground.
Caesar, no; Virtue was the foundation, and you may
Batter, but not orethrow it.
Well Isle try
The utmost of your fortitude: arm that Slave;
And Sirrah, kill that Traitor; tic a work
That brngs you home your Freedom.
Gracious Sir, what is he I must murder?
Tic a King.
Ha!
Villain, why stir thou? Strike, I say, you Slave.
Slave, Isle not strike; know thou or he, or he, or Caesar
What tic to bee a Murderer; nay, more,
The Murderer of a King; nay, most of all,
To murder God himself; (for such are Kings:)
O you dull bloody Romans; see, •…n's eyes
Are thousands of armed armed Angels; and each Ray
A flame of Lightning ready to devour
The hand thats lift against sacred Majesty.
Caesar, I'm no Italian; though thy Slave,
I will not be thy Devil; those are bred
In the Shambles, let them Butcher; fetch for this
Some from the Roman Gallows; for they are
Hangmen that must perform it; and thou look
Like one: go, take the Office, Isle not doo it.
The Slaue's afraid to strike him; timorous Coward:
Call another.
Timorous! Caesar, no:
Were I to scale a Tower, or sack a Town,
I'd do it; although the ruins fell like Quarries on me:
Timorous! •…near feared Mankind; Caesar, know,
Nor earth nor Hell hath ought that can affright me:
I'ue buckled with proud Iulius thine Uncle, and was one
That, by expulsion, beat him from bright Albion:
And yet to kill a King, I'm timorous.
Let that Slave have the weapon: Sirrah, kill
That King, and have thy freedom: wilt thou do it?
Yes, for my liberty,
As soon as you can speak it: Shall I strike?
Stay, what's thy Country?
Rome, Rome; I was bred in one of those Colleges where Lechery and Murder are Pue-mates: Come, will you give the word?
Doe not defer it Caesar,
I have made peace with my Conscience long since.
Why then strike.
Yet Villain hold; art not amazed to do it?
Amazed, why?
To strike off these my shackles, such a blow
I would give to my Father.
But a worse
Shall fall upon thy Carcass: bind that Slave,
And throw him headlong down into the Sea;
The earth's too much infected.—Herod, thus
Mine arms gives thee thy freedom: take thy Crown;
Wear it with safety; and but be to me
Faithful; Isle love thee as did Anthony.
Caesar is royal; and, by this, hath bound
A faithful Servant to him.
For that wretch,
Give him his liberty; since you have served
Virtue, thou shalt serve Caesar; henceforth be
Commander ore a Legion: Those that know
Goodness; by Goodness ever greater grow.
Caesar's a God in all things.
Lord how their poison swells them.
Sure they'll burst, if this strong Colic hold them.
Mother, withdraw; the Greek begins to scold.
And why to scold, proud Madame?
Nay, I want a tongue for your encounter.
Yet this thing,
Of which thou art derived, ought to know
She owes me some obeisance; though she was
Mother to him that wore the Crown, I am
Mother to him that wears it.
Tut, pride loves not to distinguish: goodly Lord, not so much as how doe you forsooth; (every foolish City∣zens salutation;) nor hail to the Sister of my Lord the King, (every Court-Coxecombes Congee;) nor save you sweet Lady, (Fools and Physicians Orisons)
How this shows.
It shows that you are insolent.
Insolent: hug it sweetly, tic your own;
And every sin besides th•…'s damnable:
Come, you're despised Gracious; so profane,
Ignoble and unholy, that our Tribes
Are stained in your coniunctions; poor things, know,
Your titular King, in whom your glories dwell,
Is but a roy all murderer; your selves,
And his proud Bastard, bloody Substitutes:
O, I could paint you bravely; for my grieves
Have all your perfect colours.
Come I could
Make you run•…dog-like back, and from the ground
Like up the filth you vtterd.
Never sure;
Sheele leave it where she found it.
Yes, and you
Leave virtue where you found it; hark you Queen,
You are vnchaft, and most incontinent.
Incontinent: with whom?
His picture lies within you; pluck it out,
And let your false heart follow.
It is Truths part to suffer; so must I.
Vengeance upon such sufferance.
Come, you're a barbarous Creature.
Base Edomite.
Slanderous Grecian.
Old Beldam.
Young Cocatrice.
S'death, I could tear thine eyes out.
Do but (This) that motion shall destroy thee.
Marry mew.
Hold in the name of Verue; heere's a brawl
Able to inflame patience: Beauteous Queen,
Divinest Alexandra; what can move
These storms in this calm weather.
Flattering Sir,
You best can close up mischief.
If I may,
Isle lay my life a subject to your mercies;
Make me your footstools to appease your wrathes;
My blood Isle make your sacrifice.
No more;
I that but now shed tears, now laugh: O God!
To see so brave a Maister-piece of Villainy
By such a Bastard Issue bee compacted:
Thou make atonement? Hence Bastard, hence;
The dregs of Lust, the foul Disease of Wine,
That were begot when sin was revelling:
Thou make attonemenr? No; go lea•…no to drown
The Lords elected people; here stands she
That looks to taste thy poison.
Miracles!
Wrest not my good thoughts (Madam) for I call
Just Heaven to witness how I loved your Son;
And would my self have dyed to ransom him;
But your misprision I impute to heate
And Choleric spleen, which now misgouernes you.
Nay, you should thank her for abusing you;
Wee are become her vassals.
Think not so.
Yes, and cry vengeance for it; wicked one,
There's wier whips in making, and I know
Furies will soundly lash you; you, and you;
Both are m•…rkt out to perish; faith you are.
How now; what means this outrage? Peace for shame;
This talk fits Stews and Brothels: Gome, no more;
Mother, your judgment should be far more wise;
And Madam, you should be more temperate:
A•… Princes hands, all injuries should look
Not for revenge but pa•…ience.
Thou which art made of Cowardice and fear;
Dost thou confirm their actions?
Yes, tic fit;
Lust still must flatter falsehood.
Ha; what's that? why Wife—
Call me not Wife;
The sound of death hath far more Musique in it:
Wife? O, my fate! Wife unto such a Lecher?
Why Salumith.
Isle be no Salumith of thine, ther'es your Love;
She whom you foster in her insolences;
Shoe's your Salumith: O crudulous women,
How easily are you gulled, with a seducing kiss!
Now it works.
A fair word makes the Devil seem a Saint;
But Isle be revenged, and in so strange a course
As never woman took. Do ye perpetrate my goodness?
There's your Salumith.
Admirable still.
And there's th'old Hen her Mother,
A couple of seasoned dishes, fall too, fall too.
Nay Madam, you're too bitter.
By Heaven &amp; happiness, I know not what this means;
Yet were the King not suddenly returned,
And craved our swift attendance; I would sift
And try this language strangely.
Is the King returned?
He is, and safely.
Then my hate, Isle give thee fire to work on.
So will I; I'm armed with able mischief.
And my plots
Shall run as fast to aid and second you.
Ladies, shake hands with passion, and let's join
To meet the King with royal cheerfulness.
Sir, not I;
Let them that love their horror seek it still:
Goodness I want, with him is all thats ill.
You may report our speeches; say, our joy
Is, we have left no more he can destroy.
This is a violent passion.
Let it rule;
Repentance needs must follow.
Welcome, O welcome to Jerusalem;
May Herod live for ever fortunate.
We thank you: Mother &amp; Sister, rise; let no knee bow
But to the Gods of Greece; by whose support
Wee stand unshaked and vnremoou'd: but (me thinks)
In this great universal Rhapsody
Of comfort and amazement, I doe miss
Two fair companions of my happiness:
Where is my lovely Miriam? what withdraws
Her Mother Alexandra? Sure, my heart
Looked for their entertainment.
Gracious Sir,
Th'vnfortunate destruction of her Son,
The high Priest Aristobulus (late drowned
Within t•… River Rigill) so takes up
Their hearts with powerful sorrow, that their minds
Are borne with nothing but calamity.
That guest is soon removed; go, my Sons,
Inform your Grandmother and Mother-Queene,,
How much I long to see them.
Tic a work
Worthy our duties.
Ioseph, go, attend;
There's need of your assistance.
Yes; and all I fear too weak to draw them:
Royal Sir, you are abused in your credulity;
It is not grief but malice, bitter spleen,
An anger I may call Treason, which keeps back
These two from noble duties: Sir, they say
You doe usurp, and are a Murderer,
And teach all yours to murder; that you are
No lawful King of Israel; but a Greek
Descended basely; drawn from polluted blood:
Profane, unholy; nay, (indeed) what not
That Rancor can imagine? Sir, I fear
Your life is plotted on; a wrath like theirs,
So loud, so public, nay so impudent;
Is not without assistance.
Bravely urged.
Good Sister, think not so; a loss like theirs
Will make dumb patience mutiny; believe,
It moves much in my own breast; as for plots,
Alas, what can they dream of?
Desperate things.
Things which may shake your foot-hold; for, I fear
The Queen is turned an Aspic, and will spread
Her fatal poison ore you; if you dote,
The Lethargy will kill you: Sir, tic said,
Nay, t'will be proved she is incontinent.
Incontinent! with whom?
With him I blush to mention; Ioseph Sir,
Ioseph my Husband wrongs you.
Peace for shame;
Your Jealousy doth fool you.
Well, take heed
Affection doe not blind you: tic a stain,
Almost the whole world finds out; and a truth,
Not hidden, but apparent; pray you Sir,
Speak you what is reported.
Tic not fit,
Nor dare I credit Rumour, chiefly when
It speaks of such great persons; yet tic true,
Many wild things are vtterd; nay indeed
Some proved I wish were hidden: but alas,
Who knows not Slander's ever impudent?
Doe not give truth that title; for you know,
It will be proved by many witnesses.
Thart jealous Sister, and than such a fiend,
There is no worse companion: come, no more;
Should all the Prophets, Patriarchs, and Priests
Lodged in the holy Books of Israel
Come forth and tell this message, I would stand
Boldly and interpose them; for I know,
There is no truth to guard them; no nor faith.
O my Divinest Miriam, how art thou
And thy great sweetness injured? Th'vnblowne Rose,
The mines of Crystal, nor the Diamond,
Are half so chaft, so pure and innocent.
O poor forsaken Virtue, how art thou
Torn down by thy despisers, and consumed
By th'enuious flame of the malicious?
But I am come to guard thee, and restore
Thy goodness back with interest; for I vow
To hear nought but thy praises: here she comes;
Welcome my dearest, sweetest, happiest,
All that my longings look for; thus, and thus,
Like a rich Chain, my love shall hang about thee;
And make the whole world doe thee reverence;
Nay weep not Mother; come, I know your care,
And bear an equal burden: here, O here
Is the true Tomb of Aristobulus.
You can dissemble royally; but that
Cannot cure mine Impostume.
Say not so;
You must forget the work of accident.
Of accident? of plotted Massacre;
Murder beyond example: but there's left
A Hell to reckon with.
Good sweet, no more;
Let not your Judgment wrong you to suspect
Mine Innocence unjustly; for, I vow,
Never came death so near me; or did force
My tears in such abundance; but you know,
Earth must not question Heaven: Yet to show
My fair affection to your Princely Son;
Within an Urn of Gold, Isle lodge his bones;
And to his Funeral Rites, add such a Pomp,
As shall amaze Invention; and besides,
There's not an eye in all Jerusalem,
But shall drop sorrow for him.
Funerals are
But wretched satisfactions.
Note this pride.
Yes, and her Daughters fullennesse.
Why looks my lovely Miriam downward, &amp; deiects
The glory of her bright eye? I had thought
My safe return (which strikes a general joy
Through Iuda and Jerusalem, and makes
Mount Zion so triumphant) had not had
The power to kill her comforts: Lovely one;
How have I lost thy friendship; or, what Fiend
Sends this Divorce betwixt vs?
Your own Dissimulation. Cruel Sir;
You've dealt unjustly with me, and profaned
A Temple held you sacred.
What, your self?
O doe not speak it; for to that blessed Shrine
I have been so religious, that the world
Hath oft condemned me of Idolatry:
And can you then accuse me?
Yes, and call
Your own heart to be witness.
Let me then
Be struck with fearful Thunder.
Sir, take heed;
Vengeance is quick in falling.
Let it come:
You call a Love in question, that's as just
As Equity or Goodness; by that power—
Come, you will now be perjured; but Isle stay
That imputation from you: What became
Of your affection, when you bound that man;
If you miscarried in your work at Rome,
That he should see me poisoned? Start you now?
O, it was a venomed Complot.
Sir, a word:
You're a faithless young man; and have lost
The great hope I had in you.
By my life,
Hopes, and all fruitful wishes; I'm of this
As Innocent as Silence: if my lips
Ere opened to relate it; let me feel
Some sudden fatal judgment: Gracious Sir,
Search out this secret further, twill be found
There is more Treason breeding.
I'm resolved.
Madam, you have accused me; and I stand
So strongly on mine own truth, that you must
Discover your Informers: By that love
Once you did fine to bear me; by that faith
Which should link married couples; by the awe,
Duty and truth of Women; or if these
Be concealed with you fury; yet by that
Great power your King hath ore you, and to shun
The scourge of Torments, which I solemnly
Will try to the extremest; here I bind,
Nay, doe command you, that unfeignedly
You tell me who informed you.
You have laid
So great Commandments on me, that I dare
In no wise disobey you. Sir, it was
Lord Ioseph that informed me.
Ha; Ioseph!
O my abused confidence!
Now it works.
The fire begins to kindle.
But Isle bring
Fuel that shall inflame it.
Ioseph? was it Ioseph? then tic time to feel
My cold dull vnbelieuing.
O pardon me;
It was my love, not malice.
No, your lust,
And you shall buy it dearly: Call a Guard.
Have I for this so often lost my self
Within the Labyrinth of her wanton eyes;
And am I now repaid with Treachery:
Cease on those wretched Creatures; Salumith,
Stand forth, and what thy knowledge can approve
Against those Traitors, speak it; now mine ear
Lies open to my safety.
Bravely speak,
You shall have strong supporters; now his ear
Is open, see you fill it.
Doubt me not.
Great Sir, with confidence as full of Truth,
As they are full of Treason; I aver,
These, in your absence, have abused your bed,
With most incestuous foul Adultery.
All that's like goodness shield me.
Woman, look up;
The vault of Heaven is Marble; this untruth
Will make it fall to kill thee.
Let it come,
If I speak ought unjustly; all my words,
My blood and oath shall seal to.
Good, let my love persuade thee; doe not buzz
Such foul things in his ears; his Majesty
Is too much moved already.
Good my Lord,
Let me discharge my duty.
Nay, for that,
I dare not to withstand; yet, questionless,
The Queen is not so wicked.—Go, put home;
You've all things to assist you:—Sirrah Jew,
Forget not thy preferment.
Fear me not.
How now, what tumult's that?
O my dread Lord,
Grant me your gracious pardon; I must tell
A sad and heavy Story; yet most true:
And yet against such a person, as I fear
Your ear will not receive it.
Speak; against whom?
Against the Queen.
O sacred Truth, but thee,
I have nor sword, nor armour.
Utter it.
Since your departure, to my hands she brought
This fatal Viol; saying, Pheroas,
Thou art the Kings Cup-bearer; by my love
I charge thee, when his Majesty shall call
For wine, give him this Potion; tic a draught
Shall crown thee with great fortunes: I desired
To know the nature; she, with solemn oaths,
Swore it was nothing but a wholesome drink,
Compounded with such Art; that, tasting it,
You would dote of her beauty, and become
A very Slave to her perfections:
I promised to perform it; yet my fear
Arguing with my Judgment, made me try
The virtue on a Spaniel; and I found
It was an odious poison.
Wonderful!
After this trial, I demanded then,
From whom her Highness had it: she affirmed,
From the Lord Ioseph; but by stricter search,
I found this Jew was he compounded it.
I doe confess the Queen of Israel
Commanded me to try my utmost skill
In this most strong Confection; said it was
To prove the force of Simples: I, her Slave,
Durst not to disobey her; yet suspect
Made me reveal it to this Noble-man.
How answer you this Treason?
Silently.
Thats a confession.
Why, as good be dumb,
As speak to ears are glewd up; or a faith
Thats armed against believing: but (great Sir)
If either of these open; then, believe,
Was never wronged a greater innocence.
Malice hath wrought upon vs, and oretane
Our guiltless lives with vengeance: Hell it self
Is not more false then these are; yet, I know,
Nothing can save vs but a Miracle.
The guilty ever plead thus; cursed chance,
To have my Joys devour me: but, tic done;
Princes, your ears and Counsels.
Ha! is it so,
Hath Mischief got the Conquest; then tic time
To change my disposition, and deceive
Those which would else deceive me; in this kind,
It skils not whom we injure, whom we blind.
Sir, of my life all this is counterfeit,
And this great Devil enchants you; for these slaves,
They speak but what is taught them.
On my life,
Our royal Mother's guiltless; doe not let
Their hateful malice step between her life,
And your most gracious favour.
Princely youths,
Nature and love deceives you: wretched things,
What can you say to stay destruction?
That w'are the Kings, and none are innocent,
Unless he please to think so.
Impudent!
Is that all thou can utter? Have I lived
To see thee grow thus odious, to forsake
The chaste embraces of a royal bed,
For an incestuous Lecher; to become
The Peoples scorn, the honest Matrons curse,
The Tribes disgrace, and Israels obloquy;
Nay more, the whole worlds wonder, and a stain
Ne'er to be washed off from Jerusalem?
O mine afflicted honour!
Heere's a change.
A Tempest never looked for.
Pack for shame,
Run to thine own destruction: What, a Whore?
A poisoning Whore? a bawdy Murderess?
Nay, more; a treacherous Strumpet? O that Heaven
Had made mine anger Lightning, that it might
Destroy thee in a moment.
Madam, stay;
Can your true goodness think me culpable?
Is it not proved apparent?
Then be dumb,
Be dumb for ever Miriam; if you think
I can be guilty, who is innocent?
Madam, you are my Mother; O call up
Your worst imaginations, all the scopes
Both of mine Infancy, Childhood or ripe years,
And if the smallest shadow in them all
Betoken such an error, curse me still,
Let me find death with horror; otherwise,
Silence and patience help me. Sir, tic fit
You plead your own cause; I am conquered.
There's but one true Judge over Israel,
And hee knows I am guiltless.
Tic the Plea
Of every guilty person: Animis,
Convey those wicked creatures, with your Guard,
Unto the market-place, and there in sight
Of all the people, cause the Hangman take
Their cursed head from their bodies.
Stay, great Sir,
Doe not an act t'amaze all Israel;
O look with mercies eyes upon the Queen;
The Innocent Queen our Mother; let not Slaves
Blast her with false reproaches; be a God
And find out Truth by Miracle.
No more.
No more? yes sure, if every word I speak
Should nail me to destruction: Mighty Sir,
Favour your own repentance, doe not spill
The innocent blood unjustly; for th'account
Is heavy as damnation: to your self,
And to your own, become a Daniel.
Isle hear no more.
O sacred Sir, you must;
Upon my knees I beg compassion;
Compassion for my Mother.
To this ground
Weal grow eternally; till you vouchsafe
To grant her mercy; or to give her Cause
A larger course of trial.
Once again,
I charge you to forget her.
How, forget
The chaste womb which did bear vs; or the paps
Which gave vs suck? Can there in Nature be
A Lethargy so frozen?
Nay, what's more;
Can we forget her holy Stock, derived
From all the blessed Patriarchs, in whom
You and our selves are glorious? O, dread Sir,
Have mercy on her goodness.
Mercy, Sir.
How am I vexed with importunity;
Away to Execution: if again
I doe command tic fatal.
And if we
Endure it, let vs perish; brother draw,
And let our good swords guard her: Sir, you've broke
A link in Natures best chain; and her death,
Converts vs to your mortal enemies.
What; am I braved by Traitors? Villains, force
Way to the Execution, or you perish.
Mother, hold life but one hour and we'll rescue you.
Did ever Kings own bowels thus become
The Typhon of sedition; or, can't be,
I could beget these Serpents? Left be so
Under the Aetna of their damned pride,
Isle smoother and consume them.
Sir, I know
Your wisdom such, as can discern what tic
At once to fear, to suffer, and to dye,
By th'hand of sterne ambition; which, in the end,
Makes still her habitation like the place
Where poison grows, so naked and so bare
That dust disdains t'abide there.
Passing true;
But Isle root out that vengeance: yet again,
When I awake my memory, to look
Upon her sweetness, goodness, and conceive,
That no affair, no wisdom, or fond zeal,
Which oft attaints others, could touch her;
O then, me thinks, I might at least have breathed,
Before I had condemned her; Justice should
Ith dark of these confusions, borne a Torch
Before Truth and mine anger: but alas,
Folly and Rashness led me; and I'ue lost
All my delight at one throw. Antipater,
Go, run, fly; O, stay the Execution.
Willingly. Yet please you first to think
Whether the act hurt not your Majesty;
Kings, in these weighty causes, must not play
At fast and loose; their words are Oracles;
And judgment should pursue them.
Good, no more; go stay the Execution.
Not on earth is there a man more willing;
Yet, when Kings condemn themselves of rashness,
Who can blame contempt to follow after?
Lord to see how time is lost with talking.
I am gone.
Yet Sir, believe; the Majesty which strikes
Against contempt shall ne'er recover it.
Yet again.
Sir, I can vanish quickly; yet, behold,
Heere's one can save •…y labour.
Speak my Lord; where is my Queen?
O, whore's my Miriam?
Sir, she is dead.
Dead? Be the world dead with her; for on earth
There's no life but her glory: yet declare
How dyed the woeful Lady?
Like a Saint.
Like did I say? O Sir, so far beyond,
That never Saint came near her president:
She did not go, as one that had been led
To take a violent parting; but as Fate
Had in her own hands thrust her Destiny,
Saying, or live or dye: whilst she, that knew
The one and th'others goodness, did agree
Only to dye as you have most excellent.
Her Mothers bitter railings, all the cries
Of the amazed People, moved not her;
No not one poor small twinckle of her eye:
But, with a constancy, that would outface
The brazen front of terror; she assends
Up to the fatal Scaffold; and but once
Looked round about the people: then lifts up
Her snow-white hands to Heaven;
Talks to it as if she had been in it: then false down
Upon her humble knees; which, as they bent,
You might behold humility retire
Down to her heart; and left within her eyes
Nothing but sweetness flaming: whilst upon
And round about her, Majesty did hang,
And cloth her as a garment: to be brief,
She took the stroke, not as a punishment;
But a reward; so Saint-like hence she went.
Enough, too much; you have slain me Pheroas;
O, I have lost in her death more true joys,
Then Heaven can give or, earth is worthy of:
I am a Traitor to my self and love;
To Nature, Virtue, Beauty, Excellence;
I have destroyed the whole world; for but her,
It had no Soul, nor moving; no delig•…t,
No triumph, glory, or continuance:
I cannot live to lose her; call her back,
Or I shall dye complaining.
This is strange
Can the dead be awakened?
Easily Sir,
My sighs shall breath life in her; and my voice
Rouse her, as doth a Trumpet; nay, more loved
Then either wind or Thunder: can thou think
That I can live without her; she, to whom
The whole world was a Theater, where men
Sate viewing her good actions; she, that had
As much right unto Paradise, as Kings
Ha•…e to their Courts and Kingdoms; she that lent
Mintage to others beauties; for, none are
Or good, or fair, but such as looked like her:
She, in whose body sweetly was contained
Th'Easterne Spicery, the Western treasure,
And all the world holds happy: may it be
That I can live and want her? or, could I
With one sad breath destroy her? she, that had
(In her own thoughts) read all that ere was writ,
To better, or instruct vs: She, that knew
Heaven so well on Earth; that, being there,
S•…ee finds no more then she did think on here;
And have I kilt her? She, whose very dreams
Were more devout then our Petitions;
Have I profaned that Temple? Fall, O fall
Down to the gro•…nd and perish; ne'er look up,
But when or Blastings, Mildews, Lightnings,
O•… poisonous Serenes strike thee. Herod, here,
O here, dig up thy grave with sorrow.
Fie, tic unfit Greatness should yield to passion.
You're a fool;
He that not mourns for her, will never morn;
But is worse then the Devil. Miriam,
O Miriam; thou that through the Spheres
(As through so many golden Beads) hast run,
In one poor moment, to felicity;
Look down upon thy Vassal, me thy Slave,
And see how much I languish: let thine eye
Guild my complaints, and cheer my misery.
O oyall Sir, take better comfort;
There was ne'er on Earth a Creature worth your sorrow.
Sir, you •…ie; deadly and falsely; for she doth deserve
The tears of men and Angels: Sh•…e, O she,
Of who•… the Ancients prophesied, when first
They made all Virtues Females; She, that was
The first and best fair Copy, from whose lines
The world might draw perfection: She, not worth
The tears of all thats living? D•…lnesse, go;
Pack from my sight for ever: O, it was thou,
Thou that did make me kill her: hence, avaunt;
By all that's good or holy; if, from hence
Thou ere presume to see me, or come near
The place of my abiding; it is thy death,
As certain as Fate spoke it.
O my Lord.
Away; reply, and I will kill thee.
Do not offend him further; vanish Sir.
To Arms my Lord, to Arms: your Princely Sons,
Attended by the people, stand between
The Town of Bedlam and Jerusalem;
Their Ensigns spread, their Bows bent, and their Swords
Waving like wings of Eagles: Sir, they vow
Revenge for their Mothers death.
On whom?
On you, the City; but especially,
Upon the Prince Antipater.
No more,
They are angry surges, which with one poor blast,
Isle make •…all to the Center; troubled thoughts,
Rest till this storm be over: happy man,
Isle make thee tread upon them; this day shall
Be thy Coronation; but their Funeral.
It was a brave Lesson that Egystus taught,
And Clitemnestra writ religiously:
Sin safest way to sin; None or alone; both excellent,
Yet Herod lives vnwrong'd and vnremou'd.
The Sons of Oedipus, in life, nor after death,
Agreed but once; which was, t'imprison Oedipus;
An act of no small wonder: O, but Boys,
Isle mount a world aboue you; t'imprison, is
Still to have danger near me: tut, tic death,
Death that my aims doe shoot at: Isle invent
What none shall alter: fie, tic nothing worth,
By Worth, by Birth, by Choice, by Chance to bee a King;
But so to climb I choose, as all may fear and wonder;
Fear to attempt the like, and wonder how I wrought it;
Cursed be he (in this case) that craves his Fathers blessing;
My Throne must be my Fathers Monument;
My Reign built on his ruin: but how? how? witless, how?
Ask how, and seek a Crown? By Poison; no, by Sword;
Sword; no, by Subtlety: O Hell awake, awake;
And once for all instruct me.
O resolute Iugurth; what afford'st thou me?
Non mordant mortui; Dead men doe not bite:
True, noble Bastard: Iugurth, in thy light
Thy Brothers dwelt; O Iugurth, so doe mine:
Thou kild'st them Iugurth; Iugurth, so must I.
Thus sing we several Descant on one plain-song, Kill:
Four parts in one, the Mean excluded quite:
The Base sings deeply, Kill; the Counter•…nor, Kill;
The Tenor, Kill, Kill; the Treble, Kill, Kill, Kill:
In Diapason Kill is the Unison, s•…auen times redoubled;
And so oft must I kill: as, first the King,
(His Wife is past) two Sons, two Brethren, and a Sister;
And think not but I can: can; nay, but I will:
I am no puny in these Documents:
The Tiger, tasting blood; finds it to sweet to leave it:
The Hake, once made to pre•…, takes all delight in preying;
The Virgin, once deflowered, thinks pleasure to grow cōmon;
And can I then stop in a middle way?
Cl•…ze foe•…ains, rivers dry; pluck up the to•…ts bows perish;
Banish the Sun, the Moon and Star doe vanish:
And, were it to obscure the world, and sp•…yle
Both Man and Beast, Nature, and every thing;
Yet would I do it; and why? I must, and will be King.
Kingly Antipater.
Never grew Pride more high, more desperate;
Nor ever could the Arrogance of man
Find out a Breast more large and spacious:
But Fate and he must wrestle. Let me now
Entreat your worthy Patience, to contain
Much in Imagination; and, what Words
Cannot have time to utter; let your Eyes
Out of this dumb Show, tell your Memories.
The Sons of Miriam, having met the King,
Are ready for Encounter; but are staid
By th'awe of great Augustus, at whose feet
They cast their Lives and Weapons: hee, with frowns
Chides the two angry Princes; yet commands
The Father to forgive them; peace is made:
Only against Aniipater they bend
The fury of their courage; which the King
Withstands and reconciles them: all made sound;
Augustus gives them Garlands, and installs
Them equal Captains over Palestine:
But yet Antipater, by Harrods means,
Gets the precedence and Priority:
How in that •…hrong he iustles; tic your Eyes,
And no•… my Tongue must censure: this we hope
Our Scale is still assending; and you'll •…nde
Better, and better; and the Best behind.
You must take my directions.
Any thing your Ladyship will have me.
Thou shalt inform his Majesty; his Sons hired thee, when his Highness should approach to view the buildings, by seeming chance to throw some stone upon him, which might crush him to pieces. Do this and thou shalt gain by it.
A halter, or some worse thing; for (Madam) the least stone that is employed about the Temple, is 20. Cubits broad, and 8. thick, and thats able to break a mans neck without a halter.
No matter.
Nay, and it be no matter for breaking a neck (though it be an ill Joint to set) Isle venture a swearing for it.
Doe, and live rich and happy; hold, there's gold.
Nay, if I can get my living by swearing and forswea∣ring; Isle never use other occupation.
Neighbour Lyme; news, news, news.
What news, Neighbour Handsaw?
Marry Sir, Charity has got a new coat; for I saw a
Beadle just now whipping on Statute-lace.
And what's become of Liberality?
Cry you m•…rcy Lady, faith she went like a Baud at a
Carts tail, roaring up and down; but her purse was empty.
Th art deceived her hand is ever open,
And to desert she•…s free; behold else.
This is more of Liberality, (as you call it) then I have found, since I began first to build the Temple.
Or I either.
You shall have more,
•…e pour it on in showers; perform but my commandments.
Madam, by my Handsaw &amp; Compass, I will do any thing; say, speak, swear, and forswear any thing your Lady∣ship can invent or purchase.
Hark your ea•…es.
Hum, ha; pretty, pretty; Isle play my part t•… tittle; Neighbour, look to yours: nay, and Isle doe it presently; for the King is now coming to the Temple, and I came to call you Neighbour; we'll doe it there.
What else; a man may bee forsworn in any place,
City, Court or Country, has no difference.
About it then; be constant wary and you're for•…unate.
Fear vs not, if you want any more to be forsworn, give me your money, Isle press a dozen •…radefinen shall doe it as well as any Scribe in all Jerusalem.
I or Publican either.
Away then.
Thus catch we hearts with gold; thus Spiders can
Poison poor Flies, and kill the innocent man.
Be swift as Lightning; for the cause requires it:
Such paper-plots are invisible Goblins;
Pinching them most, which doe least injury.
Y are armed with full instructions.
Sir, I am.
Your Letters are Chrysanders, and not mine.
I know it well.
Away then, outflye Eagles; yet Sir, hark;
Carry your Countnance wisely, seem to be
A Saint in thy delivery.
Sir, your care
Makes you too curious, fear me not.
Within there.
Did your Excellence call?
I did; what, is your Lesson got?
My Lord, unto a syllable; my tongue
Hath po•…son for your purpose, and I am
Confirmed in every circumstance.
The time, (at night;) the place, (the Bed-chamber;)
The manner, (armed;) the instruments, (their Swords.)
Tut, this is needless; Sir, my Quality
Needs not a twice instruction.
Nobly said; hold, there's gold.
This is a good perswader; right or wrong,
T•…easure will make the dumb man use his tongue.
True; tic the sick •…ans Balm, the Usury•…s Pledge,
And indeed all men's Masters; go away,
The time's ripe for thy purpose; thus these Slaves
Run post to Hell for shadows; ha, Salumith:
O my best Aunt and Mistress; you're well met:
Never were times so tickle; nor, I think,
Stood innocence in more danger: would my life
Were lost, to thrust fears from you.
Why, Princely Nephew, I'ue no cause to fear.
Tic well you are so armed; indeed, a life
So good as yours, free, and religious,
Thinks not on fear, or ill men's actions:
Yet Madam, still your state is slippery;
Believe it while these Princes doe survive,
And dream how you accused the Mother-Queene,
They still will practise against you.
Yes, and you;
The High-Priests death, and Marriams Tragedy,
Will be objected against you.
Tic confessed;
VV'are both marks of their vengeance.
Yet so far
Beyond them, Isle not fear them; heere's my hand,
I'ue marked them for destruction: since our fates
Have equal danger; tic no reason but
They doe enjoy like triumph; once again,
Believe it, they are sinking.
Nobly said,
Mirror of Women, Angel, Goddess, Saint.
Peace, no more; here comes mine Instrument.
What, this; the Kings Barber, your doting Amorite?
The same, observe him.
O blessed Comb; thou spotless Ivory,
With which my Mistress Salumith once daind
To comb the curious felters of her hair,
And lay each thread in comely equipage;
Sleep here in peace for ever; let no hand
(But mine henceforth) be ever so audacious,
Or daring as to touch thee.
Pitiful fool, go sleep, or thoult run mad else,
Sizers, sweet Sizers; sharpe, but gentle ones;
That once did cut the Locks of Salumith;
Making them in humility hang down
On either side her cheeks, as it were to guard
The Roses, that there flourish: O, go rest,
Rest in this peaceful Case; and let no hand
Of mortal race profane you.
Sfoote, the Slave
Will beggar himself with buying new Instruments.
O tic a piece of strange Idolatry.
Tooth-pick, dear Tooth-pick; Eare-pick, both of you
Have been her sweet Companions; with the one
I'ue seen her pick her white Teeth; with the other
Wriggle so finely worme-like in her Ear;
That I have wished, with envy, (pardon me)
I had been made of your condition:
But tic too great a blessing.
What, to be made a Tooth-picke?
Nay, you'll spoil all, if you interrupt him.
Salumith, O Salumith;
When first I saw thy golden Lockes to shine,
I brake my glass; needing no Face, but thine:
When at those corrall Lips, I was a gazer;
Greedy of one sweet touch, I broke my Razor:
When to thy Cheeks, thou did my poor Eyes call;
Away flew Sizers, Basin, Balls and all:
On y the Crisping-Irons I kept most dear;
To doe thee service here and every where.
Not every where good Triphon, some place still
Must be reserved for other purposes.
Bright Go-o-o-desse.
Well proceed;
What, at a stand? has true love got the power,
To strike dumb such a nimble wit?
Cry hem, pluck up thy heart man? what, a polling shaving Squire, and struck dead with a woman?
Nothing so, he does but mock, he loves not Salumith.
Not love you Lady? O strange blasphemy!
Faith, what would thou do now but for a kiss of her hand.
What would I do? what not? O any thing.
Isle number all those Hairs my Sizers cut,
And dedicate those Numbers to her Shrine;
A Breath more loathsome then the Stench of Nile,
Isle rectify, and, for her sake, make pleasant;
A Face more black then any Aethiope,
Isle scour as white as Silver; to attain
But one touch of her finger, I'd beget
Things beyond wonder; stab, poison, kill,
Break mine own neck, my friends, or any mans.
Spoke like a daring servant; hark thine ear;
Doe this and have thy wishes.
What, but this?
No more believe it: why, tic nothing man;
Only, it asks some seriousness and Art,
By which to move the King, and gain belief.
But shall I have a k•…sse from that white hand,
Which gripes my heart within it?
Sir, you shall; tic there, pay your devotion.
Then by this kiss Isle do it; h•…ney kiss
There's recall tion in thee, and I'm fixed
To doc it swiftly, quickly; from my lip
Thy sweet taste shall not part, till I have spoke
All that your wishes look for: boast of this;
You've bought two Princes lives with one poor kiss.
Spoke like a noble Servant.
Nephew, true;
Let him and's follies wrestle; from their birth
We will bring out our safeties; Villains, we know
Are sometimes Stilts, on which great men must go.
Sir, as you're royal, hear vs.
Villains, Traitors, Vipers.
In the name
Of goodness and of good men; what hand dare
Be raised against his Sovereign? Gracious Sir,
Let not your rage abuse you; there's none here
That your word cannot slaughter.
Give me way;
Shall my own blood destroy me? that I gave
Isle sacrifice to Justice.
Yet Sir, hold.
Hear but our innocent answer.
If we prove
Guilty, let tortures cease vs.
O my Lord,
Tic a becoming Justice; hear them speak.
What, Villains that are armed against me?
Tic not so; Nephews, dear Nephews,
Throw at his Highness feet, these ill becoming weapons;
In this case, they doe not guard but hurt you.
We obey; and, with our weapons offer up our lives,
To have our cause but heard indifferently.
Sir, there's no greater innocence on earth
Injured then our allegiance: let but truth
Accuse vs in a shadow; spare vs not.
But truth accuse you? O strange impudence!
You are not of Brass, but Adamant: see thou this,
This man you hired with stone to murder me;
This man with timber; both you wrought to stain
The sacred building with foul Parricide. Is not this true?
Most true (my Lord) wee will both bee for∣sworn unto it.
Falsehood, you are grown a mighty one, when these;
These Slaves shall murder Princes.
No, not these
Your wild acts doe destroy you: Speak, my Lord;
Did not you see these in the dead of night,
Armed with their weapons, watch at my Chamber door,
Intending to assault me?
Tic most true;
And had I not with threats and some exclaims
Removed them, you had perished.
Wonderful.
O truth, for shame awaken; this Slave will
Exile thee from all Mankind.
What, doth this
Bristle your guilty spirits? No, Isle come
Nearer unto your Treasons; heir's your hands,
Your own hands, most unnatural: Sister, see;
See, mine Antipater; (•…or I know, you both
Are perfect in their hands and Characters)
This Letter did they traitrously convey
Unto Chrysander, which commands our Powers,
And Conquests won in Greece; inciting him
To break his firm allegiance, and to join
His strength with theirs, to work our overthrow.
Speak, our Centurion; did not you receive
This Letter from Chrysander?
My Lord, I did.
And that it is their own hands, witness you;
And you; and all that know them.
I am struck dumb with wonder; I should swear
This were your own hands Nephews.
By my hopes;
If it be false, tic strangely counterfeit;
The Slave that did it had a cunning hand,
And near acquaintance with you: but, dear Sir,
It shall be gracious in you to conceive
The best of these misfortunes: who, that knows
The world, knows not her mischiefs; and how Slaves
Are ever casting Mines up; for my part,
(Though there's no likelihood) I will suppose,
This is, and may be counterfeit.
And so will I.
But never I, it is impose•…ible.
Sir, I beseech you, howsoever you lose
The force of Nature, or the touch of blood;
Lose not the use of Justice; that should live,
When both the rest are rotten: all these proofs
Are false as Slander, and the wo•…ke hewed out
Only by malice; when w'are tan away,
Tic you your self next follows: why alas,
We are your Armour; he that would strike home,
And hit you soundly, must unbuckle vs.
Besides Sir, please you either send, or call
Chrysander home (whom we have ever held,
A noble, free, and worthy Gentleman)
And, if he doe accuse vs; we will throw
Our lives to death with willingness; nay more,
Plead guilty to their Slanders.
In my thoughts
This is a noble motion; hear them Sir.
It will renown your patience; Sacred Sir,
Let me beg for my Nephews; you have said
You took delight to hear me; hear me now.
S'foote, you're too earnest, and will spoil vs all;
Beg with a scurvy cold Parenthesis.
Sir, (though I know; in this case, minutes are
Irrecoverable losses) yet, you may
(If it please you) grant them their Petition.
I'm resolved,
Chrysander shall be sent for: ha, how now?
Why stir thou? why art breathless?
O my Lord,
My gracious Lord, hear me; I must disclose
A treason foul and odious: these your Sons,
Your Princely Sons, chiefly Prince Alexander,
By fearful threats, and golden promises,
Have laboured me, that when I should be called,
To trim your Highness beard, or cut your hair;
I then should lay my Razor to your throat,
And send you hence to Heaven.
O unnatural!
Villain, speak this again.
Villain, speak truth, fear Judgment.
Briefly Sir, Prince Alexander, and Aristobulus
Offered me heaps of gold to cut your throat,
When I should trim or shave you.
From which, thus
Mine own hand shall secure me; villain, die,
That knew a way to kill me; and henceforth,
What Slave soever dare to fill mine ear
With tales of this foul nature, thus shall perish;
Isle not be tortured living: whore's my Guard?
Handle those treacherous young men; and, with cords,
Strangle them both immediately.
Sir, O Sir.
Hear vs; but hear vs.
Never, I am deaf;
Villains, that hatch such execrable thoughts,
Unfit for noble spirits, shall not breath:
Dispatch I say; for unto time Isle raise
Such Trophies of Severity; that he
Which reads your Story with a bloody thought,
Shall tremble and forsake it.
Yet that man
Seeing your Rigour, and our Innocence,
Shall turn his fear to pity, and condemn
The malice of your rashness: Sir, to dye
Thus, as we doe, not guilty, is a death,
Of all, most blessed, most glorious; for, it is
To brave death, not to feel it; and this end
Revives vs, but not kills vs.
Brother, true;
Let me embrace thy goodness; for I know,
The last gasp of a death thus innocent,
Hath no pain in it; and w'are sure to find
Sweetness in the shortness, all content of mind.
Pull, and dispatch them.
This was well contrived.
An act worth imitation.
O, mighty Sir,
You have done Justice bravely, on your head
Depends so many heads, and on your life
The lives of such abundance; that, believe,
Acts and Consents must not alone be feared;
But Words and Thoughts; nay very Visions,
In this case must be punish't: Ancient times,
(For Princes safeties) made our Dreams our Crimes.
Tic true; and I am resolute to run a Course,
T'affright the proud'st Attempter; go, convey
Those bodies unto Burial: Antipater,
Come near me man; you are now the only branch
Left of this aged Body; which, howere
Disdained, for want of grafting; yet, Isle now
Make thee the chief, the best, and principal.
It is our pleasure, that with winged speed,
Forthwith you pass to Rome; and, in our name,
Salute the great Augustus; say, that age, grief,
And some natural sickness, having made
My mind unfit for Government; I crave,
He would confirm thee in the Royalty:
Which granted, I will instantly give up
To thee and to thy goodness, all I hold;
Either in Crown, or Greatness.
Gracious Sir.
Doe not cross my commandment; for I know
Thy sweet and modest temper: but away;
Fly in thy happy journey; I presage,
Those which did hate my Youth, will love mine Age.
Heeresa b•…aue change, sweet Nephew; can you fly
Aboue the pit•… you play in?
No, sweet Aunt;
Nor in my flight will leave you, could I shoot
Through Heaven, as through the ayre; yet would I bear
Thy goodness ever with me: how ere I rise,
Tic you alone shall rule Jerusalem.
No, tic Antipater; go, be fortunate:
I'ue other plots in working.
So have I:
The Kings death and her own; till that be done,
Nothing is perfect; th'halfe way is but run.
Ha! who's this? the noble Pheroas?
What chance makes my dear Uncle droop thus?
Doe not give way to your discontentment.
Pardon me, it is become my Moister; spacious minds
Are not like little bosoms; they may press
And crush disgraces inward; but the great,
Gives them full Field to fight in; and each stroke
Contempt doth strike is mortal.
Say not so;
You may find reparation.
Tell me where;
Not upon earth; when reputation's gone,
Tic not in Kings to bring her back again:
I am a banished out-cast, and what's more,
The scorn of those gaze on me: but a day
Will come, of Visitation, when the King
May wish these foul deeds undone.
Come, no more
W'are partners in your sorrows; and how ere
The King doth yet smile on vs, we know well
The word of any Peasant hath full power
To turn vs topsy turuy.
Are you there?
Nay, then you have got feeling.
Sensibly,
And fear, and will prevent it.
Come buy you lusty Gallants
These S•…ples which I sell;
In all our days were never seen like these,
For beauty, strength, and smell:
Here's the King-cup, the Pounce, with the Violet,
The Rose that loves the shower,
The wholesome Gilliflower,
Both the Cowslip, Lily,
And the Daffadilly;
With a thousand in my power.
Why where are all my Customers? none come buy
Of the rare Jew that sells etern•…tie?
Indeed Moister I'm of your mind; for none of your
Drugs but sends a man to life everlasting.
Peace knave I say, here's in this little thing
A Jewel prizelesse, worthy of a King:
If any man so bold dare bee,
Unseen, unknown to coape with me,
And give the price which I demand;
Heere's treasure worth a Monarchs Land.
Hark how the Mou•…ebanke sets out his ware.
O, tic a noble Braggart; two dried frogs,
An ownce of Rats-bane, grease and Staues-aker,
Are all his ingredients.
Peace for shame,
Have Charity before you; hark, observe.
Here's golden Amaranthus,
That true Love can provoke;
Of Horehound store, and poisoning Elebore,
With the Polipode of the Oak:
Here's chaste Veruine and lustful Eringo,
Health-preseruing Sage,
And Rue, which cures old Age;
With a world of others,
Making fruitful Mothers:
All these attend me as my Page.
Come buy, come buy, unknown, unseen,
The b•…st that is, or ere hath been:
He tha, not asking what, dare coape,
May buy a wealth past thought, past hope.
Come buy, Come buy, &amp;c.
Moister, faith give me leave to make my Procla∣motion too, though not in rime; yet in as unsensible meeter as may be.
If the Devil any man provoke,
To buy's own mischief in a poake;
Or else, that hood-winckt he would climb
Up to the Gallows ere his time;
If fools would learn how to convey
Their •…riends the quite contrary way;
Come to my Moister, they shall have
Their wish; for hoe's a crafty knave.
Sirrah, you're saucy.
Fitter for your dish of knavery.
How now Achitophel; what's this curious drug
You make such boast of; may not I question it?
By no means Sir; he that will purchase this,
Must pitch and pay; but ask no questions.
Not any?
No, not any; doe you think
Perfection needs Encomiums?
O my Lord, you may take my Masters word at all times; for, being a Physician, hoe's the only best member in a Common-wealth.
How prove you Physicians the best members?
Because Madam, without them the world would in∣crease so fast, that one man could not live by another.
Go to, y are a mad knave: but come Achitophel,
How prize you this rich Jewel? If it be fit
Only for Kings; tic for Antipater.
The price is, two thousand Drachma's.
Once Isle prove mad for my private pleasure,
There's your price; give me the I•…ell;
Now it's bought &amp; sold, you may disc•…ose the full perfection.
There's reason f•…r my Lord, then know you've here
The strongest quickest killingest poison, which
Learning or Art ere uttered; for one drop
Kills sooner then a Canon; yet so safe
And free from all suspicion, that no eye
Shall see or swelling, pustule, or disease,
Rage or affrighting torment: but as death were
Kissing and not killing, hence they go
Wrapped up in happy Slumbers.
Tic enough;
Go, and as Art produces things like these,
Let me hear from you.
The Jew is all your Creature.
Though (my Lord) I did not trouble my brains, yet I bestirred my stumps ere this work was brought to pass; I know the weight of the Pestle and Mortar, and though my hands lost some leather; yet they found labour worthy your Lordships remembrance.
O, I understand you, go, there's gold.
Now my best Aunt and Uncle, see you this;
Hears but a little substance; yet a strength
Able to bear a Kingdom every way:
This shall bring safety to vs, and conduct
Hered the way to Heaven: Uncle you
Shall take it to your keeping; and as I
Direct you by my Letters, so employ it;
How ere storms yet hang ore vs, you shall find,
I have a Deity can calm the wind.
You are excellent in all things; keep thy way•…
What we admire, that we must obey.
But is it ce taine Pheroas is so sick,
As Rumour doth give out?
Madam, he is;
Nor hath he ever since his Banishment
Cast up his heavy countenance.
Tic most strange;
But judgment still pursues him; yet Isle call
And visit his affliction; for although
His words accused my Miriam; tic his sin
Not person, that I envy.
Madam, here comes his Lady.
O, you are well encountered; I am sad
That sadness thus afflicts you.
I'm bound unto your goodness.
How fares your noble Husband?
Desperately ill;
His•…cknesse Madam rages like a Plague,
Once 〈◊〉 never cured; tic his mind
That doth afflict his body; and that war
Quickly brings on destruction.
Whence should proceed these Passions?
All I can gather is his Banishment,
Which, drawing something to his Conscience,
Makes every thing more mortal.
Advice and sufferance is a ready cure
For these distempered passions; and might I
But see him, I would boldly tender them.
Your Highness may; for now he's coming forth
To change the ayre, not his affliction.
Leave me, O leave me to my self, that I may think
Upon the tedious hours I'ue yet to live.
O, what a Journey hath that man to Heaven,
Whose Conscience is oppressed with injury;
Sin, like so many Pulls hanging by,
To draw the Soul still downward: Herod; O Herod.
Ha, what's this? sure I must sound him deeper:
How fare you Sir?
O Madam, Madam; I am full of miseries.
Discourse with Patience; she will comfort you.
Patience? there is a worm hath bitten Patience off;
And, being entered, sucks my vitals up.
Herod, loathed Herod: O credulous Pheroas!
Why doe you call on Herod?
Nothing now:
Was it not a strange thing, that he kilt his Wife?
Who doe you mean, Miriam?
Indeed t'was easily done; but soundly sworn to.
O, I feel a dagger.
Let not her name offend you; she deserved
A death more horrid, and her end was just:
O Pheroas, I hated her for that Act
More then the Scriech-Owle day; and would my self
Have been her Executioner; had not Law
Stepped in twixt me and anger.
O Madam, you're deceived; merely decein'd:
I have a Conscience tells me otherwise.
O my 〈◊〉 leave, torm•… me not within,
Nor raise this strange rebellion: hark, they cry
Judgment upon a wretch; that wretch am I.
This savours of distraction.
A Hall, a hall; let all the deadly sins
Come in and here accuse me: Isle confess,
Truth must no longer be obscured: why so;
All things are now prepared; the Judge is set,
And wrangling Pleaders buzzing in his ears,
Makes Babel no confusion.
Whom doe you see Sir?
Fear and a guilty Conscience; nay, what's more,
See where proud Herod and pale Envy sits;
Poor Miriam standing at the Bar of death,
And her Accuser I, falsely opposing her.
Let not your passion work thus.
Give him leave; Passion abates by venting.
This is strange meditation.
I doe confess before the Mercy-seate
Of Men and Angels, I slew Miriam;
It was I accused her falsely, I subornd,
Struck her to the heart with Slander; but her foes
Shall follow after when the H•…bbub comes
And overtakes me downward, down below,
In Hell amongst the damned.
Gentle Sir,
Name them which thus seduced you.
Pardon me,
I dare not, nor I may not; you may guess,
Their Characters are easy; for my self,
Let mine own shame sleep with me; I confess,
Miriam was chaste as fair, all good, all virtuous.
But yet, shoe's dead.
So are my Joys and comforts: O, till now
I had clean lost my self; and as a man
Left in a Wilderness, finds out no path
To carry him to safety; so was I
Distract, till this was uttered.
You have divulged a Mystery, whose truth
Shall sprinkle blood through all Jerusalem.
O me, poor innocent Miriam, let thy soul
Look down on my revengement; for thy sake,
I will so get all Greatness; faith I will.
Sir, I doe wish you may dye happy now;
Your free confession is a Sacrifice.
Madam, I thank you; and belieu't for truth,
The hurly burly which but late I had
Is now appeased; Truth's a brave Secretary.
I could not rest before; yet now I feel
A calmness overspread me; and my mind,
Like a decayed Temple new adorned,
Shows, as it ne'er was sullied.
You're happy Sir.
Madam, I am; for, with this peace of mind,
I find my breath decaying; yet before
I take this long last Journey, one thing more
I must disclose; then, all is perfitted.
Wife, reach me the Viol standing in my Study,
Of which I was so careful, and did bind
Your self by Oath to look to: go, away;
Tic a new birth that Villainy would bring forth.
More mischiefs yet in hatching?
These actions lead you on to happiness;
And for the penitent man, remission stands
Ready to fold him in her Crystal arms:
Yet noble Pheroas, make me so much blessed,
To know who plot•… Marriam's Ttagoe•…y
Name it no more; op not my wound afresh;
Least, in th'incision, I should bleed to death:
I have too much upon me; add to Fire,
Not Oil, but Water; Seas will not raise his care,
Whose ship lies sanded on the hill Despair.
Sir, here's the Viol.
Here's a little Compass; but a mighty sound:
And in this little Thimble, lies strange Villainy.
Madam, it was once prepared for the King;
And he from me deserved it; not from him
That bought it to destroy him: but Isle show
Mercy to my Tormentors.
And those deeds
Argue a pious Nature.
If they doe;
Then thus I will express them: Wife, by all
The ties that I can challenge, or entreat
By oath, by faith, by love and loyal duty,
I bind thee keep this glass till I be dead;
But, once departed, spill it on the ground,
Where ne'er treads living Creature; and (though urged)
Deny thou ever saw it; yea, though death
Be threatened to confess it: this performed,
My peace is made with all things.
By all the Bonds of love and faith I will.
Then Herod doe thy worst; I am beyond
The reach of all thine envy; peace dwells here;
And quiet Slumber sits upon mine eyes:
I have no Racks nor Batteries now within,
As erst I had when I was troubled:
My numbed feet which late so leaden were,
I could not stand nor walk; have now such vvarmth,
That I can travel unto Paradise;
And, with spread arms, encircle mercy to me:
I that accused the Queen, accuse my self,
And on her Altar lay my bleeding heart;
Where I have found such mercy in my truth,
That Marriams self hath got me happy pardon:
For which dear Sweet I thank thee: now I come,
My life hath run it's Circle, and's come round;
Mount Soul to Heaven; sink sins unto the ground.
O, he is gone, his life is withered:
What shall become of me? I'm lost for ever.
My Lord, my Husband; O, my Pheroas;
Lift up those eyes, they are too soon obscured
From her, that as her life did tender thee.
Have patience; tic a fruitless Dialogue,
Since to the dead you speak; withdraw him hence,
His Conscience is unburdened, he secure
On his long Journey wandered; and believe,
The causers of his woe shall follow him;
By all that's good they shall; second me Fate,
And let revenge once murder cruel hate.
No, Isle prevent you, Salumith shall know,
All your designs, and how your actions go.
Where is Niraleus? what, have you tan survey
Of all the holy Building? May it be said,
Herod in it hath out-gone Solomon?
Dread Sir, it may: nay and so far out-gone,
As Sunshine petty Starre-light.
Come discourse
The manner of the Building.
Briefly thus,
The Temple which King Solomon set up,
In honour of the God of Israel,
(Being by your great Mightiness defaced)
Is thus by you restored. The general Frame,
In height, in breadth, in length, is every way
Fully an hundred Cubits; and besides,
Twenty lies hid in the Foundation:
The matter is white Marble; every Stone
Twelve Cubits broad, and eight in the outward part;
So curiously contrived, that not a hair
Differs in all the Building: every Gate
Is closed in gold, and so enchased and set
With precious Stones; that never, till this day,
Saw mortal man so rich a Jewelry:
The Tops and Thresholds, Silver; and each Bar
Studded with knobs of shining Diamonds.
Close to the holy Building, stands a Court
Of square Proportion; every way stretched out
Seven hundred and twenty Cubits: all the Wall
Is made of massy Silver, and adorned
With Pillars of white Marble; from whose base
To the top are forty Cubits; and thereon
Mounted such curious Walks and Galleries,
That thence you may behold the Fishes dance
Within the River Citron: all the Floor
Is paved with Marble, Touch, and Ivory;
And on the golden Gate, is finely wrought
A flaming Sword; which, by Inscription,
Threats death to all dare enter.
What's within?
Within this Court, is framed a curious Vine
Of perfect Gold; the Body and large Arms,
Of shining Gold, brought from Arabia:
The Sprays and lesser Branches, are compact
Of Ophyr Gold; more red and ration•…:
The Tops and Twines, whereon the Clusters hang,
Are yellow Gold; wrought in Assyria:
The Fruit it self is Crystal; and so joined,
That when the Sun looks on them, they reflect
And vary in their colours several ways,
According to their Objects. To conclude;
Such Art, such Wealth, and Wonder in the Frame
Is joined and wed together; that the World
Shall never see it equalled: but this Truth
Shall still hang on it as a Prophecy:
Blush Art and Nature; none below the Sun
Shall ever doe what Herod now hath done.
Enough, you have given me satisfaction; and forthwith,
In solemn wise Isle have it consecrate
Unto the God of Israel: how now;
Why comes our Sister thus amazedly.
Sir, I beseech you, for your royal health,
And for the Kingdoms safety, you'll be pleased
To hear this E•…uch speak; and howsoever
Yaue vowed no more to hear Conspiracies:
Yet Sir, in this regard him; and admit,
He may make known what may endanger you.
Whence is the Eunuch?
Belonging to Alexandra.
Let him speak freely.
It pleased my Lady Sir, this other day,
(Hearing how desperately strong sickness raged
Upon Prince Pheroas) for some special cause
To go and visit him; she found him pained,
Both in his mind and body; uttering forth
Many distracted Speeches; some against
Your Highness person, most against himself;
Saying, he had maliciously accused
The late Queen most unjustly: in the end,
He makes his Lady from his Study bring
A Viol filled with Poison; saying, this
Was for the King prepared; and by those
That had least cause to hurt him: when he had
Viewed it, and showed the venom; he bequeaths
The Viol to his Lady; gives her charge
Of safe and curious keeping, till his eyes
Were closed in death for ever; but, that done,
To cast it forth and spill it on the ground,
Where none that lives might know it: this scarce spoke,
His Soul forsakes his Body; but the Glass
My Lady, and his sad Wife doth preserve,
I fear, for your destruction; Marriams Soul
Hath strong revengement promised.
Tic enough;
You have told me likely danger: Hillus with
Your Guard attach the Wife of Pheroas;
Then search the house; and whatsoere you find
Like Poison, see you bring me: Animis,
With your Guard cease my Mother; go, away;
Be careful, &amp; be happy.
Doubt vs not.
Still shall I thus be hunted, and compelled
To turn head on mine own blood? Is there left
Nothing to guard me but my Cruelty?
Then let my Passion conquer and keep down
All Mercy from appearing.
Sir, twill be
A royal Justice in you: who not knows
The Lybian Lyons never dare approach
The walls whereon their spoils hang; Wolves we see
Fly from the sound of those Drums, which we know
Are headed with their own Skins: Sir, believe,
Severity brings safety.
Tic most true,
And I will hence begin to study it.
How now, whom have you there?
Sir, tic the Wise of the deceased Pheroas.
By what means comes she thus disabled?
By her own fatal mischief: when she saw
I did ap•…roach her Dwelling; first she bars
All Doors against my passage; then, her self
Mounts up into a T•…rret, which orelookes
What ever stands about it; thence she calls,
And asks me what I came for; I declared
The pleasure of your Greatness; and with terms
Fit for her royal Calling, wished she would
Obey what I must finish: She returns
An answer like her fury; said she would
Nor yield to you, nor mine authority.
Which anger being over; she cried see,
Thus will I fly to Herod; and that spoke,
Down from the Turret did she throw her self
As if a VVhirle-winde took her: which perceiud,
I made the Soldiers catch her; yet the force
Came with such deadly violence, that some
She struck dead underneath her; and her self
Bruised, as you see, and wounded: By our means
Hath yet so much life left, as may resolve,
What we cannot discover.
What of the Poison?
No where to be found.
It was a strange desperate hazard.
But a toy;
They which dare doe, dare suffer; desperate Soul,
Doe not play with more mischief; but confess,
Where is the Poison, which thy treacherous Lord
(Having for me provided) did convey
Unto thy charge and keeping.
Sir, I vow,
There ne'er was any given me; neither had
My Lord a thought so odious.
Come tic false;
Nor can you now outstrip me; to deny,
Is but to add to sorrow; or confess,
Or drink of more affliction.
Madam, doe;
It will be too apparent, trust the King;
Isle sue and beg your safety.
Tic advice
Worthy your best embraces.
Quickly speak;
For I am sudden in my Cruelty.
What shall I speak; but, that you're tyrannous,
Thus to compel a falsehood; I protest,
He never gave me any; nor know I
Of any hidden Poison.
Prepare her for the Torture: Shall my life
Lye in these rotten Caskets, and not I
Dare to consume or break them? Wretched thing,
Isle make you speak louder then Tempests doe;
And true as Oracles; or else, believe,
He crack your strongest heart-strings: so, pull home;
Stretch her out like a Lutestring.
O, as you're a King have mercy; hold, O hold.
Speak truth, or there's no mercy; higher yet.
O, my weak strength cannot bear it; hold, O hold.
I will confess and perish.
Doe it with truth there's safety, give her ease.
I doe confess the Poison; that my Lord
Bequeathed it to my keeping; that it was
Prepared to kill you: but (great Sir)
Never by him.
Who then became the Author?
Sir, it was Antipater.
Mischief on mischief,
How came she by that knowledge?
Antipat•…! how, from Antipater?
Ere his departure unto Rome, he came
And feasted with my Lord; declared his hopes;
And that betwixt him and the Crown, did stand
Nothing but your weak life, and great Augustus favour:
The latter got; the first he said should fall,
And vanish in a moment; to which end,
He had prepared that poison; and besought
My Lord to keep it safely; for he meant
At his return to use it.
Can you tell by whose means he attained it?
He bought it of the Jew Achitophel.
What did you with that Poison?
As my dead Lord commanded; on the ground
I cast most part thereof; only some drops
Left in the Viols bottom, with the Glass,
(At her most strong entreaty) I bestowed
On the Queen Alexandra.
Take her down;
This at the first had eased your misery:
Ha Sir, Antipater; all this Antipater?
O Heaven! But tic no wonder.
Yes, that Truth
Should thus come forth by Miracle; till now
Mischief hath gone safe guarded: but, I hope,
Your Highness will make use on it.
Doubt me not.
Here comes my second trouble: what the Jew?
You have prevented sending for: false Queen,
That hast disgraced thy Sex with Cruelty.
What Poison's in your keeping?
Not any Sir.
Not any: impudent?
O Madam, tic
Too late now to excuse it; pain, O pain,
Tyrannous pain hath torn all from my Bosom:
The Viol which I gave you, and the drops,
Is that his Highness urges.
I do confess them;
Here is the Viol and the drops: from this,
What can your malice gather?
That your intent
Was, therewith to destroy me. O, you Gods!
What's life, when This can take it? This, this drop;
This little paltry nothing.
Sir, tic false
I never did intend your injury.
What not intend it? Blushless impudence!
If you be made my Judge, I know I'm then
Worse then all fear can make me.
You're indeed
A mischief too long growing. Sirrah, Jew;
Was this your Composition?
It was a work
My Art brought forth; but never did my thought
Touch at your Highness.
Who made you to prepare it?
The Prince Antipater.
Villain, you are damned for that discovery.
No matter; Isle have royal company.
And Sirrah, you had a finger in this work too.
No truly My Lord, I durst not dip my finger in your dish,
After great men is always good manners.
Then you knew it was prepared for the King.
Alas, I knew my Moister had nothing too dear for his
Grace, and my Lord Antipater I know gave a good price for it.
Was this Poison then prepared for me?
O Sir, by all likelihood; for ever your Physician is like your Hake; the greater the Foul is that he kills, the greater is still both his reward and reputation.
Tic true, and you shall both find it: go, hang up that
Peasant presently; and then cast him into Silo.
Who me, hang up me? that cannot be good payment.
Why fool?
Because I shall never be able to acknowledge satisfaction.
Away with him; and for that treacherous Jew,
And you false-hearted Madam, both shall taste
Of that you would have tendered; equally
Divide that Bane into two cups of wine,
And give it them to drink off; tic decreed,
What was prepared for me, shall make you bleed.
Tic welcome Sir; a sudden death, I know
Is terrible and fearful; but indeed,
To those which doe attend it, and doe stand
Constantly gazing on it; who doe live,
Where it scars none but Cowards; those can meet,
And kiss it as a sweet Companion:
Tic unto those a Bugbear, who do think
Never on Heaven, but for necessity.
Your Tyranny hath taught me other rules;
And this guest comes long looked for: heere's a health
To all that honour Virtue; let suffice,
Death doth oretake; but it doth not surprise.
Well Madam, I must pledge you; yet before,
Isle doe the King some service: I confess,
I did compound the poison; it was prepared
To kill your Majesty; the Plot was laid
Both by Antipater and Salumith:
They equally suborned me; each bestowed
Reward upon me, and encouragement:
T'was they which made me to accuse the Queen,
I must confess unjustly; they, long since,
Have shared you and the Kingdom: that tic true,
Be this last draught my witness; for no Slave
Madly will carry falsehood to his Grave.
But thou dost, and it will damn thee.
Say not so;
I know this smoke will kindle, and my care
Must now prevent my danger. Animis,
Guard you my Sister safely: Hillus, cause
Those bodies to be buried: you Niraleus,
Shall make for Rome with all speed; thence, bring back
That false, ungrateful, proud Antipater:
Carry the matter close, but cunningly:
For that poor Soul, bid our Physicians
With all care to respect her; for tic she
That only can accuse our enemies.
Thus runs the wheels of State, now up, now down;
And none that lives finds safety in a Crown.
Once more, I must entreat you to bestow
Much on Imagination; and to think,
That now our Bastard hath attained the top
And height of his Ambition: You have seen
Augustus Crown him; all his great Requests
Are summed and granted: therefore, now suppose
He is come home in Triumph; all his Plots
He holds as strong as Fate is, nothing fears;
(So brave his mind enchants him) how at last,
He falls to utter ruin; sit, and see:
No man hath power to out-worke Destiny.
O Niraleus; so liberal was the royal breasted Caesar,
As far exceeds all thought or just expression.
When he established me Iudea's King,
His bounty did so far extend it self,
That even his Court appeared a Paradise;
The People like so many Demi-Kings;
Himself, the great Vice-gerent ore them all.
Caesar is royal, and Antipater deserving.
Me thinks (as in a Mirror) still I see
Augustus dealing yellow Arabian gold
Amongst the vulgar, in Antipaters name;
So lovely were his looks, so Angel-like his words
The very thought strikes m•… into a Rapture:
O, I could laugh my self breathless in conceit,
To think on those fair honours we received.
Live to deserve ever.
How now; what Motion-mongers are these? S'death, what mean they? Doe they make me a Bachelor Cuckond? But that I would know the intent, I could be very angry: but Isle not mind 'em.
That's he was carried in triumph through Rome.
Poor Young-man, thy Greatness must down.
He scorned (being great) to look on Poverty;
But now Poverty scorns Baseness: farewell.
Your Greatness will have a cold welcome home.
See how he looks.
Pitifully pale.
I doubt he will run mad.
Come, let's leave him. Ha, ha, ha.
Has Nature stamped me with Deformity?
Am I of late transformed? Am I the Owl
So lately made, for Birds to wonder at? Is it so?
I think I am my self; I have my Voice,
My Legs, my Hands, my Head, Face, Eyes and Nose;
I'm disproportioned no way that I know of:
Then why doe these Wood-cracks wonder at me?
I could be naturally vex't, and have good cause for it:
But Isle be patient, walk, observe: here comes a friend.
My Lord;—You are undone.
Ha, noble Animis; what, gone so soon?
Noble Hillus.
My Lord;—Your •…cke is broke.
Ha! whats that? strange entertainment: you're undone:
Whom should this be; for me it cannot be? No;
I am a King, and tic a hard matter to undo a King.
P•…sh; there's no Moral in these foolish words:
Your Neck is broke; a Banquerout's Sentence.
We are unlimited, both in Wealth, and State;
As boundless as the Sea; freer in gift.
No; tic not their words can breed am•…zement;
But their strange looks, gestures, and geerings at me:
Instruct me good Nirale•…, thou art an honest man;
How shows this disrespect? strangely: doe's it not?
Nothing, nothing Sir; Courtiers you know are apish:
Tic only some new Project they have to entertain you.
Proiects for entertainment! Well, they are strange;
And I find something troubles me.
What aisle you Sir? Do ye faint? You're wondrous pale;
You change Colour strangely: Do ye bleed?
A Drop; nothing, but a Drop.
Tic ominous.
True; and I find something that staggers me:
I will retire my self from Court to day.
Retire from Court! O, name it not for shame;
Least you incur a public Scandal on you:
Why should you fly from that most covets you?
Will you obscure your Sunne-beames in their height?
Cover your Glories in their M•…rnings rise?
Those that now geared; then, will laugh outright;
When looks can put Antipater to flight.
No, forage on; and, l•…ke a daring Lion,
Single your Game; let not pale Fear dismay you:
Appeal for Justice to Heroic Herod,
Against those that thus contemned your Sovereignty:
True Valour in the weakest Trench doth lie;
Then bear you bravely on, and scorn to fly.
You have new created me: I love this Honour,
That is by merit purchased: second me then;
And let the worst of fortunes fall upon me:
This G•…art Isle keep; grappling this Sword,
(Though walled with Pikes) Isle beat my passage through;
And to great Herod make my Supplication.
He that fears Envy shall be sure to find it:
But he securest, that the least doe's mind it.
Stay, a new Onset.
Great Antipater.
I, that sounds nobly; why not this before?
This cause and this Authority.
What, betrayed; and sleeping taken?
Slaves let me go, Isle to the King for Justice:
Ha ye caught the Lamb within the Lions Den?
Cowardly wretches: O for my good Sword,
And liberty to gratulate your Treacheries.
Your Treasons must be first answered Sir;
Till then, you must to Prison.
Ha, Niraleus; art thou my accuser?
Have I within my boss•…me kept a Snake,
To sting me first? Treacherous Lords,
My Treasons?' against whom? or, by whom acted?
Innocence protect me: guide me to Herod,
That, to his sacred person, I may tell
The Injuries Antipater does suffer:
He comes; O happy hour: Justice; Justice Sir.
The Justice that you merit; hence away with him.
O sacred Herod, hear thy Vassal speak:
Consider what I am; thy Son: if my offences
Prove prejudicial to thee; Isle lay my life
As footstool to thy inercies: O, consider,
I never was that disobedient Son,
That did in any thing oppose his Father:
But with a greediness, still ran to act,
Ere thy Command was past: if these Honours,
These titular glories, great Augustus gave me;
If these offend my Sovereign, cut them off;
Raze them from off my head; and let me be
Any thing, but Harrods scorn; no misery
Can work upon me half that troubled grief,
As does one frown from those thy glorious eyes:
Let not those white hairs now be stained with blood,
Blood of thine own begetting; every drop
In me, from thee had being; can thou be so unkind,
To cast thy self away? O sacred Sir,
I see compassion in your tender eyes;
Weeping for me, that moan your miseries.
Through what a Labyrinth is mercy led;
Rise in our fauo•…r evermore beloved.
Rise in your favour! O Herod be more just;
As thou art K•…ng; so be a God in Justice;
The blood of Babes, c•…yes sor thine equity:
Remember but his Stratagems forepast;
All which, acquitting, you are accessory.
Think first on Aristobul•… fell death;
Your two brave Sons, and noble Iosephs fall:
Next Pheroas your Brother; O, your native blood:
And Alexandra, that most innocent Lady;
Uni•…stly and untimely brought to death,
All through his poysnous Complots.
All these are past and cannot be recal'd.
Let not his smooth words Sir entice you to him;
In stillest Rivers are the greatest dangers:
If none of these can move you to doe Justice,
Whose Souls yet hovering still doe cry Revenge;
Ye•… there is one whose cause must not be slipped;
Though Cannons roar yet must not you be deaf;
But (l•…ke the glory you were made for) be
A King, a God in Judgment, and in Justice:
Sons are no longer Ours, then they are Natures;
When Nature leaves them, we may leave our claim:
Be this your warrant, justly to execute
Judgment on him, that he's unjustly murdered
Your Mother, Sons, Brothers, Sisters: if not for these;
Think upon her as dear as was your life,
Your Miriam; you innocent, chaste, fair Miriam;
By his false witness, turned to untimely dust:
O as you're great, be good, gracious, and just.
All those forenamed were of no effect:
My Miriam; O my heart: hence with the Slave;
Isle hear no more of his enchanting words.
O Herod, Kingly Father.
Away with him; Isle blot out all Affinity:
O Niraleus, he was so deeply rooted in our love;
All those and thousands more could never work
Me to have sent him from my presence: but
My Miriam; O, the very name of her
Is like a passing-Knell, to a sick man:
For, if to be a King, is to be wretched;
Then to be mean is to be glorious:
The tho•…light of Miriam, like a Fever burns,
Diffects me every Nerve; I feel within
My cog•…ations beating, things long past
Are now present•…d, now I suffer for them;
I m grown a Monster, and could chafe my self
Out of my self; I'm all on fire within:
O Miriam, Miriam, Mistress of my Soul;
I shall expire with breathing on thy name:
Thy dear remembrance burns me: who attends?
Go•…e me some Fruit to cool me.
What, will you taste some Syrup, or some grapes?
No, give me an Apple.
Here are fair ones Sir.
Lend me a knife to pare it: O Niraleus,
I have done cruel Justice; is there left
A good thing to succeed me? All my Sons,
My Brothers, Sisters; nay, the very last
Of all my blood is vanished.
Say not so; Your Childrens Children live yet:
Passing true, young Archelaus and Antipas;
Beet yo•…r ch•…rge to see them sent for home;
Something I m•…st act, worthy my Meditation;
Isle not live to have care dwell so near me; one small prick
With this will doe it: thus Isle try it.
Hold, in the name of wonder; what have you done Sir?
Nothing but sought to ease my misery;
A little more had done it.
Good Sir have patience; a Surgeon there.
Patience, thou see I have, to kill my self;
I shall ere long rest in my Marriams arms:
I would not be a King another year,
For both the Crowns of Iuda and of Rome:
Provide my Bed, I'm faint and something sick:
Antipater, be close, Isle sift your knavery;
A King has eye-balls that can pierce through stone;
His very looks, shall make the Slave confess,
Who's just, and who's unjust: all is not well;
Lend me your hands, we'll try who is the strongest;
A wager, of vs two, I live the longest.
These are (my Lord) your Lodgings; here you may
Rest at your noble pleasure; when you call,
W'are ready to attend you.
Why tic well;
Yet, if a man should ask this Chambers name,
You would call it a Prison.
Tic no less.
Then Gentlemen I thank you; take your ease.
Never till now had thou Antipater,
True cause t'account with wisdom; all thy Life
He's been but sport and Tennis-play: but this,
O this is Serio Ioco, such a Game,
As calls thy Life in question; nay, thy Fame;
Thy Virtue, Praise, and Reputation:
What art thou now? a Prisoner; that's a Slave:
Nay, Slave to Slaves; slavish extremity!
But now a King; but now a Cast-away;
Crowned, and vncrown'd; and undone every way:
Whore's now my hellish Counsellors? my hope?
My strong bewitched persuasion? Rise, O rise;
And once more show me my deliverance:
Tut, all mute and hidden; tic the Devils trick
Sill to forsake men in their misery;
And I am pleased they doe so: let none share
Either in my downfall, or welfare.
Keeper, welcome: what news hath ill luck now?
Strange Sir, and heavy; Rumour saith, the King
Hath slain himself.
Ha, call thou that ill news?
What, is he dead?
Tic strongly so reported.
Thou dost not mock my Fortune; prithee speak,
Speak, and speak freely; thou had wont to love
And joy in what did please me: say; Is the King dead indeed?
Upon my life, tic firmly so reported.
Excellent, excellent; noble, happy news;
Why, what heart could wish better? I am traunc't
And rapt with admiration; why, I knew
Fortune durst not forsake me: now hoe's dead,
I may say, as the Devil says, ell's mine:
My hopes, my thoughts, my wishes; prithee joy
Doe not too much overcome me: once again,
Say, is he dead? is Herod vanished?
Questionless, so talks Rumour.
Name it truth;
Doe not abuse a thing so excellent:
And now hoe's dead; who think thou is the King?
I think your Greatness only.
Why, tic true;
Exceeding true; who, but Antipater:
Hath not Augustus chose me? set the Crown
Here? here, my Animis? hath not public Rome
Styled me the King of lute? is there left
Any of Casmonani; or the Seed
Which they doe call the holy Israel?
No, I have sent them packing; they are as dead
As Herod and my fears are: O, my Joys,
How nimble have you made me! To behold
The Hangman hang himself; would it not please
Those that stood near the Gallows: by my Life,
(Which this sweet news hath lengthened) had I seen
The Old man kill himself; I think I should
Have burst my sides with laughing: Come, let's go;
Isle have the Crown immediately.
Go, my Lord, whither?
Unto the Court, the City, any where;
Whither my pleasure leads me.
Pardon me;
I have not that Commission.
How; not that Commission? S'foot, dare any heart
Harbour a thought against me? Come, you are wise;
Open thy Doors unto me; I have power
That knows, and can requite thee; by this hand,
If thou withstandst my purpose; look to be
Despised and wretched.
Good my Lord, be pleased.
Not to have you dispute my sufferance:
Come will you let me go?
Sir, I dare not.
Expect a damned mischief.
Take better thoughts,
And good my Lord conceive, this is but News;
It may be true, or false, or any way.
You will not let me go then?
Would I could;
Yet if you will take patience, with all hast
Isle fly unto the Court: if there I find
The News be firm and certain; I'm your Slave:
You shall dispose your self, and me and all things.
Pox of your purity, your Ginger-bread,
And nice, safe reseruations: but, since force
Makes me obey you; go, away, be gone;
Fly as thou look for favour.
I am vanished.
O, what a thing is Man! how quickly made
And mared, and yet again reedified,
All with a breath; to make vs know, in Kings,
Consists the great work of Creation:
Why, I was lost but now; and now again,
Am found as great as ever; thus can Fate
Change and reaching at pleasure; he that would
Have killed, is killed in killing: foolish Fiends,
You are deceived to leave me; I shall live
To make you bound to mine Iniquity;
Indeed I shall; and make Posterity
Cite only my example; then (my Soul)
Sit, and sleep out thy dangers.
O royal Caesar, this grace thus performed
In my poor Visitation; makes my Soul
A Bond slave to thy Virtue.
Tic no more
Then what your worth may challenge; only Sir,
This violence on your person, by your self,
Must crave my reprehension.
Tic but fit:
Yet royal Caesar, what should Nature doe;
When, like to me, its grown unnatural?
Turned a devouring Serpent; eating up
The whole Fry it engendered; nay, the arms
And branches of it's body. Sir, it was I
That killed the virtuous high Priest Aristobulus;
See where he comes bright Angel-like: O stay,
Doe not afflict me further: how he moves
Like gentle ayre about me: see, to him,
Enters his royal Mother; hold, O hold;
I doe confess my vengeance, and will shed
My life-bloud to appease you.
Why, this is
But fancy which torments you; here appears
Nothing that's strange about vs.
See my Sons;
My lovely Boys; tic true, I murdered you;
Come, take revenge, and spare not: art thou there;
O, let me fly and catch thee: be thou Flame,
Blastings, or mortal Sickness; yet I dare
Leap and embrace my dearest Miriam:
Miriam, O Miriam; Will•…nes, let me go;
You shall not hold me from her: O, a Sword,
A Sword for Heavens mercy; for, but death,
Nothing can join me to her.
This is strange;
Nor have I seen Passion more powerful: See you hold him fast.
Shall I not reach my comfort? then, O come
You that my wrath hath injured; stick, stick here
The Arrows of your Poison: so; it works, it works.
A Slumber overtakes him.
Let him rest.
Hold, O hold; whither is courage vanished? Pox of fears,
And Dreams imaginations: shall I turn
Coward whilst I am sleeping? No, Isle laugh
Even in my Grave, at all my Villames:
Yes, in despite of thee, and thee, and both
Your damned base Bravadoes: ha, ha, ha;
My Mountebank and s Zany! How can Hell
Spare such neat skipping Raskals? What, my fine
Neat shaving amorous Barber! See, I dare
Face, and out-face ye all; I Death himself;
For, none of you, but dyed most worthily.
Ha, I am now transfigured: stand away;
Accuse me not you blessed Innocents:
O, you doe break my breast up, tear my Soul;
And burn Offence to an Anatomy:
I know my mischief slew you; give me leave,
And Isle become both Priest and Sacrifice:
They will not have mine Offering: see, they are gone;
And I am only fooled with Visions.
Sit, and sleep out Phantasmas.
Ha, ha, ha;
This Vision doth not scarre me; that you fell,
It was I•…stice and my Virtue; all your threats
Doe but augment my Triumph: go, pack hence;
I grieve for nought but injured innocence.
Where is the King my Moister?
What's thy will?
Imperial Sir, Tic from Antipater.
Antipater? speak forth, I hear thee; that's a sound
Ever craves mine attention.
Gracious Sir,
The rumour of your death, when it had filled
The City; flew to him.
Yes, and then
How took he my departing? Come, I see
Strange things in thy deliverance: speak, speak free;
How took he that sad Message?
Not to the heart.
No it was enough the countenance languished.
That was as light as any.
On thy life
Tell me his whole demeanour.
Sir, in brief;
When I had told the fatal Accident
Both of your wound and dying; sudden mirth
Ran through him like a Lightning; and he seemed
Only a flame of Jest and Merriment:
His joy was past example; and he swore,
His sins had made him King of Israel:
What shall I say; if threatenings or reward
Could but have bought his freedom; at my choice
Lay all my heart could number.
Peace, no more;
I think what thou can utter: O, this Son,
This Bastard Son hath only ruined me:
Hell never knew his equal; all my sins
Are but the seeds he planted: fie, O fie.
Do not afflict your self; tic Justice now
Shall take the Cause in handling: Captains hark,
And hark Niraleus, doe as I command;
Be vigilant and serious: go, away.
It shall be so; these Visions are to me,
Like Old-wiues Tales, or Dreams of Goblins;
And shall pass like them, scorned and jested at:
Why, what to me is Conscience? if I could
Neglect it in my whole Course; shall I now
Now when the Goal is gotten, stand afraid
Of such poor moral Shadows? No, tic here,
Hardened by Hell and Custom which shall keep
And out-face all such Battery: I'm my self,
A King, a royal King; and that dear Joy
Shall bury all Offences: Herod's dead;
And in his Grave, sleep my distemperance.
Health to the King of Iuda.
Ha, what's that?
Long life unto the King Antipater.
Is the news true then? is the Old man dead?
The wretched poor Old man; and, have my Stars
Made me the man I wished for? O, you are
My Nightingales of comfort, and shall sing
Notes far aboue your Fortunes.
Sir, hoe's dead;
And in his death hath given you all, that Rome
Before confirmed upon you; which we thus
Fix on your sacred Temples; only crave,
You will be pleased (as Herod did desire)
That ere you do ascend the Sovereign Chair,
First to behold his Body, and on it
Bestow one Tear or natural Sacrifice.
O tic a Rent most ready; Tears in me
Are like Showers in the Spring time, ever black;
But never far from Sunshine: Come, I have
A longing heart and busy thoughts, which knows
There's much to doe in little time: away:
I long to meet my glory; never hour
Was Crowned with better fate, or stronger power.
This Preparation's honest; so dispatch,
And place these mortal Triumphs handsomely:
Sirrah, conceal your person; let no fear
Make his fear grow too early.
Tic, my Lord,
My part to couch like Mischief, close, but sure;
When I break out I'm fatal.
Thou speak truth;
Would this day did not need thee: tic a world
To think how strong our cares are; and how weak
All things which doe but look like comfort: there's
Not left in me a shadow; not a breath
Of any hope hereafter; this Bastards faith,
On which so much I doted, to be lost
Thus against kind and nature; tic a sin,
That tears my heart in pieces.
Say not so;
Tic rather comfort well discovered:
But peace; see they are approaching.
Give way, stand back; room for the King of Iuda.
No, let them throng about me; and behold
Their glory, and Redeemer, Ha; what's this? a Vision?
〈◊〉 •…tall Prodigy: the King is living: O, I'm lost
Past hope, and past imagination; by his side
The Emperor Augustus: then I see,
There is no way, but to destruction.
Yes, to deserve destruction: wretched thing;
Thou scorn of all are scorned; see, I live
Only to sound thy Judgment: thou, that though
To build thy Throne upon my Sepulchre;
See how you are dashed in pieces.
Gracious Sir.
Labour not for excuses; you have run
A strange Career in Villainy; and thrust
All goodness from you with such violence,
That Mercy dares not help you.
Yet, my Lord,
Hear mine unfeigned Answer.
In thy breast
Was never thing looked like Simplicity;
Thou hast made Goodness wretched, and defamed
All virtuous things that graced Nobility;
You have eat my blood up; made my loathed life
Only a Scale to reach Confusion;
Of these things I accuse thee; this I prove
Both by my Life, my Death, and Infamy;
And for this thou must perish: One, call forth
The Minister of death; and in my view,
Some minutes ere my dying; let me see
His head tan from his body.
Sir, O Sir;
Think that you are a Father.
No, a King,
And thence ordained for Justice; to put back
Ought of that heavenly Office, were to throw
Mountains ith face of Iupiter; know you're lost,
Lost to all Mankind and Mortality:
Therefore to make your last hour better seem,
Then all that went before it; what you know
Of Treasons unrevealed; lay them forth:
The work will well become you.
Is there no mercy?
Not upon earth; nor for Antipater.
Then farewell Hope for ever; welcome Death;
I, that have made thee as mine Instrument,
Will make thee my Companion; and, I thus
Ascend and come to meet thee: Here I am
A Monarch over all that look on me,
And doe despise what all you tremble at:
Sir, it is true, I meant your Tragedy;
Did quite root out you•… Issue; and if life
Had held, would have wipte out your Memory:
This I confess; and to this had no help;
But mine ill thoughts and wicked Salumiths.
Was she assistant to you?
Sir, she was.
Produce her presently.
Sir, tic too late;
The heart-strong Lady once imprisoned,
Forsook all food, all comfort, and with sighs,
Broke her poor heart in sunder.
And that word
Hath brought mine unto cracking; strike, O strike;
Dispatch the Execution; or mine eyes
Will not continue to behold the grace
Of the revenge I thrist for.
Fear me not;
I am as swift in my desire of death,
As you are in your longings: Come, thou friend
To great men's Fears, and poor men's Miseries,
Strike, and strike home with boldness; here's a Life
Thy steel may quench, not conquer; for the thought
Exceeds all mortal Imitation:
Greatness grew in my Cradle; with my Blood,
It was fed to mature ripeness; on my Grave,
It shall, to all the Ages of the World,
Live in eternal dreadful Epitaphs:
This service men shall doe me; and my name
Remain a Bug-beare to Ambition. Come; I am now prepared.
Sir, will you please to kneel.
What to thy vildnes? Slave, Isle stand as high
And strong as is a Mountain; strike, or perish.
I cannot then Sir doe mine Office.
Pox of your form in these extremities.
What art thou there, poor tortured Wickedness?
And dost thou waft me to thee? Then, I come;
I stoop, I fall, I will doe any thing;
〈◊〉 me as Destiny: O stay,
My quick Soul shall oretake thee: for, but we,
Never two reached the height of Villainy.
Strike, O strike.
O-o-o-
Whence came that deadly groan.
From the King; the blow the Hangman gave Antipater,
Took his life in the Instant: Sir, hoe's dead.
The Gods have showed their wonders; some withdraw
The Bodies and inter them: that; where none
May pity or lament him: the other so;
As all men may admire him: for the Crown,
Thus I bestow it on young Archelaus:
Rome makes thee King of Iuda; and erects
Thy Chair and Throne within Jerusalem.
Long live Archelaus, King of Jerusalem.
I will be Caesars servant; and my life,
I hope shall purge these woes from Israel.
Tic a sweet royal Promise; prosper in it;
Make Virtue thy Companion: for we see,
She builds their ruins, spring from Tyranny.
you've heard a Tale, which not a noble Ear
But he's drunk with devotion; and how ere
It scant in phrase or action; yet it may
Rank with some others, and be held a Play,
Though not the best, nor worst; yet wee hope
It keeps the middle passage; thats the scope
Of our Ambition: But, of this w'are bold,
A truer Story ne'er was writ, or told:
If Envy hurt it, tic our Fates; and we
Beg but your hands, for the Recovery.

GOod morrow Master Tim.
Morrow Simon, my father stirring Simon?
Not yet I think, he heard some ill news of your Brother Alexander last night, that will make him lye an hour extraordinary.
Hum, I am sorry the old man should lye by the hour, but oh, these wicked Elder Brothers, that swear refuse them, and drink nothing but wicked Sack, when wee swear nothing but niggers noggers, make a meal of a bloat Herring, water it with four shillings Beer, and then swear wee have dined as well as my Lord Mayor.
Here was Goody Finn the fish-woman fetched home her Ring last night.
Ye should have put her money by her self, for fear of wronging of the whole heap.
So I did fir and washed it first in two waters.
All these petty pavvnes sirrah, my Father committs to to my managing, to instruct me in this craft, that when he dyes, the common-wealth may wanta good member.
Nay, you are cursed as much as he already.
Oh Brother, it is well you are up.
Why, why?
Now you shall see the dainty Widow, the sweet Widow, the delicate Widow, that to morrow morning must bee our Mother in Law.
What the Widow Nag.
Yes, yes, she that dwells in Blacke-fryers, next to the sign of the Fool laughing at a feather.
She, she, good Brother make your self handsome, for my father will bring her hither presently.
Niggers noggers, I thought hee had been sick and had not been up Simon.
Why so did I too, but it seems the Widow took him at a better hand, and raised him so much the sooner.
While I tie my Band, prithee stroke up my fore-toppe a little, Niggers, and I had but dreamed of this an hour before I waked, I wood have put on my Sunday clothes, 'mailes my shoo•s are as pale as the check of a stewed Pander, a clout, a clout Simon.
More hast, the vvorse speed, here's ne'er a clout now.
Whats that lies by the books?
This it is a Sumners coat.
Prithee lends a sleeve of that, had a Noble on it last night, and never paid me my Bill money.
Look, look upon, and ready, all ready Widow is, he is in some deep discourse with Simon, concerning monies out to one or another.
Has he said his prayers sit?
Praver before providence, when did ye know any thrive, and swell tha• uses it, hoe's a chip of the old block, I exercise him in the trade of thrift, by turning him to all the petty pawns, If they come to me, I tell 'em I have given over Brokering, moi∣ling for muck and trash, and that I mean to live a life Monastic, a praying life, pull out the tail of Cressus from my pocket, and swear it is called Charities looking glass, or an exhortation to for∣sake the World.
Dainty Hypocrite.
Peace.
But let a fine fool that's well feathered come, and with∣all good meat, I have a friend it may be, that may compassionate his wants, Isle tell ye an old Saw for it over my chimney yonder, a poor man seem to him that's poor, and prays thee for to lend, but tell the prodigal (not quite spent) thou woo't procure a friend.
Trust me a thristy saw.
Many will have virtuous admonitions on their walls, but not a piece in their coffers, give me these vvittie politic saws, and indeed my house is furnished with no other.
How happy shall I be to vved such wisdom.
Shall bed it, shall bed it wench, shalt have it by infusion, look, look. 
Save ye Master Tim.
Who's this, goodman fyle the black-smith, I thought'had been our old collier: did you go to bed with that dirty face goodman fyle?
And rise with it too sir.
What have you bumming out there goodman fyle?
A vice sir, that I would fine bee furnished with a little money upon it.
Why how will you doe to work then goodman fyle?
This is my spare vice, not that I live by.
Hum, ye did not buy this spare vice of a lean Courtier, did ye?
No sir, of a fat Cooke, that strained of a Smith for's rent.
Oh hard hearted man of grease.
Nay, nay, Simon, we must do it sometimes.
Ha thrifty whoreson.
And what wood serve your turn goodman fyle?
A Noble Sir.
What upon a spare vice to lend a Noble?
Why sir, for ten groats you may make your self drunk, and so buy a vice outright for half the money.
That is no noble vice I assure ye.
How long wood y• have it!
But a fortnight, it is to buy stuff I protest sir.
Look ye being a neighbour, and borne one for another.
Ha villain, shalt have a•l.
There is five shillings uppon't, which at the fortnights end goodman Fyle you must make five shillings six pence.
How sir?
Nay and it were not to doe you a courtesy—
Ha Boy.
And then I had forgot three pence for my Bill, so there is four pence, and nine pence, which you are to tender back, five shillings six pence, goodman Fyle at the end of the fortnight.
Well and it were not for earnest necessity, hay boys, I come, I come, you black rascals, let the Cans go round.
Simon, because the man's an honest man, I pray lay up his Vice, as safe as it were your own.
And if hee miss his day, and forfeit, it shall bee yours and your heirs for ever.
What, disbursing money boy? here is thy mother in law
Your nose drops, '•will spoil her ruff.
Pray forsooth—what's a cl•cke.
Oh fie upon him Mistress, I thought he had begun to ask you blessing.
Peace, vveele have more oa't. 
I wonnot kiss indeed.
And he wonnot, here are those that will forsooth.
Get ye in you Rogue.
I hope ye will Sir? I was bred in Ireland where the wo∣men begin the salutation.
I wonnot kiss truly.
Indeed you must.
Wood my girdle may break if I doe.
I have a mind.
Niggers noggers I wonnot.
Nay nay, now his great oath's past, ther's no talk on it, 〈…〉ke him ne'er the worse, ther's an old saw sort,
A kiss first, next the feeling sense,
Crack say the purse strings, out fly the penee.
But he can talk though, whose Boy are you Tim?
Your boy forsooth Father.
Can ye turn and wind a penny Tim.
Better then yourself forsooth father.
You have looked in the Church book late, bow old are you Tim?
Two and tvventy years, three moneths', three days, and three quarters of an hour, forsooth Father.
He has Arithmetic.
And Grammar too, vvhat's Latin for your head Tim?
Caput.
But what for the head of a block?
Caput blockhead.
Doe ye hear, your ear.
Aura.
Your eye.
Occules.
That's for one eye, vvhat's Latin for two.
Occulies, occulies.
An admirable accidental Gramarian I protest sir.
This boy shall have all, I have an elder rogue that sucks and dravves me, a saverne Accademian: one that protests to Whores, and shires with High-vvay lavvyers; an arrant unclari∣fied Rogue, that drinks nothing but wicked Sack.
Here's a Gentleman would speak with you,
Look, look, now hoe's come for more money.
A very hopeful house to match into wench, the Fa∣there a Knave, one son a drunkard, and tother a fool.
O monster Father, look if hee bee not drunk, the very sight of him makes me long for a cup of six.
Pray Father, pray to God to bless me.
Look, look, takes his brother for his Father.
Alas Sir, when the drink's in, the wit's out, and none but wise children know their own Fathers.
Why I am none of your Father, brother, I am Tim, doe ye know Tim.
Yes, umph—for a coxcomb.
How wild he looks: good sir weal take our leaves.
Shalt not go faith Widow: you Cheater Rogue, must I ha my friends frighted out my house by you, look heel steal
nothing to feast his Bawds, get ye out sirrah, there are Con∣stables, Beadles, whips, and the College of extravaging, E∣clipped Bridewell ye Rogue, ye Rogue there is, there is—mark that.
Can you send me a Mark upon this Ring sir, and there set it down in your Book, and vmph—mark that.
Isle have no stolen Rings, picked out of pockets, or taken upon the way, not I.
Isle give you an old saw for it.
There's a Rogue mocks his Father, sirrah, get 'ye gone, Simon, go let loose the Mastiff.
Alas sir, heel tear and pull out your sons throat.
Better pul't out, then a halter stretched, away out of my doors rogue, I defy thee.
Must you be my Mother in Law?
So your father says sir.
You see the worst of your eldest son, I abuse no body.
The Rogue will fall upon her.
I will tell ye an old saw.
Pray let's hear it.
An old man is a bed full of bones,
and who can it deny,
By whom (vmph) a young wench lies and greanes,
for better company.
Did ye ever hear such a Rascal? come come, let's leave him: Isle go buy thy wedding Ring presently, you're best bee gone sirrah: I am going for the Constable, I and one of the Church-wardens, and now I think on it, hee shall pay five shil∣lings to the poor for being drunk, twelve pence shall go into the box, and tother four, my partner and weal share betwixt us, there's a new path to thrist wench, wee must live, wee must live girl.
And at last die for altogether.
It is a Diamond.
You'll be at the fountain after dinner?
White, twill run boy.
Here's a noble now, and Isle bring you tother as I come
by to the Tavern, but Isle make you swear, I shall drink no∣thing but small Better.
Niggers niggers thou shalt not, there's thine own oath for thee, thou shalt eat nothing and thou woo't, but a poacht spider, and drive it down with sirrup of Toads. 
Ah, prithee Simon bid the maid eat my breakfast her self.
Has turned his stomach, for all the World like a Puritans, at the sight of a surplice, but your breakfast shall bee devoured by a stomach of a stronger constitution I war∣rant you. 
No Game abroad this morning, this Coxcomb Park, I think bee past the best, I have known the time the bottom twixt these hills has been better fledged.
Look out Captain, there's matter of employment at foot of the hill.
A business?
Yes, and hopeful, there's a morning bird, his flight it seems for London, hee hallowes and sings sweetly, prithee let us go and put him out of tune.
Thee and I have Crotchets in our pates, and thou know∣est two Crotchets make one quaver, he shall shake fort. 
Did her not see her true Loves,
As her came from London,
Oh, if her saw not her fine prave Loves,
Randall is quite undone,
Well, was never mortal man in Wales, cooed have wagd pra∣ver, finers, and nimblers, then Rentals have done, to get service in Londons: whoop, where was her now, just upon a pridge of stone, between the legs of a couple of pretty hills, but no more ne'er mountains in Wales, then Clim of the Cloughes bow, to her Cozen Davits Harp, and now her prattle of Dave, I think yonder come prancing down the hills from Kingston a couple of her
tother cozens Saint Nicholas Clerks. the morning was so red as an egg, and the place ferry full of dangers, perils, and bloody busi∣noses by reports: yew her swords was trawne, God plesse us and her cozen Hercules was not stand against too, which shall her take if they take Randalls, will rip Rentals cuts out, and then Ran∣dals shall see Pawles steeples no more, therefore her will go di∣rectly under the pridge, here was but standing to knees in little fine cool fair waters, and becat if her have Randalls out, her shall come and fetch Randalls and her will, were her nineteen Nicholas Clerks. 
Which way took hee?
On straight I think.
Then we should see him man, hee was just in mine eye when we were at foot of the hill, and to my thinking stood here loo∣king towards us upon the bridge.
So thought I, but with the cloud of dust wee raised about us, with the speed our horses made: it seems we lost him, how I could stamp and bite my horses ears off.
Let's spur towards Coomb house, he struck that way, sure hoe's not upon the Road.
'Sfoot if wee miss him, how shall vvee keep our word with Sander Bloodhound in Fleetstreete after dinner at the Foun∣taine, hoe's out of cash, and thou know by Cutters Law, wee are bound to relieve one another.
Let's scour towards Coomb house, but if we miss him.
N• matter, dost see yonder Barn of the left hand?
What of that?
At the West end, I tore a piece of board out,
And stuffed in close amongst the straw, a bag
Of a hundred pound at least, all in round shillings:
Which I made my last nights purchase for a Lawyer.
Dost know the place to fetch it again?
The torn board is my land mark, if we miss this,
We make for that, and whilst that lasts—oh London,
Thou Labyrinth that puzzle strictest search,
Convenient Innes of Court, for highvvay Lavvyers,
How with rich wine, Tobacco, and sweet Wenches,
we will canvas thy dark case.
Away, let's spur. 
Spur did her call her, have made Rentals stand without pootes, in ferry pitiful pickles, but her will run as nimbles to Londons, as Creyhound after Rabbits, and yet now her remember what her Cozens talked, was some wiser and some too, Rentals heard talk of Parne upon left hand, and a prave bag with hundred pounds in round shil∣lings Cod plesse us, and yonder was Parnes and upon left hands too, now here was questions, &amp; demands to be made, why Rentals should not rob them would rob Rentals, her will go to parnes, pluck away ports, pull out pigs, and show her cozen a round pair of heals, with aule her round shillings, mark her now. 
The Rogue rise right, and has out stripped us this was staying in Kingston with our unlucky Hostess, that must be dandled, and made drunk next her heart, she made us slip the very Cream of the morning, if any thing stand augward, a woman's at one end on it.
Come, we have a hundred pieces goodyet in the Barn, they shall last us, and Saunder a months mirth at least.
Oh these sweet hundred pieces, how I will kiss ye, and hug ye with that zeal a Usurer does his bastard money, when hee comes from Church, were not for them, where were our hopes, but come, they shall bee sure to thunder in the Taverns, I but now, just now I see pottle pots thrown down the stayres, just like Sergeants and Yeomen, one in the neck of another.
Delicate vision. 
Her have got her page and aule by the hand, and her had ferrily thought in conscience, had not bin so ma∣ny round shillings in whole worlds but in Wales, it was time to supply her store, her had but thirteen pence half
penny in awl the worlds, and that her have left in her little white purse, with a rope her sound pie the parne, just in the place her had this: Rentals will bee no serving mans now, her will buy •er prave Parrells, prave Swords, prave Taggers, and prove •eiders, and go a wooing to prave comely pretty ma•ds, r•b Randalls, becat and her were ten dozens of cos•ns, Rentals rob her, mark her now. 
A plague of Friday mornings, the unfortunate day in the whole week.
Was ever the like sate, 'sfoote when I put it in I was so wary, though it were midnight, that I watched till a cloud had masked the Moon, for fear she should have seen't.
Oh luck.
A Gale of wind did but creep ore the bottom, and because I heard things stir, I stayed, it was twelvescore past me.
The pottle pots will sleep in peace to night.
And the sweet clinkes.
The clattering of pipes.
The Spanish fumes.
The more wine boy, the nimble a•on, •non sir.
All to night will be nothing, come wee must shift, sfoot what a witty rogue 'tvvas t〈…〉ave, this fair thirteen pence halfepenny, and this old halter, intimating a•tly.
Had the hang-man met us three, by these presages,
Here had bin his work, and here his wages.
Come, come, we must make friends. 
There sirrah, there's his bond, run into the Strand, s•xe weeks the •allow Chandler fetched my hundred mark•, ••ent him to set him up, and to buy great, this is his day, Isle have his bones foe•'• •se, so pray tell him.
But are a Chandlers ones worth so much Father?
Out Coxcomb.
Worth so much, I know my Master will make dice on them, then it is but letting Master Alexander carry them next Christmas to the Temple, he'll make a hundred marks a night of them.
Mass that's true.
And run to Master Eare-lacks the informer, in Thieving lane, and ask him what he has done in my busi∣ness he gets abundance, and if he carry my cause with one false oath, he shall have Moll, he will take her with a little, are ye gone Sir?
No forsooth.
As ye come by Temple-barre, make a steppe to'th Devil.
To the Devil father?
My Master means the sign of the Devil.
And he cannot hurt ye fool, ther's a Saint holds him by the nose.
Sniggers, what does the Devil and a Saint both in a sign?
What a question's that, what does my Master, and his prayer book a Sunday both in a pew?
Well, well, ye Gypsy, what do wee both in a pew?
Why make a fair show, and the Devil and the Saint does no more.
•'are witty, you're witty, cal to the man of the house, bid him send in the bottles of wine to night, they will be at hand in the morning,—will ye run sir?
To the devil as fast I can Sir, the world shall know who's son I am. 
Let me see now, for a posy for the Ring:
Never an end of an old saw, it is a quick Widow Simon,
And wood have a witty posy.
If she be quick, shoe's with child, vvhosoever got it you must father it, so that you come of the nick, forth wid∣dow's quick, there's a witty posy for you quick Widow▪
No, no, Isle have one shall savour of, of a saw.
Why then twill smell of the painted cloth.
Let me see, a Widow witty.
Is pastime pretty, put in that for the sports sake.
No, no, I can make the sport, then an old man.
Then will she answer, if you cannot a younger can,
And look, look sir, now I ta ke of the younger,
Yonder's Ancient Young come over again, that
M•rgaged sixty pound Per annum before he went,
I am deceived if he come not a day after the Fair.
Mine Alminacke.
A prayer book sir.
A prayer book for devote beggars I hate, look I beseech thee, Fortune now befriend me, and I will call the plaguy whore in, let me see, six months.
Yes, tic he certain, this is a business must not bee slackened sir.
Look I beseech thee, wee shall have oat meal in our pottage six weeks after.
Four days too late Simon, four days too late Simon.
Plummes in our pudding a Sunday, plummes in our pudding.
Master bloodhound as I take it.
You are a stranger Sir, you shall be witness, I shall be railed at else, they will call me devil, I pray you how many months from the first of May, to the sixth of November following?
Six months and four days just.
I ask, because the last first of May, a noble gentle∣man, one Ancient Young.
I am the man sir?
My spectacles Simon, look Simon, is this Ancient Young?
Tvvas Ancient Young sir:
And is it not Ancient Young?
No sir, you have made him a young Ancient
Oh Simon, a Chair, I know him now, but I shall not live to tell him.
How fare ye sir?
The better for you, he thanks you sir.
Sick, sick, exceeding sick,
Of the sudden, strange.
A qualm of threescore years come over his sto∣macke, nothing else.
That you beloved, you, who of all men in the world, my poor heart doted on, whom I loved better then Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Uncles, Aunts, what wood ye have, that you should stay four days too late.
I have your money ready,
And sir, I hope your old love to my Father.
Nay, nay, I am Noble, fellow, very Noble, a very rock of friendship, but, but, I had a house and barn burned down to the ground, since you were here.
How?
How burned ask Simon?
By fire, sir, by fire.
To build up which, for I am a poor man, a poor man, I was forced by course of Law to enter upon your Land, and so for less money then you had of me, I was fine to sell it to another, that by four days stay, a man should lose his blood, our livings, our blood, ô my heart, ô ny head.
Pray take it not so hamons, weal go to him. Isle buy it again of him, he wonnot be too cruel.
A dog, a very dog, there is more mercy in a pair of unbrib'd Bailiffs, to shun all such solicitings, he's rid to York, a very cut-throat Rogue, but Isle send to him.
A honest old man, how it moves him, this was my negligence, good Simon convey him into some vvarmer room, and I pray, how ever Fortune, she that gives ever with the dexterity she takes, shall please to fashion out my sufferings, yet for his sake, my deceased Father, the long friend of your heart, in your health, keep me happy.
Oh right honest young man Simon.
Sir, Blood. Have I don't well?
The deu'll himself could not have don't better.
I tell thee an old saw sirrah, hee that dissembles in wealth shall not want, they say dooms day is coming, but think you not an't, this will make the pot sees Simon,
good Sir talk no more, my mouth runs over, Sleep, wake, worthy beggar, worthy indeed to be one, and am one worthily—how fine it is to wanton without afflict∣on, I must look out for Fortunes, over again, no, I have money here, and it is the curse of merit•, not to work, when she has money: there was a handsome Widow, whose wild ma• j•alous husband died at Sea, let me see, I am near Black-fryers, Isle have o•e start at her, or else—
By my troth tic he Captain Yongs soon, I have l•ved him even with languishings, ever since I was a girl but should I know it, I should run mad sure, what handsome Gentlemen travaire and manners makes, my Father begun to ye Sir, in a cup of final Beer.
How does he pray?
Pretty well now Sir.
Mas it is small indeed—you'll pledge me?
Yes sir.
Pray will ye tell me one thing?
What is it.
Which is smaller, this Beer, or your maidenhead?
the Beer a great •eale Sir.
I in quality.
But not in quantity.
No?
Why?
Let me try, and Isle tell you.
Will you tell me one thing before you try?
Yes.
Which is smaller, this Beer or your wit?
O the Beer, the Beer.
In quality.
Yes, in quantity.
Why then I pray keep your quantity of your wit, from the quality of my maidenhead, and ye shall find my maidenhead more then your wit.
A witty maidenhead by this hand.
Is my Mistress ready for dinner?
Yes, if dinner be ready for my Mistress.
Half an hour ago man.
But prithe• sir, is it for certain, for yet it cannot sink into my head, that she is to be married to morrow.
Troth, she makes little preparation, but it may be she wood be wedded, as sh• wood be bedded, privately.
Bedded call ye it, and she be bedded no better then heel bed her, she may lie •antaliz'd and eat wishes.
Pox on him, they say hoe's the arrantst 〈◊〉. i er, we shall never live good day with him.
Well, and she be s〈…〉ipt by threescore and ten, may she live sixescore and eleven, and repent twelve times a that's once an hour.
Set meat of the board. 
Yes. 
Why doe's your fellow grumble so?
I doe not know.
They say you're to marry one that will feed us.
With horse-plummes, instead of Beef and Cabbage.
And are you grieved at that?
No, but my friends are.
What friends are grieved?
My guts.
So it seems, you begone Clown?
Yes, and shall conclude Coxcomb, and I be fed with herring bones, 'sfoo•e, I say no more, but if wee d•e want as much bread of our dany allowance, as wood dine a Sparrow, or as much drink as wood fox a Fly, I know what I know.
And what doe ye know sir?
Why, that there goes but a pair of sheets, a pro∣motor, and a knave, if you know more, take your choice of either.
Tic well sir, set on dinner.
O Mistress, yonder's the mad gallant, Master A∣lexander Bloodhound entered into the Hall.
Ye should have kept him out.
Alas, ne'er a wench in town could do it hoe's so nimble, I had no sooner opened the door, but hee thrust in ere I was aware. 
And how does my little handsome dainty, deli∣cate, welfavoured, straight, and comely delicious bewitch∣ing Widow.
'Sfoote here's one runs division before the Fiddlers.
Sir, this is no seasonable time of visit.
Tic pudding time wench, pudding time, and a dainty time, dinner time my nimble eyd witty one, wooed be married to morrow sirrah. 
She will be mad to morrow sirrah.
What, art thou a fortune teller.
A chip of the same block, a fool Sir.
Good fool, give me a cup of cool Beer.
〈◊〉 your Master a cool cup of Beer.
Pish, I spoke to the fool.
I thought you'd brought the fool with you Sir.
Fool, it is my man, shalt sit i'faith wench,
For once I be as merry as you are mad, and learn fashions, I am set you see Sir, but you must pardon Sir our rudeness, Fridays fare for my self, a dish of eggs and a Rabbit, I looked for no stranger faces.
Strange, mine's a good face in faith, prithee Bus.
Why here's one comes to the business now.
Sirrah, wooed have the old fellow?
Your Father, yes.
I tell thee thou shalt not, no, no, I have such—
There's but one raw bit Sir?
Thy Easter sure shall have a coat.
Let it be of your own cut Sir?
Nay, nay, nay, two to one is extremity—but as 〈◊〉 was telling thee, I have such a husband for thee, so knowing, so discreet, so sprightly, fill a Cup of Claret, so; Admire∣bly, in desires so excellently, Admirably deserving, that an old man, fie, fie, prethe—ha to thee.
The man's mad sure.
Mad, by this hand, a witty Gallant.
Prithee peace, shalt hear a Song.
What copes-mate's this trow, who let him is?
By this light, a fellow of an excellent breeding.
He came unbidden, and brought his stool with him.
Look Mistress, how they stare one at another?
Yes, and swell like a couple of gibed Cats, met both by chance in the dark, in an old Carret.
Look, look, now ther's no fear of the wild beasts, they have forgot their spleens, and look prettily, they fall to their pasture, I had thought they had bin angry, and they are hungry.
Are they none of Duke Humsreyes furies, doe you think, that they devised this plot in Pals to get a dinner?
Time may produce as strange a truth.
Let's note them.
Her loved her once, her loved her no more,
Saint Tauis so well as her loved her then.
Another Bar, this is the Cooke-maids leaving, op the door, and this is the daintiest dish she has sent in, a Widgia in Welch sauce—pray lets make a merry day on it.
What doe her keep open house, had her heard her was Widdovves that dwelt here, are you Widows good wo••ns?
I want a husband Sir.
Augle Randalls comes in very good times, you
keep Ordinaries her think, what have you set a cat before gallants there?
They will eat him for the second course—these are suitors to my Mistress sure, things that she sleights, set your fear boldly in, Widows are not caught as maids kiss, faintly, but as Mastiffs fight, valiantly.
Is her so, I pray bid her Mistress observe Ran∣dals for valours, and prave adventures?
Some Beer.
Let them want nothing.
Here VVidow.
I thank you Sir.
Some Wine.
Here is Wine for you Sir.
Rentals will not be outprav'd I warrant her.
Here VVidow.
I thank you too Sir,
Sounds some Metheglings here.
What does he call for?
Here are some eggs for you Sir.
Eggs man, some Metheglings, the wine of Wales.
Troth sir here's none in the house, pray make a ver∣sue of necessity, and drink to her in this glass of Claret.
Well, because her will make a great deals of no∣cessities of virtues, mark with what a grace Rentals will drink to her Mistress.
He makes at you forsooth.
Let him come, I have ever an English virtue to put by a welch.
O noble Widows, her heart was full of woes.
No noble Welshman, her heart was in her hose.
Sounds, was that her manners to take away Randalls cups?
No, it showed scurvy.
Tak't you at worst then.
Whelp of the Devil, thou shalt see thy Sire for it.
Gentlemen what mean ye?
Let her come, let her come, Rentals will
redeem reputations her warrant her.
Redeem your wit sir, first for you Sir, you are a stranger, and see you,—but you, fie Master Bloodhound.
Ha, Bloodhound, good sir let me speak with you.
Sounds, what doe Rentals amongst ploodhounds, good Widows lend her an ear.
Ancient Young, how false our memories have plaid through long discontinuance, but why met here man, is Mars so bad a pay-master, that our Ancients fight under Cupids Banner?
Faith this was but a sudden start begotten from distraction of some fortunes, I pursue this Widow but for want of wiser work.
The Welshman labours at it.
A pair of a hundred of seeps, thirty prave Cowes, and twelve dozen of Runts.
Twelve dozen of Goose.
Give her but another hark?
He has the mortgage still, and I have a handsome sister, doe but meet at the Fountain in Fleetestreete after dinner, ô I will read thee a History of happiness, and thou shalt thank me.
A•, read ell's well, or vveapons.
A word Iarvis?
Oh prave VViddowes, her will meet her there, he• know her times and her seasons, her warrant her, Ran∣dalls will make these prave Gallants hang her selfes in those garters of willow Garlands apout her pates, mark her now, and remember. 
Adieu sweet widow, for my ordinary—
It was not so much worth Sir.
You mean, 'tvvas worth more then, and that's another handsomely begged.
You conclude women cunning beggars then.
Yes, and men good benefactors, my best wishes wait on so sweet a Mistress—will ye walk? 
Isle follow ye, woo't think on it soon at night, or not at all?
I wood not have my wishes wronged, if I should bring it about handsomely, you can be honest?
Can, dost conclude me a'satt in cheat?
No, a smooth Gallant sir, doe not you fail to bee here soon at nine, still provided, you will be honest, if I con∣vey you not under her bed, throw me a top of the Tester, and say me o•• of the way like a rusty Bilbo.
Enough, drink that, fare •el, Widow, Fate, the Destinies, and the three ill favoured Sisters, have concluded the means, and when I am thy Husband?
I shall be your wife.
Doe but remember these cross Capers, then ye peter sweet one?
Till then adieu ye bitter sweet one.
This dinner would have showed better in bed-lane, and she a tother side, holds her whole nest of suitors play, what Art decks the dark Labyrinth of a women's heart. 
Marry old Earelacke, is my Father mad?
They are both a concluding on it yonder, to more∣row's the day, one vvedding dinner must serve both mar∣riages.
Oh Simon, the Ancient, the delicate Ancient there's a man, and thou talk of a man, a good face &amp; sparkling eye, a strenght body, a delicate hand, a clean leg and foot, ah sweet Simon, there's a man worth, Maidenhead.
But I say, Master Eare-lacke the old man, a foot like a Bear, a leg like a bed-staffe, a hand like a hatchet, an eye like a pig, and a face like a w••la Pygmy, there's a man for a Maidenhead.
Oh look, look, oh alas what shall I doe with him?
What, why what shall fifteen doe vuith sixty and tvvelve, make a screen of him, stand next the fire,
whilst you sit behind him, and keep a friends lips warm•, many a wench wot be glad of such a fortune.
Your oath struck it dead then? ô my sides.
Five hundred deep of your side itaith father.
Mole, come hither Mole, I hope Simon has discovered the project?
And to morrow must bee the day Mole, both of a day, one dinner shall serve, we may have store of little ones, we must save for our family.
Good Sir, what rashness was parent to this mad∣ness, marry an old man—Eare-lacke the Informer?
Madness—you're a vvhore.
Is she a vvhore Simon?
She must be your wise, I tell—
An arrant vhore, to refuse Master Innocent Ear∣lack of Rogue-land, that for his dwelling, next that hee doth Inform now and then against enormities, and hath bin blancketted, it may be pump't in's time: yet the world knows, he dos't not out of need, hoe's of mighty means, but takes delight now and then to trot up and down, to a∣void Idleness, you vvhore.
Good Sir.
Pray Father.
This wound vvants oil, good sir in al my paths
I will make you my guide, I was only startled,
And with the suddenness of the word marriage
In that I knew, that this deserving Gentleman
And I, had never so much conference,
Whereby this coal of Paph•s, by the Rhetoric
Of his love-stealing heart, Captivating Language,
Might be blovvne into a flame.
Does she take Tobacco Father?
No, no, man, here are out of ballads,
She has all the Garland of good will by heart.
Snails she may sing me asleep a nights then Simon•
Why, right Sir, and then it is but tickling you of the forehead with her heals, you are avvake again, and ne'er the vvorse man.
Is he but five years older then your self sir?
Nay, I want a week and three days of that too.
Isle tell thee an old saw for it girl, old, say he be, old blad•s are best, young hearts are never old.
Ah Hay.
Gold is great Glee, gold begets rest, what fault is found in Gold?
I will answer presently Sir, with another Saw.
Let's have it, lets ha'te.
Mark Moll.
Young, say she be young, young Mutton's sweet, content is above Gold, if like an old Cock he with young Mutton meets, he feeds like a Cuckold.
A very pretty pithy one, I protest, look and Moll dee not laugh, shalt have a pair of gloves for thee, what leather dost love?
Calfe Sir, sh••p's too simple for me.
Nay, it is a witty notable knave, he should never serve me else.
My Mistress remembers her love, and requests you would endure her so much to your patience, as to read that.
Love letters, love lies, dost mark Simon, these Women are violent, Simon, whilst I read the lie, doe you rail to him upon the Brewer, swear has deceived us, and save a cup of Beer by it.
I will save you a cup at that rate fir.
I can make thee a hundred a year jointure wench, at the first indeed, I began with petty businesses wench, and here I picked, and there I picked, but now I run through none but things of Value.
Sir, many thoughts trouble me, and your words carry such vveight, that I will choose a time, when I have nothing else to doe, to think on 'em.
By my troth, she talks the vvittiliest, and I wood understand her.
Oh nimble, nimble Widow, I am sorry wee have no better friends, but pray commend me, tho in a blunt dry Commendations at the time and place appointed, I wonnot fail, I know she has a nest of suitors, and wo'd car∣ry't close, because she fears surprise.
What news Father?
Shalt lie there all night son.
Was that the first news I heard on it.
I must meet a friend in the dark soon, let me see, we lovers are all a little mad, doe you and Moll take a turn or two in the garden, whilst Simon and I go up into the Gar∣ret and device, the guess come.
He's a little mad, and I had best hang him upon the cross beam in the Garret. 
Come Mole, come Molkin, we'll even to the Ca∣mamile bed, and talk of household stuff, and bee sure thou remember a Trade.
Please ye go before Sir?
Nay, an old Ape has an old eye, I shall go before, and thou vvoo't show me a Love-tricke, and locke me into the Garden, butterflies, I will come discreetly be∣hind Moll.
Out upon him, what a suitor have I got, I am sorry you are so bad an Archer sir.
Why Bird, why Bird?
Why, to shoot at Buts, when you should 〈◊〉 prick-shafts, short shooting will loose ye the game, I a• 〈◊〉 you sir.
Her mind runs sure upon a Fletcher, or a Bow∣yer, hovvsoeuer, Isle inform against both the Fletcher, for taking whole money for piec't arrovves, the Bowyer for horning the head men of his Parish, and taking money for his pains. 
Some rich Canary boy.
Anon, anon Sir.
Possible ••us cheated of a hundred pi•ces, A han•some halter, and the Hangmans wages pop'• in the place, what an acute witness we have in wickedness.
Tic done, and handsomely you.
Here's a pottle of rich Cannary, and a quart of neat Claret Gentlemen, and there's a Gentleman belovv, he says he is your Brother, Master Bloodhound, he appoin∣ted to meet you here.
The expected thing that bought the Bristovv stone.
Send him up prithee, remember how it must bee carried?
I am her Grandmother, forge•t not that by any means.
And pray remember that you doe not mump• as if you were ch•wing Bacon, and spoil all.
I warrant ye.
And hark.
Are these th• company sir?
Yes, but those I ••k• not, the•e are not they, Isle stay in the next room till my company come.
Where you please Sir, pray follow me.
I hear him coming up gingerly.
Oh hee tramples upon the bosom of a Tavern with that dexterity, as your Lavvyers Clerks doe to VVestminster Hal upon a dirty day with a pair of white silk stockings, Brother Tim, why now you're a man of your word I see.
Nay I love to be as good as my say, see brother, look, there's the rest or your money upon the Ring, I can∣not spend a penny, for I have ne'er a penny left, what are these, what are these?
Gallants of note and quality, hee that fits taking
Tobacco is a Captain, Captain Carve-gut.
He will not make a Capon of me, will •ee.
Are you not my brother?
Hee that powers out that sparkling sprightly
Claret, is a Lieutenant under him, Lieutenant B〈…〉.
He was a S•rg•ant first.
Of the Poultry, or of Woodstreete.
Of the Poultry, of a Woodcock:
A Serge••ned in the Field, a man of blood.
I'll take my leave brother, I am in g〈…〉 ha••.
That delicate sweet young Gentlewoman.
Faugh this Tobacco.
That bears the b••sh of 〈…〉ing upon her cheeks, whoseeyes are like a pair of 〈…〉ing Twi••es.
Sh•• looks •used upon •e.
I think you are in hast.
No, no, no pray:
Whose lips are beds of Roses, betwixt which
There steals a breath sweeter th•n Indian Spices.
Sweeter then Ginger.
But then to touch th•se lips—you stay too long sure.
Pish I tell you, I doe no•, I know my time, pray what's her name?
But it is descended from the 〈…〉cian steam, the great tribute L〈…〉 her 〈…〉e, th•• ••ci••t ••••on is her reverent Granham.
Niggers I have read of her in the Mire••r of Kaighthood.
Co•• they shall know you.
Nay brother.
I say they shall.
Let me go down and wash my face first.
〈◊〉 ••ce is a ••no face my brother Gentle•••.
Sir, you are victoriously welcome.
That word has ••'ne conque•d me.
I desire to ki〈…〉 your hand Sir.
Indeed but you shall not Sir, I went out early, and forgot to wash i'm.
Precious Do〈…〉il.
Sir, I shall call it• 〈…〉efie if you shall 〈◊〉 to
vouchsa•e to pledge me.
What is it brother four or six?
•our or six, it is rich Canary, it came from be∣yond the Sea•.
I wi•• doe no courtesy at this time Sir, yet for one cup I care not, because it comes from b•yond the Seas.
I think it is Outlandish win•.
Look how it glides.
Now truly the Gentleman drinks as like one Ma∣ster Widgen a kinsman of mine.
Pox on ye hei•ding.
I have heard of that Widgin, I have been taken for him, and now I think on it, A cup of this is better then our four shilling Beer at home.
You must drink another Sir, you drunk to no body.
Is it the law, that if a man drinks to no body, hee must drink again.
I, I, I. Fill his glass.
Why, then I will drink to no body once more, because I will drink again.
Did I not tell ye. More wine there Drawer.
This Pageant's worth the seeing by this hand.
Me thinks this glass was better then the to'ther Gentlemen.
Oh Sir, the deeper the sweeter ever.
Doe ye think so?
Ever that when ye drink to no body.
Why then I pray give me tother cup that I may drink to some body.
I have not drunk yet sir.
Again ye Witch? drink to the young Gentle∣women•n.
Mistress Lindabrides.
Thanks most ingenious sir.
Shoe's a little shame faced, the deeper the sweeter for•ooth.
Pox on ye for a Coxcomb.
In the next room I have seen and heard all.—Oh noble •ouldiers.
Here Boys, give vs some more wine. There's hundred Marks Gallants. It is your own. And doe but let me bear on Office amongst ye. I know as great a matter has been done for as small a sum. Pray let me follow the fashion.
Well, for once take up the money, Give me a cup of Sack. And give me your hand sir, and because our Flemish Corporal was lately choked at Delph with a Flap∣dragon. Bear you his name and place, and be henceforth called Corporal Codshead. Let the health go round.
Round. And this go not round. Some wine there Tipster. Is there ne'er a Tipster in the house?
My worthy friend, thou art Master of thy word, Gentlemen it is Ancient Young, you're Soldiers, come come, save cap, complement in cup. Prithee sit down.
Are you a Captain sir?
Yes.
And you a Lieutenant.
Yes.
I pray where served you last?
Why, at the battle of Prague.
Under what Colonel. In what Regiment?
Why, l•t me see: but come in company: let's sit sir. True Soldiers scorn unnecessary discourse, especially in Taverns.
Tic true, true Soldiers do: but you are Tauern-rats.
How?
Prithee.
Foul food that lies all day vndisgested,
Upon the queasy stomach of some Tavern,
And are •pewed out at midnight.
Corporal Codsheads health sir.
In thy face fool.
This is a cruel Ancient.
•ee are but the worms of worth,
The sons of shame and baseness,
That in a Tavern dares out-sit the Sun,
And rather then a Whore shall part unpledg'd,
You'll pawn your souls for a superfluous cup,
Though ye cast it into the reckoning,
The true soldier, who is all o'er, a History of man,
Noble, and Valiant, Wisdom is the mould,
In which he casts his Actions, such a discreet temperance
Doth daily deck his doings, that by his modesty,
He is guest the son of merit, and by his mildness
Is believed Valiant, go, and build no more
These •ire Castles of hatched fame, which fools
Only admire and fear you for, the wise-man
Derides and jeers ye puffs really of
Virtue and Valour? (These fair twins
That are borne, breath and die together) then
You'll no more be called butterflies, but men:
Think on it, and pay your reckoning.
Shall we suffer this Saunder?
I must go after him.
Kill him, and there be no more men in Christen∣dome.
I know my Sister loves him, and hee swears hee loves her,—and by this hand, it shall go hard if hee have her not, smock and all, brave excellent man, with what a strength of zeal wee admire that goodness in another, which we cannot call our own. 
Hoe's a dead man I warrant him.
But whore's our Corporal, Corporal, Corporal?
Well, here's your Corporal, and you  can be quiet.
Look and he have not in•constable himself in a wood∣den Castle?
Is he gone that called us butter-flies?
Yes, yes, has taken wing, and your Brother's gone after him, to fight with him.
Thats well, he cannot in conscience but doe us the courtesy and kill him for us, come gallants, what shall wee doe? Isle never go home to go to bed with my guts full of 〈◊〉 shillings beer, when I may replenish them with
Sack,—Hay, now am I as lusty, me thinks wee two have blew ••eards, is there ne'er a wench to be had? Drawer bring us up impossibilities, an honest Whore, and a conscionable reckoning.
Why here's all fire, wit, where he will or no.
Ah whore, ô tempting, handsome Sir, think of a rich Wife rather.
Tempting handsome Sir, she is not married is she Gentlemen?
A woodcock spring'd, let us but keep him in this bachavalian mist till morning, and it is done.
Tempting handsome Sir, I have known a wo∣man of handsome tempting fortunes, throw her self away upon a handsome tempting Sir.
Hark you sir, if she had, and cooed bee tempted too't, have you a mind to marry: wooed ye marry her?
Oh, and a man were so, worthy tempting Sir.
Give me but a piece from you.
And when will you give it me again?
Pray give me but a piece from you, Isle pay this reckoning intoth' argaine, and if I have not a trick to make it your own, Isle give you ten for it—here's my witness.
There it is, send thee good luck with it, and go drunk to bed.
Do not you be too rash, for she observes you, and is infinitely affected to good breeding.
I wonnot speak I tell you, till you hold up your finger, or fall a vvhistling.
Come, weal pay at Bar, and to the Meter in Bredstreete, weal make a mad night on it, please ye sweet Ladies but to walk into Bredstreete, this gentleman has a foo•each slight supper, and he most ingenuously professes, it would appear to him, the Meridian Altitude of his de∣sired happiness, but to have the table decked with a pair of perfections, so exquisitely refulgent.
He talks all sack, and he will drink no small Beer:
Pray lead, and he shall follow.
Bless mine eyes, my heart is full of changes.
Oh, is it so, I have heard there be more changes in a women's heart in an hour, then can be rung up on six bells, seven days, well go thy ways, little dost thou think how thou shalt be betrayed, within this four and twenty hours, thou shalt be mine own Wife, flesh and blood, by Father and Mother, ô tempting handsome Sir.
But sirrah, can tell what my Mistress means to doe with her suitors?
Nay, nay, I know not, but there is one of them I am sure worth looking after.
Which is he, I prithee?
Oh Iohn, Master Randall, Iohn.
The Welshman.
The witty man, the pretty man, the singing man, he has the dantiest ditty, so full of pith, so full of spirit, as they say.
Ditties, they are the ends of old Ballets.
Old ends, I am sure they are new beginnings with me.
Here comes my Mistress:
Who was that knokt it Gate?
Why your welch wooer.
Alas, the sight on's eyes enough to singe my little May denhead, I shall never be able to endure him.
When high King Henry, second ruled this land,
the couple of her name,
Besides her Queen, was teerely loved,
a fair and Princely—Widows,
Hark you Widows, Rentals was disturbed in cogitate∣ens, about Lands, Ploughs, and Cheese presses in Wales, and becat her have forgot where her, and her meet soon at pright dark Evenings.
Why on the Change, in the Dutch walks.
Oh haw, have her—but Rentals was talk no Ducth, pray meet her in the Welch walk, was no Welch walk there?
Fie, no, there are no Welch Merchants there.
Mas, was ferry true, was aule Gentlemen in Wales, her never saw her Shamber-maid, pray where was her Shamber-maid?
Taken up in the Kitchen Sir.
Can her make wedding pedd pravely for Rentals, and Widows?
Pray tell him Iarvis where she can or no.
Sir, not to delay, but to debilitate the strength of your Active apprehension of my Mistress favour.
Was ferry good words.
Hark in your ear, she will have her nest fea∣thered with no British breed.
Zounds, was not Prittish so good as English?
Yes, Where ther's Wisdom, Wit, and Valour, but as amongst our English, wee may have one Fool, a Knave, a Coxcomb, and a Coward, she bid me tell ye, she has seen such wonders come out of Wales in one shirt, you're an Ass, and sheele have none of you
Yew, S. Tauie, Owen Morgan, and aule her Co∣sins, was Widow her self •ay so?
Good sir, let every circumstance make up one an∣swear, take it with you.
And the R•mane answer is, the English goose Sir.
Sounds, her was kill now, gog, and gogmagog, a whole dozen of shiants, make •oole of Rentals, Randalls was wished to as prave match as widows was, know one Mary Bloodhound,
was ha aule, when her father kick up heals, and becat though her never saw her, her will send her Love letters presently, get her good wills, and go to shurch and marry, and her were eight and thirty, two hundred and nine and fifty widows, mark her now.
He pelts as he goes pitifully.
Whore's Mary?
Mary.
Pray go to Algate, to my Sempstris for my rue••e, I must use it say too morrow, did ye bid her hollow it just in the French fashion cut?
Yes forsooth.
It was well, we have no other proof in use, that we are English, if wee doe not Zany them, let Iohn go with you.
Yes forsooth:
But pray forsooth, how doe you mean to dispose of your suitors?
Shall I tell thee, for this thou hast given him this cure, and he is past care, for old Bloodbound the Saw-mong∣er, I writ to him, to meet me soon at ten in the dark, upon the change, and if I come not by ten, he should stay while twelve, intimating something mystically, that to avoid sir∣prizalls of other Rivals, I mean to go from thence with him to lye at his house all night, and go to Church with him in the morning, when my meaning is only kn•very, to make my self merry, and let him cool his heals there till morning.
And now have I a whimsy, newly jumped into the coll of ingenious apprehensive, to sauce him daintisy, that for that, what think ye of the Gentleman that brought a a stool with him out of the Hall, and sate down at dinner with ye in the parlour?
They say hoe's an Ancient, but I affect not his C•llours.
But what say ye to the mad victorious Alexander?
A wild mad Roarer, a trouble not worth minding.
Hee will mind you ere morning: troth Mistress There waits a Gentleman in the next room, that hath a long time loved you, and has watched for such an hour, when all was out of doors, to tell you so; and none being within but you and I, hee desires you would hear him speak, and there's an end on it.
What is he?
An honest man.
How know ye?
Why, he told me so.
And why were you such a fool to take his own word?
Because all the wit I had cood get no bodies else.
A Knave will ever tell you he's an honest man.
But an honest man will never tell you hoe's a knave.
Well sir, your Mistress dares look upon the ho∣nest man.
And the honest man dares look upon my Mi∣stress. 
It is the roughest bluntest Fellow.
Yet when I take young Bloodhound to a retired collection of scattered judgment, which often lies disioynted, with the confused distraction of so many: Me thinks he dwells in my opinion, a right ingenious spirit, veiled merely with the vanity of youth and wildness: he looks me thinks like one that could retract himself from his mad starts, and when he pleased turn tame: his handsome wildness me thinks becomes him, could hee keep it bounded in Thrift and Temperance: but down these thoughts, my resolve rests here in private,—But from a fool, a Miser, and a man too jealous for a little sweetness love, Cupped de∣fend me.
And to a Widow wife,
Nobly liberal, and discreetly Credulous,
Cupped hath sent me.
Pray prove as you appear a Gentleman. Why Iaruis?
Look ye here's Iaruis haangs by Geometry, and here's the Gentleman. For less I am not that afar off ta∣ken with the Sainted praises of your wealthy beauty, your person, wisdom, modesty, and all that can make woman gracious, in this habit sought and obtained your ser∣vice.
For heavens sake what's your intent?
I love you.
Pray keep off.
I wood keep from you. Had my desires bodies
How I cood beat them into better fashion,
And teach them Temperance, For I rid to find you;
And at a meeting amongst many Dames,
I saw you first: Oh how your taking eyes,
Those actiues sparkling sweet discovered twins,
In their strong captivating motion, told me
The story of your heart, a 10•0 Cupids
Me thought sate playing on that pair of Christails,
Carrying to the swiftness of conetous Fancy,
The very letters we spell love with.
Fie. Fie.
I have struck her to the heart, through my face
Apparelled with this field of gravity,
The neglected roughness of a Soldiers dart.
These diamond pointed eyes but hither through, and you will see a young spring on it, but question times fair ones.
They 'le confess, tho with a blush they have often found good wine at an old bush. My blood is young, and full of amorous heats, which but branched out into these lusty veins,
Wood play, and dally, and in wanton Turnings
Wood teach you strange constructions.
Let time and place then with Loves old friend opportunity instruct you to be wise.
Alas Sir, where learned you to catch occasions thus?
Of a Lawyers Clarke wench, that with six such Catches, leapt in five years from his Desk to his Coach drawn with four horses.
Doe ye mean marriage?
Marriage a cloying meat, marry who thou wooed to make a show to shroud thee from the storms round headed opinion, that sways all the world, may let fall on thee. Me Cozen? thou shalt call once in a month, or so: I'll read false Letters from a far distant Uncle, insert his commendations to thee, hug thy believing husband into a pair of handsome horns. Look upon him with one eye, and wink upon thee with tother. Woodst have any more?
The return of Servants, or some friendly visit will intercept vs now: resume your habit, and bee but Iaruis till no morrow morning, I now by the potent truth of friendship, I will give you plenty of cause to confess I love you truly, and strongly.
•'are in earnest.
On my life serious, let this kiss seal it.
The softest vvax ever sealed bawdy business.
Now for old Bloodbound, I will meet you upon the Change Sir, with a blind bargain, and then help your son to a good penny-worth: this night shall be all mirth, a Mistress of delight. 
Nay, nay, nay, mark what follows, I must bring her home•'th dark, turn her up to bed, and here she goes to Church: my Cloak sirrah.
It is a very dark night sir, you will not have a cloak for the rain.
I am going to steal the Widow from I know not how many.
Nay, then I let your cloak for the rain alone, and fetch you a cloak for your knavery. 
To bed, to bed—good son, what Simon I say.
Sir.
I charge ye let not one bee up ith'house, but your self, after the clock strikes ten, nor a light bee stirring, Moll, Trick up the greene bed-chamber very dainti•y.
I shall Sir.
And well remembered Moll, the keys of my Compting house, are in the left pocket of my hose above in the wicker chair, look to them and have a care of the black box there I have often told thee of, look to that as to thy Maidenhead.
I shall sir.
Pray for me all, pray for me all.
Have you left out any thing for supper?
Out Rogue shall not I bee at infinite expense to morrow, fast too night, and pray for me.
An old devil in a greasy Satin doublet, keep you company.
Ha, what's that?
I say, the Satin doublet you will wear too more∣row, will be the best in the company sir.
That's true, thats true, I come Widow, I come Wench.
Oh sweet Simon, what shall I doe to morrow, to morrow must be the day, the doleful day, the dismal day, alas Simon, what dost thou think in thy con-science I shall do with an old man?
Nay, you're well enough served, you know how your rather not an ho••e ago, lay at you •o have the Ancient, one that your •eeth•even water at, and yet you cry, I cannot love him, I wonnot have him.
I cooed willingly marry him, if I might doe no∣thing but look on him all day, where he might not see me, but to he with him, alas I shall be undone the first night.
That's true, how will you go to bed else, but re∣member hee is a man of War, an Ancient, you are his co∣lours, now when he has nimbly displayed ye, and handsomely folded ye up against the next fight, then we shall have you cry, ô sweet Simon, I had been undone, if I had not been undone.
Nay, and then the old fellow would mumble me to bed.
A bed, a Bawd with two teeth would not mumble Bacon, so then hee so sparing you, shall wear nothing, but from the Brokers at second hand, when being an Ancients wife, you shall be sure to flourish.
Prithee go in and busy the old man with a piece of Reynard the Fox, that he may not disturb us, for at this hour I expect Ancient Young, and my Brother.
Well, I leave you to the managing of Ancient Young, while I go in and flap the old man in the mouth with a Fox tail. 
Look, look, &amp; he have not brought him just upon the minute, ô sweet silken Ancient, my mind givesme•, thee and I shall dance the shaking of the sheets together.
Now, you Mistress fig•ail, s•he Wind come about yet, I ha brought the Gentleman, doe not you t•ll him now, you had rather have his room then his comp∣ny, and so show your breeding.
Now fie upon you, by this light you're the wic∣ked'st fellow, my Brother but abuses y•u, pray Sir go o∣ver again, yo'ue a handsome spying wi•, you may send more truth over in one of your w•ll penned pamphlets, then all the vveekely news we buy for our penny.
Pox on it, Isle stay no lo•ger.
Sfoote thou shalt stay longer, we will stay her heart her guts out.
Ha, ha, how will you doe for a sister then?
Prithee Moll doe, doe but look upon him?
••s, when I ha no better object.
What can thou see in him thou unhansome 〈…〉os thing, that merits not above thee?
What wooed I give to kiss him?
Has hee not a handsome body, straight legged, a good face.
Yes, but his lips look as if they were as hard as his heart.
Foot, shall try that presently.
You're basely sir conditioned,—Poh.
Why, doe you ••it?
Ye may go by this light, he kisses sweetly.
Doe b•t stay a •i•t•e Moll, prithe Moll, thou know 〈…〉y Father has wronged him; make him amen•s and marry him.
Sweet M. Spe•dall spare your busy breath,
I must have a wise man, or else none.
And is not he a wise man?
No.
Why?
Because he keeps a fool company.
Why, you are now i•'s company.
But birds of a feather will fly together, and you and he are seldom asunder.
Why you young witch, call your elder brother •oole; but go thy ways, and keep thy may denhead till it grow more deservedly de•pi•ed, then are the old base boots of a half stewed Pander: Lead a Welch Morris with the Apes in hell amongst the little devils,—or when thou sha•t lye sighing, by the side of some rich fool,—remember thou thing of thread and needles, not worth three pence half penny.
Too late I fear I ha'be•no too coy, you are to be married then sir?
I am indeed sweet Mistress, to a Maid
Of excellent parentage, breeding, and beauty.
I ha'thought of such Musicians for thee.
But let it not be any way distaste•ull unto you, that thus I tried you, for your brother persuaded me to pre∣tend love to you, that he might perceive how your mind stood to marriage, in that (as I guess) hee has a husband kept in store for you.
I, I have provided a husband for thee Moll.
But In•e have no husband of your providing, for alas now shall have the old man whether I will or no.
I have such a stripling for thee, he wants one eye, and is crooked legged, but that was broke at Footbale.
Alas, we cannot mould men you know.
Hoe's rich, hoe's rich Moll.
Ha'him and his riches good sir, you're to be mar∣ried in earnest.
In earnest; why, doe ye think men marry as Fencers sometimes fight, in jest?
Shall I show her Mistress Elizabeths Letter I snatched from thee?
Not, and thou love me.
Goo• brother let me see it, sweet brother, dai•tie brother, honey broth••.
No in•eed, you shall not s•e't, sweet sister, dainty •ester, honey sister.
Oh good si•, since so long time I have loved you, let me not dye for your sake.
The tide turns.
Long time• ued me?
Long •re you w•ned to Sea I did.
I have loved you very long with all my heart.
Think of Bess; think of Bess, it is the better match.
Ye wicked brother, Indeed I love you better, then all the Besses in the world, and if to night I shift not into better fortunes, to morrow I am made the miserablest wi•e marriage and misery can produce.
Is it possible?
Alas Sir, I am to mary an old man, a very old man, trust me, I was strange in the nice timorous temper of a Ma••, I know•it is against our sex to say we love, but rather then to match with sixty and ten, threescore and ten times I wooed tell you so, and tell them ten times over too, truth loves not virtue with more of virtuous truth, then I doe you, and wonnot you love me then? 
And lye with thee too by this hand Wench, come let us have fair weather, thou art mine, I am thine, there's an end of the business, this was but a trick, ther's the projector.
Oh you're a sweet brother.
And now you are my sweet Sister, I know the old man's gone to meet with an old wench that will meet with him, •r Iarvis has no juice in's brains, and while I in the mean time, set another wheel a going at the Widows, doe thou soon about ten, for it is to bee very conveniently dark, meet this Gentleman at the Nags head corner, just against Leaden-hill, wee lie in Lime-streete, thither he shall carry thee, Accommodate thee daintily, all night with Mistress Dorothy, and marry thee in the morning very Methodically.
But I have the charge of my Fathers keys, where all his writings lye.
How all things jump in a just equivalence, to keep thee from the thing of threescore and ten, did thou not see my Mortgage lately there?
Stay, stay.
A wl•te devil with a red fox tail, in a black box.
But yesterday my father showed it me; &amp; swears if I pleased him well, it should serve to ••mp out my portion.
Prove thine old Dad a Prophet, bring it with thee Wench.
But now it's parting, hee charged me to have a care to that, as to my Maidenhead.
Why, fine have thy Maidenhead and that into the bargain, thy c•arge is performed, away, get thee in, forget not the hour, and you had better fight under Ancient Yongs colours, then the old Mans standard of sixty and ten. 
Remember this, mad-braine.
Ha, ha, ha, Grandmother, Isle tell thee the best jest.
Prithee chic.
Jest kether, here will bee jesting of all sides I think, if Iarvis keep his word.
Sirrah, whilst thou were sent for into the next room, up came our second course, amongst others in a dish of blackebirds, there lay one, that I swore was a Wood∣cock, you were at Table Captain.
That I was, and our brave mad crew, which for my sake you were pleased to make welcome.
Pish, vve'le have as many more to morrow night, but still I swore it was a Woodcock: she swore '•was a backe-Bird, •ow who shall we be tried by, but Sergeant Sliceman, Captain Carveguts Cozen here, a trifling vva∣ger, a matter of the reckoning was laid, the Sergeant svvore tvvas a backe-Bird, I presently paid the reckoning, and she clapped of the breast presently, and svvore 'tvvas a Wood∣cock, as if any other wood pass after the reckoning was paid.
This was a pretty one I protest.
Made sure before such a mad crew of witnesses, sirrah, Granham, al's agreed, Sue's—.
I you may see, how you men can betray poor maids.
Do you hear Corporal, yonder's Sergeant Slice∣man, and the brave crew that supped with us have called for three or four gallons of wine, and are offering money.
How, prithee Granham look to Dab, doe you two but hold them in a talk, whilst I steal down and pay the reckoning.
Do it daintily, theyl'e stay all night.
That's it I would have man, weal make them all drunk, they'll never leave us else, and still as it comes to a crown, Isle steal down and pay it in spite of their teeth, remember therefore that ye make them all drunk, but be sure you keep me sober to pay the reckonings.
Agreed, agreed.
Oh Iarvis, Iarvis, how I long till I see thee.
There wee must meet soon, and bee married to morrow morning, Simon, is it not a mad brother?
Yes, and I can tell you news of a mad Lover.
What is he in the name of Cupped?
Why one Master Rentals, a Welshman, I have had such a fit with him, he says he was wished to very wealthy Widow, but of you he has heard much Histories, that he will marry you, though he never saw you, and that the par∣boiled Aetna of his bosom, might be quenched by the con∣sequent pastime, in the prittish flames of his prittish blood, he falutes you with that love letter.
This is a mad Lover indeed, prithee read it.
Mas, has writ it in Welch English, we had been spoiled else, for want of an interpreter, but thus he begins, Mistress Maries.
He makes two Maries serve one Mistress?
Ever while you live, it is your first rule in Weleh Grammars, that her forsake Widows, and take Maids, was no create wonder, for Sentlemen ever love the first cut.
But not of the Coxcomb, hee should have put in that.
The Coxcomb follows by consequence, mark else. I Randall crack, of Carmaerden, doe love thee Mary Ploodbounds, of H•••ds-ditch, dwelling Aulgate, and Pishops gate, just as between hawk and buzzard.
Hee makes an indifferent wooing,
And that her loves Marries so moustrous, yet no∣ver saw her, was because her hear her in all Societies so ferry fillanously commended, but specially before one Ma∣ster pussy Constables of her Parish, who made her self half foe•'• by swearing by the Wines, that Maries wooed be monstrous good Marriages for Rentals.
Master busy it seems was not idle.
If Maries can love a Prittaine of the plood of Cad∣walader, which Cadwalader, was Prutes great Crandfather. Randalls was come in proper persons, pring round shillings in her pockets, get fathers good will, and go to Surch a Sun∣day, with a whole dozen of Welch Harps before her, so her rest her constant Lovers, Randall William, ap Thomas, ap Tavy, ap Robert, ap Rice, ap Sheffery, Crack.
Fie, what shall I doe with all them?
Why, he said, these all rest your constant Lovers, whereof, for manners sake, hee puts himself in the first place; he will call here presently, will you answer him by Letter or word of mouth.
Troth, neither of either, so let him understand.
Will ye not answer the Love-sicke gentleman.
If hee bee sick with the love of me, prithee tell him, I cannot endure him, let him make a virtue of necessi∣tie, and apply my hate for's health.
I, but Isle have more care of the Gentleman I war∣rant you, if I doe not make my self merry, and startle your mid-night meeting, say Simon has no more wit then his God∣fathers, and they were both Head-men of this Parish.
Farewell VViddowes prove, her sall no Rentals have,
VViddowes was ferry full of wiles,
Mary Ploodhounds now, Rentals make a v••,
Was run for Moll a couple of miles.
•are a mad man.
Yew, her was very clad her was mad.
The old man has money enough for her, and if you marry her, as if your project take, you may, sheele take you more then a man.
More then mans, what the?
Trough cannot you tell that, this is the truth on it, she wood be married to morrow, to one Ancient Young a fell∣low she cannot endure, now she says, if you cooed meet her privately to night, between ten &amp; eleven, just at the great Crosse-way, by the Nags head Tavern at Leaden-hall.
Was high, high pump, there as her turn into Graces street.
Theres the very place, now because you come the vvelcomest man in the world to hinder the match against her mind with the Ancient, there she will meet you, go with you to your lodging, lie there all night, and bee mar∣ried to you in the morning at the Tower, as soon as you shall please.
Becat her will go and prepare Priests presently, look ye Simkins, there is a great deal of round shillings for her, her was very lucky shillings, for came to Randalls shust for all the World as Fortune was come to Fool, tell Marries, her will meet her, her warrant her, make many puppy Fools of Ancients, and love her very mon∣strously. 
Ha, ha, ha, so, so, this midnight match shall bee mine, she told me she was to meet the Ancient there, Isle bee sure the Ancient shall meet him there, so I shall Iye a bed to laugh, to think if hee meet her there, how she will bee startled, and if the Ancient meet him there, how hee will bee cudgelled, beware your ribs Master Randall. 
I wonder where this young rogue spends the day, I hear hee has received my hundred Marks, and my
advantage with it and it may be, hee went home since I went out. •••uis was with me but even now, and bid me watch, and narrowly, for fear of some of my Rival spies: For I know she has many wealthy Suitors, all love mo∣ney. This Iaruis is most neat in a love business; and when we are married because many mouths much meat, I will requite his courtesy, and turn him away; the Widdowe's all I look for.—Nay, let her fling to see I have her pos∣sessions, there's a Saw for it.
There's thriving in Wiving: For when we bury
Wives by halfe-dozens, the Money makes marry.
Oh money, money, money, I will build thee
An Altar on my heart, and offer to thee
My morning longings, and my evening wishes,
And had thou life, kill thee with covetous kisses.
But now and she speak she spoils all, or if hee call her by my Mistress his name, hast thou no: tricks to enjoin them both to silence till they come sure.
Phaw, that's a stale one, she shall speak to him in her own accent, hee shall call her by her own name lea∣uing out the Bawd, yet she shall violently believe he loves her, and hee shall confidently believe the same which hee requires, and she but presents. 
Fall off, she comes.
Iaruis.
Here I have discovered him, it is he by his coughs, remember your instructions, &amp; use few words, for though till to night you knew it not, and will he married early in the morning, to prevent a Vintners Widow, that lays clay me to him.
Iaruis.
Good old man, I know him by his tongue.
Is she come? is she come Iaruis?
Ask her if she wood live sir, she walks a loose yonder.
We shall cozen all her wooers.
Nay, amongst all of you, weal cozen one great one, that had laid a pernicious plot this night, with a cluster
of his roaring friends to surprise her, carry her down to the water side, pop her in at Puddle-dock, and carry her to Graves end in a pair of Oars.
What, what is his name I prithee.
Hoe's a Knight abounding in deeds of charity, his name Sir Nicholas Name.
And wood he pop her in at Puddle-dock?
And he cood but get her down there.
By my troth we shall pop him fairly, where is she? where is she?
Ha, doe you not perceive a fellow walk up and down muffled yonder?
There is something walks.
That fellow has dogd vs all the way, and I fear all is frustrate.
Not I hope man.
This tic to be in love, if I doe not dwindle.
I know him now.
Tic none of Sir Nicholas spies, is it?
Hee serves him.
He wonnot murder me, will hee?
He shall not touch you, only I remember this af∣ter-noone, this Fellow by what he had gathered by caves dropping, or by frequent observation, asked me privately if there were no meeting betwixt you and my Mistress to night in this place, for a Widow hee said hee knew you were to meet.
Good.
Now I handsomely threw dust in's eyes, and yet kept the plot swift a foot too, Itold him you were here to meet a Widow too, whom you long loved, but would not let her know it till this afternoon, naming to him one of my Aunts, a Widow by Fleete-Ditch, her name is Mi∣stress Gray, and she keeps divers Gentlewomen lodgers.
Good again.
To turn the sent then, and to cheat Inquisition the more ingeniously.
And to bob Sir Nicholas most neatly.
Bee sure all this night studably in the hearing of a∣ny that ye shall but suspect to be within hearing to call her nothing but Mistress Coote.
Or Widow Coote.
Yes, you may put her in so, but bee sure you cohere in every particle, with the precedent Fallacy, as that you have loved her long, tho till this day, and so as I did de∣monstrate.
But how and she wooed say she is not Widow Come, and that she knows no such woman, and so spoil all?
Trust that with her wit, and my instructions vvee suspected a spy, and therefore she will change her voice.
Thou hast a delicate Mistress of her.
One thing more, and ye meet presently, mine Aunt has had mine husbands, tell her you'll hazard a limb and make the tenth.
Prithee let me alone, and Sir Nicholas were here himself, he shoo'd swear it were thine Aunt.
Go forwards towards him, bee not too full of prattle, but make use of your instructions.
Who's there, Widow Coote?
Master Bloodbound as I take it.
She changes her voice bravely, I must tell thee true Widow, I have loved thee long time, look how the Rogue looks, but had never the wit to let thee know it till to day.
So I was given to understand Sir.
Is it not a fool finely?
Handsome by this hand.
I like thy dwelling well upon the Fleet ditch.
A pretty wholesome Ayre Sir, in the Summer time.
Who would think it were she Iarvis?
I told ye she was tutored.
Isle home with her presently, some stays up in the dark.
Fool and he have any private discourse with her, they discover themselves one to another, and so spoil the plot, no trick, no by no means sir, to hazard your person with her, the bold rogue may come up close to discover her to be my Mistress, and recover her with much danger to you.
Hee has got a dagger.
And a sword six foot in length, I'll carry her home for you, therefore not a light be stirring; for I know your Rivals will watch your house, Simon shall show vs the chamber, weal conduct her up ith dark, shut the door to her aboue, and presently come down and let you in be∣lowe.
There was never such a Ieruis heard off, bid Si• to be careful, by the same token, I told him he shoot feed to morrow for all the week after: good night Widow, Coote my man stays up, we will bob Sir Nicholas bravely. Good night sweet vviddow Coote. I doe but seem to part, weal meet at home wench. 
Adieu my sweet dear heart.
Go you with me, so, so, I will Cage this Cookow, and then for my young Madcap, if all hit right, this more∣nings mirth shall crown the Craft of the night, follow me warily.
I warrant thee Iaruis, let me alone to right my self into the garb of a Lady: Oh strange to see how dreams fall by contraries, I shall bee coached to morrow, and yet last night dreamed I was carted: prithee keep a little state, go Iaruis. 
Was ferry exceeding dark, but here is high pumps, sure here is two co•pie of cross ways, and there was the street where Grace dwells, one hundred pound in mornings in round shillings, and wife worth one thousand ere her go to bed. Randalls fortunes comes tumbling in, like Lawyers Fees, hudole upon huddle.
Oh sweet Ancient, keep thy word, and win my heart, They say, a Moone-shine night is good to run
away with another mans wife, but I am sure a dark night is best to steal away my Fathers daughter.
Mary.
Oh, are ye come Sir? there's a box of Land and livings, I know not what ye call it.
Lands, and livings?
Nay, nay, and wee talk, we are undone, doe ye not see the Watch coming up Gracious-streete yonder, this Cross way was the worst place wee could have met at, but that is yours, and I am yours, but good Sir doe not blame me, that I so suddenly yielded to your love, alas you know what a match an't I should have to morrow else.
Her means the scurvy Ancient.
In the morning wee shall bee Man and Wife, and then, alas I am undone, the Watch are hard upon us, got you back through Cornehill, Isle run round about the Change, by the Church corner: down Cat-eaten street, and meet you at Bartholomew Lane end. 
Cats street was call her, sure Randalls was wrapped in mothers smock. 
Keep straight towards Bishops-gate, I am de∣ceived and I heard not somebody run that way.
Stay Sir, here's somebody come from Aldga•award?
Alas, I shall bee hanged for staying so long for this Cuff.
Come before the Constable here.
Let the Constable come before me and hee please.
How, how, where ha you bin pray Da••e, ha?
For my Mistress Ruff, at her Sempstris Sir, she must needs use it to morrow, and that made me stay till it was done.
Pray who's your Mistress, where dwell ye?
With one Mistress Wag in Black-Fryers, next to the sign of the Feathers and the Fool sir.
Oh, I know her very well, make hast home, tic late. Come, come, let's back to Gracechurch, ell's well, ell's well.
I escaped the Watch at Bishopsgate with ease, there is some body turning down the Church corner towards the Exchange, it may be Mistress Mary.
Ancient.
Yes.
Are ye here again, you have nimbly followed me; what said the Watch to ye?
I past them easily, the gates are but now shut in.
As wee go, I'll tell you such a tale of a Welch wooer, and a lamentable Loue-letter.
Yes, Simon told me of such a Rat, and where hee lodges, I thought I should have met him here.
Here, out upon him:—But the Watches vvalke their station, and in few words is safety, I hope you will play fair, and lodge me with the Maid ye told me of.
She stays up for vs Wench, in the word of a Gen∣tleman, all shall be fair and civil.
I believe you.
Zounes was another Fire Drake walk in Shange, weal run pack, mas Marries have saved her labours, and was come after Randalls, Marries was Randall that loves her mightily Marries.
Master Randall.
How did Watch let her go at Graces street?
They knew me, and let me pass.
Well now, her understands Marries loves Ran∣dalls
so mighty deal.
If Iohn have not told him, I'll be hanged.
Marries shall go with Randalls to lodgings, and that her Father work no diuorcements, hee will lye with her aule t'night, and marry her betimes next more∣ning, mean time her will make Lands and Livings fast.
How Father? this is a mistake sure, and to fa∣shion it fit for mine own following, I will both question and answer in ambiguities, that if hee snap me any way, I may make my self good ith tother, and as hee shall disco∣for himself, I'll pursue the conceit accordingly: but will ye not deceive me, many minds are many men's Alma∣nacks, the dates of your desire's out, wee serve for nothing but to light Tobacco.
If Randall false to Marries prove,
Then let not Marries Randalls love:
For Randalls was so true as Io•e,
And Marries was her joy.
If Randalls was not Pritaine borne,
Let Marries Randalls prow adorn.
And let her give a foul great horn to Randalls,
Her will love her cret deal of much her warrant her.
And it is but venturing a maidenhead, if the worst come to the worst, it may come back with ad∣uantage. 
Is not Mary come home yet?
No forsooth.
Tic a fine time of night, I shall thank her for it, it is past eleven I am sure. Fetch, the prayer-booke lies within upon my bed.
Yes forsooth.
I wonder what this Gentleman shoot bee
that caught me so like Iarvis, hee say hee has fitted old Blood•and according to his qualitic—but I must not let him da••y too long upon my daily company, Lust is a hand-woolse, who with daily seeding, one time of other takes a sudden start upon his benefactor.
Oh Mistress, Mistresie.
What's the matter wench?
A man, a man under your bed Mistress.
A man, what man?
A neat man, a proper man, a welfavoured man, a ha〈…〉ome man.
Call up Iohn, whore's Iarvis?
Alas, I had no power to speak, his very looks are able to make a woman stand as still as a Millers horse when hes lading, ô he comes, he comes. 
How came you hither Sir? how got you in?
As Citizens wives doe into Masks, when∣there I wooed or no nay, nay, doe not doubt the descry∣tion of my constitution: I have brought ne'er a great in my bosom, and by this hand, I lay under thy ••d, with a heart as houest, and a blood as cold, as had my sister lay near top—will ye have me yet?
You are very rude, uncivil fellow.
Uncle•will, and lay so tame while you set up your foot upon the bed, to u••ie your shoe, such another word, I will uncivillize that injured civility which you so scurvily slander, and reward you with an undecencie proportionable to your understandings, will ye have me, will you mar∣rye me?
You, why tomorrow morning I am to be marri∣ed to your Father.
What, to sixty, and I know not how many, that will lie by your side, and divide the hours with cou•hes, as Cocks doe the night by instinct of Nature.
And provide for his family all day.
And only wish well to a fair wise all night.
And keepe's credit all day in all companies.
And discredit himself al night in your company.
Fie, fie, pray quite my house Sir.
•oars, it is my house.
Your house, since when?
Even since I was begotten, I was borne to〈…〉, I must have thee, and I will havethee, and this house is mine, and none of thine.
Oh Mistress, the saddest Accident in the street yonder.
What Accident prithee?
You must pardon my boldness, into your bedde-Chamber, there is a Gentleman slain in a fray at the door yonder, and the people wonnot bee persuaded, but that hee that did it, took this house, there is the Con∣stable, Church-wardens, and all the Head-men of the Pa∣rich, be now searching, and they say they will come up hither to your bed chamber, but they'll find him, Isle keep them down as long as I can, I can doe no more then I can. 
Are not you the murderer Sir?
I ha been under thy bed by this hand this three hours.
Pray get you down then, they will all come up, and find you here and all, and what will the Parish think then? pray get you down.
No, no, no; I will not go down now I think on it. 
Why, what doe you mean, you will not bee so uncivil to unbrace you here?
By these Buckles I will, and what they will think on it—
Alas, you will undo me.
No, no, I will undo my self look ye.
Good Sir, I will off with my doublet to my very shirt.
Pray sir have more care of a Women's repu∣tation.
Have a care on it thy self Woman, and marry me then.
Shoot they come up and see this: what cooed they think, but that some foul uncivil Act of shame had this night stained my house, and as good marry him as my name lost for ever.
Will you have me before tother sleeve goes off?
Doe, hang your self, I will not have you—look, look, if he have not pulled it off quite, why you won∣not pull off your boots too will you?
Breeches and all by this flesh.
What, and stand naked in a Widows Cham∣ber.
As naked as Grantham steeple, or the Strand May-pole by this spur, and what your grave Parishio∣ners will think on it?
Gentlemen pray keep down.
Alas, they are at the stairs foot, for Heavens sake Sir.
Will you have me?
What shall I doe? no.
This is the last time of asking, they come up, and down go my breeches, will you have me?
I, I, I, alas, and your breeches go down
I am undone for ever.
Why then kiss me upon it, and yet there's no cracking your credit, Iarvis is come in, Iarvis.
I have kept my promise Sir, you're caught the old one.
How caught, is there no body below then?
No body but Iohn, for sooth, recovering a Tobacco snuff, that departed before supper.
And did you promise this Sir?
A woman cannot have a hansomer cloud, then a haire-brain'd Husband: I will be your Cousin, hee shall bee my Cuckold.
I love ye for your Art.
Come, Come, put on Sir, I have acquainted ye both with your Fathers intended marriage, •th morning you shall certify him very early by Letter, the quality of your fortunes, and return to your c∣bedience, and that you and your wife, still concealing the parties, will Attend him to Church, Iohn and Isle bee there early, as commanded by my Mistress, to discharge our attendance: about goes the plot, out comes the project, and these's a wedding dinner dressed to your hands.
As pat as a fat Heir to a lean Shark, wee shall hunger for it, honest Iarvis, I am thy bed-fellow to night, and to morrow thy Master.
You're a fine man to use a woman thus?
Pish, Come, come, fine men must use fine Woe∣men thus, tic fit, plain truth takes Maids, VViddovves, are won with wit.
You shall wear horns with wisdom, that is in your pocket.
Come Iohn, carry your hand steadily, the guess drop in a pace, doe not let your wine drop on it.
Tic as I told thee, Master Alexander, thy Mistress
eldest son will be here.
Rose, I pray burn some pitch in the Parlour, it is good against ill airs, Master Alexander will be here.
I am up before ye son Earelacke, will Ancient Young bee here with a rich Wife too? thy Mistress is not stirring yet sirrah, Isle hold my life the Baggage slip to thy Mistress, there they have even locked the door to them, and are tricking up one another: oh these women! but this Rogue Tim, hee lay out to night too, he received my hun∣dred Mark, and I fear is murdered: Truss, Truss, good Iarvis.
He has bin a wooing Sir, and has fetched over the delicat'st young Virgin, her Father died but a week since, and left her to her marriage, five thousand pound in mo∣ney, and a parcel of Land, worth three hundred Perannum.
Nay, nay, it is like, the boy had ever a captive∣ting tongue to take a woman—ô excellent money, ex∣cellent money, Mistress of my devotions, as if my Wid∣dowes estate is little less too, and then Sander, he has got a monied woman too, there will be a bulk of money, Simon is puling sir, I may tell thee, one that by natures course, cannot live long: •other, a Mid-night sir•et cuts off, then have I a trick to cozen both their Widdovves, and make all mine, ô Iarvis, what a monied generation shall I then get upon thy Mistress?
A very virtuous brood.
Has't done?
I have done Sir.
Isle in and get some m•••cke for thy Mistress, to quicken her this morning, and then to Church in earnest, it is done, where is Sir Nicholas Nemo and his words that watch so for her? Ha, ha, ha, al's mixed with honey, I have mirth, a sweet young Widow and her money, ô that sweet Saint, called money.
Joy I, and a 100 pound a year in a black box to the bargain given away in the dark last night, to we know not who, and to be heard of wee know not when. Sfoote and this be joy, wood we had a handful, some slice of sor∣row to season it.
By this light it was strange.
Believe me Sir, I thought I had given it you, he that took it called me by my name.
Did he speak Welch or English?
Alas, I know not, I enjoined him silence seeing the Watch coming, who parted vs.
If this were not Master Randalls of Randall Hall that I told ye of, I'll be fleaed.
Be maskt, and with-draw a while, here comes our Dad.
Why Master Busy, asleep as thou standst man?
Some horse taught him that it is worth god a mercy.
I watch all night, I protest Sir the Counters pray for me, I send all in Cut and long tail.
What, what?
I sent twelve Gentlewomen, our own neigh∣bours last night, for being so late but at a women's labour.
Alas Sir, a woman in that kind you know must have help.
What's that to me? I am to take no notice of that, they might have let her alone till morning, or she might have cried out some other time.
Nay, nay, Master Busy knows his place I warrant ye.
Son Alexander welcome, and Ancient Young to, I have heard all.
You must pardon the meritable rudeness of the Gentlewomen Sir, in not unmasking, they entreated me to inform you: there are some ith house to whom they wood by no means be laid open.
They are witty, they are witty.
But for my self, I am now your most obedient virtuous Alexander.
Obedience, hang her virtue, let her starve; has she money? hath she money?
Two Chests of silver, and two Vtropian Trunks, full of gold and Jewels.
They are all Alexanders women, doe ye mark?
Alexander was the Conquer•ur Sir.
Come, come, weal to Church presently: Pri∣thee Iaruis whilst the Musicle plays just upon the delici∣os close, usher in the Brides, the Widow, and my Moll.
I tell ye true Gallants, I have seen neither of them to day. Shall I give him the lye?
They are both locked up itaith, trimming of one another. Oh these women, they are so secret in their bu∣sinesse, they will make very Coxcombs of vs men, and do it at pleasure to, it is well said friends, play, play, whore's Simon?
How he bestirs him.
Yes, he will sweat by and by.
Here is the sign of Simon Sir.
Have the guests Rosemary without?
They have Rose the Cooke-mayd without, but they say you have Mistress Mary within.
Well said Rascal.
Maria's aboue good-man Blockhead. Call my son Earelack, bid him for shame make hast.
He shall make hast for shame.
I am so busied, you must bear with me Gentle∣men, they leave it all to me here.
But I will go charge some of the inferior guess in the Kings name to fill some wine.
No, no, good Master Busy, wee will first usher the brides.
Oh Gentlemen, where are you? where are you?
Where are you Gentlemen?
What's the matter?
Whore's Moll Simon, the Widow Simon, the dainty Widow?
There is no Moll, there is no dainty young Wid∣dow, but a damnable Bawd we found a bed with a face like an Apple half roasted.
How's this?
Why Gentlemen?
Now it works.
Iaruis you're a Rogue, a Cut-purse Iaruis, run Simon, call my son Earelack, hee shall put her into the Spy∣ritual Court for this.
Nay, has put her in there already, for wee found him a bed with her.
Possible.
Ha Boys, the Informer and the Bawd, the Bawd and the Informer have got a devil betwixt them Gentle∣men.
Nay Sir, the jest was, that they should fall asleep together, and forget themselves, for very lovingly wee found them together, like the Iemini, or the two Winter mornings met together: Look, look, look where they come Sir, and Iaruis between them, just like the picture of knavery, betwixt fraud and lechery.
Tim is a puling Sirrah, I may tell it thee, a mid∣night surfeit too may cut off Sander, I'll cozen their Wives, make all mine own, and then, Oh Iaruis what a moneyed generation shall I get, upon this vviddow Coote that hath two teeth.
Did wee bring you to Music with a mischief Oarlock? thou art a Goat, thou hast abused the best bed in my house, I'll set a Sumner upon thee.
Bloodhound, thou art a Usurer, and take forty in the hundred, ••e inform against thee.
Are you a Bawd huswife, ha?
Alas Sir, I was merely •nuied, betrayed by Jar∣uis, but as I have been Bawd to the flesh, you have been Bawd to your money; so set the Hare Pie against the Goose g•ble•s, and you and I are as daintily matched as can be sir.
Simon, run to the widow Wags, tell her wee are both abu•'d, this Iaruis is a •ugler, say.
I can save Simon that labour Sir, I assure you the wid∣dow is married to your son Alexander, and as a confirm∣tion she is come her self to witness i•. 
•our fair young daughter is wife to this Anti∣ent, who is come likewise to witness it.
The plain truth is Master Bloodhound, I would entreat you to keep the kennel, the younger dog be∣ing of the better sent, has borne the game before ye.
We have clapped hands on it Sir, and the Priest that shoot have married you to her, is to marry her to me, so sister, talk for your self.
Ha brave tricks and conceits, can ye dance Ma∣ster Earelack?
Ha, ha: the old man's a little mad: but thou art not married Moll?
Yes indeed Sir, and will lye with this Gentleman soon at night: doe you think I wood chew Ram mut∣ton, when I might swallow Venison, that's none of Venus documents Monsieur Dottevill?
•ox of that Venus, s•ee is a Whore I warrant her.
And were not you the tother Juggler with Iaruis in this, hey pass and repose.
Good Sir be satisfied, the Widow and my sister sung both one song, and what was it, but Crabbed age and youth cannot live together. Now wee persuaded them, and
they cooed not live together, they wood never endure to lie together, this consequently descended, there was the Antecedent, wee clapped hands, sealed lips, and so fell unto the relative,
This was your bargain upon the Exchange Sir, and because you have ever been addicted to old proverbs, and pithy Saws, pray let me seal up the mistake with one that will appear very seasonably.
And I pray let's hear it sir.
You, a new fangled fowler, came to show your Art in the dark, but take this truth, you caught in truth a Cookow for it. 
Heyday, wee are cheated by the rule• faith, now sirrah, they say you are to be married too.
Yes indeed Father, I am going to the business, and Gentlemen all, I am come whether you will or no, to muite ye all to my marriage, to this Gentlewoman, who though a good face need no Mask; shoe's maskt to make a man think she has a scurvy face, when I know 〈◊〉 has a good face, this is S•cke to them and out of their Element.
But sirrah, setting aside marriages, whore's my hundred Mark you went to receive?
Hum, upon such a match of mine, talk of a hun∣dred Mark, this is to drink ignoble •our shillings beer, a hundred Mark, why your Lawyer there can clear such a trifle in a Term, and his Clients ne'er the better.
Such a match, I pray discover her, what is she?
What is she, heere's my Brother knows •hat she is well enough, come hither Dab, and bee• known unto you, her name is Lindabrades, descended from the Em∣perour Tribatio of Greece, and half Niece, some six and fifty descents to most unvanquished Claridiana.
Who's this? pox on it, what  makes that Bawd yonder?
I am very much deceived, and I did not send this Gentlewoman very drunk tother night to'th Counter.
I tell thee prattling Constable, it is a lye, Linda∣brades a Drunkard?
Hark ye brother, where lies her living?
Where, why in Greece.
In grease.
She looks as if she had sold Kitchinstuffe.
This is a common whore, and you a cheated Cox∣comb, come hither, you rotten Hospital, hung round with greasy Satin, doe not you know this Vermin?
I winckt at ye Sue, and ye cooed have seen me, there's one I•rni•, a rope on him has juggled me into the sudds t•o.
Now I know her name too, doe not you pass un∣der the name of Sue shortheeles, minion?
Go look Master little wit, will not any woman thrust her self upon a good fortune, when tic offered her?
Sir Marmaduke, you are a Justice of peace; I charge ye in the Kings name, you and Master Ambodexter, to assist me with the Whore and the Bawd, to Bridewell.
By my troth and we will, by that time we shall have an excellent stomach by that time dinners ready.
I, I, away with them, away with them.
Oh this Rogue Iarvis.
Now, now, you look like a melancholy dog, that had lost his dinner, whore's my hundred Marks now you Coxcomb?
Truly father, I have paid some sixeteen recko∣nings, since I saw you, I was never sober since you sent me to the Devil yesterday, and for the rest of your money, I sent it to one Captain Carvegut, he swore to me his Father was my Lord Majors Cooke, and that by Easter next, you should have the principal, and eggs for the use indeed sir.
Oh Rogue, Rogue, I shall have eggs for my money, I must hang my self.
Not before dinner pray Sir, the Pies are almost baked. 
And Marries now was won, and all her pusinesse done, and Randalls now was run, her have made all sure I her warrant her.
Look, look, yonder's the conceit, the
mistake happened upon last night.
And the very box it's girdle.
Cot plesse her Father Ploodhounds, Rentals have robed Ancients her warrant her.
Sir it is known how you came by that box.
Yew was her so, will hear an Noble Prittaine, how her gull an English Flag?
And you ought to cry.
Oh noble Randalls, as her meet by Nags-head with Moires Plood, prave.
Here's another mad-man.
Hark in your ear, you must deliver that box to me.
Hark in her tother ear, her will not deliver her, and her were nine and forty Ancients, and five and fourscore Flags.
Let my foe write mine Epitaph, and if I tear not my birth-right from thy bosom?
Gentlemen, there's Elegant in the house, pray set no more abroach.
Nay let her come with her pack of needles, Ran∣dalls can pox and bob, as well as her, her warrant her.
What box is that? I shoo'd know that box.
I will resolve ye sir, keep them asunder.
You will restore that box?
Her will not restore her, it was Mary Ploodhounds gave her the box, Rentals have married Mary Ploodhounds and gul'd Ancients, mark her now.
Mark him good Sir, me thinks he says hee has married Mary Bloodhound.
Hang him, hoe's mad!
Zoun's, make Tog of Randalls? come out here Maries.
Look here was Mary Ploodhounds. Enter Maid &amp; Hugh. now, I pray tumble down of her Mary-po•es, and ask her father pleasing?
This, why this is your Maid Widow,
This is Mary the Widows Maid man.
And here is Mary Ploo•hound, my choleric shred of Cadwallader, married to this Gentleman, who has a hundred a year dangling at your girdle there.
I pray Mistress are you married to this Gentle∣man?
By six•'th morning forsooth, hee to•ke me for Mary Ploodhound, having it seems, never seen any on's be∣fore, and I being something amorously affected, as they say to his Welch ditties, answered to her name, lay with him all night, and married him this morning, so that as he took me for her, I took him as he was forsooth.
She means for a fool, I am fine to answer for you.
Ha, ha, ha, Cupped this twenty four hours has done nothing but cut cross capers.
Doe ye hear, sir Bartholomew Bayard, that leap before ye look, it will handsomely become you, to restore the Box to that Gentleman, and the Magnitude of your desire, upon this dainty, that is so amoro•sly taken with your ditties.
Her wail in woe, her plunge in pain.
And yet becat her doe not neither, Randalls will prove her self Prittaines borne, and because her understands Ancients was prave fellows, and great Travellers, there is her box for her.
I thank ye.
And because was no remedies, before her aule, here will Rentals embrace Maries, and take a pusse— 
Save ye gallants, doe ye want any guess?
Call me thy Cos, and carry it handsomely.
Who have we here trow?
Dost thou know the Gentleman that whispered to thee?
Oh wondrous well, hee bid me call him Cos, and 〈◊〉 it handsomely.
Widow, wood I were off again.
Know all, this Gentleman has to obtain his Lust, and loose desires, served me this seven months, under the shape and name of Iarvis.
Possible?
Look well, doe ye not know him?
The very face of Iarvis.
I truly Father, and he were any thing like him,
I would svveare 'tvvere he.
I must cast my skin; and am caught—why Cos.
Come you're cozened,
And with a Noble craft, he tempted me
In mine own house, and I bid him keep's disguise
But till this morning and he shoo'd perceive,
I loved him truly, intending here before ye,
To let him know it, especially in the presence
Of you Sir, that intend me for your Wife.
What shoo'd this mean?
Some witty trick I warrant thee, prithee dis∣patch him presently, that we were at Church.
First, then know ye for truth sir, I mean never to marry.
How Woman?
She has dispatcht you Sir.
And for a truth sir, know you, I never mean to bee your Whore.
This is strange.
But true, as she whose chaste immaculate soul,
Retains the Noble stamp of her integrity,
With an undefac't perfection—perchance as these
Nay Common Fame, hath scattered you, conceive me,
Because pale jealousy (Cupids angry Fool)
Was frequent lodger at that sign of Folly;
My husbands soon suspicious heart, that I
In a close clouded looseness, shoo'd expose him
To that desperate distraction of his fortunes,
That sent him to the Sea, to nourish her,
With your vain hope, that the Fame of frequent suitors,
Was but a Mask of loose scopes, like men at Lotteries:
You thought to put in for one Sir, but believe me,
You have drawn a blank.
Base• her look ferry black indeed,
Oh my beloved husband,
However in thy life, thy jealousy
Sent thee so far to find death, I will bee
I will be married to nothing but thy memory.
But shall the pies be spoiled then?
Let her alone, if her husband doe not know this.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Her Husband I told you was a madman.
Why her Husbands dead sir.
He is not dead Sir, hee had it spread a purpose, he is in England, and in your house, and look: doe ye not see him?
Where, where?
Here, here hee is that hath found rash jealousy,
Loves joys, and a wife whose discreet carriage
Can intimate to all men a fair freedom.
And to one be faithful, such a wife I prove,
Her husbands glory worth a wealthy Love.
You are welcome to my soul Sir.
By my troth Master Wag this was a wigs trick indeed, but I knew I know ye, I remembered you a mo∣neth ago, but that I had forgotten where I saw you.
I knew you were a crafty Merchant, you helped my Master to such bargains upon the Exchange last night: here has been the merriest morning after it.
My Pitchers broke just at the Well head, but give me leave to tell you Sir, that you have a noble Wife, and indeed such a one as wood worthily feast the very dis∣creation of a wise mans desire, her wit ingeniously waits upon her virtue, and her virtue advisedly gives freedom to her wit, but because my marriage shall seriously pro∣ceede, I wed my self Sir to Obedience, and filial rogue∣larity, and vow to redeem in the duty of a son, the affe∣ction of a father.
Becat was as well spoke as Randall her self cood talk.
All is forgotten now my best son Alexander, and that my wedding want no good company, I inuit you all.
Come my deserving Wife,
Wisdom this day remarries vs. And Gentlemen
From all our errors we'll extract this truth,
Where vicious ends propose, they stand on wheels,
And the least turn of chance throws up their heals:
But virtues Lovers ever greene doe last,
Like Laurel which no lightening can blast.

SHamount, welcome; we have mist thee long,
Though absent but two days: I hope your sports
Answer your time and wishes.
Very nobly sir:
We found game worthy your delight my Lord,
It was so royal.
I've enough to hear on it,
Prithee bestow it upon me in discourse.
What is this Gentleman Cos? you are a Courtier,
Therefore know all their insides.
No farther then the Taffeta goes good Cos,
For the most part, which is indeed the best part
Of the most general inside: marry thus far
I can with boldness speak this ones mans Character,
And upon honour pass it for a true one;
He has that strength of many merit in him,
That it exceeds his Sovereigns power of gracing;
He's faithfully true to valour, that he hates
The man from Casars time, or farther off,
That ever took disgrace unrevenged:
And if he chance to read his abject story,
He tears his memory out, and holds it virtuous,
Not to let shame have so much life amongst us;
There is not such a curious piece of courage
Amongst mans fellowship, or one so jealous
Of honours loss, or reputations glory:
There's so much perfect, of his growing story.
It would make one dote on virtue as you tell it.
I have told it to much loss, believe it Cos.
How the Duke graces him? what is he brother?
Do you not yet know him? a vain-glorious coxcomb,
As proud as he that fell for it:
Set but aside his valour, no virtue,
Which is indeed, not fit for any Courtier;
And we his fellows are as good as he,
Perhaps as capable of favour too,
For one thing or another, if it were looked into:
Give me a man, were I a Sovereign now,
Has a good stroke at Tennis, and a stiff one,
Can play at Equinoctium with the Line,
As even as the thirteenth of September,
When day and night lye in a scale together:
Or may I thrive as I deserve at Billiards;
No otherwise at Chess, or at Primero:
These are the parts required, why not advanced?
Trust me, it was no less then excellent pleasure,
And I'm right glad it was thine. How fares our kinsman?
Who can resolve us best?
I can my Lord.
There if I had a pity without bounds,
It might be all bestowed — A man so lost
In the wild ways of passion, that he's sensible
Of nought but what torments him?
True my Lord,
He runs through all the Passions of mankind,
And shifts 'em strangely too: one while in love,
And that so violent, that for want of business,
He will court the very Prentice of a Laundress,
Though she have kib'd heals: and in's melancholy again,
He will not brooke an Empress, though thrice fairer
Then ever Maud was; or higher spirited
Then Cleopatra, or your English Countess:
Then on a sudden he's so merry again,
Out-laughs a waiting woman, before her first Child:
And turning of a hand, so angry—
'Has almost beat the Northern fellow blind;
That is for that use only; if that mood hold my Lord,
'Had need of a fresh man; I'll undertake,
He shall bruise three a month.
I pity him dearly:
And let it be your charge, with his kind brother,
To see his moods observed; let every passion
Be fed even to a surfeit, which in time
May breed a loathing: let him have enough
Of every object, that his sense is rapt with;
And being once glutted, then the taste of folly
Will come into his relish. 
I shall see
Your charge my Lord most faithfully effected:
And how does noble Shamount?
Never ill man
Until I hear of baseness, then I sicken,
I am the healthful'st man in the Kingdom else.
Be armed then for a fit, 
Here comes a fellow
Will make you sick at heart, if baseness do it.
Let me be gone: what is he?
Let me tell you first,
It can be but a qualm, pray stay it out sir,
Come, you've borne more then this.
Borne? never any thing
That was injurious.
Ha, I am far from that.
He looks as like a man as I have seen one:
What would you speak of him? speak well I prithee,
Even for humanities cause.
You'd have it truth though?
What else sir? I have no reason to wrong heaven
To favour nature; let her bear her own shame
If she be faulty.
Monstrous faulty there sir.
I'm ill at ease already.
Pray bear up sir.
I Prithee let me take him down with speed then.
Like a wild object that I would not look upon.
Then thus: he's one that will endure as much
As can be laid upon him.
That may be noble:
I'm kept too long from his acquaintance.
O sir,
Take heed of rash repentance, you're too forward
To find out virtue where it never settled:
Take the particulars first of what he endures;
Videlicet, Bastinadoes by the great.
How!
Thumps by the dozen, and your kicks by whole sale.
No more of him.
The twinges by the nostril he snuffs up,
And holds it the best remedy for sneazing.
Away.
Has been thrice switz't from seven a clock till nine,
Yet with a Cart-Horse stomach fell to break-fast,
Forgetful of his smart.
Nay, the disgrace on it;
There is no smart but that: base things are felt
More by their shames then hurts Sir, I know you not,
But that you live an injury to nature:
I'm heartily angry with you.
Pray give your blow or kick, and begone then:
For I ne'er saw you before, and indeed,
Have nothing to say to you, for I know you not.
Why would thou take a blow?
I would not sir,
Unless it were offered me; and if from an enemy—
I'd be loath to deny it from a stranger.
What, a blow?
Endure a blow? and shall he live that gives it?
Many a fair year—why not sir?
Let me wonder!
As full a man to see too, and as perfect—
I prithee live not long—
How?
Let me entreat it:
Thou dost not know what wrong thou dost mankind,
To walk so long here; not to dye betimes.
Let me advise thee, while thou hast to live here,
Even for mans honour sake, take not a blow more.
You should advise them not to strike me then sir,
For Isle take none I assure you, less then are given.
How fine would I preserve mans form from shame,
And cannot get it done? however sir,
I charge thee live not long.
This is worse then beating.
Of what profession art thou, tell me sir,
Besides a Taylor? for Isle know the truth.
A Taylor? I'm as a good a Gentleman—
Can show my arms and all.
How black and blew they are?
Is that your manifestation? upon pain
Of pounding thee to dust, assume not wrong fully,
The name of Gentleman, because I am one,
That must not let thee live.
I have done, I have done sir,
If there be any harm, beshrew the Herald,
I'em sure I ha not been so long a gentleman,
To make this anger: I have nothing no where,
But what I dearly pay for. 
Groom begone;
I never was so heart-sick yet of man.
Enter Lady, the Dukes sister, Lapets wife.
Here comes a cordial Sir from tother sex,
Able to make a dying face look cheerful.
The blessedness of Ladies —
You're well met sir.
The sight of you has put an evil from me,
Whose breath was able to make virtue sicken.
I'm glad I came so fortunately. What was it sit?
A thing that takes a blow, lives and eats after it,
In very good health; you have not seen the like Madam,
A monster worth your sixpence, lovely worth,
Speak low Sir; by all likely-hoods it is her husband,
That now bestowed a visitation on me. Farewell sir. 
Husband? is it possible that he has a wife?
Would any creature have him? it was some forced match,
If he were not kicked to the Church of the wedding day,
Isle never come at Court. Can be no otherwise:
Perhaps he was rich, speak Mistress Lapet, was it not so?
Nay, that's without all question.
O ho, he would not want kickers enough then;
If you are wise, I much suspect your honesty;
For wisdom never fastens constantly,
But upon merit: If you incline to fool,
You are alike unfit for his society;
Nay if it were not boldness in the man
That honours you, to advise you, troth his company
Should not be frequent with you.
It is good counsel sir.
Oh I am so careful where I reverence,
So just to goodness, and her precious purity,
I am as equally jealous, and as fearful,
That any undeserved stain might fall
Upon her sanctified whiteness, as of the sin
That comes by wilfulness.
Sir, I love your thoughts,
And honour you for your counsel and your care.
We are your servants.
Hoe's but a gentleman of the chamber, he might have kissed me:
Faith, where shall one find less curtsy, then at Court?
Say I have an undeserver to my husband:
That's ne'er the worse for him: well strange leapt men,
It is but a kiss lost, there'll more come again. 
Look who comes here sir, his love fit's upon him;
I know it, by that set smile, and those congees.
How courteous hoe's to nothing? which indeed,
Is the next kin to woman; only shadow
The elder Sister of the twain, because it is seen too.
See how it kisses the fore-finger still;
Which is the last edition, and being come
So near the thumb every Cobbler has got it?
What a ridiculous peace, humanity
Here makes it self?
Nay, good give leave a little sir,
You're so precise a manhood—
It afflicts me
When I behold unseemelinesse in an Image
So near the Godhood, it is an injury
To glorious Eternity.
Pray use patience sir.
I do confess it freely precious Lady,
And loves suit'is so, the longer it hangs
The worse it is; better cut off sweet Madam;
O that same drawing in your nether lip there,
Foreshewes no goodness Lady: make you question on it?
Shame on me but I love you.
Who is it sir,
You are at all this pains for? may I know her?
For thee thou fairest, yet the falsest woman,
That ever broke mans heart-strings.
How? how's this sir?
What, the old trick of Ladies? mans apparel,
Will it ne'er be left amongst you? steal from Court in it?
I see the fit grows stronger.
Pray let's talk a little.
I can endure no more.
Good, let us alone a little:
You are so exact a work: love light things somewhat sir.
They are all but shames.
What is it you'd say to me sir?
Can you be so forgetful to enquire it Lady?
Yes truly sir.
The more I admire your stintinesse:
What cause have I given you, illustrious Madam,
To play this strange part with me?
Cause enough,
Do but look back sir into your memory,
Your love to other women ô lewd man,
'Tas almost killed my heart, you see I'm changed with it,
I have lost the fashion of my Sex with grief on it,
When I have seen you courting of a Dowdy;
Compared with me, and kissing your fore-finger
To one of the black-guards Mistresses: would not this
Crack a poor Ladies heart, that believed love,
And waited for the comfort? but it was said sir,
A Lady of my hair cannot want pitying:
The Countries coming up, farewell to you sir.
Whither intend you sir?
A long journey sir:
The truth is, I'm with child, and go to travel.
With child? I never got it.
I heard you were busy
At the same time sir, and was loath to trouble you.
Why, are not you a whore then, excellent Madam?
O by no means, it was done sir in the state
Of my belief in you, and that quits me,
It lies upon your falshod.
Does it so?
You shall not carry her though sir, she's my contract.
I prithee thou four Elements ill brewed,
Torment none but thy self; away I say
Thou beast of passion, as the drunkard is
The beast of wine; dishonour to thy making,
Thou man in fragments.
Hear me precious Madam.
Kneel for thy wits to heaven.
Lady, I'll father it,
Who ere begot it: it is the course of greatness.
How virtue groans at this?
I'll raise the Court, but I'll stay your slight.
How wretched is that peace? 
He's the Dukes kinsman sir.
That cannot take a passion away sir,
Nor cut a fit, but one poor hour shorter,
He must endure as much as the poorest beggar,
That cannot change his money; there's the equality
In our impartial essence:
What's the news now? 
Your worthy brother sir, has left his charge,
And come to see you. 
O the noblest welcome
That ever came from man, meet thy deservings:
Methinkes I've all joys treasure in mine arms now,
You are so fortunate in prevention brother,
You always leave the answerer barren sir,
You comprehend in few words so much worth—
It is all too little for thee: come you are welcome,
So I include all: take especial knowledge pray,
Of this dear Gentleman, my absolute friend,
That loves a Soldier far above a Mistress,
Thou excellently faithful to 'em both.
But love to manhood, owns the purer troth. 
THere should be in this gallery—on they are here,
Pray sit down; believe me sir I'm weary.
It well becomes a Lady to complain a little
Of what she never feels: your walk was short Madam,
You can be but afraid of weariness;
Which well employs the softness of your Sex,
As for the thing it self, you never came to it.
You're wondrously well read in Ladies sir.
Shall I think such a creature as you Madam,
Was ever borne to feel pain, but in travel?
There's your full portion,
Besides a little toothache in the breeding,
Which a kind husband too, takes from you Madam.
But where do Ladies sir, find such kind husbands?
Perhaps you have heard
The Rhumaticke story of some loving Chandler now,
Or some such melting fellow, that you talk
So prodigal of men's kindness: I confess sir,
Many of those wives are happy, their ambition
Does reach no higher, then to love and ignorance,
Which makes an excellent husband, and a fond one:
Now sir, your great ones aim at height, and cunning,
And so are oft deceived, yet they must venture it;
For it is a Ladies contumely sir,
To have a Lord an Ignorant; then the worlds voice
Will deem her for a wanton ere she taste on it:
But to deceive a wise man, to whose circumspection,
The world resigns it self with all his envy;
It is less dishonour to us then to fall,
Because his believed wisdom keeps out all.
Would I were the man Lady, that should venture
His wisdom to your goodness.
You might fail
In the return, as many men have done sir:
I dare not justify what is to come of me,
Because I know it not, though I hope virtuously;
Marry what's past or present, I durst put
Into a good mans hand, Which if he take
Upon my word for good, it shall not cousin him.
No, nor her after?
It may hap so too sir:
A women's goodness, when she is a wise,
Lies much upon a mans desert, believe it sir,
If there be fault in her, Isle pawn my life on it,
It is first in him, if she were ever good,
That makes one; knowing not a husband yet,
Or what he may be, I promise no more virtues,
Then I may well perform, for that were cousinage.
Happy were he that had you with all fears,
That's my opinion, Lady.
What say you now sir?
Dare you give confidence to your own eyes?
Not yet I dare not.
No?
Scarce yet, or yet:
Although I see it is he. Why can a thing,
That's but my self divided be so false?
Nay doe but mark how the chair plays his part too:
How amorously it is bent.
Hell take thy bad thoughts,
For they are strange ones. Never take delight
To make a torment worse. Look on 'em heaven,
For that's a brother: send me a fair enemy,
And take him; for a fouler fiend there breathes not:
I will not sin, to think there's ill in her,
But what's of his producing.
Yet goodness, whose enclosure is but flesh,
Holds out oft times but sorely. But as black sir,
As ever kindred was: I hate mine own blood,
Because it is so near thine. Live without honesty,
And moist thou dye with an unmoistned eye,
And no tear follow thee. 
You're wondrous merry sir; I would your Brother heard you.
O my sister
I would not out of the way, let fall my words Lady,
Pore the precisest humour.
Yea, so close.
They are merry, that's the worst you can report on 'em;
They are neither dangerous, nor immodest.
So sir,
Shall I believe you, think you?
Who's this Lady?
O the Dukes Cousin; he came late from travel sir.
Respect belongs to him.
For as I said Lady,
They are merry that's the worst you can report of em:
They are neither dangerous, nor immodest.
How's this?
And there I think I left.
Abuses me.
Now to proceed, Lady; perhaps I swore I loved you,
If you believe me not, you're much the wiser.
He speaks still in my person, and derides me.
For I can cog with you.
You can all doe so.
We make no question of men's promptness that way.
And smile, &amp; wave a chair with comely grace too,
Play with our Tastle gently, and doe fine things,
That catch a Lady sooner then a virtue.
I never used to let man live so long
That wronged me.
Talk of Battalions, woo you in a skirmish;
Divine my mind to you Lady; and being sharp set,
Can court you at half pike: or name your weapon,
We cannot fail you Lady. 
Now he dies:
Were all succeeding hopes stored up within him.
O fie, in the Court sir?
I most dearly thank you sir.
Tic rage ill spent upon a passionate mad-man.
That shall not privilege him for ever sir:
A mad-man call you him? I have found too much reason
Sound in his injury to me, to believe him so.
If ever truth from mans lips may be held
In reputation with you, give this confidence;
And this his love-fit, which we observe still,
By's flattering and his fineness: at some other time,
He will go as slovenly as heart can wish.
The love and pity that his Highness shows to him,
Makes every man the more respectful of him:
Has never a passion, but is well provided for,
As this of Love, he is full fed in all;
His swinge as I may term it: have but patience,
And ye shall witness somewhat.
Still he mocks me:
Look you, in action, in behaviour sir;
Hold still the chair, with a grand mischief to you,
Or Isle set so much strength upon your heart sir—
I feel some power has restrained me Lady:
If it be sent from love, say, I obey it,
And ever keep a voice to welcome it.
THou Deity, swift winged love,
Sometimes below, sometimes above,
Little in shape, but great in power,
Thou that make a heart thy Tower,
And thy loop-holes, Ladies eyes,
From whence thou strik'st the fond and wise.
Did all the shafts in thy fair quiver
Stick fast in my ambitious liver;
Yet thy power would I adore,
And call upon thee to shoot more.
shoot more, shoot more.
I prithee hold though, sweet Celestial boy;
I'm not requited yet with love enough,
For the first arrow that I have within me:
And if thou be an equal archer Cupped,
Shoot this Lady, and twenty more for me.
Me sir?
Tic nothing but device, fear it not Lady;
You may be as good a maid after that shaft Madam,
As ere your mother was at twelve and half:
Tic like the boy that draws it, 'tas no sting yet.
Tic like the miserable maid that draws it—aside.
That sees no comfort yet, seeing him so passionate.
Strike me the Duchess of Valois in love with me,
With all the speed thou can, and two of her women.
You shall have more. 
Tell 'em I tarry for 'em.
Who would be angry with that walking trouble now
That hurts none but it self?
I am better quieted.
Isle have all women-kind struck in time for me
After thirteen once:
I see this Cupped will not let me want,
And let him spend his forty shafts an hour,
They shall be all found from the Dukes Exchequer;
He's come already.
O turn thy bow,
Thy power we feel and know,
Fair Cupped turn away thy bow:
They be those golden Arrows,
Bring Ladies all their sorrows,
And till there be more truth in men,
Never shoot at maid again.
What a felicity of whores are here?
And all my concubines, struck bleeding new:
A man can in his life time make but one woman,
But he may make his fifty Queens a month.
Have you remembered a Priest honest brothers?
Yes sister, and this is the young gentleman,
Make you no question of our faithfulness.
His growing shame sister provokes our care.
He must be taken in this fit of love Gentlemen.
What else sir? he shall do it.
Enough.
Be cheerful wench. 
Now by the stroke of pleasure, a deep oath,
Nimbly hopt Ladies all; what height they bear too?
A story higher then your common statures;
A little man must go up stairs to kiss 'em:
What a great space there is
Betwixt loves dining Chamber, and his Garret?
Isle try the utmost height—the Garret stoops methinkes;
The rooms are made all bending, I see that,
And not so high as a man takes 'em for.
Now if you'll follow me sir, I've that power,
To make them follow you.
Are they all shot?
All, all sir, every mothers daughter of 'em.
Then there's no fear of following; if they be once shot,
They'll follow a man to the devil—As for you sir—
Me sir?
Nay sweet sir.
A noise, a threatening; did you not hear it sir?
Without regard sir, so would I hear you.
This must come to something, never talk of that Sir,
You never saw it otherwise.
Nay dear merit —
Me above all men?
Troth you wrong your anger.
I will be armed my honourable Lecher.
O fie sweet sir.
That devours women's honesties by lumps,
And never chawst thy pleasure.
What do you mean sir?
What does he mean t'ingrosse all to himself?
There's others love a whore, as well as he sir.
Oh and that be part of the fury, we have a City
Is very well provided for that case;
Let him alone with her, sir we have women
Are very charitable to proper men,
And to a Soldier that has all his limbs;
Marry the sick and lame gets not a penny:
Right women's charity, and the husbands follow't too:
Here comes his highness sir.
Isle walk to cool my self. 
Who's that?
The brother of Shamont.
He's Brother then
To all the Courts love, they that love discreetly,
And place their friendliness upon desert:
As for the rest, that with a double face
Look upon merit, much like fortunes visage,
That looks two ways, both to lifes calms and storms,
Isle so provide for him, chiefly for him,
He shall not wish their loves, nor dread their envies.
And here comes my Shamont. 
That Ladies virtues are my only joys,
And he to offer to lay siege to them?
Shamont.
Her goodness is my pride; in all discourses,
As often as I here rash tongued gallants,
Speak rudely of a woman, presently
I give in but her name, and they are all silent:
O who would lose this benefit?
Come hither sir.
It is like the gift of healing, but diviner;
For that but cures diseases in the body,
This works a cure on fame, on reputation:
The noblest piece of Surgery upon earth.
Shamont; he minds me not.
A Brother do it?
Shamont I say. Gives him a touch with his switch.
Ha?
If he be mortal, by this hand he perishes; 
Unless it be a stroke from heaven, he dies for it.
Why, how now sir? it was I.
The more's my misery.
Why, what's the matter prithee?
Can you ask it sir?
No man else should; stood forty lives before him
By this I would have op'd my way to him;
It could not be you sir, excuse him not,
What ere he be, as you're dear to honour,
That I may find my peace again.
Forbear I say.
Upon my love to truth, it was none but I.
Still miserable?
Come, come, what ails you sir?
Never sate shame cooling so long upon me,
Without a satisfaction in revenge,
And heaven has made it here a sin to wish it.
Hark you sir?
O you've undone me.
How?
Cruelly undone me;
I have lost my peace, and reputation by you:
Sir pardon me, I can never love you more. 
What language call you this sirs?
Truth my Lord, I've seldom heard a stranger.—
He is a man of a most curious valour,
Wondrous precise, and punctual in that virtue.
But why to me so punctual? my last thought
Was most entirely fixed on his advancement:
Why, I came now to put him in possession
Of his fair fortunes: what a mis-conceiver it is?
And from a Gentleman of our Chamber merely,
Made him vice-admiral; I was settled in it,
I love him next to health: call him Gentlemen;
Why would not you, or you have taken as much,
And never murmured? 
Troth, I think we should my Lord,
And there's a fellow walks about the Court,
Would take a hundred of 'em.
I hate you all for it,
And rather praise his high pitched fortitude,
Though in extremes for niceness: now I think on it,
I would I had never done it.—Now sir, where is he?
His suit is only sit to be excused.
He shall not be excused, I love him dearelier:
Say we entreat him; go, he must not leave us. 
So virtue bless me, I ne'er knew him paralleled;
Why, he's more precious to me now, then ever.
With much fair language, w'ave brought him?
Thanks—Where is he?
Yonder sir.
Come forward man.
Pray pardon me, I'm ashamed to be seen sir.
Was ever such a touchy man heard of?
Prithee come nearer.
More into the light?
Put not such cruelty into your requests my Lord,
First to disgrace me publicly, and then draw me
Into men's eyesight, with the shame yet hot
Upon my reputation.
What disgrace sir?
What?
Such as there can be no forgiveness for,
That I can find in honour.
That's most strange sir.
Yet I have seartch'd my bosom to find one,
And wresled with my inclination,
But 't will not be: would you had kilt me sir,
With what an ease had I forgiven you then?
But to endure a stroke from any hand
Under a punishing Angels, which is justice,
Honour disclame that man, for my part chiefly:
Had it been yet the malice of your sword.
Though it had cleft me, 'thad been noble to me;
You should have found my thanks paid in a smile
If I had fell unworded; but to shame me,
With the correction that your horse should have,
Were you ten thousand times my royal Lord,
I cannot love you never, nor desire to serve you more.
If your drum call me. I am vowed to valour,
But peace shall never know me yours again,
Because I've lost mine own, I speak to dye sir;
Would you were gracious that way to take off shame,
With the same swiftness as you power it on:
And since it is not in the power of Monarchs
To make a Gentleman, which is a substance
Only begot of merit, they should be careful
Not to destroy the worth of one so rare,
Which neither they can make; nor lost, repair. 
You've set a fair light sir before my judgement,
Which burns with wondrous clearness; I acknowledge it,
And your worth with it: but then sir, my love,
My love — what gone again?
And full of scorn my Lord.
That language will undo the man that keeps it,
Who knows no difference twixt contempt and manhood.
Upon your love to goodness, gentlemen, 
Let me not lose him long: how now?
The game's at height my Lord.
Confound both, thee and it: hence break it off;
He hates me brings me news of any pleasure:
I felt not such a conflict since I could;
Distinguish betwixt worthiness and blood 
I I heartily commend your project Gentlemen,
It was wise and virtuous.
It was for the safety
Of precious honour sir, which near blood binds us to:
He promised the poor easy fool there marriage,
There was a good maiden-head lost in the belief on it,
Beshrew her hasty confidence.
O no more sir,
You make her weep again; alas poor Cupped:
Shall she not shift her self?
O by no means sir:
We dare not have her seen yet, all the while
She keeps this shape, it is but thought device,
And she may follow him so without suspicion,
To see if she can draw all his wilde passions,
To one point only, and that's love, the maine point:
So far his highness grants, and gave at first,
Large approbation to the quick conceit,
Which then was quick indeed.
You make her blush insooth.
I fear it is more the flag of shame, then grace sir.
They both give but one kind of colour sir:
If it be bashfulness in that kind taken,
It is the same with grace; and there she weeps again.
In truth you're too hard, much, much too bitter sir,
Unless you mean to have her weep her eyes out,
To play a Cupped truly.
Come, have done then:
We should all fear to sin first; for it is certain,
When it is once lodged, though entertained in mirth,
It must be wept out, if it ere come forth.
Now it is so well, I'll leave you.
Faithfully welcome sir,
Go Cupped to your charge; hoe's your own now;
If he want love, none will be blamed but you.
The strangest marriage, and unfortunat'st Bride
That ever humane memory contained;
I cannot be my self for it. 
Oh Gentlemen? 
How now sir, what's the matter?
His melancholy passion is half spent already,
Then comes his angry fit at the very tail on it,
Then comes in my pain gentlemen; 'has beat me even to a Cullis.
I am nothing, right worshipful, but very pap,
And jelly: I have no bones, my body's all one business,
They talk of ribs, &amp; chines most freely abroad in the world,
Why, I have no such thing; who ever lives to see me dead
Gentlemen, shall find me all mummy good to fill galipots
And long dildo glasses: I shall not have a bone to throw
At a dog.
Alas poor vassal, how he goes?
O Gentlemen,
I am unjoynted, do but think of that:
My breast is beat into my maw, that what I eat,
I am fine to take it in all at mouth with spoons;
A lamentable hearing; and it is well known, my belly
Is driven into my back.
I earned four Crowns a month, most dearly Gentlemen,
And one he must have when the fit's upon him,
The privy purse allows it, and it is thriftiness,
He would break else some forty pounds in casements,
And in five hundred years undo the Kingdom:
I have cast it up to a quarrel.
There's a fellow kicked about court, I would
He had his place brother, but for one fit of his indignation.
And suddenly I have thought upon a means for it.
I Prithee how?
It is but preferring Brother
This stockfish to his service, with a letter
Of commendations, the same way he wishes it,
And then you win his heart: for of my knowledge
He has laid waite this half year for a fellow
That will be beaten; and with a safe conscience
We may commend the carriage of this man in it;
Now servants he has kept, lusty tall feeders,
But they have beat him, and turned themselves away:
Now one that would endure, is like to stay,
And get good wages of him; and the service too
Is ten times milder Brother, I would not wish it else.
I see the fellow has a sore crushed body,
And the more need he has to be kicked at ease.
I sweet Gentlemen, a kick of ease, send me to such a Master.
No more I say, we have one for thee, a soft footed Master,
One that wears wool in's toes.
O Gentlemen, soft garments may you wear,
Soft skins may you wed,
But as plump as pillows, both for white and red.
And now will I reveal a secret to you,
Since you provide for my poor flesh so tenderly,
'Has hired mere Rogues, out of his Chamber window,
To beat the Soldier, Monsieur Shamonts Brother.
That nothing concerns us sir.
For no cause Gentlemen,
Unless it be for wearing shoulder points,
With longer taggs then his.
Is not that somewhat?
Billakin sir, the difference of long taggs,
Has cost many a mans life, and advanced other some,
Come follow me.
See what a gull am I:
Oh every man in his profession;
I know a thumpe now, as juditiously,
As the proudest he that walks, I'll except none;
Come to a tag, how short I fall? I'm gone. 
I have been ruminating with my self,
What honour a man loses by a kick:
Why, what's a kick? the fury of a foot,
Whose indignation commonly is stamped
Upon the hinder quarter of a man;
Which is a place very unfit for honour,
The world will confess so much:
Then what disgrace I pray, does that part suffer
Where honour never comes, I'd fine know that?
This being well forced, and urged, may have the power
To move most Gallants to take kicks in time,
And spurn out the duelloes out of the kingdom,
For they that stand upon their honour most,
When they conceive there is no honour lost,
As by a table that I have invented
For that purpose alone, shall appear plainly,
Which shows the vanity of all blows at large,
And with what ease they may be took of all sides,
Numbering but twice one the Letters Patience
From C.P. to E. I doubt not but in small time
To see a dissolution of all bloodshed,
If the Reformed Kick do but once get up:
For what a lamentable folly it is,
If we observ't, for every little justly,
Which is but the ninth part of a sound thump,
In our meek computation, we must fight forsooth, yes,
If kill, I'm hang'; if I be killed my self,
I dye for it also: is not this trim wisdom?
Now for the Con, a man may be well beaten,
Yet pass away his fourscore years smooth after:
I had a father did it, and to my power
I will not be behind him. 
O well met.
Now a fine punch or two, I look for it duly.
I've been to seek you.
Let me know your lodging sir,
I'll come to you once a day, and use your pleasure sir.
I'm made the fittest man for thy Society:
I'll live and dye with thee: come show me a Chamber;
There is no house but thine, but only thine,
That's fit to cover me: I've took a blow sirrah.
I would you had indeed: why, you may see sir;
You'll all come to it in time, when my booke's out.
Since I did see thee last, I've took a blow.
Pha sir that's nothing; I have took forty since.
What? and I charged thee thou should not?
I sir, you might charge your pleasure,
But they would gived me, whether I would or no.
Oh I walk without my peace, I've no companion now;
Prithee resolve me, for I cannot ask
A man more beaten to experience,
Then thou art in this kind, what manner of blow
Is held the most disgraceful, or distasteful?
For thou dost only censure 'em by the hurt,
Not by the shame they do thee: yet having felt
Abuses of all kinds, thou may deliver,
Though't be by chance, the most injurious one.
You put me to it sir; but to tell you truth,
They are all as one with me, little exception.
That little may do much, let's have it from you.
With all the speed I may: first then, and foremost,
I hold so reverently of the Bastinado sir,
That if it were the dearest friend in the world,
I'd put it into his hand.
Go too, I'll pass that then.
You're the more happy sir,
Would I were past it too:
But being accustomed to it, It is the better carried.
Will you forward?
Then there's your sowce, your wherrit, and your dowst,
Tuggs on the hair, your bob of the lips, a whelp on it,
I ne'er could find much difference: Now your thumpe,
A thing derived first from your Hemp-beaters,
Takes a mans wind away, most spitefully:
There's nothing that destroys a Colic like it,
For it leaves no wind in the body.
On sir, on.
Pray give me leave, I'm out of breath with thinking ont.
This is far off yet.
For the twinge byth' nose,
It is certainly unsightly, so my tables says,
But helps against the head-ache, wondrous strangely.
Is it possible?
O your crushed nostrils slakes your opilation
And makes your pent powers flush to wholesome sneezes.
I never thought there had been half that virtue
In a wrung nose before.
O plenitude sir:
Now come we lower, to our modern kick,
Which has been mightily in use of late,
Since our young men drank Coltsfoot: and I grant you,
It is a most scornful wrong, cause the foot plays it;
But mark again, how we that take it, requite it
With the like scorn, for we receive it backward;
And can there be a worse disgrace retorted?
And is this all?
All but a lug byth' ear,
Or such a trifle.
Happy sufferer,
All this is nothing to the wrong I bear:
I see the worst disgrace, thou never felt yet;
It is so far from thee, thou can not think on it;
Nor dare I let thee know, it is so abject.
I would you would though, that I might prepare for it,
For I shall have it at one time or another:
If it be a thwack, I make account of that;
There's no new fashioned swappe that ere came up yet,
But I've the first on 'em, I thank 'em for it.
Hast thou enquired?
But Can hear nothing Madam.
If there be but so much substance in thee
To make a shelter for a man disgraced,
Hide my departure from that glorious woman
That comes with all perfection about her:
So noble, that I dare not be seen of her,
Since shame took hold of me: upon thy life
No mention of me.
I'll cut out my tongue first,
Before I'll loose my life, there's more belongs to it.
See there's a Gentleman, enquire of him.
For Monsieur Shamont Madam?
For whom else sir?
Why, this fellow dares not see him.
How?
Shamont Madam?
His very name's worse then a fever to him,
And when he cries, there's nothing stils him sooner;
Madam, your Page of thirteen is to hard for him,
It was trid in the wood-yard.
Alas poor grieved Merit!
What is become of him? if he one fail,
Virtue shall find small friendship: farewell then
To Ladies words, for any hope in men,
He loved for goodness, not for Wealth, or lust,
After the worlds foul dotage, he ne'er courted
The body but the beauty of the mind,
A thing which common courtship never thinks on:
All his affections were so sweet and fair,
There is no hope for fame if he despair. 
Good morrow to you again most heartily sir,
Cry you mercy I heard you not, I was somewhat busy.
He takes it as familiarly, as an Ave,
Or precious salutation: I was sick till I had one,
Because I am so used to it.
How ever you deserve, your friends &amp; mine, here
Give you large commendations in this Letter,
They say you will endure well.
I'd be loath
To prove 'em liers: I've endured as much
As mortal pen and Ink can set me down for.
Say you me so?
I know and feel it so sir,
I have it under black and white already;
I need no pen to paint me out.
He fits me,
And hits my wishes pat, pat: I was ne'er
In possibility to be better manned,
For he's half lamed already, I see it plain,
But take no notice on it, for fear I make
The Rascal proud, and dear, to advance his wages;
First let me grow into particulars with you;
What have you endured of worth? let me hear.
Marry sir, I'm almost beaten blind.
That's pretty well for a beginning,
But many a milhorse has endured as much.
Shame of the millers heart for his unkindness then.
Well sir, what then?
I've been twice thrown down stairs, just before supper.
Puh, so have I, that's nothing.
I but sir,
Was yours pray before supper?
There thou possessed me.
I marry, that's it, 't'ad been less grief to me,
Had I but filed my belly, and then tumbled,
But to be flung down fasting, there's the dolor.
It would have grieved me, that indeed: proceed sir.
I have been plucked &amp; tugged bith' hair of the head
About a gallery, half an Acre long.
Yes, that's a good one, I must needs confess,
A principal good one that, an absolute good one,
I have bin trod upon, and spurned about,
But never tugged byth' hair, I thank my fates.
O it is a spiteful pain.
Peace, never speak on it,
For putting men in mind on it.
To conclude,
I'm burst sir: my belly will hold no meat.
No? that makes amends for all.
Unlesse't be puddings,
Or such fast food, any loose thing beguiles me, I'm ne'er the better for it.
Sheepheads will stay with thee?
Yes sir, or Chaldrons.
Very well sir:
Any your burst fellows must take heed of surfeits:
Strange things it seems, you have endured;
Too true sir.
But now the question is, what you will endure
Hereafter in my service?
Any thing
That shall be reason sir, for I'm but froth;
Much like a thing new calv'd, or come more nearer sir,
You've seen a Cluster of Frog-spawns in April,
Even such a starch am I, as weak and tender
As a green woman yet.
Now I know this,
I will be very gently angry with thee,
And kick thee carefully.
O I sweet sir.
Peace, when thou art offered well, lest I begin now.
Your friends and mine have writ here for your truth,
They'll pass their words themselves, and I must meet 'em.
Then have you all: 
As for my honesty there is no fear of that,
For I have ne'er a whole bone about me, 
Think upon love, which makes all creatures handsome,
Seemly for ey-sight; go not so disfusedly,
There are great Ladies purpose sir to visit you.
Grand plagues, shut in my casements, that the breaths
Of their Coach-mares reek not into my Nostrils;
Those beasts are but a kind of Bawdy fore-runners.
It is not well with you,
When you speak ill of fair Ladies.
Fair mischiefs, give me a nest of Owls, and take 'em;
Happy is he say I, whose window opens
To a browne Bakers chimney, he shall be sure there
To hear the Bird sometimes after twilight:
What a fine thing it is me thinks to have our garments
Sit loose upon us thus, thus careleslely,
It is more manly, and more mortifying;
For w'are so much the readier for our shrouds:
For how ridiculous were it, to have death come,
And take a fellow pinned up like a Mistress?
About his neck a Ruff, like a pinched Lantern,
Which Schoole-boyes make in winter; and his doublet
So close and pent, as if he feared one prison
Would not be strong enough, to keep his soul in;
Butt's Tailor makes another:
And trust me, for I know it when I loved Cupped,
He does endure much pain, for the poor praise
Of a neat sitting suit.
One may be handsome sir,
And yet not pained, nor proud.
There you lie Cupped,
As bad as Mercury: there is no handsomeness,
But has a wash of Pride and Luxury,
And you go there too Cupped. Away dissembler,
Thou take the deeds part which befooles us all;
Thy Arrow heads shoot out sinners: hence away,
And after thee Isle send a powerful charm,
Shall banish thee for ever.
Never, never,
I am too sure thine own. 
HEnce all you vain Delights,
As short as are the nights,
Wherein you spend your folly,
Ther's nought in this life sweet,
If man were wise to see it,
But only Melancholy,
O sweetest melancholy.
Welcome folded Arms, and fixed eyes,
A sigh that piercing mortifies,
A look that's fastened to the ground,
A tongue chained up without a sound.
Fountain heads, and pithless Groves,
Places which pale passion loves:
Moon-light walks, when all the fowls
Are warmly housed, save Bats and Owls;
A mid-night Bell, a parting groan,
These are the sounds we feed upon;
Then stretch our bones in a still gloomy valley,
Nothing's so dainty sweet as lovely melancholy.
So, so, the Wood-cock's gin'd;
Keep this door fast brother.
Isle warrant this.
Isle go incense him instantly;
I know the way to it.
Will it not be too soon think you,
And make two fits break into one?
Pah, no, no; The tail of his melancho
Is always the head of his anger, and follows as close,
As the Report follows the powder.
This is the appointed place, and the hour struck,
If I can get security for's truth,
Isle never mind his honesty: poor worm,
I durst lay him by my wife, which is a benefit
Which many masters have not: I shall have no maid
Now got with child, but what I get my self,
And that's no small felicity: In most places
They are got by the men, and put upon the Masters:
Nor shall I be resisted when I strike,
For he can hardly stand; these are great blessings.
I want my food, deliver me a varlet. 
How now: from whence comes that?
I am allowed a Carcass to insult on;
Whore's the villain?
He means not me I hope.
My maintenance rascals; my Bulk, my exhibition.
Bless us all,
What names' are these? would I were gone again.
A Curse upon thee for a slave,
Art thou here, and heard me rave?
Fly not sparkles from mine eye,
To show my indignation ny?
Am I not all foam, and fire?
With voice as hoarse, as a Towne-crier?
How my back ops and shuts together,
With fury, as old men's with weather?
Coldest thou not hear my teeth knash hither?
No truly sir, I thought it had been a Squirrel,
Shaving a Hazle-nut.
Death, hell, fiends, and darkness,
I will thrash thy mangy carcass.
O sweet sir.
There cannot be too many Tortures,
Spent upon those lousy Quarters.
Hold, oh. 
Thy bones shall rue, thy bones shall rue,
Thou nafly, scurvy, mongrel Toad, 
Mischief on thee;
Light upon thee,
All the plagues
That can confound thee
Or did ever reign abroad:
Better a thousand lives it cost,
Then have brave Anger spilt or lost. 
May I open mine eyes yet, and safely peep?
Isle try a groan first—oh—Nay then hoe's gone.
There was no other policy but to dye,
He would have made me else. Ribs are you sore?
I was ne'er beaten to a tune before.
Lapet.
Again? 
Look, look, hoe's flat again,
And stretched out like a Coarse a handful longer
Then he walks trust me brother. Why Lapet.
I hold my life we shall not get him speak now.
Monsieur Lapet; it must be a privy token,
If any thing fetch him, hoe's so far gone.
We come to pass our words for your mans truth.
O gentlemen you're welcome: I have been thrashed i'faith.
How? thrashed sir?
Never was Shrove-tuesday Bird
So cudgeled gentlemen.
Pray how? by whom sir?
Nay that I know not.
Not who did this wrong?
Only a thing came like a walking song.
What beaten with a Song?
Never more tightly, gentlemen:
Such crotchets happen now and then, methinks,
He that endures well, of all waters drinks. 
YEs, yes, this was a Madman, sir, with you,
A passionate Madman.
Who would have looked for this sir?
And must be privileged? a pox privilege him:
I was never so dry beaten since I was borne,
And by a litter of rogues, mere rogues, the whole twenty
Had not above nine elbows amongst 'em all too:
And the most part of those left-handed rascals,
The very vomit, Sir, of hospitals,
Bridewells, and Spittle-houses; such nasty smellers,
That if they'd been unfurnished of Club-Trunchions,
They might have cudgeled me with their very stinks,
It was so strong, and sturdy: and shall this,
This filthy injury, be set off with madness?
Nay take your own bloods council sir, hereafter,
Isle deal no further in it: if you remember,
It was not come to blows, when I advised you.
No, but I ever said, it would come to something,
And it is upon me, thank him: were he kin
To all the mighty Emperors upon earth,
He has not now in life three hours to reckon;
I watch but a free time.
Your noble brother, sir, Isle leave you now. 
Soldier I would I could persuade my thoughts
From thinking thee a brother, as I can
My tongue from naming on it: thou hast no friend here,
But fortune and thy own strength, trust to them.
How? what's the incitement, sir?
Treachery to virtue;
Thy treachery, thy faithless circumvention:
Has Honour so few daughters, never fewer,
And must thou aim thy treachery at the best?
The very front of virtue? that blessed Lady? the Dukes sister?
Created more for admirations cause,
Then for loves ends; whose excellence sparkles
More in divinity, then mortal beauty;
And as much difference twixt her mind and body,
As twixt this earths poor center and the Sun:
And could thou be so injurious to fair goodness,
Once to attempt to court her down to frailty?
Or put her but in mind that there is weakness,
Sin, and desire, which she should never hear of?
Wretch, thou'st committed worse then Sacrilege,
In the attempting on it, and oughtst to dye for it.
I rather ought to doe my best, to live, sir;
Provoke me not; for I've a wrong sits on me,
That makes me apt for mischief; I shall lose
All respects suddenly of friendship, Brother-hood,
Or any sound that way.
But 'ware me most;
For I come with a two-edg'd injury;
Both my disgrace, and thy apparent falsehood,
Which must be dangerous.
I courted her, sir:
Love starve me with delays when I confess it not.
There's nothing then but death
Can be a penance fit for that confession.
But far from any vicious taint.
O sir,
Vice is a mighty stranger grown to courtship.
Nay then the fury of my wrong light on thee.
Forbear, the Duke's at hand.
Here, hard at hand, upon my reputation.
I must doe something now. 
Isle follow you close sir.
We must entreat you must not; for the Duke
Desires some conference with you.
Let me go,
As you're gentlemen.
Faith we dare not sir.
Dare ye be false to honour, and yet dare not
Doe a man justice? give me leave—
Good sweet sir.
He has sent twice for you.
Is this brave, or manly?
I prithee be conformed.
'Death— 
Peace, hoe's come in truth.
Oh have you betrayed me to my shame afresh?
How am I bound to loath you?
Shamont, welcome,
I sent twice.
But my Lord, he never heard on it.
Pray pardon him, for his falseness, I did Sir,
Both times; I'd rather be found rude then faithless.
I love that bluntness dearly: he's no vice,
But is more manly then some others virtue,
That lets it out only for show or profit.
Will it please you quit me sir, I've urgent business?
Come, you're so hasty now: I sent for you
To a better end.
And if it be an end,
Better or worse, I thank your goodness for it.
I've ever kept that bounty in condition,
And thankfulness in blood, which well becomes
Both Prince and Subject, that where any wrong
Bears my impression, or the hasty figure
Of my repented anger, I'm a Law
Even to my self, and doom my self most strictly
To Justice, and a noble satisfaction:
So that, what you in tenderness of honour,
Conceive to be loss to you, which is nothing
But curious opinion, Isle restore again,
Although I give you the best part of Genoa,
And take to boot but thanks for your amends.
O miserable satisfaction,
Ten times more wretched then the wrong it self;
Never was ill better made good with worse:
Shall it be said that my posterity
Shall live the sole heirs of their fathers shame?
And raise their wealth and glory from my stripes?
You have provided nobly bounteous sir,
For my disgrace, to make it live for ever,
Out-lasting Brass or Marble:
This is my fears construction, and a deep one,
Which neither argument nor time can alter:
Yet I durst swear, I wrong your goodness in it sir,
And the most fair intent on it, which I reverence
With admiration, that in you a Prince,
Should be so sweet and temperate a condition,
To offer to restore where you may ruin,
And do it with justice, and in me a servant,
So harsh a disposition, that I cannot
Forgive where I should honour, and am bound to it.
But I have ever had that curiosity
In blood, and tenderness of reputation,
Such an antipathy against a blow,
I cannot speak the rest: Good sir discharge me,
It is not fit that I should serve you more,
Nor come so near you; I'm made now for privacy,
And a retired condition, that's my suit,
To part from Court for ever, my last suit.
And as you profess bounty, grant me that, Sir.
I would deny thee nothing.
Health reward you; sir. 
He's gone again already, and takes hold
Of any opportunity, not riches
Can purchase him, nor honours, peaceably,
And force were brutish: what a great word's gone with him,
And but a gentleman? well, for his sake,
Isle ne'er offend more those I cannot make:
They were his words, and shall be dear to memory.
Say I desire to see him once again;
Yet stay, hoe's so well forward of his peace,
It were pity to disturb him: he would groan
Like a soul fetched again; and that were injury,
And I've wronged his degree too much already.
Call forth the gentlemen of our chamber instantly.
I shall my Lord. 
I may forget again,
And therefore will prevent: The strain of this
Troubles me so, one would not hazard more:
Your will my Lord?
Yes; I discharge you all.
My Lord—
Your places shall be otherwise disposed of.
Why sir?
Reply not, I dismiss you all:
You're gentlemen, your words will find you fortunes;
Nor shall your farewell tax me of ingratitude,
Isle give you all noble remembrances,
As testimonies against reproach and malice,
That you departed loved.
This is most strange, sir.
But how is your grace furnished, these dismised?
Seek me out Grooms.
Men more insensible of reputation,
Less curious and precise in terms of honour,
That if my anger chance let fall a stroke,
As we are all subject to impetuous passions,
Yet it may pass unmurmur'd, undisputed,
And not with braver fury prosecuted. 
It shall be done, my Lord.
Know you the cause sir?
Not I kind gentlemen, but by conjectures,
And so much shall be yours, when you please.
Thanks sir.
We shall in the mean time think our selves guilty
Of some foul fault, through ignorance committed.
No, it is not that, nor that way.
For my part.
I shall be dis-inherited, I knew so much.
Why sir, for what?
My sire's of a strange humour,
He will form faults for me, and then swear 'em mine,
And commonly the first begins with lechery.
He knows his own youths trespass.
Before you go,
Isle come and take my leave, and tell you all sirs.
Thou were it ever just and kind. 
That's my poor virtue sir,
And parcel valiant; but it's hard to be perfect:
The choosing of these fellows now will puzzle me,
Horribly puzzle me; and there's no judgement,
Goes true upon mans out-side, there's the mischief:
He must be touched, and tried, for gold or dross;
There is no other way for it, and that's dangerous too;
But since I'm put in trust, I will attempt it:
The Duke shall keep one daring man about him: 
Soft, who comes here? a pretty bravery this:
Every one goes so like a gentleman,
It is hard to find a difference, but byth' touch.
Isle try your mettle sure.
Why what doe you mean sir?
Nay, and you understand it not, I doe not.
Yes, would you should well know,
I understand it for a box of the ear Sir.
And of my troth, that's all I gave it for.
It were best it be so.
This is a brave Coward,
A jolly threatening Coward; he shall be Captain:
Sir, let me meet you an hour hence in the Lobby.
Meet you? the world might laugh at me then i'faith.
Lay by your scorn &amp; pride, the're scurvy qualities,
And meet me, or Isle hox you while I have you,
And carry you gambril'd thither like a Mutton.
Nay, and you be in earnest, here's my hand
I will not fail you.
It is for your own good.
Away.
Too much for your own good, sir, a pox on you.
I prithee curse me all day long so.
Hang you.
Isle make him mad; hoe's loath to curse too much to me;
Indeed I never yet took box of the ear,
But it redounded, I must needs say so—
Will you be gone?
Curse, curse, and then I go.
Look how he grins, I've angered him to the kidneys. 
Was ever such a prigging coxcomb seen?
One might have beat him dumb now in this humour,
And he would have grind it out still: 
O here's one made to my hand,
Methinks looks like a Craven;
Less pains will serve his trial: some slight justly.
How? take you that sir:
And if that content you not—
Yes very well sir, I desire no more.
I think you need not;
For you have not lost by it. 
Who would have thought this would have proved a gentleman?
Isle never trust long chins and little legs again,
Isle know 'em sure for gentlemen hereafter:
A gristle but in show, but gave his cuff
With such a fetch, and reach of gentry,
As if h'had had his arms before the flood;
I have took a villainous hard task upon me;
Now I begin to have a feeling on it.
O here comes a tried piece, now, the reformed kick.
The millions of punches, spurns, and nips
That he has endured? his Buttock's all black Lead,
He 's half a Negro back-ward; he was past a Spaniard
In eighty eight, and more Egyptian-like;
His Table and his Book come both out shortly,
And all the Cowards in the Town expect it;
So, if I fail of my full number now,
I shall be sure to find 'em at Church corners,
Where Dives, and the suffering Ballads hang.
Well, since thou art of so mild a temper,
Of so meek a spirit, thou moist live with me,
Till better times doe smile on thy deserts.
I am glad I am got home again.
I am happy in your service, sir,
You'll keep me from the Hospital.
So, bring me the last proof, this is corrected.
I, you're too full of your correction, sir.
Look I have perfect Books within this half hour.
Yes sir.
Bid him put all the Thumps in Pica Roman,
And with great Tees, (you vermin) as Thumps should be.
Then in what Letter will you have your Kicks?
All in Italica, your Backward blows
All in Italica, you Hermophrodite:
When shall I teach you wit?
O let it alone,
Till you have some your self sir.
You mumble?
The Victuals are locked up;
I'm kept from mumbling. 
He prints my Blows upon pot-paper too, the rogue,
Which had been proper for some drunken Pamphlet.
Monsieur Lapet? how the world rings of your sir?
Your name sounds far and near.
A good report it bears, for an enduring name—
What luck have you sir?
Why, what's the matter?
I'm but thinking on it.
I've heard you wish this five year for a place.
Now there's one fallen, and freely without money too;
And empty yet, and yet you cannot hav't.
No? what's the reason? Isle give money for it,
Rather then go without sir.
That's not it, sir;
The troth is, there's no gentleman must have it
Either for love or money: it is decreed so;
I was heartily sorry when I thought upon you,
Had you not been a gentleman I had fitted you.
Who I a gentleman? a pox I'm none, sir.
How?
How? why did you ever think I was?
What? not a gentleman?
I would you would put it upon me i'faith.
Did not my Grand-father cry Coney-skins?
My father Aquavitae? a hot gentleman:
All this I speak on in your time and memory too;
Only a rich Uncle died and left me chattels,
You know all this so well too—
Pray excuse me, sir, have not you Arms?
Yes, a poor couple here.
That serve to thrust in wildfowl.
Heralds Arms,
Symbols of gentry, sir: you know my meaning;
They've been shown and seen.
They have.
I fex have they.
Why I confess, at my wives instigation once,
(As women love these Heralds kickshaws naturally)
I bought 'em: but what are they think you? puffs.
Why, that's proper to your name being Lapet.
Which is La fart, after the english letter.
The Herald, sir, had much a doe to find it.
And can you blame him?
Why it is the only thing that puzzles the devil.
At last he looked upon my name again,
And having well compared it, this he gave me,
The two Cholliques playing upon a wind instrument.
An excellent proper one: but I pray tell me,
How does he express the Cholliques?
They are hard things.
The Cholliques? with hot trenchers at their bellies,
There's nothing better, Sir, to blaze a Chollique.
And are not you a gentleman by this sir?
No, I disclaime't: no belly-ake upon earth
Shall make me one: he shall not think
To put his gripes upon me,
And wring out gentry so, and ten pound first.
If the wind instrument will make my wife one,
Let her enjoy't, for she was a Harpers Grand-childe:
But sir, for my particular, I renounce it.
Or to be called so?
I sir, or imagined.
None fitter for the place: give me thy hand.
A hundred thousand thanks, beside a Bribe sir.
You must take heed
Of thinking toward a gentleman, now.
Pish, I am not mad, I warrant you: nay more sir,
If one should twit me in the teeth that I'm a gentleman,
Twit me their worst, I am but one since Lemmas,
That I can prove, if they would see my heart out.
Marry in any case keep me that evidence.
Here comes my servant, Sir, Galoshio,
Has not his name for nought, he will be trod upon:
What says my Printer now?
Here is your last proof Sir.
You shall have perfect Books now in a twinkling.
These marks are ugly.
He says, sir, they're proper:
Blows should have marks, or else they are nothing worth.
But why a Peel-crow here?
I told 'em so sir:
A Scar-crow had been better.
How Slave? look you Sir,
Did not I say, this Whirrit, and this Bob,
Should be both Pica Roman.
So said I Sir, both Picked Romans,
And he has made 'em Welch Bills,
Indeed I know not what to make on 'em.
Hay-day; a Souse, Italica?
Yes, that may hold Sir,
Souse is a bonaroba, so is Flops too.
But why stands Bastinado so far off here?
Alas you must allow him room to lay about him, sir.
Why lies this Spurn lower then that Spurn, sir?
Marry this signifies one kicked down stairs, sir,
The other in a Gallery: I asked him all these questions.
Your Books name?
Prithee Lapet mind me, you never told me yet.
Marry but shall sir: it is called The up-rising of the kick,
And the downfall of the Duello.
Bring that to pass you'll prove a happy member,
And doe your Country service: your young bloods
Will thank you then, when they see foure-score.
I hope
To save my hundred Gentlemen a month by it,
Which will be very good for the private house.
Look you, your Table's finished sir already.
Why then behold my Master-piece: see, see, sir,
Here's all your Blows, and Blow-men whatsoever,
Set in their lively colours, givers, and takers.
Troth wondrous fine, sir.
Nay, but mark the postures,
The standing of the takers I admire more then the givers,
They stand scornfully, most contumeliously, I like not thē,
Oh here's one cast into a comely figure.
My Master means him there that's cast down headlong.
How sweetly does this fellow take his Dowst?
Stoops like a Cammell, that Heroic beast,
At a great load of Nut-megs; and how meekly
This other fellow here receives his Whirrit?
Oh Master here's a fellow stands most gallantly,
Taking his kick in private behind the hangings,
And raising up his hips to it. But oh, sir,
How daintily this man lies trampled on?
Would I were in thy place, what ever thou art:
How lovely he endures it?
But will not these things, sir, be hard to practise, think you?
Oh, easy, sir: Isle teach 'em in a Dance.
How? in a dance?
Isle lose my new place else,
What ere it be; I know not what it is yet.
And now you put me in mind, I could employ it well,
For your grace, specially: For the Dukes cozen
Is by this time in's violent fit of mirth,
And a devise must be sought out for suddenly,
To over-cloy the passion.
Say no more, sir,
Isle fit you with my Scholars, new practitioners,
Endurers of the time.
Whereof I am one sir.
You carry it away smooth; give me thy hand, sir.
Ha, ha, ha. 
Hark, hark, how loud his fit's grown.
Ha, ha, ha.
Now let our sister lose no time, but ply it
With all the power she has.
Her shame grows big, brother;
The Cupids shape will hardly hold it longer,
It would take up half an Ell of China Damask more,
And all too little: it struts per'lously:
There is no tamp'ring with these Cupids longer,
The mere conceit with woman-kinde works strong.
Ha, ha, ha.
The laugh comes nearer now,
It were good we were not seen yet. 
Ha, ha, ha.
And was he bastinadoed to the life? ha, ha, ha.
I prithee say, Lord General, how did the Rascals
Entrench themselves?
Most deeply, politically, all in ditches.
Ha, ha, ha.
It is thought he'll ne'er bear arms in the field again,
Has much ado, to lift 'em to his head, sir.
I would he had.
On either side round Truncheons plaid so thick,
That Shoulders, Chines, nay Flanks were paid to the quick.
Well said Lord General: ha, ha, ha.
But pray how grew the difference first betwixt you?
There was never any sir; there lies the jest man;
Only because he was taller then his brother;
There's all my quarrel to him; and me thought
He should be beaten for it, my mind so gave me, sir,
I could not sleep for it; Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Another good jest quickly, while it is hot now;
Let me not laugh in vain: ply me, O ply me,
As you will answer't to my Cozen Duke.
Alas, who has a good jest?
I fall, I dwindle in it.
Ten Crowns for a good jest: have you a good jest, sir?
A pretty moral one.
Let's have it, what ere it be.
There comes a Cupped
Drawn by six fools.
That's nothing.
Help it, help it then.
I have known six hundred fools drawn by a Cupped.
I that, that, that's the smarter Moral: ha, ha, ha.
Now I begin to be Song-ripe methinks.
Isle sing you a pleasant air, sir, before you ebb.
Oh how my Lungs doe tickle? ha, ha, ha.
Oh how my Lungs doe tickle? oh, oh, ho, ho.
Set a sharp Jest
Against my breast,
Then how my Lungs doe tickle?
As Nightingales,
And things in Cambric rails,
Sing best against a prickle.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Ho, ho, ho, ho, ha.
Laugh.
Laugh.
Laugh.
Laugh.
Wide.
Loud.
And vary.
A smile is for a simpering Novice.
One that ne'er tasted Caviar,
Nor knows the smack of dear Anchovies.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho.
A giggling waiting wench for me,
That shows her teeth how white they be.
A thing not fit for gravity,
For theirs are foul and hardly three.
Ha, ha, ha.
Ho, ho, ho.
Democritus, thou ancient Fleerer,
Now I miss thy laugh, and have since.
There you named the famous Geerer,
That ever geared in Rome, or Athens.
Ha, ha, ha.
Ho, ho, ho.
How brave lives he that keeps a fool,
Although the rate be deeper?
But he that is his own fool sir,
Does live a great deal cheaper.
Sure I shall burst, burst, quite break thou art so witty.
It is rare to break at Court for that belongs to the City.
Ha, ha, my spleen is almost worn to the last laughter.
O keep a corner for a friend, a jest may come hereof∣la.
Twinge all now, twinge, I say.
Down derry.
Not angry Law, nor doors of Brass shall keep me
From my wrongs expiation, to thy Bowels,
I return my disgrace; and after turn
My face to any death that can be sentenced.
Murder, O murder, stop the murderer there—
I am glad hoe's gone; he has almost trod my guts out;
Follow him who list for me, Isle have no hand in it.
Oh it was your luck and mine to be squelched Mr.
Has stamped my very Puddings into Pancakes.
O Brothers, oh, I fear it is mortal: help, O help,
I'm made the wretched'st woman, by this accident,
That ever love beguiled. 
We are undone Brother,
Our shames are too apparent: Away receptacle
Of Luxury, and dishonour, most unfortunate,
To make thy self but lucky to thy spoil,
After thy Sexes manner: lift him up Brother;
He breathes not to our comfort, hoe's too wasted
Ever to cheer us more: A Surgeon speedily;
Hence; the unhappiest that ere stepped aside,
She'll be a Mother before shoe's known a Bride.
Thou had a most unfortunate conception,
What ere thou prov'st to be; in midst of mirth
Comes ruin, for a welcome, to thy birth. 
This is a beautiful life now; privacy
The sweetness and the benefit of essence:
I see there is no man, but may make his paradise;
And it is nothing, but his love, and dotage
Upon the worlds foul joys, that keeps him out on it:
For he that lives retired in mind, and spirit,
Is still in paradise, and has his innocence,
Partly allowed for his companion too,
As much as stands with justice: here no eyes
Shoot their sharp pointed scorns upon my shame;
They know no terms of reputation here,
No punctual limits, or precise dimensions;
Plain downright honesty is all the beauty
And elegance of life found amongst shepherds;
For knowing nothing nicely, or desiring it,
Quits many a vexation from the mind,
With which our quainter knowledge does abuse us;
The name of envy is a stranger here,
That dries men's bloods abroad, robs health and rest,
Why here's no such fury thought on: no, nor falsehood,
That brotherly disease, fellow-like devil,
That plays within our bosom, and betrays us.
Oh are you here?
La Nove, it is strange to see thee.
I have rid one horse to death,
To find you out, sir.
I am not to be found of any man
That saw my shame, nor seen long.
Good, your attention:
You ought to be seen now, and found out sir,
If ever you desire before your ending
To perform one good office, nay a dear one,
Mans time can hardly match it.
Be it as precious
As reputation; if it come from Court
I will not hear on it.
You must hear of this, Sir.
Must?
You shall hear it.
I love thee, that thoul't dye.
It were nobler in me,
Then in you living: you will live a murderer,
If you deny this office.
Even to death sir.
Why then you'll kill your brother.
How?
Your Brother sir:
Bear witness heaven, this man destroys his brother
When he may save him, his least breath may save him:
Can there be wilfuller destruction?
He was forced to take a most unmanly wrong,
Above the suffering virtue of a Soldier,
Has killed his Injurer, a work of honour;
For which, unless you save him, he dyes speedily
My conscience is discharged, I'm but a friend,
A Brother should go forward where I end. 
Dyes?
Say he be nought, that's nothing to my goodness,
Which ought to shine through use, or else it loses
The glorious name it is known by: hoe's my brother;
Yet peace is above blood: Let him go; I,
But whore's the nobleness of affection then?
That must be cared for too, or I'm imperfect,
The same blood that stood up in wrath against him,
Now in his misery runs all to pity;
I'd rather dye than speak one syllable
To save my self: but living as I am,
There's no avoiding on it, the worlds humanity
Expects it hourly from me: curse of fortune,
I took my leave so well too: Let him dye,
It is but a brother lost; so pleasingly,
And swiftly I came off, it were more then irksomeness,
To tread that path again; and I shall never
Depart so handsomely: But then whore's posterity?
The consummation of our house and name?
I'm torn in pieces betwixt love and shame. 
Good morrow fellow Poltrot, and Moulbazon,
Good morrow fellows all.
Monsieur Lapet?
Look, I've remembered you, here's books a piece for you.
O sir, we dearly thank you.
So you may;
There's two impressions gone already sirs.
What no? in so short a time?
It is as I tell you sir,
My Kick sells gallantly, I thank my stars.
So does your Table; you may thank the Moon too.
It is the Book sells the Table.
But it is the Book-seller
That has the money for 'em, I'm sure o'that.
Twill much enrich the Company of Stationers,
It is thought twill prove a lasting benefit,
Like the Wise Masters, and the Almanacs,
The hundred Novels, and the Book of Cookery,
For they begin already to engross it,
And make it a stock-book, thinking indeed
Twill prove too great a benefit, and help,
For one that's new set up: they know their way,
And make him Warden, ere his beard be gray.
Is it possible such virtue should lye hid,
And in so little paper?
How? Why there was the Carpenter,
An unknown thing, an odoriferous Pamphlet,
Yet no more Paper, by all computation,
Then Ajax Telamon would use at once,
Your Herring proved the like, able to buy
Another Fishers Folly, and your Pasquill
Went not below the mad-caps of that time,
And shall my elaborate Kick come behind think you?
Yes, it must come behind, it is in Italica too,
According to your humour.
Not in sale, varlet.
In sale, sir? it shall sail beyond 'em all I trow.
What have you there now? oh, Page, 21.
That Page is come to his years, he should be a serving-man.
Mark how I snap up the Duello there:
One would not use a dog so,
I must needs say; butt's for the common good.
Nay sir, your Commons seldom fight at sharp,
But buffet in a ware-house.
This will save
Many a gentleman of good blood from bleeding sirs,
I have a curse from many a Barber Surgeon;
They'd give but too much money to call it in;
Turn to Page 45. see what you find there.
O out upon him,
Page 45. that's an old thief indeed.
The Duke, clap down your Books; away Galoshio.
Indeed I am too foul to be in the presence,
They use to shake me off at the chamber door still. 
Good my Lord, grant my suit; let me not rise
Without the comfort on it: I have not often
Been tedious in this kind.
Sister, you wrong your self,
And those great virtues that your fame is made of,
To waste so much breath for a Murderers life.
You cannot hate the offence more then I doe, sir,
Nor the offender, the respect I owe
Unto his absent brother, makes me a suitor,
A most importunate sister; make me worthy
But of this one request.
I am deaf
To any importunacy, and sorry
For your forgetfulness; you never injured
Your worth so much, you ought to be rebuked for it:
Pursue good ways, end as you did begin,
It is half the guilt to speak for such a sin.
This is loves beggary right, that now is ours,
When Ladies love, and cannot show their powers. 
La Nove?
My Lord.
Are these our new attendants?
We are my Lord, and will endure as much
As better men, my Lord, and more I trust.
What's hee?
My Lord, a decayed Gentleman,
That will doe any service.
A decayed one?
A renounced one indeed; for this place only.
We renounce him then, go, discharge him instantly.
He that disclaims his gentry for mere gains,
That man's too base to make a vassal on.
What says the Duke?
Faith little to your comfort sir,
You must be a gentleman again.
How?
There's no remedy.
Marry, the fates forfend: ne'er while I breath sir.
The Duke will have it so, there's no resisting.
He spied it in your fore-head.
My wife's doing.
She thought she should be put below her betters now,
And sued to have me a gentleman again.
And very like sir:
Marry Isle give you this comfort when ell's done,
You'll never pass but for a scurvy one,
That's all the help you have: come show your pace.
The heaviest gentleman that ever lost place;
Bear witness I am forced to it. 
Though you have a courser title yet upon you,
Then those that left your places, without blame,
Tic in your power to make your selves the same:
I cannot make you gentlemen, that's a work
Raised from your own deservings; merit, manners,
And in-borne virtue doe's it. Let your own goodness
Make you so great, my power shall make you greater;
And more t'encourage you, this I add again,
There's many Grooms now exact Gentlemen.
Me thinks it is strange to me to enter here:
Is there in nature such an awful power,
To force me to this place? and make me doe this?
Is mans affections stronger then his will?
His resolution? was I now resolved
Never to see this place more? Doe I bear
Within my breast one blood that confounds the other?
The blood of love, and will, and the last weakest?
Had I ten Millions, I would give it all now,
I were but past it, or it would never come;
For I shall never do it, or not do it well,
But spoil it utterly betwixt two passions.
Yonder's the Duke himself, I will not do it now,
Had twenty lives their several sufferings in him. 
Who's that went out now?
I saw none, my Lord.
Nor you?
I saw the glimpse of one my Lord.
What ere it was, methought it pleased me strangely,
And suddenly my joy was ready for it.
Did you not mark it better?
Troth my Lord,
We gave no great heed to it.
Twill not be answered,
It brings me hither still; by maine force hither:
Either I must give over to profess humanity,
Or I must speak for him.
It is here again:
No marvel it was so pleasing, it is delight
And worth it self, now it appears unclouded.
My Lord—
He turns away from me: by this hand
I am ill-us'd of all sides: it is a fault
That fortune ever had, to abuse a goodness.
Methought you were saying somewhat.
Mark the Language,
As coy as face; I see twill ne'er be granted.
We little looked in troth to see you here yet.
Not till the day after my brothers death, I think.
Sure some great business drew you.
No insooth, sir,
Only to come to see a brother dye sir,
That I may learn to go too; and if he deceive me not,
I think he will doe well in it of a soldier,
Manly, and honestly: and if he weep then,
I shall not think the worse on's man-hood for it,
Because hoe's leaving of that part that has it.
Has slain a noble gentleman, think on it, sir.
I would I could not sir.
Our Kinsman too.
All this is but worse sir.
When it is at worst,
Yet seeing thee, he lives.
My Lord—
He lives,
Believe it as thy bliss, he dyes not for it:
Will this make satisfaction for things past?
Oh my Lord—
Will it? speak.
With greater shame to my unworthiness.
Rise then, wee're even: I never found it harder
To keep just with a man: my great work's ended.
I knew your brothers pardon was your suit, sir,
How ever your nice modesty held it back.
I take a joy now, to confess it, sir.
My Lord—
Hear me first, sir, what ever your news be:
Set free the Soldier instantly.
Tic done, my Lord.
How?
In effect: it was part of my news too,
There's fair hope of your noble kinsmans life sir.
What say thou?
And the most admired change
That living flesh ever had; he's not the man my Lord;
Death cannot be more free from passions, sir,
Then he is at this instant: hoe's so meek now,
He makes those seem passionate, was never thought of:
And for he fears his moods have oft disturbed you sir,
Hoe's only hasty now for his forgiveness,
And here behold him sir.
Let me give thanks first: our worthy Cousin—
Your unworthy trouble sir;
For which, with all acknowledged reverence,
I ask your pardon; and for injury
More known and wilful, I have chose a wise,
Without your counsel, or consent, my Lord.
A wife? where is she sir?
This noble Gentlewoman.
How?
Whose honour my forgetful times much wronged.
Hoe's madder then he was.
I would have sworn for him.
The Cupped, cousin?
Yes, this worthy Lady, sir.
Still worse and worse.
Our sister under pardon, my Lord.
What?
Which shape Love taught her to assume.
Is it truth then?
It appears plainly now below the waste my Lord.
Shamont, did ever read of a she-Cupid?
Never in fiction yet: but it might hold sir;
For Desire is of both Genders.
Make that good here: 
I take thee at thy word, sir.
O my Lord,
Love would appear too bold, and rude from me,
Honour and admiration are her rights,
Her goodness is my Saint, my Lord.
I see,
You're both too modest to bestow your selves:
I'll save that virtue still; it is but my pains: come,
It shall be so.
This gift does but set forth my poverty.
Sir, that which you complain of is my riches.
Soldier, now every noise sounds peace, you are welcome.
Sir my repentance sues for your blessed favour,
Which once obtained, no injury shall lose it;
Isle suffer mightier wrongs.
Rise, loved and pardoned;
For where hope failed, nay Art it self resigned,
Thou'st wrought that cure, which skill could never find;
Nor did there cease, but to our peace extend;
Never could wrongs boast of a nobler end.
IT's grown in fash'on of late in these days,
To come and beg a sufferance to our Plays;
Faith Gentlemen our Poet ever writ
Language so good, mixed with such sprightly wit,
He made the Theatre so sovereign
With his rare Scaenes, he scorned this crouching vein:
We stabbed him with keen daggers when we prayed
Him write a Preface to a Play well made.
He could not write these toys; it was easier far,
To bring a Felon to appear at the Bar,
So much he hated baseness; which this day,
His Scaenes will best convince you of in's Play,
OUr Poet bid us say for his own part,
He cannot lay too much forth of his Art:
But fears our over-acting passions may,
As not adorn, deface his laboured Play:
Yet still he is resolute for what is writ
Of Nicer valour, and assumes the wit:
But for the Love-Scaenes which he ever meant,
Cupped in's Petticoat should represent,
He will stand no shock of censure; the Plaie's good,
He says he knows it, (if well understood.)
But we (blind god) beg, if thou art divine,
Thou'lt shoot thy Arrows round, this Play was thine.

