WHy should you droop Leosthenes, or despair
My Sisters favour? what before you purchased
By Court-ship, and fair language in these Wars,
(For from her soul you know she loves a Soldier)
You may deserve by action:
Good Timagorus
When I have said my friend; think all is spoken
That may assure me yours; and pray you believe
The dreadful voice of war that shakes the City,
The thundering threats of Carthage; nor their Army
Raised to make good those threats, affright not me.
If fair Cleora were confirmed his prize,
That has the strongest Arm, and sharpest Sword,
I would court Bellona in her Horrid-trime,
As if she were a Mistress, and bless Fortune
That offers my young valour to the proof,
How much I dare doe for your Sisters love.
But when that I consider how averse
Your noble Father great Archidamus;
Is, and hath ever been to my desires:
Reason may warrant me to doubt and fear:
What seeds soever I sow in this wars
Of Noble courage, his determinate will
May blast, and give my harvest to another
That never toyld for it.
Prithee doe not nourish
These jealous thoughts: I am thine, (and pardon me
Though I repeat it thy Timagoras)
That for thy sake, when the bold Theban sued
Far famed Pisander, for my sisters love,
Sent him disgraced, and discontented home.
I wrought my Father then, and I that stopped not
In the career of my affection to thee,
When that renowned Worthy that brought with him
High birth, wealth, courage, as feed Advocates
To mediate for him, never will consent
A fool that only has the shape of man,
Asotas, though he be rich Cleons Heir
Shall bear her from thee.
In that trust I love,
Which never shall deceive you.
Sir the General
Timoleon by his Trumpets hath given warning
For a remove.
It is well, provide my Horse.
I shall Sir.
This Slave has a strange aspect.
Fit for his fortune, it is a strong limm'd knave;
My Father bought him for my Sisters Litter.
O pride of women! Coaches are too common,
They surfeit in the happiness of peace,
And Ladies think they keep not state enough,
If for their pomp, and ease, they are not borne
In triumph on men's shoulders.
Who Commands
The Carthaginian Fleet?
Giscos their Admiral,
And tic our happiness: a raw young fellow,
One never trained in Arms, but rather fashiond
To tilt with Ladies lips, then crack a Lance,
Ravish a Feather from a Mistress Fan
And wear it as a Favour; a steel Helmet
Made horrid with a glorious Plume, will crack
His women's neck.
No more of him, the motiue's
That Corinth gives vs aid:
The common danger
For Sicily being afire, she is not safe;
It being apparent that ambitious Carthage,
That to enlarge her Empire, strives to fasten
An unjust gripe on vs (that live free Lords
Of Syracusa) will not end, till Greece
Acknowledge her their Sovereign.
I am satisfied.
What think you of our General?
He is a man
Of strange and reserved parts; But a great Soldier.
His Trumpets call vs, I'll forbear his Character.
To morrow in the Senate house at large,
He will express himself.
Isle follow you.
Nay good Chuck.
I have said it; Stay at home,
I cannot brooke with gadding, you are a fair one,
Beauty invites temptation, and short heals
Are soon tripped up.
Deny me, by my honour
You take no pity on me. I shall swoon
As soon as you are absent, ask my Man else,
You know he dares not tell a lie.
Indeed,
You are no sooner out of sight, but she
Does feel strange qualms, then sends for her young Doctor
Who ministers physic to her, on her back,
Her Ladyship lying as she were enthranced.
(I have peeped in at the key hole and observed them)
And sure his Potions never fail to work,
For she is so pleasant, in the taking them
She tickles again.
And alls to make you merry
When you come home.
You flatter me, I am old,
And Wisdom cries beware.
Old, Duck to me
You are young Atones.
Well said Venus,
I am sure she Vulcans him.
I will not change thee
For twenty boisterous young things without Beards.
These bristles give the gentlest Tittillations,
And such a sweet dew flows on them, it cures
My lips without Pomatum; here is a round belly,
It is a Down pillow to my back. I sleep
So quietly by it; and this tunable nose
(Faith when you hear it not) affords such music,
That I curse all night Fiddlers.
This is gross,
Not find she flouts him.
As I live I am jealous.
Jealous! of me Wife?
Yes, and I have reason,
Knowing how lusty and active a man you are.
Hum, hum!
This is no cunning queen! slight, she will make him
To think, that like a Stag he has cast his homes,
And is grown young again.
You have forgot what you did in your sleep,
And when you waked called for a Caudle.
It was in his sleep,
For waking I durst trust my Mother with him.
I long to see the man of war Cleora
Archadamus Daughter goes, and rich Olimpa,
I will not miss the show.
There's no contending,
For this time I am pleased, but I'll no more on it.
So careless we have been, my noble Lords,
In the disposing of our own affairs,
And ignorant in the Art of government,
That now we need a stranger to instruct vs.
Yet we are happy, that our neighbour Corinth
(Pitying the unjust gripe Carthage would lay
On Siracusa) hath vouchsafed to lend vs
Her man of men Timoleon to defend
Our Country, and our Liberties.
Tic a favour
We are unworthy of, and we may blush,
Necessity compels vs to receive it.
O shame! that we that are a populous Nation,
Engaged to liberal nature, for all blessings
An Island can bring forth; we that have limbs
And able bodies; Shipping, Arms, and Treasure,
The sinews of the War, now we are called
To stand upon our Guard, cannot produce
One fit to be our General.
I am old and fat,
I could say something else.
We must obey
The time, and our occasions, ruinous buildings,
Whose bases and foundations are infirm
Must use supporters; we are circled round
With danger, o'er our heads with sail stretched wings,
Destruction hovers; and a cloud of mischief
Ready to break upon vs; no hope left vs
That may divert it, but our sleeping virtue
Roused up by brave Timoleon.
When arrives he?
He is expected every hour.
The braueries
Of Syracusae, among whom my son
Timagorus, Leosthenes, and Asotas
(Your hopeful heir Lord Cleon) two days since
Rode forth to meet him, and attend him to
The City, every minute we expect
To be blessed with his presence.
What shout's this?
Tic seconded with loud Musique.
Which confirms
His wished for entrance. Let vs entertain him
With all respect, solemnity, and pomp,
A man may merit, that comes to redeem vs
From slavery, and oppression.
Isle locke up
My doors, and guard my gold; these Lads of Corinth
Have nimble fingers, and I fear them more
Being within our walls, then those of Carthage,
They are far off.
And Ladies be it your care
To welcome him, and his followers with all duty:
For rest resolved; their hands, and swords, must keep you
In that full height of happiness you live:
A dreadful change else follows.
We are instructed.
Isle kiss him for the honour of my Country,
With any she in Corinth.
Were he a Courtier,
I have sweet meat in my Closet should content him
Be his palate ne'er so curious.
And if need be
I have a Couch, and a banqueting house in my Orchard,
Where many a man of honour has not scorned
To spend an afternoon.
These men of war
As I have heard, know not to court a Lady.
They cannot praise our dressings, kiss our hands,
Usher vs to our Litters, tell love Stories;
Commend our feet, and legs, and so search upwards.
A sweet becoming boldness: they are rough,
Boisterous and saucy, and at the first sight
Ruffle, and towse vs, and as they find their stomachs
Fall roundly to it.
Troth I like em the better.
I cannot endure to have a perfumed Sir
Stand cringing in the hams; licking his lips,
Like a Spaniel o'er a Firmenty pot, and yet
Has not the boldness to come on, or offer
What they know we expect.
We may commend
A Gentleman's modesty, manners, and fine language,
His singing, dancing, riding of great horses,
The wearing of his clothes, his fair complexion,
Take presents from him, and extol his bounty,
Yet, though he observe, and waste his state upon vs,
If he be stanch and bid not for the stock
That we were borne to traffic with; the truth is
We care not for his company.
Musing Cliora?
She's studying how to entertain these Strangers,
And to engross them to her self.
No surely,
I will not cheapen any of their Wares,
Till you have made your Market: you will buy
I know at any rate.
She has given it you.
No more, they come.
The first kiss for this Jewel.
It is your seat.
Which with a general suffrage
As to the supreme Magistrates surely tenders,
And prays Timoleon to accept.
Such honours
To one ambitious of rule or titles;
Whose heaven on earth, is placed in his command,
And absolute power on others; would with joy,
And veins swollen high with pride, be entertained.
They take not me: for I have ever loved
An equal freedom: and proclaimed all such
As would usurp on others liberties,
Rebels to nature, to whose bounteous blessings
All men lay claim as true legitimate sons.
But such as have made forfeit of themselves
By vicious courses, and their birthright lost;
Tic not injustice they are marked for slaves
To serve the virtuous; for my self, I know
Honours and great employments are great burdens,
And must require an Atlas to support them.
He that would govern others, first should be
The Master of himself, richly endued
With depth of understanding, height of courage,
And those remarkable graces which I dare not
Ascribe unto my self.
Sir, empty men
Are Trumpets of their own deserts: but you
That are not in opinion, but in proof
Really good, and full of glorious parts,
Leave the report of what you are to fame,
Which from the ready tongues of all good men
Aloud proclaims you.
Besides you stand bound
Having so large a field to exercise
Your active virtues offered you, to impart
Your strengths to such as need it.
Tic confessed.
And since you'll have it so, such as I am
For you and for the liberty of Greece
I am most ready to lay down my life:
But yet consider men of Syracusa,
Before that you deliver up the power
Which yet is yours to me, to whom tic given
To an impartial man, with whom nor threats,
Not prayers shall prevail, for I must steer
An even course.
Which is desired of all.
Timophanes my brother, for whose death
I am tainted in the world, and foully tainted,
In whose remembrance I have ever worn
In peace and war, this liuory of sorrow
Can witness for me, how much I detest
Tyrannous Usurpation: with grief
I must remember it, for when no persuasion
Could win him to desist from his bad practise,
To change the Aristocracy of Corinth
Into an absolute Monarchy; I chose rather
To prove a pious and obedient son
To my Country my best mother, then to lend
Assistance to Timophanes, though my brother
That like a Tyrant strove to set his foot
Upon the Cities freedom.
It was a deed
Deserving rather Trophies, then reproof.
And will be still remembered to your honour
If you forsake not vs.
If you free Sicilie
From barbarous Carthage yoke, it will be said,
In him you slew a Tyrant.
But giving way
To her invasion, not vouchsafing vs
(That fly to your protection) aid, and comfort,
Twill believed, that for your private ends
You kilt a brother.
As I then proceed,
To all posterity may that act be crowned
With a deserved applause, or branded with
The mark of infamy; Stay yet, ere I take
This seat of Justice, or engage my self
To fight for you abroad, or to reform
Your State at home, swear all upon my sword,
And call the gods of Sicily to witness
The oath you take; that whatsoever I shall
propound for safety of your Common-wealth,
Not Circumscribed or bound in, shall by you
Be willingly obeyed.
So may we prosper,
As we obey in all things.
And observe
All your commands as Oracles.
Doe not repent it.
He asked not our consent.
Hoe's a clown, I warrant him.
I offred my self twice, and yet the Churl
Would not salute me.
Let him kiss his Drum,
Isle save my lips, I rest on it.
He thinks women
No part of the republique.
He shall find
We are a Common-wealth.
The less your honour.
First then a word or two, but without bitterness,
(And yet mistake me not, I am no flatterer)
Concerning your ill government of the State,
In which the greatest, noblest, and most rich,
Stand in the first file guilty.
Ha! how's this?
You have not, as good Patriots should doe, studied
The public good, but your particular ends.
Factious among your selves, preferring such
To Offices, and honours, as ne'er read
The Elements, of saving policy,
But deeply skilled in all the principles,
That usher to destruction.
Sharpe.
The better.
Your Senate house, which used not to admit
A man (how ever popular) to stand
At the Helm of government; whose youth was not
Made glorious by action, whose experience
Crowned with gray hairs, gave warrant to her counsels
Heard, and received with reverence, is now filled
With greene heads that determine of the State
Over their Cups: or when their sated lusts
Afford them leisure, or supplied by those
Who rising from base arts, and sordid thrift
Are eminent for their wealth, not for their wisdom.
Which is the reason, that to hold a place
In Counsel, which was once esteemed an honour,
And a reward for virtue, hath quite lost
Lustre, and Reputation, and is made
A mercenary purchase.
Hee speaks home.
And to the purpose.
From whence it proceeds,
That the treasure of the City is engrossed
By a few private men: the public Coffers
Hollow with want; and they that will not spare
One Talent for the common good, to feed
The pride and bravery of their Wives, consume
In Plate, in Jewels, and superfluous slaves,
What would maintain an Army.
Have at vs.
We thought we were forgot.
But it appears,
You will be treated of.
Yet in this plenty,
And fat of peace, your young men ne'er were trained
In Martial discipline, and your ships vnrig'd,
Rot in the harbour, no defence prepared,
But thought unuseful, as if that the gods
Indulgent to your sloth, had granted you
A perpetuity of pride and pleasure,
No change feared, or expected. Now you find
That Carthage looking on your stupid sleeps,
And dull security, was invited to
Invade your Territories.
You have made vs see, Sir,
To our shame the Countries sickness: now from you
As from a careful, and a wise physician
We doe expect the cure.
Old festered sores
Must be lanced to the quick and cauterised,
Which borne with patience, after i'll apply
Soft Unguents: For the maintenance of the war
It is decreed all moneys in the hand,
Of private men, shall instantly be brought
To the public Treasury.
This bites sore.
The Cure
Is worse then the disease; Isle never yield to it.
What could the enemy, though victorious
Inflict more on vs? all that my youth hath toyld for
Purchased with industry, and preserved with care
Forced from me in a moment.
This rough course
Will never be allowed of.
O blind men!
If you refuse the first means that is offered
To give you health, no hope's left to recover
Your desperate sickness. Doe you prize your muck
Aboue your liberties? and rather choose
To be made Bondsman, then to part with that
To which already you are slaves? or can it
Be probable in your flattering apprehensions,
You can capitulate with the Conqueror
And keep that yours, which they come to possess,
And while you kneel in vain, will ravish from you?
But take your own ways, brood upon your gold,
Sacrifice to your Idol, and preserve
The prey entire, and merit the report
Of careful Steward, yield a just account
To your proud Masters, who with whips of Iron
Will force you to give up what you conceal,
Or tear it from your throats, Adorn your walls
With Persian Hangings wrought of Gold and Pearl;
Cover the floors on which they are to tread
With costly Median silks; perfume the rooms
With Cassia, and Amber: where they are
To feast and revel, while like servile Grooms
You wait upon their trenchers; feed their eyes
With massy Plate until your Cupbords crack
With the weight that they sustain; set forth your Wives
And Daughters in as many varied shapes
As there are Nations, to provoke their lusts,
And let them be embraced before your eyes,
The object may content you; and to perfect
Their entertainment, offer up your Sons,
And able men for Slaves; while you, that are
Unfit for labour, are spurned out to starve
Unpitied in some Desert, no friend by,
Whose sorrow may spare one compassionate tear,
In the remembrance of what once you were.
The blood turns.
Observe, how old Cleon. shakes,
As if in picture hee had shown him, what
He was to suffer.
I am sick, the man
Speaks poniards, and diseases.
O my Doctor,
I never shall recover.
If a Virgin,
Whose speech was ever yet ushered with fear,
One knowing modesty, and humble silence
To be the choicest ornaments of our sex,
In the presence of so many Reverend men,
Struck dumb with terror and astonishment,
Presume to cloth her thought in vocal sounds,
Let her find pardon. First, to you, great Sir,
A bashful Maid's thanks, and her zealous prayers
Winged with pure innocence, bearing them to Heaven,
For all prosperity, that the Gods can give
To one, whose piety must exact their care,
Thus lowe I offer.
Tic a happy Omen.
Rise blessed one, and speak boldly: on my virtue
I am thy warrant; from so clear a Spring
Sweet Rivers ever flow.
Then thus to you
My noble Father, and these Lords, to whom
I next owe duty, no respect forgotten
To you my Brother, and these bold young men
(Such I would have them) that are, or should be
The Cities Sword and Target of defence.
To all of you, I speak; and if a blush
Steal on my cheeks, it is shown to reprove
Your paleness; willingly I would not say
Your cowardice, or fear: think you all treasure
Hid in the bowels of the Earth, or Shipwrecked
In Neptunes watery Kingdom, can hold weight
When Liberty, and Honour, fill one scale,
Triumphant Justice sitting on the beam?
Or dare you but imagine that your gold is
Too dear a salary for such as hazard
Their blood, and lives in your defence? For me
An ignorant Girl, bear witness heaven, so far
I prize a Soldier, that to give him pay
With such Devotion as our Flamens Offer
Their Sacrifices at the holy Altar,
I doe lay down these jewels, will make sale
Of my superfluous Wardrobe to supply
The meanest of their wants.
Brave masculine spirit!
We are shown to our shame what we in honour
Should have taught others.
Such a fair example
Must needs be followed.
Ever my dear Sister,
But now our Families glory.
Were she Deformed
The virtues of her mind would force a Stoicque
To sue to be her servant.
I must yield,
And though my heart blood part with it, I will
Deliver in my wealth.
I would say something,
But the truth is, I know not what.
We have money,
And men must now be thought on.
We can press
Of Labourers in the country (men in-vr'd
To cold and heate) ten thousand.
Or if need be,
In roll of Slaves, lusty, and able Varlets,
And fit for service.
They shall go for me,
I will not pay and fight too.
How! your Slaves?
O stain of Honour! once more, Sir, your pardon,
And to their shames, let me deliver, what
I know in justice you may speak.
Most gladly,
I could not wish my thoughts a better organ,
Then your tongue, to express them.
Are you men?
(For Age may qualify, though not excuse
The backwardness of these) able Young men?
Yet now your Countries libertie's at the stake,
Honour, and glorious triumph, made the garland
For such as dare deserve them; a rich Feast
Prepared by Victory of immortal viands,
Not for base men, but such as with their Swords
Dare force admittance, and will be her Guests,
And can you coldly suffer such rewards
To be proposed, to Labourers and Slaves?
While you that are borne Noble (to whom these
Valued at their best rate, are next to Horses,
Or other Beasts of carriage) cry aim,
Like idle lookers on, till their proud worth
Make them become your masters?
By my hopes,
There's fire and spirit enough in this to make
Thersites valiant.
No; far, far be it from you,
Let these of meaner quality contend,
Who can endure most labour; Plough the earth,
And think they are rewarded, when their sweat
Brings home a fruitful Harvest to their Lords;
Let them prove good Artificers, and serve you
For use and ornament, but not presume
To touch at what is Noble; if you think them
Unworthy to taste of those Cates you feed on,
Or wear such costly garments; will you grant them
The privilege and prerogative of great minds,
Which you were borne to? Honour, won in war
And to be stiled preservers of their Country
Are Titles fit for free and generous Spirits,
And not for Bond-men: had I been borne a man
And such ne'er dying glories made the prize
To bold Heroic Courage; By Diana,
I would not to my Brother, nay my Father,
Be bribed to part with the least piece of honour
I should gain in this action.
Shoe's inspired,
Or in her speaks the Genius of your Country
To fire your blood in her defence. I am raped
With the imagination! Noble maid,
Timoleon is your Soldier, and will sweat
Drops of his best blood, but he will bring home
Triumphant conquest to you. Let me wear
Your colours, Lady, and though youthful heats
That look no further then your outward form,
Are long since buried in me, while I live,
I am a constant lover of your mind,
That does transcend all presidents.
It is an honour:
And so I doe receive it.
Plague upon it,
She has got the start of vs. I could even burst
With envy at her fortune.
A raw young thing,
We have too much tongue sometimes, our Husbands say,
And she out-strips vs.
I am for the journey.
May all Diseases, sloth and lechery bring,
Fall upon him that stays at home.
Though old,
I will be there in person.
So will I.
Me thinks I am not what I was; her words
Have made me younger, by a score of years,
Then I was when I came hither.
I am still
Old Cleon, fat, and unwieldy, I shall never
Make a good Soldier, and therefore desire
To be excusde at home.
Tic my suite too.
I am a grissell, and these Spider fingers,
Will never hold a Sword. Let vs alone
To rule the Slaves at home, I can so yerk em,
But in my Conscience, I shall never prove
Good Justice in the war.
Have your desires:
You would be burdens to vs, no way aids.
Lead, fairest, to the Temple, first we will pay
A Sacrifice to the Gods for good success.
For, all great actions the wished course doe run,
That are, with their allowance, well begun.
Stay Cymbrio, and Gracculo.
The business?
Meet me to morrow night, near to the Grove
Neighbouring the East part of the City.
Well.
And bring the rest of our Condition with you,
I have something to impart, may break our fetters,
If you dare second me.
We'll not fail.
A Cart-rope
Shall not bind me at home.
Think on it, and prosper.
So, so, it is well, how doe I look?
Most sprightfully.
I shrink not in the shoulders, though I am old,
I am tough, steel to the back, I have not wasted
My stock of strength in Feather-beds: heir's an arm too,
There's stuff in it, and I hope will use a Sword
As well as any beardless Boy of you all.
I am glad to see you, Sir, so well prepared,
To endure the travail of the war.
Go too sir,
I shall endure, when some of you keep your Cabins,
For all your flaunting Feathers, nay Leosthenes
You are welcome too, all friends, and fellows now.
Your servant Sir.
Pish, leave these Complements,
They stink in a Soldiers mouth, I could be merry,
For now my Gowne's off, farewell Gravity,
And must be bold to put a question to you,
Without offence, I hope.
Sir, what you please.
And you will answer truly?
On our words, Sir.
Go too, then, I presume you will confess,
That you are two notorious Whore-maisters.
Nay spare your blushing, I have been wilde my self,
A snatch, or so, for Physic, does no harm;
Nay, it is physic, if used moderately,
But to lye at rack, and manger,
Say we grant this,
For if we should deny it, you'll not believe vs,
What will you infer upon it?
What you'll groan for,
I fear, when you come to the test. Old Stories tell vs
There is a Month called October; which brings in
Cold weather, there are trenches too, it is rumor'd
In which to stand all night to the knees in water,
In Gallants breeds the tooth-ach, there's a sport too
Named lying Pard??????, (doe you mark me) tic a game,
Which you must learn to play at: now in these seasons,
And choice variety of Exercises,
(Nay I come to you) and fasts not for Devotion,
Your rambling hunt-smocke, feels strange altorations,
And in a Frosty morning, looks as if
He could with ease creep in a pottle Pot
In stead of his Mistress placket, then he Curses
The time he spent in midnight visitations;
And finds what he superfluously parted with,
To be reported good, at length, and well breathed,
But if retriu'd into his back again,
Would keep him warmer then a Scarlet wast-coate,
Or an Armour lined with Fur. O welcome, welcome,
You have cut off my discourse, but I will perfect
My lecture in the Camp.
Come, we are stayed for,
The General's a fire for a remove,
And longs to be in action.
Tic my wish too,
We must part, nay to tears, my best Cleora,
I shall melt too, and that were ominous.
Millions of blessings on thee, all that's mine,
I give up to thy charge, and sir, look
You, with that care and reverence observe her
Which you would pay to me, a kiss, farewell Girl.
Peace wait upon you, fair one.
It were impertinence
To wish you to be careful of your Honour,
That ever keep in pay a Guard about you
Of faithful virtues: Farewell friend, I leave you
To wipe our kisses off, I know that Lovers
Part with more circumstance and ceremony,
Which I give way to.
Tic a noble favour,
For which, I ever owe you, we are alone,
But how I should begin, or in what language
Speak the unwilling word, of parting from you,
I am yet to learn.
And still continue ignorant,
For I must be most cruel to my self,
If I should teach you.
Yet it must be spoken,
Or you will chide my slackness, you have fired me
With the heate of noble action, to deserve you,
And the least spark of honour, that took life
From your sweet breath, still famed by it, and cherished,
Must Mount up in a glorious flame, or I
Am much unworthy.
May it not burn here,
And as a Sea-marke, serve to guide true Lovers,
(Tossed on the Ocean of luxurious wishes)
Safe from the rocks of Lust into the harbour,
Of pure affection? rising up an example,
Which after-times shall witness, to our glory,
First took from vs beginning.
Tic a happiness,
My duty to my Country, and mine Honour
Cannot consent too, besides, add to these,
It was your pleasure, fortifide by persuasion,
And strength of reason, for the general good,
That I should go.
Alas, I then was witty
To plead against my self, and mine eye fixed,
Upon the hill of Honour, ne'er descended
To look into the veil of certain dangers,
Through which, you were to cut your passage to it.
Isle stay at home then.
No, that must not be,
For so to serve my own ends, and to gain
A petty wreath my self; I rob you of
A certain triumph, which must fall upon you,
Or Virtue's turned a hand-maide to blind Fortune:
How is my soul divided! to confirm you,
In the opinion of the world, most worthy
To be beloved, (with me you are at the height,
And can advance no further) I must send you
To Court the Goddess of sterne War, who if
She see you with my eyes, will ne'er return you,
But grow enamoured of you.
Sweet, take comfort,
And what I offer you, you must vouchsafe me,
Or I am wretched; all the dangers, that
I can encounter in the War, and trifles;
My enemies abroad to be contemned;
The dreadful foes, that have the power to hurt me,
I leave at home with you.
With me?
Nay, in you,
On every part about you, they are armed
To fight against me.
Where?
Ther's no perfection
That you are Mistress of, but musters up
A Legion against me, and all sworn
To my destruction.
This is strange!
But true, sweet,
Excess of love can work such miracles.
Upon this Ivory fore-head are entrenched
Ten thousand rivals, and these Suns command,
Supplies from all the world, on pain to forfeit
Their comfortable beams; these Ruby lips,
A rich Exchecquer to assure their pay;
This hand, Sibillas golden bough to guard them
Through Hell, and horror, to the Elision Springs;
Which who'll not venture for? and should I name
Such as the virtues of your mind inuit,
Their numbers would be infinite.
Can you think,
I may be tempted?
You were never proved.
For me I have conversed with you no farther,
Then would become a Brother. I ne'er tuned
Loose Notes to your chaste ears; or brought rich Presents
For my Artillery, to batter down,
The fortress of your honour, nor endeavoured
To make your blood run high at solemn Feasts
With Viands, that provoke; (the speeding Philtres)
I worked no Bawds to tempt you; never practised
The cunning, and corrupting Arts they study,
That wander in the wilde Maze of desire;
Honest simplicity, and Truth were all
The Agents I employed, and when I came
To see you, it was with that reverence,
As I beheld the Altars of the gods;
And love, that came along with me, was taught
To leave his Arrows, and his Torch behind,
Quenched in my fear to give offence.
And it was
That modesty that took me, and preserves me,
Like a fresh Rose, in mine own natural sweetness;
Which sullied with the touch of impute hands,
Loose both sent and beauty.
But, Cleora,
When I am absent, as I must go from you,
(such is the cruelty of my fate) and leave you
Unguarded, to the violent assaults
Of loose temptations; when the memory
Of my so many years of Love, and service,
Is lost in other objects; when you are courted
By such as keep a Catalogue of their Conquests,
Won upon credulous Virgins; when nor Father
Is here to owe you; Brother to advise you;
Nor your poor servant by, to keep such off,
By lust instructed how to undermine,
And blow your chastity up; when your weak senses
At once assaulted, shall conspire against you;
And play the traitors to your soul, your virtue:
How can you stand? faith though you fall, and I
The judge, before whom you then stood accused,
I should acquit you.
Will you then confirm,
That love, and jealousy, though of different natures,
Must of necessity be twins? the younger,
Created only to defeat the elder,
And spoil him of his Birth-right: it is not well.
But being to part, I will not chide, I will not,
Nor with one syllable, or tear express,
How deeply I am wounded with the arrows
Of your distrust: but when that you shall hear
At your return, how I have borne my self,
And what an after penance I take on me,
To satisfy your doubts: when like a Vestal
I show you to your shame, the fire still burning,
Committed to my charge by true affection,
The people joining with you in the wonder.
When by the glorious splendour of my sufferings,
The prying eyes of jealousy are struck blind,
The Monster too that feeds on fears, even starved
For want of seeming matter to accuse me,
Expect Leosthenes, a sharpe reproof
From my just anger.
What will you doe?
Obey me,
Or from this minute you are a stranger to me.
And doe it without reply: all seeing Sun,
Thou witness of my innocence, thus I close
Mine eyes against thy comfortable light,
Till the return of this distrustful man.
Now bind 'em sure, nay do it, if vncompeld.
I loose this knot, until the hands that made it
Be pleased to untie it, may consuming plagues
Fall heavy on me, pray you guide me to your lips,
This kiss, when you come back shall be a Virgin
To bid you welcome: Nay, I have not done yet.
I will continue dumb, and you once gone,
No Accent shall come from me: now to my chamber,
My Tomb, if you miscarry: there I'll spend
My hours in silent mourning, and thus much
Shall be reported of me to my glory,
And you confess it, whither I live or die,
My Chastity triumphs over your jealousy.
You slave, you Dog, down Cur.
Hold, good young Master,
For pities sake.
Now am I in my kingdom.
Who says I am not valiant? I begin
To frown again, quake villain.
So I doe, Sir,
Your looks are Agues to me.
Are they so Sir,
Slight, if I had them at this bay, that flout me,
And say I look like a sheep, and an Ass, I would make 'em
Feel, that I am a Lyon.
Doe not roar, Sir,
As you are a valiant beast: but doe you know
Why you use me thus?
I'll beat thee a little more,
Then study for a reason, O I have it,
One brake a jest on me, and then I swore
Because I durst not strike him, when I came home
That I would break thy head.
Plague on his mirth,
I am sure I morn for it.
Remember too, I charge you
To teach my Horse good manners; yet this morning,
As I rode to take the ayre, th'untutor'd Jade
Threw me, and kic'kd me.
I thank him for it.
What's that?
I say, Sir, I'll teach him to hold his heals,
If you will rule your fingers.
I'll think upon it.
I am bruised to jolly; better be a dog,
Then slave to a Fool or Coward.
Heere's my Mother,
She is chastising too: How brave we live!
That have our slaves to beat, to keep vs in breath,
When we want exercise.
Careless Harlotry,
Look too't, if a Curl fall, or wind, or Sun,
Take my Complexion off, I will not leave
One hair upon thine head.
Here's a second show
Of the Family of pride.
Fie on these wars,
I am starved for want of action, not a gamester left
To keep a woman play; if this world last
A little longer with vs, Ladies must study
Some new found Mystery, to cool one another,
Wee shall burn to Cinders else; I have heard there have been
Such Arts in a long vacation; would they were
Reueal'd to me: they have made my Doctor too
Physician to the Army, he was used
To serve the turn at a pinch: but I am now
Quite unprovided.
My Mother in law is sure
At her devotion.
There are none but our slaves left,
Nor are they to be trusted; some great women
(Which I could name) in a dearth of Visitants,
Rather then be idle, have been glad to play
At small game, but I am so queasy stomack't,
And from my youth have been so used to Dainties,
I cannot taste such gross meat; some that are hungry
Draw on their shoemakers, and take a fall
From such as mend Mats in their Galleries;
Or when a Taylor settles a Petticoat on,
Take measure of his Bodkin: fie upon it,
It is base; for my part, I could rather lie with
A Gallants breeches, and conceive upon 'em,
Then stoop so low.
Fair Madam, and my Mother.
Leave the last out, it smells rank of the Country,
And shows course breeding, your true Courtier knows not
His Niece, or Sister from another woman,
If she be apt and cunning. I could tempt now
This fool, but he will be so long a working.
Then hoe's my Husbands Son; the fitter to
Supply his wants, I have the way already.
I'll try, if it will take; when were you with
Your Mistress, fair Cleora.
Two days since,
But shoe's so coy forsooth, that ere I can
Speak a penned speech I have bought, and studied for her,
Her woman calls her away.
Here's a dull thing,
But better taught I hope, send of your man.
Sir, be gone.
This is the first good turn,
She ever did me.
We will have a Scene of mirth,
I must not have you shamed for want of practise.
I stand here for Cleora, and doe you hear Minion,
(That you may tell her, what her woman should do)
Repeat the lesson over, that I taught you,
When my young Lord came to visit me, if you miss
In a Syllable or posture!
I am perfect.
Would I were so: I fear I shall be out.
If you are, I'll help you in. Thus I walk musing:
You are to enter, and as you pass by,
Salute my woman, be but bold enough,
You'll speed I warrant you; begin.
Have at it.
'Saue thee sweet heart. A kiss.
Venus forbid, Sir,
I should presume to taste your honours lips
Before my Lady.
This is well on both parts.
How does thy Lady?
Happy in your Lordship,
As oft as she thinks on you.
Very good,
This Wench will learn in time.
Does she think of me?
O Sir, and speaks the best of you, admires
Your wit, your clothes, discourse; and swears, but that
You are not forward enough for a Lord, you were
The most complete, and absolute man: I'll show
Your Lordship a Secret.
Not of thine own?
O no, Sir,
It is of my Lady, but upon your honour,
You must conceal it.
By all means.
Some times
I lie with my Lady, as the lastnight I did,
She could not say her prayers, for thinking of you,
Nay, she talked of you in her sleep, and sighed out,
O sweet Asotus, sure thou art so backward,
That I must ravish thee, and in that fervor
She took me in her arms, threw me upon her,
Kissed me, and hugged me, and then waked, and wept;
Because it was but a dream.
This will bring him on,
Or hoe's a block. A good Girl!
I am mad,
Till I am at it.
Be not put off, Sir,
With away, I dare not; fie you are immodest,
My Brother's up, my Father will hear, shoot home, Sir,
You cannot miss the mark.
There's for thy counsel.
This is the fairest interlude, if it prove earnest,
I shall wish I were a Player.
Now my turn comes.
I am exceeding sick, pray you send my Page
For young Asotus, I cannot live without him,
Pray him to visit me, yet when hoe's present,
I must be strange to him.
Not so: you are caught.
Lo whom you wish, behold Asotus here!
You wait well, Minion, shortly I shall not speak
My thoughts in my private Chamber, but they must
Lie open to discovery.
'Slid shoe's angry.
No, no, Sir, she but seems so. To her again.
Lady, I would descend to kiss your hand,
But that it is glou'd, and Ciuit makes me sick;
And to presume to taste your lips not safe,
Your woman by:
I hope shoe's no observer,
Of whom I grace.
She's at her book, O rare!
A kiss for entertainment is sufficient:
Too much of one dish cloys me.
I would serve in
The second course, but still I fear your woman.
You are very cautelous.
Slight shoe's asleep!
It is pity, these instructions are not printed:
They would sell well to Chamber-maides, it is no time now
To play with my good fortune, and your favour,
Yet to be taken, as they say: a scout
To give the signal when the enemy comes,
Were now worth gold: Shoe's gone to watch.
A waiter so trained up were worth a million,
To a wanton City Madam.
You are grown conceited.
You teach me; Lady, now your Cabinet.
You speak, as it were yours.
When we are there,
Isle show you my best evidence.
Hold, you forget,
I only play Cleora's part.
No matter,
Now we have begun, let's end the act.
Forbear, Sir,
Your Fathers wife?
Why, being his Heir, I am bound,
Since he can make no satisfaction to you,
To see his debts paid.
Madame, my Lord.
Fall off,
I must trifle with the time too; Hell confound it.
Plague on his toothless chaps, he cannot do it
Himself, yet hinders such as have good stomachs.
Where are you, Wife? I fine would go abroad,
But cannot find my Slaves, that bear my Litter:
I am tired, your shoulder, Son; nay sweet, thy hand too,
A turn or two in the Garden, and then to Supper,
And so to Bed.
Never to rise, I hope, more.
Twill take, I warrant thee.
You may doe your pleasure:
But, in my judgement, better to make use of
The present opportunity.
No more.
I am silenced.
More wine, pray thee drink hard, friend,
And when we are hot, what ever I propound,
Second with vehemence: men of your words, all welcome,
Slaves use no ceremony, sit down, heir's a health,
Let it run round, fill every man his Glass.
We look for no waiters; this is Wine.
The better,
Strong, lusty wine: drink deep, this juice will make vs
As free as our Lords.
But if they find, we taste it,
We are all damned to the quarry, during life,
Without hope of redemption.
Pish, for that
We'll talk anon: another rouse, we loose time,
When our lowe blood's wound up a little higher,
Isle offer my design; nay, we are cold yet,
These Glasses contain nothing; doe me right,
As ever you hope for liberty. It is done bravely,
How doe you feel your selves now?
I begin
To have strange Conundrums in my head.
And I,
To loath base water: I would be hanged in peace now,
For one month of such Holy-dayes.
An age, Boys,
And yet defy the Whip, if you are men,
Or dare believe, you have souls.
We are no Brokers:
Nor Whores, whose marks are out of their mouths, they have none,
They hardly can get salt enough to keep 'em
From stinking aboue ground.
Our Lords are no Gods?
They are Devils to vs, I am sure.
But subject to
Cold, hunger, and diseases.
In abundance.
Your Lord, that feels no ach in his chine at twenty,
Forfeits his privilege, how should their Surgeon build else,
Or ride on their Foot-cloathes?
Equal nature fashioned vs
All in one mould: The Bear serves not the Bear,
Nor the Wolf, the Wolf; it was odds of strength in tyrants,
That plucked the first link from the Golden chain
With which that thing of things bound in the world.
Why then, since we are taught, by their examples,
To love our Liberty, if not Command,
Should the strong serve the weak, the fair deformed ones?
Or such as know the cause of things, pay tribute
To ignorant fools? Ell's but the outward gloss
And politic form, that does distinguish vs.
Cymbrio, thou art a strong man; if in place
Of carrying burdens, thou had been trained up
In Martial discipline, thou might have proved
A General, fit to lead and fight for Sicilie,
As fortunate as Timolcon.
A little fighting
Will serve a Generals turn.
Thou, Gracculo,
Hast fluency of Language, quick conceit,
And I think, covered with a Senators robe,
Formally set on the Bench, thou would appear
As brave a Senator.
Would I had Lands,
Or money to buy a place; and if I did not
Sleep on the Bench, with the drowsiest of'em, play with my Chain,
Look on my Watch, when my guts chimed twelve, and wear
A state Beard, with my Barbers help, rank with 'em,
In their most choice peculiar gifts; degrade me
And put me to drink Water again, which (now
I have tasted Wine) were poison.
It is spoke nobly,
And like a Gown-man, none of these, I think too,
But would prove good Burgers.
Hum: the fools are modest,
I know their insides: Here's an ill-fac'd fellow,
(But that will not be seen in a dark Shop,)
If he did not in a month, learn to out-sweare,
In the selling of his Wares, the cunningest Tradesman
In Syracusa, I have no skill; Here's another,
Observe but what a cozening look he has,
(Hold up thy head, man) if for drawing Gallants
Into mortgages for Commodities, cheating Heirs
With your new counterfeit Gold thread, and gummed Veluets,
He does not transcend all that went before him,
Call in his patent; pass the rest, they'll all make
Sufficient Becos, and with their brow-antlets
Bear up the Cap of maintenance.
Is 't not pity then,
Men of such eminent virtues, should be Slaves?
Our fortune.
Tic your folly, daring men
Command, and make their fates. Say, at this instant,
I marked you out a way to Liberty;
Possessed you of those blessings, our proud Lords
So long have surfeited in; and what is sweetest,
Arm you with power, by strong hand to revenge
Your stripes, your unregarded toil, the pride,
The insolence, of such as tread upon
Your patient sufferings; fill your famished mouths,
With the fat and plenty of the Land; redeem you
From the dark vale of Servitude, and seat you
Upon a hill of happiness; what would you doe
To purchase this and more?
Doe any thing,
To burn a Church or two, and dance by the light on it
Were but a May-game.
I have a Father living,
But if the cutting of his throat could work this,
He should excuse me.
Slight, I would cut mine own,
Rather then miss it, so I might but have
A taste on it, ere I dye.
Be resolute men,
You shall run no such hazard, nor groan under
The burden of such crying sins.
The means?
I feel a women's longing.
Doe not torment vs
With expectation.
Thus then, our proud Masters;
And all the able Freemen of the City
Are gone unto the wars,
Observe but that.
Old men, and such as can make no resistance,
Are only left at home.
And the proud young fool
My Master: If this take, I'll hamper him.
Their Arsenal, their Treasure's in our power,
If we have hearts to seas 'em, if our Lords fall
In the present action, the whole countrie's ours;
Say they return victorious, we have means
To keep the Town against them: at the worst
To make our own conditions: now if you dare
fall on their Daughters, and their wives, break up
Their Iron Chests, banquet on their rich Beds,
And carve your selves of all delights and pleasures
You have been barred from, with one voice cry with me,
Liberty, Liberty.
Liberty, Liberty.
Go then, and take possession; use all freedom,
But shed no blood: so this is well begun,
But not to be commended, til't be done.
Why, think you, that I plot against my self?
Fear nothing, you are safe, these thick-skinn'd slaves,
(I use as instruments to serve my ends)
Pierce not my deep designs: nor shall they dare
To lift an arm against you.
With your will.
But turbulent spirits raised beyond themselves
With case, are not so soon laid: they oft prove
Dangerous to him that called them up.
Tic true,
In what is rashly undertook. Long since
I have considered seriously their natures
Proceeded with mature advise, and know
I hold their will, and faculties in more awe
Then I can doe my own. Now for their Licence,
And riot in the City, I can make
A just defence, and use: it may appear too
A politic prevention of such ills
As might with greater violence, and danger
hereafter be attempted; though some smart for it,
It matters not: how ever, I am resolved;
And sleep you with security. Holds Cleora
Constant to her rash vow?
Beyond belief;
To me, that see her hourly, it seems a fable.
By signs I guess at her commands, and serve 'em
With silence, such her pleasure is, made known
By holding her fair hand thus; she eats little,
Sleeps less, as I imagine; once a day
I lead her to this Gallery, where she walks
Some half a dozen turns, and having offred
To her absent Saint a sacrifice of sighs,
She points back to her prison.
Guide her hither,
And make her understand the slaves revolt.
And with your utmost eloquence enlarge
Their insolence, and Rapes done in the City,
Forget not to, I am their chief, and tell her
You strongly think my extreme dotage on her,
As I am Marullo, cause this sudden uproar,
To make way to enjoy her.
Punctually
I will discharge my part.
O Sir, I sought you.
You have missed the best sport. Hell, I think is broke loose,
There's such variety of all disorders,
As leaping, shooting, drinking, dancing, whoring
Among the slaves; answered with crying, howling,
By the Citizens and their wives: such a confusion,
(In a word, not to tyre you) as I think
The like was never read of.
I share in
The pleasure, though I am absent. This is some
Revenge for my disgrace.
But Sir; I fear,
If your authority restrain them not,
They'll fire the City, or kill one another,
They are so apt to outrage; neither know I
Whether you wish it, and came therefore to
Acquaint you with so much.
I will among 'em,
But must not long be absent.
At your pleasure.
They are at our gates, my heart! affrights &amp; horrors
Increase each minute: No way left to save vs;
No flattering hope to comfort vs, or means
By miracle to redeem vs from base lust,
And lawless rapine. Are there Gods, yet suffer
Such innocent sweetness to be made the spoil
Of brutish appetite? Or, since they decree
To ruin Natures master-peece (of which
they have not left one pattern) must they choose,
To set their tyranny of, slaves to pollute
The spring of chastity, and poison it
With their most loathed embraces? and of those
He that should offer up his life to guard it?
Marullo, cursed Marullo, your own Bond-man
Purchased to serve you, and fed by your favours.
Nay, start not; it is he, hee the grand Captain
Of these libidinous beasts, that have not left
One cruel act undone, that Barbarous conquest,
Yet ever practised in a captive City.
He doting on your beauty, and to have fellows
In his foul sin, hath raised these mutinous slaves,
Who have begun the game by violent Rapes,
Upon the Wives and Daughters of their Lords:
And he to quench the fire of his base lust,
By force comes to enjoy you: doe not wring
Your innocent hands, it is bootless; use the means
That may preserve you. It is no crime to break
A vow, when you are forced to it; show your face,
And with the majesty of commanding beauty,
Strike dead his loose affections; if that fail,
Give liberty to your tongue, and use entreaties,
There cannot be a breast of flesh, and blood,
Or heart so made of flint, but must receive
Impression from your words; or eyes so sterne,
But from the clear reflection of your tears
Must melt, and bear them company: will you not
Doe these good offices to your self? poor I then,
Can only weep your fortune; here he comes.
He that aduances
A foot beyond this, comes upon my sword
You have had your ways, disturb not mine.
Speak gently,
Her fears may kill her else.
Now love inspire me!
Still shall this Canopy of envious night
Obscure my Suns of comfort? and those dainties
Of purest white and red, which I take in at
My greedy eyes, denied my famished senses?
The Organs of your hearing yet are open;
And you infringe no vow, though you vouchsafe,
To give them warrant, to convey unto
Your understanding parts the story of
A tortured and despairing Lover, whom
Not Fortune but affection marks your slave.
Shake not, best Lady; for (belee???'t) you are
As far from danger as I am from force.
All violence I'll offer, tends no farther
Then to relate my sufferings, which I dare not
Presume to doe, till by some gracious sign
You show, you are pleased to hear me.
If you are,
Hold forth your right hand.
So, it is done, and I
With my glad lips seal humbly on your foot,
My souls thanks for the favour: I forbear
To tell you who I am, what wealth, what honours
I made exchange of to become your servant:
And though I knew, worthy Leosthenes
(For sure he must be worthy, for whose love
You have endured so much) to be my rival,
When rage, and jealousy counselled me to kill him,
(Which then I could have done with much more ease,
Then now, in fear to grieve you, I dare speak it)
Love seconded with duty boldly told me,
The man I hated, fair Cleora favoured,
And that was his protection.
See, she bows
Her head in sign of thankfulness.
He removed,
By th'occasion of the war (my fires increasing
By being closed, and stopped up) frantic affection
prompted me to doe something in his absence,
That might deliver you into my power,
Which you see is effected, and even now,
When my rebellious passions chide my dullness,
And tell me how much I abuse my fortunes;
Now it is in my power to bear you hence,
Or take my wishes here, (nay, fear not Madam
True loue's a servant, brutish lust a Tyrant)
I dare not touch those viands, that ne'er taste well,
But when they are freely offred: only thus much,
Be pleased I may speak in my own dear cause,
And think it worthy your consideration.
I have loved truly, (cannot say deserved,
Since duty must not take the name of merit)
That I so far prise your content, before
All blessings, that my hopes can fashion to me,
That willingly I entertain despair,
And for your sake embrace it. For I know,
This opportunity lost, by no endeavour
The like can be recovered. To conclude,
Forget not, that I lose my self, to save you.
For what can I expect, but death and torture
The war being ended? and, what is a task
Would trouble Hercules to undertake,
I doe deny you to my self, to give you
A pure unspotted present to my rival.
I have said, if it distaste not, best of Virgins,
Reward my temperance with some lawful favour,
Though you contemn my person.
See, she kneels
And seems to call upon the gods to pay
The debt she owes your virtue. To perform which
As a sure pledge of friendship, she vouchsafes you
Her fair right hand.
I am paid for all my sufferings.
Now when you please, pass to your private Chamber:
My love, and duty, faithful guards, shall keep you
From all disturbance; and when you are sated
With thinking of Leosthenes, as a fee
Due to my service, spare one sigh for me.
Come on, Sir.
Oh.
Doe you grumble? you were ever
A brainelesse Ass, but if this hold, I'll teach 'you
To come aloft, and doe tricks like an Ape
Your mornings lesson: if you miss ???
O no, Sir.
What for the Carthaginians? a good beast.
What for our self your Lord? exceeding well.
There's your reward. Not kiss your paw? So, so, so.
Was ever Lady the first day of her honour
So waited on by a wrinkled crone? she looks now
Without her painting, curling, and perfumes
Like the last day of January; and stinks worse
Then a hot brach in the dog days. Further of,
So stand there like an image; if you stir,
Till with a quarter of a look I call you,
You know what follows.
O what am I fallen to!
But it is a punishment for my lust and pride,
Justly returned upon me.
How dost thou like
Thy Ladyship Zanthia?
Very well, and bear it
With as much state as your Lordship.
Give me thy hand;
Let vs like conquering Romans walk in triumph,
Our captives following. Then mount our Tribunals,
And make the slaves our footstools.
Fine by Jove,
Are your hands clean minion?
Yes forsooth.
Fall off then.
So now come on: and having made your three duties,
Down I say, (are you stiff in the hams?) now kneel,
And tie our shoe. Now kiss it and be happy.
This is state indeed.
It is such as she taught me,
A tickling itch of greatness, your proud Ladies
Expect from their poor Waiters, we have changed parts;
She does what she forced me to doe in her reign,
And I must practise it in mine.
It is justice;
O here come more.
Discover to a Drachma,
Or I will famish thee.
O I am pin'de already.
Hunger shall force thee to cut off the browns
From thy arms and thighs, then broil them on the coals
For Carbonadoes.
Spare the old Jade, he's foundered.
Cut his throat then,
And hang him out for a scarre-Crowe.
You have all your wishes
In your revenge, and I have mine. You see
I use no tyranny: When I was her slave,
She kept me as a sinner to lie at her back
In frosty nights, and fed me high with dainties,
Which still she had in her belly again ever morning,
And in requital of those courtesies
Having made one another free, we are married,
And if you wish vs joy, join with vs in
A Dance at our Wedding.
Agreed, for I have thought of
A most triumphant one, which shall express, wee are Lords, and
these our slaves.
But we shall want
A woman.
No, here's Iane of Apes shall serve;
Carry your body swimming: whore's the Music?
I have placed it in yon Window.
Begin then sprightly.
Well done on all sides. I have prepared a Banquet;
Let's drink, and cool vs.
A good motion,
Wait here,
You have been tired with feasting, learn to fast now.
Isle have an Apple for Jack, and may be some scrapps
May fall to your share
Whom can we accuse
But our selves for what we suffer? thou art just
Thou all-creating power. And misery
Instructs me now, that yesterday acknowledged,
No Deity beyond my lust and pride.
There is a heaven aboue vs, that looks down
With the eyes of Justice, upon such as number
Those blessings freely given, in the account
Of their poor merits: Else it could not be
Now miserable I, to please whose palate
The Elements were ransacked, yet complained
Of Nature, as not liberal enough
In her provision of rarities
To soothe my taste, and pamper my proud flesh:
Now wish in vain for bread:
Yes, I doe wish too,
For what I fed my dogs with.
I that forgot
I was made of flesh and blood, and thought the silk
Spun by the diligent worm, out of their entrails,
Too course to clothe me; and the softest Down
Too hard to sleep on; that disdained to look
On virtue being in rags; that stopped my nose
At those that did not use adulterate arts
To better nature; that from those, that served me,
Expected adoration, am made justly
The scorn of my own Bond-woman.
I am punished,
For seeking to Cuckold mine own natural Father.
Had I been gelded then, or used my self
Like a man: I had not been transformed, and forced
To play an ore-growne Ape.
I know I cannot
Last long, that's all my comfort: come, I forgive both,
It is in vain to be angry, let vs therefore
Lament together like friends.
What a true mirror
Were this sad spectacle for secure greatness!
Here they that never see themselves, but in
The Glass of servile flattery, might behold
The weak foundation upon which they build,
That trust in humane frailty. Happy are those,
That knowing in their births, they are subject to
Uncertain change, are still prepared, and armed
For either fortune: A rare principle,
And with much labour, learned in wisdoms school!
For as these Bond-men by their actions show,
That their prosperity, like too too large a Sail
For their small bark of judgment; sinks them with
A fore-right gale of liberty, ever they reach
The Port they long to touch at: So these wretches
Swollen with the false opinion of their worth,
And proud of blessings left them, not acquired,
That did believe they could with Gyant-armes
Fathom the earth, and were aboue their fates.
Those borrowed helps that did support them, vanished:
Fall of themselves, and by unmanly suffering,
Betray their proper weakness, and make known
Their boasted greatness was lent, not their own.
O for some meat, they sit long.
We forgot,
When we drew out intemperate feasts till midnight:
Their hunger was not thought on, nor their watchings;
Nor did we hold our selves served to the height,
But when we did exact, and force their duties
Beyond their strength and power.
We pay for it now,
I now could be content to have my head
Broke with a rib of Beef, or for a Coffin
Be buried in the dripping Pan.
Doe not hold me,
Not kiss the Bride?
No Sir.
She's common good,
And so we'll use her.
We'll have nothing private.
Hold:
Here, Marullo.
Hoe's your chief.
We are equals,
I will know no obedience.
Nor superior,
Nay, if you are Lyon-drunke, I will make one,
For lightly ever he that parts the fray,
Goes away with the blows.
Art thou mad too?
No more, as you respect me.
I obey, Sir,
Quarrel among your selves?
Yes, in our Wine, Sir,
And for our Wenches.
How could we be Lords else?
Take heed, I have news will cool this heat, &amp; make you
Remember, what you were.
How?
Send off these,
And then I'll tell you.
This is tyranny,
Now she offends not.
It is for exercise,
And to help digestion, what is she good for else?
To me it was her language.
Leave her off,
And take heed Madam minx, the Wheel may turn.
Go to your meat, and rest, and from this hour
Remember, he that is a Lord to day,
May be a Slave to morrow.
good morality.
But what would you impart?
What must inuit you
To stand upon your guard, and leave your feasting,
Or but imagine, what it is to be
Most miserable, and rest assured you are so.
Our Masters are victorious:
How?
Within
A days march of the City, fleshed with spoil,
And proud of conquest, the Armado sunk,
The Carthaginian Admiral hand to hand,
Slain by Leosthenes.
I feel the whip
Upon my back already.
Every man
Seek a convenient Tree, and hang himself.
Better die once, then live an age to suffer
New tortures every hour.
Say, we submit,
And yield vs to their mercy.
Can you flatter
Your selves with such false hopes? or dare you think
That you imperious Lords, that never failed
To punish with severity petty slipps,
In your neglect of labour, may be won
To pardon those licentious outrages,
Which noble enemies forbear to practise
Upon the conquered? What have you omitted,
That may call on their just revenge with horror,
And studied cruelty? We have gone too far
To think now of retiring; in our courage,
And during, lies our safety; if you are not
Slaves in your abject minds, as in your fortunes
Since to die is the worst, better expose
Our naked breasts to their keen Swords, and sell
Our lives with the most advantage, then to trust
In a forestalled remission, or yield up
Our bodies to the furnace of their fury,
Thrice heated with revenge.
You led vs on.
And it is but justice, you should bring vs off.
And we expect it.
Hear then, and obey me,
And I will either save you, or fall with you;
Man the Walls strongly, and make good the Ports
Boldly deny their entrance, and rip up
Your grievances, and what compelled you to
This desperate course: if they disdain to hear
Of composition, we have in our powers
Their aged Fathers, Children, and their Wives,
Who to preserve themselves, must willingly
Make intercession for vs. It is not time now
To talk, but doe. A glorious end or freedom
Is now proposed vs; stand resolved for either,
And like good fellows, live, or die together.
I am so far from envy, I am proud
You have outstripped me in the race of honour.
O it was a glorious day, and bravely won!
Your bold performance gave such lustre to
Timoleons wise directions, as the Army
Rests doubtful, to whom they stand most engaged
For their so great success.
The Gods first honoured,
The glory be the Generals; it is far from me
To be his rival.
You abuse your fortune,
To entertain her choice, and gracious favours,
With a contracted brow; Plumed victory
Is truly painted with a cheerful look,
Equally distant from proud insolence,
And base deiection.
O Timagoras,
You only are acquainted with the cause,
That loads my sad heart with a hill of lead.
Whose ponderous weight, neither my new got honour,
Assisted by the general applause
The soldier crowns it with: nor all wars glories
Can lessen, or remove; and would you please,
With fit consideraton to remember,
How much I wrong Cleoras innocence,
With my rash doubts; and what a grievous penance,
She did impose upon her tender sweetness,
To pluck away the Vulture jealousy,
That fed upon my Liver: you cannot blame me,
But call it a fit justice on my self,
Though I resolve to be a stranger to
The thought of mirth, or pleasure.
You have redeemed
The forfeit of your fault, with such a ransom
Of honourable action, as my Sister
Must of necessity confess her sufferings
Weighed down by your fair merits; and when she views you
Like a triumphant Conqueror, carried through
The Streets of Syracusa, the glad people
Pressing to meet you, and the Senators
Contending who shall heap most honours on you;
The Oxen crowned with Girlands led before you
Appointed for the Sacrifice; and the Altars
Smoking with thankful Incense to the gods:
The Soldiers chanting loud hymns to your praise:
The windows filled with Matrons, and with Virgins,
Throwing upon your head, as you pass by,
The choicest Flowers; and silently invoking
The Queen of Love, with their particular vows,
To be thought worthy of you; can Cleora,
(Though, in the glass of selfe-loue, she behold
Her best deserts) but with all joy acknowledge,
What she endured, was but a noble trial
You made of her affection? and her anger
Rising from your too amorous ears, soon drenched
In Lethe, and forgotten.
If those glories
You so set forth were mine, they might plead for me;
But I can lay no claim to the least honour,
Which you with foul injustice ravish from her;
Her beauty, in me wrought a miracle,
Taught me to aim at things beyond my power,
Which her perfections purchased, and gave to me
From her free bounties; she inspired me with
That valour, which I dare not call mine own:
And from the fair reflection of her mind,
My soul received the sparkling beams of courage.
She from the magazine of her proper goodness,
Stocked me with virtuous purposes; sent me forth
To trade for honour; and she being the owner
Of the bark of my adventures, I must yield her
A just account of all, as fits a Factor:
And howsoever others think me happy,
And cry aloud, I have made a prosperous voyage:
One frown of her dislike at my return,
(Which, as a punishment for my fault, I look for)
Strikes dead all comfort.
Tush, these fears are needless,
She cannot, must not, shall not be so cruel.
A free confession of a fault wins pardon;
But being seconded by desert, commands it.
The General is your own, and sure; my Father
Repents his harshness: for my self, I am
Ever your creature, one day shall be happy
In your triumph, and your Marriage.
May it prove so,
With her consent, and pardon.
Ever touching
On that harsh string? she is your own, and you
Without disturbance seize on what's your due.
She has her health then:
Yes, Sir, and as often
As I speak of you, lends attentive ear
To all that I deliver; nor seems tyr'de,
Though I dwell long on the relation of
Your sufferings for her, heaping praise on praise,
On your unequalled temperance, and command,
You hold o'er your affections.
To my wish:
Have you acquainted her with the defeature
Of the Carthaginians, and with what honours
Leosthenes comes Crowned home with?
With all care.
And how does she receive it?
As I guess
With a seeming kind of joy, but yet appears not
Transported, or proud of his happy fortune.
But when I tell her of the certain ruin,
You must encounter with at their arrival
In Syracusa, and that death with torments
Must fall upon you, which you yet repent not;
Esteeming it a glorious martyrdom,
And a reward of pure, unspotted love,
Preserved in the white robe of Innocence:
Though she were in your power, and still spurred on
By insolent lust; you rather chose to suffer
The fruit untasted, for whose glad possession,
You have called on the fury of your Lord,
Then that she should be grieved, or tainted in
Her Reputation.
Doth it work compunction?
Pities she my misfortune?
She expressed
All signs of sorrow, (which) her vow observed,
Could witness a grieved heart. At the first hearing
She fell upon her face, rent her fair hair,
Her hands held up to heaven, and vented sighs,
In which she silently seemed to complain,
Of heavens injustice.
It is enough: waite carefully,
And upon all watched occasions, continue
Speech, and discourse of me: it is time, must work her.
I'll not be wanting, but still strive to serve you.
Now, Poliphron, the news:
The conquering Army
Is within ken.
How brooke the slaves the object?
Cheerfully yet; they do refuse no labour,
And seem to scoff at danger; it is your presence
That must confirm them; with a full consent,
You are chosen to relate the tyranny
Of our proud Masters; and what you subscribe too,
They gladly will allow of, or hold out
To the last man.
I'll instantly among them:
If we prove constant to our selves, good fortune
Will not, I hope, forsake vs.
It is our best refuge.
Thus far we are returned victorious, crowned
With Wreathes triumphant, (famine, blood, and dearth,
Banished your peaceful confines,) and bring home
Security, and peace. It is therefore fit
That such as boldly stood the shock of war,
And with the dear expense of sweat and blood
Have purchased Honour, should with pleasure reap
The harvest of their toil; and wee stand bound
Out of the first file of the best deservers,
(Though all must be considered to their merits)
To think of you Leosthenes, that stand,
And worthily, most dear in our esteem,
For your heroic valour.
When I look on
(The labour of so many men, and ages)
This well-built City, not long since designed
To spoil and rapine; by the favour of
The gods, and you their ministers preserved;
I cannot in my height of joy, but offer
These tears for a glad sacrifice.
Sleep the Citizens?
Or are they overwhelmed with the excess
Of comfort, that flows to them?
Wee receive
A silent entertainment.
I long since
Expected, that the virgins, and the Matrons,
The old men striving with their age, the Priests
Carrying the Images of their gods before 'em
Should have met vs with Procession: Ha! the gates
Are shut against vs!
And upon the Walls
Armed men seem to defy vs!
I should know
These faces; they are our slaves.
The mystery, Rascals?
Open the ports, and play not with an anger,
That will consume you.
This is aboue wonder.
Our Bond-men stand against vs!
Some such things
We were in mans remembrance; the slaves are turned
Lords of the Town, or so; nay, be not angry:
Perhaps on good terms, giving security,
You will be quiet men, we may allow you
Some lodgings in our Garrets, or out-houses;
Your great looks cannot carry it.
The truth is,
We have been bold with your wives, toyed with your daughters.
O my prophetic soul!
Rifled your Chests,
Been busy with your Wardrobes.
Can we endure this?
O my Cleora!
A Caudle, for the Gentleman,
He will die a???the pip else.
Scorned too! are you turned stone?
Hold parley with our Bond-men? force our entrance,
Then Villains, expect.
Hold: you wear men's shapes
And if like men you have reason, show a cause
That leads you to this desperate course, which must end
In your destruction?
That, as please the Fates,
But we vouchsafe; speak Captain.
Hell, and Furies!
Bay'd by our own cures?
Take heed, you be not wurried.
We are sharpe set.
And sudden.
Briefly thus then,
Since I must speak for all; your tyranny
Drew vs from our obedience. Happy those times,
When Lords were styled fathers of Families,
And not imperious Masters; when they numbered
Their servants almost equal with their Sons,
Or one degree beneath them; when their labours
Were cherished, and rewarded, and a period
Set to their sufferings; when they did not press
Their duties, or their wills beyond the power
And strength of their performance; all things ordered
With such decorum, as wise Law-makers,
From each well-gouern'd private house derived
The perfect model of a Common-wealth;
Humanity then lodged in the hearts of men,
And thankful Masters carefully provided
For Creatures wanting reason. The noble horse
That in his fiery youth from his wide nostrils,
Neighed courage to his Rider, and brake through
Groves of opposed Pikes, bearing his Lord
Safe to triumphant victory, old or wounded,
Was set at liberty, and freed from service.
The Athenian Mules, that from the Quarry drew
Marble, hewed for the Temples of the gods,
The great work ended, were dismised, and fed
At the public cost; nay, faithful dogs have found
Their Sepulchres; but man to man, more cruel,
Appoints no end to the sufferings of his slave;
Since pride stepped in and riot, and o'return'd
This goodly frame of Concord, teaching Masters
To glory in the abuse of such, as are
Brought under their co??mand; who grown unuseful,
Are less esteemed than beasts; this you have practised,
Practised on vs with rigour; this hath forced vs,
To shake our heavy yokes off; and if redress
Of these just grievances be not granted vs,
We'll right our selves, and by strong hand defend,
What we are now possessed of.
And not leave
One house vnfir'd.
Or throat uncut of those
We have in our power.
Nor will we fall alone,
You shall buy vs dearly.
O, the gods!
Unheard of insolence!
What are your demands?
A general pardon, first, for all offences
Committed in your absence. Liberty,
To all such, as desire to make return
Into their countries; and to those that stay,
A competence of land freely allotted
To each mans proper use; no Lord acknowledged.
Lastly, with your consent, to choose them wives
Out of your Families.
Let the City sink first.
And ruin seas on all, ever we subscribe
To such conditions.
Carthage, though victorious,
Could not have forced more from vs:
Scale the Walls,
Capitulate after.
He that wins the top first,
Shall wear a mural wreath.
 Each to his place.
Or death or victory; charge them home, &amp; fear not.
We wrong our selves, and we are justly punished,
To deal with Bond-men, as if we encountered
An equal enemy.
They fight like devils:
And run upon our Swords, as if their breasts
Were proof beyond their Armour.
Make a firm stand:
The slaves not satisfied, they have beat vs off,
Prepare to sally forth.
They are wilde beasts,
And to be tamed by policy; each man take
A tough whip in his hand: such as you used
To punish them with, as masters; in your looks
carry severity, and awe; twill fright them
More then your weapons; savage Lyons fly from
The sight of fire; and these that have forgot
That duty, your ne'er taught them with your swords,
When unexpected, they behold those terrors
Advanced aloft, that they were made to shake at,
Twill force them to remember what they are,
And stoop to due obedience.
Here they come.
Leave not a man alive; a wound is but a fleabyting,
To what we suffered being slaves.
O my heart!
what doe we see? the whip! our Masters!
Dare you rebel, slaves?
Mercy, mercy; where Shall we hide vs from their fury?
Fly, they follow;
O, we shall be tormented:
Enter with them,
But yet forbear to kill them; still remember
They are part of your wealth, and being disarmed,
There is no danger.
Let vs first deliver
Such as they have in Fetters, and at leisure
Determine of their punishment.
Friend, to you
I leave the disposition of what's mine:
I cannot think I am safe without your Sister,
Shoe's only worth my thought; and till I see
What she has suffered, I am on the rack,
And furye's my tormentors.
I know, I am pursued, nor would I fly,
Although the Ports were open, and a Convoy
Ready to bring me off: the baseness of
These villains, from the pride of all my hopes,
Have thrown me to the bottomless Abisse
Of horror, and despair; had they stood firm,
I could have bought Cleoras free consent,
With the safety of her Fathers life, and Brothers:
And forced Leosthenes to quit his claim,
And kneel a Suitor for me.
You must not think,
What might have been, but what must now be practiced,
And suddenly resolve.
All my poor fortunes
Are at the stake, and I must run the hazard.
Unseen, convey me to Cleora's Chamber,
For in her sight, if it were possible,
I would be apprehended: doe not inquire
The reason why, but help me.
Make haste, one knocks,
Jove turn all to the best: you are welcome Sir.
Thou giu'st it in a heavy tone.
Alas, Sir,
Wee have so long fed on the bread of sorrow,
Drinking the bitter water of afflictions,
Made loathsome to, by our continued fears,
Comfort's a stranger to vs.
Feare's! your sufferings,
For which I am so overgone with grief,
I dare not ask without compassionate tears,
The villains name, that robed thee of thy honour;
For being trained up in chastities cold School,
And taught by such a Mistress as Cleora,
It were impious in me, to think Timandra
Fell with her own consent.
How mean you, fell, Sir?
I understand you not.
I would, thou did not,
Or that I could not read upon thy face,
In blushing characters, the story of
Libidinous Rape; confess it, for you stand not
Accountable for a sin, against whose strength
Your o're-match'd innocence could make no resistance;
Under which odds, I know Cleora fell too,
Heavens help in vain invoked; the amazed Sun,
Hiding his face behind a mask of clouds,
Not daring, to look on it, in her sufferings
All sorrowe's comprehended; what Timandra,
Or the City has endured, her loss considered,
Deserves not to be named.
Pray you doe not bring, Sir,
In the chimeras of your jealous fears,
New monsters to affright vs.
O Timandra.
That I had faith enough but to believe thee,
I should receive it with a joy beyond
Assurance of Elision shades hereafter,
Or all the blessings in this life, a Mother
Could wish her children crowned with: but I must not
Credit impossibilities, yet I strive
To find out that, whose knowledge is a curse,
And ignorance a blessing. Come, discover
What kind of look he had, that forced thy Lady,
(Thy ravisher, I will enquire at leisure,)
That when hereafter I behold a stranger
But near him in aspect, I may conclude,
(Though men and Angels should proclaim him honest,)
Hee is a Hell-bred villain.
You are unworthy
To know she is preserved, preserved untainted.
Sorrow (but ill bestowed) hath only made
A rape upon her comforts, in your absence.
Come forth, dear Madam.
Ha!
Nay, she dserues
The bending of your heart; that to content you,
Has kept a vow, the breach of which a vestal
(Though the infringing it had called upon her
A living funeral,) must of force have shrunk at;
No danger could compel her, to dispense with
Her cruel Penance; though hot lust came armed
To seize upon her, when one look, or accent
Might have redeemed her.
Might? O doe not show me
A beam of comfort, and straight take it from me;
The means, by which she was freed? Speak, O speak quickly,
Each minute of delay's, an age of Torment:
O speak, Timandra.
Free her from her oath,
Her self can best deliver it.
O blessed office!
Never did Gally-slaue shake off his chains,
Or looked on his redemption from the Oar,
With such true feeling of delight, as now
I find my self possessed of; now I behold
True light indeed; For since these fairest stars,
(Covered with clouds of your determinate will)
Denied their influence to my optique sense,
The Splendour of the Sun appeared to me,
But as some little glimpse of his bright beams
Conveyed into a Dungeon; to remember
The dark inhabitants there, how much they wanted.
Open these long-shut lips, and strike mine ears
With Music more harmonious, then the Spheres
Yield in their heavenly motions; And if ever
A true submission, for a crime acknowledged,
May find a gracious hearing, teach your tongue
In the first sweet, articulate sounds, it utters
To sign my wish'd-for pardon.
I forgive you.
How greedily I receive this? Stay, best Lady,
And let me by degrees ascend the height
Of humane happiness; All at once delivered,
The torrent of my joys will overwhelm me;
So, now a little more; And pray excuse me,
If like a wanton Epicure I desire,
The pleasant taste these cates of comfort yield me,
should not too soon be swallowed. Have you not
(By your unspotted truth, I doe conjure you
To answer truly) suffered in your honour:
(By force, I mean, for in your will I free you)
Since I left Syracusa?
I restore
This kiss, (so help me goodness,) which I borrowed,
When I last saw you.
Miracle of virtue!
One pause more, I beseech you, I am like
A man, whose vital spirits consumed, and wasted
With a long and tedious Fever, unto whom
Too much of a strong Cordial at once taken
Brings death, and not restores him. Yet I cannot
Fix here: but must enquire the man, to whom
I stand indebted for a benefit,
Which to requite at full, though in this hand
I grasped all Scepters the worlds Empire bow to,
Would leave me a poor Bank'rout; name him, Lady;
If of a mean estate, I'll gladly part with
My utmost fortunes to him; but if noble,
In thankful duty study how to serve him;
Or if of higher rank, erect him Altars,
And (as a god) adore him.
If that goodness,
And noble temperance (the Queen of virtues)
Bridling rebellous passions (to whose sway,
Such as have conquered Nations have lived slaves)
Did ever wing great minds to fly to heaven;
He that preserved mine honour, may hope boldly
To fill a seat among the gods, and shake of
Our frail corruption.
Forward.
Or if ever,
The powers aboue did masque in humane shapes,
To teach mortality, not by cold precepts
Forgot as soon as told, but by examples,
To imitate their pureness, and draw near
To their Celestial Natures; I believe
Hoe's more then man.
You doe describe a wonder.
Which will increase, when you shall understand,
He was a lover.
Not yours, Lady?
Yes,
Loved me, Leosthenes; Nay more, so doted,
(If clear affections scorning gross desires
May without wrong be styled so) that he durst not
With an immodest syllable, or look,
In fear it might take from me, whom he made
The object of his better part, discover,
I was the Saint, he sued too.
A rare tempter!
I cannot speak it to the worth: All praise
I can bestow upon it, will appear
Envious detraction. Not to rack you farther,
Yet make the miracle full; though of all men
He hated you Leosthenes, as his rival:
So high yet he prized my content, that knowing
You were a man I favoured, he disdained not
Against himself to serve you.
You conceal, still,
The owner of these excellencies.
It is Marullo,
My Fathers Bond-man.
Ha, ha, ha!
Why doe you laugh?
To hear the labouring mountain of your praise
Delivered of a Mouse.
The man deserves not
This scorn, I can assure you.
Doe you call,
What was his duty, merit?
Yes, and place it,
As high in my esteem, as all the honours
Descended from your Ancestors, or the glory,
Which you may call your own, got in this action;
In which I must confess you have done nobly,
And I could add; As I desired; but that
I fear, it would make you proud.
Why Lady, can you
Be won to give allowance, that your slave
Should dare to love you?
The Immortal gods
Accept the meanest Altars, that are raised
By pure devotions; and sometimes prefer
An ounce of Frankincense, honey, or milk,
Before whole Hecatombes, or Sabaean Gums
Offered in ostentation. Are you sick
Of your old disease? I'll fit you.
You seem moved.
Zealous, I grant, in the defence of virtue.
Why, good Leosthenes, though I endured,
A penance for you sake, aboue example,
I have not so far sold my self, I take it,
To be at your devotion, but I may
Cherish desert in others, where I find it.
How would you tyrannize, if you stood possessed of
That, which is only yours in expectation?
That now prescribe such hard conditions to me?
One kiss, and I am silenced.
I vouchsafe it;
Yet, I must tell you, it is a favour, that
Marullo, when I was his, not mine own,
Durst not presume to ask; No, when the City
Bowed humbly to licentious Rapes, and lust.
And when I was of men and gods forsaken,
Delivered to his power, he did not press me
To grace him with one look or syllable.
Or urged the dispensation of an oath
Made for your satisfaction; The poor wretch
Having related only his own sufferings,
And kissed my hand, which I could not deny him,
Defending me from others, never since
Solicited my favours.
Pray you, end,
The story does not please me.
Well, take heed
Of doubts, and fears; For know, Leosthenes,
A greater injury cannot be offered
To innocent chastity, then unjust suspicion.
I love Marulloes fair mind, not his person,
Let that secure you. And I here command you,
If I have any power in you, to stand
Between him and all punishment, and oppose
His temperance to his folly; If you fail ???
No more, I will not threaten.
What a bridge
Of glass I walk upon, over a River
Of certain ruin: mine own weighty fears
Cracking what should support me: And those helps,
Which confidence lends to others, are from me
Ravished by doubts, and wilful Jealousy.
But are you sure we are safe?
You need not fear,
They are all under guard, their fangs par'd off:
The wounds their insolence gave you, to be cured,
With the blame of your revenge.
And shall I be
The thing I was borne, my Lord?
The same wise thing;
Slight, what a beast they have made thee! Africa never
Produced the like.
I think so: Nor the land
Where Apes, and Monkeys, grow, like Crabs, and Wall-nuts
On the same tree. Not all the Catalogue
Of Conjurers, or wise women, bound together
Could have so soon transformed me, as my Rascal
Did with his whip; Not in outside only,
But in my own belief, I thought my self
As perfect a Baboon.
An Ass, thou were ever.
And would have given one leg with all my heart
For good security to have been a man
After three lives, or one and twenty years,
Though I had dyed on Crouches.
Never varlets
So triumphed o'er an old fat man: I was famished.
In deed you are fallen away.
Three years of feeding
On Cullises and jolly, though his Cooks
Lard all he eats with marrow, or his Doctors
Power in his mouth Restoratives, as he sleeps,
Will not recover him.
But your Ladyship looks
Sad on the matter, as if you had missed
Your ten-crowne Amber Posits, good to smooth
The Cutis, as you call it, and prepare you
Active, and high for an afternoons encounter,
With a rough gamester, on your couch; fie on it,
You are grown thrifty, smell like other women;
The College of Physicians have not sate,
As they were used, in council how to fill
The cranies in your cheeks, or raise a rampire,
With Mummy, Ceruses, or Infants fat,
To keep off age, and time.
Pray you, forbear;
I am an altered woman.
So it seems;
A part of your honours ruff stands out of rank too.
No matter, I have other thoughts.
O strange!
Not ten days since it would have vexed you more,
Then th'losse of your good name; Pity, this cure
For your proud itch came no sooner! Marry, Olympia seems to bear up still.
I complain not, Sir,
I have borne my fortune patiently.
Thou were it ever
An excellent bearer; so is all your tribe,
If you may choose your carriage: How now, friend,
Looks our Cleora lovely?
In my thoughts, Sir.
But why this guard?
It is Timoleons pleasure;
The slaves have been examined, and confess,
Their riot took beginning from your house:
And the first moouer of them to rebellion,
Your slave Marullo.
Ha! I more, then fear.
They may search boldly.
You are unmannered Grooms,
To pry into my Ladies private lodgings;
There's no Marulloe's, there.
Now I suspect too;
Where found you him?
Close hid in your Sisters Chamber.
Is that the villains sanctuary?
This confirms
All she delivered, false.
But that I scorn,
To rust my good Sword in thy slavish blood,
Thou now were dead.
Hoe's more a slave, then Fortune,
Or Misery can make me, that insults
Upon unweaponed Innocence.
Prate, you dog?
Cures snap at Lyons in the toil, whose looks
Frighted them being free.
As a wilde beast,
Drive him before you.
O Divine Cleora!
Dare thou presume to name her?
Yes, and love her:
And may say, have deserved her.
Stop his mouth:
Load him with Irons too.
I am deadly sick,
To look on him.
If he get loose, I know it,
I caper, like an Ape, again: I feel
The whip already.
This goes to my Lady.
Come, cheer you, Sir, we'll urge his punishment
To the full satisfaction of your anger.
Hee is not worth my thoughts; No corner left
In all the spacious rooms of my vexed heart,
But is filled with Cleora: And the Rape
She has done upon her honour, with my wrong,
The heavy burden of my sorrows song.
Thou art thine own disposer. Were his honours
And glories centupled, (as I must confess,
Leosthenes is most worthy) yet I will not,
How ever I may counsel, force affection.
It needs not, Sir, I prize him to his worth,
Nay, love him truly, yet would not live slau'd
To his jealous humours. Since by the hopes of heaven,
As I am free from violence, in a thought
I am not guilty.
It is believed Cleora,
And much the rather, (our great gods be praised for it)
In that I find beyond my hopes, no sign
Of riot in my house, but all things ordered,
As if I had been present.
May that move you
To pity poor Marullo.
It is my purpose
To doe him all the good I can, Cleora;
But his offence being against the State,
Must have a public trial. In the mean time
Be careful of your self, and stand engaged
No farther to Leosthenes, then you may
Come off with honour: For, being once his wife,
You are no more your own, nor mine, but must
Resolve to serve, and suffer his commands,
And not dispute'em; ever it be to late,
Consider it duly. I must to the Senate.
I am much distracted; in Leosthenes
I can find nothing justly to accuse,
But his excess of love, which I have studied
To cure with more then common means, yet still
It grows upon him. And if I may call
My sufferings merit, I stand bound to think on
Marullos dangers; though I save his life,
His love is unrewarded: I confess,
Both have deserved me, yet of force must be
Unjust to one; such is my destiny.
How now? whence flow these tears?
I have met, Madam,
An object of such cruelty, as would force
A Savage to compassion.
Speak, what is it?
Men pity beasts of rapine, if o're-match'd,
Though baited for their pleasure: but these monsters
upon a man, that can make no resistance,
Are senseless in their tyranny. Let it be granted,
Marullo is a slave, hoe's still a man;
A capital offender, yet in justice
Not to be tortured, till the Judge pronounce
His punishment.
Where is he?
Dragged to prison
With more then barbarous violence, spurned and spit on
By the insulting officers, his hands
Pinioned behind his back: laden with fetters;
Yet, with a Saint-like patience, he still offers
His face to their rude buffets.
O my grieved soul!
By whose command?
It seems, my Lord your brothers;
For hoe's a looker on: and it takes from
Honoured Leosthenes to suffer it,
For his respect to you, whose name in vain
The grieved wretch loudly calls on.
By Diana,
It is base in both, and to their teeth I'll tell 'em
That I am wronged in it.
What will you doe?
In person
Visit, and comfort him.
That will bring fuel
To the jealous fires, which burn too hot already
In Lord Leosthenes.
Let them consume him;
I am Mistress of my self. Where cruelty reigns,
There dwells nor love, nor honour.
So, it works.
Though hitherto I have ran a desperate course
To serve my brothers purposes, now it is fit,
I study mine own ends. They come. Assist me
In these my undertakings, loves great Patron,
As my intents are honest.
It is my fault.
Distrust from others springs, Timagoras,
From diffidence in our selves. But I will strive,
With the assurance of my worth, and merits,
To kill this monster, jealousy.
It is a guest
In wisdom never to be entertained
On trivial probabilities; but when
Hee does appear in pregnant proofs, not fashioned
By idle doubts and fears, to be received,
They make their own horns, that are too secure,
As well as such as give them grouth, and being
From mere imagination. Though I prize
Cleora's honour equal with mine own;
And know what large additions of power
This match brings to our family; I prefer
Our friendship, and your peace of mind so far
Aboue my own respects, or hers, that if
She hold not her true value in the test,
It is far from my ambition for her cure,
That you should wound your self.
This argues for me.
Why she should be so passionate for a Bond-man,
Falls not in compass of my understanding,
But for some nearer interest; or hee raise
This mutiny, if he loved her (as you say,
She does confess, he did) but to enjoy
By fair or foul play, what he ventured for,
To mee's a Riddle.
'Pray you, no more; already
I have answered that objection in my strong
Assurance of her virtue.
It is unfit then,
That I should press it further.
Now I must
Make in, or all is lost.
What would Timandra?
How wilde she looks? How is it with thy Lady?
Collect thy self, and speak.
As you are noble,
Have pity, or love piety. Oh!
Take breath.
Out with it boldly.
O, the best of Ladies,
I fear, is gone for ever.
Who, Cleora?
Deliver, how. 'Sdeath, be a man, Sir, speak.
Take it then in as many sighs, as words
My Lady.
What of her?
No sooner heard,
Marullo was imprisoned, but she fell
Into a deadly swoon.
But she recovered.
Say so, or he will sink too, hold, Sir, fie,
This is unmanly.
Brought again to life,
But with much labour; she awhile stood silent,
Yet in that interim vented sighs, as if
They laboured from the prison of her flesh,
To give her grieved soul freedom. On the sudden
Transported on the wings of rage, and sorrow,
She flew out of the house, and unattended
Entered the common prison.
This confirms
What but before I feared.
There you may find her,
And if you love her, as a Sister ???
Damme her.
Or you respect her safety, as a lover,
Procure Marullos liberty.
Impudence
Beyond expression.
Shall I be a Bawd
To her lust, and my dishonour?
She'll run mad else,
Or doe some violent act upon her self.
My Lord her Father, sensible of her sufferings.
Labours to gain his freedom,
O, the Devil!
Has she bewitched him too?
I'll hear no more.
Come, Sir, we'll follow her, and if no persuasion
Can make her take again her natural form,
Which by lusts powerful spell she has cast off,
This Sword shall dis-inchant her.
O my heart-strings!
I knew, it would take. Pardon me, fair Cleora.
Though I appear a traitoress, which thou wilt doe
In pity of my woes, when I make known
My lawful claim, and only seek mine own.
There's for your privacy. Stay, unbind his hands.
I dare not, Madam.
I will buy thy danger.
Take more gold, doe not trouble me with thanks;
I doe suppose it done.
My better Angel
Assumes this shape to comfort me, and wisely;
Since from the choice of all celestial figures,
Hee could not take a visible form so full
Of glorious sweetness.
Rise. I am flesh and blood,
And doe partake thy tortures.
Can it bee?
That charity should persuade you to descend
So far from your own height, as to vouchsafe
To look upon my sufferings? How I bless
My fetters now, and stand engaged to Fortune
For my captivity, no, my freedom rather!
For who dares think that place a Prison, which
You sanctify with your presence? or believe,
Sorrow has power to use her sting on him,
That is in your compassion armed, and made
Impregnable? though tyranny raise at once
All engines to assault him.
Indeed virtue,
With which you have made evident proofs, that you
Are strongly fortified, cannot fall, though shaken
With the shock of fierce temptations, but still triumphs
In spite of opposition. For my self
I may endeavour to confirm your goodness,
(A sure retreat which never will deceive you)
And with unfeigned tears express my sorrow,
For what I cannot help.
Doe you weep for me?
O save that precious balm for nobler uses,
I am unworthy of the smallest drop,
Which in your prodigality of pity
You throw away on me. Ten of these pearls
Were a large ransom to redeem a kingdom
From a consuming plague, or stop heavens vengeance
Called down by crying sins, though at that instant
In dreadful flashes falling on the roofs
Of bold blasphemers. I am justly punished
For my intent of violence to such pureness;
And all the torments flesh is sensible of
A soft and gentle penance.
Which is ended
In this your free confession.
What an object
Have I encountered?
I am blasted too:
Yet hear a little further.
Could I expire now,
These white and innocent hands closing my eyes thus,
It were not to die, but in a heavenly dream
To be transported, without the help of Charon
To the Elision shades. You make me bold:
And but to wish such happiness, I fear,
May give offence.
No, for, believe, Marullo,
You have won so much upon me, that I know not
That happiness in my gift, but you may challenge.
Are you yet satisfied?
Nor can you wish,
But what my vows will second, though it were
Your freedom first, and then in me full power
To make a second tender of my self,
And you receive the present. By this kiss
(From me a virgin bounty) I will practise
All arts for your deliverance; and that purchased
In what concerns your father aims, I speak it,
Doe not despair, but hope.
To have the Hangman,
When he is married to the cross, in scorn,
To say, gods give you joy.
But look on me,
And be not too indulgent to your folly,
And then (but that grief stops my speech) imagine,
What language I should use.
Against thy self.
Thy malice cannot reach me.
How?
So, brother;
Though you join in the Dialogue to accuse me,
What I have done, I'll justify; and these favours,
Which you presume will taint me in my honour;
Though jealousy use all her eyes to spy out
One stain in my behaviour; or Envy
As many tongues to wound it, shall appear
My best perfections. For to the world
I can in my defence allege such reasons,
As my accusers shall stand dumb to hear 'em,
When in his Fetters this mans worth and virtues
But truly told shall shame your boasted glories,
Which fortune claims a share in.
The base villain
Shall never live to hear it.
Murder, help,
Through me you shall pass to him.
What's the matter?
On whom is your Sword drawn? are you a judge?
Or else ambitious of the hangmans office
Before it be designed you? you are bold too,
Vnhand my daughter.
Shoe's my valours prize.
With her consent, not otherwise. You may urge
Your title in the Court; if it prove good,
Possess her freely: Guard him safely off too.
You'll hear me, Sir?
If you have ought to say,
Deliver it in public; all shall find
A just Judge of Timoleon.
You must
Of force now use your patience.
Vengeance rather
Whirle-windes of rage possess me; you are wronged
Beyond a Stoicque sufferance, yet you stand,
As you were rooted.
I feel something here,
That boldly tells me, all the love and service,
I pay Cleora, is another due,
And therefore cannot prosper.
Melancholy,
Which now you must not yield to.
It is apparent,
In fact your Sisters innocent, however
Changed by her violent will.
If you believe so,
Follow the chase still: And in open court
Plead your own interest; we shall find the Judge
Our friend I fear not.
Some thing I shall say,
But what ???
Collect your self, as we walk thither.
Tic wondrous strange! nor can it fall within
The reach of my belief, a slave should be
The owner of a temperance, which this age
Can hardly parallel in free-borne Lords,
Or Kings proud of their purple.
It is most true.
And though at first it did appear a fable,
All circumstances meet to give it credit;
Which work so on me, that I am compelled
To be a Suitor, not be denied,
Hee may have aequall hearing.
Sir, you graced me
With the title of your Mistress, but my fortune
Is so far distant from command, that I
Lay by the power you gave me, and plead humbly
For the preserver of my fame and honour.
And pray you, Sir, in charity believe,
That since I had ability of speech,
My tongue has so much been inured to truth,
I know not, how to lye,
I'll rather doubt
The Oracles of the gods, then question, what
Your innocence delivers: and as far
As justice with mine honour can give way,
He shall have favour. Bring him in, unbound:
And though Leosthenes may challenge from me,
For his late worthy service, credit to
All things he can allege in his own cause,
Marullo (so I think you call his name)
Shall find, I doe reserve one ear for him,
To let in mercy. Sit and take your places;
The right of this fair virgin first determined,
Your Bond-men shall be censured.
With all rigour,
We doe expect.
Tempered, I say, with mercy.
Your hand Leosthenes: I cannot doubt
You that have bin victorious in the war,
should in a combat fought with words come off,
But with assured triumph.
My deserts, Sir,
(If without arrogance I may stile them such)
Arm me from doubt, and fear.
It is nobly spoken,
Nor be thou daunted (howsoe're the fortune
Has marked thee out a slave) to speak thy merits;
For virtue though in rags may challenge more,
Then vice set off with all the trim of greatness.
I had rather fall under so just a judge,
Then be acquitted by a man corrupt
And partial in his censure.
Note his language,
It relishes of better breeding then
His present state dares promise.
I observe it.
Place the fair Lady in the midst, that both
Looking with covetous eyes upon the prize
They are to plead for, may from the fair object,
Teach Harms eloquence.
Am I fallen so lowe
My birth, my honour, and what's dearest to me,
My love, and witness of my love, my service,
So vnder-valewd, that I must contend
With one, where my excess of glory must
Make his o'rethrow a conquest? shall my fullness
supply defects in such a thing, that never
Knew any thing but want and emptiness?
Give him a name, and keep it such from this
Unequal competition? if my pride
Or any bold assurance of my worth,
Has plucked this mountain of disgrace upon me,
I am justly punished, and submit; but if
I have been modest, and esteemed my self
More injured in the tribute of the praise,
Which no desert of mine prized by selfe-loue
Ever exacted; may this cause, and minute
For ever be forgotten. I dwell long
Upon mine anger, and now turn to you
Ungrateful fair one; and since you are such,
It is lawful for me to proclaim my self,
And what I have deserved.
Neglect, and scorn
From me for this proud vaunt.
You nourish, Lady
Your own dishonour in this harsh reply,
And almost prove what some hold of your sex.
You are all made up of passion. For if reason
Or judgment could find entertainment with you,
Or that you would distinguish of the objects
You look on in a true glass, not feduc'd
By the false light of your too violent will,
I should not need to plead for that, which you
With joy should offer. Is my high birth a blemish?
Or does my wealth, which all the vain expense
Of women cannot waste, breed loathing in you?
The honours I can call mine own thought scandals?
Am I deformed, or for my Fathers sins
Mulcted by nature? if you interpret these
As crimes, it is fit I should yield up my self
Most miserably guilty. But perhaps
(Which yet I would not credit) you have seen
This gallant, pitch the bar, or bear a burden
Would crack the shoulders of a weaker bond-man;
Or any other boisterous exercise,
Assuring a strong back to satisfy
Your loose desires, insatiate as the grave.
You are foul mouthed.
Ill mannered too.
I speak
In the way of supposition, and entreat you
With all the fervor of a constant lover,
That you would free your self from these aspersions,
Or any imputation black tongued Slander
Could throw on your unspotted virgin-whitenesse;
To which there is no easier way, then by
Vouchsafing him your favour; him, to whom
Next to the General, and the gods, and fautors,
The country owes her safety.
Are you stupid?
Slight leap into his arms, and there ask pardon.
O, you expect your slaves reply, no doubt
We shall have a fine oration; I will teach
My Spaniel to howl in sweeter language,
And keep a better method.
You forget
The dignity of the place.
Silence.
Speak boldly.
It is your authority gives me a tongue,
I should be dumb else; and I am secure,
I cannot clothe my thoughts, and just defence
In such an abject phrase, but twill appear
Equal, if not aboue my lowe condition.
I need no bombast language, stolen from such,
As make Nobility from prodigious terms
The hearers understand not; I bring with me
No wealth to boast of, neither can I number
Uncertain fortunes favours, with my merits;
I dare not force affection, or presume
To censure her discretion, that looks on me
As a weak man, and not her fancies Idol.
How I have loved, and how much I have suffered,
And with what pleasure undergone the burden
Of my ambitious hopes (in aiming at
The glad possession of a happiness,
The abstract of all goodness in mankind
Can at no part deserve) with my confession
Of mine own wants, is all that can plead for me.
But if that pure desires, not blended with
Foul thoughts, that like a River keeps his course,
Retaining still the clearness of the spring,
From whence it took beginning, may be thought
Worthy acceptance; then I dare rise up
And tell this gay man to his teeth, I never
Durst doubt her constancy, that like a rock
Beats off temptations, as that mocks the fury
Of the proud waives; nor from my jealous fears
Question that goodness, to which as an Altar
Of all perfection, he that truly loved,
Should rather bring a sacrifice of service,
Then raze it with the engines of suspicion;
Of which when he can wash an AEthiope white,
Leosthenes may hope to free himself;
But till then never.
Bold presumptuous villain.
I will go farther, and make good upon him
In the pride of all his honours, birth, and fortunes,
Hoe's more unworthy, then my self.
Thou lie.
Confute him with a whip, and the doubt decided,
Punish him with a halter.
O the gods!
My ribs, though made of Brass can not contain
My heart swollen big with rage. The lye! Whip?
Let fury then disperse these clouds, in which
I long have masked disguised; that when they know,
Whom they have injured, they may faint with horror
Of my revenge, which wretched men expect,
As sure as fate to suffer.
Ha! Pisander!
It is the bold Theban!
There's no hope for me then:
I thought I should have put in for a share,
And borne Cleora from them both; but now
This stranger looks so terrible, that I dare not
So much as look on her.
Now as my self,
Thy equal, at thy best, Leosthenes.
For you, Timagoras; praise heaven, you were borne
Cleora's brother, it is your safest armour.
But I loose time. The base lie cast upon me,
I thus return: thou art a perjured man,
False and perfidious: And hast made a tender
Of love, and service to this Lady; when
Thy soul (if thou hast any) can bear witness,
That thou were not thine own. For proof of this,
Look better on this virgin, and consider
This Persian shape laid by, and she appearing
In a Greekish dress, such as when first you saw her,
If she resemble not Pisanders sister,
One, called Stately?
It is the same! my guilt
So chokes my spirits, I can not deny
My falsehood, nor excuse it.
This is she
To whom thou were contracted: this the Lady,
That when thou were my prisoner fairly taken
In the Spartan war, that begged thy liberty,
And with it gave her self to thee ungrateful.
No more, Sir, I entreat you; I perceive
True sorrow in his looks, and a consent
To make me reparation in mine honour,
And then I am most happy.
The wrong done her,
Drew me from Thebes with a full intent to kill thee:
But this fair object, met me in my fury
And quite disarmed mo, being denied to have her
By you my Lord Archidamus, and not able
To live far from her, love (the Mistress of
All quaint devices, prompted me to treat
With a friend of mine, who as a Pirate sold me
For a slave to you my Lord, and gave my Sister
As a present to Cleora.
Strange Meanders!
There how I bare my self needs no relation.
But if so far descending from the height
Of my then flourishing fortunes, to the lowest
Condition of a man, to have means only
To feed my eye, with the sight of what I honoured,
The dangers to I vnderwent; the sufferings;
The clearness of my interest may deserve
A noble recompense in your lawful favour.
Now it is apparent that Leosthenes
Can claim no interest in you, you may please
To think upon my service.
Sir, my want
Of power to satisfy so great a debt,
Makes me accuse my fortune - but if that
Out of the bounty of your mind, you think,
A free surrender of my self full payment,
I gladly tender it.
With my consent to
All injuries forgotten.
I will study
In my future service to descerue your favour
And good opinion.
Thus I gladly fee
This Advocate to plead for me.
You will find me
An easy judge, when I have yielded reasons
Of your Bond-mens falling off from their obedience,
And after, as you please, determine of me.
I found their natures apt to mutiny
From your too cruel usage; and made trial
How far they might be wrought on; to instruct you
To look with more prevention, and care
To what they may hereafter undertake
Upon the like occasions. The hurt's little
They have committed, nor was ever cuer
But with some pain effected. I confess
In hope to force a grant of fair Cleora
I urged them to defend the Town against you;
Nor had the terror of your whips, but that
I was preparing of defence else-where
So soon got entrance; in this I am guilty,
Now as you please, your censure.
Bring them in,
And though you have given me power, I doe entreat
Such as have undergone their insolence,
It may not be offensive though I study
Pity more then revenge.
Twill best become you.
I must consent.
For me I'll find a time
To be revenged hereafter.
Give me leave,
I'll speak for all.
What can thou say to hinder
The course of justice?
Nothing. You may see
Wee are prepared for hanging, and confess
We have deserved it. Our most humble suite is
We may not twice be executed.
Twice? how meanest thou!
At the Gallows first, and after in a Ballad
Sung to some villainous tune. There are ten-grot-Rimers
About the Town grown fat on these occasions.
Let but a Chapel fall, or a street be fired,
A foolish lover hang himself for pure love,
Or any such like accident, and before
They are cold in their graves, some damned Dittie's made
Which makes their ghosts walk. Let the State take order
For the redress of this abuse, recording
It was done by my advice, and for my part
I'll cut as clean a caper from the Ladder,
As ever merry Greek did.
Yet I think
You would show more activity to delight
Your Master for a pardon.
O, I would dance
As I were all ayre, and fire.
And ever be
Obedient and humble?
As his Spaniel,
Though he kicked me for exercise, and the like
I promise for all the rest.
Rise then, you have it.
Cease these clamours.
And now the war being ended to our wishes,
And such as went the pilgrimage of love,
Happy in full fruition of their hopes,
It is lawful thanks paid to the powers divine,
To drown our cares in honest mirth, and Wine.

It was in the Temple where I first beheld her,
And now again the same, what Omen yet
Follows of that? None but imaginary,
Why should my hopes or fate be timorous?
The place is holy, so is my intent:
I love her beauties to the holy purpose,
And that (me thinks) admits comparison
With mans first creation, the place blessed
And is his right home back (if he achieve it.)
The Church hath first begun our interview
And that's the place must join us into one,
So there's beginning and perfection too.
O Sir, are you here? Come, the wind's fair with you,
You're like to have a swift and pleasant passage.
Sure you're deceived friend, it is contrary
In my best judgement.
What for Malta?
If you could buy a gale amongst the Witches,
They could not serve you such a lucky pennyworth
As comes a Gods Name.
Even now I observed
The temples Vane to turn full in my face,
I know it is against me.
Against you?
Then you know not where you are.
Not well indeed
Are you not well sir?
Yes, Jasperino.
Unless there be some hidden malady
Within me, that I understand not.
And that
I begin to doubt sir, I never knew
Your inclinations to travels at a pause
With any cause to hinder it till now.
Ashore you were wont to call your servants up,
And help to trap your Horses for the speed.
At sea I have seen you weigh the anchor with 'em,
Hoist sails for fear to lose the foremost breath,
Be in continual prayers for fair winds,
And have you changed your orisons?
No, friend,
I keep  same church, same devotion.
Lover I'm sure you're none, the Stoic
Was found in you long ago, your mother
Nor best friends, who have set snares of beauty,
I and choice ones too, could never trap you that way
What might be the cause?
Lord, how violent,
Thou art; I was but meditating of
Somewhat I heard within the temple.
Is this violence? it is but idleness
Compared with your hast yesterday.
I'm all this while a going, man.
Backwards, I think, sir. Look your servants.
The sea-men call, shall we Board your trunks?
No, not to day.
Tic the critical day,
It seems, and the sign in Aquarius.
We must not to sea to day, this smoke will bring forth fire.
Keep all on shore, I doe not know the end
(Which needs I must do) of an affair in hand
Ere I can go to sea.
Well, your pleasure.
Let him even take his leisure too, we are safer on land.
How now! The Laws of the Medes are changed sure, salute
a woman, he kisses too: wonderful! where learnt he this? &amp; does it
perfectly too; in my conscience he ne'er rehearsed it before. Nay, go
on, this will be stranger and better news at Valentia, then if he had
ransomed half Greece from the Turk.
You are a Scholar, sir.
A weak one, Lady.
Which of the Sciences is this love you speak of?
From your tongue I take it to be music.
You are skilful in it, can sing at first sight.
And I have showed you all my skill at once.
I want more words to express me further.
And must be forced to repetition:
I love you dearly.
Be better advised, sir:
Our eyes are Sentinels unto our judgements,
And should give certain judgement what they see;
But they are rash sometimes, and tell us wonders
Of common things, which when our judgements find,
They can then check the eyes, and cal them blind.
But I am further, Lady; yesterday
Was mine eyes employment, and hither now
They brought my judgement, where are both agreed.
Both Houses then consenting, it is agreed,
Only there wants the confirmation
By the hand Royal, that's your part, Lady.
Oh there's one above me, sir, for five days past
To be recal'd; sure, mine eyes were mistaken,
This was the man was meant me, that he should come
So near his time, and miss it.
We might have come by the Carriers from Valentia, I see and
saved all our sea-provision: we are at farthest sure, methinks I should
doe something too, I meant to be a venturer in this voyage. Yonder's
another Vessel, I'll board her, if she be lawful prize, down goes her
top-sail.
Lady, your father.
Is in health, I hope.
Your eye shall instantly instruct you, Lady.
He's coming hitherward.
What needed then
Your duteous preface? I had rather
He had come unexpected, you must stall
A good presence with unnecessary blabbing:
And how welcome for your part you are,
I'm sure you know.
Wilt never mend this scorn
One side nor other? Must I be enjoined
To follow still whilst she flies from me? Well,
Fates do your worst, I'll please my self with sight
Of her, at all opportunities,
If but to spite her anger, I know she had
Rather see me dead then living, and yet
She knows no cause for it, but a peevish will.
You seemed displeased Lady on the sudden.
Your pardon Sir, it is my infirmity,
Nor can I other reason render you,
Then his or hers, or some particular thing
They must abandon as a deadly poison,
Which to a thousand other tastes were wholesome,
Such to mine eyes is that same fellow there,
The same that report speaks of the Basilic.
This is a frequent frailty in our nature,
There's scarce a man amongst a thousand sound,
But hath his imperfection: one distastes
The sent of Roses, which to infinites
Most pleasing is, and odoriferous.
One oil, the enemy of poison,
Another Wine, the cheerer of the heart,
And lively refresher of the countenance.
Indeed this fault (if so it be) is general,
There's scarce a thing but is both loved and loathed,
My self (I must confess) have the same frailty.
And what may be your poison sir? I am bold with you.
And what might be your desire perhaps, a cherry.
I am no enemy to any creature
My memory has, but yon' Gentleman.
He does ill to tempt your sight, if he knew it.
He cannot be ignorant of that Sir,
I have not spared to tell him so, and I want
To help my self, since he's a Gentleman
In good respect with my father, and follows him.
He's out of his place then now.
I am a mad Wag, wench.
So me thinks; but for your comfort I can tell you, we have
a Doctor in the City that undertakes the cure of such.
Tush, I know what Physic is best for the state of mine own
body.
It is scarce a well governed state, I believe.
I could show thee such a thing with an Ingredian that we
two would compound together, and if it did not tame the maddest
blood in the town for two hours after, Isle ne'er profess Physic again.
A little poppy Sir, were good to cause you sleep.
Poppy; I'll give thee a pop in the lips for that first, and begin
there: Poppy is one simple indeed, and Cuckoo (what you call it)
another: I'll discover no more now, another time I'll show thee all.
My Father, Sir.
Oh Joanna, I came to meet thee, your devotion's ended.
For this time, Sir,
I shall change my Saint, I fear me, I find
A giddy turning in me; Sir, this while
I am beholding to this Gentleman
Who left his own way to keep me company,
And in discourse I find him much desirous
To see your castle: He hath deserved it, Sir,
If ye please to grant it.
With all my heart, Sir.
Yet ther's an article between, I must know
Your country; we use not to give survey
Of our chief strengths to strangers, our citadels
Are placed conspicuous to outward view,
On Promonts tops; but within are secrets.
A Valentian, Sir.
A Valentian,
That's native, Sir; of what name, I beseech you?
Alsemero, Sir.
Alsemero; not the son of John de Alsemero?
The same Sir.
My best love bids you welcome.
He was wont to call me so, and then he speaks
A most unfeigned truth.
Oh Sir, I knew your father,
We two were in acquaintance long ago
Before our chins were worth Julan Down,
And so continued till the stamp of time
Had coined us into silver: Well, he's gone,
A good Soldier went with him.
You went together in that, Sir.
No by Saint Jaques, I came behind him.
Yet I have done somewhat too, an unhappy day
Swallowed him at last at Gibraltar
In fight with those rebellious Hollanders,
Was it not so?
Whose death I had revenged,
Or followed him in Fate, had not the late League
 me.
I, I, it was time to breath:
Oh Joanna, I should he told thee news,
I saw Piracquo lately.
That's ill news.
He's hot preparing for this day of triumph,
Thou must be a Bride within this seven-night.
Ha!
Nay good Sir, be not so violent, with speed
I cannot render satisfaction
Unto the dear companion of my soul,
Virginity (whom I thus long have lived with)
And part with it so rude and suddenly,
Can such friends divide never to meet again,
Without a solemn farewell?
Tush, tush, there's a toy.
I must now part, and never meet again
With any joy on earth; Sir, your pardon,
My affairs call on me.
How Sir? by no means,
Not changed so soon, I hope, you must see my castle,
And her best entertainment ere we part,
I shall think my self unkindly used else.
Come, come, let's on, I had good hope your stay
Had been a while with us in Elegant;
I might have bid you to my daughters wedding.
He means to feast me, &amp; poisons me before hand,
I should be dearly glad to be there, sir,
Did my occasions suit as I could wish.
I shall be sorry if you be not there
When it is done sir, but not so suddenly.
I tell you, sir, the Gentleman's complete,
A Courtier and a Gallant, enriched
With many fair and noble ornaments,
I would not change him for a son-in-law,
For any he in Spain, the proudest he,
And we have great ones, that you know.
He's much bound to you, sir.
He shall be bound to me,
As fast as this tie can hold him, Il'e want my will else.
I shall want mine if you do it.
But come, by the way, I'll tell you more of him:
How shall I dare to venture in his castle,
When he discharges murderers at the gate?
But I must on, for back I cannot go.
Not this Serpent gone yet?
Look Girl, thy glove's fallen,
Stay, stay, Deflores help a little.
Here, Lady.
Mischief on your officious forwardness,
Who bade you stoop? they touch my hand no more:
There, for t'others sake I part with this,
Take um and draw thine own skin offwith um.
Here's a favour come; with a mischief: Now
I know she had rather wear my pelt tanned
In a pair of dancing pumps, then I should thrust my fingers;
Into her sockets here I know she hates me,
Yet cannot choose but love her:
No matter, if but to vex her, I'll haunt her still,
Though I get nothing else, Il'e have my will.
Lollio, I must trust thee with a secret,
But thou must keep it.
I was ever close to a secret, Sir.
The diligence that I have found in thee,
The care and industry already past,
Assures me of thy good continuance.
I have a wife.
Fie sir, it is too late to keep her secret, she's known to be married
all the town and country over.
Thou goosed too fast my Lollio, that knowledge
I allow no man can be bared it;
But there is a knowledge which is nearer,
Deeper and sweeter, Lollio.
Well sir, let us handle that between you and I.
It is that I go about man; Lollio,
My wife is young,
So much the worse to be kept secret, sir.
Why now thou meet the substance of the point,
I am old, Lollio.
No sir, it is I am old Lollio.
Yet why may not this concord and sympathize?
Old trees and young plants often grow together,
Well enough agreeing.
I sir, but the old trees raise themselves higher and broader
then the young plants.
Shrewd application: there's the fear man,
I would wear my ring on my own finger;
Whilst it is borrowed it is none of mine,
But his that uses it.
You must keep it on still then, if it but lye by,
One or other will be thrusting into it.
Thou conceiv'st me Lollio, here thy watchful eye
Must have employment, I cannot always be at home.
I dare swear you cannot.
I must look out.
I know it, you must look out, it is every mans case.
Here I doe say must thy employment be.
To watch her treadings, and in my absence
Supply my place.
I'll do my best, Sir, yet surely I cannot see who you should
have cause to be jealous of.
Thy reason for that Lollio, it is a comfortable question.
We have but two sorts of people in the house, and both under
the whip, that's fools and mad-men; the one has not wit enough
to be knaves, and the other not knavery enough to be fools.
I those are all my Patients, Lollio.
I do profess the cure of either sort:
My trade, my living it is, I thrive by it;
But here's the care that mixes with my thrift,
The daily Visitants, that come to see
My brainsick Patients, I would not have
To see my wife: Gallants I do observe
Of quick enticing eyes, rich in habits,
Of stature and proportion very comely:
These are most shrewd temptations, Lollio.
They may be easily answered, Sir, if they come to see the
Fools and Mad-men, you and I may serve the turn, and let my Mistress
alone, she's of neither sort.
It is a good ward, indeed come they to see
Our Mad-men or our Fools, let um see no more
Then what they come for; by that consequent
They must not see her, I'm sure she's no fool.
And I'm sure she's no mad-man.
Hold that Buckler fast, Lollio my trust
Is on thee, and I account it firm and strong.
What hour is it Lollio?
Towards belly hour Sir.
Dinner time, thou mean twelve a clock.
Yes Sir, for every part has his hour, we wake at six and look
about us, that's eye-hour; at seven we should pray, thats knee-hour;
at eight walk, that's leg hour; at nine gather flowers, and pluck a
Rose, that's nose-hour; at ten we drink, that's mouth hour; at eelven
lay about us for victuals, that's hand hour; at twelve go to dinner,
that's belly hour.
Profoundly, Lollio it will be long
Ere all thy Scholars learn this Lesson, and
I did look to have a new one enteredstay
I think my expectation is come home.
Save you sir, my business speaks it self,
This sight takes off the labour of my tongue.
I, I Sir, it is plain enough, you mean him for my patient.
And if your pains prove but commodious,
To give but some little strength to his sick
And weak part of Nature in him, these are
But patterns to show you of the whole pieces
That will follow to you, beside the charge
Of diet washing, and other necessaries
Fully defrayed.
Believe it, sir, there shall no care be wanting.
Sir, an officer in this place may deserve something,
The trouble will pass through my hands.
It is fit something should come to your hands then, sir.
Yes, sir, it is I must keep him sweet, and read to him, what is
his name.
His name is Antonio, marry we use but half
To him, only Tonie.
Tonie, Tonie, it is enough, and a very good name for a fool,
what's your name Tonie?
He, he he, well I thank you cousin, he he, he.
Good Boy hold up your head: he can laugh, I perceive by
that he is no beast.
Well sir, if you can raise him but to any height,
Any degree of wit, might he attain
(As I might say) to creep but on all four,
Towards the chair of wit, or walk on crutches,
It would add an honour to your worthy pains,
And a great family might pray for you,
To which he should be heir, had he discretion
To claim and guide his own; assure you sir,
He is a Gentleman.
Nay, there's no body doubted that, at first sight I knew him
for a Gentleman, he looks no other yet.
Let him have good attendance and sweet lodging.
As good as my Mistress lies in sir, and as you allow us time
and means, we can raise him to the higher degree of discretion.
Nay, there shall no cost want sir.
He will hardly be stretched up to the wit of a Magnifico.
Oh no, that's not to be expected, far shorter
Will be enough.
Isle warrant you make him fit to bear office in five weeks,
I'll undertake to wind him up to the wit of Constable.
If it be lower then that it might serve turn.
No fie, to level him with a Headborough, Beadle, or Watchman,
were but little better then he is; Constable I'll able him: if he
do come to be a Justice afterwards, let him thank the Keeper. Or I'll
go further with you, say I do bring him up to my own pitch, say I
make him as wise as my self.
Why there I would have it.
Well, go to, either I'll be as errant a fool as he, or he shall
be as wise as I, and then I think twill serve his turn.
Nay, I doe like thy wit passing well.
Yes, you may, yet if I had not been a fool, I had had more
wit then I have too remember what state you find me in.
I will, and so leave you: your best cares I beseech you.
Take you none with you, leave um all with us.
Oh my cousins gone, cousin, cousin, oh.
Peace, Peace Tony, you must not cry child, you must be whipped
if you do, your cousin is here still, I am your cousin, Tony.
He, he, then I'll not cry, if thou be my cousin, he, he, he.
I were best try his wit a little, that I may know what Form to
place him in.
I, doe Lollio, doe.
I must ask him easy questions at first; Tony, how many
true fingers has a Taylor on his right hand?
As many as on his left, cousin.
Good, and how many on both?
Two less then a Dewce, cousin.
Very well answered; I come to you again, cousin Tony, How
many fools goes to a wise man?
Forty in a day sometimes, cousin.
Forty in a day? How prove you that?
All that fall out amongst themselves, and go to a Lawyer to
be made friends.
A parlous fool, he must sit in the fourth Form at least, I perceive
that: I come again Tony, How many knaves make an honest
man?
I know not that cousin.
No, the question is too hard for you: I'll tell you cousin,
there's three knaves may make an honest man, a Sergeant, a Jailer,
and a Beadle; the Sergeant catches him, the Jailer holds him, and
the Beadle lashes him; and if he be not honest then, the Hangman
must cure him.
Ha, ha, ha, that's fine sport cousin.
This was too deep a question for the fool Lollio.
Yes, this might have served your self, tho I say it;
Once more, and you shall go play Tonie.
I, play at push-pin in cousin, ha, he.
So thou shalt, say how many fools are here.
Two, cousin, thou and I.
Nay, you're too forward there, Tonie mark my question, how
many fools and knaves are here? a fool before a knave, a fool behind
a knave, between every two fools a knave, how many fools, how
many knaves?
I never learnt so far cousin.
Thou putst too hard questions to him, Lollio.
I'll make him understand it easily; cousin stand there.
I cousin.
Master, stand you next the fool.
Well, Lollio.
Here's my place: mark now Tonie, there a fool before a knave.
That's I cousin.
Here's a fool behind a knave, that's I, and between us two fools
there is a knave, that's my Master, it is but we three, that's all.
We three, we three, cousin.
Putt's head in the pillory, the breads too little.
Fly, fly, and he catches the swallow.
Give her more onion, or the Devil put the rope about
her crag.
You may hear what time of day it is, the Chimes of Bedlam
goes.
Peace, peace, or the wire comes.
Cat whore, Cat whore, her permasant, her permasant.
Peace, I say, their hour's come, they must be fed, Lollio.
Theres no hope of recovery of that Welsh mad-man,
Was undone by a Mouse, that spoiled him a Permasant,
Lost his wits for 't.
Go to your charge, Lollio, I'll to mine.
Go you to your mad-mens Ward, let me alone with your
fools.
And remember my last charge, Lollio.
Of which your Patients do you think I am? Come Tonie you
must amongst your School-fellows now, there's pretty Scholars
amongst um, I can tell you there's some of 'em at stultus, stulta, stultum.
I would see the mad-men, cousin, if they would not bite me.
No, they shall not bite thee, Tonie.
They bite when they are at dinner, do they not cousin.
They bite at dinner indeed, Tonie; well, I hope to get credit
by thee, I like thee the best of all the Scholars that ever I brought
up, and thou shalt prove a wise man, or I'll prove a fool my self.
OH Sir, I'm ready now for that fair service,
Which makes the name of friend sit glorious on you.
Good Angels and this conduct be your guide,
Fitness of time and place is there set down, sir.
The joy I shall return rewards my service.
How wise is Alsemero in his friend?
It is a sign he makes his choice with judgement.
Then I appear in nothing more approved,
Then making choice of him; for it is a Principle, He that can choose
That bosom well, who of his thoughts partakes,
Proves most discreet in every choice he makes.
Me thinks I love now with the eyes of judgement.
And see the way to merit, clearly see it.
A true deserver like a Diamond sparkles,
In darkness you may see him, that's in absence,
Which is the greatest darkness falls on love,
Yet is he best discerned then
With intellectual eye-sight; what's Piracquo
My Father spends his breath for, and his blessing
Is only mine, as I regard his name,
Else it goes from me, and turns head against me,
Tranform'd into a Curse; some speedy way
Must be remembered, he's so forward too,
So urgent that way, scarce allows me breath
To speak to my new comforts.
Yonders she
What ever ails me, now a late especially,
I can as well be hanged as refrain seeing her;
Some twenty times aday, nay not so little,
Doe I force errands, frame ways and excuses
To come into her sight, and I have small reason for it,
And less encouragement; for she baits me still
Every time worse then other, does profess herself
The cruelest enemy to my face, in town,
At no hand can abide the sight of me,
As if danger, or ill luck hung in my looks.
I must confess my face is bad enough,
But I know far worse has better fortune,
And not endured alone, but doted on,
And yet such pickhaird faces, chins like Witches,
Here and there five hairs, whispering in a corner,
As if they grew in fear one of another,
Wrinkles like troughs, where swine deformity swells
The tears of perjury that lie there like wash,
Fallen from the slimy and dishonest eye,
Yet such a one plucked sweets without restraint,
And has the grace of beauty to his sweet,
Though my hard fate has thrust me out to servitude,
I tumbled into th'world a Gentleman.
She turns her blessed eye upon me now,
And I'll endure all storms before I part with it.
Againthis ominous ill-fac'd fellow more disturbs me,
Then all my other passions.
Now't begins again,
Isle stand this storm of hail though the stones pelt me.
Thy business? What's thy business?
Soft and fair, I cannot part so soon now.
The villain's fixedThou standing toad-pool.
The shower falls amain now.
Who sent thee? What's thy errand? leave my sight.
My Lord your father charged me to deliver a message to you.
What another since, do it and be hanged then, let me be rid of
thee.
True service merits mercy.
What's thy message?
Let beauty settle but in patience, you shall hear all.
A dallying trifling torment.
Signior Alonzo de Piracquo Lady, sole brother to Tomazo de Piracquo.
Slave, when will it make an end?
Too soon I shall.
What all this while of him?
The said Alonzo, with the foresaid Tomazo.
Yet again.
Is new alighted.
Vengeance strike the news,
Thou thing most loathed, what cause was there in this
To bring thee to my sight?
My Lord your father charged me to seek you out.
Is there no other to send his errand by?
It seems it is my luck to be in the way still.
Get thee from me.
Sowhy am not I an Ass to devise ways
Thus to be raild at? I must see her still,
I shall have a mad qualm within this hour again,
I know it, and like a Common Garden Bull,
I doe but take breath to be lugged again.
What this may bode I know not, I'll despair the less,
Because ther's daily presidents of bad faces
Beloved beyond all reason; these foul chops
May come into favour one day, amongst his fellows:
Wrangling has proved the mistress of good pastime,
As children cry themselves asleep, I have seen
Women have chid themselves abed to men.
I never see this fellow, but I think
Of some harm towards me, danger's in my mind still,
I scarce leave trembling of an hour after.
The next good mood I find my father in,
I'll get him quite discarded: Oh I was
Lost in this small disturbance and forgot.
Afflictions fiercer torrent that now comes,
To bear down all my comforts.
You're both welcome,
But an especial one belongs to you, sir,
To whose most noble name our love presents
The addition of a son, our son Alonzo.
The treasury of honour cannot bring forth
A Title I should more rejoice in, sir.
You have improved it well; daughter prepare,
The day will steal upon thee suddenly.
How ever, I will be sure to keep the night,
If it should come so near me.
Alonzo.
Brother.
In troth I see small welcome in her eye.
Fie, you are too severe a censurer
Of love in all points, there's no bringing on you
If Lovers should mark every thing a fault,
Affection would be like an ill set book,
Whose faults might prove as big as half the volume.
That's all I do entreat.
It is but reasonable,
I'll see what my son says too't: Son Alonzo,
Here's a motion made but to reprieve
A Maidenhead three days longer; the request
Is not far out of reason, for indeed
The former time is pinching.
Though my joys
Be set back so much time as I could wish
They had been forward, yet since she desires it,
The time is set as pleasing as before,
I find no gladness wanting.
May I ever meet it in that point still:
You're nobly welcome, sirs.
So, did you mark the dullness of her parting now?
What dullness? Thou art so exceptious still.
Why let it go then I am but a fool
To mark your harms so heedfully.
Whore's the oversight?
Come, your faith's cozened in her, strongly cozened,
Unsettle your affection with all speed,
Wisdom can bring it too, your peace is ruined else.
Think what a torment it is to marry one
Whose heart is leapt into another bosom:
If ever pleasure she receive from thee,
It comes not in thy name, or of thy gift,
She lies but with another in thine arms,
He the half father unto all thy children
In the conception, if he get 'em not,
She helps to get 'em for him, in his passions, and how dangerous
And shameful her restraint may go in time to,
It is not to be thought on without sufferings.
You speak as if she loved some other then.
Do you apprehend so slowly?
Nay, and that be your fear only, I am safe enough,
Preserve your friendship and your counsel brother,
For times of more distress, I should depart
An enemy, a dangerous, deadly one
To any but thy self, that should but think
She knew the meaning of inconstancy,
Much less the use and practice; yet w'are friends,
Pray let no more be urged, I can endure
Much, till I meet an injury to her,
Then I am not my self. Farewell sweet brother,
How much w'are bound to heaven to depart lovingly.
Why here is loves tame madness, thus a man
Quickly steals into his vexation.
The place is my charge, you have kept your hour,
And the reward of a just meeting bless you.
I hear my Lady coming; complete Gentleman,
I dare not be too busy with my praises,
They are dangerous things to deal with.
This goes well, these women are the Ladies Cabinets,
Things of most precious trust are lock into 'em.
I have within mine eye, all my desires,
Requests that holy prayers ascend heaven for'
And brings 'em down to furnish our defects,
Come not more sweet to our necessities,
Then thou unto my wishes.
W'are so like in our expressions, Lady, that unless I borrow
The same words, I shall never find their equals.
How happy were this meeting this embrace,
If it were free from envy? This poor kiss
It has an enemy, a hateful one,
That wishes poison to it: how well were I now
If there were none such name known as Piracquo?
Nor no such tie as the command of Parents,
I should be but too much blessed.
One good service
Would strike off both your fears, and I'll go near it too,
Since you are so distressed, remove the cause
The command ceases, so there's two fears blown out
With one and the same blast.
Pray let me find you sir. What might that service be so
strangely happy?
The honorablest piece about man, Valour.
I'll send a challenge to Piracquo instantly.
How? Call you that extinguishing of fear
When it is the only way to keep it flaming?
Are not you ventured in the action,
That's all my joys and comforts? Pray no more, sir.
Say you prevailed, your dangers and not mine then
The law would claim you from me, or obscurity
Be made the grave to bury you alive.
I'm glad these thoughts come forth, O keep not one
Of this condition sir; here was a course
Found to bring sorrow on her way to death:
The tears would ne'er a dried, till dust had choked 'em.
Blood-guiltiness becomes a fouler visage,
And now I think on oneI was too blame,
I ha mared so good a market with my scorn;
'T had been done questionless, the ugliest creature
Creation framed for some use, yet to see
I could not mark so much where it should be.
Lady.
Why men of Art make much of poison,
Keep one to expel another, where was my Art?
Lady, you hear not me.
I do especially sir, the present times are not so sure of our side
As those hereafter may be, we must use 'em then
As thrifty folks their wealth, sparingly, now till the time opens.
You teach wisdom, Lady.
Within there Diaphanta.
Do you call, Madam?
Perfect your service, and conduct this Gentleman
The private way you brought him.
I shall, Madam.
My love's as firm as love ever built upon.
I have watched this meeting, and doe wonder much
What shall become of t'other, I'm sure both
Cannot be served unless she transgress; happily
Then Il'e put in for one: for if a woman
Fly from one point, from him she makes a husband,
She spreads and mounts then like Arithmetic,
1, 10, 100, 1000, 10000, proves in time Sutler to an Army Royal.
Now do I look to be most richly raild at,
Yet I must see her.
Why, put case I loathed him
As much as youth and beauty hates a Sepulchre,
Must I needs show it? Cannot I keep that secret,
And serve my turn upon him?see he's hereDeflores.
Ha, I shall run mad with joy,
She called me fairly by my name Deflores,
And neither Rogue nor Rascal.
What have you done to your face elate? you've met with some good Physician,
You've pruned your self me thinks, you were not wont
To look so amorously.
Not I, tic the same Physiognomy to a hair and pimple,
Which she called scurvy scarce an hour ago: How is this?
Come hither, nearer man.
I'm up to the chin in heaven.
Turn, let me see, vauh tic but the heat of the liver, I perceiv't.
I thought it had been worse.
Her fingers touched me, she smells all Amber.
I'll make a water for you shall cleanse this within a fortnight.
With your own hands, Lady?
Yes, mine own sir, in a work of cure, I'll trust no other.
It is half an act of pleasure to hear her talk thus to me.
When w'are used to a hard face, it is not so unpleasing,
It mends still in opinion, hourly mends, I see it by experience.
I was blessed to light upon this minute, I'll make use on it.
Hardness becomes the visage of a man well,
It argues service, resolution, manhood, if cause were of employment.
It would be soon seen, if ever your Ladyship had cause to use it.
I would but wish the honour of a service so happy as that mounts to.
We shall try youOh my Deflores!
How's that? She calls me hers already, my Deflores,
You were about to sigh out somewhat, Madam.
No, was I? I forgotOh!
There it is againthe very fellow on it.
You are too quick, sir.
There's no excuse for it, now I heard it twice, Madam,
That sigh would fain have utterance, take pity on it,
And lend it a free word, alas how it labours
For liberty, I hear the murmur yet beat at your bosom.
Would Creation
I well said, that's it.
Had formed me man.
Nay, that's not it.
Oh it is the soul of freedom, I should not then be forced to marry one
I hate beyond all depths, I should have power
Then to oppose my loathings, nay remove 'em for ever from my sight.
Oh blessed occasionWithout change to your Sex, you
have your wishes.
Claim so much man in me.
In thee Deflores? There's small cause for that.
Put it not from me, it's a service that I kneel for to you.
You are too violent to mean faithfully,
There's horror in my service, blood and danger,
Can those be things to sue for?
If you knew how sweet it were to me to be employed
In any act of yours, you would say then
I failed, and used not reverence enough
When I receive the charge on it.
This is much methinks, belike his wants are greedy, &amp; to such
Gold tastes like Angles foodRise.
I'll have the work first.
Possible his need is strong upon him, there's to encourage thee
As thou art forward and thy service dangerous,
Thy reward shall be precious.
That I have thought on, I have assured my self of that before
hand, and know it will be precious, the thought ravishes.
Then take him to thy fury.
I thirst for him.
Alonzo de Piracquo.
His ends upon him, he shall be seen no more.
How lovely now dost thou appear to me!
Never was man dearlier rewarded.
I do think of that.
Be wondrous careful in the execution.
Why? are not both our lives upon the cast?
Then I throw all my fears upon thy service.
They ne'er shall rise to hurt you.
When the deed's done, I'll furnish thee with all things for thy
flight, thou may live bravely in another country.
I, I, we'll talk of that hereafter.
I shall rid my self of two inveterate loathings at one time,
Piracquo and his Dog-face.
Oh my blood, methinks I feel her in mine arms already.
Her wanton fingers combing out this beard,
And being pleased, praising this bad face.
Hunger and pleasure they'll commend sometimes
Slovenly dishes, and feed heartily on 'em,
Nay which is stranger, refuse daintier for 'em.
Some women are odd feedersI'm too loud.
Here comes the man goes supperless to bed,
Yet shall not rise to morrow to his dinner.
Deflores.
My kind honourable Lord.
I am glad I have met with thee.
Sir.
Thou can show me the full strength of the Castle,
That I can sir.
I much desire it.
And if the ways &amp; straits of some of the passages be not too tedious
for you, I will assure you worth your time and sight, my Lord.
Puh, that shall be no hinderance.
I'm your servant then: it is now near dinner time, against your
Lordships rising I'll have the keys about me.
Thanks kind Deflores.
He's safely thrust upon me beyond hopes
YEs, here are all the keys, I was afraid my Lord,
I'd wanted for the postern, this is it.
Iv all, I've all, my Lord: this for the Sconce.
It is a most spacious and impregnable Fort.
You'll tell me more my Lord: this descent
Is somewhat narrow, we shall never pass
Well with our weapons, they'll but trouble us.
Thou say true.
Pray let me help your Lordship.
It is done. Thanks kind Deflores.
Here are hooks my Lord, to hang such things on purpose.
Lead, Il'e follow thee.
All this is nothing, you shall see anon a place you little dream on
I am glad I have this leisure: all your masters house
Imagine I had taken a Gondola.
All but my self, sir, which makes up my safety,
My Lord, I'll place you at a Casement here,
Will show you the full strength of all the Castle.
Look, spend your eye a while upon that object.
Here's rich variety Deflores.
Yes, sir.
Goodly munition.
I, there's Ordnance sir, no bastard metal, will ring you a peal
like Bells at greet men's Funerals; keep your eye straight, my Lord,
take special notice of that Scone before you, there you may dwell
awhile.
I am upon it.
And so am I.
Deflores, oh Deflores, whose malice hast thou put on?
Doe you question a work of secrecy? I must silence you.
Oh, oh, oh.
I must silence you.
So, here's an undertaking well accomplished.
This vault serves to good use nowHa! what's that
Threw sparkles in my eye?Oh it is a Diamond
He wears upon his finger: it was well found,
This will approve the work. What, so fast on?
Not part in death? I'll take a speedy course then,
Finger and all shall off. So, now I'll clear
The passages from all suspect or fear.
Why sirrah? Whence have you commission
To fetter the doors against me? If you
Keep me in a Cage, pray whistle to me,
Let me be doing something.
You shall be doing, if it please you, I'll whistle to you if you'll pipe after.
Is it your Masters pleasure, or your own,
To keep me in this Pinfold?
It is for my masters pleasure, lest being taken in another mans
Corn, you might be pounded in another place.
It is very well, and he'll prove very wise.
He says you have company enough in the house, if you please
to be sociable, of all sorts of people.
Of all sorts? Why here's none but fools and mad-men.
Very well: And where will you find any other, if you should
go abroad? There's my master and I to boot too:
Of either sort one, a mad-man and a fool.
I would even participate of both then if were as you, I know
you're half mad already; be half foolish too.
You're a brave saucy Rascal, come on sir,
Afford me then the pleasure of your Bedm;
You were commending once to day to me,
Your last come lunatic, what a proper
Body there was without brains to guide it,
And what a pitiful delight appeared
In that defect, as if your wisdom had found
A mirth in madness; pray sir let me partake
If there be such a pleasure.
If I doe not show
You the handsomest, discreetest mad-man, one that I may
Call, the understanding mad-man; then say I am a fool.
Well, a match, I will say so.
When you have a taste of the mad-man, you shall (if you please)
see Fools College, of the side, I seldom lock there, it is but shooting a
bolt or two, and you are amongst em.
Come on sir, let me see how handsomely you'll behave your self now.
How sweetly she looks! Oh but there's a wrinkle in her
brow as deep as Philosophy, Anacreon drink to my Mistress health,
I'll pledge it: Stay, stay, there's a Spider in the cup: No, tic but a
Grape-stone, swallow it, fear nothing Poet; so, so, lift higher.
Alack, alack, tic too full of pity
To be laughed at; how fell he mad? Can thou tell?
For love, Mistress,
He was a pretty Poet too, and that set him forwards first;
The Muses then forsook him, he ran mad for a Chambermaid,
Yet she was but a dwarf neither.
Hail bright Titania, why standst thou idle on these flowery
banks? Oberon is dancing with his Dryads, I'll gather daisies, primrose,
violets, and bind them in a verse of Poesy.
Not too near, you see your danger.
Oh hold thy hand great Diomed, thou feedst thy horses well,
they shall obey thee; Get up, Bucephalus kneels.
You see how I awe my flock, a Shepherd has not his dog at
more obedience.
His conscience is unquiet, sure that was
The cause of this. A proper Gentleman.
Come hither Esculapius, hide the poison.
Well, tic hid.
Did thou never hear of one Tiresias a famous Poet?
Yes, that kept tame wild-geese.
That's he, I am the man.
No.
Yes, but make no words on it, I was a man seven years ago,
A stripling I think you might.
Now Im'e a woman, all feminine.
I would I might see that.
Juno struck me blind,
I'll ne'er believe that; for a woman they say, has an eye more
then a man.
I say she struck me blind.
And Luna made you mad, you have two trades to beg with.
Luna is now big bellied, and there's room for both of us to
ride with Hecate; I'll drag thee up into her silver sphere, and there
we will kick the Dog, and beat the bush that barks against the Witches
of the night, the swift Licanthropi that walks the round, we will tear
their wolfish skins, and save the sheep.
Is it come to this? nay then my poison comes forth again, mad
slave, indeed, abuse your Keeper!
I prithee hence with him, now he grows dangerous.
Sweet love pity me, give me leave to lye with thee.
No, I'll see you wiser first: To your own kennel.
No noise she sleeps, draw all the Curtains round,
Let no soft sound molest the pretty soul,
But love, and love, creeps in at a mouse-hole.
I wo'd you wod get into your hole.
Now Mistress I will bring you another sort, you shall be fooled another
while, Tony, come hither Tony, look who's yonder Tony.
Cousin, is it not my Ant?
Yes, it is on of um Tony.
He, he, how do you Uncle?
Fear him not Mistress, it is a gentle nigget, you may play with
him, as safely with him as with his bauble.
How long hast thou been a fool?
Ever since I came hither, Cousin?
Cousin, I'm none of thy Cousins fool.
Oh mistress, fools have always so much wit as to claim their
kindred.
Bounce, bounce, he falls, he falls.
Hark you, your scholars in the upper room are out of order.
Must I come amongst you there? Keep you the fool mistress,
I'll go up, &amp; play left handed Orlando amongst the madmen.
Well, Sir.
It is opportuneful now, sweet Lady! nay,
Cast no amazing eye upon this change.
Ha!
This shape of Folly shrouds your dearest Love,
The truest servant to your powerful beauties,
Whose magic had this force thus to transform me.
You are a fine Fool indeed.
Oh it is not strange: Love has an intellect that runs through all
The scrutinous Sciences; and like
A cunning Poet, catches a quantity
Of every Knowledge, yet brings all home
Into one mystery, into one secret
That he proceeds in.
You're a parlous Fool.
No danger in me: I bring nought but Love,
And his soft wounding shafts to strike you with:
Try but one arrow; if it hurt you,
I'll stand you twenty back in recompense.
A forward Fool too.
This was Love's teaching:
A thousand ways she fashioned out my way,
And this I found the safest and nearest
To tread the Gallaxia to my Star.
Profound, withal certain: You dreamed of this;
Love never taught it waking.
Take no acquaintance of these outward Follies; there is within
A Gentleman that loves you.
When I see him, I'll speak with him; so in the mean time
Keep your habit, it becomes you well enough
As you are a Gentleman, I'll not discover you;
That's all the favour that you must expect:
When you are weary, you may leave the school,
For all this while you have but plaid the Fool.
And must again; he, he, I thank you Cozen, I'll be your Valentine
To motrow morning.
How do you like the Fool, Mistress?
Passing well, Sir.
Is he not witty, pretty well for a Fool?
If he hold on as he begins, he is like to come to something
I, thank a good Tutor: You may put him to it; he begins
To answer pretty hard questions. Tony, how many is
Five times six?
Five times six, is six times five.
What Arithmetician could have answered better? how many is
One hundred and seven?
One hundred and seven, is seven hundred and one, Cozen.
This is no wit to speak on; Will you be rid of the Fool now?
By no means, let him stay a little:
Catch there, catch the last couple in hell.
Again, must I come amongst you? Would my Master were
come home!
I am not able to govern both these Wards together.
Why should a minute of Loves hour be lost?
Fie, out again! I had rather you kept
Your other posture: you become not your tongue,
When you speak from your clothes.
How can he freeze, lives near so sweet a warmth? shall I alone
Walk through the orchard of the Hesperides.
And cowardly not dare to pull an apple?
This with the red cheeks I must venture for.
Take heed, there's Giants keep 'em.
How now fool, are you good at that? have you read Lipsius?
He's past Ars Amend; I believe I must put harder
Questions to him, I perceive that
You are bold without fear too.
What should I fear, having all joys about me? Do you smile,
And Love shall play the wanton on your lip,
Meet and retire, retire and meet again:
Look you but cheerfully, and in your eyes
I shall behold mine own deformity,
And dress my self up fairer; I know this shape
Becomes me not, but in those bright mirrors
I shall array me handsomely.
Cuckoo, Cuckoo
some as birds, others as beasts.
What are these?
Of fear enough to part us, yet are they but our schools of
Lunatiques,
That act their fantasies in any shapes
Suiting their present thoughts; if sad, they cry;
If mirth be their conceit, they laugh again.
Sometimes they imitate the beasts and birds,
Singing, or howling, braying, barking; all
As their wilde fancies prompt um.
These are no fears.
But here's a large one, my man.
Ha, he, that's fine sport indeed, cousin:
I would my master were come home, it is too much for one shepheard
to govern two of these flocks; nor can I believe that one
Churchman can instruct two benefices at once, there will be some incurable
mad of the one side, and very fools on the other.
Come Tony.
Prithee cousin, let me stay here still.
No, you must to your Book now you have plaid sufficiently.
Your fool is grown wondrous witty.
Well, I'll say nothing; but I do not think but he will put you
down one of these days.
Here the restrained current might make breach,
Spite of the watchful bankers, would a woman stray,
She need not gad abroad to seek her sin,
It would be brought home one ways or other:
The Needles point will to the fixed North,
Such drawing Articks women's beauties are.
How dost thou sweet rogue?
How now?
Come, there are degrees, one fool may be better then another
What's the matter?
Nay, if thou give thy mind to Fools-flesh, have at thee.
You bold slave you.
I could follow now as t'other fool did,
What should I fear, having all joys about me: do you but smile,
And love shall play the wanton on your lip,
Meet and retire, retire and meet again:
Look you but cheerfully, and in your eyes,
I shall behold my own deformity,
And dress my self up fairer, I know this shape
Becomes me not; and so as it follows, but is not this the more
Foolish way? Come sweet rogue, kiss me my little Lacedemonian.
Let me feel how thy pulses beat; Thou hast a thing
About thee, would doe a man pleasure, I'll lay my hand on it.
Sirrah, no more I see you have discovered
This loves Knight arrant, who hath made adventure
For purchase of my love; be silent, mute,
Mute as a statue, or his injuction
For me enjoying, shall be to cut thy throat,
I'll do it, though for no other purpose,
And be sure he will not refuse it.
My share, that's all, I'll have my fools part with you
No more your master.
Sweet, how dost thou?
Your bounden servant, sir.
Fie, fie, sweet heart, no more of that.
You were best lock me up.
In my arms and bosom, my sweet Isabella,
I'll lock thee up most nearly. Lollio,
We have employment, we have task in hand,
At noble Vermonderos our Castle Captain,
There is a nuptial to be solemnised,
Beatrice Joanna his fair daughter Bride,
For which the Gentleman hath bespoke our pains,
A mixture of our madmen and our fools,
To finish (as it were) and make the fagg
Of all the Revels, the third night from the first,
Only an unexpected passage over,
To make a frightful pleasure, that is all,
But not the all I aim at; could we so act it,
To teach it in a wild distracted measure,
Though out of form and figure, breaking times head,
It were no matter, it would be heald again
In one age or other, if not in this,
This, this Lollio, there's a good reward begun,
And will beget a bounty be it known.
This is easy, sir, I'll warrant you: you have about you Fools
and Madmen that can dance very well, and it is no wonder, you best
Dancers are not the wisest men, the reason is, with often jumping
they jolt their brains down into their feet, that their wits lie more in
their heels then in their heads.
Honest Lollio, thou give me a good reason,
And a comfort in it.
You've a fine trade on it, Mad-men and Fools are a staple-commodity.
Oh wife, we must eat, wear clothes, and live,
Just at the Lawyers Haven we arrive,
By madmen and by fools we both do thrive.
Valentia speaks so nobly of you, sir,
I wish I had a daughter now for you.
The fellow of this creature were a partner
For a Kings love.
I had her fellow once, sir,
But heaven has married her to joys eternal,
It were sin to wish her in this vale again.
Come sir, your friend and you shall see the pleasures
Which my health chiefly joys in.
I hear the beauty of this seat largely.
It falls much short of that.
So, here's one step
Into my fathers favour, time will fix him,
I have got him now the liberty of the House,
So wisdom by degrees works out her freedom;
And if that eye be darkened that offends me,
I wait but that Eclipse; this Gentleman
Shall soon shine glorious in my Fathers liking,
Through the refulgent virtue of my love.
My thoughts are at a banquet for the deed,
I feel no weight in it, it is but light and cheap,
For the sweet recompense, that I set down for it.
Deflores.
Lady.
Thy looks promise cheerfully.
All things are answerable, time, circumstance,
Your wishes and my service.
Is it done then.
Piracquo is no more.
My joys start at mine eyes, our sweetest delights
Are evermore born weeping.
I've a token for you.
For me?
But it was sent somewhat unwillingly,
I could not get the Ring without the Finger.
Bless me! what hast thou done?
Why is that more then killing the whole man? I cut his
heart strings.
A greedy hand thrust in a dish at Court
In a mistake, hath had as much as this.
It is the first token my father made me send him,
And I made him send it back again
For his last token, I was loath to leave it,
And I'm sure dead men have no use of Jewels,
He was as loath to part with it, for it stuck,
As if the flesh and it were both one substance.
At the Stags fall the Keeper has his fees:
It is soon applied, all dead men's fees are yours, Sir,
I pray bury the finger, but the stone
You may make use of shortly, the true value,
Tak't of my truth, is near three hundred Ducats.
'Twil hardly buy a capcase for ones conscience tho
To keep it from the worm, as fine as it is.
Well, being my fees I'll take it,
Great men have taught me that, or else my merit
Would scorn the way on it.
It might justly, sir: Why thou mistake Deflores, it is not goven
in state of recompense.
No, I hope so, Lady, you should soon witness my contempt
too't then.
Prithee, thou look as if thou were it offended.
That were strange, Lady, tic not possible
My service should draw such a cause from you.
Offended? Could you think so? That were much
For one of my performance, and so warm
Yet in my service.
It were misery in me to give you cause, sir.
I know so much, it were so, misery
In her most sharp condition.
It is resolved then; look you sir, here's 3000. golden Florens,
I have not meanly thought upon thy merit.
What salary? Now you move me.
How Deflores?
Do you place me in the rank of verminous fellows,
To destroy things for wages? offer gold?
The life blood of man; Is any thing
Valued too precious for my recompense?
I understand thee not.
I could have hired a journey-man in murder at this rate,
And mine own conscience might have,
And have had the work brought home.
I'm in a labyrinth;
What will content him? I would fain be rid of him.
I'll double the sum, sir.
You take a course to double my vexation, that's the good you doe.
Bless me! I am now in worse plight then I was,
I know not what will please him: for my fears sake
I prithee make away with all speed possible.
And if thou be so modest not to name
The sum that will content thee, paper blushes not,
Send thy demand in writing, it shall follow thee,
But prithee take thy flight.
You must fly too then.
I?
I'll not stir a foot else.
What's your meaning?
Why are not you as guilty, in I'm sure
As deep as I? and we should stick together.
Come, your fears counsel you but ill, my absence
Would draw suspect upon you instantly,
There were no rescue for you.
He speaks home.
Nor is it fit we two engaged so jointly,
Should part and live asunder.
How now sir? This shows not well.
What makes your lip so strange? This must not be betwixt us.
The man talks wildly.
Come kiss me with a zeal now.
Heaven I doubt him.
I will not stand so long to beg 'em shortly.
Take heed Deflores of forgetfulness, twill soon betray us.
Take you heed first;
Faith you're grown much forgetful, you're too blame in it.
He's bold, and I am blamed for it.
I have eased you of your trouble, think on it, I'm in pain,
And must be eased of you; it is a charity,
Justice invites your blood to understand me.
I dare not.
Quickly.
Oh I never shall, speak it yet further of that I may lose
What has been spoken, and no sound remain on it.
I would not hear so much offence again for such another deed.
Soft, Lady, soft; the last is not yet paid for, oh this act
Has put me into spirit; I was as greedy on it
As the parcht earth of moisture, when the clouds weep.
Did you not mark, I wrought my self into it.
Nay sued and kneeled for it: Why was all that pains took?
You see I have thrown contempt upon your gold,
Not that I want it, for I doe piteously,
In order I will come unto't, and make use on it,
But it was not held so precious to begin with;
For I place wealth after the heels of pleasure,
And were I not resolved in my belief
That thy virginity were perfect in thee,
I should but take my recompense with grudging.
As if I had but half my hopes I agreed for.
Why it is impossible thou can be so wicked,
Or shelter such a cunning cruelty,
To make his death the murderer of my honour.
Thy language is so bold and vicious,
I cannot see which way I can forgive it with any modesty.
Push, you forget your self, a woman dipped in blood, and
talk of modesty.
O misery of sin! would I had been bound
Perpetually unto my living hate
In that Piracquo, then to hear these words.
Think but upon the distance that Creation
Set twixt thy blood and mine, and keep thee there.
Look but into your conscience, read me there,
It is a true Book, you'll find me there you equal:
Push, fly not to your birth, but settle you
In what the act has made you, you're no more now,
You must forget your parentage to me,
You're the deeds creature, by that name
You lost your first condition, and I challenge you,
As peace and innocence has turned you out,
And made you one with me.
With thee, foul villain?
Yes, my fair murdress; Do you urge me?
Though thou writst maid, thou whore in thy affection,
It was changed from thy first love, and that's a kind
Of whoredom in thy heart, and he's changed now,
To bring thy second on thy Alsemero,
Whom (by all sweets that ever darkness tasted,
If I enjoy thee not) thou ne'er enjoyst,
I'll blast the hopes and joys of marriage,
I'll confess all, my life I rate at nothing.
Deflores.
I shall rest from all lovers plagues then,
I live in pain now: that shooting eye
Will burn my heart to cinders.
O sir, hear me.
She that in life and love refuses me,
In death and shame my partner she shall be.
Stay, hear me once for all, I make thee master
Of all the wealth I have in gold and jewels,
Let me go poor unto my bed with honour,
And I am rich in all things.
Let this silence thee,
The wealth of all Valentia shall not buy my pleasure from me,
Can you weep Fate from its determined purpose?
So soon may weep me.
Vengeance begins;
Murder I see is followed by more sins.
Was my creation in the womb so cursed,
It must engender with a Viper first?
Come, rise, and shroud your blushes in my bosom,
Silence is one of pleasures best receipts:
Thy peace is wrought for ever in this yielding.
'Lasse how the Turtle pants! Thoul't love anon,
What thou so fear, and faintst to venture on.
THis fellow has undone me endlessly,
Never was Bride so fearfully distressed;
The more I think upon th'ensuing night,
And whom I am to cope with in embraces,
One both ennobled both in blood and mind,
So clear in understanding, that's my plague now,
Before whose judgement will my fault appear
Like malefactors crimes before Tribunals,
There is no hiding on it, the more I dive
Into my own distress; how a wise man
Stands for a great calamity, there's no venturing
Into his bed, what course so ever I light upon,
Without my shame, which may grow up to danger;
He cannot but in justice strangle me
As I lie by by him, as a cheater use me;
It is a precious craft to play with a false Dye
Before a cunning Gamester; here's his closet,
The key left in it, and he abroad in the Park,
Sure it was forgot, I'll be so bold as look in it.
Bless me! A right Physicians closet it is,
Set round with viols, every one her mark too.
Sure he does practice Physic for his own use,
Which may be safely called your great mans Wisdom.
What manuscript lies here? The Book of Experiment,
Called Secrets in Nature: so it is, it is so,
How to know whether a woman be with child or no.
I hope I am not yet; if he should try tho
Let me see folio 45. Here it is;
the leaf tuckt dow upon it, the place suspicious.
If you would know whether a woman be with child, or not,
Give her two spoonfuls of the white water in Glass C.
Wher's that Glass C: O yonder I see it now, and if she be with child,
She sleeps full twelve hours after, if not, not
None of that water comes into my belly.
I'll know you from a hundred, I could break you now
Or turn you into milk, and so beguile
The master of the mystery, but I'll look to you.
Ha! that which is next, is ten times worse.
How to know whether a woman be a maid, or not;
If that should be applied, what would become of me?
Belike he has a strong faith of my purity,
That never yet made proof; but this he calls
A merry slight, but true experiment, the Author Antonius Mizaldus.
Give the party you suspect the quantity of a spoonful of the water,
In the glass M. which upon her that is maid, makes three several
effects, twill make her incontinently gape, then fall into a sudden
sneezing, last into a violent laughing, else dull, heavy and lumpish.
Where had I been? I fear it, yet it is seven hours to bed time.
Cuds Madam, are you here?
Seeing that wench now
A trick comes in my mind, it is a nice piece,
Gold cannot purchase; I come hither wench,
To look my Lord.
Would I had such a cause to look him too.
Why he's in the Park Madam.
There let him be.
I madam, let him compass,
Whole Parks and Forests, as great Rangers doe,
At roosting time a little lodge can hold 'em.
Earth-conquering Alexander, that thought the world
Too narrow for him, in the end had but his pit-hole.
I fear thou art not modest, Diaphanta.
Your thoughts are so unwilling to be known, Madam,
It is ever the Brides fashion towards bed-time,
To set light by her joys, as if she owed 'em not.
Her joys; her fears thou would say.
Fear of what?
Art thou a maid, and talk so to a maid?
You leave a blushing business behind,
Beshrew your heart for it.
Do you mean good sooth, madam?
Well, if I'd thought upon the fear at first,
Man should have been unknown.
Is it possible?
I will give a thousand Ducats to that woman
Would try what my fear were, and tell me true
To morrow, when she gets from it: as she likes
I might perhaps be drawn too't.
Are you in earnest?
Do you get the woman, then challenge me,
And see if I'll fly from it; but I must tell you
This by the way, she must be a true maid,
Else there's no trial, my fears are not hers else.
Nay, she that I would put into your hands, madam
shall be a maid.
You know I should be shamed else, because she lies for me.
Tic a strange humour:
But are you serious still? Would you resign
Your first nights pleasure, and give money too?
As willingly as live; alas, the gold
Is but a by-bet to wedge in the honour.
I doe not know how the world goes abroad
For faith or honesty, there's both required in this.
Madam, what say you to me, and stray no further,
I've a good mind in troth to earn your money.
You're too quick, I fear, to be a maid.
How? not a maid? nay then you urge me madam,
Your honourable self is not a truer
With all your fears upon you.
Bad enough then.
Then I with all my lightsome joys about me.
I'm glad to hear't then, you dare put your honesty
Upon an easy trial.
Easy?any thing.
I'll come to you straight.
She will not search me? will she?
Like the fore-woman of a female Jury.
Glass M. I, this is it; look Diaphanta,
You take no worse then I do.
And in so doing I will not question what it is, but take it.
Now if the experiment be true, twill praise it self,
And give me noble ease:Begins already,
There's the first symptom; and what hast it makes
To fall into the second, there by this time
Most admirable secret, on the contrary
It stirs not me a whit, which most concerns it.
Ha, ha, ha.
Just in all things and in order,
As if it were circumscribed, one accident gives way unto another.
Ha, ha, ha.
How now wench?
Ha, ha, ha, I am so so light at heart, ha, ha, ha. so pleasurable.
But one swig more, sweet Madam.
I, to morrow, we shall have time to sit by it.
Now I'm sad again.
It lays it self so gently too; Come wench, most honest Diaphanta
I dare call thee now.
Pray tell me, madam, what trick call you this?
I'll tell thee all hereafter; we must study the carriage of this
business:
I shall carryit well, because I love the burden.
About midnight you must not fail to steal forth gently,
That I may use the place.
Oh fear not, Madam,
I shall be cool by that time: the brides place,
And with a thousand Ducats; I'm for a Justice now,
I bring a portion with me, I scorn small fools.
I tell thee knave, mine Honour is in question,
A thing till now free from suspicion,
Nor ever was there cause; who of my Gentlemen are absent?
Tell me and truly how many, and who.
Antonio, Sir, and Franciscus.
When did they leave the Castle?
Some ten days since, sir, the one intending to Briamata,
The other for Valentia.
The time accuses um, a charge of murder
Is brought within my Castle gate, Piracquo's murder,
I dare not answer faithfully their absence:
A strict command of apprehension
Shall pursue um suddenly, and either wipe
The stain off clear, or openly discover it.
Provide me winged warrants for the purpose.
See, I am set on again.
I claim a brother of you.
You're too hot, seek him not here.
Yes, amongst your dearest bloods,
If my peace find no fairer satisfaction,
This is the place must yield account for him,
For here I left him, and the hastytie
Of this snatched marriage, gives strong testimony
Of his most certain ruin.
Certain falsehood;
This is the place indeed, his breach of faith,
Has too much mared both my abused love,
The honourable love I reserved for him,
And mock't my daughters joy; the prepared morning
Blushed at his infidelity, he left
Contempt and scorn to throw upon those friends
Whose belief hurt 'em: oh it was most ignoble
To take his flight so unexepectedly,
And throw such public wrongs on those that loved him
Then this is all your answer.
Tic too fair for one of his alliance; and I warn you
That this place no more see you.
The best is, there is more ground to meet a mans revenge on.
Honest Deflores.
That's my name indeed.
Saw you the Bride? Good sweet sir, which way took she?
I have blessed mine eyes from seeing such a false one.
I'd fain get off, this man's not for my company,
I smell his brothers blood when I come near him.
Come hither kind and true one; I remember
My brother loved thee well.
O purely, dear sir, me thinks I am now again a killing on him.
He brings it so fresh to me.
Thou can guess sirrah,
One honest friend has an instinct of jealousy
At some foul guilty person.
'Lasse sir, I am so charitable, I think none
Worse then my selfYou did not see the Bride then?
I prithee name her not. Is she not wicked?
No, no, a pretty easy round-packt sinner,
As your most Ladies are, else you might think
I flattered her; but sir, at no hand wicked,
Till they are so old their sins and vices meet,
And they salute Witches; I am called, I think sir:
His company even ore-lays my conscience.
That Deflores has a wondrous honest heart.
He'll bring it out in time, I'm assured on it.
O here's the glorious master of the days joy.
I will not be long till he and I do reckon sir.
You are most welcome.
You may call that word back,
I do not think I am, nor wish to be.
It is strange you found the way to this house then.
Would I'd ne'er known the cause, I'm none of those sir,
That come to give you joy, and swill your wine,
It is a more precious liquor that must lay
The fiery thirst I bring.
Your words and you appear to me great strangers.
Time and our swords may make us more acquainted;
This the business.
I should have a brother in your Place,
How treachery and malice have disposed of him,
I'm bound to enquire of him which holds his right:
Which never could come fairly.
You must look to answer for that word, sir.
Fear you not, I'll have it ready drawn at our next meeting.
Keep your day solemn. Farewell, I disturb it not,
Il'e bear the smart with patience for a time.
It is somewhat ominous this, a quarrel entered
Upon this day, my innocence relieves me,
I should be wondrous sad elseJasperino,
I have news to tell thee, strange news.
I have some too,
I think as strange as yours, would I might keep
Mine, so my faith and friendship might be kept in it.
Faith sir, dispense a little with my zeal,
And let it cool in this.
This putt's me on, and blames thee for thy slowness.
All may prove nothing,
Only a friendly fear that leapt from me, sir.
No question it may prove nothing; let's partake it thou.
It was Diaphanta's chance, for to that wench
I pretend honest love, and she deserves it,
To leave me in a back part of the house,
A place we chose for private conference;
She was no sooner gone, but instantly
I heard your brides voice in the next room to me;
And lending more attention, found Deflores
Louder then she.
Deflores? Thou art out now.
You'll tell me more anon.
still I'll prevent thee, the very sight of him is poison to her.
That made me stagger too, but Diaphanta
At her return confirmed it.
Diaphanta!
Then fell we both to listen, and words past
Like those that challenge interest in a woman:
Peace, quench thy zeal, tic dangerous to thy bosom
Then truth is full of peril.
Such truths areO were she the sole glory of the earth,
Had eyes that could shoot fire into Kings breasts,
And touched, she sleeps not here, yet I have time
Though night be near, to be resolved hereof,
And prithee do not weigh me by my passions.
I never weighed friend so.
Done charitably, that key will lead thee to a pretty secr
By a Chaldean taught me, and I've
My study upon some, bring from my closet
A glass inscribed there with the letter M.
And question not my purpose.
It shall be done sir.
How can this hang together? Not an hour since?
Her woman came pleading her Lady's fears,
Delivered her for the most timorous virgin
That ever shrunk at mans name, and so modest,
She charged her weep out her request to me,
That she might come obscurely to my bosom.
All things go well, my women's preparing yonder
For her sweet voyage, which grieves me to lose,
Necessity compels it; I lose all else.
Push, Modesties shrine is set in yonder forehead.
I cannot be too sure tho my Joanna.
Sir, I was bold to weep a message to you,
Pardon my modest fears.
The Dove's not meeker.
She's abused questionless.Oh are you come, sir?
The glass upon my life; I see the letter.
Sir, this is M.
T's it
I am suspected.
How fitly our Bride comes to partake with us!
What is it, my Lord?
No hurt.
Sir, pardon me, I seldom taste of any composition.
But this upon my warrant you shall venture on.
I fear twill make me ill.
Heaven forbid that.
I'm put now to my cunning, th'effects I know.
If I can now but feign 'em handsomely.
It has that secret virtue it ne'er mist, sir,
Upon a virgin.
Treble qualited
By all that's virtuous it takes there, proceeds.
This is the strangest trick to know a maid by.
Ha, ha, ha, you have given me joy of heart to drink my Lord.
No, thou hast given me such joy of heart,
That never can be blasted.
What's the matter sir?
See now it is settled in a melancholy,
Keep both the time and method, my Joanna:
Chaste as the breath of heaven, or mornings womb,
That brings the day forth, thus my love encloses thee.
Oh heaven! is this the waiting moon?
Does love turn fool, run mad, and all once?
Sirrah, here's a mad-man, akin to the fool too,
A lunatic lover.
No, no, not he I brought the Letter from.
Compare his inside with his out, and tell me.
The out's mad, I'm sure of that, I had a taste on it.
This is stark madness.
Now mark the inside.
Sweet Lady, having now cast off this Counterfeit Cover of
a mad-man, I appear to your best Judgement a true and
faithful Lover of your beauty.
He is mad still.
If any fault you find, chide those perfections in you, which have
have made me imperfect; It is the same Sun that causes to
grow, and enforces to wither.
Oh Rogue!
Shapes and transhapes, destroys and builds again, I come in winter
to you dismantled of my proper ornaments, by the sweet splendour
of your cheerful smiles, I spring and live a lover.
Mad Rascal still.
Tread him not under foot, that shall appear an honour to your bounties.
I remainmad till I speak with you, from whom I expect
my cure. Yours all, or one beside himself, Franciscus.
You are like to have a fine time on it, my Master and I may
give over our professions, I do not think but you can cure fools and
madmen faster then we, with little pains too.
Very likely.
One thing I must tell you Mistress, you perceive, that I am
privy to your skill, if I find you minister once and set up the trade,
I put in for my thirds, I shall be mad or fool else.
The first place is thine, believe it, Lollio,
If I do fall.
I fall upon you.
So.
Well I stand to my venture.
But thy council now, how shall I deal with um:
We do you mean to deal with um.
Nay, the fair understanding, how to use um.
Abuse um, that's the way to mad the fool, and make a fool
of the madman, and then you use um kindly.
It is easy, I'll practise, do thou observe it,
The key of thy Wardrobe.
There fit your self for um, and I'll fit um both for you.
Take thou no further notice, then the outside.
Not an inch, I'll put you to the inside.
Lollio, art there, will all be perfect think thou
To morrow night, as if to close up the solemnity:
Vermandero expects us:
I mistrust the madmen most, the fools will do well enough
I have taken pains with them.
Tush they cannot miss; the more absurdity,
The more commends it, so no rough behaviours
Affright the Ladies; they are nice things thou know.
You need not fear, Sir, so long as we are there with our
commanding peesles, they'll be as tame as the ladies themselves.
I will see them once more rehearse before they go.
I was about it, Sir; look you to the madmens Morris, and let
me alone with the other; there is one or two that I mistrust their
fooling; I'll instruct them, and then they shall rehearse the whole
measure.
Do so, I'll see the music prepared: but, Lollio.
By the way, how does my wife brook her restraint:
Does she not grudge at it.
So, so, she takes some pleasure in the house, she would abroad
else, you must allow her a little more length, she's kept too
short.
She shall along to Vermandero's with us,
That will serve her for a months liberty.
What's that on your face, Sir?
Where, Lollio, I see nothing.
Cry you mercy, Sir, tic your nose, it showed like the trunk
of a young Elephant.
Away, Rascal: I'll prepare the music, Lollio
Do, Sir; and I'll dance the whilst; Tony, where art thou
Tony?
Here, Cozen, where art thou?
Come, Tony, the footmanship I taught you.
I had rather ride, Cozen.
I, a whip take you; but I'll keep you out,
Vault in; look you, Tony, Fa, la la la la.
Fa, la la la la.
There, an honour.
Is this an honour, Cousin?
Yes, and it please your worship.
Does honour bend in the hams, Cousin?
Marry does it, as low as worship, squireship, nay yeomandry
It self sometimes, from whence it first stiffened,
There rise a caper.
Caper after an honour, Cousin.
Very proper, for honour is but a caper, rise as fast and high,
Has a knee or two, and falls to the ground again,
You can remember your figure, Tony?
Yes, Cozen, when I see thy figure, I can remember mine.
Hey, how she treads the air, shough shough, to'ther way,
He burns his wings else, here's wax enough below Icarus,
More then will be cancelled these eighteen moons;
He's down, he's down, what a terrible fall he had, stand up,
Thou son of Cretin Dedalus, and let us tread the lower
Labyrinth; I'll bring thee to the Clue.
Prithee, Cousin let me alone.
Art thou not drowned,
About thy head I saw a heap of Clouds
Wrapped like a Turkish Turban on thy back,
A crooked Chameleon coloured rainbow hung,
Like a Tiara down unto thy hams.
Let me suck out those Billows in thy belly,
Hark how they roar and rumble in the streets.
Bless thee from the Pirates.
Pox upon you, let me alone.
Why should thou mount so high as Mercury,
Unless thou had reversion of his place?
Stay in the Moon with me Endymion,
And we will rule these wild rebellious waves,
That would have drowned my love.
I'll kick thee if again thou touch me,
Thou wild unshapen Antic; I am no fool,
You Bedlam.
But you are as sure as I am, mad.
Have I put on this habit of a frantic,
With love as full of fury to beguile
The nimble eye of watchful jealousy,
And am I thus rewarded?
Ha dearest beauty.
No, I have no beauty now,
Nor never had, but what was in my garments.
You a quick-sighted lover, come not near me.
Keep your Caparisons, you're aptly clad,
I came a feigner to return stark mad.
Stay, or I shall change condition,
And become as you are.
Wy Tony, whither now? why fool?
Whose fool, usher of Idiots, you Coxcomb.
I have foold too much.
You were best be mad another while then.
So I am, stark mad, I have cause enough,
And I could throw the full effects on thee,
And beat thee like a Fury.
Doe not, doe not, I shall not forbear the Gentleman under
the fool, if you doe; alas, I saw through your Fox-skin before
now: Come, I can give you comfort, My Mistress loves you, and
there is as arrant a mad-man in the house, as you are a fool; your
Rival, whom she loves not; if after the mask we can rid her
of him, You earn her love she says, and the fool shall ride
her.
May I believe thee?
Yes, or you may choose whether you will or no.
She's eased of him, I have a good quarrel on it.
Well, keep your old station yet, and be quiet.
Tell her I will deserve her love.
And you are like to have your desire.
Down, down, down a-down a-down, and then with a horse trick,
To kick Latona's forehead, and break her bowstring.
This is to'ther counterfeit, I'll put him out of his humour,
Sweet Lady, having now cast this counterfeit cover of a mad-man.
I appear to your best judgement a true and faithful lover of your
beauty. This is pretty well for a mad-man.
Ha! what's that?
Chide those perfections in you which made me imperfect.
I am discovered to the fool.
I hope to discover the fool in you, ever I have done with
you. Yours all, or one beside himself, Franciscus. This mad-man
will mend sure.
What? Do you read sirrah?
Your destiny sir, you'll be hanged for this trick, and another
that I know.
Art thou of counsel with thy mistress?
Next her Apron strings.
Give me thy hand.
tay, let me put yours in my pocket first: your hand is true,
is it not? It will not pick, I partly fear it, because I think it does
lye.
Not in a syllable.
So, if you love my mistress so well as you have handled the
matter here, you are like to be cured of your madness.
And none but she can cure it.
Well, Il'e give you over then, and she shall cast your water
next.
Take for thy pains past.
I shall deserve more, sir, I hope, my mistress loves you, but must
have some proof of your love to her.
There I meet my wishes.
That will not serve, you must meet her enemy and yours.
He's dead already.
Will you tell me that, and I parted but now with him?
Show me the man.
I that's a right course now, see him before you kill him in any
case, and yet it needs not go so far neither; it is but a fool that haunts
the house, and my mistress in the shape of an idiot, bang but his
fools coat well-favouredly, and it is well.
Soundly, soundly.
Only reserve him till the masque be past; and if you find him
not now in the dance your self, I'll show you.
Inin my master.
He handles him like a feather. Hey!
Well said, in a readiness Lollio.
Yes, sir.
Away then, and guide them in Lollio,
Entreat your Mistress to see this sight.
Hark is there not one incurable fool
That might be begged? I have friends.
I have him for you, one that shall deserve it too.
Good boy Lollio.
It is perfect well fit, but once these strains,
We shall have coin and credit for our pains.
ONe struck, and yet she lies by itOh my fears,
This strumpet serves her own ends, it is apparent now,
Devours the pleasure with a greedy appetite,
And never minds my honour or my peace,
Makes havoc of my right; but she pays dearly for it,
No trusting of her life with such a secret,
That cannot rule her blood, to keep her promise.
Beside, I have some suspicion of her faith to me,
Because I was suspected of my Lord,
And it must come from herHark by my horrors,
Another clock strikes two.
Pissed, where are you?
Deflores!
IIs she not come from him yet?
As I am a living soul not.
Sure the Devil
Hath sowed his itch within her, who'd trust a waiting-woman?
I must trust some body.
Push, they are Termagants.
Especially when they fall upon their Masters
And have their Ladies first fruits, they are mad whelps,
You cannot stave 'em off from game Royal, then
You are so harsh and hardy ask no counsel
And I could have helped you to a Apothecaries daughter
Would have fallen off before eleven, and thank you too.
O me, not yet, this whore forgets her self
The Rascal fares so well, look you're undone,
The Day-star by this hand, see Bosphorus plain yonder.
Advise me now to fall upon some ruin,
There is no counsel safe else.
Peace, I have it now,
For we must force a rising, there's no remedy.
How? take heed of that.
Tush, be you quiet, or else give over all.
Prithee I ha'done then.
This is my reach, Il'e set some part afire of Diaphanta's cham ber.
How? fire sir, that may endanger the whole house.
You talk of danger when your semi's on fire.
That's true, do what thou wilt now.
Push, I aim at a most rich success, strikes all dead sure,
The chimney being a fire, and some light parcels
Of the least danger in her chamber only,
If Diaphanta should be met by chance then,
Far from her lodging, which is now suspicious,
It would be thought her fears and affrights then,
Drove her to seek for succour, if not seen
Or met at all, as that's the likeliest,
For her own shame she'll hasten towards her lodging,
I will be ready with a piece high-charg'd,
As it were to cleanse the chimney: there it is proper now,
But she shall be the mark.
I'm forced to love thee now,
Cause thou provid'st so carefully for my honour.
'Slid it concerns the safety of us both,
Our pleasure and continuance.
One word now prithee, how for the servants?
I'll dispatch them some one way, some another in the hurry,
For Buckets, Hooks, Ladders; fear not you;
The deed shall find it's time, and I've thought since
Upon a safe conveyance for the body too.
How this fire purfies wit! Watch you your minute.
Fear keeps my soul upon it, I cannot stray from it.
Ha! What art thou that take away the light
Twixt that starr and me? I dread thee not,
It was but a mist of conscienceEll's clear again.
Who's that, Deflores? Bless me! it slides by,
Some ill thing haunts the house, t'has left behind it,
A shivering sweat upon me; I'm afraid now.
This night hath been so tedious; Oh this strumpet!
Had she a thousand lives, he should not leave her
Till he had destroyed the lastList oh my terrors,
Three struck by St Sebastians.
Fire, fire, fire.
Already! How rare is that mans speed!
How heartily he serves me! his face loathes one,
But look upon his care, who would not love him?
The East is not more beauteous then his service.
Fire, fire, fire.
Away, dispatch, hooks, buckets, ladders; thats well said,
The fire bell rings, the chimney works, my charge;
The piece is ready,
Here's a man worth lovingoh you're a jewel.
Pardon frailty, Madam,
In troth I was so well, I even forgot my self.
You've made trim work.
What?
Hie quickly to your chamber, your reward follows you.
I never made so sweet a bargain.
Oh my dear Joanna,
Alas, art thou risen too, I was coming,
My absolute treasure.
When I mist you, I could not choose but follow.
You are all sweetness, the fire is not so dangerous.
Think you so sir?
I prithee tremble not Believe me it is not.
Oh bless my house and me.
My Lord your father.
Knave, whither goes that piece?
To scour the chimney,
Oh well said, well said,
That fellow's good on all occasions.
A wondrous necessary man, my Lord.
He hath a ready wit, he's worth 'em all, sir,
Dog at a house of fire, I ha'seen him singed ere now:
Ha, there he goes.
It is done.
Come sweet to bed now; alas, thou wilt get cold.
Alas, the fear keeps that out;
My heart will find no quiet till I hear
How Diaphanta my poor woman fares;
It is her chamber sir, her lodging chamber.
How should the fire come there?
As good a soul as ever Lady countenanced,
But in her chamber negligent and heavy.
She escaped a Mine twice.
Twice?
Strangely twice, sir.
Those sleepy sluts are dangerous in a house,
And they be ne'er so good.
Oh poor virginity! thou hast paid dearly for it.
Bless us! What's that?
A thing you all knew once, Diaphanta's burnt.
My woman, oh my woman!
Now the flames are
Greedy of her, burnt, burnt, burnt to death sir.
Oh my presaging soul!
Not a tear more, I charge you by the last embrace
I gave you in bed before this raised us.
Now you tie me,
Were it my sister now she gets no more.
How now?
All danger's past, you may now take your rests, my Lords,
The fire is thoroughly quenched; ah poor Gentlewoman,
How soon was she stifled!
Deflores, what is left of her inter,
And we as mourners all will follow her:
I will entreat that honour to my servant,
Even of my Lord himself.
Command it sweetness.
Which of you spied the fire first?
It was I, Madam.
And took such pains in it too? a double goodness!
It were well he were rewarded.
He shall be, Deflores, call upon me.
And upon me, sir.
Rewarded? precious, here's a trick beyond me;
I see in all bouts both of sport and wit,
Always a woman strives for the last hit:
I cannot taste the benefits of life
With the same relish I was wont to do.
Man I grow weary of, and hold his fellowship
A treacherous bloody friendship, and because
I am ignorant in whom my wrath should settle,
I must think all men villains; and the next
I meet, who ere he be, the murderer
Of my most worthy brotherHa! What's he?
Oh the fellow that some call honest Deflores;
But me thinks honesty was hard bested
To come there for a lodging, as if a Queen
Should make her Palace of a Pest-house,
I find a contrariety in nature
Betwixt that face and me, the least occasion
Would give me game upon him; yet he's so foul
One would scarce touch with a sword he loved,
And made account of, so most deadly venomous,
He would go ne'er to poison any weapon
That should draw blood on him, one must resolve
Never to use that sword again in fight.
In way of honest manhood, that strikes him;
Some river must devour't, it were not fit
That any man should find it.What again?
He walks a purpose by, sure to choke me up,
To infect my blood.
My worthy noble Lord.
Dost offer to come near and breath upon me?
A blow.
Yea, are you so prepared?
I'll rather like a soldier die by th'sword
Then like a Politician by thy poison.
Hold, my Lord, as you are honourable.
All slaves that kill by poison, are still cowards.
I cannot strike, I see his brothers wounds
Fresh bleeding in his eye, as in a Crystal,
I will not question this, I know you're noble.
I take my injury with thanks given, Sir.
Like a wise Lawyer; and as a favour,
Will wear it for the worthy hand that gave it:
Why this from him, that yesterday appeared,
So strangely loving to me?
Oh but instinct is of a subtler strain,
Guilt must not walk so near his lodge again,
He came ne'er me now.
All league with mankind I renounce for ever,
Till I find this murderer; Not so much
As common courtesy, but Il'e lock up:
For in the state of ignorance I live in,
A brother may salute his brothers murderer.
And wish good speed to'th villain in a greeting.
Noble Piracquo.
Pray keep on your way, sir,
I've nothing to say to you.
Comforts bless you sir.
I have forsworn complement, in troth I have, sir;
As you are merely man, I have not left
A good wish for you, nor any here.
Unless you be so far in love with grief,
You will not part from it upon any terms,
We bring that news will make a welcome for us.
What news can that be?
Throw no scornful smile
Upon the zeal I bring you, tic worth more sir,
Two of the chiefest men I kept about me,
I hide not from the law, or your just vengeance.
Ha!
To give your peace more ample satisfaction,
Thank these discoverers.
If you bring that calm,
Name but the manner I shall ask forgiveness in
For that contemptuous smile upon you:
I'll perfect it with reverence that belongs
Unto a sacred altar.
Good sir rise,
Why now you over-doe as much a this hand,
As you fell short a'tother. Speak Alibius;
It was my wives fortune, as she is most lucky
At a discovery to find out lately
Within our Hospital of Fools and mad-men,
Two counterfeits slipped into these disguises;
Their names Franciscus and Antonio.
Both mine sir, and I ask no favour for 'em.
Now that which draws suspicion to their habits,
The time of their disguisings agrees justly
With the day of the murder.
O blessed revelation!
Nay more, nay more sir, Isle not spare mine own
In way of justice; They both feigned a journey
To Bramata, and so wrought out their leaves,
My love was so abused in it.
Time's too precious
To run in waste now; you have brought a peace
The riches of five kingdoms could not purchase,
Be my most happy conduct, I thirst for 'em,
Like subtle lightning will I wind about 'em,
And melt their marrow in 'em.
Your confidence I'm sure, is now of proof.
The prospect from the Garden has showed
Enough for deep suspicion.
The black masque
That so continually was worn upon it,
Condemns the face for ugly ere't be seen,
Her despite to him, and so seeming bottomless.
Touch it home then, it is not a shallow probe
Can search this ulcer soundly, I fear you'll find it
Full of corruption, it is fit I leave you,
She meets you opportunely from that walk
She took the back door at his parting with her.
Did my fate wait for this unhappy stroke
At my first sight of woman?she's here.
Alsemero!
How do you?
How do I? Alas! how do you? you look not well.
You read me well enough, I am not well.
Not well sir? Is it in my power to better you?
Yes.
Nay, then you're cured again.
Pray resolve me one question, Lady.
If I can.
None can so sure. Are you honest?
Ha, ha, ha, that's a broad question, my Lord,
But that's not a modest answer, my Lady:
Do you laugh? My doubts are strong upon me
It is innocence that smiles, and no rough brow
Can take away the dimple in her cheek.
Say I should strain a tear to fill the vault,
Which would you give the better faith to?
It were but hypocrisy of a sadder colour,
But the same stuff, neither your smiles nor tears
Shall move or flatter me from my belief,
You are a Whore.
What a horrid sound it hath!
It blasts a beauty to deformity;
Upon what face soever that breath falls,
It strikes it ugly: oh you have ruined
What you can ne'er repair again.
I'll all demolish and seek out truth within you,
If there be any left, let your sweet tongue,
Prevent your hearts rifling; there Il'e ransack
And tear out my suspicion.
You may sir, it is an easy passage, yet if you please.
Show me the ground whereon you lost your love.
My spotless virtue may but tread on that
Before I perish.
Unanswerable,
A ground you cannot stand on, you fall down
Beneath all grace and goodness, when you set
Your ticklish heel on it; there was a visor
O'er that cunning face, and that became you,
Now Impudence in triumph rides upon it;
How comes this tender reconcilement else
Twixt you and your despite, your rankerous loathing
Deflores? He that your eye was sore at sight of,
He's now become your arms supporter, your lips Saint.
Is there the cause?
Worse, your lusts Devil, your adultery.
Would any but your self say that,
It would turn him to a villain.
It was witnessed by the counsel of your bosom Diaphanta.
Is your witness dead then?
It is to be feared,
It was the wages of her knowledge, poor soul,
She lived not long after the discovery.
Then hear a story of not much less horror,
Then this your false suspicion is beguiled with,
To your beds scandal, I stand up innocence,
Which even the guilt of one black other deed,
Will stand for proof of, your love has made me
A cruel murdress:
Ha.
A bloody one.
I have kissed poison for it, stroked a serpent,
That thing of hate, worthy in my esteem,
Of no better employment, and him most worthy
To be so employed; I cause to murder
That innocent Piracquo, having no
Better means then that worst, to assure
Your self to me.
Oh the place it self ere since
Has crying been for vengeance, the Temple
Where blood and beauty first unlawfully
Fired their devotion, and quenched the right one,
It was in my fears at first, twill have it now,
Oh thou art all deformed.
Forget not sir,
It (for your sake) was done, shall greater dangers
Make the less welcome?
Oh thou should have gone
A thousand leagues about to have avoided
This dangerous bridge of blood, here we are lost.
Remember I am true unto your bed.
The bed it selfe's a Charnel, the sheets shrouds
For murdered Carcases, it must ask pause
What I must do in this, mean time you shall
Be my prisoner only, enter my Closet.
Isle be your Keeper yet; Oh in what part
Of this sad story shall I first begin?Ha
This same fellow has put me inDeflores.
Noble Alsemero!
I can tell you news sir, my wife has her commended to you
That's news indeed my Lord I think she would
Commend me to the gallows if she could,
She ever loved me so well, I thank her.
What's this blood upon your band Deflores?
Blood? No sure, it was washed since.
Since when man?
Since to'ther day I got a knock
In a Sword and Dagger School; I think it is out.
Yes, it is almost out, but it is perceived tho.
I had forgot my message; this it is,
What price goes murder?
How sir?
I ask you sir,
My wife's behind hand with you, she tells me,
For a brave bloody blow you gave for her sake
Upon Piracquo.
Upon? It was quite through him sure,
Has she confessed it?
As sure as death to both of you,
And much more then that:
It could not be much more,
It was but one thing, and that she's a Whore.
I could not choose but follow, oh cunning Devils!
How should blind men know you from fair faced saints?
He lies, the villain does be-lye me.
Let me go to her, sir.
Nay, you shall to her.
Peace crying Crocodile, your sounds are heard,
Take your prey to you, get you into her sir.
I'll be your pander now, rehearse again
Your Scene of lust, that you may be perfect
When you shall come to act it to the black audience
Where howls and gnashings shall be music to you.
Clip your adulteress freely, it is the pilot
Will guide you to the Mare mortuum,
Where you shall sink to fadoms bottomless.
Oh Alsemero. I have a wonder for you
No sir, it is I, I have a wonder for you
I have suspicion ne'er as proof it self
For Piracquo's murder.
Sir, I have proof
Beyond suspicion, for Piracquo's muster.
Beseech you hear me, these two have been disgui'd
Ever since the deed was done.
I have two other
That were more close dsguis'd then your two could be,
Ever since the deed was done.
You'll hear me, these mine own servants.
Hear me, those nearer then your servants
That shall acquit them, and prove them guiltless.
That may be done with easy truth, sir:
How is my cause bandied through your delays!
It is urgent in blood, and calls for hast;
Give me a brother alive or dead;
Alive, a wife with him, if dead for both.
A recompense for murder and adultery.
Oh, oh, oh.
Hark, it is coming to you.
Nay, I'll along for company.
Oh, oh.
What horrid sounds are these?
Come forth you twins of mischief.
Here we are, if you have any more
To say to us, speak quickly, I shall not,
Give you the hearing else, I am so stout yet,
And so I think that broken rib of mankind.
An Host of enemies entered my Citadel,
Could not amaze like this, Joanna, Beatrice, Joanna.
O come not near me sir, I shall defile you,
I am that of your blood was taken from you
For your better health, look no more upon it,
But cast it to the ground regardlesly,
Let the common shower take it, from distinction,
Beneath the stars, upon yon Meteor
Ever hang my fate, amongst things corruptible,
I ne'er could pluck it from him, my loathing
Was Prophet to the rest, but ne'er believed
Mine honour fell with him, and now my life.
I am a stranger to your bed,
Your bed was coz'ned on the nuptial night,
For which your false-bride died.
Diaphanta!
Yes, and the while I coupled with your mate
At barly-break; now we are left in hell.
We are all there, it circumscribes here.
I loved this woman in spite of her heart,
Her love I earned out of Piraequos murder.
Ha, my brothers murderer.
Yes, and her honours prize
Was my reward, I thank life for nothing
But that pleasure, it was so sweet to me,
That I have drunk up all, left none behind
For any man to pledge me.
Horrid Villain!
Keep life in him for further tortures.
No, I can prevent you, here's my penknife still,
It is but one thread more,and now it is cut.
Make haste Joanna by that token to thee.
Can not forget so lately put in mind
I would not go to leave thee far behind.
Forgive me Alsemero, all forgive,
It is time to die, when it is a shame to live.
Oh my name is entered now in that record,
Where till this fatal hour it was never read.
Let it be blotted out, let your heart lose it,
And it can never look you in the face,
Nor tell a tale behind the back of life,
To your dishonour, justice hath so right
The guilty hit, that innocence is quit
By proclamation, and may joy again.
Sir, you are sensible of what truth hath done,
It is the best comfort that your grief can find.
Sir, I am satisfied, my injuries
Lie dead before me, I can exact no more,
Unless my soul were loose, and could ore-take
Those black fugitives, that are fled from thence
To take a second vengeance; but there are wraths
Deeper then mine (tic to be feared) about 'em.
What an opacous body had that moon:
That last changed on us? here's beauty changed
To ugly whoredom: here servant obedience
To a master-sin, imperious murder.
I a supposed husband changed embraces
With wantonness, but that was paid before;
Your change is come too, from an ignorant wrath
To knowing friendship. Are there any more on's?
Yes sir, I was changed too, from a little Ass as I was, to a great
Fool as I am; and had like to have been changed to the gallows, but
that you know my Innocence always excuses me.
I was changed from a little wit to be stark mad,
Almost for the same purpose.
Your change is still behind, but deserve best your transformtion.
You are a jealous Coxcomb, keep Schools of Folly,
And teach your Scholars how to break your own head.
I see all apparent wife, and will change now
Into a better husband, and never keep Scholars
That shall be wiser then my self.
Sir, you have yet a sons duty living,
Please you accept it, let that your sorrow
As it goes from your eye, go from your heart,
Man and his sorrow at the grave must part.
ALL we can doe, to Comfort one another,
To stay a Brothers sorrow, for a Brother;
To Dry a Child, from the kind Fathers eyes
Is to no purpose, it rather multiplies:
Your only smiles have power to cause re-live
The Dead again, or in their Rooms to give
Brother a new Brother, Father a Child;
If these appear, All griefs are reconciled.

ROderigo.
Art mad?
Yes, not so much with Wine; its as rare to see a Spaniard a drunkard, as a Germane sober, an Italian no Whoremonger, an English man to pay his debts. I am no Borachia, Sack, Maligo, nor Canary breeds the Calenture in my brains, mine eye mads me, not my cups.
What would have us do?
Doe?
So far as tic fit for a Gentlemen we'll venture.
I ask no more, I ha seen a thing has bewitched me, a delicate body, but this in the waste, Foot and Leg tempting, the Face I had a glimpse of: but the Fruit must needs be delicious, the Tree being so beautiful.
Prithee to the point.
Here tic, an old Gentleman, (no matter who he is) an old Gentlewoman (I ha nothing to do with her) but a young creature that follows them, Daughter or Servant, or whatsoever she be her I must have, they are coming this way, shall I have her? I must have her.
How, how?
Thou speak impossibilities.
Easy, easy, easy, i'll seize the young girl: stop you the old man, stay you the old woman.
How then?
I'll fly off with the young Bird, that's all, many of our Spanish Gallants act these merry parts every night, they are weak and old, we young and sprightly, will you assist me?
Troth Roderigo any thing in the way of honour.
For a wench Man any course is honourable.
Nay not any, her Father, if he her Father may be noble.
I am as noble.
Would the adventure were so.
Stand close, they come.
It is late would we were in Madrill.
Go faster my Lord.
Clara, keep close.
Help, help, help!
Are you crying out? I'll be your Midwife.
What mean you Gentlemen?
Villains, Thieves, Murderers.
Do you know me? Jam De Cortes, Pedro de Cortes!
De Cortes, Diego, come away.
Clara, where is my Daughter?
Clara I these Villains
Have robed us of our comfort, and will, I fear,
Her of her honour.
This had not wont
To be our Spanish Fashion, but now our Gallants,
Our Gentry, our young Dons heated with Wine,
(A fire our Country-men doe seldom sit at)
Commit these outrages, Clara!Maria,
Let's homeward, I will raise Madrill to find
These traitors to all goodness, Clara.
Oh Diego I am lost, I am mad!
So we are all.
It is not with wine, i'm drunk with too much horror,
Inflamed with rage, to see us two made Bawds
To Roderigo's lust, did not the old man
Name Decortes, Pedro de Cortes?
Sure he did.
Oh Diego, as thou love me, nay on the forfeit
Of thine own life or mine, seal up thy lips,
Let 'em not name De Cortes, stay, stay, stay,
Roderigo has into his Fathers house
A passage through a Garden.
Yes, my Lord.
Thither I must find Roderigo out,
And check him, ckeck him home, if he but dare
No more; Diego along my soul does fight
A thousand battles blacker then this night.
Tho the black veyle of night hath over-clowded
The World in darkness, yet ever many hours
The Sun will rise again, and then this act
Of my dishonour will appear before you;
More black then is the Canopy that shrouds it,
What are you, pray what are you?
Hushed, a friend! a friend.
A friend, be then a gentle Ravisher,
An honourable villain, as you have
Disroab'd my youth of natures goodliest portion,
My Virgin purity, so with your Sword
Let out that blood which is infected now,
By your soule-stayning lust.
Pish.
Are you noble?
I know you then will marry me, say.
Umh.
Not speak to me! are want on Devils dumb?
How are so many harmless Virgins wrought
By falsehood of prevailing words to yield
To easy forfeits of their shames and liberty,
If every Orator of folly plead
In silence, like this untongu'd piece of violence?
You shall not from me.
Phew no more.
You shall not,
Who ever you are, Disease of natures sloth:
Birth of some monstrous sin, or scourge of virtue,
Heavens wrath and mankinds burden, I will hold you,
I will, be rough and therein merciful,
I will not loose my hold else.
There, it is gold.
Gold, why! alas for what? the hire of pleasure,
Perhaps is payment, mine is misery;
I need no wages for a ruined name,
More then a bleeding heart.
Nay then you're troublesome,
I'll lock you safe enough.
They cannot fear
Whom grief hath armed with hate and scorn of life.
Revenge I kneel to thee, alas'gainst whom?
By what name shall I pull Confusion down
From Justice on his head that hath betrayed me?
I know not where I am, up I beseech thee
Thou Lady regent of the air, the Moon,
And lead me by thy light to some brave vengeance,
It is a Chamber sure, the guilty Bed.
Sad evidence against my loss of honour
Assures so much, what's here, a window curtain?
Oh Heaven! the stars appear 'too, ha! a chamber,
A goodly one, dwells Rape in such a paradise!
Help me my quickened senses, it is a garden
To which this window guides the covetous prospect,
A large one and a fair one, in the midst
A curious Alabaster Fountain stands,
Framed like-like what? no matter, swift remembrance,
Rich furniture within too! and what's this?
A precious Crucifix? I have enough,
Assist me oh you powers that guard the innocent.
Now!
Welcome, if you come armed in destruction,
I am prepared to die.
Tell me your Name,
And what you are.
You urge me to a sin
As cruel as your lust, I dare not grant it,
Think on the violence of my defame,
And if you mean to write upon my Grave
An Epitaph of peace, forbear to question,
Or whence, or who I am; I know the heate
Of your desires are after the performance
Of such a hellish act, by this time drowned
In cooler streams of penance; and for my part
I have washed off the Leprosy that cleaves
To my just shame, in true and honest tears;
I must not leave a mention of my wrongs,
The stain of my unspotted birth to memory,
Let it lie buried with me in the dust,
That never time hereafter may report
How such a one as you have made me live;
Be resolute, and do not stagger, doe not,
For I am nothing.
Sweet let me enjoy thee
Now with a free allowance.
Ha, enjoy me!
Insufferable villain!
Peace: speak low,
I mean no second force, and since I find
Such goodness in an unknown frame of virtus:
Forgive my soul attempt, which I shall grieve for
So heartily, that could you be your self
Eye-witness to my constant vowed repentance,
Trust me you'd pity me.
Sir, you can speak now.
So much I am the Executioner
Of mine own trespass, that I have no heart,
Nor reason to disclose my name or quality;
You must excuse me that, but trust me (fair one)
Were this ill deed undone, this deed of wickedness,
I would be proud to court your love like him,
Whom my first birth presented to the World: this for your satisfaction,
What remains, that you can challenge as a service from me?
I both expect and beg it.
First, that you swear neither
In riot of your Mirth, in Passion
Of Friendship, or in folly of Discourse,
To speak of wrongs done to a ravished Maid.
As I love truth I swear.
Next that you lead me
Near to the place you met me, and there leave me
To my last fortunes ever the morning rise.
Say more.
Lay a new man, if ever you marry
(Oh me! my heart's a breaking) but if ever
You marry in a constant love to her
That shall be then your Wife, redeem the fault
Of my undoing, I am lost for ever,
Pray use no more words.
You must give me leave
To veil you close.
Do what you will, no time
Can ransom me from sorrows or dishonours,
Shall we now go?
My shame may live without me,
But in my soul I bear my guilt about me,
Lend me your hand, now follow.
Not yet come in, not yet?
No i'll assure your Lordship, I have seldom known
Him keep out so long, my Lord usually observes
More seasonable hours.
What time of night is it?
On the stroke of three.
The stroke of three! it is wondrous strange!
Dost hear?
My Lord.
Ever six I will be here again,
Tell thy Lord so: ever six,a must not sleep,
Or if a doe, I shall be bold to wake him:
Be sure thou tell himdoe.
My Lord I shall.
Diego.
Walk thou the street that leads about the Perado,
I'll round the West part of the City, meet me
At the Inquisition Chapel; if we miss him
We'll both back to his Lodgings.
At the Chapel?
I there we'll meet.
Agreed, I this way.
She is not noble, true, wise nature meant
Affection should enable her descent,
For love and beauty keeps as rich a seat
Of sweetness in the mean borne, as the great
I am resolved.
It is Roderigo certainly,
Yet his voice makes me doubt, but I'll o're-hear him
That if only I should be the Man
Made accessory, and a party both
To mine own torment, at a time so near
The birth of all those comforts I have travelled with,
So many, many hours of hopes and fears;
Now at the instantHa, stand! thy name,
Truly and speedily.
Don Lewys!
The same; but who art thouspeak?
Roderigo.
Tell me,
As you're a noble Gentleman, as ever
You hope to be enrowl'd amongst the virtuous,
As you love goodness, as you wish to inherit
The blessedness and fellowship of Angels,
As you are my friend, as you are Roderigo,
As you are any thing that would deserve
A worthy name, where have you been to night?
Oh! how have you disposed of that fair Creature
Whom you led captive from me, speak, oh speak,
Where, how, when, in what usage have you left her?
Truth I require all truth.
Tho I might question
The strangeness of your importunity;
Yet cause I note distraction in the height
Of curiosity, I will be plain, and brief.
I thank you sir.
Instead of feeding
Too wantonly upon so rich a Banquet,
I found even in that beauty that invited me
Such a commanding majesty of chaste
And humbly glorious virtue, that it did not
More check my rash attempt, then draw to ebb
The float of those desires, which in an instant
Were cooled in their own streams of shame and folly.
Now all increase of honours.
Fall in full showers on thee Roderigo,
The best man living.
You are much transported
With this discourse methinks.
Yes, I am.
She told ye her Name too.
I could not urge it
By any importunity.
Better still;
Where did you leave her?
Where I found her, farther
She would by no means grant me to waite on her,
Oh Luys I am lost.
This selfsame Lady
Was she to whom I have been long a Suitor,
And shortly hope to marry.
She your Mistress then? Luys, since friendship,
And noble honesty conjures our loves
To a continued league, here I unclasp
The secrets of my heart. Oh I have had
A glimpse of such a Creature, that deserves
A Temple, if thou love her, (and I blame thee not)
For who can look on her, and not give up
His life unto her service? if thou love her,
For pities sake conceal her; let me not
As much as know her Name, there's a temption in it,
Let me not know herDwelling, Birth or Quality,
Or any thing that she calls hers, but thee
In thee my friend, I'll see her, and to avoid
The surfeits and those rarities that tempt me,
So much I prize the happiness of friendship,
That I will leave the City.
Leave it.
Speed me!
For Salamanca, court my studies now
For Physic against infection of the mind.
You doe amaze me!
Here to live, and live
Without her, is impossible and wretched.
For Heavens sake never tell her what I was,
Or that you know me, and when I find that absence
Hath lost her to my, memory, I'll dare
To see ye againemeane time the cause that draws me
From hence, shall be to all the World untol'd;
No friend but thou alone, for whose sake only
I undertake this voluntary exile
Shall be partaker of my griefs; thy hand
Farewell: and all the pleasures, joys, contents
That bless a constant Lover, henceforth crown thee
A happy Bridegroom.
You have conquered friendship
Beyond example.
Ha, ha, ha! some one
That hath slept well to night, should a but see me
Thus merry by my self, might justly think
I were not well in my wits.
Diego!
Yes it is I, and I have had a fine fegary,
The rarest, Wild-goose chase.
Thad made thee melancholy.
Don Roderigo here? it is well you met him;
For tho I mist him, yet I met an accident
Has almost made me burst with laughter.
How so?
I'll tell you, as we parted, I perceived
A walking thing before me strangely tickled
With rare conceited raptures, him I dogged,
Supposing 'thad been Roderigo landed
From his new Pinnace, deep in contemplation
Of the sweet voyage he stole to night.
You're pleasant.
Prithee who was it?
Not I.
Y'ate in the right, not you indeed;
For it was that noble Gentleman Don John,
Son to the Count Francisco de Carcomo.
In love it seems.
Yes, pepperd on my life,
Much good may it do him, Id not be so lind
For my Cap full of double Pistolets.
What should his Mistress be?
That's yet a Riddle
Beyond my resolution, but of late
I have observed him oft to frequent
The sports the Gipsies newly come to th'City present.
It is said there is a Creature with'em,
Tho young of years, yet of such absolute beauty,
Dexterity of wit, and general qualities,
That Spain reports her not without admiration.
Have you seen her?
Never.
Nor you my Lord?
I not remember.
Why then you never saw the prettiest toy
That ever Sung or Danced.
Is she a Gypsy?
In her condition, not in her complexion.
I tell you once more, it is a spark of beauty
Able to set a World at gaze, the sweetest,
The wittiest rogue, shalls see 'em? they have fine gambols,
Are mightily frequented, Court and City
Flock to 'em, but the Country does 'em worship.
This little Ape gets money by the sack full,
It troules upon her.
Will ye with us friend?
You know my other projects, sights to me
Are but vexations.
Oh you must be merry,
Diego, we'll to the Gipsies.
Best take heed
You be not snapped.
How snapped?
By that little Fair,
'Thas a shrewd tempting Face, and a notable Tongue.
I fear not either.
Go then.
will you with us?
I'll come after.
Pleasure and youth like smiling evils woo us,
To taste new follies; tasted, they undo us.
Come my brave boys, the Taylors sheers has cut us into shapes fitting our Trades.
A trade free as a Masons.
A trade brave as a Courtiers, for some of them doe but shark, and so do we.
Gipsies, but no tanned ones, no Red-oker rascals umberd with soot and bacon as the English Gipsies are, that sally out upon Pullen, lie in ambuscado for a rope of Onions, as if they were Welsh Freebooters; no, our stile has higher steps to climb over, Spanish Gipsies, noble Gipsies.
I never knew nobility in baseness.
Baseness! the arts of Cocoquismo, and Germania used by our Spanish Pickeroes (I mean Filching, Foisting, Niming, Iilting) we defy; none in our College shall study 'em, such Graduates we degrade.
I am glad Spain has an honest company.
We'll entertain no Mounty-bancking Stroule,
No Piper, Fiddler, Tumbler through small hoops;
No Ape carrier, Baboon bearer,
We must have nothing stale, trivial or base:
Am I your Major domo, your Teniente,
Your Captain, your Commander?
Who but you?
So then, now being entered Madrill the enchanted Circle of Spain, have a care to your new Lessons.
Wee listen.
Plow deep furrows, to catch deep root in the opinion of the best, Grandos, Dukes, Marquesses, Condes, and other Titulados, show your sports to none but them, what can you doe with 3. or 4. Fools in a dish, and a block-head cut into sippets?
Scurvy meat.
The Lacedaemonians threw their Beards over their shoulders, to observe what men did behind them as well as before, you must do.
We shall never do it, our muzzles are too short.
Be not English Gipsies, in whose company a man's not sure of the ears of his head they so pilfer; no such angling; what you pull to Land catch fair; there is no Iron so foul but may be gilded, and our Gypsy profession how base soever in show, may acquire commendations.
Gipsies, and yet pick no pockets?
Infamous and roguy, so handle your Webs, that they never come to be woven in the Loom of Justice, take any thing that's given you, Purses, Knives, Handkerchers, Rosaries, Tweezes, any toy, any money, refuse not a Maruade, a blank, Feather by Feather birds build Nests, grain peckd up after grain, makes Pullen fat.
The best is we Spaniards are no great feeders.
If one City cannot maintain us, away to another, our horses must have wings; does Madrill yield no money? Sivell shall; is Sivell close fisted? Vallidoly is open; so Cordica, so Toledo: doe not our Spanish Wines please us? Italian can then, French can, preferments bow is hard to draw, set all your strengths to it, what you get, keep, all the World is a second Rochill, make all sure, for you must not look to have your Dinner served in with Trumpets.
No, no, Sackbuts shall serve us.
When you have money, hide it; sell all our horses but one.
Why one?
It is enough to carry our apparel and trinkets and the less our ambler eats, our cheer is the better; none be fluttish, none thievish, none lazy, all Bees, no Drones, and our hives shall yield us Honey.
See Father, how I am fitted; how do you like This our new stock of clothes?
My sweet Girl excellent; see their old robes be safe.
That sir, I'll look to,
Whilst in my house you lie, what thief so ever
Lays hands upon your goods, call but to me
I'll make the satisfaction.
Thanks good Hostess.
People already throng into the Inn,
And call for you into their private rooms.
No Chamber Comedies, Hostess ply you your tide; flow let 'em to a full Sea, but we'll show no pastime till after dinner, and that in a full ring of good people, the best, the noblest, no closet sweet meates, pray tell 'em so.
I shall. 
How old is Pretiosa?
Twelve and upwards.
I am in my teens assure you Mother, as little as I am, I have been taken for an Elephant, Castles and Lordships offered to be set upon me, if I would bear 'em; Why your smallest Clocks are the pretiest things to carry about Gentlemen.
Nay Child thou wilt be tempted.
Tempted! tho I am no mark in respect of a huge But, yet I can tell you great bubbers have shot at me, and shot golden Arrows, but I my self gave aim, thus; wide, four Bows; short, three and a half; they that crack me shall find me as hard as a Nut of Galisia, a Parrot I am, but my teeth too tender to crack a wantons Almond.
Thou art my noble Girl, amany Dons
Will not believe but that thou art a Boy
In Women's Clothes, and to try that conclusion
To see if thou be Alcumy, or no,
They'll throw down Gold in Musses, but Pretiesa
Let these proud Sakers and Jer-falcons fly,
Do not thou move a wing, be to thy self,
And not a changeling.
How! not a Changeling!
Yes Father, I will play the changeling,
I'll change my self into a thousand shapes
To court our brave Spectators; I'll change my postures
Into a thousand different variations,
To draw even Ladies eyes to follow mine;
I'll change my voice into a thousand tones
To chain attention; not a changeling Father,
None but my self shall play the changeling.
Do what thou wilt Pretiosa.
What noise is this?
Here's Gentlemen swear all the oaths in Spain they have seen you, must see you, and will see you.
To drown this noise let 'em enter.
Is your Play-house an Inn? a Gentleman cannot see you without crumpling his Taffeta cloak.
Nay more then a Gentleman, his man being a diminutive Don too.
Is this the little ape does the fine tricks?
Come aloft Jack little ape!
Would my Jack might come aloft, please you to set the water Mill, with the Ivory cogs in it a grinding my handful of purging comfetts.
My Master desires to have you loose from your company.
Am I a Pigeon think you to be caught with Cummin-seeds? a fly to glow my wings to sweete-meates and so be tan?
When do your gambols begin?
Not till we ha dined.
Foot then your bellies will be so full you'll be able to do nothing, Soto prithee set a good face on it for I cannot, and give the little Monkey that Letter.
Walk off and hum to your self: I dedicate (sweet destiny, into whose hand every Spaniard desires to put a Distaff) these lines of Love.
What Love, what's the matter?
Grave Mother Bumby the marks out a your mouth.
What's the Paper, from whom comes it?
The commodity wrapped up in the Paper, are Verses, the warming Pan that puts heat into 'em, you fire-braind bastard of Helicon.
What's your Masters Name?
His name is Don Tomazo Portacareco, Nunckle to young Don Hortado de Mendonza, Cousin german to the Condo de Tindilla, and natural brother to Francisco de Bavadilla, one of the Commentators of Aleantaro, a Gentleman of long standing.
Verses! I love good ones, let me see 'em.
Good ones! if they were not good ones, they should not come from me, at the name of Verses I can stand on no ground.
Here's gold too, who's is this?
Whoe's but yours? if there been any fault in the Verses, I can mend it extempore; for a stich in a mans stocking not taken up in time ravells out all the rest.
Botcherly Poetry, botcherly.
Verses and gold! these then are golden Verses.
Had every Verse a Pearl in the eye it should be thine.
A pearl in mine eye! I thank you for that, doe you wish me blind?
I by this light doe I, that you may look upon nobodies crime but mine.
I should be blind indeed!
Pray Sir read your Verses.
Shall I sing 'em or say 'em?
Which you can best.
Both scurvily.
I'll set out a throat then.
Oh that I were a Bee to sing
Hum buzz, buzz, hum, I first would bring
Home Honey to your Hive, and there leave my sting.
He manders.
Oh that I were a Goose to feed
At your barne-dore, such Corn I need,
Nor would I bite, but Gozlings breed.
And Ganders.
Oh that I were your Need'les eye,
How through your Linen would I fly;
And never leave one stich awry!
He will towze ye.
Oh would I were one of your hairs,
That you might comb out all my cares;
And kill the Nits of my dspaires,
Oh Lousy.
How! Lousy I can Rimes be Lousy?
No, no, they are excellent.
But are these all your own?
Mine own! wud I might never see Inck drop out of the nose of any Goose quil more, if velvet Cloaks have not clapped me for 'em, doe you like 'em?
Past all compare, they shall be writ out
When you've as good or better.
For these and those pray book me down your debtor.
Your Paper is long lived, having two souls,
Verses and Gold.
Would both those were in thee pretty little body, sweets Gypsy.
A Pistolet and this Paper, it would choke me.
No more then a bribe does a Constable; the Verses will easily into your head, then buy what you like with the Gold, and put it into your belly, I hope I ha chawed a good reason for you.
Will you chaw my Janet ready sir?
And eat him down if you say the word. 
Now the coxcomb my man is gon, because you're but a Country company of Strowles, I think your stock is thred-bare, here mend it with this Cloak.
What do you mean sir?
This Scarf, this Feather, and this Hat.
Dear Signior.
If they be never so dear, pox'o this hot Ruff; little Gypsy, wear thou that.
Your meaning sir.
My meaning is not to be an Ass, to carry a burden when I need not, if you show your Gambols forty Leagues hence, I'll gallop to 'em; Farewell old Gray-beard, adieu Mother mumble-crust, morrow my little Wart of beauty. 
So harvest will come in, such Sunshine days Will bring in golden sheafs, our Markets raise, Away to your task. 
Mother, Grand-mother!
Two rows of Kindred in one mouth!
Be not uncivil sir, thus have you used her thrice.
Thrice! three thousand more: may I not use mine own?
Your own! by what tenure?
Cupped entails this Land upon me, I have wooed thee, thou are coy, by this air I am a Bull of Tarisa, wild, mad for thee: you told I was some copper coin, I am a Knight of Spain, Don Francisco de Carcomo my Father, I Don John his Son, this paper tells you more, grumble not old Granam, (hears gold) for I must by this white hand, marry this cherry-lip'd, sweet-mouth'd villain.
There's a thing called quando.
Instantly.
Art thou so willing?
Peace threescore and five.
Marry me! eat a Chicken ever it be out of the shell! I'll wear no shackles, liberty is sweet; that I have, that I'll hold, marry me! can Gold and Lead mix together? a Dimond, &amp; a button of Crystal fit one ring? you are too high for me, I am too low; you too great, I too little.
I pray leave her sir, and take your Gold again.
Or if you dote, as you say, let me try you do this.
Any thing, kill the great Turk, pluck out the Mogul's Eyeteeth; in earnest Pretiosa any thing!
Your taste is soon set down, turn Gypsy for two years, be one of us, if in that time you mislike not me, nor I you, here's my hand farewell.
There's enough for your Gold, witty Child. 
Turn Gypsy I for two years! a capering Trade.
And I in th'end may keep a dancing School,
Having served for it, Gypsy! I must turn,
Oh beauty! the Suns fires cannot so burn.
I have offended, yet oh Heaven! thou know
How much I have abhorred even from my birth,
A thought that tended to immodest folly;
Yet I have fallen, thoughts with disgraces strive,
And thus I live, and thus I die alive.
Fie Clara, thou dost court calamity too much.
Yes Girl, thou dost.
Why should we fret our eyes out with our tears?
Weary complaints, it is fruitless, childish,
Impatience, for when mischief hath wound up
The full weight of the Ravishers foul Life,
To an equal height of ripe iniquity,
The poise will by degrees, sink down his Soul
To a much lower, much more lasting ruin
Then our joint wrongs can challenge.
Darkness it self
Will change nights sable brow, into a Sun-beame
For a discovery, and be sure
When ever we can learn what monster it was
Hath robed thee of the Jewel held so precious,
Our vengeance shall be noble.
Royal, any thing;
Till then lets live securely: to proclaim
Our sadness were mere vanity.
A needs not,
I'll study to be merry.
We are punished
Maria justly, covetousness to match
Our Daughter to that matchless piece of ignorance,
Our foolish Ward, hath drawn this curse upon us.
I fear it has!
Off with this face of grief.
Here comes Don Lewys; noble sir.
My Lord,
I trust I have you and your Ladies leave
To exchange a word with your fair Daughter.
Leave and welcome, hark Maria, your ear too.
Mine my Lord.
Dear Clara, I have often sued for Love,
And now desire you would at last be pleased
To stile me yours.
Mine eyes ne'er saw that Gentleman
Whom I more nobly in my heart respected,
Then I have you, yet you must Sir excuse me,
If I resolve to use a while that freedom
My younger days allow.
But shall I hope?
You will do injury to better fortunes
To your own Merit, Greatness, and Advancement,
Which I beseech you not to slack.
Then hear me,
If ever I embrace another choice,
Until I know you elsewhere matched, may all
The chief of my Desires find scorn and ruin.
Oh me!
Why figh you Lady?
Deed my Lord I am not well.
Then all Discourse is tedious,
I'll choose some fitter time; till when fair Clara.
You shall not be unwelcome hither sir;
That's all that I dare promise.
Diego!
My Lord!
What says Don Pedro?
He will go with you.
Leave us:
Shall I my Lord, entreat your privacy?
Withdraw Maria, we'll follow presently,
The great Corigidor, whose politic stream
Of popularity, glides on the shore
Of every vulgar praise, hath often urged me
To be a Suitor to his Catholic Majesty,
For a repeal from banishment for him
Who slew my Father, complements in vows,
And strange well studied promises of friendship,
But what is new to me, still as he Courts
Assistance for Alvarez my grand enemy,
Still he protests how ignorant he is,
Whether Alvarez be alive or dead?
To morrow is the day we have appointed
For meeting at the Lord Francisco's house,
The Earl of Carcomo; now my good Lord,
The sum of my request is, you will please
To lend your presence there, and witness wherein
Our joint accord consists.
You shall command it.
But first as you are noble, I beseech you
Help me with your advice, what you conceive
Of great Fernando's importunity,
Or whether you imagine that Alvarez
Survive or not?
It is a question sir
Beyond my resolution, I remember
The difference betwixt your noble Father,
And Condo de Alvarez, how it sprung
From a mere trifle first, a cast of Hawks,
Whose made the swifter flight, whose could mount highest,
Lie longest on the wing. From change of words
Their controversy grew to blows, from blows
To Parties, thence to Faction, and in short
I well remember how our streets were frighted
With brawls, whose end was blood, till when no friends
Could mediate their discords: by the King
A reconciliation was enforced,
Death threatened the first occasioner
Of breach, besides the confiscation
Of Lands and Honours, yet at last they met
Again; again they drew to sides, renewed
Their ancient quarrel, in which dismal uproar
Your Father hand to hand fell by Alvarez,
Alvarez fled, and after him the doom
Of exile was set out; He as Report
Was bold to voice, retired himself to Rhodes,
His Lands and Honours by the King bestowed
On you, but then an Infant.
Ha, an Infant!
His Wife the sister to the Corigidor,
With a young Daughter, and some few that followed her
By stealth were shipped for Rhodes, and by a storm
Ship-wrack'd at Sea, but for the banished Condo,
It was never yet known what became of him,
Here's all I can inform you.
A repeal,
Yes, I will sue for it, beg for it, buy it, any thing
That may by possibility of friends,
Or Money, I'll attempt.
It is a brave charity.
Alas poor Lady, I could morn for her!
Her loss was Usury more then I covet;
But for the Man, I'd sell my patrimony
For his repeal, and run about the World
To find him out, there is no peace can dwell
About my Fathers Tomb, till I have sacrificed
Some portion of revenge to his wronged ashes.
You will along with me?
You need not question it.
I have strange thoughts about me, two such furies
Revel amidst my joys as well may move
Distraction in a Saint, Vengeance and Love,
I'll follow sir.
Pray lead the way: you know it.
How now! from whence come you sir?
From fleeing my self sir.
From playing with Fencers sir, and they have beat him out of his Clothes sir.
Cloak, Band, Rapier, all lost at Dice!
Nor Cards neither.
This was one of my Masters dog-dayes, and he would not sweat too much.
It was mine own Goose, and I laid the Jiblets upon an other Coxcombs trencher, you are my Guardian, best beg me for a fool now.
He that begs one begs tother.
Does any Gentleman give away his things thus?
Yes, and Gentlewomen give away their things too.
To Gulls sometimes, and are Cony-catch'd for their labour.
Wilt thou ever play the Coxcomb?
If no other parts be given me, what would you have me do?
Thy Father was as brave a Spaniard
As ever spake the haute Castilian Tongue.
Put me in Clothes, I'll be as brave as he.
This is the ninth time thou hast plaid the Ass,
Flinging away thy trappings and thy cloth
To cover others, and go naked thy self.
I'll make 'em up ten, because I'll be even with you.
Once more your broken walls shall have new hangings.
To be well hung, is all our desire.
And what course take you next?
What course? why my man Soto and I will go make some maps.
What maps?
Not such Maps as you wash houses with, but Maps of Countries.
I have an Uncle in Sivell, I'll go see him, an Aunt in Seen in Italy, I go see her.
A Cousin of mine in Rome, I go to him with a Mortar.
There's a Courtesan in Venice, I'll go tickle her.
Another in England; I'll go tackle her.
So, so, and whore's the money to do all this?
If my wookes being cut down cannot fill this Pocket, cut 'em into Trapsticks.
And if his Acres being sold for a Maruedi, a Turf for marks in Cages, cannot fill this Pocket, give 'em to Gold-finders.
You'll gallop both to the Gallows, so fareyou well.
And be hanged you, new clothes y'ad best.
Four cloaks, that you may give away three, and keep one.
We'll live as merrily as beggars, lets both turn Gipsies.
By any means, if they cog we'll lie, if they toss we'll tumble.
Both in a belly, rather then fail.
Come then, we'll be Gipsified.
And tipsified too.
And we will show such tricks, and such rare gambols.
As shall put down the Elephant and Camels.
A thousand stings are in me! oh what wild prisons
Make we our bodies, to our immortal souls!
Brave Tenants to bad houses! it is a dear rent
They pay for naughty Lodging: the soul, the Mistress,
The body, the Carriage that carries her,
Sins the swift wheels that hurry her away;
Our Will the Coachman rashly driving on,
Till Coach and Carriage both are quite o'er thrown;
My body yet scopes bruises, that known thief
Is not yet called to the bar, there's no true sense
Of pain, but what the Law of conscience
Condemns us to, I feel that, who would loose
A Kingdom for a Cottage? an Estate
Of perpetuity, for a mans Life?
For annuity of that Life (pleasure) a spark
To those Celestial fires that burn about us!
A painted Star to that bright Firmament
Of constellations, which each night are set
Lighting our way, yet thither how few get?
How many thousand in Madrill drink off
The cup of lust, (and laughing) in one month
Not whining as I doe? should this sad Lady
Now meet me, do I know her? should this Temple
(By me profaned) lie in the ruins here,
The pieces would scarce show her me:would they did
Shoe's Mistress to Don Lewysby his steps,
And this disguise I'll find her; to Salamanca
Thy Father thinks you are gon; no close here stay
Where ever thou travell'st, Scorpions stop thy way: these.
Soto, how doe I show?
Like a rusty Armour new scoured, but Master how show I?
Like an Ass with a new pibal'd saddle on his back.
If the Devil were a Taylor, he would scarce know us in these gabardines.
If a Taylor were the Devil, I'd not give a Louse for him, if he should bring up this fashion amongst Gentlemen, and make it common.
The freshness of the Morning be upon you both.
The saltness of the Evening be upon you single.
Be not displeased, that I abruptly thus
Break in upon your favours, your strange habits
Invite me with desire, to understand
Both what you are, and whence, because no Country
(And I have measured some) show me your like.
Our like! no we should be sorry, we or our clothes should be like fish, new, stale, and stinking in three days.
If you ask whence we are, we are Egyptian Spaniards; if what, we are, ut, re, mi, fa, sol. Jugglers, Tumblers, any thing any where, every where.
A good fate hither leads me by the hand,
Your quality I love, the scenical School
Has been my Tutor long in Italy,
(For that's my Country,) there have I put on
Sometimes the shape of a Comedian,
And now and then some other.
A Player! a brother of the tyring house.
A Bird of the same feather.
Welcome, wut turn Gypsy?
I can nor Dance, nor Sing, but if my Pen
From my invention can strike Music tunes,
My head and brains are yours.
A Calves head and brains were better for my stomach.
A rib of Poetry.
A modicum of the Muses, a horse-shooe of Helicon.
A Mag-py of Parnassin, welcome again, I am a fire-brand of Phoebus my self, we'll invoke together, so you will not steal my Plot.
It is not my fashion.
But now adays it is all the fashion.
What was the last thing you writ, a Comedy?
No it was a sad, too sad a Tragedy.
Under these eves I'll shelter me.
See here comes our company,
Doe our tops spin as you would have 'em?
If not whip us round.
I sent you a Letter to tell you we were upon a march.
And you are welcomeyet these fools will trouble us.
Rich fools shall buy our trouble.
Hang Lands, it's nothing but Trees, Stones and Dirt, old Father I have Gold to keep up our stock, precious Pretiosa, for whose sake I have thus transformed my self out of a Gentleman into a Gypsy, thou shalt not want sweet Rimes my little Musk-cat, for besides my self here's an Italian Poet, on whom I pray throw your welcomes.
Hoe's welcome!
Sir, you're most welcome, I love a Poet,
So hee writes chastely, if your Pen can sell me
Any smooth quaint Romances, which I may sing,
You shall have Baize and Silver.
Pretty heart no selling:
What comes from me is free.
And me too.
We shall be glad to use you sir, our sports
Must be an Orchard bearing several Trees
And Fruits of several taste; one pleasure dulls.
A time may come, when we (besides these pastimes)
May from the Grandoes and the Dons of Spain
Have leave to try our skill even on the Stage,
And then your wits may help us.
And mine too.
They are your servants.
Trip softly through the streets, till we arrive
You know at whose house Father.
Trip it Gipsies, trip it fine,
Show tricks and lofty Capers;
At threading Needles we rapine,
And leaping over Rapiers.
Pindy Pantie rascal toys,
We scorn cutting Purses,
Tho we live by making noise,
For cheating none can curse us.
Over High-wayes, over low,
And over Stones and Gravel,
Tho we trip it on the Toe,
And thus for Silver travel.
Tho our Dances waste our backs,
At night fat Capons mend them;
Eggs well brewed in Butterd'-sack,
Our Wenches say befriend them.
Oh that all the World were mad,
Then should we have fine Dancing,
Hobby horses would be had,
And brave Girls keep a prancing,
Beggars would on Cock-horse ride,
And Boobies fall a roaring,
And Cuckolds tho no Horns be spied,
Be one another goring.
Welcome Poet to our Ging,
Make Rimes we'll give thee reason,
Canary Bees thy brains shall sting
Mull-sack did ne'er speak Treason.
Peter-see-me shall wash thy nowle,
And Malligo Glasses fox thee,
If Poet thou toss not bowl for bowl
Thou shalt not kiss a Doxy.
Lewys de Castro, since you circled are
In such a golden Ring of worthy friends,
Pray let me question you about that business
You and I last conferd on.
My Lord I wish it.
Then Gentlemen tho you all know this man,
Yet now look on him well, and you shall find
Such mines of Spanish honour in his bosom,
As but in few are treasured.
Oh my good Lord!
Hoe's Son to that de Castro, o'er whose Tomb
Fame stands writing a book which will take up
The age of time to fill it with the stories
Of his great acts, and that his honoured Father
Fell in the quarrel of those Families
His own, and Don Alvarez de Castilla.
The volume of those Families is too large,
And too wide Printed in our memory.
Would it had ne'er come forth.
So wish we all.
But heir's a Son as matchless as the Father,
For hee minds bravery: he lets blood his Spleen,
Tears out the Leaf in which the Picture stands
Of slain de Castro, casts a Hill of Sand
On all revenge, and stifles it.
It is done nobly.
For I by him am courted to solicit
The King for the repeal of poor Alvarez,
Who lives a banished man some say in Naples,
Some say in Arragon.
No matter where,
That Paper folds in it my hand and heart,
Petitioning the royalty of Spain
To free the good old man, and call him home;
But what hope hath your Lordship that these beams
Of grace shall shine upon me?
The word Royal!
And that's enough.
Then since this sluice is drawn up to increase
The stream, with pardon of these honoured friends
Let me set op another, and that's this,
That you my Lord Don Pedro, (and this Lady
Your noble Wife) would in this fair assembly
(If still you hold me Tenant to your favour)
Repeal the promise, you so oft have made me,
Touching the beauteous Clara for my Wife.
What I possess in her before these Lords
I freely once more give you.
And what's mine?
To you (as right heir to it) I resign.
What would you more?
What would I more? the tree bows down his head
Gently to have me touch it, but when I offer
To pluck the fruit, the top branch grows so high
To mock my reaching hand, up it does fly;
I have the Mothers smile, the Daughters frown.
Oh you must woo hard!
Woo her well shoe's thine own.
That Law holds not amongst Gipsies, I shoot hard,
And am wide off from the Mark.
Is this my Lord your Music?
None of mine.
A crew of Gipsies with desire,
To show their sports are at your Gates afire.
How, how, my Gates afire Knave!
Art panting? I am a fire l'me sure!
What are the things they doe?
They Frisk, they Caper, Dance and Sing,
Tell fortunes too (which is a very fine thing)
They tumblehow? not up and down
As Tumblers doe, but from Town to Town.
Antics they have, and Gipsie-masking,
And toys which you may have for asking;
They come to devour, nor Wine, nor good Cheer,
But to earn money, if any be here.
(But being asked, as I suppose,
Your answer will be in your tother hose)
For there's not a Gypsy amongst'em that begs,
But gets his living by his Tongue and Legs.
If therefore you please Dons they shall come in,
Now I have ended, let them begin.
I, I, by any means.
But fellow bring you Music along with you too.
Yes my Lord, both loud Music, and still Music, the loud is that which you have heard, and the still is that which no man can hear. 
A fine Knave.
There is report of a fair Gypsy,
A pretty little toy, whom all our Gallants
In Madrill flock to look on: this she trow?
Yes sure it is sheI should be sorry else.
Come follow your Leader follow
Our Convoy be Mars and Apollo,
The Van comes brave up here,
 As hotly comes the Rear.
 Our Knackers are the Fifes and Drums,
Sa, sa, the Gipsies Army comes.
Horsemen we need not fear
There's none but footmen here;
The Horse sure charge without;
Or if they wheel about,
 Our Knackers are the shot that fly
Pit a pat rattling in the Sky.
If once the great Ordnance play
That's laughing, yet run not away;
But stand the push of Pike
Scorn can but baesely strike.
 Then let our Armies join and sing
And pit a pat make our Knackers ring.
Arm, Arm, what Bands are those?
They cannot be sure our foes;
Weal not draw up our force,
Nor muster any Horse,
 For since they pleased to view our sight
Let's this way, this way, give delight.
A Council of War lets call,
Look either to stand or fall;
If our weak Army stands
Thank all these noble hands;
Whose gates of Love being open thrown
We enter, and then the Town's our own.
A very dainty thing.
A handsome Creature.
Look what a pretty pit there's in her chin.
Pit' it is a Grave to bury Lovers in.
My Fathers disguise guard me.
Soto, there's de Cortez my guardian; but he smells not us.
Peace brother Gypsy, wud any one here know his fortune?
Good fortunes all of us.
It is I sir needs a good one, come sir what's mine?
Mine and my husbands fortunes keep together,
Who is it tells mine?
I, I, hold up Madam, fear not your pocket, for I ha but two Hands.
You are sad, or mad, or glad
For a couple of Cocks that cannot be had,
Yet when abroad they have picked store of grains
Doodle doo they will cry on your Dunghills again.
Indeed I miss an idle Gentleman,
And a thing of his a fool, but neither sad
Nor mad for them, would that were all the Lead
Lying at my heart.
What look thou on so long?
So long I do you think good fortunes are fresh Herrings, to come in shoal? bad fortunes are like Mackerel at Midsummer, you have had a sore loss of late.
I have indeed, what is it?
I wonder it makes you not mad; for
Through a gap in your Ground
Thence late hath been stole
A very fine Ass, and a very fine Foal,
Take heed for I speak not by hobs and by nabs,
Ever long you'll be horribly troubled with scabs.
I am now so, go silly fool.
I ha gin't him.
Oh Soto, that Ass and Foal fattens me!
The Mother of the Gipsies, what can she do?
I'll have about with her.
I with the Gypsy Daughter.
To her Boy I
From you went a Dove away
Which ever this had been more white,
Then the silver Robe of, Day,
Her Eyes the Moon has none so bright.
Sate she now upon your hand
Not the Crown of Spain could buy it;
But it is flown to such a Land,
Never more shall you come no it;
Ha! yes if Palmistry tell true,
This Dove again may fly to you.
Thou art a lying Witch, I'll hear no more.
If you be so hot sit, we can cool you with a Song.
And when that Song's done, we'll heat you again with a dance.
Stay dear sir, send for Clara, let her know her fortune:
It is too well known.
Twill make her merry to be in this brave Company.
Good Diego fetch her.
What's that old man! has he cunning too?
More then all we.
Has he! I'll try his Spectacles.
Ha! Roderigo there! the Scholar
That went to Salamanca, takes he degrees
In the School of Gipsies? let the fish alone,
Give him Line, this is the Dove, the Dove: the Raven
That Beldam mocked me with.
What Worms pick you out there now?
Thiswhen this Line the other crosses
Art tells me it is a book of losses,
Bend your hand thus, Oh! here I find
You have lost a Ship in a great wind.
Lying Rogue I ne'er had any.
Hark, as I gather,
That great Ship was de Castro called your Father.
And I must hew that Rock that split him.
Nay and you threaten.
And what's Don John thy fortune? you are long fumbling at it?
She tells me tales of the Moon sir.
And now it is come to the Sun sir.
Your Sun wud ride, the youth wud run,
The youth wud sail, the youth wud fly;
Hoe's tying a knot will ne'er be done,
He shoots, and yet has ne'er an eye.
You have two, it were good you lent him one,
And a heart too, for he has none.
Hoyday, lend one of mine eyes!
They give us nothing, he would best put on a bold face and ask it.
Now that from the Hive
You gathered have the Honey,
Our Bees but poorly thrive,
Unless the Banks be sunny.
Then let your Sun and Moon
Your gold and silver shine,
My thanks shall huming fly to you.
 And mine, and mine, and mine.
See, see, your Gypsy toys,
You mad Girls, you merry Boys.
A boon voyage we have made
Loud Peals must then be had,
If I a Gypsy be
A crack rope I am for thee;
Oh here's a Golden Ring,
Such clappers please a King;
Such clapers please a King: you pleased may pass away
Then let your Bell-ropes stay,
Now chime it is Holy-day,
Now chime it is Holy-day.
No more of this pray Father, fall to your Dancing. Dance.
Clara will come too late now.
It is great pity,
Besides your Songs, Dances and other Pastimes,
You do not as our Spanish Actors doe, make trial of a Stage.
We are sir about it,
So please your high authority to sign us
Some warrant to confirm us.
My hand shall do itand bring the best in Spain to see your Sports.
Which to set off this Gentleman a Scholar
Pox on you.
Will write for us:
A Spaniard sir?
No my Lord an Italian.
Denies his Country toomy Son sings Gypsy Ballads,
Keep as you are, we'll see your Poets vain,
And yours for playing; time is not ill spent
That's thus laid out in harmless merriment.
My Lord of Carcomo, for this entertainment,
You shall command our loves.
You're nobly welcome.
The Evening grows upon us, Lords to all
A happy time of day.
The like to you Don Pedro.
To my hearts sole Lady,
Pray let my service humbly be remembered,
We only mist her presence.
I shall truly
Report your worthy love.
You shall no further,
Indeed my Lords you shall not.
With your favour
Wee will attend you home.
Whore's Don Pedro? oh sir!
Why what's the matter?
The Lady Clara,
Passing near to my Lord Corigidors house,
Met with a strange mischance.
How, what mischance?
The Jester that so late arrived at Court,
And there was welcome for his Countries sake,
By importunity of some friends, it seems
Had borrowed from the Gentleman of your Horse,
The backing of your mottled Barberry:
On which being mounted, whilst a number gazed
To hear what Jests hee could perform on Horse back,
The head strong beast unused to such a Rider,
Bears the Press of People before him;
With which throng, the Lady Clara meeting,
Fainted, and there fell down; not bruised I hope;
But frighted and entranced.
Ill destined mischief!
Where have you left her?
At your house my Lord,
A servant coming forth, and knowing who
The Lady was, conveyed her to a Chamber,
A Surgeon too is sent for.
Had she been my Daughter,
My care could not be greater, then it shall be
For her recur.
But if she miscarry,
I am the most unhappy Man that lives.
Diego Coast about the Fields,
And over-take Don Pedro and his Wife,
They newly parted from us.
I'll run speedily.
A strange mischance, but what!
I have my Lord Francisco this day noted,
I may tell you, an accident of merriment and wonders
Indeed my Lord.
I have not thoughts enough
About me to imagine what th'event
Can come to, it is indeed about my Son;
Hereafter you may counsel me.
Most gladlyhow fares the Lady?
Called back to Life, but full of sadness.
Talks she nothing?
Nothing, for when the women that attend on her
Demanded how she did, she turned about,
And answered with a sigh, when I came near,
And by the Love I bore her, begged a word
Of hope to comfort me in her well-doing;
Before she would reply, from her fair Eyes
She greetes me with a Bracelet of her tears;
Then wished me not to doubt, she was too well,
Entreats that she may sleep without disturbance,
Or company until her Father came.
And thus I left her.
For shoe's past the worst,
Young Maids are oft so troubled.
Here come they
You talk ofsir, your Daughter for your comfort
Is now upon amendment.
Oh my Lord!
You speak an Angels voice.
Pray in and visit her.
I'll follow instantlyyou shall not part
Without a cup of Wine my Lord.
It is now too troublesome a time;
Which way take you Don Lewys?
No matter which, for till I hear
My Clara be recovered I am nothing,
My Lord Corigidor, I am your servant
For this free entertainment.
You have conquered me
In noble curtsy.
Oh! that no art
But Love it self can cure a Love-sick heart.
Clara, hope of mine age!
Soul of my comfort,
Kill us not both at once; why dost thou speed
Thine Eye in such a progress about these Walls?
Yon large Window
Yields some fair prospect, good my Lord look out,
And tell me what you see there.
Easy suite,
Clara it over-viewes a spacious Garden,
Amidst which stands an Alabaster Fountain,
A goodly one.
Indeed my Lord.
The griefs grow wide,
And will mislead thy judgement through thy weakness
If thou obey thy weakness.
Who owns these glorious buildings?
Don Fernando
De Azeutda, the Corigidor
Of Mardrill, a true noble Gentleman.
May I not see him?
See him Clara, why?
A truly noble Gentleman you said sir.
I did: lo here he comes in person,
We are my Lord your servants.
Good no complement,
Young Lady there attends below a Surgeon
Of worthy fame and practice, is it your pleasure
To be his Patient?
With your favour sir,
May I impart some few, but needful words
Of secrecy to you, to you your self,
None but your self.
You may.
Must I not hear 'em?
Nor I.
Oh yes, pray sit my Lord.
Say on.
You have been Married.
To a Wife young Lady,
Who whiles the Heavens did lend her me was fruitful
In all those virtues which stiles Woman good.
And you had Children by her.
Had it is true,
Now have but one, a Son, and hee yet lives,
The Daughter, as if in her Birth, the Mother
Had perfected the errand she was sent for
Into the World, from that hour took her Life
In which the other that gave it her, lost hers;
Yet shortly she unhappily, but fatally
Perished at Sea.
Sad story!
Roderigo,
My Son.
How is hee called sit?
Roderigo.
Hee lives at Salamanca, and I fear
That neither Time, Persuasions nor his Fortunes
Can draw him thence.
My Lord, do ye know this Crucifig?
You drive me to amazement, it was my Sons,
A Legacy bequeathed him from his Mother
Upon her Death-bed, dear to him as Life;
On Earth there cannot be another treasure
Hee values at like rate as hee does this.
Oh then I am a cast-away!
How's that?
Alas she will grow frantic.
In my bosom,
Next to my Heart my Lord I have laid up,
In bloody Characters a Tale of horror,
Pray read the Paper, and if there you find
Ought that concerns a Maid undone, and miserable
Made so by one of yours, call back the piety
Of nature, to the goodness of a Judge,
An upright Judge, not of a partial Father,
For doe not wonder that I live to suffer
Such a full weight of wrongs, but wonder rather
That I have lived to speak them; thou great man
Yet read, read on, and as thou read consider
What I have suffered, what thou ought to doe;
Thine own Name, Father-hood, and my dishonour
Be just as Heaven and fate are, that by miracle
Have in my weakness wrought a strange discovery;
Truth copied from my heart is texted there:
Let now my shame be thoroughly understood,
Sins are heard farthest, when they cry in blood.
True, true, they doe not cry but hollow here,
This is the Trumpet of a Soul drowned deep
In the unfathom'd Seas of matchless sorrows.
I must lock fast the door.
I have no words
To call for vengeance.
I am lost in marvel.
Sir, pray fit as you sat before: white paper
This should be innocence, these Letters Gulls
Should be the honest Oracles of Revenge.
What's Beauty but a perfect white and red?
Both here well mixed, limn truth so beautiful,
That to distrust it as I am a Father;
Speaks me as foul, as rape hath spoken my Son,
It is true.
It is true.
Then mark me how I kneel
Before the high tribunal of your Injuries;
Thou too too much wronged Maid scorn not my tears,
For these are tears of Rage, not tears of Love.
Thou Father of this too too much wronged Maid,
Thou Mother of her counsels and her cares;
I doe not plead for pity to a Villain,
Oh! let him die as hee hath lived dishonourably,
Basely and cursedly, I plead for pity,
To my till now untainted blood and honour,
Teach me how I may now be just and cruel;
For henceforth I am Childless.
Pray sir rise,
You wrong your place and age.
Point me my Grave
In some obscure by path, where never memory
Nor mention of my Name may be found out.
My Lord, I can weep with you, nay weep for ye
As you for me, your passions are instructions,
And prompt my faltering Tongue to beg at least
A noble satisfaction, tho not revenge.
Speak that again.
Can you procure no Balm
To heal a wounded Name?
Oh you are as fair
In Mercy as in Beauty, wilt thou live,
And I'll be thy Physician?
I'll be yours.
Don Pedro, we'll to counsel
This Daughter shall be ours, sleep, sleep, young Angel,
My care shall wake about thee.
Heaven is gracious,
And I am eased.
Wee will be yet more private,
Might curtains o'er the world, soft dreams rest with thee.
The best revenge is to reform our crimes,
Then time crowns sorrows, sorrows sweeten times.
Welcome, welcome, welcome.
More Sacks to the Mill.
More Thieves to the Sacks.
Peace.
I give you now my welcome without noise.
It is Music to me.
Oh sir!
You must not be in your Mutton before we are out of our Veale.
Stay for Vinegar to your Oysters, no opening till then.
No kissing till you're sworn.
Swear me then quickly.
I have brought Gold for my Admission.
What you bring leave, and what you leave count lost.
I brought all my Teeth, two are struck out, them I count lost, so must you.
I brought all my wits, half I count lost, so must you.
To be as you are, I lose Father, Friends,
Birth, Fortunes, all the World; what will you doe
With the beast I rode on hither?
A Beast is it a Mule? send him to Muly Crag a whee in Barberry.
Is it an Ass? give it to a Lawyer, for in Spain they ride upon none else.
Kill him by any means, lest being pursued
The beast betray me.
Hoe's a beast betrays any man.
Except a Bailiff to be pumped.
Pray buy the Carcass and the furniture.
Doe, doe, bury the Asses Household-stuff, and in his skin sow any Man that's mad for a Woman.
Do so then, bury it, now to your Oath.
All things are ready.
Thy best hand lay on this Turf of Grass,
(There thy Heart lies) vow not to pass
From us two years for Sun nor Snow,
For hill nor dale (how ever Winds blow.)
Vow the hard Earth to be thy Bed,
With her greene Cushions under thy Head;
Flower banks or Moss to be thy board,
Water thy Wine,
And drink like a Lord.
Kings can have but Coronations,
Wee are as proud of Gypsy Fashions;
Dance, Sing, and in a well-mixt border,
Close this new Brother of our Order.
What we get, with us come share,
You to get must vow to care;
Nor strike Gypsy, nor stand by,
When strangers strike, but fight or die;
Our Gypsy Wenches are not common,
You must not kiss a fellows Lemon;
Nor to your own (for one you must)
In Songs send, errands of base lust.
Dance, Sing, and in a well mixed border,
Close this new Brother of our Order.
On this Turf of Grass I vow
Your Laws to keep, your Laws allow.
A Gypsy, a Gypsy, a Gypsy.
Now choose what Maid has yet no mate, shoe's yours.
Here then fix I my fate.
Again fall too before you ha washed!
Your Nose in the Manger, before the Oats are measured.
Jade so hungry!
Set foot to foot, those Garlands hold,
Teach him how, now mark what more is told;
By cross Arms the Lovers sign,
Vow as these flowers themselves entwine,
Of Aprils wealth building a throne
Round; so your love to one or none,
By those touches of your Feet,
You must each night embracing meet;
Chaste how ever disjoined by Day,
You the Sun with her must play;
She to you the Marigold
To none but you her Leaves unfold;
Wake she or sleep, your Eyes so charm,
Want, wee, nor weather doe her harm.
This is your Market now of kisses,
Buy and sell free each other Blisses.
Most, willingly.
Holy days, high days, Gypsy Fairs,
When kisses are Fairings, and hearts meet in pairs.
All Ceremonies end here; Welcome Brother, Gypsy.
And the better to instruct thee, mark what a brave Life it is all the year long.
Brave Don cast your eyes on our Gypsy Fashions,
In our antique hey de guise, wee go beyond all Nations;
Plump Dutch at us grutch, so do English, so do French,
He that loops on the Ropes, show me such an other wench.
We no Camels have to show, nor Elephant with grout head,
We can Dance, he cannot go, because the Beast is Corne-fed;
No blind Bears shedding tears, for a Colliers whipping,
Apes nor Dogs, quick as Frogs, over Cudgels skipping.
Jack in Boxes, nor Decoys, Puppets nor such poor things,
Nor are we those roaring Boys, that cousin Fools with guilt Rings;
For an Ocean, not such a motion, as the City Ninivie,
Dancing, Singing, and fine Ringing, you these sports shall hear and see.
Come now what shall his Name be?
His Name shall now be Andrew, friend Andrew mark me:
Two years I am to try you, prove fine Gold,
The uncrack'd Diamond of my Faith shall hold.
My vows are Rocks of Adamant.
Two years you are to try me, black when I turn
May I meet youth and want, old age and scorn.
Kings Diadems shall not buy thee.
Doe you think
You can endure the Life and love it?
As Usurers dote upon their treasure.
But when your Face shall be tand, like a Sailors workday hand:
When your Feet shall be galled, and your Noddle be mall'd:
When the Woods you must forredge, and not meet with poor Pease-porridge:
Be all to be dabled, yet lie in no Sheet:
With Winters Frost, Hail, Snow and Sleet;
What Life will you say it is then?
As now the sweetest.
Away, away, the Corigidor has sent for you.
Hence merrily fine to get Money,
Dry are the Fields, the Banks are Sunny;
Silver is sweeter far then Honey.
Fly like Swallows,
Wee for our Coneys must get Mallowes,
Who loves not his Dill, let him die at the Gallows;
Hence bonny Girls foot it trimly.
Smug up your beetle Brows, none look grimly,
To show a pretty foot, Oh! it is seemly.
Doe you hear you Gypsy? Gypsy?
Me?
There's a young Gypsy newly entertained,
Sweet Gypsy call him back for one two words,
And here's a Jewel for thee.
I'll send him.
What's his Name?
Andrew.
A very handsome fellow, I ha seen Courtiers
Jet up and down in their full bravery,
Yet here's a Gypsy worth a drove of 'em.
With me sweet Heart?
Your Name is Andrew.
Yes.
You can tell Fortunes Andrew.
I could once,
But now I ha lost that knowledge, I am in haste,
And cannot stay to tell you yours.
I cannot tell yours then,
And cause you are in hast, I am quick,
I am a Maid.
So, so, a maid quick.
Juanna Cardochia,
That's mine own Name, I am my Mothers Heir
Here to this House, and two more.
I buy no Lands.
They shall be given you, with some Plate and Money,
And free possession (during life) of me,
So the match like you, for so well I love you
That I in pity of this Trade of Gipsying
(Being base, idle and slavish) offer you
A state to settle you, my youth and beauty,
(Desired by some brave Spaniards) so I may call you
My husband, shall I Andrew?
'Lass pretty Soul,
Better Stars guide you, may that hand of Cupped
Ache, ever shot this arrow at your heart,
Sticks there one such indeed?
I would there did not,
Since you'll not pluck it out.
Good sweet I cannot;
For marriage it is a Law amongst us Gipsies
We match in our own tribes, for me to wear you
I should but wear you out.
I doe not care
Wear what you can out, all my life, my wealth,
Ruin me, so you lend me but your love,
A little of your love.
Would I could give it,
For you are worth a World of better men,
For your free noble mind, all my best wishes
Stay with you, I must hence.
Wear for my sake
This Jewel.
I'll not rob you, I'll take nothing.
Wear it about your neck but one poor Moon;
If in that time your eye be as it is now,
Send my Jewel home again, and I protest
I'll never more think on you; deny not this,
Put it about your neck:
Well then it is done.
And vow to keep it there.
By all the Goodness
I wish attend your fortunes I doe vow it.
Scorned! thou hast tempered poison to kill me
Thy self shall drink; since I cannot enjoy thee
My revenge shall.
Where are the Gipsies?
Gon;Diego do you love me?
Love thee Juanna!
Is my life mine! it is but mine so long
As it shall do thee service.
There's a younger Gypsy newly entertained.
A handsome rascal; what of him?
That slave in obscene Language courted me.
Drew Rialls out, and would have bought my body
Diego from thee!
Is hee so Itchy? I'll cure him.
Thou shalt not touch the Villain, I'll spin his fate;
Woman strikes sure, fall the blow ne'er so late.
Strike on sin, thou wilt be a striker.
See Don Lewys, an Army!
(The strongest Army in Spain) to the full length
Is stretched to pluck old Count Alvarez home
From his sad banishment.
With longing Eyes,
(My Lord) I expect the man, your Lordships pardon,
Some business cal's me from you.
Prithee Don Lewys,
Unless th'occasion be too violent,
Stay and be merry with us, all the Gipsies
Will be here presently.
I will attend your Lordship,
Before their sports be done.
Be your own Carver,
Not yet shake off these fetters? I see a Son
Is heavy when a Father carries him
On his old heart.
Could I set up my rest,
That hee were lost, or taken prisoner;
I could hold truce with sorrow; but to have him
Vanish I know not how, gon none knows whither,
It is that mads me.
You said he sent a Letter.
A Letter! a mere Riddle; he's gon to see
His fortune in the Wars, what Wars have wee?
Suppose we had, goes any man to the Field
Naked, unfurnished, both Arms and Money?
Come, come, he's gon a Winching; we in our youth
Ran the self same Bias.
The Gipsies my Lord are come.
Are they? let them enter:
My Lord De Cortez send for your Wife and Daughter,
Good company is good Physic, take the pains
To seat your selves in my great Chamber.
See they are here; what's your number?
The figure of nine casts us all up my Lord.
Nine! let me seeyou are ten sure.
That's our Poet, he stands for a Cipher.
Ciphers make numbers; what Plays have you?
Five or six my Lord.
It's well so many already.
Wee are promised a very merry Tragedy, if all hit right, of Cobby Nobby.
So, so, a merry Tragedy, there is a way which the Italians, and the Frenchmen use; that is, on a word given, or some slight Plot,
The Actors will extempore fashion out
Scenes neat and witty.
We can do that my Lord, please you bestow the Subject
Can you? come hither,
You Master Poet to save you a labour,
Look you, against your coming I projected
This Comic passageyour Dram; that's the Scene.
I, I, my Lord.
I lay in our own Country, Spain.
It is best so.
Here's a brave part for this old Gypsylook you
The Father: read the Plotthis young she Gypsy,
This Ladynow the sonplay him your self.
My Lord, I am no Player.
Pray at this time.
(The Plot being full) to please my noble Friends,
Because your brains must into theirs put Language,
Act thou the Sons part,I'll reward your pains.
Protest my Lord
Nay, nay, shake off protesting,
When I was young sir, I have plaid my self.
Your self my Lord! you were but a poor Company then.
Yes, full enough honest fellowwill you do it?
I'll venture.
I thank you, let this Father be a Don
Of a brave spirit, old Gypsy observe me.
Yes my Lord.
Play him up high, not like a Pantaloone,
But hotly, nobly, checking this his Son,
Whom make a very rake-hell, a debauched fellow,
This point I think will show well.
This of the Picture,
It will indeed my Lord.
My Lord, what part play I?
What parts dost use to play?
If your Lordship has ever a Coxcomb, I think I could fit you.
I thank your Coxcombe-ship.
Put a Coxcomb upon a Lord!
There are parts to serve you all, go, go, make ready,
And call for what you want.
Give me the Plot, our wits are put to trial.
What's the Son's Name, Lorenzo? that's your part
Look only you to that,these I'll dispose;
Old Don Avero, mine; Hialdo, Lollio,
Two servants, you for them.
One of the foolish knaves give me, I'll be Hialdo.
And I Lollio.
Is there a Banquet in the Play? wee may call for what wee will.
Yes, here is a Banquet.
I'll go then and bespeak an ocean of Sweet meates, Marmalade and Custards.
Make hast to know what you must doe.
Doe I call for enough, and when my Belly is full, fill my Pockets.
To a Banquet there must be Wine, Fortunes a scurvy Whore; if she makes not my head sound like a Rattle; and my Heels dance the Canaries.
So, so, dispatch, whilst me employ our brains
To set things off to the Life.
I'll be straight with you,
Why does my Father put this trick on me?
Spies hee me through my Vizard? if hee does
He's not the King of Spain, and it is no Treason;
If his invention, Jet upon a Stage
Why should not I use action? a debauched fellow!
A very rake-hell, this reflects on me,
And I'll retort it, grown a Poet Father?
No matter in what strain your Play must ruune,
But I shall fit you for a roaring Son.
Come Ladies take your places, this their Music,
It is very handsome, oh! I wish this Room
Were frighted, but with noble friends
As are to you my welcomes, begin there masters.
Presently my Lord, wee want but a cold Capon for a property.
Call, call for onenow they begin.
Both short and sweet some say is best,
Wee will not only be sweet but short,
Take you Pepper in the Nose you mar our sport.
By no means Pepper.
Of your Love measure us forth but one span,
We do (tho not the best) the best we can.
A good honest Gypsy.
Slave! whore's my Son Lorenzo?
I have sought him my Lord in all four Elements; in Earth, my Shoes are full of Gravel; in Water, I drop at Nose with sweating; In Air, wheresoever I heard noise of Fiddlers, or the wide mouths of Gallon-pots roaring; and in Fire, what
Chimney soever I saw smoking with good cheer, for my Masters Dinner, as I was in hope.
Not yet come home? before on this old Tree
Shall grow a branch so blasted, I'll hew it off,
And bury it at my foot, did thou enquire
At my Brothers?
At your Sisters.
At my Wives Fathers?
At your Uncles Mothers, no such sheep has broke through their hedge, no such Calse as your Son sucks, or bleats in their ground.
I am unblessed to have but one Son only,
One staff to bear my age upone Taper left,
To light me to my Grave, and that burns dimly
That leaves me darkling hid in clouds of woe,
He that should prop me is mine overthrow.
Well done old fellow is it not?
Yes, yes, my Lord.
Here comes his man Hialdo.
Whore's the prodigal your Master sirrah?
Eating Acorns amongst Swine, draff amongst Hogs, and gnawing bones amongst Dogs; has lost all his Money at Dice, his Wits with his Money, and his honesty with both, for hee bumfiddles me; makes the Drawers curvet, pitches the Plate over the Bar, scores up the Vintners Name in the Ram-head; flirts his Wife under the Nose, and bids you with a Pox send him more Money.
Art thou one of his Currs to bite me too?
To nail thee to the Earth were to doe Justice.
Here comes Bucephalus my prancing Master, nail me now who dares.
I sit like an Owl in the Ivy bush of a Tavern! Hialdo I have drawn red Wine from the Vintners own Hogshead.
Here's two more, pierce them too.
Old Don, whom I call Father; am I thy Son? if I be, flesh me with Gold, fat me with Silver; had I Spain in this hand,
and Portugal in this, puff it should fly, whore's the Money I sent for?I'll tickle you for a Rake-hell.
Not a Marvedi.
Thou shalt have none of me.
Hold his Nose to the Grinstone my Lord.
I shall have none!
Charge me a case of Pistols.
What I have built I'll ruin, shall I suffer
A Slave to set his Foot upon my heart?
A Son! a barbarous Villain, or if Heaven save thee
Now from my Justice, yet my curse pursues thee.
Hialdo, carbonado thou the old Rogue my Father.
Whilst you slice into Collups the rusty Gamon his man there.
No Money! Can Taverns stand without anon, anon? Fidlers live without scraping, Taffeta Girls look plump without pampering? if you will not Lard me with Money, give me a Ship, furnish me to Sea.
To have thee hanged for Piracy?
Trim, tram, hang Master hand Man.
Then send me to the West-Indies, buy me some Office there.
To have thy throat cut for thy quarrelling.
Else send me and my ningle Hialdo to the Wars.
A match, we'll fight Dog, fight Bear.
Oh dear Hernando! welcome, clap Wings to your heals,
And pray my worthy friends bestow upon me
Their present Visitation.
Lorenzo, see the anger of a Father,
Although it be as loud and quick as thunder,
Yet'cis done instantly, cast off thy wildness,
Be mine, be mine, for I to call thee home
Have with my honoured friend here, Don Hernando
Provided thee a Wife.
A Wife! Is she handsome? is she rich? Is she fair? Is she witty? Is she honest? Hang honesty. Has she a sweet Face, Cherry-Cheeke, Strawberry-lip, white-skin, dainty Eye, pretty Foot, delicate Legs? as there's a Girl now.
It is a Creature both for Birth and fortunes,
And for most excellent graces of the mind,
Few like her are in Spain.
When shall I see her?now Father pray take your curse off.
I doe, the Lady
Lives from Mardrill, very near fourteen Leagues,
But thou shalt see her Picture.
That, that, most Ladies in these days are but very fine Pictures.
Ladies to you first welcome, my Lords (Alonzo,
And you worthy Marquess) thanks for these honours.
Away you: to th'cause now of this meeting, my Son Lorenzo,
Whose wildness you all know comes now to the Lure,
Sits gently; has called home his wandering thoughts,
And now will Marry.
A good Wife Fate send him.
One stayed may settle him.
Fly to the mark sir, show me the Wench, or her Face, or any thing I may know it is a woman fit for me.
She is not here her self, but here's her Picture.
My Lord De Carcamo, pray observe this.
I doe attentivelyDon Pedro, mark it.
If you ha done your part, yonders a Wench wud ha a bout with you, 
Me!
A Wench!
Why stand you staring at it? how do you like her?
Are you in earnest?
Yes sir, in earnest.
I am not so hungry after flesh to make the Devil a Cuckold
Look not upon the Face, but on the goodness
That dwells within her.
Set fire on the Tenement.
Shoe's rich, nobly descend.
Did ever Nobility look so scurvilie?
I am sunk in fortuaes, she may raise us both.
Sink, let her to her Granam; marry a Witch! have you fetched a Wife for me out of Lapland? an old Midwife in a velvet Hat, were a goddess to this: that a red Lip!
There's a red Nose.
That a yellow hair.
Why? her teeth may be yellow.
Whore's the full Eye?
She has full blabber Cheeks.
Set up thy rest, her merriest thou or none.
None then, were all the Water in the World one Sea, all Kingdoms one Mountain. I would climb on all four, up to the top of that Hill, and head-long hurl my self into that abisse of waves ever I would touch the skin of such rough Gaberdine, for the breath of her Picture stinks hither.
What tumult's this?
Murder, murder, murder, one of our Gipsies is in danger of hanging, hanging!
Who is hurt?
It is I my Lord, stabbed by this Gypsy.
Hee struck me first, and I'll not take a blow
From any Spaniard breathing.
Are you so brave?
Break up your play: lock all the doors.
I faint my Lord.
Have him to a Surgeon, how fell they out?
Oh! my good Lord, these Gipsies when they lodged
At my house, I had a Jewel from my Pocket
Stolen by this Villain.
It is most false my Lords,
Her own hands gave it me.
She that calls him Villain,
Or says he stole.
Hoyday, we hear your scolding.
And the hurt Gentleman finding it in his bosom
For that hee stabbed him.
Hence with all the Gipsies.
Ruffians and Thieves, to prison with 'em all.
My Lord we'll leave engagements, in Plate and Money
For all our safe forth-commings; punish not all
For one's offence, we'll prove our selves no Thieves.
Oh Soto! I make Buttons.
Would I could make some, and leave this Trade.
Iron him then, let the rest go free, but stir not one foot
Out of Madrill; bring you in your witness.
Prick him with a Pin, or pinch him by the Elbow; any thing.
My Lord Don Pedro, I am your Ward, wee have spent a little Money to get a horrible deal of Wit, and now I am weary of it.
My runne-awayes turned Jugglers! Fortune-Tellers!
No great Fortunes.
To Prison with 'em both: a Genleman play the Ass!
If all Gentlemen that play the Ass should to Prison, you must widen your Jayles. Come Soto, I scorn to beg, set thy foot to mine, and kick at shackles.
So, so, away with 'em.
Send all our Company after, and we'll play there, and be as merry as you here. 
Our Comedy turned Tragical! please you Lords walk.
This Actor here and I must change a word,
And I come to you.
Well my Lord, your pleasure
Why? could thou think in any base disguise
To blind my sight? Fathers have Eagles Eyes.
But pray sir why was this done? why when I thought you
Fast locked in Salamanca, at your Study,
Leaped you into a Gypsy?
Sir, with your pardon,
I shall at fit time, to you show cause for all:
Mean time sir, you have got a Trade to live by,
Best to turn Player, an excellent Ruffian! ha!
But know sir, when I had found you out, I gave you
This project of set purpose, it is all my self,
What the old Gypsy spake must be my Language,
Nothing are left me but my Offices,
And thin-fac'd honours, and this very Creature
By you so scorned, must raise me by your Marrying her.
You would not build your glory on my ruins.
The Rascal has belied the Lady,
She is not half so bad, ell's one, shoe's rich.
Oh! will you see the joys of my full youth?
To Dunghill muck, seek out some wretches Daughter;
Whose soul is lost for gold then? you are more noble
Then to have your Son, the top branch of your house
Grow in a heap of rubbish; I must marry a thing,
I shall be ashamed to own, ashamed to bring her
Before a Sun-beame.
I cannot help it sir, resolve upon it, and do it.
And do it and die.
Is there no face in Spain for you to pick out
But one to fright me? when you sat the Play here
There was a beauty, to be Lord of which
I would against an Army throw defiance.
She! Alas.
How! how! at every hair of her's
There hangs a very Angel, this! I am ready
To drop down looking at it: Sir I beseech you
Bury me in this Earth, on which I am humbled
To beg your blessing on me for a Gypsy,
Rather thenoh! I know not what to term it.
Pray what is that young pensive piece of beauty?
Your voice for her, I eyed her all the scene.
I saw you did.
Me thought it was a sweet Creature.
Well tho my present state stands now on Ice,
I'll let it crack and fall, rather then bar thee
Of thy content, this Lady shall go by then.
Hang let her there, or any where.
That young Lannard,
Whom you have such a mind to, if you can whistle her
To come to Fist, make trial, play the young Falconer.
I will nor mar your marriage, nor yet make
Beauty no wealth, wealth ugliness, which you will take.
I thank you sir, put on your Mask good Madam,
The Sun will spoil your Face else.
THou hast now the Wife of thy desires.
Sir, I have;
And in her every blessing that makes Life
Loath to be parted with.
Noble she is,
And fair, has to enrich her Blood and Beauty
Plenty of Wit, Discourse, Behaviour, Carriage.
I ow you duty for a double birth,
Being in this happiness begot again,
Without which I had been a man of wretchedness.
Then henceforth, Boy, learn to obey thy fate,
It is fallen upon thee, know it, and embrace it:
Thy Wife's a wanton.
A wanton!
Examine through the progress of thy youth,
What capital sins, what great one it is, for it is
A great one you have committed.
I a great one!
Else Heaven is not so wrathful to pour on thee
A misery so full of bitterness;
I am thy Father, think on it, and be just;
Come doe not dally.
Pray my Lord.
Fool it were
Impossible that Justice should rain down
In such a frightful horror without cause.
Sir, I will know it, rather blush thou did
An act thou dare not name then that it has
A name to be known by.
Turn from me then,
And as my guilt sighs out this monster Rape,
Oh! doe not lend an Ear.
Rape! fearful.
Hence, hence springs my due reward.
You are none of mine.
Or if thou be, thou dost belly the stamp
Of thy Nativity.
Forgive me.
Had she
Poor wronged Soul (who ever she was) no Friend,
Nor Father to revenge, had she no Tongue
To roar her injuries?
Alas I know her not.
Peace thou wilt blaze a sin beyond all president,
Young man thou should have married her, the Devil
Of lust that riots in thy Eye, should there
Have let full love and pity; not on this stranger
Whom thou hast doted on.
Oh! had I married her,
I had been then the happiest man alive:
As I the happiest Woman being married,
Look on me sir.
You shall not find a change
So full of fears as your most noble Father,
In his wise Trial urged.
Indeed you shall not,
The forfeit of her shame shall be her pawn.
Why pray do ye mock my sorrows? now oh now
My horrors flew about me!
No thy comforts,
Thy blessings Roderigo.
By this Crucifix
You may remember me.
Ha! art thou that Lady wronged?
I was, but now am
Righted in noble satisfaction.
How can I turn mine Eyes, and not behold
On every side my shame!
No more hereafter,
Wee shall have time to talk at large of all,
Love her that's now thine own, doe Roderigo.
Shoe's far from what I charactred.
My care shall live about me to deserve your love.
Excellent ClaraFathers both, and Mother,
I will redeem my fault.
Our blessings dwell on ye.
Married to Roderigo!
Judge your self,
See where they are.
Is this your Husband Lady?
He is sir, Heavens great hand that on Record,
Fore-points the equal Union of all hearts,
Long since decreed, what this day hath been perfected.
It is well then, I am free it seems.
Make smooth
My Lord, those clouds which on your brow deliver
Emblems of storm; I will as far as honour
May privilege, deserve a noble friendship,
As you from me deserve a worthy memory.
Your Husband has proved himself a friend,
Trusty and tried, he's welcome I may say
From the University,
To a new School
Of happy knowledge Lewys.
Sir, I am not so poor to put this injury up,
The best blood flows within you is the price.
Lewys for this time calcalme your anger,
And if I do not give you noble satisfaction,
Call me to what account you please.
So, so, I come for Justice t'ee,
And you shall grant it.
Shall and will.
With speed too.
My poor friend bleeds the whiles.
You shall your self
Before wee part, receive the satisfaction
You come for, who attends
My Lord?
The Prisoner.
He attends your Lordships pleasure.
What would this Girl? foh no tricks.
Get you to your Cabin Hus-wife, wee have no ear for Ballads.
Take her away.
A wondrous lively Creature.
Noble Gentlemen,
If a poor Maids, a Gypsy Virgins tears
May soften the hard edge of angry Justice;
Then grant me gracious hearing (as you're merciful.)
I beg my Husbands Life.
Thy Husbands, little one!
Gentle sir, our plighted troaths are Chronicled
In that white Book above, which notes the secrets
Of every thought and heart, he is my Husband,
I am his Wife.
Rather his Whore.
Now trust me,
You're no good man to say so, I am honest,
Deed la I am, a poor soul that deserves not
Such a bad word, were you a better man
Then you are, you doe me wrong.
The Toy grows angry.
And it becomes her sweetly, troth my Lord,
I pity her.
I thank you sir.
Your Husband
You'll say is no Thief.
Upon my Conscience hee is not.
Dares not strike a man.
Unworthily
Hee dares not, but if trod upon, a Worm
Will turn again.
That turning turns your Worm
Off from the Ladder, Minion.
Sir, I hope
You are not his Judge, you are too young, too choleric,
Too passionate, the price of Life or Death
Requires a much more grave consideration
Then your years warrant, he sit they (like gods)
Upon whose head the reverend badge of Time
Hath sealed the proof of Wisdom; to these Oracles
Of riper Judgment, lower in my heart,
Then on my knees, I offer up my suite,
My lawful suite, which begs they would be gentle
To their own fems, their own imortall stories,
Oh! doe not think my Lords compassion thrown
On a base low estate, on humble People
Less meritorious, then if you had favored
The faults of great men; and indeed great men
Have often times great faults; he whom I plead for
Is free, the soul of Innocence it self
Is not more white, will you pity him?
I see it is in your Eyes, it is a sweet Sun-beame,
Let it shine out; and to adorn your praise
The prayers of the poor shall crown your days,
And theirs are something hard.
Beshrew the Girl,
She has almost melted me to tears.
Hence triflercall in my friends,
What hope of ease?
Good hope, but still I smart,
The worst is in my pain.
The price is high
Shall buy thy vengeance, to receive a wound
By a base Villains hand, it mitts me.
Men subject to the extremity of Law,
Should carry peace about'em to their Graves,
Else were you nobler then the blood you boast of,
Could any way (my Lord) derive you know,
I would return sharpe answer to your slanders;
But it suffices I am none of ought
Your rage mistermes me.
None of 'em, no Rascal?
No Rascal.
Nor no Thief.
Ask her, that's my Accuser, could your Eyes
Pierce through the secrets of her foul desires;
You might without a partial Judgement, look into
A Women's Lust and Malice.
My good Lords,
What I have Articled against this fellow,
I justify for truth.
On then, no more,
This being true she says; I have deserved
To die.
Wee sit not here to bandy Words,
But minister Law, and that condemns thee
For theft unto the Gallows.
Oh my misery!
Are you all Marble-brested? are your bosoms
Hooped round with Steel, to cast away a man?
More worthy Life and Honours then a thousand
Of such, as only pray unto the shadow
Of abused greatness.
It is in vain to storm,
My Fate is here determined!
Lost Creature,
Art thou grown dull too; is my Love so cheap,
That thou court'st thy destruction, because I love thee?
My Lords, my Lords; speak Andrew, prithee now,
Be not so cruel to thy self and me,
One word of thine will do it.
Away with him,
To morrow is his day of Execution.
Even when you will.
Stay man thou shalt not go;
Here are more Women yet, sweet Madam speak:
You Lady, you methinks should have some feeling
Of tenderness, you may be touched as I am,
Troth were your cause, I'd weep with you, and join
In earnest suite for one you held so dear.
My Lord, pray speak in his behalf.
I would, but dare not,
It is a fault so clear and manifest.
Back with him to his Dungeon.
Heaven can tell.
I sorrow not to die, but to leave her,
Who whiles I live is my Lifes comforter.
Now shall I be revenged.
Oh me unhappy!
See the Girl falls,
Some one look to her!
Alas poor Maid.
Pretiosa!
She does recover, mine honourable Lord.
In vain, what is it?
Be pleased to give me private audience;
I will discover something shall advantage
The noblest of this Land.
Well I will hear thee,
Bring in the Girl.
Ought with me, what is it?
I care not for thy Company old Ruffin,
Rascal art impudent?
To beg your service.
Hang your self.
By your Fathers Soul sir, hear me.
Dispatch.
First, promise me you will get Repreeve
For the condemned Man, and by my Art,
I'll make you master of what your Heart on Earth
Can wish for, or desire.
Thou lie thou can not.
Try me.
Doe that, and then as I am noble,
I will not only give thy friend his Life,
But royally reward thee, love thee ever.
I take your word, what would you?
If thou mock me,
It were better thou were damned.
Sir, I am resolute.
Resolve me then, whether the Count Alvarez,
Who slew my Father, be alive or dead?
Is this the mighty matter? the Count lives.
How!
The Count lives!
Oh fate I now tell me where?
And be, my better genius.
I can do it,
In Spain a lives: more, not far from Madrill,
But in disguise much altered.
Wonderful Scholar,
Miracle of Artists, Alvarez living!
And near Madrill too! now for Heavens sake where?
That's all, and I am thine.
Walk off my Lord
To the next Field, you shall know all.
Apace then, I listen to thee
With a greedy Ear, the Miserable and the Fortunate
Are alike in this, they cannot change their Fate.
Good, good, you would fine kill him and revenge Your Fathers Death.
I would.
Bravely, or securely?
Not basely for the World.
Wee are secure.
Young Lewys, two more trusty blades then these,
Spain has not in her Army; with this
Alvarez slew thy Father, and this other,
Was that the King of France wore, when great Charles
In a set Battle took him Prisoner;
Both I resign to thee.
This is a new Mystery.
Now see this naked bosom, turns the points
Of either on this Bulwark, if thou covet'st
Out of a sprightly youth, and manly thirst
Of vengeance blood, if blood be thy ambition,
Then call to mind the fatal blow that struck
De Castor thy brave Father to his Grave;
Remember who it was that gave that blow,
His enemy Alvarez, hear, and be sudden,
Behold Alvarez!
Death, I am deluded.
Thou art incredulous, as Fate is certain
I am the man.
Thou that Butcher!
Tremble not young man, trust me I have wept
Religiously to wash off from my Conscience
The stain of my offence: twelve years and more,
Like to a restless Pilgrim I have run
From foreign Lands to Lands, to find out Death.
I am weary of my Life, give me a Sword,
That thou may know with what a perfect zeal
I honour old De Castors memory;
I'll fight with thee, I would not have thy hand
Dipped in a wilful Murder, I could wish
For one hours space I could pluck back from Time,
But thirty of my years, that in my fall
Thou might deserve report: now if thou Conquerst
Thou can not triumph, I am half dead already,
Yet I'll not start a foot.
Breathes there a spirit
In such a heap of rage?
Oh! that I had
A Son of equal growth with thee, to tug
For Reputation: by thy Fathers ashes,
I would not kill thee for an other Spain,
Yet now I'll do my best, thou art amazed,
Come on.
Twelve tedious Winters banishment!
It was a long time.
Could they redeem thy Father?
Would every Age had been twelve Ages Lewys,
And I for Penance every Age a dying,
But it is too late to wish.
I am overcome,
Your nobleness hath conquered me, here ends
All strife between our Families, and henceforth
Acknowledge me for yours.
Oh! thou reviv'st
Fresh horrors to my Fact, for in thy gentleness
I see my sin anew.
Our peace is made,
Your Life shall be my care, twill be glad news
To all our noble friends.
Since Heaven will have it so,
I thank thee glorious Majesty; my Son
For I will call thee, ever the next morrow:
Salute the World, thou shalt know stranger mysteries.
I have enough to feed on; sir I'll follow ye.
Don John Son to the Count of Carcomo,
Woman take heed thou trifle not.
Is this
My Lord so strange?
Beauty in Youth, and Wit
To set it forth, I see transforms the best
Into what shape Love fancies.
Will you yet
Give me my Husbands Life?
Why little one hee is not Married to thee.
In his Faith
He is; and faith and troth. I hope bind faster,
Then any other Ceremonies can,
Doe they not pray my Lord?
Yes, where the Parties
Pledged, are not too unequal in degree,
As hee and thou art.
This is new Divinity.
My Lord, behold this Child well: in her Face,
You may observe by curious insight, something
More then belongs to every common birth.
True, it is a pretty Child.
The Glass of misery
Is after many a change of desperate fortune,
At length run out, you had a Daughter
Called Constanza.
Ha!
A Sister Guyamara,
Wife to the Count Alvarez.
Peace, oh peace!
And to that Sisters charge you did commit
Your Infant Daughter, in whose birth your Wife
Her Mother died.
Woman thou art too cruel.
What do ye mean Granam? Lass the noble man Grows angry.
Not I, indeed I doe not,
But why do ye use me thus?
Your Child and Sister,
As you supposed were drowned.
Drowned, talking Creature!
Supposed!
They live Fernando from my hand,
Thy Sisters hand receive thine own Constanza,
The sweetest best Child living.
Doe you mock me?
Torment me on, yet more, more yet and spare not,
My heart is now a breaking: now!
Oh Brother!
Am I so far removed off from your Memory,
As that you will not know me? I expected
An other welcome home, look on this Casket,
The Legacy your Lady left her Daughter,
When to her Son, she gave her Crucifix.
Right, right, I know ye now.
In all my sorrows,
My comfort has been here; she should be,
Be yours, Constanza kneel sweet Child
To thy old Father.
How my Father?
Let not
Extremity of joys ravish Life from me
Too soon Heaven I beseech thee; thou art my Sister,
My Sister Guyamara; how have mine Eyes
Been darkened all this while:it is she!
It is Brother,
And this Constanza, now no more a stranger,
No Pretiosa henceforth.
My souls treasure,
Live to an Age of goodness, and so thrive
In all thy ways, that thou may die to live.
But must I call you Father?
Thou wilt rob me else
Of that felicity; for whose sake only
I am ambitious of being young again;
Rise, rise, mine own Constanza.
It is a new name,
But it is a pretty one, I may be bold
To make a suite t'ee.
Any thing.
Oh Father!
And if you be my Father think upon
Don John my Husband, without him alas
I can be nothing.
As I without thee,
Let me alone Constanza, tell me, tell me,
Lives yet Alvarez?
In your house.
Enough.
Cloy me not, let me by degrees, digest
My joyswithin, my Lords Francisco, Pedro.
Come all at once, I have a World within me,
I am not mortal sure, I am not mortal,
My honourable Lord, partake my blessings.
Count Alvarez lives here in my house;
Your Son my Lord, Francisco, Don John
Is the condemned man falsely accused of theft,
This my Lord Pedro, is my Sister Guyamare,
Madam, this Constanza mine own Child,
And I am a wondrous merry Man,
Without the Prisoner.
Here free and acquitted,
By her whose folly drew her to this error,
And she for satisfaction is assured
To my wronged friend.
I crave your pardons,
Hee whose I am, speaks for me.
Wee both beg it.
Excellent, Admirable; my dear Brother.
Never a happy man till now: young Lewys
And I are reconciled.
For ever faithfully, religiously.
My noble Lord most welcome.
To all my heart pays what it owes, due thanks
Most, most brave youth to thee.
I all this while,
Stand but a looker on, and tho my Father
May justly tax the violence of my Passions,
Yet if this Lady, Lady of my life
Must be denied, let me be as I was,
And die betimes.
You promised me.
I did,
My Lord of Carcomo, you see their hearts
Are joined already, so let our consents
To this wished Marriage.
I forgive thine errors,
Give me thy hand.
Me thine! but wilt thou love
My Daughter, my Constanza?
As my bliss.
I thee as Life, Youth, Beauty, any thing
That makes life comfortable.
Live together one, ever one.
And Heaven Crown your happiness.
Now sir, how like you a Prison?
As Gallants doe a Tavern, being stopped for a Reckoning, scurvily.
Though you Caged us up never so close, wee Sung like Cuckoos.
Well, well, you be your self now.
My self, am I out of my Wits Soto?
Here now are none but honourable Friends,
Will you to give a farewell to the life
You ha led as Gipsies, these being now found none,
But noble in their Births, altered in Fortunes,
Give it a merry shaking by the hand;
And cry adieu to folly?
We'll shake our Hands, and our Heals if you'll give us leave. 
On Brides, and bridegrooms to your Spanish Feasts,
Invite with bent Knees all these Noble Guests.

