PLeasure attend ye, and about ye sit
The springs of mirth fancy delight and wit
To stir you up, doe not your looks let fall,
Nor to remembrance our late errors call,
Because this day w'are Spaniards all again,
The story of our Play, and our Scene Spain:
The errors too, doe not for this cause hate,
Now we present their wit and not their state.
Nor Ladies be not angry if you see,
A young fresh beauty, wanton and too free,
Seek to abuse your Husband, still tic Spain,
No such gross errors in your Kingdom reigns,
W'are Vestalls all, and though we blow the fire,
We seldom make it flame up to desire,
Take no example neither to begin,
For some by president delight to sin:
Nor blame the Poet if he slip aside,
Sometimes lasciviously if not too wide.
But hold your Fans close, and then smile at ease,
A cruel Scene did never Lady please.
Nor Gentlemen, pray be not you di•pleased,
Though we present some men fooled some diseased,
Some drunk, some mad: we mean not you, you're free,
We tax no farther then our Comedy,
You are our friends sit noble then and see.
ARe your companies full Coronell?
No not yet sir:
Nor will not be this month yet, as I rec∣kon.
How rises your command?
We pick up still, and as our monies hold out,
We have men come, about that time I think
We shall be full too, many young gallants go.
And unexperienced,
The wars are dainty dreams to young hot spirits,
Time and experience will allay those visions,
We have strange things to fill our numbers,
There's one Don Leon, a strange goodly fellow,
Recommended to me from some noble Friends,
For my Alfores, had you but seen his person,
And what a Giants promise it protests.
I have heard of him and that he hath served before too.
But no harm done, nor never meant, Don Michael
That came to my ears yet, ask him a question,
He blushes like a girl, and answers little,
To the point less, he wears a sword a good one,
And good clothes too, he is whole skinned, has no hurt yet,
Good promising hopes, I never yet heard certainly
Of any Gentleman that saw him angry.
Preserve him, he will conclude a peace if need be,
Many as strong as he will go along with us,
That swear as valiantly as heart can wish,
Their mouth charged with six oaths at once, and whole once,
That make the drunken Dutch creep into mole-hils.
Tic true, such we must look for, but Michael Perez,
When heard you of Donna Margarita, the great heiresse.
I hear every hour of her, though I never saw her,
She is the main discourse, noble Don Iuan de Castro,
How happy were that man cood catch this wench up,
And live at ease, she is fair, and young, and wealthy,
Infinite wealthy, and as gracious too
In all her entertainments, as men report.
But she is proud sir, that I know for certain,
And that coms seldom without wantonness,
He that shall marry her, must have a rare hand.
Would I were married, I would find that wisdom,
With a light reyne to rule my wife, if ever woman
Of the most subtlest mould went beyond me,
I would give the boys leave to whoote me out of the parish.
Sir there be two gentlewomen attend to speak
With ye.
Wait on them in.
Are they two handsome women?
They seem so, very handsome, but they are veiled sir.
Thou putst' sugar in my mouth, how it melts with me,
I love a sweet young wench.
Wait on them in I say.
Don Iuan.
How you itch Michael, how you burnish!
Will not this soldiers heat out of your bones yet,
Doe your eyes glow now?
There be two.
Say honest, what shame have you then.
I would fine see that,
I have been in the Indies twice, &amp; have seen strange things,
But two honest women: one I read of once.
Pre thee be modest.
Isle be any thing.
You are welcome Ladies.
Both hooded, I like um well though,
They come not for advice in law sure heather,
Maybe they would learn to raise the pick,
I am for um. They are very modest, tic a fine preludium.
With me or with this gentleman,
would you speak Lady?
With you sir as I guess, Iuan de Castro.
Her curtain opens, she is a pretty gentlewoman.
I am the man, and shall be bound to fortune,
I may doe any service to your beauties.
Captain, I hear you are marching down to Flanders,
To serve the Catholic King.
I am sweet Lady.
I have a kinsman and a noble friend,
Employed in those wars, may be sir you know him,
Don Campusano Captain of Carbines,
To whom I would request your Nobleness,
To give this poor remembrance.
I shall doe it,
I know the Gentleman a most worthy Captain.
Something in private.
Step aside: Isle serve thee.
Prithee let me see thy face.
Sir you must pardon me,
Women of our sort that maintain fair memories,
And keep suspect off from their chastities,
Had need wear thicker v•isles.
I am no blaster of a Ladies beauty,
Nor bold intruder on her special favours,
I know how tender reputation is,
And with what guards it ought to be preserved Lady,
You may to me.
You must excuse me Seignior, I come
Not here to sell my self.
As I am a Gentleman, by the honour of a soldier•
I believe you.
I pray you be civil, I believe you would see me,
And when you have seen me, I believe you will like me.
But in a strange place, to a stranger too,
As if I came on purpose to betray you,
Indeed I will not.
I shall love you dearly,
And tic a sin to fling away affection,
I have no Mistress, no desire to honour
Any but you• will not this oyster open?
I know not, you have struck me with your modesty,
She will draw sure; so deep, and taken from me?
All the desire I might bestow on others;
Quickly before they come.
Indeed I dare not.
But since I see you are so desirous Sir
To view a poor face that can merit nothing
But your repentance.
It must needs be excellent.
And with what honesty you ask it of me.
When I am gone let your man follow me,
And view what house I enter, thither come,
For there I dare be bold to appear open.
And as I like your virtuous carriage then,
I shall be able to give welcome to you,
She hath done her business, I must take my leave sir.
Isle kiss your fair white hand, and thank ye Lady,
My man shall wait, and I shall be your servant,
Sirrah, come near, hark.
I shall doe it faithfully.
You will command me no more services?
To be careful of your noble health, dear Sir,
That I may ever honour you.
I thank you,
And kiss your hands, wait on the Ladies down there.
You had the honour to see the face that came to you.
And •it was a fair one, what was yours, don Michael?
Mine was in the 'clipse, and had a cloud drawn over it
But I believe well, and I hope tic handsome,
She had a hand would stir a holy Hermit.
You know none of um?
No.
Then I doe Captain,
But isle say nothing till I see the proof on it,
Sit close Don Perez, or your worship's caught,
I fear a fly.
Were those she brought love letters?
A packet to a kinsman now in Flanders;
Yours was very modest me thought.
Some young unmanaged thing;
But I may live to see—
Tic worth experience,
Let's walk abroad and view our companies.
What are you for the wars Alonzo?
It may be I,
It may be no, even as the humour takes me,
If I find peace amongst the female creatures,
And easy entertainment, isle stay at home,
I am not so far obliged yet to long marches,
And mouldy biscuits to run mad for honour,
When you are all gone I have my choice before me.
Of which hospital thou wilt sweat in; wilt thou
Never leave whoring?
There is less danger in it then gunning Sanchio,
Though we be shot sometimes the shot's not mortal,
Besides it breaks no limbs.
But it disables um,
D'ost thou see how thou pul'st thy legs after thee, as they
Hung by points.
Better to pull um thus then walk on wooden ones,
Serve bravely for a billet to support me.
Fie, fie, tic base.
Dost thou count it base to suffer?
Suffer abundantly, tic the crown of honour;
You think it nothing to lie twenty days
Under a surgeons hands that has no mercy.
As thou hast done I am sure but I perceive now
Why you desire to stay, the orient heiresse,
The Margarita sir.
I would I had his.
They say she will marry.
Yes, I think she will.
And marry suddenly as report goes too,
She fears his youth will not hold out Alonzo.
I would I had the sheathing on it.
They say too
She has a greedy eye that must be fed
With more then one mans meat.
Would she were mine,
I would cater for her well enough: but Sanchio,
There be too many great men that adore her,
Princes, and Princes fellows that claim privilege.
Yet those stand off in the way of marriage,
To be tied to a mans pleasure is a second labour.
She has bought a brave house here in town.
• have heard so.
If she convert it now to pious uses,
And bid poor Gentlemen welcome.
When comes she to it?
Within these two days, she is in the country yet,
And keeps the noblest house.
Then there's some hope of her,
Wilt thou go my way?
No, no, I must leave you
And repair to an old Gentlewoman
That has credit with her, that can speak a good word.
Send thee good fortune, but make thy body sound first.
I am a soldier,
And too sound a body becomes me not,
Farewell Sanchio.
Tic this• or that house, or I have lost mine aim,
They are both fair buildings, she walked plaguy fast,
And hereabouts I lost her, stay, that's she,
Tic very she,—she makes me a low curtsy,
Let me note the place, the street I well remember.
She is in again, certain some noble Lady,
How happy should I be if she love my Master:
A wondrous goodly house, here are brave lodgings,
And I shall sleep now like an Emperor,
And eat abundantly• I thank my fortune,
Isle back with speed• and bring him happy tidings.
What should it mean, that in such hast
We are sent for?
Belike the Lady Margaret has some business
She would break to us in private.
It should seem so.
Tic a good Lady, and a wise young Lady.
And virtuous enough too I warrant ye
For a young woman of her years: tic pity
To load her tender age with too much virtue.
Tic more sometimes then we can well away with.
Good morrow Ladies.
Morrow my good Madam.
How does the sweet young beauty, Lady Margaret?
Has she slept well after her walk last night?
Are her dreams gentle to her mind?
Ell's well,
Shoe's very well, she sent for you thus suddenly
To give his counsel in a business
That much concerns her.
She does well and wisely,
To ask the counsel of the ancientst Madame,
Our years have run through many things she knows not.
She would fine marry.
Tic a proper calling,
And well beseems her years, who would she yoke with?
Thats left to argue on, I pray come in
And break your fast, drink a good cup or two,
To strengthen your understandings, then sheele tell ye.
And good wine breeds good counsel,
Wele yield to ye.
Have you seen any service?
Yes.
Where?
Every where.
What office bore ye?
None, I was not worthy.
What Captains know you?
None, they were above me.
Were you never hurt?
Not that J well remember,
But once J stole a Hen, and then they beat me;
Pray ask me no long questions, J have an ill memory.
This is an Ass, did you never draw your sword yet?
Not to doe any harm I thank heaven for it.
Nor ne'er tan prisoner?
No, • ran away,
For • had ne'er no money to redeem me.
Can you endure a Drum?
It makes my head ache.
Are you not valiant when you are drunk?
I think not, but I am loving Sir.
What a lump is this man,
Was your Father wise?
Too wise for me •'me sure,
For he gave all he had to my younger brother.
That was no foolish part isle bear you witness.
Can thou lye with a woman?
I think I could make shift sir,
But I am bashful.
In the night?
I know not,
Darkness indeed may doe some good upon me.
Why art thou sent to me to be my officer,
I, and commended too, when thou dare not fight?
There be more officers of my opinion,
Or I am consent sir, men that talk more too.
How wilt thou scope a bullet?
Why by chance,
They aim at honourable men, alas I am none sir.
This fellow has some doubts in's talk that striks me,
He cannot be all fool: welcome Alonzo.
What have you got there temperance into your cō∣pany?
The spirit of peace? we shall have wars
By th'ounce then, O here's another Pumpion,
Let him loos for luck sake, the crammed son
Of a starved Usurer, Cacafogo, both their brains butterd,
Cannot make two spoonefulls.
My Fathers dead: I am a man of war too,
Monies, demeans; I have ships at sea too,
Captains.
Take heed of the Hollanders, your ships may leake else.
I scorn the Hollanders, they are my drunkards.
Put up your gold sir, isle borrow it else.
I am satisfied, you shall not,
Come out, I know thee, meet mine anger instantly.
I never wronged ye.
Thou hast wronged mine honour,
Thou look upon my Mistress thrice lasciviously,
Isle make it good.
Doe not heat your self, you will surfeit.
Thou wan'st my money too, with a pair of base bones,
In whom there was no truth, for which I beat thee,
I beat thee much, now I will hurt thee dangerously.
This shall provoke thee.
You struck too low by a foot sir.
You must get a ladder when you would beat
This fellow.
I cannot choose but kick again, pray pardon me.
Had thou not asked my pardon, I had killed thee,
I leave thee as a thing despised, assoles manus a la siniare a Maestro.
You have escaped by miracle, there is not in all Spain,
A spirit of more fury then this fire drake.
I see he is hasty, and I would give him leave,
To beat me soundly if he would take my bond.
What shall I doe with this fellow?
Turn him off,
He will infect the camp with cowardice,
If he go with thee.
About some week hence sir,
If I can hit upon no abler officer,
You shall hear from me.
I desire no better.
You have made me now too bountiful amends, Lady
For your strict carriage when you saw me first,
These beauties were not meant to be concealed,
It was a wrong to hide so sweet an object,
I cooed now chide ye, but it shall be thus,
No other anger ever touch your sweetness.
You appear to me so honest, and so civil,
Without a blush sir, I dare bid ye welcome.
Now let me ask your name.
Tic Estifanie, the heir of this poor place.
Poor doe you call it,
There's nothing that I cast mine eyes upon,
But shows both rich and admirable, all the rooms
Are hung as if a Princess were to dwell here,
The Gardens, Orchards, every thing so curious:
Is all that plate your own too?
Tic but little,
Only for present use, I have more and richer,
When need shall call, or friends compel me use it,
The suits you see of all the upper chambers,
Are those that commonly adorn the house,
I think I have besides, as fair as civil•
Or any town in Spain can parallel.
Now if she be not married, I have some hopes,
Are you a maid?
You make me blush to answer,
I ever was accounted so to this hour,
And that's the reason that I live retired sir.
Then would I counsel you to marry presently,
If I can get her, I am made for ever,
For every year you loose, you loose a beauty,
A husband now an honest careful husband,
Were such a comfort, will ye walk above stairs.
This place will fit our talk, tic fitter far sir,
Above there are day-beds, and such temptations
I dare not trust sir.
She is excellent wise withal too.
You named a husband, I am not so strict sir,
Nor ti'de unto a Virgins solitariness,
But if an honest, and a noble one,
Rich, and a soldier, for so I have vowed he shall be,
Were offered me, I think I should accept him,
But above all he must love.
He were base else,
There's comfort ministered in the word soldier,
How sweetly should I live.
I am not so ignorant, but that I know well,
How to be commanded,
And how again to make my self obeyed sir,
I wast but little, I have gathered much,
My real not the less worth, when tic spent,
If spent by my direction, to please my husband,
I hold it as indifferent in my duty,
To be his maid in the kitchen, or his Cook,
As in the Hall to know my self the Mistress.
Sweet, Rich, and provident, now fortune stick
To me; I am a soldier, and a bachelor, Lady,
And such a wife as you, I cood love infinitely,
They that use many words, some are deceitful,
I long to be a husband, and a good one,
For tic most certain I shall make a president
For all that follow me to love their Ladies,
I am young you see, able I would have you think too,
If it please you know, try me before you take me,
It is true I shall not meet in equal wealth
With ye, but Jewels, Chains, such as the war
Has given me, a thousand ducats I dare
Presume on in ready gold, now as your
Care may handle it, as rich cloths too, as
Any he bears arms Lady.
You are a true gentleman, and fair, I see by ye,
And such a man I had rather take.
Pray doe so, isle have a Priest of the sudden.
And as suddenly you will repent too.
Isle be hanged or drowned first,
By this and this, and this kiss.
You are a Flatterer,
But I must say there was something when • saw you.
First, in that most noble face, that stirred my fancy.
Isle stir it better ere you sleep sweet Lady,
Isle send for all my trunks and give up all to ye,
Into your own dispose, before I bed ye,
And then sweet wench.
You have the art to cozen me.
Sit down and give me your opinions seriously.
You say you have a mind to marry Lady.
Tic true, I have for to preserve my credit,
Yet not so much for that as for my state Ladies,
Conceive me right, there lies the maine of the question,
Credit I can redeem, money will imp it,
But when my monie's gone, when the law shall
Cease that, and for incontinence strip me
Of all.
Doe you find your body so malicious that way.
I find it as all bodies are that are young and lusty,
Lazy, and high fed, I desire my pleasure•
And pleasure I must have.
It is fit you should have,
Your years require it, and it is necessary,
As necessary as meat to a young Lady,
Sleep cannot nourish more.
But might not all this be, &amp; keep ye single.
You take away variety in marriage,
The abundance of the pleasure you are bared then,
I'st not abundance that you aim at.
Yes why was I made a woman.
And every day a new?
Why fair and young but to use it.
You are still in the right, why would you marry then.
Because a husband stops all doubts in this point,
And clears all passages.
What husband mean ye.
A husband of an ea•y faith a fool,
Made by her wealth, and moulded to her pleasure,
One though he see himself become a monster,
Shall hold the door, and entertain the maker.
You grant there may be such a man.
Yes marry, but how to bring um to this rare Perfection.
They must be chosen so, things of no honour,
Nor outward honesty.
No it is no matter,
I care not what they are, so they be lusty.
Me thinks now a rich Lawyer, some such fellow,
That carries credit, and a face of awe,
But lies with nothing but his clients business.
No ther's no trusting them, they are too subtle,
The Law has moulded um of natural mischief.
Then some grave governo•,
Some man of honour, yet an easy man.
If he have honour I am undone, isle none such,
Isle have a lusty man, honour will cloy me.
Tic fit ye should Lady;
And to that end, with search and wit and labour,
I have found one out, a right one and a perfect,
He is made as strong as brass, is of brave years too,
And doubty of complexion.
Is he a Gentleman?
Yes and a So•ldier, as gentle as you would wish him,
A good fellow, wears good clothes.
Those isle allow him,
They are for my credit, does he understand,
But little?
Very little.
Tic the better.
Has not the war•es •red him up to anger?
No, he will not quarrel with a dog that bites him,
Let him be drunk or sober, is one silence.
Has no capacity what honour is?
For that's the soldiers god.
Honor's a thing too subtle for his wisdom•
If honour lye in eating, he is right honourable.
Is he so goodly a man doe you say?
As you shall see Lady,
But to all this is but a trunk.
I would have him so,
I shall add branches to him to adorn him,
Go, find me out this man, and le• me see him,
If he be that motion that you tell me of,
And make no more noise, I shall entertain him,
Let him be here.
He shall attend your Ladyship.
Why thou art not married indeed.
No, no, pray think so,
Alas I am a fellow of no reckoning,
Not worth a Ladies eye.
Woodst thou steal a fortune,
And make none of all thy friends acquainted with it•
Nor bid us to thy wedding.
No indeed,
There was no wisdom in it, to bid an Artist,
An old seducer to a female banquet,
I can cut up my pie without your instructions.
Was it the wench in the veil.
Basto it was she,
The prettiest rogue that ere you looked upon,
The lovingst thief.
And is she rich withal too.
A mine, a mine, there is no end of wealth Coronell.
I am an ass, a bashful fool, prithee Coronell,
How doe thy companies fill now.
You are merry sir,
You intend a safer war at home belike now.
I doe not think I shall fight much this year Coro∣nil,
I find my self given to my ease a little,
I care not if I sell my foolish company,
They are things of hazard.
How it angers me,
This fellow at first sight should win a Lady,
A rich young wench, and I that have consumed
My time and art in searching out their subtleties,
Like a fooled Alchemist blow up my hopes still,
When shall we come to thy house and be freely merry.
When I have managed his a little more,
I have a house to entertain an army.
If thy wife be fair, thou wilt have few less
Come to thee.
But where they'll get entertainment is the point Senior.
I beat no drum.
You need none but her taber,
May be isle march after a month or two,
To get me a fresh stomach, I find Coronell
A wantonness in wealth, methinks I agree not with,
Tic such a trouble to be married too,
And have a thousand things of great importance,
Jewels and plates, and fooleries molest me,
To have a mans brains whimsied with his wealth:
Before I walked contentedly.
My Mistress sir is sick, because you are absent,
She mourns and will not eat.
Alas my Jewel,
Come isle go with thee, gentlemen your fair leaves,
You see I am tide a little to my yoke,
Pray pardon me, would ye had both such loving wives.
I thank ye
For your old boots, never be blank Alonzo,
Because this fellow has out stripped thy fortune,
Tell me ten days hence what he is, and how
The gracious state of matrimony stands with him,
Come, lets to dinner, when Margarita comes
We'll visit both, it may be then your fortune.
Is he come?
Yes Madame, has been here this half hour,
I have questioned him of all that you can ask him,
And find him as fit as you had made the man,
He will make the goodliest shadow for iniquity.
Have ye searched him Ladies?
Is a man at all points, a likely man.
Call him in Altea.
A man of a good presence, pray ye come this way,
Of a lusty body, is his mind so•am.
Pray ye question him, and if you find him not
Fit for your purpose, shake him off, there's no harm Done.
Can you love a young Lady? How he blushes.
Leave twirling of your hat, &amp; hold your head up,
And speak to'th Lady.
Yes, I think I can,
I must be taught, I know not what it means Madam.
You shall be taught, and can you when she pleases
Go ride abroad, and stay a week or two?
You shall have men and horses to attend ye,
And money in your purse.
Yes I love riding,
And when I am from home I am so merry.
Be as merry as you will: can you as handsomely
When you are sent for back, come with obedience,
And doe your duty to the Lady loves you?
Yes sure, I shall.
And when you see her friends here,
Or noble kinsmen, can you entertain
Their servants in the Cellar, and be busied,
And hold your peace, what ere you see or hear of.
It were fit I were hanged else.
Let me try your kisses,
How the fool shakes, I will not eat ye sir,
Beshrew my heart he kisses wondrous manly,
Can ye doe any thing else?
Indeed I know not;
But if your Ladyship will please to instruct me,
Sure I shall learn.
You shall then be instructed;
If I should be this Lady that affects ye,
Nay say I marry ye?
Hark to the Lady.
What money have ye?
None Madam, nor friends,
I wood doe any thing to serve your Ladyship.
You must not look to be my Mr Sir,
Nor talk ith house as though you wore the breeches,
No, nor command in any thing.
I will not.
Alas I am not able, I have no wit Madam.
Nor doe not labour to arrive at any,
Twill spoil your head I take ye upon charity•
And like a servant ye must be unto me,
As I behold your duty I shall love ye,
And as you observe me, I may chance lye with ye,
Can you mark these.
Yes indeed forsooth.
There is one thing,
That if I take ye in I put ye from me,
Utterly from me, you must not be saucy,
No, nor at any time familiar with me,
Scarce know me, when I call ye not.
J will not, alas I never knew my self sufficiently.
Nor must not now.
Isle be a dog to please ye.
Indeed you must fetch and carry as I appoint ye.
I were too •lame else.
Kiss me ag•n; a strong fellow,
There is a vigour in his lips: if you see me
Kiss any other, twenty in an hour sir,
You must not start, nor be offended.
No, if you kiss a thousand I shall be contented,
It will the better teach me how to please ye.
I told ye Madam,
Tic the man I wished for; the less you speak.
Isle never speak again Madam,
But when you charge me, then isle speak softly too.
Get me a Priest, isle wed him instantly,
But when you are married sir, you must wait
Upon me, and see you observe my laws.
Else you shall hang me.
Isle give ye better clothes when you deserve um,
Come in, and serve for witnesses.
We shall Madam.
And then away to'th city presently,
Isle to my new house and new company.
A thousand crowns are thine, &amp; I am a made man.
Doe not break out too soon.
I know my time wench.
What have you caught him?
Yes.
And doe you find him
A man of those hopes that you aimed at?
Yes too,
And the most kind man• and the ablest also
To give a wife content, he is sound as old wine,
And to his soundness rises on the palate,
And there's the man; I find him rich too Clara.
Hast thou married him.
What dost thou think I fish without a bait wench?
I bob for fools? he is mine own I have him,
I told thee what would tickle him like a trout,
And as I cast it so I caught him daintily,
And all he has I have• stowed at my devotion.
Does thy Lady know this? she is coming now to town,
Now to live here in this house.
Let her come,
She shall be welcome, I am prepared for his,
She is mad sure if she be angry at my fortune,
For what I have made bold.
Dost thou not love him?
Yes, entirely well,
As long as there he stays and looks no farther
Into my ends, but when he doubts, I hate him,
And that wise hate will teach me how to cozen him,
How to decline their wives, and curb their manners,
To put a sterne and strong reyne to their natures,
And holds he is an Ass not worth acquaintance,
That cannot mould a devil to obedience,
I owe him a good turn for these opinions,
And as I find his temper I may pay him.
O here he is, now you shall see a kind man.
My Estifania, shall we to dinner lamb,
I know thou staist for me.
I cannot eat else.
I never enter but me thinks a Paradise
Appears about me.
You are welcome to it Sir.
I think I have the sweetest seat in Spain wench,
Me thinks the richest too, weal eat ith garden
In one of the arbours, there tic cool and pleasant,
And have our wine cold in the running fountain
Who's that?
A friend of mine Sir.
Of what breeding?
A Gentlewoman Sir.
What business has she?
Is she a learned woman in the Mathematics,
Can she tell fortunes?
More then I know Sir.
Or has she ere a letter from a kinswoman,
That must be delivered in my absence wife,
Or comes she from the Doctor to salute ye,
And learn your health, she looks not like a confessor.
What need all this, why are you troubled Sir.
What doe you suspect, she cannot •uckold ye,
She is a woman Sir, a very woman.
Your very woman may doe very well Sir
Toward the matter, for though she cannot perform it
In her own person, she may doe it by Proxy,
Your rarest jugglers work still by conspiracy.
Cry ye mercy husband, you are jealous then,
And happily suspect me.
No indeed wife.
Me thinks you should not till you have more cause
And clearer too: I am sure you have heard say husband,
A woman forced will free her self through iron,
A happy, calm, and good wife discontented
May be taught tricks.
No, no, I doe but jest with ye.
To morrow friend isle see you.
I shall leave ye
Till then, and pray all may go sweetly with ye.
Why whore's this girl, whose at the door.
Who knocks there?
Is it for the king ye come, you knock so boisterously?
Look to the door.
My Lady, as I live Mistress, my Laddie's come,
Shoe's at the door, I peeped through, &amp; I saw her,
And a stately company of Ladies with her.
This was a week too soon, but I must meet with her,
And set a new wheel going, and a subtle one,
Must blind this mighty Mars, or I am ruined.
What are they at door?
Such my Michael
As you may bless•e the day they entered here,
Such for our good.
Tic well.
Nay, twill be better
If you will let me but dispose the business,
And be a stranger to it, and not disturb me,
What have I now to doe but to advance your fortune.
Doe, I dare trust thee, I am ashamed I am angry,
I find thee a wise young wife.
Isle wise your worship
Before I leave ye, pray ye walk by and say nothing,
Only salute him, and leave the rest to me Sir,
I was borne to make ye a man.
The rogue speaks heartily,
Her good will colours in her cheeks, I am borne to love her.
I must be gentler to these tender natures,
A soldiers rude harsh words befit not Ladies,
Nor must we talk to them as we talk to
Our Officers, isle give her way, for tic for me she
Works now, I am husband, heir, and all she has.
Who are these, what •lanting things, a woman
Of rare presence, excellent fair, this is too big
For a bawdy house, too open seated too.
My husband Lady.
You have gained a proper man.
What ere I am, I am your servant Lady.
Sir, be ruled now,
And I shall make ye rich, this is my cozen,
That Gentleman dotes on her, even to death, see how he obe∣serves her.
She is a goodly woman.
She is a mirror,
But she is poor, she were for a Princes side else,
This house she has brought him too as to his own,
And presuming upon me, and upon my courtesy,
Conceive me short, he knows not but she is wealthy,
Or if she did know otherwise, it were all one,
He is so far gone.
Forward, she has a rare face.
This we must carry with discretion husband,
And yield unto her for four days.
Yield our house up, our goods and wealth.
All this is but in seeming
To milk the lover on, doe you see this writing,
200 a year when they are married,
Has she sealed too for our good; the time's unfit now,
Isle show it you to morrow.
All the house.
All, all, and weal remove too, to confirm him.
They'll into 'th country suddenly again
After they are matched, and then sheele open to him.
The whole possession wife, look what you doe,
A part of the house.
No, no, they shall have all,
And take their pleasure too, tic •or our 'vantage,
Why, whats four days, had you a sister sir,
A Niece or Mistress that required this courtesy,
And should I make a •cruple to doe you good?
If easily it would come back.
I swear Sir,
As easily as it came on, first not pity
To let such a Gentlewoman for a little help,
You give away no house.
Clear but that question.
Isle put the writings into your hand.
Well then.
And you shall keep them safe.
I am satisfied; wood I had the wench so too•
When she has mar•ed him,
So infinite his love is linked unto his,
You, I, or any one that helps at this pinch
May have heaven knows what.
Isle remove the goods straight,
And take some poor house by, tic but for four days.
I have a poor old friend; there weal be.
Tic well then.
Go handsome off, and leave the house clear.
Well.
That little stuff weal use shall follow after;
And a boy to guide ye, peace and we are made both.
Come, let's go in, are all the rooms kept sweet wench.
They are sweet and neat.
Why whore's your husband?
Gone Madam.
When you come to your own he must give place Lady.
Well, send you joy, you would not let me know•t,
Yet I shall not forget ye.
Thank your Ladyship.
Are you at ease now, is your heart at rest,
Now you have got a shadow, an umbrella
To keep the scorching worlds opinion
From your fair credit.
I am at peace Altea.
If he continue but the same he shows,
And be a master of that ignorance
He outwardly professes, I am happy,
The pleasure I shall live in and the freedom
Without the squint-eye of the law upon me,
Or prating liberty of tongues, that envy.
You are a made woman.
But if he should prove now
A crafty and dissembling kind of husband,
One read in knavery, and brought up in the art
Of villainy concealed.
My life, an Innocent.
That's it I aim at,
That's it I hope too, then I am sure I rule him,
For Innocents are like obedient children
Brought up under a hard mother in law, a cruel,
Who being not used to break-fasts &amp; collations,
When they have course bread offered um, are thankful,
And take it for a favour too, are the rooms
Made ready to entertain my friends, I long to dance now
And to be wanton; let me have a song, is the great couch up,
The Duke of Medina sent?
Tic up and ready.
And day beds in all chambers?
In all Lady,
Your house is nothing now but various pleasures
The Gallants begin to gaze too.
Let um gaze on,
I was brought up a Courtier, high and happy,
And company is my delight, and courtship,
And handsome servants at my will, whore's my good husband•
Where does he wait?
He knows his distance Madam,
I warrant ye, he is busy in the cellar
Amongst his fellow servants, or asleep,
Till your command awake him.
Tic well Altea.
It should be so, my ward I must preserve him,
Who sent for him, how dare he come uncalled for,
His bonnet on too.
Sure he sees you not.
How scornfully he looks.
Are all the chambers
Decked and adorned thus for my Ladies pleasure,
New hangings every hour for entertainment•
And new plate bought, new jewels to give lustre.
They are, and yet there must be more and richer,
It is her will.
Hum, is it so, tic excellent,
It is her will too, to have feasts and banquets,
Revels and masques•
She ever loved um dearly,
And we shall have the bravest housekept n•w sir,
I must not call ye master she has warned me•
Nor must not put my hat off to ye.
Tic no fashion,
What though I be his husband, I am your fellow,
I may cut first.
That's as you shall this•ve sir.
And when I lye with her.
May be isle light ye.
On the same point you may doe me that service.
Madame, the Duke Medina with some captains
Will come to dinner, and have •en• are wine,
And their best services.
They shall be welcome,
See all be ready in the noblest fashion,
The house perfumed, now I shall take my pleasure,
And not my neighbour Justice maund• at me,
Go, get your best cloths on, but till I call ye,
Be sure you be not seen, dine with the gen•lewomen,
And behave your self cleanly sir, tic for my credit.
Madame, the Lady Iulia.
That's a bawd,
A three pild bawd, bawd major to the army.
Ha• brought her coach to wait upon your Ladyship,
And to be informed if you will take the air• this morning.
The neat air of his nunnery.
Tell her no, in the afternoon Isle call on his.
I will Madame.
Why are not you gone to prepare your self,
May be you shall be sewer to the first course,
A portly presence, Alten he looks lean,
Tic a wash knave, he will not keep his flesh well.
A willing, madame• one that needs no spurring.
Faith madame, in my little understanding,
You had better entertain your honest neighbours•
Your friends about ye, that may speak well of ye,
And give a worthy m•ntion of yo•r bounty.
How now what's this?
Tic only to persuade ye,
Courtiers are but tickle things to deal withal,
A kind of march-pane men that will not last Madame,
An egg and pepper goes farther then their potions,
And in a well built body• a poor parsnip
Will play his prize, above their strong potabiles.
The fellows mad.
H• that shall counsel Ladies,
That have both licorish and ambitious eyes,
I• either •ad, or d•unke, let him speak Gospel.
He breaks out modestly.
Pray ye be not angry,
My indiscretion has made bold to tell ye,
What you'll find true.
Thou dare not •alke.
Not much Madame,
You have a tie upon your servants tongue,
He dares not be so bold as reason bids him,
It were fit there were a stronger on your temper,
Ne'er look so sterne upon me I am your husband,
But what are husbands, read the new worlds wonders,
Such husbands as this monstrous world produces,
And you will scarce find such deformities,
They are shadows to conceal your venial virtues,
Sails to your mills, th•t grind with all occasions,
Balls that lye by you, to wash out your staines,
And bills naild up with horn before your stories,
To rent out last.
Doe you hear him talk?
I have done Madame,
An ox once spoke, as learned men deliver,
Shortly I shall be such, then Isle speak wonders,
Till when I tie my self to my obedience.
First isle untie my self, did you mark the Gentlemā,
How boldly and how saucily he talked,
And how unlike the lump I took him for,
The piece of ignorant dow, he stood up to me
And mated my commands, this was your providence,
Your wisdom, to elect this gentleman,
Your excellent forecast in the man, your knowledge,
What think ye now.
I think him an ass still,
This boldness some of your people have blown
Into him, this wisdom too with strong wine,
It is a Tyrant, and a Philosopher also, and finds
Out reasons.
Isle have my cellar locked, no school kept there•
Nor no discovery• Isle t•rne my drunkards,
Such as are understanding in their draughts,
And dispute learnedly the whys and wherefores,
To grass immediately, Isle keep all fool•s,
Sober or drunk, still fools• that shall know nothing,
Nothing belongs to mankind, but obedie•ce,
And such a hand isle keep over this husband.
He will fall again, my life he eryes •y this time,
Keep him from drink, he has a hye constitution.
Shall I wear my new su•e Madame?
No your old clothes•
And get you into the country presently,
And see my hawks well trained, you shall have victuals,
Such as are fit for saucy palates sir,
And lodgings with the hinds it is to good too.
Good madame be not so rough, with repent••e,
You see now he's come roun'd again.
I see not what I expect to see.
You shall see Madame, if it shall please your Lady∣ship.
Hoe's humbled,
Forgive good Lady.
Well go get you handsome,
And let me hear no more.
Have ye yet no feeling,
Isle pinch ye to the bones then my proud Lady.
See you preserve him thus upon my favour,
You know his temper, tie him to the grindstone,
The next rebellion Isle be rid of him,
Isle have no needy rascals, I tie to me,
Dispute my life, come in and see all handsome.
I hope to see you so too, I have wrought ill else.
Shall I never return to mine own house again,
We are lodged here in the miserablest dog-hole,
A conjurers circle gives content above it,
A hawks mew is a princely palace to it,
We have a bed no bigger then a basket,
And there we lye like butter clapped together,
And sweat our selves to sawee immediately,
The fumes are Infinite inhabit here too;
And to that so thick, they c•t like marmalette,
So various too, they'll pose a gold finder,
Never return to mine own paradise?
Why wife I say, why Estifa•in.
I am going presently.
Make hast good jewel,
I am like the people that live in the sweet Lands:
I dye I dye if I stay but one day more here,
My lungs are rotten with the damps that rise,
And I cough nothing now but stinks of all sorts,
The inhabitants we have are two starved rats,
For they are not able to maintain a cat here,
And those appear as fearful as two devils,
They have eat a map of the whole world up already,
And if we stay a night we are gone for company,
Ther's an old woman that's now grown to marble,
Dri'd in this brick hill, and she sits in the chimney,
Which is but three tiles raised like a house of cards,
The true proportion of an old smoked Sibill,
There is a young thing too that nature meant
For a maid servant, but tic now a monster,
She has a husk about his like a chestnut
With baseness, and living under the line here,
And these two make a hollow sound together,
Like frogs or winds between two doors that murmur•
Mercy deliver me, o are you come wife,
Shall we be free again.
I am now going,
And you shall presently to your own house sir,
The remembrance of this small vexation,
Will be argument of mirth for ever:
By that time you have said your orisons,
And broke your fast, I shall be back and ready,
To usher you to your old content, your freedom.
Break my neck rather, is there any thing here to eat
But one another, like a race of Cannibals,
A piece of buttered wall you think is excellent,
Let's have our house again immediately,
And pray ye take heed unto the furniture,
None be imbesseld.
Not a pin I warrant ye.
And let um instantly depart.
They shall both,
There's reason in all courtesies they must both,
For by this time I know she has acquainted him,
And has provided too she sent me word sit,
And will give over gratefully unto you.
Isle walk in the Church-yard,
The dead cannot offend more then these living,
An hour hence Isle expect ye.
Isle not fail sir.
And doe you hear, let's have a handsome dinner,
And see all things be decent as they have been,
And let me have a strong bath to restore me,
I stink like a stall-fish shambles, or an oil shop.
You shall have all, which some interpret nothing,
Isle send ye people for the trunks before hand,
And for the s•uffe.
Let um be known and honest,
And doe my service to your niece.
I shall sir,
But if I come not at my hour come thither,
That they may give you thanks for your fair courtesy,
And pray ye be brave for my sake.
I observe ye.
Thou art very brave.
I have reason, I have money.
Is money reason.
Yes and ruin too Captain,
If ye have no money you're an ass.
I thank ye.
Ye have meaner, ever thank him that has money.
Wilt thou lend me any?
Not a far thing Captain,
Captains are casual things.
Why so are all men, thou shalt have my bond.
Nor bonds nor fetters Captain,
My money is mine own, I make no doubt on it.
What dost thou doe with it?
Put it to pious uses,
Buy wine and wenches, and undo young coxcombs,
That would undo me.
Are those hospitals?
I first provide to fill my hospitals,
With creatures of mine own that I know wretched,
And then I build, those are more bound to pray for me,
Besides I keep th'inheritance in my name still.
A provident charity, are you for the wars sir?
I am not poor enough to be soldier,
Nor have I faith enough to ward a bullet.
This is no lineing for a trench I take it.
Ye have said wisely.
Had you but my money,
You would swear it Coronell, I had rather drill at home,
A hundred thousand crowns, and with more honour,
Then exercise ten thousand fools with nothing,
A Wise man safely feeds, fools cut their fingers.
A right state-usurer, why dost thou not marry,
And live a reverend Justice.
Is it not nobler to command a reverent Justice, then to be one,
And for a wife, what need I marry Captain,
When every courteous fool, that owes me money.
Owes me his wife too, to appease my fury.
Wilt thou go to dinner with us.
I will go, and view the pearl of Spain, the orient
Fair one, the rich one too, and I will be respected,
I bear my patent here, I will talk to her,
And when your Captains ships shall stand a loose,
And pick your noses, I will pick the purse,
Of his affection.
The Duke dines there to day too, the Duke of Me∣dina.
Let the King dine there,
He owes me money, and so farre's my creature,
And certainly I may make bold with mine own Captain.
Thou wilt eat monstrously.
Like a true borne Spaniard,
Eat as I were in England where the beef grows,
And I will drink abundantly and then,
Talk ye as wantonly as Ovid did,
To stir the intellectuals of the Ladies,
I learnt it of my Fathers amorous Scrivener.
If we should play now, you must supply me.
You must pawn a horse troop,
And then have at ye Coronell.
Come let's go.
This rascal will make rare sport, how the Ladies
Will laugh him, leave ager.
If I light on him isle make his purse sweat too.
Will ye lead gentlemen.
Nay pray ye come out, and let me understand ye,
And tune your pipe a little higher Lady,
Isle hold ye fast: rub, how came my trunks open,
And my goods gone, what picklock spirit.
Ha what would ye have?
My goods again, how came my trunks all open.
Are your trunks open?
Yes and cloths gone,
And chains, and Jewels, how she smells like hung bee•e,
The palsy and picklocks, fie how she belches,
The spirit of garlic.
Whore's your gentlewoman?
The young fair woman.
What's that to my question,
She is my wife: and gone about my business.
Is she your wife sir.
Yes sir, is that wonder;
Is the name of wife unknown here.
Is she truly, truly your wife.
I think so for I married her,
It was no vision sure.
She has the keys sir,
I know she has, but who has all my goods spirit.
If you be married to that Gentlewoman,
You are a wretched man, she has twenty husbands.
She tells you true.
And she has consent all sir.
The Devil she has, I had a fair house with her,
That stands hard by, and furnished royally.
You are consent too, tic none of hers good gentle∣man,
It is a Ladies, what's the Ladies name wench.
The Lady Margarita, she was her servant
And kept the house, but going from her sir,
For some lewd tricks she plaid.
Plague a the Devil,
Am I in the full Meridian of my wisdom
Cheated by a stale queen, what kind of Lady
Is that that owes the house?
A young sweet Lady.
Of a low stature?
She is indeed but little, but she is wondrous fair•
I feel I am consent.
Now I am sensible I am undone,
This is the very woman sure, that cozen
She told me would entreat but for four days,
To make the house hers, I am entreated sweetly.
When she went out this morning, that I saw Sir,
She had two women at the door attending,
And there she gave um things, and loaded um,
But what they were, I heard your trunks to open,
If they be yours.
They were mine while they are laden,
But now they have cast their calves, they are not worth
Owning, was she his Mistress say you?
Her own Mistress, her very Mistress, Sir, and all you saw
About, and in that house was hers.
No plate, no jewels, nor no hangings?
Not a farthing, she is poor, sir, a poor shifting thing,
No money?
Abominable poor, as poor as we are,
Money as rare to her unless she steal it.
But for one civil gown his Lady gave his,
She may go bare good Gentlewoman.
I am mad now,
I think I am as poor as she, I am wide else,
One civil suit I have left too, and that's all,
And if she steal that she must flea me for it,
Where does she use?
You may find truth as soon,
Alas a thousand concealed corners sir, she lurks in,
And here she gets a fleece, and there another,
And lives in mists and smokes where none can find her.
Is she a whore too?
Little better Gentleman, I dare not say she is so sir, because
She is yours, sir, but these 5 years she has firkt
A pretty living,
Until she came to serve; I fear he will knock my
Brains out for lying.
She has served me faithfully,
A whore, and a thief, two excellent moral learnings
In one she Saint, I hope to see her legend.
Have I been feared for my discoveries,
And courted by all women to conceal um,
Have I so long studied the art of this sex,
And read the warnings to young Gentlemen:
Have I professed to tame the pride of Ladies,
And make um bear all tests, and am I tricked now,
Caught in mine own noose, here's a royal left yet,
Theres for your lodging and your meat for this week.
A silkworm lives at a more plentiful ordinary,
And sleeps in a sweeter box, farewell great grandmother,
If I doe find you were an accessory,
Tic but the cutting off too smokey minutes.
Isle hang ye presently.
And I deserve it, I tell but truth.
Nor I, I am an ass mother.
A goodly house.
And richly furnished too Sir.
Hung wantonly, I like that preparation,
It stirs the blood unto a hopeful banquet,
And intimates the Mistress free and jovial,
I love a house where pleasure prepares welcome.
Now Cacafogo, how like you this mansion,
It were a brave pawn.
I shall be master of it,
It was built for my bulk, the rooms are wide and spacious,
Aerie, and full of ease, and that I love well,
Isle tell you when I taste the wine my Lord,
And take the height of his table with my stomach,
How my affections stand to the young Lady.
All welcome to your Grace, and to these soldiers,
You honour my poor house with your fair presence•
Those few slight pleasures that inhabit here sir,
I doe beseech your Grace command, they are yours;
Your servant but preserves um to delight ye,
I thank ye Lady, I am bold to visit ye.
Once more to bless mine eyes with your sweet beauty,
Tas been a long night since you left the Court,
For till I saw you now, no day broke to me.
Bring in the Dukes meat.
She is most excellent.
Most admirable fair as ere I looked on,
I had rather command her then my regiment.
Isle have a fling, tic but a thousand Ducats,
Which I can cozen up again in ten days,
And some few jewels to justify my knavery,
Say J should marry her, sheele get more money
Then all my usury, put my knavery to it,
She appears the most infallible way of purchase,
I cood wish her a size or two stronger, for the encounter,
For I am like a Lyon where I lay hold,
But these Lambs will endure a plague load,
And never bleat neither, that sir, time has taught us.
I am so virtuous now, I cannot speak to her,
The arrant'st shame faced a•se, I broil away too.
Why whore's this dinner?
Tic not ready Madam,
Nor shall not be until I know the guests too,
Nor are they fairly welcome till I bid um.
Is not this my Alferese he looks another thing,•
Are miracles a foot again?
Why sir, why sir you.
I hear you saucy woman,
And as you are my wife command your absence,
And know your duty, tic the crown of modesty.
Your wife?
Yes good my Lord, I am her husband,
And pray take notice that I claim that honour,
And will maintain it.
If thou be her husband,
I am determined thou shall be my Cuckold,
Isle be thy faithful friend.
Peace dirt and dunghill,
I will not loose my anger on a rascal,
Provoke me more, isle beat thy blown body
Till thou reboundst again like a Tennis ball.
This is miraculous.
Is this the fellow
That had the patience to become a fool,
A flurted fool, and on a sudden break,
As if he would •hew a wonder to the world•
Both into bravery, and fortune too,
I much admire the man, J am astonished.
Isle be divorced immediately
You shall not.
You shall not have so much will to be wicked.
I am more tender of your honour Lady,
And of your age, you took me for a shadow.
You took me to gloss over your discr•dit,
To be your fool, you had thought you had found a coxcomb;
I am innocent of any foul dishonour I mean to ye,
Only I will be known to be your Lord now,
And be a fair one too, or I will fall for it.
I doe command ye from me thou poor fellow,
Thou cozened fool.
Thou cozened fool, tic not so,
I will not be commanded: I am above ye:
You may divorce me from your favour Lady,
But from your state you never shall, isle hold that,
And hold it to my use, the law allows it,
And then maintain your wantonness Isle wink at it.
Am I braved thus in mine own house.
Tic mine Madam,
You are deceived I am Lord of it, I rule it and all that's in it,
You have nothing to doe here Madam,
But as a servant to sweep clean the lodgings,
And at my farther will to doe me service,
And so isle keep it.
As you love me give way.
It shall be better,
I will give none Madame,
I stand upon the ground of mine own honour
And will maintain it, you shall know me now,
To be an understanding feeling man,
And sensible of what a woman aims at,
A young proud woman that has will to sail with,
An itching woman, that her blood provokes too,
I cast my cloud off and appear my self,
The master of this little piece of mischief,
And I will put a spell about your feet Lady,
They shall not wander but where I give way now.
Is this the fellow that the people pointed at,
For the mere sign of man, the walking image,
He speaks wondrous highly.
As a husband ought sir,
In his own house, and it becomes me well too,
I think your grace would grieve if you were put to it,
To have a wife or servant of your own,
For wives are reckoned in the rank of servants,
Under your own roof to command ye.
Brave, a strange convertion, thou shalt lead
In chief now.
Is there no difference betwixt his and you sir.
Not now Lord, my Fortune makes me even,
And as I am an honest man, I am nobler.
Get me my coach.
Let me see who dare get it
Till I command, isle make him draw your coach too,
And eat your Coach, (which will be hard diet)
That executes your will; or take your coach Lady,
I give you liberty, and take your people.
Which I turn off, and take your will abroad with ye,
Take all these freely, but take me no more,
And so farewell.
Nay sir you shall not carry it
So bravely off, you shall not wrong a Lady
In a high huffing strain, and think to bear it,
We stand not by as bawds to your brave fury,
To see a Lady weep.
They are tears of anger, I beseech ye note um not worth pity,
Wrung from her rage, because her will prevails not,
She would sound now if she could not cry,
Else they were excellent and I should grieve too,
But falling thus, they show nor sweet nor orient,
Put up my Lord, this is oppression,
And calls the sword of Justice to relieve me,
The Law to lend her hand, the king to right me,
All which shall understand how you provoke me,
In mine own house to brave me, is this princely,
Then to my guard, and if I spare your Grace,
And doe not make this place your monument,
Too rich a tomb for such a rude behaviour,
I have a cause will kill a thousand of ye, mercy for sake me.
Hold fair sir I beseech ye,
The Gentleman but pleads his own right nobly.
He that dares strike against the husbands freedom,
The husbands curse stick to him, a tamed cuckold,
His wife be fair and young, but most dishonest,
Most impudent, and have no feeling of it,
No conscience to reclaim her from a Monster,
Let her lye by him like a flattering ruin,
And at one instant kill both name and honour,
Let him be lost, no eye to weep his end,
Nor find no earth that's base enough to bury him,
Now sir fall on, I am ready to oppose ye.
I have better thought, I pray sir use your wife well.
Mine own humanity will teach me that sir,
And now you are all welcome, all, and we'll to dinner,
This is my wedding day.
Isle cross your joy yet.
I have seen a miracle, hold thine own soldier,
Sure they dare fight in fire that conquer women.
Has beaten all my loose thoughts out of me,
As if he had thresh•um out of the husk.
Save ye, which is the Lady of the house.
That's she sir, that pretty Lady,
If you would speak with her.
Don Michael Leon, another direr come?
Pray doe not know me, I am full of business,
When I have more time isle be merry with ye,
It is the woman, good Madame tell me truly,
Had you a maid called Estifania?
Yes truly had I.
Was she a maid doe you think?
I dare not swear for her,
For she had but a scant fame.
Was she your kinse-woman?
Not that I ever knew, now I look better
I think you married her, give you much joy sir,
You may reclaim her it was a wild young girl.
Give me a halter, is not this house mine Madame•
Was not she owner of it, pray speak truly.
No, certainly, I am sure my money paid for it,
And I ne'er remember yet I gave it you sir.
The hangings and the plate too?
All are mine sir,
And every thing you see about the building,
She only kept my house when I was absent,
And so ill kept it, I was weary of her.
What a Devil ails hee?
Is possessed isle assure you.
Where is your maid?
Doe not you know that have her?
She is yours now, why should I look after his,
Since that first hour I came I never saw her.
I saw her later would the Devil had had her,
It is all true I find, a wild-fire take her•
Is thy wife with child Don Michael? thy excellent wife.
Art thou a man yet.
When shall we come and visit thee?
And eat some rare fruit, thou •ast admirable Or∣chards,
You are so jealous now, pox a your jealousy,
How scurvily you look.
Pre thee leave fooling,
I am in no humour now to fool and prattle,
Did she ne'er play the wag with you.
Yes many times, so often that I was ashamed to keep her,
But I forgave her sir, in hope she would mend still,
And had not you of the instant married her,
I had put her off.
I thank ye I am blessed still,
Which way so ere I turn I am a made man,
Miserably gulled beyond recovery.
You'll stay and dine.
Certain I cannot Captain,
Hark in thine ear, I am the are•ant'st puppy,
The miserablest Ass, but I must leave ye,
I am in hast, in hast, bless ye good madame,
And you prove as good as my wife.
Will you come near sir, will your grace but honour me,
And taste our dinner, you are nobly welcome,
All angers past I hope, and I shall serve ye.
Thou art the stock of men, and I admire thee.
Isle go to a conjurer but isle find this pol-cat,
This pilfring whore, a plague of veils I cry,
And covers for the impudence of women,
Their sanctity in show will deceive Devils,
It is my evil Angel let me bless me.
Tic he, I am caught, I must stand to it stoutly,
And show no shake of fear, I see he is angry,
Vexed at the uttermost.
My worthy wife,
I have been looking of your modesty,
All the town over.
My most noble husband,
I am glad I have found ye, for in truth I am weary,
Weary and lame with looking out your Lordship.
I have been in bawdy houses.
I believe ye, and very lately too.
Pray ye pardon me,
To seek your Ladyship, I have been in cell•rs,
In private cellars, where the thirsty bawds
Hear your confessions; I have been at plays,
To look you out amongst the youthful actors,
At Puppet shows, you are Mistress of the motions;
At gosshippings I hearkened after ye,
But amongst those confusions of lewd tongues
There's no distinguishing beyond a Babel.
I was amongst the Nuns because you sing well,
But they say yours are bawdy songs, they mourn for ye,
And last I went to Church to seek you out,
Tic so loug since you were there, they have forgot ye.
You have had a pretty progress, isle tell mine now
To look you out, I went to twenty Taverns.
And are you sober?
Yes, I reel not yet sir,
Where I saw twenty drunk most of em soldiers,
There I had great hope to find you disguised too.
From hence to'th dicing house, there I found
Quarrels needless, and senseless, swords, and pots, and can∣dlesticks,
Tables, and stools, and all in one confusion,
And no man knew his friend, I left this Chaos,
And to the Surgeons went, he wi•lt me stay,
For says he learnedly, if he be tippled,
Twenty to one he whores, and then I bear of him.
If he be mad, he quarrels, then he comes •oo,
I sought ye where no safe thing would have ventured
Amongst diseases, base, and wild, wild women,
For I remembered your old Roman axiom,
The more the danger, still the more the honour.
Last to your Confessor I came, who told me
Yo• were too proud to pray, and here I have found ye.
She bears up bravely and the rogue is witty,
But I shall dash it instantly to nothing,
Here leave we off our wanton languages,
And now conclude we in a sharper tongue.
Why am I consent,
Why am I abused.
Thou most wild, base, abominable.
Captain.
Thou stinking overstewd, poor, po•ky•
Captain.
Doe you Echo me?
Yes Sir, and go before ye,
And round about ye, why doe you rail at me
For that, that was your own sin, your own knavery.
And brave me too.
You had best now draw your sword Captain,
Draw it upon a woman, doe brave Captain,
Upon your wife, oh most renowned Captain.
A plague upon thee, answer me directly,
Why did thou marry me?
To be my husband;
I had thought you had had infinite, but i'm consent.
Why did thou flatter me, and show me wonders,
A house, and riches, when they are but shadows,
Shadows to me.
Why did you work on me,
It was but my part to requite you Sir,
With your strong soldiers wit, and swore you would bring me
So much in chains, so much in jewels husband,
So much in right rich clothes.
Thou hast um rascal•
I gave um to thy hands, my trunks and all;
And thou hast opend um, and sold my treasure.
Sir, Theres your treasure, sell it to a tinker
To mend old kettles, is this noble usage,
Let all the world view here the Captains treasure,
A man would think now these were worthy matters:
Here's a shooing-horne chain, gilt over, how it senteth
Worse then the mouldy dirty heel it served for,
And here is another of a lesser value,
So little, I would shame to tie my dog in it,
These are my joynter, blush and save a labour,
Or these else will blush for ye.
A fire subtle ye, are ye so crafty.
Here is a goodly jewel,
Did not you win this at Goletta Captain,
Or took it in the field from some brave Bashaw,
How it sparkles like an old Ladies eyes,
And fills each room with light like a close lantern,
This would doe rarely in an Abbey window,
To cousin Pilgrims.
Prithee leave prating.
And here's a chain of whitings eyes for pearls,
A mussell-monger would have made a better.
Nay, prithee wife, my clothes, my clothes.
Isle tell ye,
Your clothes are paralells to these, all counter•et.
Put these and them on, you are a man of copper,
A kind of candlestick, these you thought my husband,
To have consent me withal, but I am quit with you.
Is there no house then, nor no grounds about it?
No plate nor hangings?
There are none sweet husband,
Shadow for shadow is an equal justice,
Can you rail now, pray put your fury up sir,
And speak great words, you are a soldier, thunder.
I will speak little, I have plaid the fool,
And so I am rewarded.
You have spoke well sir,
And now I see you are so conformable,
Isle heighthen you again, go to your house,
They are packing to be gone, you must sup there,
Isle meet ye, and bring clothes, and clean shirts after,
And all things shall be well; isle colt ye once more,
And teach ye to bring copper.
Tell me one thing,
I doe beseech thee tell me, tell me truth wife,
However I forgive thee, art thou honest,
The Beldam swore.
I bid her tell you so sir,
It was my plot, alas my credulous husband,
The Lady told you too.
Most strange things of thee.
Still it was my way, and all to try your sufferance,
And she denied the house.
She knew me not;
No, nor no title that I had.
It was well carried;
No more, I am right and straight.
I would believe thee,
But heaven knows how my heart is, will ye follow me.
Isle be there straight.
I am fooled, yet dare not find it.
Go silly fool, thou moist be a good soldier
In open fleld, but for our private service
Thou art an ass, isle make thee so or miss else.
Here comes another Trout that I must tickle,
And tickle daintily, I have lost my end else.
May I crave your leave sir?
Prithee be answered, thou shalt crave no leave,
I am in my meditations, doe not vex me,
A beaten thing, but this hour a most bruised thing,
That people had compassion on, it looked so.
The next Sir Palmerin, here is fine proportion,
An Ass, and then an Elephant, sweet justice,
Theres no way left to come at her now, no craving,
If money could come near, yet I would pay him;
I have a mind to make him a huge cuckold,
And money may doe much, a thousand ducats,
Tic but the letting blood of a rank heir.
Pray ye hear me.
I know thou h•st some wedding ring to pawn now.
Of Silver and guilt with a blind posy in it,
Love and a mill-horse should go round together,
Or thy child's whistle, or thy squirills chain,
Isle none of um, I would she did but know me,
Or would this fellow had but use of money,
That I might come in any way.
I am gone sir,
And I shall tell the beauty sent me to ye,
The Lady Margarita.
Stay I prithee,
What is thy will, I turn me wholly to ye,
And talk now till thy tongue ache, I will hear ye.
She would entreat ye sir.
She shall command sir,
Let it be so I beseech thee my sweet gentlewoman,
Doe not forget thy self.
She does command then,
This courtesy, because she knows you are noble.
Your Mistress by the way.
My natural Mistress,
Upon these Jewels sir, they are fair and rich•
And view um right.
To doubt um is an heresy.
A thousand ducats, it is upon necessity
Of present use, her husband sir is stubborn.
Long may he be so.
She desires withal, a better knowledge of your parts and person,
And when you please to doe her so much honour.
Comelet's dispatch.
In troth I have heard his say sir,
Of a fat man she has not seen a sweeter,
But in this business sir.
Let's doe it first•
And then dispute, the Ladies use may long •or't.
All secrecy she would desire, she told me
How wise you are.
We are not wise to talk thus,
Carry her the gold, isle look her out a jewel,
Shall sparkle like her eyes, and thee another,
Come pre thee come, I long to serve thy lady,
Long monstrously, now valour I shall meet ye,
You that dare Dukes.
Green goose you are now in sippets.
He shall not have his will, I shall prevent him,
I have a toy here that will t•rne the tide,
And suddenly, and strangely, here Don Iuan,
Doe you present it to him.
I am commanded.
A fellow sounded out of Charity,
And moulded to the height contemn his maker,
Curb the freehand that framed him? This must not be.
That such an oyster shell should hold a pearl,
And of so rare a price in prison,
Was she made to be the matter of her own undoing,
To let a slove•lie unwieldy fellow,
Un•uly and self willed, dispose her beauties,
We suffer all sir in this sad Eclipse,
She should shine where she might show like her self,
An absolute sweetness, to comfort those admire her,
And shed her beams upon her friends.
We are gulled all,
And all the world will grumble at your patience,
If she be ravished thus.
No•e fear it Sanchio,
Weel have her free again, and move at Court,
In her clear orb, but one sweet hansomenesse,
To bless this part of Spain, and have that slubberd.
Tic every good mans cause, and we must stir in it.
Isle warrant he shall be glad to please us,
And glad to share too, we shall hear anon
A new song from him, let's attend a little.
Coronell, I am bound to you for this nobleness,
I should have been your officer, tic true sir,
And a proud man I should have been to have served you•
'Tas pleased the King out of his boundless favours,
To make me your companion, this commission
Gives me a troop of horse.
I rejoice at it,
And am a glad man we shall gain your company,
I am sure the King knows you are newly married,
And out of that respect gives you more time sir.
Within four days I am gone, so he commands me,
And tic not mannerly for me to argue it,
The time grows shorter still, are your goods ready.
They are aboard.
Who waits there?
Sir.
Doe you hear ho, go carry this unto your Mistress sir,
And leather see how much the King has honoured me,
Bid his be lusty, she must make a soldier.
Sir,
Go take down all the hangings,
And pack up all my cloths, my plate and Jewels,
And all the furniture that's portable,
Sir when we lye in garrison, it is necessary
We keep a handsome port, for the kings honour;
And doe you hear, let all your Ladies wardrobe
Be safely placed in trunks, they must along too.
Whether must they go sir.
To the wars Lorenzo,
And you and all, I will not leave a turne-spit,
That has one dram of spleen against a Dutchman.
Why then St Iaques hey, you have made us all sit,
And if we leave ye, does my Lady go too.
The stuff must go to morrow towards the sea sir,
All all must go.
Why Pedro, vasco, Dego.
Come help me, come come boys, soldadoes, comrades,
We'll fley these beere-bellied rogues, come away quickly.
Has taken a brave way to save his honour,
And cross the Duke, now I shall love him dearly,
By the life of credit thou art a noble gentleman.
Why how now wife, what sick at my preferment,
This is not kindly done.
No sooner love ye,
Love ye entirely sir, brought to consider
The goodness of your mind and mine own duty,
But loose you instantly, be divorced from ye,
This is a cruelty, isle to the King
And tell him it is unjust to part two souls,
Too minds so nearly mixed.
By no means sweet heart.
•f he were married but four days as I am.
He would hang himself the fifth, or fly his Country.
He would make it treason for that tongue that durst
But talk of war, or any thing to vex him,
You shalt not go.
Indeed I must sweet wife,
What shall I loose the King for a few kisses,
We'll have enough.
Isle to the Duke my cozen, he shall to th'King.
He did me this great office,
I thank his grace for it, should I pray him now,
To undoe't again, fie it were a ba•e discredit.
Would I were able sir to bear you company,
How willing should I be then, and how merry,
I will not live alone.
Be in peace you shall not.
What k•ockings this, oh heavē my head, why rascals
I think the war's begun in the house already.
The preparation is, they are taking down,
And packing up the hangings, plate and Jewels,
And all those furnitures that shall befit me
When I lye in garrison.
Must the Coach go too Sir?
How will your Lady pass to'th sea else easily?
We shall find shipping fort there to transport it.
I go alas.
Isle have a maine care of ye,
I know ye are sickly, he shall drive the easier,
And all accommodation shall attend ye.
Woudl I were able,
Come I warrant ye,
Am not I with ye sweet, are her clothes packed up,
And all her linens? give your maids direction,
You know my times but short, and I am commanded.
Let me have a nurse,
And all such necessary people with me,
And an easy bark.
It shall not trot I warrant ye,
Curve at it may sometimes.
I am with child sir.
At four days warning, this is something speedy,
Doe you conceive as our jennets doe with a west wind,
My heir will be an arrant fleet one Lady,
Isle swear you were a maid when I first lay with ye.
Pray doe not swear, I thought I was a maid too,
But we may both be consent in that point Sir.
In such a strait point sure I could not err Madam.
This is another tenderness to try him,
Fetch his up now.
You must provide a cradle, and what a troubles that•
The sea shall rock it,
•Tic the best nurse; twill roar and rock together,
A swinging storm will sing you such a lullaby.
Faith let me stay, I shall but shame ye Sir.
And you were a thousand shames you shall along with me,
At home I am sure you'll prove a million,
Every man carries the bundle of his sins,
Upon his own back, you are mine, Isle sweat for ye.
What Sir, preparing for your noble journey?
Tic well and full of care.
J saw your mind was wedded to the war,
And knew you would prove some good man for your coūtry•
Therefore fair Cozen with your gentle pardon,
I got this place, what morn at his advancement?
You are too blame, he will come again sweet cozen,
Mean time like sad Penelope and sage,
Amongst your maids at home, and huswifely.
No sir, I dare not leave her to that solitariness,
She is young, and grief or ill news from those quarters
May daily cross her, she shall go along Sir.
By no means Captain.
By all means an't please ye?
What take a young and tender bodied Lady,
And expose her to those dangers, and those tumults,
A sickly Lady too.
Twill make his well Sir,
Theres no such friend to health as wholesome travel.
Away it must not be.
It ought not Sir,
Go hurry her, it is not humane Captain.
I cannot blame her tears, fright her with tempests
With thunder of the war.
I dare swear if she were able.
She is most able.
And pray ye swear not, she must go theres no remedy,
Nor greatness, nor the trick you had to partus,
Which I smell too rank, too open, too evident
(And I must tell you Sir, tic most unnoble)
Shall hinder me: had she but ten hours life,
Nay less, but two hours, I would have her with me,
I would not leave her fame to so much ruin,
To such a desolation and discredit
As her weakness and your hot will wood work her too.
What Masque is this now?
More tropes and figures, to abuse my sufferance,
What cozen's this?
Michael van owl, how dost thou?
In what dark barn or tod of aged •vi
Hast thou lain hid?
Things must both ebb and flow Coronell,
And people must conceal, and shine again.
You are welcome hither as your friend may say Gentlemā,
A pretty house ye see handsomely seated,
Sweet and convenient walks, the waters crystal.
He's certain mad.
As mad as a French Tailor,
That has nothing in's head but ends of fustians.
I see you are packing now my gentle cozen,
And my wife told me I should find it so,
Tic true I doe, you were merry when I was last here,
But it was your will to try my patience Madam.
I am sorry that my swift occasions
Can let you take your pleasure here no longer,
Yet I would have you think my honoured cozen,
This house and all I have are all your servants.
What house, what pleasure sir, what doe you mean?
You hold the jest so stiff, twill prove discourteous,
This house I mean, the pleasures of this place.
And what of them?
They are mine Sir, and you know it,
My wives I mean, and so conferd upon me,
The hangings sir I must entreat, your servants,
That are so busy in their offices,
Again to minister to their right uses,
I shall take view oath plate anon, and furniture•
That are of under place, you are merry still cozen,
And of a pleasant constitution,
Men of great fortunes make their mirths ad placitum.
Prithee good stubborn wife, tell me directly,
Good evil wife leave fooling and tell me honestly,
Is this my kinsman?
I can tell ye nothing.
I have many kinsmen, but so mad a one,
And so fantastic, all the house.
All mine,
And all within it, I will not bate ye an ace ont,
Can you not receive a noble courtesy,
And quietly and handsomely as ye ought Couze,
But you must ride oath top ont.
Can thou fight?
Isle tell ye presently, I cood have done sir.
For ye must law and claw before ye get it.
Away, no quarrels.
Now I am more temperate,
Isle have it proved if you were never yet in Bedlam,
Never in love for thats a lunacy,
No great state left ye that you never looked for,
Nor cannot manage, thats a rank distemper
That you were christend, and who answered for ye,
And then I yield.
Has half persuaded me I was bred in the moon,
I have ne'er a bush at my breech, are not we both mad,
And is not this a fantastic house we are in,
And all a dream we doe, will ye walk out sir,
And if I doe not beat thee presently
Into a sound belief, as sense can give thee,
Brick me into that wall there for a chimney piece,
And say I was one oath Caesars, done by a seale-cutter.
Isle talk no more, come weal away immediately.
Why then the house is his, and all thats in it,
Isle give away my skin but Isle undo ye,
I gave it to his wife, you must restore Sir,
And make a new provision.
Am I mad now or am I christend, you my pagan co∣zen
My mighty Mahound kinsman, what quirk now;
You shall be welcome all, I hope to see sir
Your Grace here, and my cos, we are all soldiers,
And must doe naturally for one another.
Are ye blank at this, then I must tell ye Sir,
Ye have no command, now ye may go at pleasure
And ride your ass troop, it was a trick I use
To try your jealousy upon entreaty,
And saving of your wife.
All this not moves me,
Nor stirs my gall, nor alters my affections,
You have more furniture, more houses Lady,
And rich ones too, I will make bold with those,
And you have Land ith Indies as I take it,
Thither weal go, and view a while those clymats,
Visit your Factors there, that may betray ye,
Tic done, we must go.
Now thou art a brave Gentleman,
And by this sacred light I love thee dearly,
The house is none of yours, I did but jest Sir,
Nor you are no cos of mine, I beseech ye vanish,
I tell you plain, you have no more right then he
Has, that senseless thing, your wife has once more foold ye:
Go ye and consider.
Good morrow my sweet cozen, I should be glad sir.
By this hand she dies for it,
Or any man that speaks for her.
These are fine toys.
Let me request you stay but one poor month,
You shall have a Commission and isle go too,
Give me but will so far.
Well I will try ye,
Good morrow to your Grace, we have private business.
If I miss thee again, I am an arrant bungler.
Thou shalt have my command, and isle march under thee,
Nay be thy boy before thou shalt be bafled,
Thou art so brave a fellow.
I have seen visions.
Come hither wife, doe you know this hand?
I doe Sir.
Tic Estifanias, that was once my woman.
She writes to me here, that one Cacafogo
A usuring jewellers son (I know the rascal)
Is mortally fallen in love with ye.
Is a monster, deliver me from mountains.
Doe you go a birding for all sorts of people,
And this evening will come to ye and show ye jewels,
And offers any thing to get access to ye,
•f I can make or sport or profit on him•
(For he is fit for both) she bids me use him,
And so I will, be you conformable, and follow but my will.
I shall not fail sir
Will the Duke come again doe you think.
No sure Sir,
Has now no policy to bring him hither•
Nor b•ing you to him, if my wit hold fair wife:
Lets in to dinner.
Had I but lungs enough to bawl sufficiently,
That all the queens in Christendom might hear me,
That men might run away from contagion,
I had my wish; would it were most high treason,
Most infinite high, for any man to marry,
I mean for any man that would live handsomely,
And like a Gentleman, in his wits and credit,
What torments shall I put her to, Phalaris bull now,
Pox they love bulling too well, though they smoke for it,
Cut her apiece, every piece will live still,
And every morsel of her will doe mischief;
They have so many lives, there's no hanging of um
They are too light to drown, they are cork and feathers,
To burn too cold, they live like Salamanders;
Under huge heaps of stones to bury her,
And so depress her as they did the Giants;
She will move under more then built old Babel,
• must destroy her.
Be consent by a thing of clouts, a she moth,
That every silkmans shop breeds; to be cheated,
And of a thousand ducats by a whim wham.
Who's that is cheated, speak again thou vision,
But art thou cheated? minister some comfort,
Tell me directly art thou cheated bravely,
Come, prithee come, art thou so pure a coxcomb
To be not one, doe not dissemble with me,
Tell me I conjure thee.
Then keep thy circle,
For I am a spirit wild that flies about thee,
And who ere thou art, if thou be humane•
Isle let thee plainly know, I am cheated damnably.
Ha, ha, ha.
Dost thou laugh damnably, I say most damnably.
By whom, good spirit speak, speak ha, ha, ha.
I will utter, laugh till thy lungs crack, by a rascal woman,
A lewd, abominable, and plain woman?
Dost thou laugh still.
I must laugh, prithee pardon me,
I shall laugh terribly.
I shall be angry, terrible angry, I have cause.
Thats it, and tic no reason but thou shoe•ldst be angry,
Angry at heart, yet I must laugh still at thee,
By a woman cheated, art' sure it was a woman?
I shall break thy head, my valour itches at thee.
It is no matter, by a woman consent,
A real woman.
A real devil,
Plague of her jewels and her copper chains•
How rank they smell.
Sweet consent sir let me see them,
I have been cheated too, I would have you note that
And lewdly cheated, by a woman also,
A scurvy woman, I am undone sweet Sir,
Therefore I must have leave to laugh.
Pray ye take it,
You are the merriest undone man in Europe.
What need we fiddles, bawdy songs and sack,
When our own miseries can make us merry.
Ha, ha, ha.
I have seen these jewels, what a notable pennyworth
Have you had next your heart, you will not take Sir
Some twenty Ducats.
Thou art deceived I will take.
To clear your bargain now.
Isle take some ten, some any thing, some half ten,
Half a Ducats.
An excellent lapidary set these stones sure,
Doe you mark their waters?
Quick-sand choke their waters,
And hers that bought um too, but I shall find his.
And so shall I, I hope, but doe not hurt her,
You cannot find in all this kingdom,
If you had need of cozening, as you may have,
For such gross natures will desire it often,
Tic at some time too a fine variety,
A woman that can cozen ye so neatly,
She has taken half mine anger off with this trick.
If I were valiant now, I would kill this fellow,
I have money enough lies by me at a pinch
To pay for twenty rascals lives that vex me,
Isle to this Lady, there I shall be satisfied.
Come, weal away unto your country house•
And there weal learn to live contently,
This place is full of charge, a•d full of hurry,
No part of sweetness dwells about these cities.
Whether you will, I wait upon your pleasure;
Live in a hollow tree Sir, Isle live with ye.
I, now you strike a harmony a true one,
When your obedience waits upon your husband,
And your sick will aims at the care of honour,
Why now I dote upon ye, love ye dearly,
And my rough nature falls like roaring streams,
Clearly and sweetly into your embraces,
O what a jewel is a woman excellent,
A wise a virtuous and a noble woman,
When wee meet such, we bear our stamps on both sides,
And through the world we hold our currant virtues,
Alone we are single medals, only faces,
And wear our fortunes out in useless shadows,
Command you now, and ease me of that trouble,
Isle be as humble to you as a servant,
Bid whom you please, invite your noble friends,
They shall be welcome all, visit acquaintance,
Go at your pleasure, now experience
Has linked you fast unto the chain of goodness:
What noise is this, what dismal cry.
Tic loud too.
Sure ther's some mischief done in the street look out there.
Look out and help.
Oh sir the Duke Medina.
What of the Duke Medina.
Oh sweet gentleman, is all most slain.
A way a way &amp; help him, all the house help.
How slain? why Margarita,
Why wife, sure some new device they have a foot again,
Some trick upon my credit, I shall meet it,
I had rather guide a ship Imperial
Alone, and in a storm, then rule one woman.
How came ye hurt sir?
I fell out with my friend the noble Coronell,•
My cause was nought, for it was about your honour:
And he that wrongs the Innocent ne'er prospers;
And he has left me thus for charity,
Lend me a bed to ease my tortured body,
That ere I perish I may show my penitence,
I fear I am slain.
Help gentlemen to carry him,
There shall be nothing in this house my Lord,
But as your own.
I thank ye noble sir.
To bed with him, and wife give your attendance.
Doctors and surgeons.
Doe not disquiet me,
But let me take my leave in peace.
Before me,
Tic rarely counterfeited.
True, it is so sir,
And take you heed, this last blow doe not spoil ye,
He is not hurt, only we made a scuffle,
As though we purposed anger, that same scratch
On's hand he took, to colour all and draw compassion,
That he might get into your house more cunningly,
I must not stay, stand now, and you're a brave fellow.
• thank ye noble Coronell, and I honour ye,
Never be quiet.
He's most desperate ill sir,
I doe not think these ten months will recover him.
Does he hire my house to play the fool in,
Or does it stand on Fairy ground we are haunted,
Are all men and their wives troubled with dreams thus.
What ail you sir?
Nay what ail you sweet wife•
To put these daily pastimes on my patience,
What dost thou see in me, that I should suffer thus,
Have not I done my part like a true husband,
And paid some desperate debts you never looked for.
You have done hand•omely I must confess sir.
Have I not kept thee waking like a hawk?
And watched thee with delights to satisfy thee?
The very tithes of which had won a widow.
Alas I pity ye.
Thou wilt make me angry,
Thou never saw me mad yet.
You are always,
You carry a kind of bedlam still about ye.
If thou persuest me farther I run stark mad,
If you have more hurt Dukes or Gentlemen,
To lye here on your cure, I shall be desperate,
I know the trick, and you shall feel I know it,
Are ye so hot that no hedge can contain ye,
Isle have thee let blood in all the veins about thee,
Isle have thy thoughts found too, and have them opened,
Thy spirits purged, for those are they that fire ye,
Thy maid shall be thy Mistress thou the maid,
And all those servile labours that she reach at,
And go through cheerfully, or else sleep empty,
That maid shall lye by me to teach you duty,
You in a palate by to humble ye,
And greeve for what you loose.
I have lost my self sir,
And all that was my base self, disobedience,
My wantonness my stubbornenesse • have lost too,
And now by that pure faith good wives are crowned with,
By your own nobleness.
I take ye up• and wear ye next my heart,
See you be worth it. Now what with you?
I come to tell my Lady,
There is a fulsome fellow would fain speak with her.
Tic Cacafogo go and entertain him,
And draw him on with hopes.
I shall observe ye.
I have a rare design upon that gentleman,
And you must work too.
I shall sir most willingly.
A way then both, &amp; keep him close in some pl•ce
From the Dukes sight, and keep the Duke in too,
Make um believe both, Isle find time to cure um.
Why how dare thou meet me again thou rebel,
And know how thou hast used me thrice, thou rascal,
Were there not ways enough to fly my vengeance,
No holes nor vaults to hide thee from my fury,
But thou must meet me face to face to kill thee?
I would not seek thee to destroy thee willingly,
But now thou come to invite me,
And come upon me,
How like a sheep biting Rogue taken in the manner,
And ready for the halter dost thou look now,
Thou hast a hanging look thou scurvy thing, hast ne'er a knife
Nor never a string to lead thee to Elisium?
Be there no pitiful Apothecaries in this town,
That have compassion upon wretched women,
And dare administer a dram of rats-bane,
But thou must fall to me?
I know you have mercy.
If I had tons of mercy thou deserve none,
What new tricks is now a foot, and what new houses
Have you in the air, what orchards in apparition,
What can thou say for thy life?
Little or nothing,
I know you'll kill me, and I know tic useless
To beg for mercy, pray let me draw my book out,
And pray a little.
Doe a very little,
For I have farther business then thy killing,
I have money yet to borrow, speak when you are ready.
Now now sir now,
Come on, doe you start off from me,
Doe you swear great Captain, have you seen a spirit.
Doe you wear guns.
I am a soldiers wife sir,
And by that privilege I may be armed,
Now whats the news, and let's discourse more friendly,
And talk of our affairs in peace.
Let me see,
Pre thee let me fee thy gun, it is a very pretty one.
No no sir you shall feel.
Hold ye villain, what thine own husband?
Let mine own •usband then,
Be in's own wits, there, there's a thousand ducats,
Who must provide for you, and yet you'll kill me.
I will not hurt thee for ten thousand millions.
When will you redeem your Jewels, I have pawned um,
You see for what, we must keep tooch.
Isle kiss thee,
And get as many more, isle make thee famous,
Had we the house now.
Come along with me,
If that be vanished there be more to hire sir.
I see I am an ass when thou art near me.
Is the fool come.
Yes and in the cellar fast,
And there he stays his good hour till I call him,
He will make dainty music among the sack-butts,
I have put him just sir, under the Dukes chamber.
It is the better.
Has given me royally,
And to my Lady a whole load of portigues.
Better and better still, go Margarita,
Now play your prize, you say you dare be honest,
Isle put ye to your best.
Secure your self sir, give me the candle,
Pass away in silence.
Who's there, oh oh.
My Lord.
Have ye brought me comfort.
I have my Lord,
Come forth it is I, come gently out Isle help ye,
Come softly too, how doe you.
Are there none here,
Let me look round; we cannot be too wary,
Oh let me bless this hour, are you alone sweet friend.
Alone to comfort you.
What's that you tumble,
I have heard a noise this half hour under me,
A fearful noise.
The fat thing's mad in the cellar,
And stumbles from one hogs head to another,
Two cups more, and he ne'er shall find the way out,
What doe you fear, come, sit down by me cheer•ully,
My husband's safe, how doe your wounds.
I have none Lady,
My wounds I counterfeited cunningly, 
And fained the quarrel too, to enjoy you sweet,
Let's loose no time, hark the same noise again.
What noise, why look ye pale, I hear no stirring,
This goblin in the vault will be so tippled,
You are not well I know by your flying fancy,
Your body's ill at ease, your wounds.
I have none, I am as lusty and as full of health,
High in my blood.
Weak in your blood you would say,
How wretched is my case willing to please ye,
And find you so disable.
Believe me Lady.
I know you will venture all you have to satisfy me,
Your life I know, but is it fit • •poile ye,
Is it my love doe you think.
Here's to the Duke•
It named me certainly,
I heard it plainly sound.
You are hurt mortally,
And fitter for your prayers sir then pleasure,
What starts you make, I would not kiss you wantonly,
For the worlds wealth• have I securd my Husband,
And put all doubts aside to be deluded.
I come I come.
Heaven bless me.
And bless us both, for sure this is the Devil•
I plainly heard it now, he will come to fetch ye,
A very spirit, for he spoke under ground,
And spoke to y•u just as you would have snatched me,
You are a wicked man, and sure this haunts ye,
Would you were out of the house.
I would I were,
A that condition I had leapt a window.
And that's the least leap if you mean to scope sir,
Why what a frantic man were you to come here,
What a weak man to counterfeit deep wounds,
To wound another deeper.
Are you honest then.
Yes then and now, and ever, &amp; excellent honest,
And exercise this pastime but to show ye,
Great men are fools sometimes as well as wretches,
Would you were well hurt with any hope of life,
Cut to the brains, or run clean through the body,
To get out quietly as you got in sir,
I wish it like a friend that loves ye dearly,
For if my husband take ye, and take ye thus a counterfeit,
One that would clip his credit out of his honour,
He must kill ye presently,
There is no mercy nor an hour of pity,
And for me to entreat in such an agony,
Would show me little better then one guilty,
Have you any mind to a Lady now.
Would I were off fair,
If ever Lady caught me in a trap more.
If you be well and lusty, fie fie shake not•
You say you love me, come, come bravely now,
Despise all danger, I am ready for ye.
She mocks my misery, thou cruel Lady.
Thou cruel Lord, would thou betray my honesty,
Betray it in mine own house, wrong my husband,
Like a night thief, thou dare not name by day-light.
I am most miserable.
You are indeed,
And like a foolish thing you have made your self so,
Could not your own discretion tell ye sir,
When I was married I was none of yours,
Your eyes were then commanded to look off me,
And I now stand in a circle and secure,
Your spells nor power can never reach my body,
Mark me but this, and then sir be most miserable,
Tic sacrilege to violate a wedlock,
You rob too Templers, make your self twice guilty,
You ruin hers, and spot his noble husbands.
Let me be gone, Isle never more a tempt ye.
You cannot go, it is not in me to save ye,
Dare ye doe ill, and poorly then shrink under it?
Were I the Duke Medina, I would fight now,
For you must fight and bravely, it concerns you,
You doe me double wrong if you sneak off sir,
And all the world would say I loved a coward,
And you must dye too, for you will be killed,
And leave your youth, your honour and your state,
And all those dear delights you worshipped hear.
The noise again.
Some small beer if you love me.
The Devil haunts you sure, your sins are mighty,
A drunken Devil too, to plague your villainy.
Preserve me but this once.
There•s a deep well
In the next yard, if you dare venture drowning,
It is but death.
I would not dye so wretchedly.
Out of a garrat window Isle let you down then,
But say the rope be rotten, it is huge high too.
have you no mercy.
Now you are frighted thoroughly,
And find what tic to play the fool in folly,
And see with clear eyes your detested folly,
Isle be your guard.
And isle be your true servant,
Ever from this hour virtuously to love ye,
Chastely and modestly to look upon ye,
And here I seal it.
I may kiss a stranger, for you must now be so.
How doe you my Lord,
Me thinks you look but poorly on this matter.
Has my wife wounded ye, you were well before,
Pray sir be comforted, I have forgot all,
Truly forgiven too, wife you are a right one,
And now with unknown nations I dare trust ye.
No more feigned fights my Lord, they never prosper.
Who's this? the Devil in the vault?
Tic he sir, and as lovingly drunk, as though he had stu∣died it.
Give me a cup of Sack, and kiss me Lady,
Kiss my sweet face, and make thy husband cuckold,
An Ocean of sweet Sack, shall we speak treason?
He is devilish drunk.
I had thought he had been a devil.
He made as many noises and as horrible,
Oh a true lover sir will lament loudly,
Which of the butts is your Mistress.
Butt in thy belly.
Theres two in thine I am sure, it is grown so mon∣strous,
Butt in thy face?
Go carry him to sleep,
A fools love should be drunk he has paid well for it too.
When he is sober let him out to rail,
Or hang himself, there will be no loss of him.
Who's this? my Mauhound cozen?
Good Sir, tic very good, would I had a house too,
For there is no talking in the open ayre,
My Tarmogant Couze, I would be bold to tell ye,
I durst be merry too; I tell you plainly•
You have a pretty seat, you have the luck on it,
A pretty Lady too, I have mist both,
My Carpenter built in a mist I thank him,
Doe me the courtesy to let me see it,
See it but once more, But I shall cry for anger.
Isle hire a Chandlers shop close under ye,
And for my foolery, sell soap and whip-cord,
Nay if you doe not laugh now &amp; laugh heartily
You are a fool couze.
I must laugh a little,
And now I have done couze thou shalt live with me
My merry couze, the world shall not divorce us,
Thou art a valiant man, and thou shalt never want•
Will this content thee?
Isle cry, and then isle be •hankfull,
Indeed I will, and isle be honest to ye.
I would live a swallow here I must confess,
Wife I forgive thee all if thou be honest,
At thy peril, I believe thee excellent.
If I prove otherways, let me beg first,
Hold this is yours, some recompense for service,
Use it to nobler ends then he that gave it.
And this is yours, your true commission, Sir,
Now you are a Captain.
You are a noble Prince Sir,
And now a soldier, Gentleman, we all rejoice in it.
Sir, I shall wait upon you through all fortunes•
And I.
And I must needs attend my Mistress.
Will you go sister?
Yes indeed good brother,
I have too ties, mine own blood,
And my Mistress.
Is she your sister?
Yes indeed good wife,
And my best sister,
For she proved so wench,
When she deceived you with a loving husband.
I would not deal so truly for a stranger.
Well I could chide ye,
But it must be lovingly and like a sister,
Isle bring you on your way, and feast ye nobly,
For now I have an honest heart to love ye,
And then deliver you to the blew Neptune.
Your colours you must wear, &amp; wear em proud∣lie,
Wear em before the bullet, and in blood too,
And all the world shall know
We are virtues servants.
And all the world shall know, a noble mind
Makes women beautiful and envy blind.
GOod night our worthy friends, and may you part
Each with as merry and as free a hart
As you came hither; to those noble eyes
That deign to smile on our poor faculties,
And give a blessing to our labouring ends,
As we hope many, to such fortune sends
Their own desires, wives fair as light as chaste;
To those that live by spite
Wives made in hast.

Then, Brother Poet,
Brother.
I have a suite.
What is it?
Your devise.
As you came in upon me, I was then
Offering the argument, and this it is.
Silence.
The mighty Neptune, mighty in his styles,
And large command of waters, and of Isles,
Not, as the Lord and Sovereign of the Seas,
But, Chief in the art of riding, late did please
To send his Albion forth, the most his own,
Upon discovery, to themselves best known,
Through Celtiberia; and, to assist his course,
Gave him his powerful  MANAGER of Horse,
With divine Proteus, Father of disguise,
To waite upon them with his counsels wise,
In all extremes. His great commands being done,
And he desirous to review his Son,
He doth dispatch a floating Isle, from hence,
Unto the Hesperian shores, to waft him thence.
Where, what the arts were, used to make him stay,
And how the Sirens wooed him, by the way,
What Monsters he encountered on the coast,
How near our general Joy was to be lost,
Is not our subject now: though all these make
The present gladness greater, for their sake.
But what the triumphs are, the feast, the sport,
And proud solemnities of Neptunes Court,
Now he is safe, and Fame's not heard in vain,
But we behold our happy pledge again.
That with him, loyal HIPPIVS is returned,
Who for it, under so much envy, burned
With his own brightness, till her starved snakes saw
What Neptune did impose, to him was law.
But, why not this, till now?
—It was not time,
To mix this Music with the vulgars chime.
Stay, till th'abortiue, and extemporal din
Of balladry, were understood a sin,
Minerua cried: that, what tumultuous verse,
Or prose could make, or steal, they might rehearse,
And every Songster had sung out his fit;
That all the Country, and the Citie-wit,
Of bells, and bonfires, and good cheer was spent,
And Neptunes Guard had drunk al that they meant;
That all the tales and stories now were old
Of the Sea-Monster Archie, or grown cold:
The Muses then might venture, vndeterr'd,
For they love, then, to sing, when they are heard.
I like it well, tic handsome: And I have
Some thing wold fit this. How do you present 'hem?
In a fine Island, say you?
Yes, a  Delus:
Such, as when fair Latena fell in travail,
Great Neptune made emergent.
I con•…e you.
I would have had your Isle brought •…oting in, now
In a brave broth, and of a sprightly greene,
Just to the colour of the Sea; and then,
Some twenty Sirens, singing in the kettel,
With an Orion, mounted on the back
Of a grown Conger, but in such a posture,
As, all the world should take him for a Dolphin:
O, it would have made such music! Have you nothing,
But a bare Island?
Yes, we have a tree too,
Which we do call the Tree of Harmony,
And is the same with  what we read, the Sun
Brought forth in the Indian Musicana first,
And thus it grows. The goodly bole, being got
To certain cubits height, from every side
The boughs decline, which taking root afresh,
Spring up new boles, &amp; those spring new, &amp; newer,
Till the whole tree become a Porticus,
Or arched Arbour, able to receive
A numerous troupe, such as our Albion,
And the Companions of his journey are.
And this they sit in
Your prime Masquers?
Yes.
But whore's your Antimasque now, all this while?
I hearken after them.
Faith, we have none.
None?
None, I assure you, neither do I think them
A worthy part of presentation,
Being things so heterogene, to all devise,
Mere By-works, and at best Outlandish nothings.
O, you are all the heaven awry! Sir.
For blood of Poetry, running in your veins,
Make not your self so ignorantly simple.
Because Sir, you shall see I am a Poet,
No less then Cooke, and that I find you want
A special service here, an Antimasque,
Isle fit you with a dish out of the Kitchen,
Such, as I think, will take the present palates,
A metaphorical dish! And, do but mark,
How a good wit may jump with you. Are you rea∣die, Child?
(Had there bin Mask, or no Mask, I had made it.)
Child of the boiling house.
Here, Father.
Bring forth the pot. It is an Whole Podrida,
But I have persons, to present the meates.
Persons!
Such as doe relish nothing, but di stato,
(But in another fashion, then you dream of)
Know all things the wrong way, talk of the affairs,
The clouds, the cortines, and the mysteries
That are afoot, and, frō what hands they have 'hem
(The master of the Elephant, or the Camels)
What correspondences are held; the Posts
That go, &amp; come, and know, almost, their minutes,
All but their business: Therein, they are fishes.
But have their garlic, as the Proverb says,
They are our Quest of enquiry, after news.
Together with their learned Authors?
Yes Sir,
And of the Epicoene gender, Hes, and Shees:
Amphibion Archie is the chief.
Good boy!
The Child is learned too. Note but the Kitchen.
Have you put him, into the pot, for Garlic?
One in his coat, shall stink as strong as he, Sir,
And his friend Giblets with him.
They are two,
That give a part of the seasoning.
I conceive
The way of your Gally-mawfrey.
You will like it,
When they come pouring out of the pot together.
O, if the pot had been big enough!
What then, Child?
I had put in the Elephant, and one Camel,
at least, for Beef.
But, whom have you for Partridge?
A brace of Dwarfs, and delicate plump birds!
And whom for Mutton, and Kid?
A fine laced Mutton,
Or two; and either has her frisking Husband:
That reads her the Corrantos, every week.
Grave Mr Ambler, Newes-master of Poules,
Supplies your Capon; and grown Captain Buzz
(His Emissary) vnderwrites for Turkey,
A Gentleman of the Forest presents Pheasant,
And a plump Poultrers wife, in Graces street,
Plays Hen with eggs in the belly, or a Cony,
Choose which you will.
But, whore's the Bacon, Thom?
Hogrel the Butcher, and the Sow his wife,
Are both there.
It is well, go, dish 'hem out.
Are they well boiled?
Podrida!
What's that? rotten?
O, that they must be. There's one maine ingredient
We have forgot, the Artichoke.
No Sir.
I have a Fruicterer, with a cold red nose,
Like a blue fig, performs it.
The fruit looks so.
Good child, go pour hē out, show their concoctiō.
They must be rottē boiled, the brotn's the best on it,
And that's the Dance. The stage here is the Char∣ger.
And Brother Poet, though the serious part
Be yours, yet, envy not the C•… his art.
Not I. Name lusis ipse Triumphus amat.
The Antimaske is danced by the persons described, coming out of the pot.
Well, now, expect the Scene it self; it opens!
The Island is discovered, the Masquers sit∣ting in their several sieges. The heavens opening, and Apollo, with Mercury, some Muses, &amp; the Goddess Harmony, make the musique. the while, the Island moves forward, Proteus sitting below, and APOLLO sings.
Look forth, the (h) Shepherd of the seas, 
And (i) of the Ports, that keep the keys,
And to your Neptune tell,
His ALBION, Prince of all his Isles,
For whom the sea, and land so smiles,
Is home returned well.
And be it thought no common Cause,
That, to it, so much wonder draws,
And all the Hea'uens consent,
With HARMONY, to tune their notes,
In answer to the public votes
That, for it, up were sent.
It was no envious Stepdames rage,
Or Tyrants malice of the age,
That did employ him forth.
But such a Wisdom, that would prove,
By sending him, their hearts, and love
That else might fear his worth.
By this time, the Island hath joined it self with the shore: And Proteus, Portunus, and  Saron; come forth, and go up finging to the State, while the Mas∣quers take time to Land.
I! now the Pomp of Neptunes triumph shines!
And all the glories of his great designs
Are read, reflected, in his sons return!
How all the eyes, the looks, the hearts here, burn
at his arrival!
These are the true fires,
Are made of joys!
Of longings!
Of desires!
Of hopes!
Of fears!
Not intermitted blocks.
But pure affections, and from odorous stocks!
Tic incense all, that flames!
And these materials scarce have names!
My King looks higher, as he scorned the wars
Of winds, and with his trident touched the stars.
There is no wrinkle, in his brow, or frown,
But, as his cares he would in nectar drown, 
And all the (l) siluer-footed Nymphs were dressed,
To wait upon him, to the Oceans feast.
Or, here in rows upon the banks were set,
And had their several hairs made into net
To catch the youths in, as they come on shore.
How! Galatea sighing! O, no more.
Banish your fears.
And Doris dry your tears.
Albion is come:
And (m) Haliclyon, too, 
That kept his side, as he was charged to do,
With wonder.
—And the Sirens have him not.
Though they no practise, nor no arts forgot
That might have won him, or by charm, or song.
Or laying forth their tresses all along
Upon the glassy waives;
Then diving:
Then,
Up with their heads, as they were mad of men.
And there, the highest-going billows crown,
Until some lusty Sea-god pulled them down,
See! He is here!
Great Master of the mayne,
Receive thy dear, and precious pawn again.
SAKON, PORTVNVS, PROTEVS bring him thus,
Safe, as thy Subjects wishes gave him vs:
And of thy glorious Triumph let it be
No loss a part, that thou their loves doest see,
Then, that his sacred hea'ds returned to thet.
This sung, the Island goes back, whilst the upper Chorus takes it from them, and the Masquers prepare for their figure.
Spring all the Graces of the age,
And all the Loves of time;
Bring all the pleasures of the stage,
And relishes of rime:
Add all the softnesses of Courts
The lockes, the laughters, and the sports.
And mingle all their sweets, and salts,
That none may say, the Triumph halts.
Here, the Masquers dance their Entry.
Which done, the first prospective of a ma∣ritime Palace, or the house of Oceanus is discovered, with loud Musique.
And the other aboue is no more seen.
Behold the Palace of Oceanus!
Hail Reverend structure! Boast no more to vs
Thy being able, all the Gods to feast;
We have seen enough: our Albion was thy guest.
Then follows the Maine Dance.
After which the second prospect of the •…ea, is shown, to the former Musique.
Now turn and view the wonders of the deep,
Where Proteus herds, and Neptunes orkes do keep,
Where all is ploughed, yet still the pasture greene
The ways are found, and yet no path is seen,
There Proteus, Portunus, Saron, go up to the Ladies with this Song.
Come noble Nymphs, and doe not hide
The joys, for which you so provide:
If not to mingle with the men,
What doe you here? Go home again.
Your dressings doe confess
By what we see so curious parts
Of Pallas, and Arachnes arts,
That you could mean no less.
Why doe you were the Silkewormes toils;
Or glory in the shellfish spoils?
Or strive to show the grains of ore
That you have gatherd on the shore,
Whereof to make a stock
To graft the greener Emerald on
Or any better-waterd stone?
Or Ruby of the rock?
Why do you smell of Amber gris,
Of which was formed Neptunes Niece,
The Queen of Love; unless you can
Like Sea-borne Venus love a man?
Try, put your selves vnto't.
Your looks your smiles, and thoughts that meet,
Ambrosian hands, and silver feet,
doe promise you will do it.
The Revels follow.
Which ended, the Fleet is discovered, while the three Cornets play.
It is time, your eyes should be refreshed at length
Which something new, a part of Neptunes strength
See, yond, his fleet, ready to go, or come,
Or fetch the riches of the Ocean home,
So to secure him both in peace, and wars,
Till not one ship alone, but all be stars.
A shout within follows.
After which the Cooke enters.
I have another service fer you, Brother Poet, a dish of pickled Sailors, fine salt Sea-boyes, shall relish like Anchoues, or Caueare, to draw down a cup of nectar, in the skirts of a night.
Come away boys, the Town is ours, hay for Nep∣tune, and our young Master.
He knows the Compass and the Card,
While Castor sits on the maine yard,
And Pollux too, to help your •…ails;
And bright Leucothoe, fills your sails:
Orion sings, the Dolphins swim,
And, all the way, to gaze on him.
The Antimasque of Sailors.
The last Song to the whole Musique, five Lutes, three Cornets, and ten voices.
Although we wish the Triumph still might last
For such a Prince, and his discovery past,
Yet now, great Lord of waters, and of Isles,
Give Proteus leave to turn unto his wiles:
And, whilst young Albion doth thy labours ease,
Dispatch Portunus to thy ports,
And Saron to thy Seas:
To meet old Nereus, with his fifty girls,
From aged Induce laden home with pearls,
And orient gummes, to burn unto thy name.
And may thy Subjects hearts be all on flame:
Whilst thou dost keep the earth in firm estate,
And, amongst the winds, dost suffer no debate.
But both at sea, and land, our powers increase,
With health, and all the golden gifts of peace.
The last Dance.

YOu have hired a Shop then?
Yes sir, and our wares
(Though brittle as a maidenhead at •ix∣teene)
Are safe unloaded; not a Crystal cracked,
Or China dish needs sodring; our choice Pictures
As they came from the workman, without blemish,
And I have studied speeches for each Pe••e,
And in a thrifty tone to sell 'em off;
Will swear by 〈◊〉, and 〈◊〉,
That this is Mistress to the great Duke of Florence,
That Niece to old King Pippin, and a third
An Austrian Princess by her Roman nose,
How ere my conscience tells me they are figures
Of Ba•des, and common Courtesans in Venice.
You make no scruple of an oath then?
•ie sir
Tic out of my Indentures, I am bound there
To swear for my Masters profit as securely
As your intelligencer must for his Prince,
That sends him forth an honourable spy,
To serve his purposes. And if it be lawful
In a Christian shopkeeper to cheat his father,
I cannot find but to abuse a Turk
In the sale of our commodities, must bee thought
A meritorious work.
I wonder sir
What's your Religion?
Troth to answer truly
I would not be of one that should command me
To feed upon poor Iohn, when I see Pheasants
And Partridges on the Table: nor doe I like
The other that allows vs to eat flesh
In the Lent though it be rotten, rather then bee
Thought superstitious, as your zealous Cobbler,
And learned botcher Preach at Amsterdam
Over a Hotchpotch. I would not be co•fined
In my belief, when all your Sects, ••ect•ries
Are grown of one opinion, if I like it
I will profess my self, in the mean time
Live I in England, Spain, France, 〈◊◊〉
I am of that Countries •aith,
And what in Tunis,
Will you turn Turk here?
No! so I should loose
A Collop of that part my D•ll in•oyn'd me
To bring home as she left it; tic her venture,
Nor dare I barter that commodity
Without her special wa•rant.
You are a Kna•e sir,
Lea•ing your Roguery think upon my business,
It is no time to fool now
Remember where you are too! though this Mart time,
Wee are allowde free trading, and with safety.
Temper your tongue and meddle not with the Turks,
Their manners, nor Religion.
Take you heed sir
What colours you wear. Not two hours since there Lan∣ded
An English Pirats Whore with a greene apron,
And as she walked the streets, one of their Muftis
Wee call them Priests at Venice, with a Razor
Cuts it of Petticoat, Smock and all, and leaves her
As naked as my Nail: the young Fry wondering
What strange beast it should be. I escaped a scouring
My Mistress Buskepoynt, of that forbidden colour
Then tide my codpeece, had it been discovered
I had been caponde.
And had been well served;
Haste to the Shop and set my Wares in order
I will not long be absent?
Though I strive sir
To put of Melancholy, to which, you are ever
Too much inclined, it shall not hinder me
With my best care to serve you
I believe thee.
O welcome sir, stay of my steppes in this life,
And guide to all my blessed hopes hereafter.
What comforts sir? have your endeavours posper'd?
Have wee tired Fortunes malice with our sufferings?
Is she at length after so many frowns
Pleased to vouchafe one cheerful look upon vs?
You give too much to fortune, and your passions,
Ore which a wise man, if Religious, triumphs.
That name fools worship, and those tyrants which
Wee arm against our better part, our reason,
May add, but never take from our afflictions:
Sir as I am a sinful man, I can not
But like one suffer.
I exact not from you
A fortitude insensible of calamity,
To which the Saint's themselves have bowed and shown
They are made of flesh, and blood, all that I challenge
Is manly patience. Will you that were trained up
In a Religious School, where divine maxims
Scorning comparison, with moral precepts
Were daily taught you, bear your constancies trial
Not like Vitelli, but a Village nurse
With curses in your mouth: Tears in your eyes?
How poorly it shows in you?
I am Schooled sir,
And will hereafter to my utmost strength
Study to bee my self.
So shall you find me
Most ready to assist you; Neither have I
Slept in your great occasions since I left you
I have been at the Viceroys Court and presde
As far as they allovve a Christian entrance.
And something I have learned that may concern
The purpose of this journey.
Dear Sir what is it?
By the command of Asambeg, the Viceroy:
The City swells with barbarous Pomp and Pride
For the entertainment of stout Mustapha
The Bash of Aleppo, who in person
Comes to receive the niece of Amurah•
The fair Donusa for his bride.
I find not
How this may profit vs.
Pray you give me leave.
Among the rest that wait upon the Viceroy,
(Such as have under him command in Tunis.)
Who as you have often heard are all false Pirats,
I saw the shame of Venice and the scorn
Of all good men: The periurde Renegade
Antono Grimaldy;
Ha! his name
Is poison to me.
Yet again?
I have done sir.
This debauched villain: whom we ever thought•
(After his impious scorn done in Saint Marks
To me as I stood at the holy Altar)
The thief that ravished your fair sister from you,
The virtuous Pauline not long since,
(As I am truly given to understand)
Sold to the viceroy a fair Christian Virgin,
On whom, maugre his fierce and cruel nature
Asambeg dotes extremely.
Tic my sister
It must be she, my better Angel tells me
Tic poor Pauline. Farewell all disguises
Isle show in my revenge that I am Noble.
You are not mad?
No sir, my virtuous anger
Makes every vein an artery, I feel in me
The strength of twenty men, and being armed
With my good cause to wreak wronged innocence
I dare alone run to the viceroys Court
And with this Poniard before his face.
Dig out Grimaldies heart.
Is this Religious?
Would you have me tame now; Can I know my sister
Mewed up in his Serragli•, and in danger
Not alone to loose her honour, but her soul,
The hell-breed Villain by too? that has sold both
To black destruction, and not haste to send him
To the Devil his tutor? to be patient now,
Were in another name to play the Pander
To the Viceroys loose embraces, and cry aim
While he by force, or flattery compels her
To yield her fair name up to his foul lust,
And after turn Apostate to the faith
That she was breed in.
D'oe but give me hearing.
And you shall soon grant how ridiculous
This childish fury is. A wise man never
Attempts impossibilities; it is as easy
For any single arm to quell an Army.
As to effect your wishes; we come hither
To learn Paulinas faith, and to redeem her,
(Leave your revenge to heaven) I oft have told you
Of a Relic that I gave her, which has power
(If we may credit holy men's traditions)
To keep the owner free from violence:
This on her breast she wears, and does preserve
The virtue of it by her daily prayers.
So if she fall not by her own consent
Which it were sin to think: I fear no force.
Be therefore patient, keep this borrowed shape
Till time and opportunity present vs
With some fit means to see her, which performed,
Isle join with you in any desperate course
For her delivery.
You have Charmed me sir
And I obey in all things; Pray you pardon
The weakness of my passion.
And excuse it.
Be cheerful man for know that good intents
Are in the end Crowned with as fair events.
Have you seen the Christian Captive,
The great Bash is so enamourd of?
Yes an't please your Excellence
I took a full view of her, when she was
Presented to him.
And is she such a wonder
As tic reported?
She was drowned in tears then,
Which took much from her beauty, yet in spite
Of sorrow, she appeared the Mistress of
Most rare perfections; and though low of stature,
Her well proportioned limbs inuit affection;
And when she speaks, each syllable is musique
That does enchant the hearers. But your Highness
That are not to be paralleled, I yet never
Beheld her equal.
Come you flatter me,
But I forgive it, we that are borne great
Seldom distaste our servants, though they give vs
More then wee can pretend too. I have heard
That Christian Ladies live with much more freedom
Then such as are borne here. Our jealous Turks
Never permit their •air wives to be leene
But at the public Bannias, or the Mosques
And even then veiled, and guarded. Thou Carazie
Were borne in England, what's the cussed me there
Among your women? Come be free and merry
I am no severe Mistress, nor ha•t thou met with
A heavy bondage.
Heavy? I was made lighter
By two stone weight at least to be fit to •erue you.
But to your question Madame, women in England
For the most part live like Queens. Your Country Ladies
Have liberty to hake, to hunt, to feast:
To give free entertainment to all comers,
To talk, to kiss, there's no such thing known there
As an Italian girdle. Your City Dam•
Without leave wears the breeches, has her husband
At as much command as her Prentice, and if need be
Can make him Cuckold by her Fathers Copy.
But your court Lady?
She, I assure you Madame,
Knows nothing but her will, must be allowed
Her Foot-men, her Caroch, her Ushers, her Pages,
Her Doctor, Chaplines, and as I have heard
They are grown of late so learned that they maintain
A strange Position, which their Lords with all
Their wit cannot confute.
What's that I prithee?
Marry that it is not only fit but lawful,
Your Madame there, her much rest, and high feeding
Duly considered, should to ease her husband
Bee allowed a private frien•. They have drawn a Bill
To this good purpose, and the next assembly
Doubt not to pass it.
Wee enjoy no more
That are of the Oath•man race, though our Religio•
Allows all pleasure. I am dull, some Music
Take my Cheapens off. So, a lusty stray•e
Who knocks there?
Tic the Bash of Aleppo
Who humbly makes request he may present
His service to you.
Reach a chair. 〈◊〉
Receive him like our self, and not depart with
One piece of Ceremony, stare, and greatness
That may beget respect, and •••erence
In one that's borne our Vassal. Now admit him:
The place is sacred, and I am to Enter
The room where she abides, with such devotion
As Pilgrims pay at Macha, when they visit
The Tomb of our great Prophet.
Rise, the sign
That wee vouchafe his presence.
May those Powers
That raised the Othoman Empire, and still guard it,
Reward your Highness for this gracious favour
You throw upon your servant. It hath pleased
The most invincible, mightiest Amurath
(To speak his other titles would take from him)
That in himself does comprehend all greatness,
To make me the unworthy instrument
Of his command. Receive divinest Lady
This letter signed by his victorious hand,
And made Authentic• by the imperial Seal.
There when you find me mentioned, far be it from yo
To think it my ambition to presume
At such a happiness, which his povverfull will
From his great minds magnificence, not my merit
Hath showrd upon me. But if your consent
Join with his good opinion and allovvance
To per•it what his favours have begun,
I shall in my obsequiousness and duty
Endeavour to prevent all just complaints,
Which want of will to serve you, may call on me.
His sacred Majesty writes here that your valour
Against the Persian hath so won upon him
That there's no grace, or honour in his gift
Of which he can imagine you •nworthy.
And what's the greatest you can hope, or aim at,
It is his pleasure you should be received
Into his Royal Family, Provided
For•so far I am vnconfind, that I
Affect and like your person. I expect not
The Ceremony which he uses in
Bestowing of his Daughters, and his nieces.
As that he should present you for my slave,
To love you, if you pleased me: or deliver
A Poniard on my least dislike to kill you.
Such tyranuie and pride agree not with
My softer disposition. Let it suffice
For my first answer, that thus far I grace you.
•ereafter some time spent to make enquire
Of the good parts, and faculties of your mind
You shall hear further from me.
Though all torments
Really suffered, or in hell imaginde
By curious fiction, in one hours delay
Are wholly comprehended: I confess
That I stand bound in duty, not to check at
What ever you command, or please to impose
For trial of my patience.
Let vs find
Some other subject, too much of one Theme cloys me•
Is it a full Mart:
A confluence of all nations
Are met together? There's variety too
Of all that Merchants trafficque for.
I know not.
I feel a Virgins longing to descend
So far from mine own greatness, as to be
Thoughnot a buyer, yet a looker on
Their strange commodities.
If without a train
You dare be seen abroad? I'll dismiss mine.
And waite upon you as a common man,
And satisfy your wishes.
I embrace it.
Provide my veil; and at the Postern Gate
Convey vs out unseen: I trouble you.
It is my happiness you deign to command me.
What doe you lack, your choice China dishes,
your pure Venetian Crystal, of all sorts, of all neat and
new fashions, from the mirror of the madam, to the private
vtensile of her chamber-maide, and curious Pictures of
the rarest beauties of Europe: what doe you lack Gentle∣men?
Take heed I say, how ere it may appear
Impertinent, I must express my love:
My advise, and counsel. You are young
And may be tempted, and these Turkish Dames
Like English mastiues that increase their fierceness
By being chainde up, from the restraint of freedom
If lust once fire their blood from a fair object
Will run a course the fiends themselves would shake •
To enjoy their wanton ends.
Sir, you mistake me
I am too full of woe, to entertain
One thought of pleasure: though all Europes Queen•
Kneeled at my feet, and Cour•ed me: much less
To mix with such; Whose difference of faith
Must of necessity: (or I must grant
My self forgetful of all you have taught me)
Strangle such ba•e desires.
Be constant in
That resolution, I'll abroad again,
And learn as far as it is possible
What may concern Pauline? Some two hours
Shall bring me back.
All blessings wait upon you.
Cold doings, Sir, a Mart doe you call this? Slight
A pudding wife, or a Witch with a thrumbe Cap
That sells Ale under ground to such as come
To know their Fortunes, in a dead Vacation
Have ten to one more stirring.
Wee must be patient
Your seller by retayle ought to be angry
But when hoe's fingering money.
Here are company;
Defend me my good Angel, I behold
A Basilisk!
What doe you lack? what doe you lack? pure
dishes, clear Crystal glasses, a dumb Mistress to
make love too? What doe you lack gentlemen?
Thy Mother for a Bavvde, or if thou hast
A handsome one thy sister for a Whore,
Without these doe not tell me of your trash
Or I shall spoil your Market.
—Old Grimaldy?
Zounds wherefore doe wee put to Sea, or stand
The Raging winds aloft, or peace upon
The Some waives when they rage most? deride
The thunder of the enemies shot, board bold•lie
A Merchants ship for prize, though we behold
The desperate Gunner ready to give fire
And blow the deck up? Wherefore shake we off
Those scrupulous rags of charity, and conscience,
Invented only to keep Churchmen warm,
Or feed the hungry months of famished beggars;
But when we touch the shore to wallovve in
All sensual pleasures.
I but Noble Captain
To spare a little for an after clap
Were not improvidence.
Hang consideration:
When this is spent is not our ship the same?
Our courage too the same to fetch in more?
The earth where it is fertillest returns not
More then three harvests, whilst the glorious Sun
Posts through the Zodiac, and makes up the year:
But the Sea, which is our Mother, (that embraces
Both the rich Indies in her outstrecht arms)
Yields every day a crop if we dare reap it.
No, no my Mates, let Tradesmen think of thrift,
And Usurers hoard up, let our expense
Be as our comings in are without bounds:
We are the Neptunes of the Ocean,
And such as trastique, shall pay sacrifice
Of their best lading; Isle have this Canvas
Your boy vveares lined with Tissue, and the cates
You taste, served up in gold; though we carouse
The tears of Orphans in our Greekish wines,
The sighs of undone Widows, paying for
The musique bought to cheer vs; ravished Virgins
To slavery sold for Coin to feed our riots,
We will have no compunction.
Doe you hear sir,
We have paid for our Ground?
Humh.
And humh too,
For all your big words, get you further off,
And hinder not the prospect of our shop
Or—
What will you doe?
Nothing sir, but pray
Your worship to give me hansell.
By the ears,
Thus sir, by the ears.
Hold, hold.
You'• still be prating.
Come let's be drunk? then each man to his whore,
Slight how doe you look, you had best go find a Corner
To pray in, and repent. Doe, doe, and cry
It will show fine in Pirats.
Wee must follow
Or he will spend our shares;
I fought for mine.
Nor am I so precise but I can drab too:
Wee will not sit out for our parts,
Agreed.
The devil gnaw off his fingers, if he were
In London among the clubs, up went his heals
For striking of a Prentice. What doe you lack,
What doe you lack gentlemen.
I wonder how the Viceroy can endure
The insolence of this fellow.
He receives profit
From the Prizes he brings in, and that excuses
What ever he commits? Ha, what are these!
They seem of rank and quality, observe 'em.
What doe you lack! see what you please to buy,
Wares of all sorts most honourable Madonna.
Peace sir, make no noise, these are not people
To be jested with.
Is this the Christians custom
In the venting their commodities.
Yes best Madame
But you may please to keep your way, heere's nothing,
But toys, and trifles, not worth your observing.
Yes, for varieties sake pray you show vs, friends,
The chiefest of your Wares.
Your Ladyships servant;
And if in worth or Title you are more,
My ignorance plead my pardon.
Hee speaks well.
Take down the looking glass: here is a mirror
Steelde so exactely, neither taking from
Nor flattering the object, it returns
To the beholder, that Narcissus might
(And never grow enamourd of himself:)
View his fair feature in it.
Poetical too.
Here China dishes to serve in a Banquet,
Though the volouptus Persian sate a guest.
Here Crystal glasses, such as Ganymede
Did fill with Nectar to the Thunderer
When he drank to Alcides, and received him
In the fellowship of the gods: true to the owners•
Corinthian plate studded with Diamonds,
Concealed oft deadly poison; This pure metal
So innocent is, and faithful to the Mistress
Or Master that possesses it: that rather
Then hold one drop that's venomous, of it self
It flies in pieces, and deludes the Traitor.
How movingly could this fellow treat upon
A worthy subject, that finds such discourse
To grace a trifle!
Heere's a Picture Madame
The master pecce of Michael Angel•,
Our great Italian workman; heere's another
So perfect at all parts that had Pigmalion
Se•no this, his prayers had been made to Venus,
To have given it life, and his Carved ivory Image
By poets ne'er remembered. They are indeed
The rarest beauties of the Christian world
And no where to be equalled.
You are partial
In the cause of those you favour I believe,
I instantly could show you one, to theirs
Not much inferior.
With your pardon Madame
I am incredculous.
Can you match me this!
What wonder look I on! I'll search aboue
And suddenly attend you.
Are you amazed
•e bring you to your self.
Ha• what's the matter!
My masters ware? We are undone! O strange!
A Lady to turn rorer, and break glasses
Tic time to shut up shop then.
You seem moved.
If any Language of these Christian dogs
Have called your anger on, in a frown show it
And they are dead already.
The offence
Looks not so far. The foolish p•ultrie fellow
Showed me some trifles, and demanded of me
For what I valued at so many aspers,
A thousand Ducats. I confess he moved me;
Yet I should wrong my self should such a beggar
Receive least loss from me.
Is it no more?
No, I assure you. Bid him bring his bill
To morrow to the Palace and enquire
For one Donusa:
That word gives him passage through all the guard;
Say there he shall receive full satisfaction.
Now when you please
I waite you.
We must not know them, lets shift off &amp; vanish.
The swines Pox overtake you, theres a curse
For a Turk that eats no Hogs flesh.
Is she gone:
Yes you may see her handy-worke.
No matter.
Said she ought else?
That you should wait upon her
And there receive Court payment, and to pass
The guards, she bids you only say you come
To one Donusa.
How! remove the wares
Doe it without reply. The Sultans niece!
I have heard among the Turks for any Lady
To show her face bare, argues love, or speaks
Her deadly hatred. What should I fear, my fortune
Is sunk so low: there cannot fall upon me
Ought worth my shunning. I will run the hazard:
She may be a means to free distressed Pauline.
Or if offended, at the worst, to die
Is a full period to calamity.
In the name of wonder! Manto, what hath my Lady
Done with her self since yesterday.
I know not.
Malicious men report we are all guided
In our affections by a wandering Planet?
But such a sudden change in such a person,
May stand for an example to confirm
Their false assertion.
Shoe's now pettish, froward,
Musique, discourse, observance tedious to her.
She slept not the last night: and yet prevented
The rising Sun in being up before him.
Called for a costly Bath, then willed the rooms
Should be per•um'd; Ransacked her Cabinets
For her choice, and richest Jewels: and appear•s now
Like Ci••hia in full glory, waited on
By the fairest of the Stars.
Can you guess the reason,
Why the Aga of the Janissaries, and he
That guards the entrance of the inmost port
Were called before her.
They are both her creatures,
And by her grace prefer'de, but I am ignorant
To what purpose they were sent for.
Here she comes.
Full of sad thoughts: we must stand further off.
What a frown was that!
Forbear.
I pity her.
What Magicque hath transformed me from my self?
Where is my Virgin pride? How have I lost
My boasted freedom? what new fire burns up
My scorched entrails. What unknown desires
Invade, and take possession of my soul;
All virtuous objects vanished? Have I stood
The shock of fierce temptations, stopped mine ears
Against all Siren notes lust ever sung,
To draw my bark of chastity (that with wonder
Hath kept, a constant, and an honoured course.)
Into the gulf of a deserved ill fame?
Now fall unpitied? And in a moment
With mine own hands dig up a grave to bury
The monumental heap of all my years,
Employed in Noble actions? O my fate!
But there is no resisting. I obey thee
Imperious god of love, and willingly
Put mine own Petterson, to grace thy triumph;
It were therefore more then cruelty in thee
To use me like a tyranne. What poor means
Must I make use of now? And flatter such,
To whom; till I betrayed my liberty,
One gracious look of mine, would have erected
An altar to my service. How now Manto!
My ever careful woman, and Carazie
Thou hast been faithful too.
I dare not call
My life mine own since it is yours, but gladly
Will part with it: when ere you shall command me,
And think I fall a Martyr, so my death
May give life to your pleasures.
But vouchsafe
To let me understand what you desire
Should be effected: I will undertake it
And curse my self for Cowardice if I paste
To ask a reason why.
I am comforted,
In the tender of your service, but shall be
Confirmed in my full joys, in the performance
Yet trust me: I will not impose upon you
But what you stand ingagde for, to a Mistress,
(Such as I have been to you.) All I ask
Is faith, and secrecy.
Say but you doubt me,
And to secure you I'll cut out my tongue
I am libde in the breech already.
Doe not hinder
Your self by these delays.
Thus then I Whisper
Mine own shame to you.—O that I should blush
To speak what I so much desire to doe!
And further—
Is this all.
Think it not base
Although I know the office undergoes
A course construction.
Course? it is but procuring
A smock employment, which has made more Knights,
In a Country I could name, then twenty years
Of service in the field.
You have my ends.
Which say you have arrived at, be not wanting
To your self, and fear not vs.
I know my burden
I'll bear it with delight,
Talk not, but doe.
O Love what poor shifts thou dost force vs too!
She was ever our good Mistress, and our maker,
And should we check at a little hazard for her,
Wee were unthankful.
I dare pawn my head,
Tic some disguised Minion of the Court,
Sent from great Amurath, to learn from her
The Viceroys actions.
That concerns not vs:
His fall may be our rise, what ere he bee
He passes through my guards.
And mine, provided
Hee give the word.
To •aynt now being thus far,
Would argue me of Cowardice.
Stand: the word.
Or being a Christian to press thus far,
Forfeits thy life.
Donusa.
Pas•e in peace.
What a privilege her name bears.
Tic wondrous strange!
(The Captain of the Ianiz••ies,) If the great Officer
The guardian of the inner port deny not,
Thy warrant: Speak,
Or thou art dead.
Donusa.
That protects thee, without fear, Enter.
So: discharge the watch.
Though he hath past the Aga, and chief Porter
This cannot be the man.
By her description I am sure it is.
O women, women•
What are you? a great Lady dote upon
A Haberdasher of small wares•
Pish, thou hast none.
No, if I had I might have served the turn:
This tic to want munition when a man
Should make a breach and Enter.
Sir, you are welcome:
Think what tic to be happy and possess it.
Perfume the Rooms there, and make way.
Let Musique with choice notes entertain the man,
The Princess now purposes to honour.
I am ravished:
Sing ore the Ditty, that I last composde
Upon my Loue-sicke passions suit, your Voice
To the Musique thats placed yonder, we shall hear you
With more delght and pleasure.
I obey you.
Is not this Tempe, or the blessed shades,
Where innocent Spirits reside? Or doe I dream,
And this a heavenly vision? Howsoever
It is a sight too glorious to behold
For such a vvretch as I am.
He is daunted.
Speak to him Madam, cheer him up, or you
Destroy what you have builded.
Would I were furnished
With his artillery, and if I stood
Gaping as he does, hang me.
That I might ever dream thus.
Banish amazement,
You, wake; your debtor tells you so, your debtor,
And to assure you that I am a substance
And no aaeriall figure, thus I raise you.
Why doe you shake? My soft touch brings no Ague,
No biting frost is in this palm: Nor are
My looks like to the Gorgons head, that turn
Men into Statues, rather they have power
(Or I have been abused) where they bestow
Their influence (let me prove it truth in you)
To g•ue to dead men motion.
Can this be?
May I believe my senses? Dare I think
I have a memory? Or that you are
That excellent creature, that of late disdain'de not
To look on my poor trifles.
I am she.
The owner of that blessed name Donusa,
Which like a potent charm, although pronounced
By my profane, but much vnworthyer tongue,
Hath brought me safe to this forbidden place,
Where Christian yet ne'er trod.
I am the same.
And to what end, great Lady pardon me,
That I presume to ask, did your command
Command me hither? or what am I? to whom
You should vouchsafe your favours; nay, your angers?
If any wilde or vncollected speech
Offensively delivered, or my doubt
Of your unknown perfections, have displeased you,
You wrong your indignation, to pronounce
Your self my sentence: to have seen you only,
And to have touched that fortune-making hand,
Will with delight weigh down all tortures, that
A flinty hangmans rage could execute,
Or rigide tyranny command with pleasure.
How the abundance of good flowing to thee,
Is wronged in this simplicity: and these bounties
Which all our •astern Kings have kneeled in vain for,
Doe by thy ignorance, or wilful fear,
Meet with a false construction. Christian, know
(For till thou art mine by a nearer name,
That title though abhord here, takes not from
Thy entertainment) that tic not the fashion
Among the greatest and the fairest Dames,
This Turkish Empire gladly owes, and bows to:
To punish where theres no offence, or nourish
Displeasures against those, without who•e mercy
They part with all felicity. Prithee be wise,
And gently understand me; Doe not force her
That ne'er knew ought but to command, not ere read
The elements of affection, but from such
As gladly sud to her, in the infancy
Of her new borne desires, to be at once
Importunate, and immodest.
Did I know.
Great Lady your commands, or to what purpose
This personated passion tends, (since it were
A crime in me deserving death, to think
It is your own: I should to make you sport
Take any shape you please to impose upon me:
And with joy strive to serve you.
Sport? thou art cruel,
If that thou can interpret my descent,
From my high birth and greatness? But to be
A part in which I truly act my self.
And I must hold thee for a dull spectator
If it stir not affection, and inuit
Compassion for my sufferings. Be thou taught
By my example, to make satisfaction
For wrongs unjustly offered. Willingly
I doe confess my fault; • iniurd thee
In some poor petty trifles; Thus I pay for
The trespass I did to thee. Here recei•e
These bags stuffed full of our imperial coin,
Or if this payment be too light, take here
These Iems for which the slavish Indian dive•
To the bottom of the Maine? Or if thou scorn
These as base dross (which take but common minds)
But fancy any honour in my gift
(Which is unbounded as the Sultans Power)
And bee possessed of't.
I am overwhelmed:
With the weight of happiness you throw upon me.
Nor can it fall in my imagination,
What wrong I ere have done you: and much less
How like a Royal Merchant to return
Your great magnificence.
They are degrees,
Not ends of my intended favours to thee.
These seeds of bounty I yet scatter on
A glebe I have not tried, but be thou thankful
The harvest is to come.
What can be added
To that which I already have received,
I cannot comprehend.
The tender of
Myself. Why dost thou start! and in that gift,
Full restitution of that Virgin freedom
Which thou hast robed me of. Yet I profess
I so far prize the lovely thief that stole it,
That were it possible thou coldest restore
What thou unwittingly hast ravished from me,
I should refuse the present.
How I shake
In my constant resolution• and my flesh
Rebellious to my better part now tells me,
As if it were a strong defence of frailty.
A Hermit in a desert trenchd with prayers
Could not resist this battery.
Thou an Italian?
Nay more I know it, a natural Venetian,
Such as are Courtiers borne to please fair Ladies,
Yet come thus slowly on?
Excuse me Madame,
What imputation so ere the world
Is pleased to lay upon vs: in my self
I am so innocent that I know not what tic
That I should offer.
By instinct I'll teach thee,
And with such ease as love makes me to ask it.
When a young Lady wrings you by the hand thus,
Or with an amorous touch presses your foot
Looks babies in your eyes, plays with your locks,
Doe not you find without a tutors help
What tic she looks for.
I am grown already
Skilful in the mystery.
Or if thus she kiss you,
Then tast's your lips again.
That latter blow
Has beat all chaste thoughts from me.
Say she points to
Some private room, the Sun beams never enters,
Provoking dishes, passing by to heighten
Declined appetite, active Music ushering
Your fainting steps, the waiters too as borne dumb,
Not daring to look on you.
Though the Devil
Stood by, and rorde, I follow: now I find
That Virtue's but a word, and no sure guard
If set upon by beauty, and reward.
The Devils in him • think.
Let him be damned too
Isle look on him though he stard as wild as hell,
Nay Isle go near to tell him to his teeth
If he mends not suddenly, and proves more thankful,
We doe him too much service, were it not for shame now
I could turn honest and forswear my trade,
Which next to being trust up at the maine yard
By some low country butterbox, I hate
As deadly as I doe fasting, or long grace
When meat cools on the table.
But take heed,
You know his violent nature.
Let his Whores
And Catamites, know it, I understand my self,
And how unmanly tic to sit at home
And rail at vs, that run abroad all hazards:
If every week we bring not home new pillage,
For the fatting his Seraglio.
Here he comes.
How terrible he looks?
To such as fear him:
The viceroy Asambeg were he the Sultans self
He will let vs know a reason for his fury,
Or we must take leave without his allowance
To be merry with our ignorance.
Mahomets hell
Light on you all, you chrouch, and cringe now, where
Was the terror of my just frowns, when you suffered
Those thieves of Malta, almost in our harbour
To board a ship, and bear her safely off,
While you stood idle lookers on?
The odds
In the men and shipping, and the suddenness
Of their departure yielding vs no leisure
To send forth others to relieve our own,
Deterd vs mighty Sir.
Deterde you cowards?
How durst you only entertain the knowledge
Of what fear was, but in the not performance
Of our command? in me great Amurah spake,
My voice did echo to your ears his thunder,
And wild you like so many Seaborne-Tritons,
Armed only with the Trumpets of your courage,
To swim up to her, and like Remoras.
Hanging upon her keel, to stay her flight
Till rescue sent from vs, had fetched you off,
You think you are safe now; who durst but dispute it
Or make it questionable, if this moment
I charged you from you hanging cliff, that glasses
His rugged forehead in the neighbour lake,
To throw your selves down headlong? or like fago•s
To fill the ditches of defended Forts,
While on your backs we marched up to the breac
That would not I.
Ha?
Yet I dare as much
As any of the Sultans boldest sons,
(Whose heaven, and hell, hang on his frown, or smile,)
His vvarlike Janissaries.
Add one syllable more
Thou doest pronounce upon thy self a sentence
That earthquake-like will swallow the
Let it open,
Isle stand the hazard, those contemned thieves
Your fellow Pirats Sir, the bold Malteze
Whom with your looks you think to quell, at Rhodes
Laughed at great Solymans anger: and if treason
Had not delivered them into his power,
Hee had grown old in glory as in years.
At that so fatal siege, or risne with shame
His hopes, and threats deluded.
Our great Prophet
How have I lost my anger, and my Power•
Find it and use it on thy flatterers:
And not upon thy friends that dare speak truth,
These Knights of Malta but a handful to
Your armies that drink rivers up, have stood
Your fury at the height, and with their crosses
Struck pale your horned moons; These men of Malta
Since I took pay from you, I have met and fought with.
Upon advantage too. Yet to speak truth
By the soul of honour, I have ever found them
As provident to direct, and bold to doe
As any trained up in your discipline:
Ravished from other nations.
I perceive
The lightning in his fiery looks, the cloud
Is broke already.
Think not therefore sir,
That you alone are Giants, and such Pigmies
You war upon.
Villain Isle make thee know
Thou hast blasphemde the Ottoman power, and safer
At noon day might have given fire to St Marks
Your proud Venetian Temple. Ceize upon him;
I am not so near reconcild to him
To bid him die: that were a benefit
The dog's unworthy off, to our use confiscate
All that he stands possessed of: Let him taste
The misery of want, and his vain riots
Like to so many walking Ghosts affright him
Where ere he sets his desperate foot. Who is it
That does command you?
Is this the reward
For all my service, and the rape I made
On fair Pauline.
Drag him hence, he dies
That dallies but a minute.
What's become
Of our shares now Master.
Would he had been borne dumb:
The beggars cure, patience is all that's left vs.
It was but intemperance of speech, excuse him
Let me prevail so far. Fame gives him out
For a deserving fellow.
At Aleppo
I durst not press you so far, give me leave
To use my own will and command in Tunis
And if you please my privacy.
I will see you
When this high wind's blown ore.
So shall you find me
Ready to doe you service. Rage now leave me
Sterne looks, and all the ceremonious forms
Attending on dread Majesty, fly from
Transformed Asambeg, why should I hug
So near my hart, what leads me to my prison?
Where she that is inthrald commands her keeper,
And robs me of the fierceness I was borne with.
Stout men quake at my frowns, and in return
I tremble at her softness. Base Grimaldi
But only named Pauline, and the charm
Had almost choked my fury ere I could
Pronounce his sentence. Would when first I saw her
Mi•• eyes had met with lightning, and in place
Of hearing her enchanting tongue, the shrikes
Of Mandrakes had made music to my slumbers,
For now I only walk a loving dream
And but to my dishonour never vvake,
And yet am blind, but when I see the object,
And madly dote on it. Appear bright spark
Of all perfection: any si•isle
Borrowed from Diamonds, or the fairest stars
To help me to express, how dear I prize
The unmatched graces, will rise up and chide me
For poor detraction.
I despise thy flatteries
Thus spit at'em, and scorn 'em, and being armed
In the assurance of my innocent virtue
I stamp upon all doubts, all fears, all tortures
Thy barbarous cruelty, or vvhat's vvorse, thy dotage
(The worthy parent of thy jealousy)
Can shower upon me.
If these bitter taunts
Ravish me from my self, and make me think
My greedy ears receive Angelical sounds,
How would this tongue tunde to a loving note
Invade, and take possession of my soul
Which then I durst not call mine own.
Thou art false,
Falser then thy religion. Doe but think me
Something aboue a beast; nay more, a monster,
Would fright the Sun to look on, and then tell me
If this base usage, can inuit affection?
If to be mewed up, and excluded from
Humane society; the use of pleasures;
The necessary, not superfluous duties
Of servants to discharge those offices,
I blush to name.
Of servants? can you think
That I that dare not trust the eye of Heaven
To look upon your beauties, that deny
My self the happiness to touch your pureness
Will ere consent an Eunuch, or bought handmaid
Shall once approach you? there is something in you
That can work Miracles, or I am consent,
Dispose and alter sexes. To my wrong
In spite of nature. I will be your nurse,
Your woman, your physician, and your fool,
Till with your free consent, which I have vowed
Never to force, you grace me with a name
That shall supply all these.
What is it?
Your husband.
My hangman when thou please.
Thus I guard me,
Against your further angers.
Which shall reach thee
Though I were in the Center.
Such a spirit
In such a small proportion I ne'er read of
Which time must alter, ravish her I dare not
The magique that she wears about her neck,
I think defends her, this devotion paid
To this sweet Saint, mistress of my sower payne
Tic fit I take mine own rough shape again.
I think hoe's lost.
Tic ten to one of that,
I ne'er knew Citizen turn Courtier yet,
But he lost his credit, though he saved himself
Why, look you sir, there are so many lobbies,
Out offices, and disputations here
Behind these Turkish hangings, that a Christian
Hardly gets off but circumcised.
I am troublde
Troublde exceedingly. Ha! what are these?
One by his rich suit should bee some french Em∣bassador
For his train I think they are Turks.
Peace, be not seen.
You are now past all the guards, and vndiscouerd
You may return.
There's for your pains, forget not
My humblest service to the best of Ladies.
Deserve her favour sir, in making haste
For a second entertainment.
Doe not doubt me,
I shall not live till then.
The train is vanished
They have done him some good office hoe's so free
And liberal of his gold. Ha, doe I dream,
Or is this mine own natural Master;
Tic he,
But strangely metamorphosde. You have made sir.
A prosperous voyage, heaven grant it be honest,
I shall rejoice then too.
You make him blush
To talk of honesty, you were but now
In the giving vain, and may think of Gazette
Your worships prentice.
There's gold, be thou free too
And Master of my shop, and all the wares
Wee brought from Venice.
Riuo then.
Dear sir
This place affords not privacy for discourse
But I can tell you wonders, my rich habit
Deserves least admiration; theirs nothing
That can fall in the compass of your wishes
Though it were to redeem a thousand slaves
From the Turkish galleys, or at home to erect
Some pious work, to shame all Hospitals,
But I am master of the means.
Tic strange.
As I vvalke Isle tell you more.
Pray you a word Sir,
And then I will put on. I have one boon more.
What is it? speak freely•
Thus then, as I am Master
Of your Shop, and wares, pray you help me to some trucking
With your last she customer, though she crack my best piece
I will endure it with patience.
Leave your prating.
I may, you have been doing, we will doe too.
I am amazed, yet will nor blame, nor chide you,
Till you inform me further. Yet must say
They steer not the right course, nor traffic well,
That seek a passage to reach Heaven, through Hell.
When said he, he would come again?
He swore,
Short Minutes should be tedious Ages to him,
Until the tender of his second service,
So much he seemed transported with the first.
I am sure I was. I charge thee Manto tell me
By all my favours, and my bounties truly
Whether thou art a Virgin, or like me
Hast forfeited that name.
A Virgin Madame?
At my years being a wayting-woman, and in Court to?
That were miraculous. I so long since lost
That barren burden, I almost forget
That ever I was one.
And could thy friends
Read in thy face, thy ma•denhead gone, that thou
Had parted with it?
No indeed. I past
For currant many years after, till by fortune,
Long and continued practise in the sport
Blew up my deck, a husband then was found out
By my indulgent father, and to the world
All was made whole again. What need you fear then
That at your pleasure may repair your honour
Durst any envious, or malicious tongue,
Presume to taint it?
How now?
Madam, the Bash
Humbly desires access.
If it had been
My neat Italian, thou had met my wishes.
Tell him we would be private.
So I did,
But he is much importunate.
Best dispatch him
His lingering here else will deter the other,
From making his approach.
His entertainment
Shall not inuit a second visit, go
Say we are pleased.
All happiness.
Bee sudden
T'was saucy rudeness in you sir to press
On my retirements, but ridiculous folly
To wast the time that might be better spent
In complemental wishes.
There's a cooling
For his hot encounter.
Come you here to stare?
If you have lost your tongue, and use of speech,
Resign your government, there's a mutes place void
In my uncles Court I hear, and you may work me
To write for your preferment.
This is strange!
I know not Madam, what neglect of mine
Has called this scorn upon me.
To the purpose
My will's a reason, and we stand not bound
To yield account to you.
Not of your angers,
But with erected ears I should hear from you
The story of your good opinion of me
Confirmed by love, and favours.
How deserved?
I have considered you from head to foot,
And can find nothing in that wainscot face,
That can teach me to dote, nor am I taken
With your grimm aspect, or toadepoole-like complexion,
Those scars you glory in, I fear to look on;
And had much rather hear a merry tale
Then all your battles won with blood and sweat,
Though you belch forth the stink too, in the service,
And swear by your Moustaches all is true.
You are yet too rough for me, purge and take physic,
Purchase perfumers, get me some French taylor,
To new create you; the first shape you were made with
Is quite worn out, let your barber wash your face too,
You look yet like a bugbear to fright children,
Till when I take my leave, wait me Carazie.
Stay you my Ladies Cabinet key.
How's this sir?
Stay and stand quietly, or you shall fall else,
Not to firk your belly up flounder like, but never
To rise again. Offer but to unlock
These doors that stop your fugitive tongue (observe me)
And by my fury, I'll fix there this bolt
To bar thy speech for ever. So, be safe now
And but resolve me, not of what I doubt
But bring assurance to a thing believed,
Thou make thy self a fortune, not depending
On the uncertain favours of a Mistress,
But art thy self one. I'll not so far question
My judgment, and observance, as to ask
Why I am slighted, and contemnde, but in
Whose favour it is done. I that have read
The copious volumes of all women's falsehood,
Commented on by the heart breaking groans
Of abused lovers, all the doubts washde off
With fruitless tears, the Spiders oobweb veil
Of arguments, allege in their defence,
Blown off with sighs of desperate men, and they
Appearing in their full deformity:
Know that some other hath displanted me,
With her dishonour. Has she given it up?
Confirm it in two syllables?
She has.
I cherish thy confession thus, and thus,
Bee mine, again I court thee thus, and thus
Now prove but constant to my ends.
By all—
Enough, I dare not doubt thee. O land Corco∣diles
Made of Egyptian stem, accursed women!
But tic no time to rail: come my best Manto.
Sir, as you are my confessor, you stand bound
Not to reveal what ever I discover
In that Religious way: nor dare I doubt you.
Let it suffice, you have made me see my follies,
And wrought perhaps compunction; For I would not
Appear an Hyppocrite. But when you impose
A penance on me, beyond flesh, and blood
To undergo: you must instruct me how
To put off the condition of a man:
Or if not pardon, at the least, excuse
My disobedience. Yet despair not sir,
For though I take mine own way, I shall doe
Something that may hereafter to my glory,
Speak me your Scholar.
I enjoin you not
To go, but send.
That were a petty trial
Not worth one so long taught, and exercised
Under so grave a master. Reverend Francisco
My friend, my father, in that word, my all;
Rest confident, you shall hear something of me
That will redeem me in your good opinion,
Or judge me lost for ever. Send Gazette
(She shall give order that hee may have entrance)
To acquaint you with my fortunes.
Go and prosper,
Holy Saints guide and strengthen thee. Howsoever
As my endeavours are, so may they find
Gracious acceptance.
Now you doe not roar sir
You speak not tempests, nor take eare-rent from
A poor shopkeeper. Doe you remember that sir,
I vveare your marks here still.
Can this be possible?
All vvonders are not ceased then.
Doe, abuse me,
Spit on me, spurn me, pull me by the nose,
Thrust out these fiery eyes, that yesterday
Would have looked thee dead.
O save me sir.
Fear nothing,
I am tame, and quiet, there's no wrong can force me
To remember what I was. I have forgot,
•ere had ireful fierceness, a steelde heart,
Insensible of compassion to others,
Nor is it fit that I should think my self
Worth mine own pity, Oh.
Grows this deiection,
From his disgrace doe you say?
Why hes cassherde sir,
His ships, his goods, his liuery-puncks confiscate,
And there is such a punishment laid upon him,
The miserable rogue must steal no more,
Nor drink, nor drab.
Does that torment him?
O Sir!
Should the State take order to bar men of acres,
From those two laudable recreations,
Drinking, and vvhoring, how should Panders purchase,
Or thrifty Whores build Hospitals? slid if I
That since I am made free, may write my self,
A City gallant, should forfeit two such charters
I should be stoned to death, and ne'er be pitied,
By the li•eries of those companies.
You'll be whipped sir,
If you bridle not your tongue. Haste to the Palace
Your Master looks for you.
My quondam Master,
Rich sons forget they ever had poor fathers,
In servants tic more pardonable; as a companion,
Or so, I may consent, but is there hope sir,
He has got me a good chapwoman? pray you write
A word or two in my behalf.
Out rascal.
I feel some insurrections.
Hence.
I vanish.
Why should I study a defence, or comfort?
In whom black guilt, and misery if balanced,
I know not which would turn the scale, look upward
I dare not, for should it but be believed,
That I (did deep in hells most horrid colours,)
Should dare to hope for mercy, it would leave
No check or feeling, in men innocent
To catch at sins, the devil ne'er taught mankind yet,
No, I must downward, downward, though repentance
Could borrow all the glorious wings of grace,
My mountainous weight of sins, would crack their pini∣once,
And sink them to hell with me.
Dreadful! hear me,
Thou miserable man.
Good sir deny not,
But that there is no punishment beyond
Damnation.
Yonder he is, I pity him.
Take comfort Captain, we live still to serve you,
Serve me? I am a devil already, leave me,
Stand further off, you are blasted else, I have heard
Schoolmen affirm mans body is composed
Of the four elements, and as in league together
They nourish life; So each of them affords
Liberty to the soul, when it grows weary
Of this fleshie prison. Which shall I make choice of?
The fire? n (I shall feel that hereafter)
The earth will not receive me• Should some whirlwind
Snatch me into the ayre: and I hang there,
Perpetual plagues would dwell upon the earth.
And those superior bodies that power down
Their cheerful influence deny to pass it,
Through those vast regions I have infected.
The (Sea) I that is justice there, I plod up
Mischief as deep as Hell there: there l'le hide
This cursed lump of clay may it turn Rocks
Where plummets weight could never reach the sands.
And grind the ribs of all such barks as press
The Oceans breast in my unlawful course.
I haste then to thee, let thy ravenous womb
Whom all things else deny, be now my tomb.
Follow him and restrain him.
Let this stand
For an example to you. I'll provide
A lodging for him, and apply such cures
To his wounded conscience, as heaven hath lent me.
Hoe's now my second care: and my profession
Binds me to teach the desperate to repent
As far as to confirm the innocent.
Your pleasure,
I'will exact your private ear,
And when you have received it, you will think
Too many know it.
Leave the room, but bee
Within our call. Now sir, what burning secret brings you
(With which it seems you are turned Cinders)
To quench in my advise, or power?
The fire
Will rather reach you.
Me?
And consume both,
For tic impossible to be put out
But with the blood of those that kindle it:
And yet one vial of it is so precious,
It being borrowed from the Ottoman spring,
That better tic I think, both we should perish
Then prove the desperate means that must restrain it,
From spreading further.
To the point, and quickly.
These winding circumstances in relations
Seldom environ truth.
Truth Asambeg?
Truth Mustapha. I said it, and add more
You touch upon a string that to my ear,
Do's sound Donusa.
You then understand
Who tic I aim at.
Take heed Mustapha,
Remember what she is, and whose we are;
Tic her neglect perhaps, that you complain of,
And should you practise to revenge her scorn,
With any plot to taint her in her honour,
Hear me.
I will be heard first, there's no tongue
A subject owes, that shall out thunder mine.
Well take your way.
I then again repeat it
If Mustapha dares with malicious breath
(On jealous suppositions) presume
To blast the blossom of Donusas Fame
Because he is denied a happiness
Which men of equal, nay of more desert,
Have sued in vain for.
More?
More. It was I spake it,
The Bash of Natolia and my self
Were Rivals for her, either of vs brought
More Victories, more Trophies, to plead for vs
To our great Master, then you dare lay claim to,
Yet still by his allowance she was left
To her election, each of vs owed nature
As much for outward form, and inward worth
To make way for vs to her grace and favour,
As you brought with you. We were heard, repulsed
Yet thought it no dishonour to sit down,
With the disgrace; if not to force affection,
May merit such a name.
Have you done yet?
Be therefore more then sure the ground on which
You raise your accusation, may admit
No undermining of defence in her,
For if with pregnant and apparent proofs•
Such as may force a judge, more then inclined
Or partial in her cause to swear her guilty;
You win not me to set off your belief,
Neither our ancient friendship, nor the rites,
Of sacred hospitality (to which
I would not offer violence) shall protect you:
Now when you please.
I will not dwell upon
Much circumstance, yet cannot but profess
With the assurance of a loyalty,
Equal to yours, the reverence I owe,
The Sultan, and all such his blood makes sacred;
That there is not a vein of mine which yet is
Vnemptied in his service, but this moment
Should freely open, so it might wash off
The stains of her dishonour, could you think?
Or though you saw it credit your own eyes?
That she, the wonder and amazement of
Her sex, the pride, and glory of the empire,
That hath disdained you, slighted me, and boasted
A frozen coldness which no appetite,
Or height of blood could thaw, should now so far
Be hurried with the violence of her lust,
As in it burying her high birth and fame,
Basely descend to fill a Christians arms
And to him yield her Virgin honour up,
Nay sue to him to take it.
A Christian?
Temper
Your admiration: and what Christian think you?
No Prince disguised; no man of mark, nor honour,
No daring vndertaker in our service,
But one whose lips her foot should scorn to touch,
A poor Mechanicke-Pedler.
Hee?
Nay more,
Whom doe you think she made her scout, nay bawd,
To find him out but me? What place makes choice of
To wallow in her foul and loathsome pleasures,
But in the palace? Who the instruments
Of close conveyance, but the captain of
Your guard the Aga, and that man of trust
The warden of the inmost port? I'll prove this,
And though I fail to show her in the act,
Glued like a neighing Gannet to her Stallion,
Your incredulity shall be convinced
With proofs I blush to think on.
Never yet,
This flesh felt such a fever, by the life
And fortune of great Amura'h, should our prophet
(Whose name I bow to) in a vision speak this,
T'would make me doubtful of my faith: lead on,
And when my eyes, and ears, are like yours, guilty,
My rage shall then appear, for I will doe
Something; but what, I am not yet determined.
They are private to their wishes,
Doubt it not.
A pretty structure this! a court doe you call it?
Valted and arched: O here has been old iumbling
Behind this arras.
Prithee let's have some sport,
With this fresh Codshead.
I am out of tune,
But doe as you please. My conscience• tush the hope
Of liberty throws that burden off,
I must go watch, and make discovery.
He's musing,
And will talk to himself, he cannot hold,
The poor foole's ravished.
I am in my masters clothes,
They fit me to a hair too, let but any
Indifferent gamester measure vs inch, by inch,
Or vvaigh vs by the standard, I may pass
I have been proved, and proved again, true mettle.
How he surveys himself.
I have heard that some
Have fooled themselves at Court into good fortunes,
That never hoped to thrive by wit in the City,
Or honesty in the Country. If I doe not
Make the best laugh at me, he weep for my self,
If they give me hearing. Tic resolve•d In• try
What may be done. By your favour •ir, I pray you
Were you borne a Courtier?
No sir, why doe you ask?
Because I thought that none could be preferred,
But such as were begot there.
O sir! many, and howsoever you are a Citizen borne,
Yet if your mother were a handsome woman,
And ever longed to see a Mask at Court,
It is an even lay but that you had
A Courtier to your Father; and I think so;
You bear your self so sprightly.
It may be,
But pray you sir, had I such an itch upon me
To change my copy, is there hope a place
May be had here for money?
Not without it
That I dare warrant you.
I have a pretty stock,
And would not have my good parts undiscovered,
What places of credit are there?
There's your Beglerbeg.
By no means that, it comes to near the beggar
And most prove so that come there.
Or your Sanzacke.
Saus-iacke fie none of that.
Your Chiaus.
Not that.
Chief Gardiner.
Out upon it,
Twill put me mind my Mother was an herb-woman,
What is your place I pray you?
Sir an Euenuch.
An Euenuch! very fine, I faith, an Euenuch!
And what are your employments? neat and easy.
In the day • waite on my Lady when she eats,
Carry her pantophles, bear up her train
Sing her asleep at night, and when she pleases
I am her bedfellow.
How? her bedfellow,
And lye with her?
Yes, and lye with her.
O rare!
Isle be an Eunuch, though I sell my shop for it
And all my wares.
It is but parting with
A precious stone or two. I know the price on it.
Isle part with all my stones, and when I am
An Eunuch, Isle so toss and towse the Ladies;
Pray you help me to a chapman.
The court Surgeon
Shall doe you that favour.
I am made! an Eunuch!
Carazie, quit the room.
Come sir, we'll treat of
Your business further.
Excellent! an Eunuch!
Leave me, or I am lost again, no prayers,
No penitence, can redeem me.
Am I grown
Old, or deformed since yesterday?
You are still,
Although the sating of your lust hath sullied
The imaculate whiteness of your Virgin beauties,
Too fair for me to look on. And though pureness,
The sword with which you ever fought, and conquered,
Is ravished from you by unchaste desires,
You are too strong for flesh and blood to treat with,
Though iron grates were interposed between vs,
To warrant me from treason.
Whom doe you fear?
That humane frailety I took from my mother,
That, as my youth increased, grew stronger on me,
That still pursues me, and though once recovered
In scorn of reason, and what's more, religion,
A gain seeks to betray me.
If you mean sir,
To my embraces, you turn rebel to
The laws of nature, the great Queen, and Mother
Of all productions, and deny allegiance.
Where you stand bound to pay it.
I will stop
Mine ears against these charms, which if Vlysses
Could live again, and he are this second Siren,
Though bound with Cables to his Mast, his Ship too
Fastened with all her Anchors, this enchantment
Would force him in despite of all resistance,
To leap into the Sea, and follow her,
Although destruction with outstretched arms,
Stood ready to receive him.
Gentle sir,
Though you deny to hear me, yet vouchsafe
To look upon me. Though I use no language
The grief for this unkind repulse, will print
Such a dumb eloquence upon my face,
As will not only plead, but prevail for me.
I am a cowar'd, I will see and here you,
The trial else is nothing, Nor the conquest,
My temperance shall crown me with hereafter,
Worthy to be remembered. Up my virtue
And holy thoughts, and resolutions arm me,
Against this fierce temptation; give me voice
Tuned to a zealous anger to express
At what an ouerualue I have purchased,
The wanton treasure of your Virgin bounties,
That in their false fruition heap upon me
Despair, and horror; that I could with that ease
Redeem my forfeit innocence, or cast up
The poison I received into my entrails,
From the alluring cup of your enticements
As now I doe deliver back the price,
And salary of your lust: or thus unclothe me
Of sins gay trappings, (the proud livery
Of wicked pleasure) which but worn, and heated
With the fire of entertainment, and consent,
Like to Alcides fatal shirt, tears off
Our flesh, and reputation both together,
Leaving our ulcerous follies bare, and open,
To all malicious censure.
You must grant,
If you hold that a loss to you, mine equals,
If not transcends it. If you then first tasted
That poison as you call it, I brought with me
A palate unacquainted with the relish
Of those delights which most (as I have heard)
Greedily swallow; and then the offence
(If my opinion may be believed)
Is not so great: how ere, the wrong no more
Then if Hippolli•• and the Virgin Huntress,
Should meet and kiss together.
What defences
Can lust raise to maintain a precipice
To the Abisse of looseness? but affords not
The least stayre, or the fastening of one foot,
To rescind that glorious height we fell from.
By Mahomet she courts him.
Nay kneels to him;
Observe the scornful villain turns away too,
As glorying in his conquest.
Are you Marble?
If Christians have mothers, sure they share in
The tigress fierceness, for if you were owner
Of humane pity, you could not endure
A Princes to kneel to you, or look on
These falling tears which hardest rocks would soften,
And yet remain vnmou'd. Did you but give me
A taste of happiness in your embraces
That the remembrance of the sweetness of it
Might leave perpetual bitterness behind it?
Or showed me what it was to be a wife,
To live a vvidow ever?
She has confessed it;
Ceise on him villains. O the furies.
How!
Are we betrayed?
The better, I expected
A Turkish Faith.
Who am I that you dare this?
Tic I that doe command you to forbear
A touch of violence.
We already Madam
Have satisfied your pleasure further then
Wee know to answer it.
Would we were well off,
We stand too far engaged I fear.
For vs?
We'll bring you safe off, who dares contradict
What is our pleasure?
Spurn the dog to prison,
I'll answer you anon.
What punishment
So ere I undergo, I am still a Christian.
What bold presumption's this? under what law
Am I to fall that set my foot upon
Your Statutes and decrees?
The crime committed
Our Alcoran calls death.
Tush, who is here
That is not Amurahs slave, and so unfit
To sit a judge upon his blood?
You have lost
And shamed the privilege of it, robed me to
Of my soul, my understanding to behold
Your base unworthy fall, from your high virtue.
I doe appeal to Amurah.
We will offer
No violence to your person, till we know
His sacred pleasure, till when under guard
You shall continue here.
Shall?
I have said it.
We shall remember this.
It ill becomes
Such as are guilty to deliver threats
Against the innocent. I could tear this flesh now,
But tic in vain, nor must I talk but do:
Provide a well made galley for Constantinople,
Such sad news never came to our great Master;
As hee directs, we must proceed, and know
No will but his, to whom what's ours we owe.
He does begin to eat?
A little, Master,
But our best hope for his recovery, is that
His raving leaves him, and those dreadful words,
Damnation, and despair, with which he ever
Ended all his discourses are forgotten.
This stranger is a most religious man sure,
And I am doubtful whether his charity,
In the relieving of our wants, or care
To cure the wounded conscience of Grimaldi,
Deserves more admiration.
Can you guess
What the reason should be that we never mention
The Church, or the high Altar, but his melancholy
Grows, and increases on him?
I have heard him
(When he gloried to profess himself an Atheist,)
Talk often and with much delight and boasting,
Of a rude prank he did ere he turned Pirate,
The memory of which, as it appears,
Lies heavy on him.
Pray you let me understand it.
Upon a solemn day when the whole City
Joined in devotion, and with barefoot steps
Passed to S. Marks, the Duke and the whole Signiory,
Helping to perfect the Religious pomp,
With which they were received; when all men else
Were full of tears, and groaned beneath the weight
Of past offences (of whose heavy burden
They came to be absolved and freed,) our Captain,
Whether in scorn of those so pious rites
He had no feeling of, or else drawn to it
Out of a wanton irreligious madness,
(I know not which) ran to the holy man,
As he was of doing the work of grace,
And snatching from his hands the sanctifide means
Dashed it upon the pavement.
How escaped he?
It being a deed deserving death with torture.
The general amazement of the people
Gave him leave to quit the Temple, and a Gundelo,
(Prepared it seems before) brought him aboard,
Since which he ne'er saw Venice. The remembrance
Of this, it seems, torments him; aggravated
With a strong belief he cannot receive pardon
For this foul fact, but from his hands against whom
It was committed.
And what course intends
His heavenly Physician, reverend Francisco,
To beat down this opinion.
He promised
To use some holy and religious fineness,
To this good end, and in the mean time charged me
To keep him dark, and to admit no visitants
But on no terms to cross him. Here he comes.
For theft! he that restores treble the value,
Makes satisfaction, and for want of means
To doe so, as a slave must serve it out
Till he hath made full payment. Ther's hope left here
O with what will ingnesse would I give up
My liberty to those that I have pillaged
And wish the numbers of my years though wasted
In the most sordid slavery might equal
The ripens I have made, till with one voice
My patient sufferings, might exact from my
Most cruel creditors, a full remission,
An eyes loss with an eye, limbs with a limb,
A sad account! yet to find peace within here,
Though all such as I have maimed, and dismembered
In drunken quarrels, or overcome with rage
When they were given up to my power, stood here now
And cried for restitution; to appease 'em,
I would doe a bloody justice on my self;
Pull out these eyes that guided me to ravish
Their sight from others; lop these legs that bore me
To barbarous violence, with this land cut off
This instrument of wrong, till nought were left me
But this poor bleeding limbless trunk, which gladly
I would divide among them.
Ha! what think I
Of petty forfeitures, in this reverend habit,
(All that I am turned into eyes) I look on
A deed of mine so fiendlike, that repentance,
Though with my tears I taught the sea new tides,
Can never wash off; all my thefts, my rapes
Are venial trespasses compared to what
I offered to that shape, and in a place too
Where I stood bound to kneel to it.
Tic forgiven,
I with his tongue (whom in these sacred vestments
With impure hands thou did offend) pronounce it,
I bring peace to thee, see that thou deserve it
In thy fair life hereafter.
Can it bee!
Dare I believe this vision, or hope
A pardon ere may find me?
Purchase it
By zealous undertakings, and no more
T'will be remembered.
What celestial balm
I feel now poured into my wounded conscience?
What penance is there Isle not undergo
Though ne'er so sharpe and rugged, with more pleasure
Then flesh and blood ere tasted, show me true sorrow,
Armed with an iron whip, and I will meet
The stripes she brings along with her, as if
They were the gentle touches of a hand,
That comes to cure me. Can good deeds redeem me?
I will rise up a wonder to the world,
When I have given strong proofs how I am altered,
I that have sold such as professed the Faith,
That I was borne in, to captivity,
Will make their number equal, that I shall
Deliver from the oar; and vvinne as many
By the clearness of my actions, to look on
Their misbeleefe, and loath it. I will be
A convoy for all Merchants: and thought worthy
To be reported to the world hereafter,
The child of your devotion, nursed up
And made strong by your charity, to break through
All dangers Hell can bring forth to oppose me;
Nor am I though my fortunes were thought desperate,
Now you have reconciled me to my self,
So void of worldly means, but in despite
Of the proud Viceroys, vvrongs I can doe something
To witness of my change; when you please try me,
And I will perfect what you shall enjoin me,
Or fall a joyful Martyr.
You will reap
The comfort of it, live yet undiscovered,
And with your holy meditations strengthen
Your Christian resolution, ere long
You shall hear further from me.
I'll attend
All your commands with patience; come my Mates,
I hitherto have lived an ill example,
And as your Captain lead you on to mischief,
But now will truly labour, that good men
May say hereafter of me to my glory,
Let but my power and means, hand with my will,
His good endeavours, did weigh down his ill.
This penitence is not counterfeit, howsoever
Good actions are in themselves rewarded,
My travails to meet with a double crown,
If that Vitelli come off safe, and prove
Himself the Master of his wild affections,
O I shall have intelligence, how now Gazette,
Why these sad looks and tears?
Tears sir? I have lost
My worthy Master, your rich heir seems to morn for
A miserable father, your young vvidow
Following a bedrid husband to his grave,
Would have her neighbours think she cries, and rores,
That she must part with such a goodman doe nothing,
When it is because he stays so long aboue ground,
And hinders a rich suitor: all is come out sir,
We are smoked for being cunnicatchers, my master
Is put in prison, his she customer
Is under guard to, these are things to weep for;
But mine own loss considerd, and what a fortune
I have, as they say, snatched our of my chops,
Would make a man run mad.
I scarce have leisure,
I am so wholly taken up with sorrow,
For my loved pupil to enquire thy fate,
Yet I will hear it.
Why sir, I had by•light a place,
A place of credit to, and had gone through with it
I should have been made an Eunuch, there was honour,
For a late poor prentice, when upon the sudden
There was such a hurleburley in the Court,
That I was glad to run away and carry
The price of my office with me.
Is that all?
You have made a saving voyage, we must think now,
Though not to free, to comfort sad Vitelli,
My grieved loule suffers for him.
I am sad too;
But had I been an Eunuch
Think not on it.
Be your own guard; obsequiousness, and service
Shall win you to be mine. Of all restraint
For ever take your leave, no threats shall awe you,
No jealous doubts of mine disturb your freedom,
No feed spies, wait upon your steps, your virtue
And due consideration in your self,
Of what is Noble, are the faithful helps
I leave you as supporters to defend you,
From falling basely.
This is wondrous strange
Whence flows this alteration?
From true judgment,
And strong assurance, neither grates of iron,
Hemde in with walls of brass, strict guards, high birth,
The forfeiture of Honour, nor the fear
Of infamy, or punishment, can stay
A woman slaude to appetite from being
False, and unworthy.
You are grown Satirical
Against our sex, why sir I durst produce
My self in our defence, and from you challenge
A testimony not to be denied,
All fall not under this unequal censure,
I that have stood your flatteries, your threats
Bore up against your fierce temptations; scorned
The cruel means you practised to supplant me,
Having no arms to help me, to hold out
But love of piety, and constant goodness,
If you are vnconfirm'd, dare again boldly
Enter into the lists, and combat with
All opposites mans malice can bring forth
To shake me in my chastity built upon
The rock of my religion.
I doe wish
I could believe you, but when I shall show you
A most incredible example of
Your frayletie in a Princess, sued and sought to
By men of worth, of rank, of eminence; courted
By happiness it self, and her cold temper
Approved by many years; yet she to fall,
Fall from her self, her glories, nay her safet,
Into a gulf of shame, and black despair,
I think you'll doubt your self, or in beholding
Her punishment for ever be deterde
From yielding basely.
I would see this wonder;
Tic sir my first petition.
And thus granted;
Aboue you shall observe all.
Sir I sought you
And must relate a wonder, since I studied
And knew what man was, I was never witness
Of such invincible fortitude as this Christian
Shows in his sufferings, all the torments that
We could present him with to fright his constancy
Confirmed, not shook it; and those heavy chains
That eat into his flesh, appeared to him
Like bracelets made of some loved mistress hairs
We kiss in the remembrance of her favours.
I am strangely taken with it, and have lost
Much of my fury.
Had he suffered poorly
It had called on my contempt, but manly patience
And all commanding virtue, wins upon
An enemy. I shall think upon him, ha!
So soon returned? this speed pleads in excuse
Of your late fault, which I no more remember.
What's the grand Signiors pleasure?
Tic enclosed here
The box to, that contains it, may inform you
How he stands affected: I am trusted with
Nothing but this, on forfeit of your head
She must have a speedy trial.
Bring her in
In black as to her funeral, tic the colour
Her fault wills her to wear, and which, in justice
I dare not pity, sit and take your place,
However in her life she has degenerated
May she die nobly, and in that confirm
Her greatness, and high blood.
I now could melt;
But soft compassion leave me.
I am affrighted
With this dismal preparation. Should the enjoying
Of loose desires find ever such conclusions,
All Women would be Vestalls.
That you cloth me
In this sad livery of death, assures me
Your sentence is gone out before, and I
To late am called, for, in my guilty cause
To use qualification, or excuse—
Yet must I not part so with mine own strengths,
But borrow from my modesty boldness, to
Enquire by whose authority you sit
My judges, and whose warrant digs my grave
In the frowns you dart against my life?
See here
This fatal sign, and warrant this brought to
A General fighting in the head of his
Victorious troops, rauishes from his hand
His even then conquering sword; this shown unto
The Sultans brothers, or his sons, delivers
His deadly anger, and all hopes laid by
Commands them to prepare themselves for heaven.
Which would stand with the quiet of your soul
To think upon, and imitate.
Give me leave
A little to complain, first of the hard
Condition of my •ortune, which may move you
Though not to rise up intercessors for me
(Yet in remembrance of my former life,
This being the first •pot, tainting mine honour)
To be the means to bring me to his presence;
And thou I doubt not, but I could allege
Such reasons in mi•e own defence, or plead
So humbly (my tears helping) that it should
Awake his sleeping pity.
Tic in vain.
If you have ought to say you shall have hearing,
And in me think him pre•ent.
I would thus then
First kneel, and kiss his feet, and after tell him
How long I had been his darling, what delight
My infant years afforded him; how dear
Hee prized his sister, in both bloods, my mother;
That she like him had frailety, that to me
Descends as an inheritance, then conjure him
By her blessed ashes, and his fathers soul,
The sword that rides upon his thigh, his right hand
Holding the Sceptre and the Ottoman fortune,
To have compassion on me.
But suppose
(As I am sure) he would be deaf, what then
Could you infer?
I then would thus rise up,
And to his teeth tell him he was a tyrant,
A most voluptuous, and insatiable Epicure
In his own pleasures: which he hugs so dearly,
As proper, and peculiar to himself,
That he denies a moderate lawful use
Of all delight to others. And to thee
Unequal judge I speak as much, and charge thee
But with impartial eyes to look into
Thy self, and then consider with what justice
Thou can pronounce my sentence. Unkind nature,
To make weak women servants, proud men Masters
Indulgent Mahomet, doe thy bloody laws
Call my embraces with a Christian, death?
Having my heate and May of youth to plead
In my excuse? and yet want power to punish
These that with scorn break through thy Cobweb edicts
And laugh at thy decrees? to tame their lusts
There's no religious bit, let her be fair
And pleasing to the eye, though Persian, Moore,
Idolatresse, Turk, or Christian, you are privileged
And freely may enjoy her. At this instant
I know, unjust man, thou hast in thy power
A lovely Christian Virgin; thy offence
Equal, if not transcending mine, why then
We being both guilty doest thou not descend
From that usurped Tribunal and with me
Walk hand in hand to death?
She raves, and we
Loose time to hear her: read the Law,
Doe, doe,
I stand resolved to suffer.
If any Virgin of what degree or quality soever,
borne a natural Turk, shall bee convicted of corporal
looseness, and incontinence, with any Christian, she is by
the decree of our great Prophet Mahomet to loose her
head.
Mark that, then tax our justice.
Ever provided that if she, the said offender, by
any reasons, arguments or persuasion, can win and prevail
with the said Christian offending with her, to alter his
religion, and marry her, that then the winning of a soul to
the Mohammedan sect, shall acquit her from all shame, dis∣grace
and punishment whatsoever.
I lay hold on that clause and challenge from you
The privilege of the Law.
What will you doe?
Grant me access and means, In•l undertake
To turn this Christian Turk, and marry him:
This trial you cannot deny.
O base!
Can fear to die make you descend so low
From your high birth, and brand the Ottoman line
With such a mark of infamy?
This is worse
Then the parting with your honour, better suffer
Ten thousand deaths, and without hope to have
A place in our great Prophets Paradise,
Then have an act to after times remembered
So foul as this is.
Cheer your spirits Madam,
To die is nothing, tic but parting with
A mountain of vexations.
Think of your honour;
In dying nobly you make satisfaction
For your offence, and you shall live a story
Of bold Heroic courage.
You shall not fool me
Out of my life, I claim the Law and sue for
A speedy trial; if I fail, you may
Determine of me as you please.
Base woman!
But use thy ways, and see thou prosper in 'em
For if thou fall again into my power
Thou shalt in vain after a thousand tortures
Cry out, for death, that death which now thou fliest from
Unloose the prisoners chains, go lead her on
To try the Magique of her tongue; I follow:
I am on the rack, descend my best Pauline.
I come not empty handed, I will purchase
Your favour at what rate you please. There's gold.
Tic the best oratory. I will hazard
A check for your content below there?
Welcome.
Art thou the happy messenger that brings me
News of my death?
Your hand.
Now if you please,
A little privacy.
You have bought it sir,
Enjoy it freely.
O my dearest pupil,
Witness these tears of joy, I never saw you
Till now look lovely; nor durst I ere glory
In the mind of any man I had built up
With the hands of virtuous, and religio•s precepts,
Till this glad minute. Now you have made good
My expectation of you. By my order,
All Roman Caesars, that led kings in chains
Fast bound to their triumphant chariots, if
Compared with that true glory, and full luster
You now appear in, all their boast• honours
Purchased with blood, and wrong, would loose their names
And be no more remembered.
This applause
Confirmed in your allowan•e joys me more,
Then if a thousand full crammed Theaters
Should clap their eager hands to witness that
The Scene I act did please, and they admire it.
But these are (father) but beginnings, not
The ends of my high aims. I grant to have mastered
The rebel appetite of flesh and blood
Was far aboue my strength; and still owe for it
To that great power that lent it. But when I
Shall maked apparent, the grimm looks of death
Affright me not, and that I can put off
The fond desire of life (that like a garment
Covers, and clothes our frailty) hastening to
My Martyrdom, as to a heavenly banquet,
To which I was a choice invited guest.
Then you may boldly say, you did not plough
Or trust the barren, and ungrateful lands
With the fruitful grain of your religious counsels.
You doe instr•ct your teacher. Let the Sun
Of your clear life (that lends to good men light)
But set as gloriously, as it did rise,
Though sometimes clouded) you may write •il ultra
To humane wishes.
I have almost gained
The end of the race, and will not •aynt, or tire now.
Sir by your leave (nay stay not) I bring comfort;
The Viceroy taken with the constant bearing
Of your afflictions, and presuming to
You will not change your temper, does command
Your irons should be tan off. Now arm your self
With your old resolution, suddenly
You shall be visited, you must leave the room to
And doe it without reply.
There's no contending,
Bee still thy self my son.
Tic not in man
To change or alter me.
Wh•n doe I look on?
My brother? tic he! but no more my tongue,
Thou wilt betray all.
Let vs hear this temptress,
The fellow looks as he would stop his ears
Against her powerful spells.
He is undone else.
I'll stand th'incounter, charge me home.
I come sir,
A beggar to you, and doubt not to find
A good mans charity, which if you deny,
You are cruel to your self, a crime, a wiseman
(And such I hold you) would not willingly
Be guilty of, nor let it find less welcome
Though I (a creature you contemn) now show you
The way to certain happiness, nor think it
Imaginary, or fantastical,
And so not worth th'acquiring, in respect
The passage to it is nor rough nor thorny;
No steep hills in the way which you must climb up;
No monsters to be conquered; no enchantments
To be dissolved by counter charms, before
You take possession of it.
What strong poison
Is wrapped up in these sugared pills?
My suite is
That you would quit your shoulders of a burden
Under whose ponderous vvaight you wilfully
Have too long groaned, to cast those fetters off,
With which with your own hands you chain your free∣dome
Forsake a severe, nay imperious mistress,
Whose service does exact perpetual cares,
Watchings, and troubles, and give entertainment
To one that courts you, whose least favours are
Variety, and choice of all delights
Mankind is capable of.
You speak in riddles.
What burden, or what mistress? or what fetters?
Are those you point at?
Those which your religion,
The mistress you too long have served, compels you
To bear with •laue-like patience.
Ha!
How bravely
That virtuous anger shows!
Be wise• and weigh
The prosperous success of things, if blessings
Are donatiues from Heaven (which you must grant
Were blasphemy to question) and that
They are called down, and powered on such as are
Most gracious with the great disposer of 'em,
Look on our flourishing Empire; if the spl••dor,
The Majesty, and glory of it dim not
Your feeble sight; and then turn back, and see
The narrow bounds of yours, yet that poor remnant
Rent in as many factions, and opinions,
As you have petty kingdoms, and then if
You are not obstinate against truth and reason,
You must confess the Deity you worship
Wants care, or power to help you.
Hold out now
And then thou art victorious.
How he eyes her!
As if he would look through her
His eyes flame too,
As threatening violence.
But that I know
The Devil thy Tutor fills each part about thee,
And that I cannot play the exorcist
To dispossess thee, unless I should tear
Thy body limb by limb, and throw it to
The furies that expect it, I would now
Pluck out that wicked tongue, that hath blaspheme•
That great omnipotence at whose nod
The fabric of the World shakes. Dare you bring
Your i•gling Prophet in comparison with
〈◊〉 inscrutable, and infinite essence
〈◊〉 made this all, and comprehends his work?
The place is too profane to mention him
Whose only name is sacred. O Donusa!
How much in my compassion I suffer,
That thou, on whom this most excelling form
And faculties of discourse, beyond a woman,
Were by his liberal gift conferred, should still
Remain in ignorance of him that gave it?
I will not foul my mouth to speak the Sorceries
Of your seducer, his base birth, his vvhoredomes,
His strange impostures; nor deliver how
He taught a Pigeon to feed in his ear,
Then made his credulous followers believe
It was an Angel that instructed him
In the framing of his Alcoran. Pray you mark me.
These words are death, were he in nought else guilty.
Your intent to win me
To be of your belief proceeded from
Your fear to die. Can there be strength in that
Religion, that suffers vs to tremble
At that which every day, nay hour vvee hast to?
This is vnanswerable and there's something tells me
I err in my opinion.
Cherish it
It is a Heavenly prompter, entertain
This holy motion, and wear on your forehead
The Sacred badge he arms His servants with,
You shall, like me, with scorn look down upon
All engines tyranny can advance to batter
Your constant resolution. Then you shall
Look truly •ayre, when your minds pureness ••wers
Your onward beauties.
I came here to take you,
But I perceive a yielding in my self
To be your prisoner.
Tic an overthrow
That will outshine all victories. O Donusa,
Dye in my faith like me, and tic a marriage
At which celestial Angels shalt be vvaiters,
And such as have been Sainted welcome vs,
Are you confirmed?
I would bee; but the means
That may assure me?
Heaven is merciful,
And will not suffer you to want a man,
To doe that sacred office, build upon it.
Then thus I spit at Mahomet.
Stop her mouth:
In death to turn Apostate! I'll not hear
One syllable from any; wretched creature!
With the next rising Sun prepare to die.
Yet Christian, in reward of thy brave courage,
Bee thy faith right, or wrong, receive this favour.
In person Isle attend thee to thy death,
And boldly challenge all that I can give
But what's not in my grant, which is to live.
You are wondrous brave, and iocound.
Welcome Father.
Should I spare cost, or not wear cheerful looks
Upon my wedding day, it were ominous
And showed I did repent it, which I dare not,
It being a marriage, howsoever sad
In the first ceremonies that confirm it,
That will for ever arm me against fears,
Repentance, doubts, or jealousies, and bring
Perpetual comforts, peace of mind, and quiet
To the glad couple.
I well understand you;
And my full joy to see you so resolved
Weak words cannot express. What is the hour
Designed for this solemnity?
The sixth,
Something before the setting of the Sun
We take •ur last leave of his fading light,
And with our souls eyes seek for beams eternal,
Yet there's one scruple with which I am much
Perplexed, and troubled, which I know you can
Resolve me of.
What is it?
This sir, my Bride
Wh•m I first courted, and then won (not with
Loose lays, poor flatteries, apish complements,
But Sacred, and Religious zeal•) yet wants
The holy badge that should proclaim her fit
For these Celestial Nuptials; willing she is,
I know, to wear it, as the choicest jewel
Or her fair forehead; but to you, that well
Could doe that work of Grace, I know the Viceroy
Will never grant access. Now in a case
Of this necessity, I would gladly learn,
Whether in me a layman, without orders,
It may not be religious, and lawful
As we go to our deaths to doe that office?
A question in it self, with much ease answered;
Midwives upon necessity perform •t,
And Knights that in •he •oly-•and fought for
The freedom• of Hierusalem, when full•
Of sweat, and enemies blood, have made their Helmets
The fount, out of which with their holy hands
They drew that heavenly liquor, 't was approved then
By the Holy Church, nor must I think it now
In you a work less pious.
You confirm me,
I will find a way to doe it. In the mean time
Your holy vows assist me.
They shall ever
Be present with you.
You shall see me act
This last Scene to the life.
And though now fall,
Rise a bles'd Martyr.
That's my end, my all.
Sir, if you slip this opportunity,
Never expect the like.
With as much ease now
We may steal the ship our of the harbour, Captain,
As ever Gallants in a wanton bravery
Have set upon a drunken Constable,
And bore him from a sleepy ruggown'd watch:
Be therefore wise.
I must be honest too
And you shall wear that shape, you shall observe me,
If that you purpose to continue mine,
Think you ingratitude can be the parent
To our unfeigned repentance? doe I owe
A peace within here, Kingdoms could not purchase,
To my religious creditor, to leave him
Open to danger, the great benefit
Never remembered? no, though in her bottom.
We could stow up the tribute of the Turk,
Nay, grant the passage safe too: I will never
Consent to weigh an Anchor up, till hee,
That only must, commands it.
This Religion
Will keep vs slaves and Beggars.
The Fiend prompts me
To change my copy: Plague upon it, we are Seamen,
What have we to doe with it, but for a snatch, or so,
At the end of a long Lent?
Mum, see who is here?
My Father!
My good convert. I am full
Of serious business which denies me leave
To hold long conference with you: Only thus much
Briefly receive; a day, or two, at the most
Shall make me fit to take my leave of Tunis,
Or give me lost for ever.
Days, nor years,
Provided, that my stay may doe you service,
But to me shall be minuets.
I much thank you:
In this small scroll you may in private read
What my intents are, and as they grow ripe
I will instruct you further. In the mean time
Borrow your late distracted looks, and gesture;
The more dejected you appear, the less
The Viceroy must suspect you.
I am nothing,
But what you please to have me be.
Farewell sir,
Be cheer•full Master, something we will doe
That shall reward it self in the performance,
And that's true prize indeed.
I am obedient.
And I, there's no contending.
Peace to you all.
Prosper thou great Existence my endeavours,
As they religiously are undertaken,
And distant equally from servile gain,
Or glorious ostentation. I am heard
In this blessed opportunity, which in vain
I long have waited for. I must show my self.
O she has found me. Now if she prove right
All hope will not forsake vs.
Farther off,
And in that distance know your duties too.
You were bestowed on me as slaves to serve me
And not as spies to pry into my actions,
And after to betray me. You shall find
If any look of mine be vnobseru'd,
I am not ignorant of a mistress power,
And from whom I receive it.
Note this, Manto.
The pride, and scorn, with which she entertains vs
Now we are made hers by the Viceroys gift.
Our sweet conditioned princess, fair Donusa,
Rest in her death waite on her, never used vs
With such contempt. I would he had sent me
To the Galleys, or the Gallows, when he gave me
To this proud little devil.
I expect
All tyrannous usage, but I must be patient;
And though ten times a day, she tears these locks,
Or makes this face her footstool, tic but justice.
Tic a true story of my fortunes, father,
My chastity preserved by miracle,
Or your devotions for me; and believe it,
What outward pride so ere I counterfeit,
Or state to these appointed to attend me,
I am not in my disposition altered,
But still your humble daughter and share with you
In my poor brothers sufferings, all bells torments
Revenge it on accursed Grimaldies soul
That in his rape of me gave a beginning
To all the miseries that since have followed
Be charitable, and forgive him gentle daughter;
Hoe's a changed man, and may redeem his fault
In his fair life hereafter. You must bear too
Your forced captivity (for tic no better,
Though you wear golden fetters) and of him,
Whom death affrights not, learn to hold out nobly.
You are still the same good counsellor.
And who knows
(Since w•at aboue is purposed, is inscrutable)
But that the Viceroys extreme dotage on you
May be the parent of a happier birth
Then yet our hopes dare fashion. Longer conference
May prove un•afe for you, and me, however
Perhaps for trial he allows you freedom.
From this learn therefore what you must attempt,
Though with the hazard of your self, heaven guard you,
And give Vitelli patience, then I doubt not
But he will have a glorious day since some
Hold truly, such as suffer, overcome.
What we commanded, see performed, and fail not
In all things to be punctual.
We shall sir.
Tic strange that you should use such circumstance
To a delinquent of so mean condition.
Had he appeared in a more sordid shape
Then disguised greatenes ever deigned to mask in,
The gallant bearing of his present fortune
Aloud proclaims him noble.
If you doubt him,
To be a man built up for great employments,
And as a cunning spy sent to explore
The Cities strength, or weakness, you by torture
May force him to discover it.
That were base;
Nor dare I doe such injury to Virtue
And bold assured courage, neither can I
Be won to think, but if I should attempt it,
I shoot against the Moon. He that hath stood
The roughest battery, that captivity
Could ever bring to shake a constant temper,
Despised the fawnings of a future greatness,
By beauty in her full perfection tendered;
That hears of death as of a quiet slumber,
And from the surplusage of his own firmness
Can spare enough of fortitude, to assure
A feeble woman; will now, Mustapha
Be altered in his soul for any torments
We can afflict his body with?
Doe your pleasure,
I only offered you a friends advice,
But without gall, or envy to the man
That is to suffer. But what doe you determine
Of poor Grimaldi? the disgrace called on him
I here has ran him mad.
There weigh the difference
In the true temper of their minds. The one,
A Pirate sold to mischiefs, rapes, and all
That make a slave relentless, and obdurate;
Yet of himself wanting the inward strengths
That should defend him, sinckes beneath compassion
Or pity of a man; where as this merchant,
Acquainted only with a civil life,
Armed in himself; entrenched, and fortifide
With his own virtue, valuing life and death,
At the same price, poorly does not inuit
A favour, but commands vs doe him right,
Which unto him, and her (we both once honoured
As a just debt I gladly pay'm; they enter,
Now sit wee equal hearers.
I shall hear
And see, sir, without passion, my wrongs arm me.
A joyful preparation! To whose bounty
Owe vvee our thanks for gracing thus our Himen?
The notes though dreadful to the ear, sound here
As our Epithalamium were sung
By a Celestial quire, and a full Chorus
Assured vs future happiness. These that lead me
Gaze not with wanton eyes upon my bride,
Nor for their service are repayed by me
With jealousies, or fears; nor doe they envy
My passage to those pleasures from which death
Cannot deter me. Great sir pardon me;
Imagination of the joys I haste to,
Made me forget my duty, but the form
And ceremony past, I will attend you,
And with our constant resolution feast you,
Not with course cates, forgot as soon as tasted,
But such as shall, while you have memory,
Be pleasing to the palate.
Bee not lost
In what you purpose.
Call you this a marriage?
It differs little from hanging, I cry at it.
See where my bride appears! in what full luster?
As if the Virgins that bear up her train,
Had long contended to receive an honour
Aboue their births, in doing her this service.
Nor comes she fearful to meet those delights,
Which once past ore, immortal pleasures follow.
I need not therefore comfort, or encourage
Her forward steps, and I should offer wrong
To her minds fortitude, should I but ask
How she can brooke the rough high going Sea,
Over whose foamie back our ship well rigged
With hope and strong assurance must transport vs.
Nor will I tell her when we reach the Haven
(Which tempests shall not hinder) what loud welcome•
Shall entertain vs; nor commend the place,
To tell whose least perfection would strike dumb
The eloquence of all boasted in story,
Though joined together.
Tic enough my dearest;
I dare not doubt you, as your humble shadow
Lead where you please, I follow.
One suite sir,
And vvillingly I cease to be a beggar,
And that you may with more security hear it,
Know tic not life Isle ask, nor to defer
Our deaths, but a few minutes.
Speak, tic granted.
We being now to take our latest leave
And grown of one belief, I doe desire
I may have your allowance to perform it
But in the fashion which we Christians use
Upon the like occasions.
Tic allowed of.
My service; haste Gazette to the next spring,
And bring me of it.
Would I could as well
Fetch you a pardon, I would not run but fly,
And be here in a moment.
What's the mystery
Of this? discover it?
Great sir, I'll tell you,
Each country hath it's own peculiar rites,
Some when they are to die drink store of wine,
Which powered in liberally does oft beget
A bastard valour, with which armed, they bear
The not to bee declined charge of death
With l•sse fear, and astonishment; Others take
Drugs to procure a heavy sleep, that so
They may insensibly recei•e the means
That casts them in an everlasting slumber;
Others—O welcome.
Now the use of yours?
The clearness of this is a perfect sign
Of innocence, and as this washes off
Staines, and pollutions from the things we vveare,
Thrown thus upon the forehead, it hath power
To purge those spots that cleue upon the mind,
If thankfully received.
Tic a strange custom!
How doe you entertain it my Donusa?
Feel you no alteration? No new motives?
No unexpected aids that may confirm you
In that to which you were inclined before?
I am an other woman, till this minute
I never lived, nor durst think how to dye.
How long have I been blind? Yet on the sudden,
By this blessed means I feel the films of error
Tan from my souls eyes. O divine Physician,
That hast bestowed a sight on me, which death,
Though ready to embrace me in his arms,
Cannot take from me. Let me kiss the hand
That did this miracle, and seal my thanks
Upon those Lips from whence these sweet words vanished
That freed me from the cruelest of prisons,
Blind ignorance, and misbeliefe: false Prophet,
Impostor Mahomet.
I'll hear no more;
You doe abuse my favours, sever 'em:
Wretch if thou had another life to loose,
This Blasphemy deserved it, instantly
Carry them to their deaths.
Wee part now, blessed one,
To meet hereafter in a Kingdom, where
Hells malice shall not reach vs.
Ha, ha, ha.
What means my Mistress?
Who can hold her spleen,
When such ridiculous follies are presented,
The Scene too made religion: O my Lord,
How from one cause two contrary effects
Spring up upon the sudden.
This is strange.
That which hath foolde her in her death,
Wins me, That hitherto have bard my self from plea∣sure,
To live in all delight.
There's Music in this.
I now will run as fiercely to your arms
As ever longing woman did, borne high
On the swift wings of appetite.
O Devil!
Nay more, for there shall be no odds betwixt vs,
I will turn Turk.
Most of your tribe doe so
When they begin in whore.
You are serious Lady?
Serious? but satisfy me in a suite
That to the world may witness that I have
Some power upon you, and to morrow challenge
What euer's in my gift, for I will bee
At your dispose.
That's ever the subscription
To a damned whores false Epistle.
Ask this hand,
Or if thou wilt, the heads of these. I am rapt
Beyond my self with joy, speak, speak, what is it?
But twelve short hours reprive for this base• couple.
The reason, since you hate them?
That I may
Have time to triumph ore this wretched woman:
I'll be my self her guardian. I will feast,
Adorned in her choice and richest Jewels,
Commit him to what guards you please. Grant this,
I am no more mine own, but yours.
Enjoy it;
Rapine at it who dares: bear him safe off
To the black Tower, but give him all things useful,
The contrary was not in your request.
I doe contemn him.
Peace in death denied me?
Thou shalt not go in liberty to thy grave,
For one night a Sultana is my slave.
A terrible little tyranness.
No more;
Her will shall be a law. Till now ne'er happy.
Sir, all things are in readiness, the Turks
That seas'd upon my Ship stowed under hatches,
My men resolved, and cheerful. Use but means
To get out of the Ports, we will be ready
To bring you aboard, and then (heaven be but pleased)
This for the Viceroys fleet.
Discharge your parts,
In mine I'll not be wanting; fear not Master,
Something will come along to fraught your Bark,
That you will have just cause to say you never
Made such a Voyage.
We will stand the hazard.
What's the best hour?
After the second watch.
Enough; each to his charge.
We will be careful.
Sit Madam, it is fit that I attend you;
And pardon, I beseech you, my rude language,
To which the sooner you will be invited,
When you shall understand, no way was left me
To free you from a present execution,
But by my personating that, which never
My nature was acquainted with.
I believe you.
You will when you shall understand, I may
Receive the honour to be known unto you
By a nearer name. And not to wrack you further,
The man you please to favour is my brother,
No Merchant, Madam, but a Gentleman
Of the best rank in Venice.
I rejoice in it
But what's this to his freedom? for my self,
Were he well off, I were secure.
I have
A present means, not plotted by my self,
But a religious man, my confessor,
That may preserve all, if we had a servant
Whose faith we might rely on.
She that's now
Your slave was once mine, had I twenty lives
I durst commit them to her trust.
O Madam,
I have been false, forgive me. I'll redeem it
By any thing however desperate
You please to impose upon me.
Troth these tears
I think cannot be counterfeit, I believe her,
And if you please will try her.
At your peril;
There is no further danger can look towards me.
This only then, can thou use means to carry
This bakemeate to Vitelli?
With much ease,
I am familiar with the guard; beside,
It being known it was I that betrayed,
My entrance hardly will of them be questioned?
About it then, say that it was sent to him
From his Donusa, bid him search the midst of't
He there shall find a cordial.
What I doe
Shall speak my care and faith.
Good fortune with thee.
You cannot eat.
The time we thus abuse
We might employ much better.
I am glad
To hear this from you. As for you Carazie,
If your intents doe prosper, make choice whither
You'll steal away with your two Mistresses
Or take your fortune.
I'll be gelded twice first;
Hang him that stays behind.
I waite you Madame,
Were but my brother off, by the command
Of the doting Viceroy there's no guard dare stay me.
And I will safely bring you to the place
Where we must expect him.
Heaven be gracious to vs.
Pauline to fall off thus? tic to me
More terrible then death, and like an earthquake
Totters this walking building (such I am)
And in my sudden ruin would prevent,
By choking up at once my vital spirits,
This pompous preparation for my death.
But I am lost; that good man, good Francisco
Delivered me a paper which till now
I wanted leisure to peruse.
This Christian
Fears not, it seems, the near approaching Sun
Whose second rise He never must salute.
Who's that?
Stand.
Manto.
Heere's the Viceroys ring
Gives warrant to my entrance, yet you may
Partake of any thing I shall deliver;
Tic but a present to a dying man
Sent from the princess that must suffer with him.
Use your own freedom.
I would not disturb
This his last contemplation.
O tic well!
He has restored all, and I at peace again
With my Pauline.
Sir, the sad Donusa
Grieved for your sufferings, more then for her own,
Knowing the long and tedious pilgrimage
You are to take, presents you with this cordial,
Which privately she wishes you should taste of,
And search the middle part, where you shall find
Something that hath the operation, to
Make death look lovely.
I will not dispute
What she commands but serve it.
Prithee Manto
How hath the unfortunate Princes spent this night
Under her proud new mistress?
With such patience
As it orecomes the others insolence
Nay triumphs ore her pride. My much hast now
Commands me hence, but the sad Tragedy past,
Isle give you satisfaction to the full
Of all hath passed, and a true character
Of the proud Christians nature.
Break the watch up,
What should we fear in the midst of our own strengths?
Tic but the Bashes jealousy. Farewell soldiers.
There's something more in this then means to cloy
A hungry appetite, which I must discover.
She, willed me search the midst. Thus, thus I pierce it:
Ha! what is this? a scroll bound up in packthread?
What may the mystery be?
Son, let down this packethread, at the West win∣dow
of the Castle. By it you shall draw up a Ladder of
ropes, by which you may descend, your dearest Donusa
with the rest of your friends, below attend you. Heaven
prosper you.
O best of men! he that gives up himself
To a true religious friend, leanes not upon
A false deceiving reed, but boldly builds
Upon a rock, which now with joy I find
In reverend Francisco. Whose good vows,
Labours, and watchings in my hopd-for freedom
Appear a pious miracle. I come,
I come, good man, with confidence, though the descent
Were steep as he•l, I know I cannot slide
Being called down, by such a faithful guide.
Excuse me Mustapha, though this night to me
Appear as tedious as that treble one
Was to the world, when •ove on fair Alcmena
Begot Alcides. Were you to encounter
Those ravishing pleasures, which the slow paced hours
(To me they are such) bar me from, you would
With your continued wishes strive to imp
New feathers to the broken wings of Time
And chide the amorous Sun, for too long dalliance
In Thetis watery bosom.
You are to violent
In your desires, of which you are yet uncertain
Having no more assurance to enjoy 'em
Then a weak women's promise, on which vvisemen
Faintely rely.
Tush she is made of truth
And what she says she will doe, holds as firm.
As laws in brass that know no change, what's this?
Some new prize brought in sure. Why are thy looks
So ghastly. Villain speak.
Great sir hear me
Then after kill me, we are all betrayed,
The •alse Grimaldi sunk in your disgrace
With his confederates, have seas'd his ship
And those that guarded it stowed under ha•ches
With him the condemned Princess, and the Merchant
That with a ladder made of ropes descended
From the black Tower in which he was enclosed,
And your fair mistress,
Ha!
With all their train
And choicest jewels are gone safe aboard,
Their sails spread forth and with a fore-gale
Leaving our cost, in scorn of all pursuit
As a farewell they showed a broad side to vs.
No more.
Now note your confidence.
No more.
O my credulity! I am too full
Of grief, and rage to speak. Dull, heavy fool
Worthy of all the tortures that the frown
Of thy incensed Master can throw on thee
Without one mans compassion, I will hide
This head among the deserts, or some cave
Fi•'d with my shame and me, where I alone
May dye without a partner in my moan.

NOW to bee modest Madam, when your are
A suitor for your father, would appear,
Courser then boldness you a while must part
with soft silence, and the blushings of a virgin,
Though I must grant (did not this cause cōmand
it) They are rich jewels you have ever worn
To all men's admiration, in this age,
If by our own forced importunity,
Or other• purchased intercession, or
Cor•upting bribes we can make our approaches
To justice guarded, from us by sterne power,
We bless the means, and industry.
Here is music
In this bag shall wake her, though she had drunk Opium,
Oraaten Mandrakes, let commanders talk
Of cannons to make breaches, give but fire
To this petard, it shall blow open Madam
The iron doors of a judge, and make you entrance,
When they (let them doe what they can) with all
Their mines, their culverins, and Basiliscos
Shall cool their feet without, this being the pickelocke
That neverfailes.
Tic true, gold can doe much,
But beauty more, were I the governor,
Though the Admiral your father stood convicted
Of what he's only doubted, half a dozen
Of sweet close kisses from these cherry lips,
With some short active conf•rinse in private,
Should sign his general pardon.
These light words •ir
Doe ill become the weight of my sad fortune
And I much wonder you that doe profess
Your self to be my fathers bosom friend,
Can raise mirth from his misery.
You mistake me,
I share in his calamity, and only
Deliver my thoughts freely, what I should doe
For such a rare petitioner, and if
You'll follow the directions, I prescribe
With my best judgement I'll mark out the way
For his enlargement.
With all real joy,
I shall put what you counsel into act,
Provided it be honest.
Honesty
In a fair she client (trust to my experience)
Seldom or never prospers, the world's wi••ked.
Wee are men, not saints sweet Lady, you must practice
The manners of the time, if you intend
To have favour from it, do not deceive your self
By building too much on the false foundations
Of chastity and virtue, bid your waiters
Stand farther of, and i'll come nearer to you.
Some wicked counsel on my life.
Ne'er doubt it,
If it proceed from him.
I wonder that
My Lord so much affects him.
Thou art a child and dost not understand on what strong
bases this frindship's raised between this Mountrevile and our Lord
Monsieur. Malefort, but isle teach thee from thy years they have
been joint purchasers, in furs, &amp; water-works, and trucked together.
In fire and water works,
Commodities boy
Which you may know hereafter.
And deal in'em
When the trade has given you over, as appears (by the increase of
your high forehead.
Heare's a crack,
I think they suck this knowledge in their milk.
I had had an ignorant nurse else• I have tide sir
My Ladies garter, and can guess.
Peace infant,
Tales out a school take heed you will be britchd else.
My Ladies colour changes.
She falls off too.
You are a naughty man, indeed you are,
And I will sooner perish with my father
Then at this price redeem him.
Take your own way,
Your modest legal way, tic not your veil
Nor mourning habit, nor these creatures taught
To howl, and cry, when you begin to whimper,
Nor following my Lords coach in the dirt,
Nor that with you rely upon, • bribe
Will doe it when there's something he likes better.
These courses in an old crone of three score,
That had seven years together tired the court
With tedious petitions and clamours,
For the recovery of a strangling husband,
To pay forsooth the duties of one to her,
But for a Lady of your tempting beauties,
Your youth and ravishing features to hope only
In such a suite as this is, to gain favour
Without exchange of curtsy, you conceive me,
Were madness at the height, here is brave young Beaufort
The meteor of Morsels, one that holds
The governor his fathers will and power
In more awe then his own, come, come advance,
Present your bag crammed with crowns of the sun,
Doe you think he cares for money? he loves pleasure,
Burn your petition, burn it, he dotes on you,
Upon my knowledge, to his cabinet, doe
And hee will point you out a certain course,
Be the cause right or wrong to have your father
Releasd with much facility.
Doe you hear?
Take a pander with you.
I tell thee there is neither
Employment yet nor money.
I have commanded
And spent my own means in my countries service,
In hope to raise a fortune.
Many have hoped so,
But hopes prove seldom certainties with soldiers.
If no preferment, let me but receive
My pay that is behind, to set me up
A tavern, or a vaulting house; while men love
Or drunkenness, or lechery, they'll ne'er fail me:
Shall I have that?
As our prises are brought in,
Till then you must be patient.
In the mean time,
How shall doe for cloths?
As most captains doe
Philosopher like, carry all you have about you.
But how shall I do to satisfy C•lone Monsieur,
There lies the doubt.
Thats easily decided,
My fathers tables free for any man
That hath borne arms.
And theres good store of meat?
Never fear that.
I'll seek no other ordinary then,
But be his daily guest without invitement,
And if my stomach hold, lle feed so heartily
As he shall pay me suddenly to be quit of me.
Tic she.
And further.
Away you are troublesome,
Designs of more weight.
Ha fair Theocrine,
Nay if a velvet petticoat move in the front
Buff jerkins must to the rear, I know my manner•
This is indeed great business, 〈◊〉 no a gugawe
I may dance attendance, this must be dispatched,
And suddenly, or all will go to wrack.
Charge her home in the flank my Lord, nay I am gone sir, Belgarde
Nay pray you Madam rise, or I'll kneel with you.
I would bring you on your knees, were I a woman.
What is it can deserve so poor a name,
As a suite to me? this more then mortal form
Was fashioned to command and not entreat,
Your will but known is served.
Great Sir, my father
My brave deserving father, but that sorrow
Forbids the use of speech.
I understand you,
Without the aids of those interpreters
That fall from your fair eyes, I know you labour,
the liberty of your father, at the least
an equal hearing to acquit himself:
and it is not to endear my service to you,
though I must add and pray you with patience hear it,
it is hard to be effected, in respect
the State's incensed against him: all presuming
the world of outrages his impious son,
turned worse than Pirate in his cruelties
expressed to this poor Country, could not be
with such ease put in execution, if
your father (of late our great Admiral)
held not or correspondence, or connived
at his proceedings.
And must he then suffer,
his cause unheard?
As yet it is resolved so,
in their determination. But suppose,
for I would nourish hope, not kill it in you,
I should divert the torrent of their purpose,
and render them that are implacable,
impartial Judges, and not swayed with spleen:
will you, I dare not say in recompense,
for that includes a debt you cannot owe me,
but in your liberal bounty, in my suit
to you be gracious?
You entreat of me, Sir,
what I should offer to you, with confession
that you much undervalue your own worth,
should you receive me. Since there come with you
not lustful fires, but fair and lawful flames.
but I must be excused, '•is now no time
for me to think of Him•ae•ll joys.
Can he (and pray you, Sir, consider it)
that gave me life, and faculties to love,
be, as he is now ready to be devoured
by ravenous wolves, and at that instant, I
but entertain a thought of those delights.
in which perhaps my ardor meets with your?
duty and pie•ie forbid it, Sir.
But this effected, and your father free,
what is your answer?
Every minute to me
will be a tedious age till our embraces
are warrantable to the world.
I urge no more, confirm it with a kiss.
I doubly feale it.
This would doe better a bed, the business ended,
they are the lovingest Couple.
Here comes my father
with the Council of war, deliver your petition,
•nd leave the rest to me.
I am sorry, Lady,
your fathers guilt compels your innocence
〈◊〉 ask what I in justice must deny.
For my sake, Sir, pray you receive, and read it.
Thou foolish boy, I can deny thee nothing.
Thus far we are happy. Madam quit the place,
•ou shall hear how we succeed.
Goodness reward you.
It is apparent, and we stay too long
•o censure Malefort as he deserves.
There is no colour of reason that makes for him:
•ad he discharged the trust committed to him,
•ith that experience and fidelity
he practised heretofore, it could not be
our Navy should be blocked up, and in our sight
our goods made prize, our Sailors sold for slaves,
•y his prodigious issue.
I much grieve,
•fter so many brave and high achievements,
he should in one ill forfeit all the good
he ever did his Country.
Well, it is granted.
I humbly thank you, Sir.
He shall have hearing,
his irons too struck off, bring him before us;
but seek no further favour.
Sir, I dare not.
Monsieur Chamont, Montaigne, Lanour, assistants
by a Commission from the most Christian King
in punishing, or •reeing Malefort
our late great Admiral: though I know you need not
instructions from me, how to dispose of
your selves in this mans trial (that exacts
your clearest judgements) give me leave with favour
to offer my opinion: we are to hear him,
a little looking back on his fair actions,
loyal, and true demeanour, not as now
by the general voice, already he's condemned.
But if we find (as most believe) he hath held
intelligence with his accursed son,
fall•e off from all allegiance, and turned
(but for what cause we know not) the most bloody
and fatal enemy, this Country ever
repented to have brought forth, all compassion
of what he was, or may be, if now pardoned,
we sit engaged to censure him with all
extremity and rigour.
Your Lordship shows us
a path which we will tread in.
He that leaves
to follow, as you lead, will lose himself.
I'll not be singular.
He comes, but with
a strange distracted look.
Live I once more
to see these hands and arms fre? these, that often
In the most dreadful horror of a fight,
Have been as sea-markes to teach such as were
Seconds in my attempts, to steer between
The rocks of too much dating, and pale fear,
To reach the Port of victory? When my sword,
Advanced thus, to my enemies appeared
A hairy comet, threatening death and ruin
To such as durst behold it. These the legs
That when our ship were grappled, carried me
With such swift motion from deck to deck,
As they that saw it, with amazement cried;
He does not run, but flies.
He still retains
The greatness of his spirit.
Now cramped with irons,
Hunger, and could, they hardly doe support me.
•ut I forget my self. O my good Lords
That •it there as my judges to determine
The life and death of Malefort, where are now
Those shouts, those cheerful looks, those loud applauses
With which when I returned laden with spoil
You entertained your Admiral 〈◊〉 ell's forgotten,
And I stand here to give account for that
Of which I am a• free, and innocent
As he that never saw the eyes of him,
•or whom I stand suspected.
Monsieur Malefort
•et not your passion so far transport you
〈◊〉 to believe from any private malice,
•r envy to your person you are questioned,
•or doe the suppositions want weight,
That doe invite us to a strong assurance,
Your son.
My shame.
Pray you hear with patience, ever
Without assistance, or sure aids from you,
Could with the pirates of Argers and Tun•,
even those that you had almost twice defeated,
acquire such credit, as with them to be
made absolute commander? (p••y you observe me)
if there had not some 〈◊〉 pas•'d between you,
that when occasion •••v'd you would 〈◊〉 y•• with 'em
to the ruin of Marcellis?
More, what urged
your son to turn Aposta••?
Had he from
the State, or Governor, the least n•glect
which envy could interpret for a wrong?
Or if you slept not in your charge, how could
so many ships as doe infest our Coast
and have in our own Harbour shut our Navy
come in unfought with?
They put him hardly •o it.
My Lords, with as much brave•ie as I can,
I'll answer each particular objection
with which you charge me. The my• ground, on which
you raise the building of your accusition,
hath reference to my so••e should I now curse him,
or wish in the agony of my troubled soul,
lightning had found him in his mothers 〈◊〉
you'll say is from the purpose, and I therefore
betake him to the Devil, and so leaves 〈◊〉
Did never loyal father but my self
beget a treacherous issue? was it in me
with as much ease to fashion up his mind,
as in his generation to form,
the organs to his body? must it follow
because that he is impious, I am false?
I would not boast my actions, yet •is lawful
to upbraid my benefits to unthankful men.
Who sunk the Turkish galleys in the Scraights.
but Malefort? who rescued the French 〈◊〉,
when they were boarded, and stowed under harches
by the Pirats of Argie••when every 〈◊〉
they did expect to be chained to the oar,
but your now doubted Admiral? then you filled
the air with shouts of joy, and did proclaim
when hope had left them, and gr•m, looked Despair
hovered with saile-stretche wings over their heads,
to me, as to the Neptune of the Sea,
they owed the restitution of their goods,
their lives, their liberties. O can it then
be probable, my Lords, that he that never
became the master of a Pirate• ship,
but at the maine yard hung the Captain up,
and cause the rest to be thrown over board,
should after all these proofs of deadly ha•e,
so oft expressed against'em, entertain
a thought of quarter with'em, but much less
(to the perpetual ruin of my glories)
to join with them to lift a wicked arm
against my mother Country, this Morsels,
which with my prodigal expense of blood
I have so oft protected.
What you have done
is granted, and applauded, but yet know
this glorious relation of your actions
must not so blind our judgements, as to suffer
this most unnatural crime you stand accused of,
to pass unquestioned.
No, you must produce
reasons of more validity, and weight,
to plead in your defence, or we shall hardly
conclude you innocent.
The large volume of
your former worthy deeds, with your experience,
both what, and when to doe, but makes against you.
For had your care and courage been the same
as heretofore, the dangers we are plunged in
had been with ease prevented.
What have ••
Omitted in the power of flesh, and blood,
Even in the birth to strangle the designs
Of this hell-bred wolf my son? alas my Lords,
I am no god, nor like him could foresee
His cruel thoughts, and cursed purposes,
Nor would the sun at my command forbear
To make his progress to the other world,
Affording to us one continued light.
Nor could my breath dispresse those foggy mists
Coverde with which, and darkness of the night,
Their navy undiscernd, without resistance
Beset our harbour? make not that my fault,
Which you in justice must ascribe to fortune.
But if that nor my former acts, nor what
I have delivered, can prevail with you
To make good my integrity and truth:
Rip up this bosom; and pluck out the heart
That hath been ever loyal.
How! a trumpet!
Enquire the cause.
Thou searcher of men's hearts,
And sure defender of the innocent,
(My other crying sins, a while not looked on)
If I in this am guilty strike the dead,
Or by some unexpected means confirm,
I am accused unjustly.
Speak the motives
That brings thee hither.
From our Admiral thus,
He does salute you fairly, and desires
It may be understood no public hate,
Hath brought him to Marse•lis, nor see 〈◊〉 he
The ruin of his country, but aims only
To wreak a private wrong; and if from you
He may have leave, and liber•y to decide it
In a single combat, he'll give up good pledges
If he fall in the trial of his right,
Wee shall weigh anchor and no more molest
This town with hostile arms.
Speak to the man,
(If in this presence he appear to you)
To whom you bring this challenge.
Tic to you;
His father•
Can it be!
Strange and prodigious.
Thou feast I stand unmovd were thy voice thunder
It should not shake me, say what would the viper?
The reverence a fathers name may challenge,
And duty of a soon, no more remembered
He does defy thee to the death.
Go on.
And with his sword well prove it on thy head,
Thou art a murderer, an Atheist
And that al attributes of men turned furies
Cannot express thee, this he will make good
If thou dare give him meeting.
Dare I live,
Dare I when mountains of my sins ore whelm me
At my last gasp ask for mercy? how I bless
Thy coming Captain, never man to me
Arrived so opportunely; and thy message,
However it may seem to threaten death,
Does yield to me a second life in curing
My wounded honour, stand I yet suspected
As a confederate with this enemy,
Whom of all men, against all ties of nature
He marks out for destruction? you are just
Immortal powers, and in this merciful,
And it takes from any sorrow, and my shame
For being the father to so bad a son,
In that you are pleased to offer up the monster
To my correction. Blush and repent
As you are bound my honourable Lords
Your ill opinions of me, not great Brutus
The father of the Roman liberty
With more assured constancy beheld
His traitor sons, for labouring to call home
The banished Tarquins, scourged with rods to death,
Then I will show when I take back the life
This prodigy of mankind received from me.
We are sorry Monsieur Malefort for our error
And are much taken with your resolution
But the disparity of years, and strength
Between you, and your son, duly considerd
We would not so expose you
Then you kill me
Under pretence to save me. O my Lords
As you love honour, and a wronged mans fame
Deny me not this fair, and noble means
To make me right again to all the world.
Should any other but my self be chosen
To punish this Apostate with death,
You rob a wretched father of a justice
That to all after times will be recorded,
I wish his strength were •••uple, his skill equal
To my experience, that in his fall
He may not shame my victory, I feel
The powers, and spirits of twenty strong men in me.
Were hee with wild fire circled, I undaunted
Would make way to him, as you doe affect Sir
My daughter Theocrin•, as you are
My true and ancient friend, as thou art valiavt,
And as all love a soldier, second me
In this my just petition, in your looks
I see a grant my Lord.
You shall orebeare me,
And since you are so confident in your cause,
Prepare you for the combat.
With more joy
Then yet I ever tasted, by the next sun,
The disobedient rebel shall hear from me
And so return in safety, my good Lords,
To all my service, I will di• or purchase
Rest to Morsels, nor can I make doubt,
But his impiety is a potent charm,
To edge my sword and add strength to my anne.
HEE did accept the challenge then?
Nay more,
Was over joyd in it; and as it had been
A fair invitement to a solemn feast,
And not a comb••• to conclude with death,
He cheerfully embraced it.
Are the articles
Signed to on both parts?
At the fathers suit,
With much unwillingness the governor
Consented to'em.
You are inward with
Our Admiral; could you yet never learn
What the nature of the quarrel is, that renders
The son, more then incensed, implacable
Against the father?
Never; yet I have
As far as manners would give warrant to it,
With my best curiousness of care observed him,
I have sa•e with him in his cabin a day together,
Yet not a syllable exchanged between us,
Sigh he did often, as if inward grief,
And melancholy at that instant would
Choke up his vital spirits, and now and then
A tear, or two, as in derision of
The toughness of his rugged temper would
Fall on his hallow cheeks, which but once felt,
A sudden flash of fury did dry up,
And laying then his hand upon his sword,
He would murmur, but yes so as I oft hard him,
We shall meet cruel father, yet we shall,
When i'll exact for every womanish drop
Of sorrow from these eyes, a strict account
Of much more from thy heart.
Tic wondrous strange.
And past my apprehension.
Yet what makes
The miracle greater, when from the maine top
A sayle's descried, all thoughts that doe concern
Himself laid by, no Lyon pinched with hunger,
Rouses himself more fiercely from his den,
Then he comes on the deck, and there how wisely
He gives directions, and how stout he is
In his executions, we to admiration,
Have been eye-witnesses, yet he never minds
The booty when tic made ours, but as if
The danger, in the purchase of the prey
Delighted him much more then the reward,
His will made known he does retire himself
To his private contemplation, no joy
Express•d by him for victory,
Hear he comes
But with more cheerful looks then ever yet
I saw him wear.
It was long since resolved on
Nor must I stagger now, may the cause
That forces me to this unnatural act,
Be buried in everlasting silence,
And I find rest in death, or my revenge,
To either I stand equal. Pray you Gentlemen
Be charitable in your censures of me,
And doe not entertain a false belief
That I am mad, for undertaking that
Which must be, when effected, still repented.
It adds to my calamity that I have
Discourse and reason, and but too well know
I can nor live, nor end a wretched life,
But both ways I am impious. Doe not therefore
Ascribe the perturbation of my soul
To a servile fear of death: I oft have viewed
All kinds of his inevitable darts,
Not are they terrible. Were I condemned to leap
From the cloud-covered brows of a steep rock
Into the deep; or Curtius-like to fill up,
For my Countries safety and an after name,
A bottomless A bysse, or charge through fire,
It could not so much shake me, as the encounter
Of this days single enemy.
If you please, Sir,
You may shunit, or defer it.
Not for the world:
Yet two things I entreat you, the first is,
You'll not enquire the difference between
My self and him, which as a father once
I honoured, now my deadliest enemy,
The last is, if I fall, to bear my body
Far from this place, and where you please inter it.
I should say more, but by his sudden coming
I am cut off.
Let me, Sir, have the honour
To be your second.
With your pardon, Sir,
I must put in for that, since our tried friendship
Hath lasted from our infancy.
I have served
U•der your command, and you have seen me fight,
And handsomely, though I say it, and if now
At this downright game, I may but hold your cards,
I'll not pull down the side.
I rest much bound
To your so noble offers, and I hope
Shall find your pardon, though I now refuse'em,
For which I'll yield strong reasons, but as briefly
As the time will give me leave. For me to borrow
(That am supposed the weaker) any aid
From the assistance of my Seconds sword,
Might write me down in the black list of those,
That have nor fire, nor spirit of their own;
But dare, and doe, as they derive their courage
From his example, on whose help and valour
They wholly doe depend. Let this suffice
In my excuse for that. Now if you please
On both parts to retire to yonder mount,
Where you, as in a Roman Theater,
May see the bloody difference determined,
Your favours meet my wishes.
It is approved of
By me, and I command you lead the way,
And leave me to my fortune.
I would gladly
Be a spectator (since I am denied
To be an Actor) of each blow, and thrust,
And punctually observe'em.
You shall have
All you desire; for in a word or two
I must make• bold to entertain the time,
If he give suffrage to it.
Yes, I will,
I'll hear thee, and then kill thee: nay farewell.
Embrace with love on both sides, and with •s
Leave deadly hate, and fury.
From this place
You ne'er shall see both living.
What's past help, is
Beyond prevention.
Now we are alone, Sir,
And thou hast liberty to unlode the burden
Which thou groan'st under. Speak thy griefs.
I shall, Sir;
But in a perplexed form and method, which
You only can interpret; would you had not
A guilty knowledge in your bosom of
The language which you force me to deliver,
So I were nothing. As you are my father
I bend my knee, and uncompelled profess
My life, and all thats mine, to be your gift;
And that in a sons duty I stand bound
To lay this head beneath your feet, and run
All desperate hazards for your ease and safety.
But this confessed on my part, I rise up,
And not as with a father, (all respect,
Love, fear, and reverence cast off,) but as
A wicked man I thus expostulate with you.
Why have you done that which I dare not speak,
And in the action changed the humble shape
Of my obedience, to rebellious rage
And insolent pride? and with shut eyes constrained me
To run my Bark of honour on a shelf,
I must not see, nor if I saw it, shun it?
In my wrongs nature suffers, and looks backward,
And mankind trembles to see me pursue
What beasts would fly from. For when I advance
This sword, as I must doe against your head,
Piety will weep, and filial duty morn,
To see their altars which you built up in me,
In a moment razed and ruined, that you could
(From my grieved soul I wish it) but produce
To qualify, not excuse your deed of horror,
Ou• seeming reason that I might fix here,
And move no father.
Have I so far lost
A fathers power, that I must give account
Of my actions to my son? or must I plead
As a fearful prisoner at the bar, while he
That owes his being to me sirs a Judge
To censure that, which only by my self
Ought to be questioned? mountains sooner fall
Beneath their valleys, and the lofty Pine
Pay homage to the Bramble, or what else is
Preposterous in nature, ere my tongue
In one short fillable yields satisfaction
To any doubt of thine, nay though it were
A certainty disdaining argument.
Since though my deeds wore Hell• black livery,
To thee they should appear triumphal robes,
Set off with glorious honour, thou being bound
To see with my eyes, and to hold that reason,
That takes or birth or fashion from my will.
This sword divides that slavish knot.
It cannot,
It cannot wretch, and if thou but remember
From whom thou had this spirit, thou dare not hope it.
Who trained thee up in arms but I? Who taught thee
Men were men only when they durst look down
With scorn on death and danger, and contemned
All opposition, till plumed victory
Had made her constant stand upon their helmets?
Under my shield thou hast fought as securely
As the young Eaglet, covered with the wings
Of her fierce Dam, learns how and where to prey.
All that is manly in thee, I call mine;
But what is weak and womanish, thine own.
And what I gave, since thou art proud, ungrateful,
Presuming to contend with him, to whom
Submission is due, I will take from thee.
Look therefore for extremities, and expect not
I will correct thee as a son, but kill thee
As a Serpent swollen with poison, who surviving
A little longer, with infections breath,
Would render all things near him, like it self
Contagious. Nay, now my anger's up,
Ten thousand virgins kneeling at my feet,
And with one general cry howling for mercy,
Shall not redeem thee.
Thou incensed Power,
A while forbear thy thunder, let me have
No aid in my revenge, if from the grave
My mother.
Thou shalt never name her more.
They are at it.
That thrust was put strongly home.
But with more strength avoided.
Welcome in,
He has drawn blood of him yet, well done old Cock.
That was a strange miss.
That a certain hit.
Hoe's fallen, the day is ours.
The Admiral's slain.
The father is victorious!
Let us haste
To gratulate his conquest.
1. Wee to morn
The fortune of the son.
With utmost speed
Acquaint the Governor with the good success,
That he may entertain to his full merit,
The father of his Countries peace and safety.
Were a new life hid in each mangled limb,
I would search, and find it. And howere to some
I may seem cruel, thus to tyrannise
Upon this senseless flesh, I glory in it.
That I have power to be unnatural,
Is my security, die all my fears,
And waking jealousies, which have so long
Been my tormentors, theres now no suspicion;
A fact, which I alone am conscious of,
Can never be discovered, or the cause
That called this Duel on. I being above
All perturbations, nor is it in
The power of Fate, again to make me wretched.
All honour to the Conqueror.
Who dares tax
My friend of treachery now?
I am very glad, Sir,
You have sped so well. But I must tell you thus much,
To put you in mind that a low ebb must follow
Your high swollen tide of happiness, you have purchased this
•our at a high price.
It is Belgards,
Above all estimation, and a little
To be exalted with it cannot savour
Of arrogance: that to this arm and sword,
Mar•ellis owes the freedom of her fears,
Or that my loyalty not long since eclipsed,
Shines now more bright than ever, are not things
to be lamented. Though indeed they may
Appear too dearly bought, my falling glories
Being made up again, and cemented
With a sons blood. It is true, he was my son
While he was worthy, but when he shook off
His duty to me, (which my fond indulgence
Upon submission might perhaps have pardoned)
And grew his Counties enemy, I looked on him
As a Stranger to my family, and a Traitor
Justly proscribed, and he to be rewarded
That could bring in his head. I know in this
That I am censured rugged and austere,
That will vouchsafe not one sad sigh or tear
Upon his slaughtered body. But I rest
Well satisfied in my self, being assured
That extraordinary virtues, when they soar
Too high a pitch for common fights to judge of,
Losing their proper splendour, are condemned
For most remarkable vices.
Tic too true, Sir,
In the opinion of the multitude:
But for my self that would be held your friend,
And hope to know you by a nearer name,
They are as they deserve, received.
My daughter
Shall thank you for the favour.
I can wish
No happiness beyond it.
Shall we have leave
To bear the corps of our dead Admiral,
As he enjoined us from this Coast?
Provided
The articles agreed on be observed,
And you depart hence with it, making oath
Never hereafter but as friends to touch
Upon this shore.
We'll faithfully perform it.
Then as you please dispose of it. Tic an object
That I could wish removed. His sins die with him,
So far he has my charity.
He shall have
A Soldiers funeral.
Farewell.
These rites
Paid to the dead, the Conqueror that survives
Must reap the harvest of his bloody labour.
Sound all l••d instruments of joy and triumph,
And with all circumstance, and ceremony
Wait on the Patron of our liberty,
Which he at all parts merits.
I am honoured.
Beyond my hopes.
It is short of your deserts.
Lead on: Oh Sir you must: you are too modest.
Talk not of comfort, I am both ways wretched,
And so distracted with my doubts and fears,
I know not where to fix my hopes. My loss
Is certain in a father, or a brother,
Or both, such is the cruelty of my fate,
And not to be avoided.
You must bear it
With patience, Madam.
And what's not in you
To be prevented, should not cause a sorrow
Which cannot help it.
Fear not my brave Lord
Your noble father; fighting is to him
Familiar as eating. He can teach
Our modern Duellists how to cleave a button,
And in a new way, never yet found out
By old Caranza.
May he be victorious,
And punish disobedience in his son,
Whose death in reason should at no part move you,
He being but half your brother, and the nearness,
Which that might challenge from you, forfelted
By his impious purpose to kill him, from whom
He received life.
A general shout.
Of joy.
Look up dear Lady, sad news never came
•sherd with loud applause.
I stand prepared,
To endure the shock of it.
I am out of breath
With running to deliver first.
What?
Wee are all made,
My Lord has wont the day, your brother's slain,
The pirats gone, and by the governor,
And states, and all the men of war he is
••ought home in triumph, nay no musing, pay me
For my good news hereafter.
Heaven is just!
Give thanks at leisure, make all hast to meet him
I could wish I were a horse that I might bear you
To him upon my back.
Thou art an ass,
And this is a sweet burden.
Peace you crackrope.
All honours we can give you and rewards
Though all that's rich, or precious in Morsels
Were laid down at your feet, can hold no weight
With your deservings, let me glory in
Your action as if it were mine own,
And have the honour with the arms of love,
To emb•ce the great performer of a deed,
Transcending all this Country ere could boast of.
Imagine, noble Sir, in what we may
Express our thankfulness, and rest assured
It shall be freely granted.
Hoe's an enemy
To goodness and to virtue, that dares think
There's any other thing within our power to give,
Which you in justice may not boldly challenge.
And as your own, for we will ever be
At your devotion.
Much honoured Sir,
And you my noble Lords, I can say only,
The greatness of your favours overwhelm me,
And like too large a sail, for the small bark
Of my poor merits, sinks me. That I stand
Upright in your opinions, is an honour
Exceeding my deserts, I having done
Nothing but what in duty I stood bound to:
And to expect a recompense were base,
Good deeds being ever in themselves rewarded.
Yet since your liberal bounties tell me that
I may with your allowance be a Suitor,
To you my Lord I am an humble one,
And must ask that, which known, I fear you will
Censure me over. bold.
It must be something
Of a strange nature, if it find from me
Denial or delay.
Thus then my Lord,
Since you encourage me: You are happy in
A worthy son, and all the comfort that
Fortune has left me is one daughter; now
If it may not appear too much presumption,
To seek to match my lowness with your height,
I should desire (and if I may obtain it,
I write Nilultra to my largest hopes)
She may in your opinion be thought worthy
To be received into your family,
And married to your son: their years are equal,
And their desires I think too, she is not
〈◊〉 noble, not my state contemptible,
And if you think me worthy your alliance,
〈◊〉 is all I doe aspire to.
You demand
That which with all the service of my life
I should have laboured to obtain from you.
O, Sir, why are you slow to meet foe fair
And noble an offer? Can France show a virgin
That may be paralleled with her? Is she not
The Phoenix of the time? the fairest star
In the bright sphere of women?
Be not raped so:
Though I dislike not what is motioned, yet
In what so near concerns me, it is fit
I should proceed with judgement.
Here she comes,
Look on her with impartial eyes, and then
Let envy if it can, name one graced feature
In which she is defective.
Welcome Girl:
My joy, my comfort, my delight, my all,
Why dost thou come to greet my victory
〈◊〉 such a sable habit? this showed well
When thy father was a prisoner, and suspected;
•ut now his faith and loyalty are admired,
Rather than doubted, in your outward garments
You are to express the joy you feel within;
Nor should you with more curiousness and care,
Pace to the Temple to be made a Bride,
Than now, when all men's eyes are fixed upon you,
You should appear to entertain the honour
From me descending to you, and in which
You have an equal share.
Heaven has my thanks
With all humility paid for your fair fortune,
And so far duty binds me, ye a little
To mou•no a brothers loss however wicked,
The tenderness familiar to our sex
May if you please excuse
Thou art deceived,
Hee living was a blemish to thy beauties,
But in his death gives ornament, and lustre
To thy perfections, but that they are
So exquisitely rare, that they admit not
The least addition. H•a! here• yet a print
Of a sad tear on thy cheek, how it takes from
Our present happiness! with a fathers lips,
A loving fathers lips, i'll kiss it off
The cause no more remembered.
You forget Sir
The presence we are in.
Tic well considered,
And yet who is the owner of a treasure,
Above all value, but without offence,
May glory in the glad possession of it.
Nor let it in you excellence beget wonder,
Or any here that looking on the daughter,
I feast my self in the imagination
Of those sweet pleasures, and allowed delights,
I tasted from the mother, who still lives
In this her perfect model, for she had
Such smooth &amp; high arched brows, such sparkling eyes
Whose every glance stord Cupids emptied quiver;
Such ruby lips, and such a lovely browne,
Disdaining all adulterate aids of art,
Kept a perpetual spring upon her face,
As death himself lamented being forced
To blast it with his paleness, and if now,
Her brightness dimd with sorrow, take and please you,
Think think young Lord, when she appears her self
(This veil removed) in her own natural pureness
How far she will transport you.
Did she need it,
The praise which you (and well deserved) give to her
Must of necessity raise new desires
In one indebted more to years; to me
Your words are but as oil powered on a fire,
That flames already at the height.
No more;
I doe believe you, and let me from you
Find so much credit, when I make her yours
I doe possess you of a gift, which I
With much unwillingness part from. My good Lords
For bear your further trouble, give me leave, for on the sudden I
am indisposd to retire to my own house, and rest. Tomorrow
As you command me I will be your guest,
And having decked my daughter like her self,
You shall have farther conference.
You are Master
Of your own will but fail not i'll expect you.
Nay I will be excusd, I must part with you
My dearest Theocrine give me thy hand,
I will support thee.
You gripe it too hard Sir.
Indeed I doe, but have no farther end in it,
But love and tenderness such as I may challenge
And you must grant. Thou art a sweet one ye•
And to be cherished.
May I still deserve it.
HAve you been careful?
With my best endeavours,
Let them bring stomachs, theres no want of meat Sir:
Portly and curious viands are prepared,
To please all kinds of appetites.
Tic well.
I love a table furnish with full plenty,
And store of friends to eat it, but with this caution,
I would not have my house a common Inn,
For some men that come rather to devour me,
Than to present their service. At this time too
It being a serious and solemn meeting,
I must not have my board pestered with shadows,
That under other men's protection break in
Without invitement.
With your favour then,
You must double your guard, my Lord, for on my knowledge
There are some so sharp se•, not to be kept out
By a file of Musket•e•s, And 'els less danger,
I'll undertake, to stand at push of pike
With an enemy in a breach, that undermined too,
And the Cannon playing on it, than to stop
One Harpy, your perpetual guest, from entrance,
When the dresser, the Cooks drum, thunders come on,
The service will be lost else.
What is hee?
As tall a trencher-man, that is most certain,
As ere demolished Pie-fortification
As soon as battered; and if the rim of his belly
Were not made up of a much tougher stuff
Than his Buff jerkin, there were no defence
Against the charge of his guts: you needs must know him,
He's eminent for his eating.
O Belgarde!
The same, one of the Admirals cast Captains,
Who swear, there being no war, nor hope of any,
The only drilling is to eat devoutly,
And to beaver drinking, (that's allowed of)
But they know not where to get it, there's the spy•e on'•.
The more their misery, yet if you can
For this day put him off.
It is beyond th'invention of man.
No: say this only,
And as from me; you apprehend me?
Yes Sir.
But it must be done gravely.
Never doubt me Sir.
We'll dine in the great room, but let the music
And banquet be prepared here.
This will make him
Lose his dinner at the least, and that will vex him.
As for the sweet meats, when they are trod under foot,
Let him take his share with the Pages and Lackeys,
Or scramble in the rushes.
Tic near twelve,
I keep a watch within me never misses.
Save thee Master Steward.
You are most welcome, Sir.
Has thy Lord slept well to night? I come to enquire.
I had a foolish dream, that against my will
Carried me from my lodging, to learn only
How he's disposed.
He's in most perfect health, Sir.
Let me but see him feed heartily at dinner,
And I'll believe so too, for from that ever
I make a certain judgment.
It holds surely
In your own constitution.
And in all men's
Tic the best symptom, let us loose no time,
Delay i• dangerous.
Troth Sir if I might
Without offence deliver what my Lord has
Committed to my trust, I shall receive it
As a special favour.
Weell fee't, and discourse
As the proverb says for health sake after dinner,
Or rather after supper, willingly then
I'll walk a mile to here thee.
Nay good Sir
I will be brief and pi•hee.
Prithee be so.
Hee bid me say of all his ghosts, that he
Stands most affected to you, for the freedom,
And plainness of your manners. He ne'er observed you
To twirl a dish about, you did not like of
All being pleasing to you; or to take
A say of venison, or stale foul by your nose,
(Which is a solecism at another table)
But by strong ea•ing of 'em did confirm
They never were delicious to your palate,
But when they were mortified, as the Huguenot says,
And so your part grows greater, nor doe you
Find fault with the sauce, keen hunger being the best,
Which ever to your much praise, you bring with you;
Nor will you with impertinent relations
Which is a master-peece, when meates before you
Forget your teeth to use your nimble tongue
But doe the fea•e you come for.
Be advised
A•d end your jeering; for if you proceed
You'll feel, as I can eat I can be angry,
And beating may ensue.
I'll take your counsel,
And roundly come to the point, my Lord much wonders•
That you, that are a courtier as a soldier,
In all things else, and every day can vary
Your actions and discourse, continue constant
To this one suite?
To one? tic well I have one,
Unpawnd, in these days, every cast commander is not ble• with
the fortune, I assure you, but why this question? does this offend
him?
Not much: but he believes it is the reason,
You ne'er presume to fit above the salt,
And therefore this day (our great Admiral
With other states being invited ghosts)
He does entreat you to appear among'em,
In some fresh habit.
This staff shall not serve
To beat the dog off, these are soldiers garments,
And so by consequence grow contemptible.
It has stung him.
I would I were acquainted with the players,
In charity they might furnish me, but there is
No faith in Brokers, and for believing Taylors
They are only to be read of, but not seen,
And sure they are confined to their own hells,
And there they live invisible, well I must not
Be fubd off thus, pray you report my service
To the Lord governor. I will obey him
And though my wardrop's poor, rather then loose
His company at this feast, I will put on
The richest s•i•e I have, and fill the chair,
That makes me worthy of—
We are shut of him, he will be seen no more here, how my fellows
Will bless me for his absence, he had starv'dem
Had he stayed a little longer, would be cood,
For his own sake shift a shirt, and thats the utmost
Of his ambition, adieu good Captains—
Tic a strange fondness.
Tic beyond example,
His resolution to part with his estate,
To make her dower the weightier is nothing,
But to observe how curious he is
In his own person to add ornament
To his daughters ravishing features, is the wonder.
I sent a page of mine in the way of courtship,
This morning to her to present my service,
From whom I understand all: there he found him
Solicitous in what shape she should appear,
This gown was rich, but the fashion stale, the other
Was quaint, and neat, but the stuff not rich enough,
Then does he curse the Taylor, and in rage
Falls on her Shoemaker, for wanting art
To express in every circumstance, the form
Of her most delicate foot, then s••s in counsel
With much deliberation to find out
What tire would best adorn her; and one chosen
Varying in his opinion, he tears off,
And stamps it under foot, then tries a second
A third and fourth, and satisfied at length
With much a doe in that, he grows again,
Perplexed and troubled where to place her Jewels
To be most marked, and whether she, should wear
This diamond on her forehead, or between
Her milke-white paps, disputing on it both ways,
Then taking in this hand, a rope of pearl,
(The best of France) he seriously considers
Whither she should dispose it on her arm
Or on her neck, with 20 other tri••es, too radios to deliver.
I have known him from his first youth, but never yet observed
In all the passages of his life, and fortunes,
Virtues so mixed with vices, valiant the world speaks him,
But with that bloody; liberal in his go•ts too.
But to maintain his prodigal expense,
A fierce extortioner, an impotent lover
Of women for a flash, but his fires quenched,
Hating as deadly, the truth is I am not
Ambitious of this match: nor will I cross you in your affections.
I have ever found you,
(And tic my happiness) a loving father,
And careful of my good:—by the loud music,
As you gave order for his entertainment,
He's come into the house two long hours since,
The Colonels, commissioners and captains,
To pay him all the rites his worth can challenge,
Went to wait on him hither.
You are most welcome,
And what I speak to you, does from My heart
disperse it self to all.
You meet my Lord your trouble.
Rather Sir increase of honour,
When you are pleased to grace my house.
The Favour 〈◊〉 doubled on my part, most worthy Sir,
Since your fair daughter, my incomparable Mistress,
Deigns us her presence.
View her well brave Beaufort,
But yet at distance, you hereafter may
Make your approaches nearer, when the priest
Hath made it lawful, and were not she mine,
I durst aloud proclaim it. Hymen never
Put on his s••••on coloured robe to change
A barren virgin name with more good omen•,
Then at her nup•ialls, look on her again,
Then tell me if she now appear the 〈◊〉
That she was yesterday.
Being her self
She cannot but be excellent, these rich
And curious dressing•, which in others might
Cover deformities, from her take lustre
Nor can add to her.
You conceive her right,
And in your admiration of her sweetness,
You only can deserve her; blush not girl,
Thou art above his praise, or mine, nor can
Obsequiou• fl••ery though she should use
Her thousand oyldtongues to advance thy worth,
Give ought (for thats impossible) but take from
Thy more then humane graces, and even then
When she hath spent her self with her best strength,
The wrong she has done thee shall be so apparent,
That loosing her own servile shape and name,
She will be thought detraction, but I
Forget my self, and something whispers to me,
I have said too much.
I know not what to think on it,
But there's some mystery in it, which I fear
Will be too soon discovered.
I much wrong
Your patience noble Sir, by too much hugging
My proper issue, and like the foolish crow
Believe my black brood sue•••.
There needs not Sir
The least excuse for this, nay I must have
Your arm, you being the master of the feast,
And this the mistress.
I am anything
That you shall please to make me.
Nay tic yours
Without more complement.
Your will's a law •ir.
Would I had been borne a Lord•
Or I a Lady.
It may be you 〈◊〉 both be got in court,
Though bred up in the City, for your mothers,
As I have heard loved the lobby, and there nightly
Are seen strange apparitions, and who knows
But that some noble fawn, heated with wine,
And cloyed with partridge, had a kind of longing
To trade in sprats? this needs no exposition,
But can you yield a reason for your wishes?
Why had I been borne a Lord, I had been no servant.
And where as now necessity makes us waiters,
We had been attended on.
And might have slept then,
As long as we pleased, and fed when we had stomachs,
And worn new cloths, nor lived as now in hope
Of a cast gown, or petticoat.
You are fools,
And ignorant of your happiness, ere I was
Sworn to the pantofle, I have heard my tutor
Prove it by logic, that a servants life
Was better then his masters, and by that
I learn from him, if that my memory fall not,
I'll make it good.
Proceed my little wit
In december• sex•e.
Thus then from the king
To the beggar, by gradation all are servants,
And you must grant the slavery is less
To study to please one, then many.
True.
Well then, and first to you Sir, you complain
You serve one Lord, but your Lord serves a thousand,
Besides his passions (that are his worst masters)
You must humour him, and he is bound to sooth
Every gre•me Sir above him, if he frown,
For the least neglect you fear to loose your place,
But if, and with all slavish observation,
From the mignions self, to the groom of his close stool,
He hourly seeks not favour, he is sure
To be eas'• of his office, though perhaps he bought it.
Nay more, that high disposer of all such
That are subordinate to him, serves, and fears
The fury of the many-headed monster,
The giddy multitude• And as a horse
Is still a horse, for all his golden trappings,
So your men of purchased titles, at their best are
But serving-men in rich liveries.
Most rare infant,
Where learnd'st thou this morality?
Why thou dull pate,
As I could thee, of my tutor.
Now for us boy.
I am cut of the governor.
Quick, quick •errs,
See all things perfect.
Let the blame be ours else.
And as I said when we are at the banquet,
And high in our cups, for tic no feast without it,
Especially among soldiers: Theocrine
Being retired, as that's no place for her,
Take you occasion to rise from the table,
And lose no opportunity.
Tic my purpose,
And if I can win her to give her heart,
I have a holy man in readiness
To join our hands, for the Admiral her father repents him of his
grant to me, and
So far transported with a strange opinion
of her fair features, that should we desire it,
I think ere long he will believe, and strongly,
The Daulphine is not worthy of her, I
Am much amazed with it.
Nay dispatch there fellows.
We are ready when you please, sweet forms your pardon,
It has been such a busy time I could not
Tender that ceremonious respect
Which you deserve, but now the great work ended,
I will attend the less, and with all care
Observe, and serve you.
This is a pend speech,
And serves as a perpetual preface to
A dinner made of fragments.
Wee wait on you.
YOU are not merry Sir.
Yes my good Lord,
You have given us ample means to drown all cares,
And yet I nourish strange thoughts, which I would
Most willingly destroy
Pray you take your place,
And drink a health, and let it be if you please
To the worthiest of Women, now observe him.
Give me the bowl, since you doe me the honour,
I will begin it.
May wee know her name Sir?
You shall, I will not choose a foreign Queens,
Nor yet our own, for that would relish of
Tame flattery; nor doe their height of title,
Or absolute power confirm their worth and goodness,
These being heavens gifts and frequently conferred
On such as are beneath em; nor will I
Name the king Mistress howsoever she
In his esteem may carry it, but if I•
As wine gives liberty, may •s• my freedom;
Not swayed this way, or that with confidence,
(And I will make it good on any equal)
If it must be to her, whose outward form
Is bettered by the beauty of her mind,
She lives not that with justice can pretend
An interest to this so sacred health,
But my fair daughter. He that only doubts it,
I doe pronounce a villain, this to her then.
What may we think of this?
It matters not.
For my part I will sooth him rather then
Draw on a quarrel, Chamont.
Tic the safest course, and one I mean to follow.
It has gone round Sir.
Now you have done her right, if there be any
Worthy to second this, propose it boldly,
I am your pledge.
Lets pause here if you please,
And entertain the time with something else,
Music there in some lofty strain, the song too
That I gave order for; the new one called
The soldiers delight?
The song ended: enter Belgarde in armour a case of C•rbi•es by his side.
Who stops me now?
Or who dares only say that I appear not
In the most rich and glorious habit that
Renders a man complete? what court so set off
With state and ceremonious pomp, but thus
Accoutred I may enter? or what feast
Though all the elements at once were ransacked,
To store it with variety transcending
The curiousness, and cost, on Traians birth day,
(Where princes only, and confederate kings
Did sit as ghosts, served, and attended on
By the senators of Rome, sat with a soldier
In this his natural, and proper shape
Might not and boldly fill a seat, and by
His present make the great solemnity
More honoured and remarkable?
Tic acknowledged,
And this a grace done to me unexpected.
But why in armour?
What's the mystery?
Pray you reveal that.
Soldiers out of action,
That very rare, but like unbidden ghosts
Bring their stools with•em, for their own defence,
At court should feed in gauntle•s, they may have
Their fingers cut else; there your carpet knights,
That never charged beyond a mistress lips,
Are still most keen, and valiant, but to you
Whom it does most concem, my Lord, I will
Address my speech, and with a soldiers freedom
In my reproof return the bitter scoff,
You threw upon my poverty, you contemned
My courser outside, and from that concluded,
(As by your groom you made me understand)
I was unworthy to sit at your table,
Among these tissues, and embroideries,
Unless I changed my habit, I have done it,
And show my self in that which I have worn
In the heate and servor of a bloody fight,
And then it was in fashion, not as now
Ridiculous, and despised, this hath past through
A wood of pikes, and every one aimed at it,
Yet scorned to take impression from their fury
Wi•h this, as still you see it fresh and new
I have charged through fire that would have singed your sables
Black fox, and ermins, and changed the proud colour
Of Skatlet though of the right Tirian die;
But now as if the trappings made the man, such only are
Admired that come adorned
With what's no part of them, this is mine own
My richest suit, a suite I must not part from,
But not regarded now, and yet remember
Tic we that bring you in the means of feasts,
Banquets, and revels, which when you possess,
With barbarous ingratitude you deny us
To be made sharers in the harvest, which
Our sweat and industry reaped, and sowed for you.
The silks you wear, we with our blood spin for you;
This massy plate, that with the ponderous weight
Does make your cupboods crack, we (unaffrighted
With tempests, or the long and tedious way,
Or dreadful monsters of the deep, that wait
With open jaws still ready to devour us)
Fetch from the other world. Let it not then
In after ages to your shame be spoken,
That you wi•h no relenting eyes look on
Our wants that feed your plenty; or consume
In prodigal, and wanton gifts on Drones
The Kingdoms treasure, yet d•rain from us.
The debt that with the hazard of our lives,
We have made you stand engaged for: or force us
Against all civil government in armour
To require that, which with all willingness
Should be tendered, ere demanded.
I commend
This wholesome sharpness in you, and prefer it
B•fore obsequious tameness, it shows lovely:
No• shall the rain of your good counsel fall
Upon the barren sands, but spring •p fruit
Such as you long have wished for. And the rest
Of your profession like you discontented
For want of means, shall in the•r present payment
Be b•not to pra•se your b•ldnesse: and hereafter
I will take order you sh•ll have no cause,
For want of change to put your armour on
But in the face of an enemy; not as now
Among your friends. To that which is due to you,
To furnish you like your self, of mine own bountle
I'll add five hundred crowns.
I to my power
Will follow the example.
Take this Captain,
Tic •ll my present store, but when you please,
Command me further.
I could wish it more.
This is the luckiest jest ever came from me.
Let a Soldier use no other Scribe to draw
The form of his petition. This will speed
When your thrice humble supplications,
With prayers for increase of health and honours
To their grave Lordships shall as soon as read
Be pocketred up, the cause no more remembered.
When this dumb Rhetoric.—Well, I have a life,
Which I in thankfulness for your great favours,
My noble Lords, when you please to command it,
Must never think mine own. Broker, be happy,
These golden birds fly to thee.
You are dull, Sir,
And seem not to be taken with the passage
You saw presented.
Passage? I observed none,
My thoughts were elsewhere busied. Ha! she is
In danger to be lost, to be lost for ever,
If speedily I come not to her rescue,
For so my Genius tells me.
What Chi••re's
Work on your fantasy?
Fantasies? They are truth•.
Where is my Theocrine? You have plotted
To rob me of my Daughter • bring me to her,
Or I'll call down the Saints to witness for me:
You are inhospitable.
You amaze me•
Your Daughter'• sake, and now exchanging 〈◊〉
With my son her servant, why doe you hear this
With such distracted looks? since to that end
You brought her hither?
Tic confessed I did,
But now pray you pardon me, and if you please
Ere she deliver up her virgin fort,
I would observe what is the art he uses
In planting his artillery against it,
She is my only care, nor must she yield
But upon noble terms.
Tic so determind.
Yet I am jealous.
Overmuch I fear.
What passions are these?
Come I will bring you
Where you, with th•se if they so please, may see
The love-s•aene acted.
There is something more
Then fatherly love in this.
We wait upon you.
Since then you meet my flames with equal order
As you profess, it is your by••tie mistress,
Nor must I call it debt, yet tic your glory,
That your excess supplies my want, and makes 〈◊〉
Strong in my weakness, which could never bee,
But in your good opinion.
You teach me Sir,
What I should say, since from your san of favour,
I like dim Phoebe, in her •elf 〈◊〉
Borrow that light I have.
Which you return
With large increase (since that you will •recome•
And I dare 〈…〉 pleased
To make what's yet divided one.
I have
Already in my wishes, modesty
Forbids me to speak more.
but what assurance,
(But still without offence) may I demand
That may secure me that your heart tongue
Join to make up this harmony?
Choose any
Suiting your love distinguished from lust,
To ask and mine to grant.
Yonder they are.
At distance too, •is yet well.
I may take then
This hand, and with a thousand burning kisses,
Swear tic the anchor to my hopes?
You may Sir.
This is somewhat too much.
And this done, view my self
In these true mirrors.
Ever •few to you Sir,
And may they aloof the ability of fight,
When they seek other object.
This is more
Then I can give consent to.
And a kiss,
Thus printed on your lips will not distaste you?
Her lips!
Why where should he kiss? are you distracted?
Then when this holy man hath made it lawful.
A priest so ready too I must break •n.
And what's spoke here is registered above,
I must ingtosse those favours to my self
Which are not to be named.
All I can give,
But what they are I know not.
I'll instruct you.
O how my blood boils!
Pray you contain your self,
Me thinks his courtship's modest.
Then being mine,
And wholly mine, the river of your love
To kinsmen and allies, nay to your father,
(Howere out of his tenderness he admires you)
Must in the One• of your affection
To me be swallowed up, and want a name
Compared with what you owe me.
Tic most •i•, Sir,
The stronger bond that binds me to you, must
Dissolve the weaker.
I am ruined if
I come not fairly off.
Theres nothing wanting
But your consent.
Some strange invention aid me.
This! yes, it must be so.
Why doe you stagger,
When what you seemed so much to wish is offered?
Both parties being agreed to.
I'll not court
A grant from you, nor doe I wrong your Daughter,
Though I say my son deserves her.
Tic far from
My humble thoughts to undervalue him
I cannot prize too high. For howsoever
From my own fond indulgence I have sung
Her praises with too prodigal a tongue,
That tenderness laid by, I stand confirmed
All that I fancied excellent in her
B•llanc'd, with what is really his own,
Holds weight in no proportion.
New turnings!
Whither tend• this?
Had you observed, my Lord,
With what a sweet gradation he wood,
As I did punctually, you cannot blame her,
Though she did listen with a greedy ear
To his fair modest offers: but so great
A good as then flowed to her, should have been
With more deliberation entertained,
And not with such haste swallowd, she shall first
Consider seriously what the blessing is,
And in what ample manner to give thanks for it,
And then receive it. And though I shall think
Short minutes years till it be perfect•ed,
I will defer that which I most desire,
And so must she, till longing expectation,
That heightens pleasure, makes her truly know
Her happiness, and with what out-strea•cht arms
She must embrace it.
This is curiousness
Beyond example.
Let it then begin
From me, in whats mine own I'll use my will,
And yield no further reason. I lay claim to
The liberty of a subject. Fall not off,
But be obedient, or by the hair
I'll drag thee home. Censure me as you please,
I'll take my own way, O the inward fires
That wanting vent consume me!
Tic most certain
H••s mad, or worse.
How, worse?
Nay, there I leave you,
My thoughts are free.
This I foresaw.
Take comfort,
H shall walk in clouds, but I'll discover him:
And he shall find, and feel, if he excuse not,
And with strong reasons this gross injury,
I can make use of my authority.
WHat flames are these my wild desires fan in me?
The torch that feeds them, was not lighted at
Thy altars, Cupped: vindicate thy self,
And doe not own it: and confirm it rather,
That this infernal brand that turns me cinders,
Was by the snake-hair'd Sisters thrown into
My guilty bosom. O that I was ever
Accursed in having issue: my sons blood,
(That like the poisoned shirt of Hercules
Grows to each part about me) which my hate
Forced from him with much willingness, may admit
Some weak defence; but my most impious love
To my fair daughter Theocrine, none.
Since my affection (rather wicked lust)
That does pursue her, is a greater crime
Than any detestation, with which
I should afflict her innocence. With what cunning
I have betrayed my self, and did not feel
The scorching heat that now with fury rage•
Why was I tender of her? covered with
That fond disguise, this mischief stole upon me.
I •hought it no offence to kiss her often,
O• twine mine arms about her softer neck,
And by false shadows of a fathers kindness
I long deceived my self: but now the effect
Is too apparent. How I strove to be
In her opinion held the worthiest man
In courtship, form, and feature, envying him
That was preferred before me, and yet then
My wishes to my self were not discovered.
But still my fires increased, and with delight
I would call her mistress, wilfully forgetting
The name of daughter choosing rather she
Should stile me servant, then with reverence father,
Yet mocking• I ne'er cherished obscene hopes,
But in my troubled slumbers often thought
She was too near to me, and then sleeping blushed
At my imagination which passed
My eyes being open, not condemning it,
I was ravished with the pleasure of the dream,
Yet spite of these temptations I have reason
That pleads against'em, and commands me to
Extinguish these abominable fires,
And I will doe it, I will send her back
To him that loves her lawfully, Within there?
Sir did you call?
I look no sooner on her,
But all my boasted power of reason leaves me,
And passion again usurps her Empire, does none else wait me?
I am wretched sir, should any owe more duty.
This is worse then disobedience, leave me.
On my knees sir, as I have ever squirt my will by yours.
And liked, and loathed with your eyes: I beseech you
To teach me what the nature of my fault is,
That hath incensed you, (sure•is one of weakness
And not of malice) which your gentler temper
On my submission I hope will pardon,
Which granted by your piety, if that I
Out of the least neglect of mine hereafter,
Make you remember it, may I sink ever
Under your dread command.
O my stars! who can but dote on this humility
That sweetens, lovely in her tears? the fetters
That seemed to lessen in their weight; but now
By this grow heavier on me.
Dear sir:
Peace, I must not hear thee.
Not look on me.
No, thy looks and words are charms.
May they have power then
To calm the tempest of your wrath, alas sir,
Did I but know in what I give offence
In my repentance I would show my sorrow,
For what is past, and in my care hereafter
Kill the occasion or cease to be
Since life without your favour is to me a load I would cast off.
O that my heart were rent in sunder, that I might ex∣per,
The cause in my death buried: yet I know not
With such prevailing Oratory it is begged from me
That to deny thee would convince me to
Have sucked the milk of Tigers, rise, and I
But in a perplexed, and mysterious method.
Will make relation that which all the world
Admires and cries up in thee for perfections,
Are to unhappy me foul blemishes,
And mulcts in nature. If thou had been borne
Deformd and crooked, in the features of
Thy body, as the manners of thy mind,
Moore lipped, flat not'd, 〈◊〉 eyed, and beetle browed
With a dwarfs 〈◊〉 to a giant was•e,
Sower breathed, with claws for fingers on thy hands,
Splay footed, gouty legged, and over all
A loathsome leprosy had spread it self,
And made thee flaun'd of humane fellowships:
I had been blessed.
Why would you wi•h a monster
For such a one or worse you have described,
To call your father.
Rather then a• now,
Though I had drow•d thee for it in the sea
Appearing as thou do•• a new Pinto••,
With Iunos fair cow eyes, Minerva's brow
Aurora's blushing cheeks, Hebes fresh youth,
Venus soft paps, with Thetis silver feet.
Sir you have liked and loved them, and oft forced
(With your hyperboles of praise poured on them)
My modesty to a defensive red,
Strowd ore that paleness, which you then were pleased
To stile the purest white.
And in that cup I drank the poison I now feel dispersed
Through every vain and artery, wherefore art thou
So cruel to me? This thy outward shape
Brought a fierce war against me, not to be
By flesh and blood resisted: but to leave me
No hope of freedom from the Magazine
Of thy minds forces, treacherously thou drowsed up
Auxiliary helps to strengthen that
Which was already in it self too potent,
Thy beauty gave the first charge, but thy d•tie
Seconded with thy care, and watchful studies
To please, and serve my will in all that might
Raise up content in me, like thunder brake through
All opposition, and my ranks of reason
Disbanded, my victorious passions fell
To bloody execution, and compelled me
With willing hands to tic on my own chains,
And with a kind of flattering joy to glory in my captivity.
I, in this you speak, sir, am ignorance it self.
And so continue, for knowledge of the arms thou bear against me
Would make thee curse thy self, but yield no •yds
For thee to help me, and it were cruelty
In me to wound that spotless innocence
How ere it make me guilty, in a word
The pl••ifie of goodness is thy ill,
Thy virtues vices, and thy humble lowness
Far worse than stubborn •ullennesse, and pride,
Thy looks that ravish all beholders •ls
As killing a• the 〈◊〉, their 〈◊〉
Expressed in sorrow for the much I suffer,
A glorious insultation, and no sign
Of pity in thee, and to hear thee speak
In thy defence, though but in silent action,
Would make the hurt already deeply festerd
Incurable, and therefore as thou would not
By thy presence raise fresh furies to torment me
I doe conjure thee by a fathers power,
(And tic my curse I dare not think it lawful
To sue unto thee in a nearer name)
Without reply to leave me.
My obedience never learned yet to question your com∣mands,
But willingly to serve 'em, yet I must
Since that your will forbids the knowledge of
My fault, lament my fortune.
O that I have reason to discern the better way
And yet pursue the worse, when I look on her
I burn with heat, and in her absence freeze
With the cold blasts of jealousy, that another
Should ere taste those delights that are denied me,
And which of their afflictions bring less torture
I hardly can distinguish, is there then
No mean? no, so my understanding tells me,
And that by my cross fates it is determind
That I am both ways wretched.
Yonder he walks sir,
In much vexation: he hath sent my Lady
His daughter weeping in, but what the cause is
Rests yet in supposition.
I guess at it, but must be further satisfied, I will sift him
In private therefore, quit the room.
I am gon, sir.
Hal who disturbs me? Montrevile? your pardon,
Would you could grant one to your self. (I speak it
With the assurance of a friend) and yet
Before it be too late, make reparation
Of the gross wrong, your indiscretion offered
To the governor and his son, nay to your self,
For there begins my sorrow.
Would I had no greater cause to morn
Then their displeasure, for I dare justify.
We must not doe all that we dare private friend
I observed your alterations with a stricter eye
Perhaps then others, and to loose no time
In repetition, your strange demeamour
To your sweet daughter.
Would you could find out some other theme to treat of.
None but this; and this Isle dwell on, how ridiculous
And subject to construction?
No more.
You made your self, amazes me, and if
The frequent trials interchanged between us
Of love and friendship, be to their desert
Esteemed by you, as they hold weight with me,
No inward trouble should be of a shape
So horrid to your self, but that to me
You stand bound to discover it, and unlock
Your secretest thoughts: though the most innocent were
Loud crying sins.
And so perhaps they are.
And therefore be not curious to learn that
Which known must make you hate me.
Think not so, I am yours in right and wrong, not shall you find
A verbal friendship in me, but an active,
And here I vow, I shall no sooner know
What the disease is, but if you give leave
I will apply a remedy, is it madness?
I am familiarly acquainted with a deep read man
That can with charms and herbs
Restore you to your reason, or suppose
You are bewitched, he with more potent spells
And magical rites shall cure you, is it heavens anger?
With penitence and sacrifice appease it,
Beyond this, there is nothing that I can
Imagine dreadful, in your fame and fortunes
You are secure, your impious son removd to
That rendered you suspected to the state,
And your fair daughter.
Oh press me no farther.
Are you wrung there? why what of her? hath •he
Made shipwreck of her honour, or conspired
Against your life? or sealed a contract with
The devil of hell, for the recovery of her young Inamorato?
None of these,
And yet what must increase the wonder in you
Being Innocent in her self, she hath wounded me,
But where enquire not. Yet I know not how
I am persuaded from my confidence
Of your vowed love to me, to trust you with
My dearest secret, pray you chide me for it,
But with a kind of pity, not insulting
On my calamity.
Forward.
This same daughter.
What is her fault?
She is too fair to me.
•a! how is this?
And I have looked upon her
More than a father should, and languish to
Enjoy her as a husband.
Heaven forbid it,
And this is all the comfort you can give me,
Where are your promised a•d•, your charm••, your herbs?
Your deep read scholar, spells, and magic rites?
Can all these disenchau•• me? no, I must be
My own Physician, and upon my self
Practice a desperate cure.
Doe not conte•••me,
Enjoin me what you please with any hazard,
Isle undertake it, what means have you practis•
To quench this hellish fire?
All I could think on,
But to no purpose, and yet sometimes absence
Does yield a kind of intermission to
The fury of the fit.
See her no more then.
Tic my last refuge, and it was my intent
And still tic, to desire your help.
Command it.
Thus then, you have a fort of which you are
The absolute Lord, whither I pray you bear her:
And that the sight of her may not again
Nourish those flames, which I feel something lessend,
By all the ties of friendship I conjure you
And by a solemn oath you must confirm it,
That though my now calmed passions should rage higher
Then ever heretofore, and so compel me
Once more to wish to see her; though I use
Persuasions mixed with threatenings; nay add to it
That I this failing should with hands held up thus
Kneel at your feet, and bathe them with my te•te•,
Prayers or curses, vows or imprecations
Only to look upon her though at distance,
You still must be obdurate.
If it be
Your pleasure sir that I shall be unmoved, I will endeavour.
You must swear to be
Inexorable as you would prevent
The greatest mischief to your friend, that fate
Could throw upon him.
Well, I will obey you.
But how the governor will be answered, yet
And tic material, is not considered.
Leave that to me. 〈◊〉 presently give order
How you shall surprise her, be not frighted with
Her exclamations.
Be you constant •o
Your resolution I will no fail
In what concerns my part.
Be ever blessed for it.
Not to be spoke with, say you?
No.
Nor you
Admitted to have conference with her?
Neither.
His doors are fast locked up, and solitude
Dwells round about em, no access allowed
To friend or enemy, but—
Nay be not moved sir,
Let his passion work, and like a hot reined horse
'T will quickly tire it self.
Or in his death
Which for her sake till now I have forborne
I will revenge the injury he hath done
To my true and lawful love.
How does your father
The Governor relish it?
Troth he never had
Affection to the match: yet in his pity
To me, he's gone in person to his house,
Nor will he be denied, and if he find not
Strong and fair reasons Malefort will hear from him
In a kind he does not look for.
In the mean time
Pray you put on cheerful looks.
Mine suite my fortune.
O heir's Montaigne.
I never could have met you
More opportunely. Isle not stale the jest
By my relation: but if you will look on
The malecontent Belgard•, newly rigde up
With the train that follows him, 't will be an object
Worthy of your noting.
Look you the Comedy
Make good the Prologue, or the scorn will dw•ll
Upon your self.
I'll hazard that, observe now;
Nay, Captain, glorious Captain:
Fall back Rascal•,
Doe you make an Owl of me? this day I will
Receive no more Petitions,
Here are bills of all occasions, and all fi•••!
If this be the pleasure of a rich suite, would I were
Again in my buff jerkin, or my armour,
Then I walked securely by my creditors noses,
And not a dog marked me, every officer sh••d me,
And not one lousy prison would receive me;
But now, as the Ballade says, I am turned gallant:
There does not live that thing I ow a sows to,
But does torment me, a faithful Cobbler told me
With his awl in his hand, I was behind hand with hi••
For setting me upright, and bad me look to my self.
A Sempstresse too, that traded but in sock•,
Swore she would set a Se•joint on my back
For a borrowed shirt: my pay and the benevolence,
The Governor and the States bestowed upon me,
The city cormorants, my monie-mongers,
Have swallowed down already, they were sums,
I grant, but that I should be such a fool
Against my o•he, being a cashiered Captain,
To pay debts, though grown up to one and twenty,
Deserves more reprehension, in my judgement,
Then a shop-keeper, or a Lawyer that lends money,
In a long 〈◊〉 vacation.
How doe you like
His meditation?
Peace, let him proceed.
I cannot now go on the score for shame,
And where I shall begin to pawn, I marry,
That is considered timely, I paid for
This train of yours Dame Ostrich fourteen crowns,
And yet it is so light, '•will hardly pass
For a Tavern reckoning, unless it be
To save the charge of painting, naild on a post
For the sign of the feathers; p•x upon the fashion,
That a Captain cannot think himself a Captain,
If he wear not this like a fore-horse; yet it is not
Staple commodity; these are perfumed too,
Of the Roman wash, and yet a stale red herring
Would fill the belly better, and hurt the head less:
And this is Venice gold, would I had it again
In french crowns in my pocket. O you commanders
That like me have no dead pa•es, nor can cousin
The Commissary at a muster, let me stand
For an example to you, as you would
Enjoy your privileges: videlicet,
To pay your debts, and take your lechery gratis
To have you• issue warmed by others fires,
To be often drunk, and swear, yet pay no forfeit,
To the poor, but when you share with one another,
With all your other choice immunities,
Only of this I seriously advise you:
Let Courtiers trip like Courtiers,
And your Lords of dirt and dung hills mete
Their woods and acres, in velvets, s•ttins, tissues,
But keep you constant to doth and 〈◊〉,
Have you hey•d of such a penite•• homily,
I am studying now
Where I shall hide my self till the rumour of
My wealth• and bravery vanish, let me see,
There is a kind of a vaulting house not far off,
Where I used to spend my afternoons, among
Suburb shee-gamesters; and yet now I think on it
I have cracked a ring or two there, which they made
Others to solder, no,
O, have we spied you.
Upon him without ceremony, now• the time
While he is in the paying vein.
Save you brave Captain.
S'light, how she stares, they are worse then she-wolves to him.
Shame me not in the streets, I was coming to you.
O Sir, you may in public pay for the fiddling
You had in private.
We hear you are full of crowns, Sir.
And therefore knowing you are open-handed,
Before all be destroyed, I'll put you in mind, Sir,
Of your young heir here.
Here's a second, Sir,
That looks for a child's portion.
There are reckonings
For Muskadine and Eg• too, must be thought on.
We have not been hasty, Sir.
But staid your leisure;
But now you are ripe, and laden with fruit.
Tic fi• you should be pulled; here's a boy, Sir,
Pray you kiss him, tic your own, Sir,
Nay, bus this first,
It hath just your eyes, and such a promising nose,
That if the sign deceive me not, in time
Twill prove a notable striker, like his father.
And yet you laid it to another.
True,
While you were poor, and it was pol•cy,
But she that has variety of fathers,
And makes nor choice of him that can maintain •t,
Ne'er studied Aristotles Problems.
A smart queen.
Why branches will you whurry me?
No, but ease you
Of your golden burden, the heavy carriage may
Bring you to a sweating sickness.
Very likely,
I some all ore already.
Will you come off, Sir?
Would I had ne'er come on: hear me with patience,
Or I will anger you. Go to, you know me
And doe not vex me further: by my sins
And your diseases, which are certain truths,
What ere you think, I am not master at
This instant, of a livre.
What, and in
Such a glorious suite?
The liker wretched things
To have no money.
You may pawn your clothes, Sir,
Will you see your issue starve?
Or the mothers beg?
Why, you unconscionable strumpets, would you have me
Transform my hat to double elout• and biggins?
My corselet to a cradle? or my belt
To swaddlebands? or turn my cloak to blankets?
Or to sell my sword and spurs for soap and candles?
Have you no mercy? what a chargeable devil
We carry in our breech•?
Now tic t•me.
To •etch him off.
Your father does it for us.
The Governor!
What are these?
And it like your Lordship,
Very poor sp•n••er•.
I am his Nurse and 〈◊〉,
You have 〈◊〉'd and lander'd me, hell take you for it•
Vanish.
Doe, doe, and talk with him hereafter.
Tic our best course
We'll find a time to fit him.
Why, In this heat, Belgarde
You are the cause of 't.
Who, I?
Yes, your pied livery, and your gold
Draw these vexations on me, pray you strip me
And let me be as I was: I will not lose
The pleasures and the freedom which I had
In my certain poverty; for all the wealth
Fair France is proud of?
Wee at better leisure
Will learn the cause of this.
What answer, Sir,
From the Admiral?
None, his daughter is removed
To the sort of Montrevile, and he himself
In person fled, but where is not discovered,
I could tell you wonders, but the time denies me
Fit liberty. In a word, let it suffice
The power of our great master is contemned,
The sacred laws of God and man profaned,
And if I sit down with this injury,
I am unworthy of my place, and thou
Of my acknowledgement: draw up all the troops,
As I go, I will instruct you to what purpose.
Such as have power to punish, and yet spare
From fear, or from co•nivence, others ill
Though not in act assist them in their w•ll
Bind them, and gag their mouths sure, I alone
Will be your convoy.
Madam,
Dearest Lady,
Let me fight for my Mistress.
Tic in vain,
Little Cockerel of the kind.
Away with them,
And doe as I command you,
Montrevile
You are my fathers friend, nay, more a soldier,
And if a right one, as I hope to find you,
Though in a lawful war you had surprised
A City, that bowd humbly to your pleasure,
In honour you stand bound to guard a virgin
From violence; but in a free estate
Of which you are a limb, to doe a wrong
Which noble enemies never consent to
Is such an insolence.
How her heart beats!
Much like a Partridge in a Sparhawkes foot,
That with a panting silence does lament
The fate she cannot fly from! sweet, take comfort,
You are safe, and nothing is intended to you
But love and Service.
They came never clothed
In force, and outrage, upon what assurance
(Remembering only that my father lives)
Who will not tamely suffer the disgrace.
Have you presumed to hurry me from his house,
And as I were not worth the waiting on,
To snatch me from the duty, and 〈◊〉
Of my poor servants.
Let not that afflict you,
You shall not want observance, I will be
Your Page, your Woman, Para•ite or Fool,
Or any other property, provided
You answer my affection.
In what kind?
As you had done young Beauforts.
How?
So Lady,
Or, if the name of wife appear a yoke
Too heavy for your tender neck, so I
Enjoy you as a private friend, or mistress,
Twill be sufficient.
Blessed Angels guard me
What frontlesse impudence is this? What d•vell
Hath to thy certain ruin tempted thee
To offer me this motion? by my hopes
Of after joys, submission, not repentance
Shall expiate this soul intent.
Intent?
Tic more, I'll make it act
Ribald, thou dare not,
And if (and with a fever to thy soul)
Thou but consider that I have a father
And such a father, as when this arrives at
His knowledge, as it shall, the terror of
His vengeance, which as sure as sa•e must follow,
Will make thee curse the hour in which lust caught thee
To nourish these b•se hopes, and tic my wonder
Thou dare forget how tender he is of me
And that each shadow of wrong done to me
Will raise in him a tempest not to be
But with thy heart-blood calmed: this when I see him.
A• thou shalt never.
Wilt thou murder me?
No, no, ti• otherwise determined, fool,
The master which in passion kills his slave
That may be useful to him, does himself
The injury: Know thou most wretched creature,
That father thou presum'st upon, that father,
That when I sought thee in a noble way,
Denied thee to me, fancying in his hope
A higher match from his excess of do•age,
Hath in his bowels kindled such a flame
Of impious most unnatural lost,
That now he fears his furious desires,
May force him to doe that he shake• to think on.
O me most wretched.
Never hope again
To blast him with those eyes, their golden beam••
Are unto him arrows of death and hell,
But unto me divine artillery.
And therefore since what I so long in vain
Purfu'd, is offered to me, and by him
Given up to my possession: doe not flatter
Thy self with an imaginary hope,
But that I'll take occasion by the forelock,
And make use of my fortune; as we walk
I'll tell the more.
I will not stir.
I'll force thee:
Help, help,
In vain,
In me my brothers blood
I• punished at the height.
The Coach there.
Dear Sir,
Tears, curses, prayer•, 〈◊〉 alike to me,
I can, and must enjoy my present pleasure,
And shall take time to 〈◊〉 for it at leisure.
I have played the fool, the gross fool, to believe
The bosom of a friend will hold a secret,
Mine own could not contain, and my industry
In taking liberty from my innocent daughter,
Out of false hopes of freedom to my self,
Is in the little help it yields me, punished.
Shoe's absent, but I have her figure here,
And every grace, and rarity about her,
Are by the pencil of my memory
In living colours painted on my heart.
My fires too, a short interim closed up
Break out with greater fury. Why was I
Since it was my fate, and not to be declined
In this so tender consciened? Say I had
Injoyd what I desired, what had it been
But incest? and there's something here that tells me
I stand accountable for greater sins,
I never checked at: neither had the crime
Wanted a praesident. I have read in story
Those first great Heroes that for their brave deeds
Were in the worlds first infancy styled gods,
Freely enjoyd what I deny my self.
Old Saturn in the golden age embraced
His sister Ops and in the same degree
The thunderer Iuno, Neptune, Thetis, and
By their example after the first deluge
Deucalion Pirrhae. Universal nature
As every day tic evident allows it
To creatures of all kinds. The gallant horse
Covers the Mare to which he was the fire,
The bird with fertile seed gives new increase
To her that hatched him. Why should envious man then
Brand that close act which adds proximity
To whats most near him, with the abhorred title
Of incest? or our later laws forbid
What by the first was granced? let old men
That are not capable of these delight•
And solemn superstitions fools prescribe
Rules to themselves, I will not curb my freedom
But constantly go on, with this assurance,
I but walk in a path which greater men
Have trod before me, h• this is the fort,
Open the gate. Within there.
With your pardon
We must forbid your entrance.
Doe you know me?
Perfectly my Lord.
I am this Captains friend.
It may be so, but till we know his pleasure
You must excuse us.
We'll acquaint him with
Your waiting here.
Waiting slave, he was ever
By me commanded.
As we are by him.
So punctual, pray you then in my name entreat
His presence.
That we shall doe.
I must use
Some strange persuasions to work him to
Deliver her, and to forget her vows,
And horrid oaths I in my madness made him.
Take to the contrary, and may I get those
Once more in my possession, I will bear her
Into some close cave, or desert, where we'll end
Our lusts and lives together.
Fail not, on
The forseit of your lives to execute
What I commanded.
how 〈◊〉 friend?
I am glad to see you wear such cheerful looks,
The worlds well altered.
Yes I thank my star••
But me thinks thou art troubled.
Some light cross,
But of no moment.
So I hope, beware
Of sad and impious thoughts, you know how far
They wrought on me.
No such come near me sir.
I have like you no daughter, and much wish
You never had been cursed with one.
Who I?
Thou art deceived, I am most happy in her.
I am glad to hear it.
My incestuous fires
Towards her are quite burnt out, I love her now
As a father, and no further.
Fix there then
Your constant peace, and doe not try a second
Temptation from her.
Yes friend though she were
By millions of degrees more excellent
In her perfections, Nay though she could borrow
A form Angel call to take my frailty
It would not doe, and therefore Montrevile
(My chief delight next her) I come to tell thee
The governor and I are reconciled,
And I confirmed, and with all possible speed
To make large satisfaction to young Beaufort
And her whom I have so much wronged, and foe•
thy trouble in her custody, of which
Isle now discharge thee, there is nothing in
My nerve• or 〈◊〉, but shall ever be
At thy devotion.
You promise faintly,
No• doubt I the performance, yet I would not
Hereafter be reported, to have been
The principal occasion of your falling
Into a relapse, or but suppose out of
The easiness of my nature, and assurance
You are firm, and can hold out, I could consent:
You needs must know there are so many lets
That make against it, that it is my wonder
You offer me the motion, having bound me
With oaths and imprecations on no terms,
Reasons, or argumen•s, you could propose,
I ever should admit you to her sight,
Much less restore her to you.
Are we soldiers, and stand on oaths?
Tic beyond my knowledge
In what we are more worthy, then in keeping
Our words, much more our vows.
Heaven pardon all,
How many thousands in our heate of wine,
Quarrels and play, and in our younger days
(In private, I may say) between our selves
In points of love, have we to answer for,
Should we be scrupulous that way.
You say well,
And very aptly call to memory
Two oaths against all ties and rites of friendship
Broken by you to me.
No more of that.
Yes tic material, and to the purpose
The first (and think upon it) was when I brought you
As a visitant to my mistress then, the mother
Of this same daughter, whom with dreadful words
Too hideous to remember, you swore deeply
For my sake never to attempt, yet then,
Then, when you had a sweet wife of your own,
I know not with what arts, philtres, and charms,
(Unless in wealth and fame you were above me)
You won her from me, and her grant obtained,
A marriage with the second waited on,
The burial of the first (that to the world
Brought your dead son) this I sate tamely down by,
Wanting indeed occasion and power
To be at the height revenged.
Yet this you seemed
Freely to pardon.
As perhaps I did.
Your daughter Theocrine growing ripe,
(Her mother too deceased) and fit for marriage
I was a suitor for her, had your word
Upon your honour, and our friendship made
Authentical, and ratified with an oath,
She should be mine, but vows with you being like
To your religion, a nose of wax
To be turned every way, that very day
The governors son but making his approaches
Of Courtship to her, the wind of your ambition
For her advancement scattered the thin sand
In which you wrote your full consent to me,
And drew you to his party. What hath pas'd since
You bear a register in your own bosom
That can at large inform you.
Montrevile
I doe confess all that you charge me with
To be strong truth, and that I bring a cause
Most miserably guilty, and acknowledge
That though your goodness made me mine own judge•
I should not show the least compassion,
Or mercy to my self. O let not yet
My foulness ••int your pur••esse, or my falsehood
Divert the torrent of your loyal faith.
My ills, if not returned by you, will add
Lustre to your much good, and to or•come
With noble sufferance will express your strength,
And triumph ore my weakness. If you please to
My black deeds being only known to you,
And in surrendering up my daughter buried:
You not alone make me your •••ve (for I
At no part doe deserve the name of friend)
But in your own breast raise a monument
Of •••tie to a wretch on whom with justice
You may express all cruelty.
You much move me.
O that I could but hope it, to revenge
An injury is proper to the wishes
Of feeble women, that want strength to act it:
But to have power to punish, and yet pardon
Peculiar to Princes, see these knees,
That have been ever •if to bend to heaven
To you are supple, Is there ought beyond this
That may speak my submission? or can pride
(Though I well know it is a stranger to you)
Desire a feast of more humility
To kill her growing appetite•?
I required not
To be sought to this poor way, yet tic so far
A kind of satisfaction that I will
Dispense a little with those serious o•ths
You made me take, your daughter shall come to you,
I will not say as you delivered her,
But as she is you may d••pose of her
As you shall think most requisite.
His last words are nettles to me.
Here the lyo• force
Would have proved useless and against my nature
Compelled me from the Crocodile to borrow
Her counterfeit 〈◊〉, there 〈…〉
May I but quench these fires th• rage 〈…〉,
And fall what can fall, I am 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉 is,
You must be packing•
Hath he •ob'd me of
Mine honour, and denies me now a room
To hide my shame?
My Lord the Admiral
Attends your Ladyship.
Close the port, and leave 〈◊〉.
Ha! who is this? how altered! how deformed!
It cannot be. And yet this creature has
A kind of a resemblance to my d••ghter,
My Theocrine! but as different
From that she was, as bodies dead are 〈◊〉
Their best perfections, from what they were
When they had life and motion.
Tic most true fir,
I am dead indeed to all but misery.
O come not near me sir, I am infectious,
To look on me at distance is as dangerous
As from a pinnacles cloud-kissing spire,
With giddy eyes to view the steep descent
But to acknowledge me a certain ruin.
O sir.
Speak Theocrine, force me not
To farther question, my fears already
Have choked my vital spirits.
Pray you turn away
Your face and hear me, and with my last breath
Give me leave to accuse you. What offence
From my first infancy did I commit
That for a punishment you should give up
My Virgin chastity to the treacherous guard
Of Gotish Montrevile?
What hath be done?
Abused me fir by violence, and this told
I cannot live to speak more: may the cause
In you find pardon, but the speeding curse
Of a ravished maid fall heavy, heavy on him,
Beaufort my lawful love, farewell for ever.
Take not thy flight so soon immaculate spirit.
Tic fled already, how the innocent
As in a gentle slumber pass away,
But to cut off the knotty thread of life
In guilty men, must force sterne Atropos
To use her sharpe knife often. I would help
The edge of hers with the sharpe point of mine
But that I dare not die, till I have rent
This dogs heart piecemeal. O that I had wings
To scale these walls, or that my hands were Canons
To bore their flinty sides, that I might bring
The villain in the reach of my good sword,
The Turkish Empire offered for his ransom
Should not redeem his life. O that my voice
Were loud as thunder and with horrid sounds
Might force a dreadful passage to his ears,
And through them reach his soul, libidinous monster
Foul ravisher, as thou du•st doe a deed
Which forced the Sun to hide his glorious face
Behind a sable Masque of clouds appear,
And as a man defend it, or like me
Show some compunction for it.
Ha, ha, ha.
Is this an object to raise mirth?
Yes, yes.
My daughter's dead.
Thou had best follow her,
Or if thou art the thing thou art reported,
Thou shoulst have led the way. Doe tear thy hair
•eke a village nurse, and mourn while I laugh at thee.
Be but a just examiner of thy self
And in an equal balance poise the nothing
Or little mischief I have done compared
With the ponderous weight of thine, and how can thou
Accuse or argue with me? 〈◊〉 was a rape
And she being in a kind contracted to me,
The fact may challenge some qualification:
But thy i••ned made natures self run backward,
And done, had c•u•'d an earth-quake.
Captain.
Ha,
Our outworkes are surprised, the sentinel slain,
The corps du guard deferred too.
By whom?
The sudden storm and darkness of the night
Forbid• the knowledge, make up speedily,
Or all is lost.
In the dive is name, whence comes this!
Doe, doe, rage on, rend open AEolus
Thy brazen prison, and let loose at once
Thy stormy issue blustering Bores,
Aided with all the gales, the Pilot numbers
Upon his compass, cannot raise a tempest
Through the vast region of the •ire, like that
I feel within me: for I am possessed
With whirle-winds, and each guilty thought to me is
A dreadful Hurricano; though this centre
Labour to bring forth earthquake, and bell open
Her wide stretched •awes, and let out all her furies,
They cannot add an atom to the mountain
Of fears and terrors that each minute threaten
To fall on my accursed head. Ha, is it fancy?
Or hath hell heard me, and makes proof if I
Dare stand the trial? yes, I doe, and now
I view these apparitions I feel,
I once did know the 〈◊〉 For what come you?
Are your•eriall •o•es deprived of language,
And so denied to tell me? that by •ignes
You bid me ask here of my self? tic so
And there is something here makes answer for you.
You come to lance my seared up conscience? Yes,
And to instruct me, that those thunderbol••,
That hurled me headlong from the height of glory,
Wealth, honours, worldly happiness, were forged
Upon the anvil of my impious wrongs
And cruelty to you? I doe confess it;
And that my lust compelling me to make way
For a second wife, I poisoned thee, and that
The cause (which to the world is undiscovered)
That forced thee to shake off thy filial duty
To me thy father, had it's spring and source
From thy impat•ence to know thy mother,
That with all duty, and obedience served me
(For now with horror I acknowledge it)
Removed unjustly: yet thou being my son,
Were it not a competent judge marked out by heaven
For her revenger, which thy falling by
My weaker hand confirmed. Tic granted by thee.
Can any penance expiate my guilt?
Or can repentance save me? they are vanished.
What's left to doe then? I'll accuse my face
That did not fashion me for nobler uses•
Or if those stars cross to me in my birth,
Had not denied their prosperous influence to it
With peace of conscience like to innocent men,
I might have ceased to be, and not as now,
To curse my cause of being.
Here is a night
To season my silks. Bu••e-jerkin, now I mi••e thee,
Thou hast endured many •whole nights, but never
One like to this; how fine my feather looks now!
Just like a Capons tail• stole•• out of the pen
And hid in the sink, and yet't had been dishonour
To have charged me without it, wilt thou fever cease,
Is the petard, as I gave directions, fastened
On the portcullis?
It hath been attempted
By divers, but in vain.
These are your gallants,
That at a feast take the first place, poor I,
Hardly allowed to follow; marry in
These foolish businesses they are con•ent
That I shall have precedence, I much thank
Their manne•, or their fear; second me Soldier,
They have had no time to undermine, or if
They have, it is blowing up, and setching
A caper or two in the ayre, and I will doe it,
Rather then blow my nails here.
O brave Captain!
Rackes cannot force more from me then I have
Already told you. I expect no favour
I have cast up my acco•pt.
Take you the charge
Of the fort• Belgarde, your dangers have deserved it.
I thank your excellence, this will keep •e safe yet
From being pulled by the sleeve, and bid remember
The thing I wot of.
All that have eyes to weep,
Spare one tear with me. Theocrin•'s dead,
Her father too lies breathless here, I think,
Struck dead with thunder.
It is apparent: •ow
His carcass smell•.
His face is altered to
Another colour.
But here's one retain•
Her native innocence, that never ye•
Called down heavens anger.
Tic in vain to morn
For whats past help. We will refer bad ma•
Your sentence to the King: may we make use of
This great example, and learn from it, that
There cannot be a want of power above
To punish murder, and unlawful love.

what of the Game, called Chesse-play can be made
To make a Stage-Play, shall this day be plaid.
First, you shall see the men in order set,
States, and their Pawns, when both the sides are met:
The Houses well distinguished: In the Game
Some men entrapped, and taken to their shame,
Rewarded by their Play: And in the Close
You shall see Checque-Mate given to Virtues Foes.
But the fairest Jewel, that our hopes can deck,
Is, so to play our Game, t'auoid your Check.
I Never see that face, but my pity rises,
When I behold so clear a Maister-peece
Of Heavens art, wrought out of dust and ashes,
In that not ours, but the Daughter of Heresy:
My soul bleeds at mine eyes.
Where should truth speak
If not in such a sorrow? they're tears plainly:
Beshrew me if she weep not heartily?
What is my peace to her to take such pains in it?
If I wander to loss, and with broad eyes
Yet miss the path she ran blind-fold in.
(Through often exercise) why should my ouer-sight,
Though in the game that ere Christian lost,
Raise the least spring of pity in her eye,
Tic doubtless a great charity, and no virtue,
Could win me surer.
Blessed things prevail with it,
If ever goodness made a gracious promise,
It is in yonder look, what little pains
Would build a Fort for virtue to all memory
In that sweet creature, were the ground-worke firmer.
It has been all my glory to be firm,
In what I have professed.
That is the enemy
That steals your strength away, and fights against you,
Disarms your soul, even in that heate of battle:
Your firmness that way, makes you more infirm,
For the right Christian conflict▪ there I spied
A zealous primitiue sparkle, but now slew,
From your devoted eyes:
Able to blow up all the Heresies
That ever sate in Council with your spirit; 
And here comes he whose Sanctimonious breath,
Can make that spark a flame: list to him (virgin)
At whose first entrance Princes will prostrate:
Women are weaker Vessels.
By my paenitence
A comely presentation, and the habit
To admiration reverend.
But the heart, the heart Lady
So meek, that as you see good Charity pictured still
With young ones in her arms, so will hee cherish
All his young tractable sweet obedient daughters
E'ene in his arms, in his own bosom,
I am my self a secular Iesuitesse,
As many Ladies are of worth and greatness,
A second sort are Iesuits in voto,
Giving their vow into the father general:
That's the Black Bishop of our house, whose pawn
This Gentleman now stands, now to receive
The College habit at his holy pleasure.
But how are these in voto employed (Lady)
Till they receive the habit.
They're not idle,
Hee finds 'em all true labourers in the work
Of universal Monarchy, which hee
And his Disciples princially aim at.
Those are maintained in many Courts and Palaces,
And are induced by noble Personages,
Into great Princes services, and prove
Some Counsellors of State, some Secretaries:
All serving in notes of intelligence:
(As Parish Clerks,) their mortuary bills,
To the father General, so are designs
Often times prevented, and importinant secrets
Of state discovered, yet no author found,
But those suspected oft that are most sound:
This mystery is too deep, yet for your entrance,
And I offend to set your zeal so back,
Checked by Obedience, with desire to hasten
Your grogresse to perfection, I commit you
To the great workers hands, to whose grave worth
I fit my reverence, as to you my wishes.
Dost find her supple?
There's a little passage made.
Let me contemplate,
With wholly wonder season my access;
And by degrees approach the Sanctuary
Of unmatched beauty, set in grace and goodness
Amongst the daughters of men I have not found
A more Cathalecall aspect, that eye
Dos promise single life and meek Obedience.
Upon those lips the sweet fresh buds of youth,
The holy dew of prayer lies like pearl,
Dropped from opening eye-lids of the morn,
Upon that bashful Rose, how beauteously
A gentle fast not rigorously imposed,
Would look upon that cheek, and how delightful
The courteous Physic of a tender penance,
Whose utmost cruelty should not exceed
The first fear of a bride to beat down frailty,
Would work to sound health your long festered judgment,
And make your merit well (through erring ignorance
Appears but spotted righteousness to me,
Far clearer then the innocence of Infants.
To the good work I bow and will become,
Obedience humblest daughter, scythence I find
The assistance of a sacred strength to aid me:
The labour is as easy to serve virtue
The right way since, it is she I ever served
In my desire, though I transgressed in Judgment.
It's easily absolved amongst the rest,
You shall not find the virtue, that you serve now
A sharpe and cruel mistress, her era's open
To all your supplications; you may boldly
And safely let in the most secret sin
Into her knowledge, which like vanished man
Never returns into the World again:
Fate looks not up more trulier,
To the guilty,
That may appear some benefit.
Who so innocent
That never stands in need on it in some kind?
If every thought were blabbed that's so confessed,
The very ayre we breath would be imblest:
Now to the work indeed, which is to catch
Her inclination, that's the special use
We make of all our practise in all Kingdoms
For my disclosing their most secret frailties,
Things which once ours, they must not hide from vs
That's the first article in the Creed we teach 'em,
Finding to what point their blood most inclines,
Know best to apt them, then to our designs:
Daughter the sooner you disperse your Errors,
The sooner you make haste to your discovery,
You must part with'em, to be nice or modest
Towards this good action, is to imitate
The bashfulness of one conceals an vlter,
For the uncomely parts that tumor vexes,
Til't be past cure. Resolve you thus fair (Lady)
The priuatst thought that runs to hide it self,
In the most secret corner of your heart, now
Must be of my acquaintance, so familiarlie
Never she friend of yours might counsel nearer.
I stand not much in fear of any account
Guilty of that black crime (most noble holiness,)
I must confess as in a sacred Temple,
Thronged with an auditory, some come rather
To feed on human object, then to taste
Of Angels food.
So in the Congregation of quick thoughts
Which are more infinite, then such assemblies,
I cannot for truths safely speak for all:
Some have bin wandrers, some sinful, some sound:
But those found ever poor entertainment.
They'd encouragement to come again,
The single life which strongly I profess now:
Heaven pardon me, I was about to part from.
Then you have past through love?
But left no stain
In all my passage (Sir) no print of wrong;
For the most chaste maid that may trace my foot-steps.
How came you off so clear?
I was discharged
By an inhumaine accident, which modesty
Forbids me to put any language too.
How you forget your self? all actions
Clad in their proper language, though mostsorded
My ear is bound by duty to let in,
And locke up everlastingly: Shall I help you;
Hee was not found to answer his creation?
A vestal Virgin in a slip of prayer,
Could no deliver mans loss modestier:
T was the White Bishops pawn▪
The same (blessed Sir)
An Heretic well pickled.
By base treachery,
And violence prepared by the Competitor:
The black Knights pawn whom I shall ever hate for it.
T was of revenge the most vnmanlist way
That ever riualltooke, a villain
That for your sake isle never absolve him off.
I wish not so heavy.
Hee must feel it,
I never yet gave absolution
To any crime of that vnmatring nature:
It seems you refuse him for defect,
That other women have in the ends of marriage:
Pardon my boldness, if I sift your goodness
To the last gre•no▪
I reverence your pains (Sir)
And must confess, custom to enjoy
What other women challenge and possess,
More ruled me then desire: for my desires
Dwell all in Ignorance, and Isle never wish
To know that fond way, may redeem them thence.
I never was so taken, beset dubly
Now with her judgment what a strength it puts forth,
I bring work nearer to you, when you have seen
A maister-peece of man, composed by Heaven
For a great Princes favour, kingdoms love:
So exact Envy could not find a place
To stick a blot on person, or on fame:
Have you not found ambition swell your wishes then?
And desire stir your blood.
By virtue never:
I have only in the dignity of the creature,
Admired the works glory.
She's impregnable,
A second siege must not fall off so tamely:
She's one of those must be informed to know
A daughters duty which some take untaught;
Her modesty brings her behind hand much,
My old means I must fly too▪ yes it is it,
Please you peruse this small tract of Obedience,
Twill help you forward well.
(Sir) that is a virtue:
I have ever thought on with especial reverence.
You will conceive by that,
My power your duty.
What makes yond troubler of all Christian water,
So near yon• blessed spring? but I know
Her goodness is the rock from whence it issues.
Unmovable as fate, it would more afflict me
Then all my sufferings for her, which so long
As she holds constant to the house she come off,
The witness of the cause, the side, the quality
Are sacrifices to her worth and virtue,
And though confined in my religious joys,
I marry her and possess her.
Behold Lady,
The two inhuman enemies, the black Knights pawn,
And the white Bishops, the golder and the gelded.
There's my grief, my hate.
What? in the Iesuites fingers? by this hand,
Isle give my part now for a Parrots feather,
She never returns virtuous, it is impossible:
Isle undertake, more wagers will be laid
Upon a Usurers return from hell,
Then upon hers from him now: have I bin guilty
Of such base malice, that my very conscience
Shakes at the memory of it, and when I look
To gather fruit find nothing but the Sauin tree:
Too frequent in Nuns Orchards, and there planted
By all conjecture to destroy fruit rather,
I will be resolved now most noble Virgin.
Ignoble villain, dare that unhallowed tongue
Lay hold upon a sound so gracious,
What's nobleness to thee, or virgin Chastity?
They're not of thy acquaintance, talk of violence,
That shames creation, deeds would make night blush
That's company for thee, hast thou the impudence
To court me with the Leprosy upon thee,
Able to infect the walls of a great building.
Son of offence forbear, go set your devil
Before your eyes, a paenitentiall vesture,
Would better become ye, some shirt of hair.
And you a three pound smock, steed of an Abbey,
An Epicene Cassible, this holy fellow
Robs safst and close, I feel a sting that's worse too:
White pawn, hast so much Charity to accept
A reconcilement, make thy own conditions,
For I begin to be extremely burdened.
No truth, no peace, of that black house, Protest
Is to be trusted, but for hope of acquittance,
And warned by difference, I may entrap him soonest,
I admit conference.
It is a nobleness
That makes confusion cleave to all my merits.
That treatise will instruct you fully.
So, so, 
The business of the Universal Monarchy
Goes forward well now, the College pot
That should be always boiling with the fuel,
Of all intelligencers possible,
Through the Christian Kingdom is this fellow
Our prime incendiary? one of those
That promised the white Kingdom seven years since
To our blacke-house, put a new daughter to him,
The great worke-slaues, he minds nor Monarchy
Nor Hererazie (diviner principalities) I brag less,
But have done more then all the conclave on'em
Take their assistant fathers in all parts:
I, or their father general in to boot:
And what I have pone, I have done factiously
With pleasant subtlety, and bewitching court-ship,
Abuse all my believers with delight,
They took comfort to be cozened by me,
To many a soul I have let in mortal poison,
Whose cheeks have cracked with laughter to receive it,
I could so roll my pills in sugared syllables,
And strew such kindly mirth o'er all my mischief,
They took their bain in way of recreation,
A pleasure steals corruption into youth,
H•ee spies me now, I must uphold his reverence,
Especially in public (though I know)
Pryapus guardianof the cherry Gardens:
Bacchus and Venus chit is not more vicious.
Blessings accumiliation keep with you (sir.)
Honours d•ssimulation be your due (sir.)
How deep in duty in observance plunge?
His charge must needs be reverend.
I am Confessor
To this Black Knight too, you see douotion's fruitful,
Sh'as many sons and daughters.
I do this the more,
To maze our adversaries to behold,
The reverence we give these great ones,
And to beget a sound opinion
Of holiness in them, and zeal in vs;
As also to enuite the like obedience
In other pupils, by our meek example:
So, is your trifle gone?
Trifle call you her, it's a good game (sir)
Sure she's the second pawn of the White house,
And to the opening of the game I hold her.
I you hold well: for that I know your play
Of old, if there were more Queens pawns you'd ply
The game a great deal harder (now sir we're in private)
But what for the maine work, the great existence?
The hope Monarchal?
It goes on in this.
In this? I cannot see it.
So you may deny
A Dials motion, because you cannot see
The hand move, or a wind that rends the Cedars.
Where stops the current of the intelligence;
Your father general Bishop of the blacke-house,
Complains for want of work.
Here's from all parts
Sufficient to to employ him, I received
A packet from the assistant fathers lately,
Look you ther's English, this Gallica.
I marry (sir) ther's some quick flesh in this.
Germanica.
Think they'n sealed this with butter.
Italica this
They put their pens the hebrew way me thinks,
Hispanica there.
Hispanica, blind word this,
The Iesuite hath writ this with juice of Lemons sure
It must be held close to the fire of Purgatory
Ere't can be read.
You will not leave your jesting (Knight)
Though it wound your own fame.
Curanda pecunia.
Take heed (Sir) we're entrapped.
He's made our own (man half in Voto yours,
His heart's in the black house, leave him to me,
Most of all friends indeed pretiously special,
You see my outside, but not my heart,
Great difference in the colour, there's some intelligence,
And as more ripeness, so your knowledge st••l
Shall prove the richer, there shall nothing happen
(Believe it) to extenuate your cause.
Or to oppress her fr,ends, but I will strive
To cross it with my counsel, purse and power
Keep all supplies both in means and men,
That may raise against you, we must part,
I dare not longer of this theme discuss,
The ear of State is quick and jealous.
Excellent estimation, thou art valued
Aboue the fleece of gold, that came short home,
Poor Iesuite, ridden soul, how art thou foold
Out of thy faith, from thy elegance drawn,
Which way so ere thou take, you're the lost Pawn.
AND here again it is the daughters duty
To obey her fessors command in all things
Without exception, or expostulations;
Tic the most general rule that ere I heard of:
Yet when I think how boundless virtue is,
Goodness and grace lies gently reconciled,
And then it appears well to have the power
Of the dispensor are's vncircumscrib de'
She's hard upon it, it was the most modest key
That I could use to open my intents,
What little, or no pains goes to some people:
Ho? a sealed note, whence this,
To the black Bishops pawn these, how to me
Strange, who subscribes it? the black King what would he.
Sir after my desire has took a Tulip
For it's own inflammation, that yet scorches me,
I shall have cooler time to think of yours,
She's past the general rule of the large extent
Of our prescription for obedience;
And yet with what alacrity of soul,
Her eye moos on the Letter.
Holy Sir,
Too long, I have mist you, oh your absence starves me,
Hasten for times redemption (worthy Sir)
Lay your commands as thick and fast upon me
As you can speak em, how I thirst to hear em:
Set me to work upon this spacious virtue,
Which the poor span of life's, tomorrow for
Boundless obedience, the humblest, yet mightiest of all
Duties, well set her down a universal goodness.
By holiness of garment, her safe innocecne
Has frighted the full meaning from it self,
She's far off from understanding now
The language of my intent, then at first meeting
For virtues sake, good sir,
Command something,
Make trial of my duty in some small service,
And as you find the faith of my obedience there,
Then trust it with a greater.
You speak sweetly,
I do command you first then.
With what joy I do prepare my duty.
To meet me,
And seal a kiss of love upon my lips,
Ho.
At first disobedient in so little too.
How shall I trust you with a greater then?
Which was your own request?
Pray send not back
My Innocence to wound me, be more courteous,
I must confess much like a ignorant plaintiff
Who presuming on the fair path of his meaning
Goes rashly on, till on a sudden brought
Into the wilderness of Law, by words
Dropped unadvisedly, hurts his good cause,
And gives the Adversary advantage by it.
Apply it you can best (sir) if my obedience
And your command can find no better way,
Fond men command, and wantons best obey.
If I can at that distance send you a blessing,
Is it not nearer to you in my arms:
It flies abroad from these li•s dealt in parcels,
And I to honour thee aboue all daughters.
Invite thee home to the house, where thou may surfeit
On that, which others miserably pine for:
A favour which the daughters of great Potentates,
Would look of envies colour but to hear.
Good men may err sometimes, you're mistaken,
Sure if this be virtues path, tic a most strange one,
I never came this way before.
That's your ignorance,
And therefore shall that edict still conduct you,
That knows no way but one, nor ever seeks it,
Tic strange if virtue should be put to one,
If there be twenty ways to some poor Village.
Your fear is wondrous faulty, cast it from you,
T'will gather else in time a disobedience,
Too stubborn for my pardon.
Have I locked my self
At unawares into sins servitude
With more desire of goodness? is this the tie
Of all strict order, and the holiest
Of all societies, the three vowed people
For Poverty, Obedience, Chastity:
The last they most forget, when a Virgins rain
I see the great work of Obedience,
Is better then half finished.
What a stranger,
Are you to duty grown, what distance keep you,
Must I bid you come forwards to a happiness
Your self should sue for? it was never so with me
I dare not let this stubbornness be known,
It would bring such fierce hate on you, yet presume not
To make that courteous care a privilege
For wilful disobedience, it turns then
Into the blackness of a curse upon you,
Come, come, be nearer.
Nearer?
Was that in scorn?
I would not have it proved so for the hopes
Of the great Monarchy, if it were like it,
Let it not dare to fly abroad again,
A stronger I will coape with it.
Bless me, threatnes me,
And quite dismays the good strength that should
Help me. I never was so doubtful of my safety.
It was but my jealousy, forgive me (sweetness)
Yours is the house of meekness, and no veonome lives
Under that roof, be nearer; why so fearful?
Nearer the Altar the more safe and sacred.
But nearer the offerors oft more wicked.
A plain and most insufferable contempt,
My glory I have lost upon this woman,
In freely offering that she should have kneeled
A year in vain for: my respect is darkened,
Give me my reverence again thou hast robed me off
In thy repulse, thou shalt not carry it hence.
(Sir.)
You're too great a winner to depart;
And I too deep a looser to give way to it.
Oh Heaven!
Lay me down reputation,
Before thou sturst thy nice Virginity
Is recompense too little for my love.
It is well if I accept of that for both,
Thy loss is but thine own, there's art to help thee,
And fools to pass thee to; in my discovery
The whole society suffers and in that,
The hope of absolute Monarchy eclipsed,
Assurance thou can make me none for thy secrecy,
But by thy honours loss, that act must awe thee.
Oh my diftrest condition.
Dost weep?
If thou had any pity, this necessity
Would wring it from thee, I must else destroy thee:
We must not tust the policy of Europe,
Upon a women's tongue.
Then take my life (Sir)
And leave my honour for to guide me to Heaven.
Take heed I take not both which I have vowed
Since, if longer thou resist.
Help, oh help.
Art thou so cruel for an honours babble:
To undo a whole fraternity, and disperse
The secrets of most nations locked in vs?
For Heaven and virtues sake
Must force confound noise?
Ho, what's that? silence (if fair worth be in thee)
Isle venture my escape on all dangers now,
Who comes to take me, let me see that pawns face,
Or his proud tympanous Mas-well with state wind,
Which being once pricked in the Convocation house,
The corrupt ayre puffs out, and he falls shrivelled.
I will discover the Arch-hypocrite,
To all the kinreds of the earth.
Confusion in that voice,
Rings the alarm of my undoing, 
How, which way escaped she from me?
Are you mad?
Can lust infatuate a man so hopeful?
No patience in your blood: the dog-starre rains sure,
Time, and fire temper would have wrought her
Pliant: I spied a Pawn of the white House walk near vs,
And made that noise of purpose to give warrant
For mine own turn: which ends in all I work for.
Methinkes I stand over a powder vault,
And the match now a kindling: what's to be done?
It is his own case, he will defend you mainly,
And happily here he comes with the black Knight too.
Oh you made noble work for the white house
This act will fill the adversaries mouth,
And blow the Luthrens cheeks, tilt crack again.
This will advance the state Monarchal business
In all parts well, and help the agents forward,
Which I have seven years laboured to accomplish.
One minute sets back by some codpiece Coledge still.
I dwell not (sir) alone in this default,
The black house yields me partners.
All more cautelous.
Queen caute, caste, that's my Motto still,
Iue travailed with that word over most Kingdoms,
And lain safe with most nations on a leaking bottom
I have been as often tossed on Venus seas
As trymer, and fresher barks, when sounder vessels
Have lain at anchor, that is kept the door.
She has no witness then?
Gross witness, when went one of his society?
To mischief with a witness?
I have don't then,
Away upon the wings of speed, take post horse,
Cast thirty leagues of earth behind thee suddenly,
Leave letters ante-dated at our house,
Ten days at least from this.
Bishop I taste thee,
Good strong Episcopal counsel, take a bottle on it,
Twill serve thee all thy journey.
But good (sir) how,
For my getting for the vnspied?
There's Check again.
No, Isle help that.
Well said my bouncing Iesuitesse.
There lies a secret valt.
Away, make hast then.
Run for my Cabinet of intelligences,
For fear they search the house, good Bishop burn'em,
I cannot stand to pick 'em now.
Begone the dangers all in you.
Let me see Queens pawn,
How formerly has packed up his intelligences,
He has laid them all in truckell beds (me thinks)
And like Court harbingers has writ the names
In Chalk upon their Chambers: English,
Oh this is the English house, what news there trow?
Ho by this hand most of these are bawdy epistles,
Time they were burnt indeed, whole bundles of 'em:
Here's from his daughter Blanch &amp; daughter Bridget:
From the safe sanctuary in the White-Friers:
Those from two tender sisters of compassion,
In the bowels of Blomsbury:
These three from the Nonnery in Drury lane:
A fire, a fire, (go Iesuitesse) a fire:
What have you there?
A note (sir) of State policy,
And an exceeding safe one.
Pray let's see it (Sir)
To sell away all the powder in the Kingdom,
To prevent blowing up, that's safe, isle able it:
Here's a factious observation now,
That suits my humour better, he writes here
Some wives in England will commit adultery,
And then send to Room for a bull for their husbands.
Have they those shifts?
Oh no familiarity breathing
Sweeter, here wench take those papers,
Schorch em soundly, burn em to French russet,
And put em, in again.
Why, what's your mystery?
Oh (sir) twill mock the adversary strangely,
If ere the house be searched, it was done in Venis
Upon the Jesuitical expulse there,
Where the Inquisitors came all specktacl'd
To pick out syllables out of the dung of treason,
(As children pick their cherry-stones) yet found none;
But what they made themselves with ends of letters.
Do as I bid you Pawn.
Faith not in all,
I love rogarie too well to let it fall:
How now, what news with you?
The sting of conscience
Afflicts me so for that inhumane violence,
On the White bishops Pawn, it takes away
My joy, my rest.
This it is to make an Eunuch,
You made a sport on it then.
Cease agreuation,
I come to be obsolu'd for it, where is my Confessor,
Why dost thou point to the ground?
Because he went that way:
Come, come, help me in with this Cabinet,
Isle tell thee a strange Story.
If it be sad, tic welcome.
Tic not much troubled with mirth, sir. Ex.
Pawn.
I attend at your great holiness service.
For great, I grant you, but greatly holy,
There the sold alters fat Cathedral bodies,
Have very often lean, little souls,
Much like the Lady in the Lobsters head,
A great deal of shell and garbage of all colours,
But for the pure part, that should take wings and mount
That's at last gasp, as if a man should gape,
And from a huge bulk let forth a butterfly,
Likethose big-bellied mountains, which the Poet
Delivers, that are brought to bed with mans flesh,
Are my book Printed pawn, my last invictiues against
Against the blacke-house?
Ready for publication:
For I saw perfect books this morning (sir.)
Fetch me a few, which I will instantly
Distribute amongst the White-house.
With all speed (sir.)
Tic a most Lordly life to rail at ease,
See, eat, and drink upon the fat of one Kingdom;
And rail upon an other with the juice on it:
I have writ this book out of the strength and marrow
Of six and thirty dishes at a meal:
But most on it out of cullishe of Cock sparrows,
Twill stick and glow the faster to the adversary,
Twill slit the root of their most Caluish cause,
And yet I eat but little butchers meat
In the conception:
Of all things I commend the White-house best,
For plenty and variety of victuals:
When I was one of the blacke-house professed,
My flesh fell half a Cubit, time to revolt,
When my own ribs revolted; but to say truth,
I have no preferment yet, that's suitable
To the greatness of my person and my parts:
I grant I live at ease, for I am made
The Moister of the beds, the long acre of beds:
But there's no Marie-gold, that shuts and opens,
Flower gentlee Venis board, apples of love,
Pinckes, Hyanths, Honie-suckles, Daffa-down-dillies,
There was a time I'd much more bribe then beds,
Now I'ue more beds, then drabs:
Yet there's no eminent trader deals in whole-sayle;
But she and I have clap a barging up,
Let in at water-gate, for which I have racked
My tenants purse-strings, that then'ue twanged again:
Yonder black Knight, the Fistula of Europe, 
Whose disease once I undertook to cure,
With a high Holborn halter, when he last
Vouchsafed to peep into my privileged lodgings
He saw good store of plate, and rich hangings:
He knew I brought none to the White-house with me,
I have not lost the use of my profession,
Since I turned White-house bishop:
Look, more books yet?
Yonder greasy gormundizing Prelate
Does work our house more mischief by his scripts,
His fat and fulsome Volumes,
Then the whole body of the adverse party.
Oh it were a Master-peece of serpent subtlety
To fetch him a this side again.
And then damme him
Into the bag for ever, or expose him
Against the adverse party, which now he feeds on;
And that would double dam him, my revenge
Has prompted me already, isle confound him
A both sides for the physic he provided,
And the base Surgeon he invented for me,
Isle tell you what a most vncutholicall jest
He put upon me once when my pain tortured me,
He told me he had found a present cure for me,
Which I grew proud on, and observed him seriously,
What think you it was, being execution day,
He showed the Hangman to me out at window.
The common Hangman.
I'll make him the baloom ball,
Of the Churches.
And both the sides shall toss him, he looks like one,
A thing swelled up with mingled drink and wine,
And will bound well from one side to another.
Come, you shall write our second bishops dead
Which has yet no employment in the Game
Perhaps nor ever shall, it may be won
Without his motion, it rest in ours:
He shall be flattered with Sede vacant,
Make him believe he comes into his place,
And that will fetch him with a vengeance to vs,
For I know powder is not more ambitious,
When the match meet it, then his mind for mounting
As Covetous and Lecherous.
No more, now (Sir) both the sides fill.
This he's bin looked for long.
The stronger sting it shoots into the blood
Of the black adversary, I'm ashamed now,
I was theirs ever, what a Lump was I?
When I was led in ignorance and blindness?
I must confess I'ue all my life time played
The Fool, till now.
And now he plays two parts, the fool and knave.
Ther's my recantation in the last leaf.
Were it like a Ciceronian in pure Latain.
Pure honesty, the better latain serves then,
Out of those pestilent pamphlets those are they
That wound our cause to the heart.
Here, more anger yet.
But we come well provided for this storm
Is this my Pawn? she that should 
Guard our Person,
Or some pale figure of deiection,
Her shape usurping, sorrow and affrightment,
Has prevailed strangely with her.
King of Integrity,
Queen of the same, and all the house professors
Of noble Candor, uncorrupted justice,
And truth of heart, through my alone discovery
(My like and honour wondrously preserved)
I bring into your knowledge with my sufferings,
Fearful affrightments, and heart-killing terrors,
The great incendiary of all Christendom,
The absolute abuser of true sanctity,
Fairer peace, and holy order can be found
In any part of th'vniuefsall Globe:
Who making meek devotion keep the door,
(His lips being full of holy zeal at first)
Would have committed a foul rape upon me.
Ho?
A rape? that's foul indeed, the very sound
To our ear fowler then the offence it self
To some Kings of the earth.
Sir, to proceed,
Gladly I offered life to preserve honour,
Which would not be accepted without both:
The chief of his ill aim to be at mine honour,
Till heaven was pleased by some unlooked for accident,
To give me courage to redeem my self.
When we find desperate sins
In ill men's company,
We place a charitable sorrow there;
But custom and their leprous inclination,
Quits vs of wonder: for our expectation
Is answered in their lives, but to find sin
Under a robe of Sanctity, is able
To draw all number to that monster only,
And leave created monsters unadmired,
The pride of him that took first fall foe pride,
Is to be Angel shaped, and imitate
The form from whence he loll; but this offender,
Far, baser then sins moister, fixed by vow
To holy order which is Angels method,
It grieves me that my knowledge must be tainted,
With his infested name,
Oh rather with thy finger point him out.
The place that he should fill is void my L.
His guilt has scared him the black Bishops pawn.
Ho, mine, my pawn? the glory of his order,
The prime and president zealot on the earth?
Impudent pawn, for thy sake at this minute
Modesty suffers, all that's virtuous blushes,
And truths self like the sun vexed with a mist,
Looks red with anger.
Be not thou drunk with rage too
Sober sincerity nor you a cup,
Spake with Hypocrisy.
You name their Bishop,
But your own Christmas bole you morning draught
Next your Episcopal heart all the twelve days,
Which smack you cannot leave all the year after.
A shrewd retort
Has made our Bishop smell of burning too,
Would I stood farther off, were it no impeachment
To my honour orthe game, would they wold play faster
White Knight, ther's acknowledged from our house
A reverence to you and respect
To that Lord Duke stands next you, with the favour
Of the white King, and th'afore-named respected,
I combat with this cause, if with all speed
Wast not one syllable, unfortunate pawn,
Of what I speak, thou dost not plead destruction
A plea which will but faintly take thee off neither,
From this Leuiathan scandal, that lies rolling
Upon the Crystal waters of devotion,
Or what may quit the more (though enough nothing)
Fall down, and foam, and by than pang discover,
The vexing spirit of falsehood strongly within thee,
Make thy self ready for perdition,
Ther's no remove in all the Game to scope it,
This pawn or this, the Bishop, or my self
Will take thee in the end, play how you can.
Spite of sins glorious ostentatio n;
And all blood-threats, that thunder cracks of pride,
Ushering a storm malice house of impudence,
Trust and aeqiuocation, my true cause
Shall keep the path it treads in.
I play thus then:
Now in the hearing of this high assembly,
Bring forth the time of this attempts conception.
It seems black Knight you are afraid to touch it
Well it's eruption, will she have it so then?
Or your white Bishop for her, the more unclean▪
Vile and impious that you urge the strain to,
The greater will her shames heap now in the end,
And the wrongs meek mans glory, the time (pawn)
Yesterdays cursed evening.
Oh the treasure of my revenge I cannot spend on thee,
Ruin enough to spare for all thy kindred too,
For honours sake call in more slanderers,
I have such plentiful confusion,
I know not how to wast it, isle bee nobler yet,
And put her to her own house: King of meekness
Take the cause to thee, for our hands are too heavy,
Our proofs will fall upon her like a Tower,
And grind her bones to powder.
What new engine,
He's the devil raised in him now.
Is it he,
And that the time stands firm, now to your scandal,
Pray do not shift your slander.
Shift your treachery,
They'ue worn one suit too long.
That holy man,
So wrongfully accused by this lost pawn:
He has not been seen these ten days in these parts.
How.
Nay at this instant thirty leagues from hence.
Fadomlesse falsehood, will it scope vnblasted.
Can you make this appear?
Light is not clearer,
By his own letters (most impartial Monarch.)
How wrongfully may sacred virtue suffer, sir.
Bishop we have a treasure of that false heart.
Step forth and reach those proofs.
Amazement covers me,
Can I be forsaken of a cause
So strong in truth and equity, will virtue
Send me no aid in this hard time of friendship.
There's an infallible staff and a red hat
Reserved for you.
Oh, sir, indeed.
A staff
That will not easily break, you may trust to it,
And such a one had your corruction need of,
There's a state fig for you now,
Behold all,
How they were in one:
I always held a charity so good
To holiness professed I ever believed rather,
The accuser false you the professor vicious.
A charity like all your virtues else,
Gracious and glorious.
Where sets the offence,
Let the faults punishment be derived from thence:
We leave her to your censure.
Most just Majesty.
Calamity of virtue, my Queen leaves me too:
Am I cast off as the Olive casts her flower?
Poor friendless innocence art thou left a prey,
To the devourer?
Nor thou art not lost,
Let em put on their bloodiest resolutions,
If the fair policy I aim at prospers:
Thy counsel (noble Duke.)
For that work chiefly.
A man for speed now.
Let it be my honour, sir,
Make me that flight that owes my lives service.
Was not this brought about for our honours:
Pish, the Galician brain can work out wonders.
Let's use her, as upon like discovery
A maid was used at Venice, every one
Be ready with a penance being majesty
Vessel of foolish scandal, take thy fright
Had been in that Cabinet of niceness,
Half the virginities the earth locked up,
And all swooped at one cast, by the dexterity
Of a Jesuitical Gamester t'ad not valued
The least part of that general worth thou hast tainted.
First I enjoin thee to a three days fast for it.
You're to penurious, sir, ill make it four.
I to a twelve hours kneeling at one time.
And in a room filed al with Aretines pictures,
(More then the twelve labours of Luxury)
Thou shalt not so much as the chaste pummel see
Of Lucrece dagger peeping: nay Isle punish thee
For a discoverer, isle torment thy modesty.
After that four days last, into the inquisition house.
Strengthened with bread and water for worse penance.
Why well said Duke of our house, nobly agriuated.
Virtue to show her influence more strong,
Fits me with patience mightier then my wrong.
I Know my pen draws blood of the black house,
Ther's never a book I writ but their cause bleeds,
It has lost many an ounce of reputation,
Since I came to this side, I deep in,
And leave the Orifex gushing were I come:
But wher's my advancement all this while I have got,
I'd have some round preferment, corpulent dignity
That bears some breath and compass in the gulf on it,
I am persuaded that this flesh would fit
The biggest chair Ecclesiastical,
If it were put to trial, to be made Moister of an Hospital,
Is but a kind of disease-bred honour:
Or dream of the poor alms Knights that wear badges
Ther's but two lazy beggarly preferments,
In the white Kingdom, and I'ue got em both,
My merit does begin to be crop-sicke
For want of other Titles.
Oh here walks his fulsome holiness:
Now for the Maister-peece
To undo him everlasting, that's put home,
And make him hang in most seriously,
That jested with an halter upon,
The black Knight? I must look to play then.
I bring fair gratings to your reverend virtues,
From Cardinal Paulus your most princely kinsman.
Our princely kinsman saith thou? we accept •m:
Pray keep your side and distance, I am chary
Of my Episcopal person:
I know the Knights walk in this Game too well,
He may slip over me, and where am I then?
There where thou shalt be
Shortly if art fail not,
(Ho, all my bodies blood mounts to my face,
To look upon this letter.)
The pill works with him,
Think on it seriously it is not yet too late then,
Through the submiss acknowledgment
Of your disobedience`
To be brotherly received into the loving
Bosom of the Conclave.
This was the chair of ease I ever aimed at,
Isle make a bonfire of my books immediately
All, that are left against that side isle sacrifice:
Pack up my plate and goods, and steal away
By night at Water-gate: It is but penning
An other recantation, and in venting
Two or three bitter books against the white house,
And then I'm atother side again,
As firm as ere I was, as fat, and flourishing:
Black Knight, expect a wonder ere't belong,
Thou shalt see me one of the blacke-house.
Your holiness is merry with the messenger,
Too happy to be true, you speak what should be.
If natural compunction touched you truly:
Oh you've drawn-blood, live blood, blood of honour
From your most dear primitiue mothers heart:
Your sharpe invectives have been points of spears
In her sweet tender sides, the unkind wounds
Which the son gives, a son of reverence specially,
They rankle ten times more, you the adversaries:
I tell you, sir, your reverend revolt
Did give the feare-fullest blow to adoration
Our cause ere felt, it shook the very statues,
The veins and ashes of the Sainted sleepers.
Forbear, or I shall melt in the place I stand,
And let forth a fat Bishop in sad syrup:
Suffice I am yours, when they least dream on it,
Ambitious fooder, power and riches draws me,
When I smell honour that's the locke of hay,
That lead me through the worlds field every way. Ex.
B. Knight. Here's a sweet pang to propogate belief on,
Like the foundation of a Chapel laid
Upon a quagmire, I may number him now
Amongst my inferior policies, and not shame em;
But let me a little solace my designs
With the remembrance of some brave ones past,
To cherish the futerrity of project,
Whose motion must be restless till that great work,
Called the possession of the world be ours:
Was it not procured a gallant fleet,
From the white Kingdom to secure our coasts,
Against th'infidell Pirates, under pretext
Of more necessities expedition,
Who made the Iayles fly open (without miracle)
And let the Locusts out, those dangerous flies.
Whose properti's to burn corn without touching
The Heretic Granaries, feel it to this minute;
And now they'ue got amongst the country Corps,
They stick so fast to the converted ears,
The loudest tempest that authority rouses,
Will hardly shake 'em off, they have their dens
In Ladies coaches, their safe groves and fens:
Nay they were followed and found out by the sent
Palm oil will make a Pursuivant relent:
Whose policy was it to put a silenced muzzle,
On all the barking tong-men of the time:
Made pictures that were enough before,
Poor sufferers in that politic restraint?
My light spleen skips, and shakes my ribs to think on it
Whilst our drift walked uncensured, but in thought
A whifle or a whisper, would be questioned,
In the most fortunate Angle in the World,
The Court has held the City by thy Horns,
Whilst I have milked her: I have got good soups too
From Countries for their liberties,
From some for their most vainly hopd for preferments.
High offices, in the air, I should no live
But for this Mellacrim, this mirth Manna, 
My pawn? how now, the new's.
Expect none very pleasing
That comes (sir) of my bringing, I'm so sad.
Thy conscience is so tender hoofed a late,
Every nail pricks it.
This may prick yours too,
If there be any quick flesh in a yard on it.
Mine, mischief must find a deep nail and a driver.
Beyond the strength of any Matchauile:
The politic Kingdoms fatten to reach mine,
Prithee compunction needle prick a little,
Unbind this sore wound.
Sir, your plots discovered.
Which of the twenty thousand, nine hundredth
Threescore and five, can tell?
Bless vs, so many?
How does poor Country men have but one plot
To keep a Cow o•, yet in law for that,
You cannot'em all sure by their names (Sir)
Yes were the number trebled: thou hast seen
A Globe stand on the table in my Closet.
A thing (sir) drawn with Countries and hard words.
True, with lines drawn
Some Tropical, some oblique.
I scarce can read, I was brought up in blindness.
Just such a thing (if ere my scull be opened)
Will my brains look like.
Like a Globe of Countries.
I and some Moister politician,
That has sharpe state eyes will go near to pick out
The plots and every climate where they fastened,
And will puzzle em too.
I'm of your mind for that (sir.
Th'le find em too full upon so no countries,
The'd need use spectacles; but I turn to you now,
What plot is that discovered?
Your last bruit sir,
Begot twixt the black Bishop and your self,
Your ante-dated letters about the Iesuite.
Discovered, how?
The white Knights policy has out stripped yours it seems:
Joined with th'assistant council of this Duke:
The white Bishops pawn undertook the journey,
Who as they say, discharged it like a flight,
I made him for the business fit and light.
It is but a bawdy pawn out of the way a little,
Ther's enough of them in all parts. 
You have heard all then.
The wonders past with me, but some
Shall down for it.
Set free that virtuous pawn from all her wrongs,
Let her be brought with honour to, the face,
Of her malicious Adversary.
Good.
Noble chaste Knight, a title of that Candor,
The greatest Prince on earth without impeachment
May have the dignity of his worth comprised in,
This fair delivering act virtue will register,
In that white book of the defence of Virgins,
Where the clear fame all preserving Knights,
Are to eternal memory consecrated;
And wee embrace as partner of that honour,
This worthy Duke, the counsel of the act,
Whom wee shall ever place in our respect.
Most blessed of Kings, throned in al royal graces,
Every good deed sends back it's own rewards,
Into the bosom of the enterpriser;
But you to express your self as well to be
King of munificence, as integrity
Adds glory to the gift.
Thy deserts claim it,
Zeal and fidelity appear, thou beauty
Of truth and innocence, best ornament
Of patience, thou that made thy sufferings glorious
Isle take no knowledge on it what makes she here?
How dare you pawn vnpennanc't with a cheek
Fresh as her false-hood yet, where castigation
Has left no pale print of her visiting anguish,
Appear in this assembly, let me alone,
Sin must be bold, that's all the grace it is bound too.
What's this?
I'm wonder struck.
Assist me goodness,
I shall to prison again.
At least I'ue mazed em,
Scattered by admiration of her innocence,
(As the fired ships put in, severed the Fleet
In eighty eight) Isle on with it, impudence
Is mischiefs patrimony, is his Justice
Injured reverence no sharplier righted,
I ever held that Majesty impartial,
That like unequal, Heaven looks on the manners,
Not on the shapes they shroud in.
This black Knight
Will never take any answer, it is a victory
To make him understand, he does amiss,
When he knows in his own clear understanding,
That he does nothing else, show him the testimony
Confirmed by good men, how that foul attempter,
Got but this morning to the place from whence
He dated his forged lines six days past,
Why may not the corruption sleep in this,
By some connivance, as you have walked in ours,
By too rash confidence.
Isle undertake
That Knight shall teach the devil how to lye.
If sin were half so wise as impudent,
She'de near seek father for an advocate. 
Now to act treachery with an angels tong,
Since all ours come out, isle bring him in strongly again,
Where is his injured chastity? this goodness
Whose worth no transitory prize can equal,
This rock of constant, and invincible virtue
That made sins tempest weary of his fury.
What is my pawn distracted?
I think rather
Ther's some notable Maister-prize of rogary,
This drum strikes up for.
Let me fall down with reverence
Before this blessed Altar.
This is madness.
Mark the end, I stand for rogery still,
I will not change my side,
I shall be taxed I know
I care not what the black house thinks of me.
What say you now?
I will not be vnlayed yet.
How ever sensure flies, I honour sanctity,
That is my object I intend no other,
I saw this glorious and most valiant virtue,
Fight the most noble combat with the devil.
If both the Bishops had bin there for seconds
T'ad been a complete Devil.
Then thou hast heard the violence intended?
Tic a truth, I joy to justify I was an agent
On virtues part, and raised that confused noise,
That started his attempt and gave her liberty.
Oh it is a righteous story she has told (Sir)
My life and same stands mutually engaged,
Both to the truth and goodness of this pawn.
Does it appear to you, yet clear as the Sun.
Lass I believed it long before it was done.
Degenerate
Base,
Perfidious.
Traitorous pawn
What are you al besides your selves?
But I remember that pawn.
May a fearful barrenness,
Blast both my hopes and pleasures, if I brought not
Her ruin in my pity, a new trap
For her more sure confusion.
Have I not won now,
Did not I say it was craft, and machination?
I smell conspiracy all the way I went,
Although the mess were covered I'm so used to it.
That queen would I fine finger.
You are too hasty (sir)
If she were took the game would be ours quickly,
My aims at that white Knight, t'entrap him first.
The Duke will follow too.
Would that Bishop were in my Diocese,
I'd soon change his whiteness.
(Sir) I could whip you up a pawn immediately,
I know where my game stands.
Do it suddenly,
Advantage least must not be lost in this play.
Pawn, thou art ours.
Hoe's taken by default,
By wilful negligence, guard the sacred persons,
Look well to the white Bishop, for that pawn
Gave guard to the queen, and him in the third place.
See what sure piece you locke your confidence in,
I made this pawn here by corruption ours,
As soon as honour by creation yours,
The whiteness upon him is but the leprosy
Of pure dissimulation: view him now,
His heart and his intents are of our colour.
Most dangerous Hypocrite
One made against vs.
This truth of his complexion.
Has my goodness,
Clemency, love, and favour gracious raised thee
From a condition next to popular labour,
Took thee from all the dublitable hazards
Of Fortune? her most unsecure adventures?
And grafted thee into a branch of honour,
And dost thou fall from the top bough by the rottennes
Of thy alone corruption, like a fruit
That's ouer-ripned by the beams of favour,
Let thy own weight reward thee, I have forgot thee,
Integrity of life is so dear to me,
Where I find falsehood, or a crying trespass,
Be it in any whom our grace shines most on,
I'd tear em from my heart.
Spoke like Heavens substitute.
You have him, we can spare him, and his shame
Will make the rest look better to their Game.
The more cunning we must use then.
Wee shall match you,
Play how you can) perhaps, and make you too.
Is there so much amazement spent on him
That's but half black, there might be hope of that man
But how will this house wonder, if I stand forth
And show a whole one, instantly discover
One that's all black, where ther's no hope at all.
Isle say, thy heart then justifies thy books,
I long for thy discovery.
Look no farther then,
Bear witness all the house I am the man,
And turn my self into the black house freely,
I am of this side now.
Monster near matched him.
This is your noble work Knight.
Now Isle halter him▪
Next news you hear, expect my books against you,
Printed at Doway, Bruxells, or Spallato.
See his goods seized on.
Lass, they were all conueyed
Last night by water-gate, to a Taylors house:
A friend of Black house.
A prepared Hypocrite.
Premeditated tuene-coate.
Yes, rail on,
Isle reach you in my writings when I'm gone.
Flatter him a while with honours till we put him
Upon some dangerous service, and then burn him▪
This came unlooked for.
How wee rejoice to see you.
Now isle discover all the white house to you.
Indeed that will both reconcile and praise you.
I rest upon you knight for my advancement.
Oh for the staff, the strong staff that will hold
And the red hat fit for the guilty mazure,
Into the empty bag, know the first way,
Pawns that are lost, are ever out of play.
How's this?
No replication you know me,
No doubt ever long you'll have more company.
The bag is big enough t'wil hold v•a•
I sue to thee, prithee be one of vs
Let my love win thee, thou hast done truth this day,
And yesterday my honour noble service.
The best Pawn of our house, could transcend it not.
My pity stands with zeal especially,
When I foresaw your marriage, then I amounted.
How? marriage?
That contaminating Art,
Would have spoiled al our fortunes a rape God bless vs.
Thou talk of marriage.
Yes, yes, you do marry,
I saw the man.
The man.
An absolute handsome Gentleman, a complete one,
You'd say so when you see him, heir to the three red hats,
Besides his general hopes in the black house.
Sure thou art mistaken, for this man
I have promised single life to all my affections.
Promise you what you will, or I, or ell's one,
There's fate rules vs, and over rules vs all me thinks.
How came you to see or know this mystery.
A Magical glass I bought of an Egyptian,
Whose stone retains that speculative virtue,
Presented the man to me, your name brings him
As often as I use it, and me thinks
I never have enough person and postures:
Are all so pleasing.
This is wondrous strange,
The faculties of soul are still the same,
I cannot feel one motion tend that way.
We do not always seek, the faith we live by,
Nor ever see our growth, yet both work▪ upward.
It was well applied, but may I see him too.
Surely you may without all doubt or fear,
Observing the right use as I was taught it,
Not looking back, nor questioning the specter.
That's no hard observation, trust it
With me, is it possible, I long to see this man.
Pray follow me then,
And Isle case you instantly.
I would so fine take one of these white pawns now.
I'd make him do all under drudgery,
Feed him with ashes, milk, cromb'd with Goats cheese;
And all the white meates can be devised for him,
So make him my white Jennet when I prance it,
After the black Knights litter.
You'd look then,
Just like the Devil striding over a night mare.
Made of a Millers daughter.
A pox on you, were you so nigh, I'm taken
Like a Blacke-bird in the great snow, this white
Pawn grinning over me.
And now because I will not foul my clothes
Ever hereafter? for white quickly soils you know.
I prethe get thee gone,
Then I shall smut thee.
Isle put that to venture, now I have
Snapped thee, thou shalt do all the dirty drugery,
That slavery was ever put too.
I shall cousin you,
You may chance come and find your work undone,
For I'm too proud to labour, isle starve first,
I tell you that before hand.
I will fit you then with a black
Whip, that shall not be behind hand.
Pish, I have been used to whipping,
I have whipped my self three miles out of Town
In a morning, I can fast a fortnight, and
Make all your meat stink, and lye upon your hands.
To prevent that, your food shall be
Black berries, and upon gaudy days a pickled
Spider cut out like Anchouis: Ime not to
Learn a months ordinary, come fir, will you firk.
Soft, soft you, you have no such
Bargain on it, if you look well about you.
I'm snapped too, a black
Pawn in the breech of me:
Wee three look like a bird spit, a white Chick
Between two russet Wood-cockes.
I'm glad of this.
But you shall have small cause, for isle firk you.
And isle firk you again.
And Isle firk you again.
Mas here will be old firking, I shall
Have the worst on it, for I can firk no body,
Wee draw together now for all the world.
Like three flies with one straw through their buttocks.
This is the room he did appear to me in,
And look you, this the Magical glass, that showed him.
I find no motion yet, what should I
Think on it? a sudden fear invades me,
A faint trembling under this omen
As oft felt the panting of a Turtle,
Under a stroking hand.
That boads good luck still,
Sign you shall change state speedily: for that trembling
Is always the first symptom of a bride,
For any vain fears that may accompany
His apparition, by my truth to friendship
I quite you of the least, never was object
More gracefully presented, the very ayre
Conspires to do him honour, and treats
Sweet vocal sin as if a bridegroom enters:
Which argues the biest harmony of your loves.
And will the using of my name produce him.
Nay of yours only, else the wonder halted,
To clear you of that doubt: isle put the difference
In practise, the first thing I do, and make
His invocation in the name of others.
That will satisfy me much.
It shall be done.
Thou with gentle form and face,
Filed lately this Egypted Glass,
By th'emperious powerful name,
And the Vninersall fame,
Of the mighty black House Queen
I conjure thee to be seen.
What see you nothing yet?
Not any part: Pray try another.
You shall have your will:
I double my command and power,
And at the instant of this hour:
Invoke thee in the white queens name,
With stay for time, and shape the same.
What see you yet?
There's nothing shows at all.
My truth reflects the clearer.
Then now fix and bless your fair eye,
With your own for ever.
Thou well composed by fates hand drawn,
To enjoy the white Queens Pawn,
Of whom thou shalt (by virtue meet)
Many graceful issues get:
By the beauty of her fame,
By the whiteness of her name,
By her fair and fruitful love,
By her truth that mates the Dove,
By the meekness of her mind,
By the softness of her kind,
By the lustre of her grace,
By al these you're summoned to this place.
Hark how the ayre enchanted with your praises,
And his approach this words to sweet notes raises.
Oh let him stay a while, a little longer.
That's a good hearing.
If he be mine, why should he part so soon?
Why, this is but the shadow of yours:
How do you?
Oh, I did in to give consent to see it,
What certainty is in our bloods our states?
What we still write is blotted out by fates:
Our wills are like a cause that is Law-tost,
What one Court orders, is by another-crost.
I find no fit place for this passion here,
Tic merely an intruder, he is a Gentleman,
Most wishfully composed, honour grows on him,
And wealth piled up for him, has youth enough too,
And yet in the sobriety of his Countenance,
Grave as a Tetrach, which is gracious
Ith'eye of modest pleasure, whore's the emptiness,
What can you more request.
I do not know
What answer yet to make, it doth require,
A meeting twixt my fear and my desire.
Shoe's caught, and which is strong, by her most wronger.
THE Iesuit in his gallant habit,
Tic he my Confessor, he might have passed me
Seven years together, had I not by chance
Advanced mine eye upon that lettered Hat bond:
The Jesuitical symbale to be worn,
By the brave Colledgians with consent,
Tic a strange habit for a holy Father,
A president of poverty especially:
But wee the sons and daughters of Obedience,
Dare not once think awry, but must confess our selves
As humble to the father of that feather,
Long spear and poniard, as to the Abbey and Alter,
And happy we are so highly graced t'attaine to it,
Holy and reverend.
How has found me out?
Oh (sir) put on the sparlingst trim of glory▪
Perfection will shine for most, and I know you
By the Catholicall mark you wear about you,
The mark aboue your fore-head.
Are you grown
So ambitious in your observance: well, your business,
I have my Game to follow.
I have a worm
Follows me, so that I can follow no game,
The most faint hearted pawn, if hee could see
His play, might snap me up at pleasure:
I desire (sir) to be absolved, my conscience
Being at ease, I could then with more courage
Play my Game.
It was a base fact.
It was to a Schisamticke pawn (sir.)
What's that to the ability of revenge
Suffices I have neither will nor power
To give you absolution for that violence,
Make your petition to the penance Chamber,
If the Tax Register relieve you in it,
By the black bishops clemency you hau'wrought out,
A single piece of favour with your money,
It's all your refuge now.
This sting shoots deeper.
Yonder's my Game, which like apoletick Chessner,
I must not seem to see.
Oh my heart.
That it is.
The very same that the Magical
Presented lately unto me.
And how like
A most regardless stranger hee walks by,
Merely ignorant of that sate, you are not indeed
The principall'st part of him, what strange mysteries
Inscrutable love works by.
The time you see,
Is not yet come.
But it is in our power now
To bring time nearer, knowledge is a mastery,
And make it observe vs, and not wee it
I would force nothing
From it's proper virtue,
Let time have his full course. I'd rather die
The modest death of undiscovered love,
You have heavens least and lowest servant suffer,
Or in his motion receive check for me:
How is my souls growth altered that single life,
The fittest garment that peace ere made for it
Is grown too straight, too stubborn on the sudden.
Hee comes this way again.
Oh here's a Traitor
Leapt from my heart into my cheek all ready.
That will betray all to his powerful eye,
If it but glance upon me.
By my verity
Look, he's past by again, down in neglect
Without the prosperous hin't of so much happiness
To look upon his forrude, how close fate
Seals up the eye of human understanding,
Till like the Suns flower, time and love encloses it,
It is pity he should dwell in ignorance longer.
What will you do?
Yes, dye a bash full death, doe
And let the remedy pass by unused skill,
You're chained enough all ready, look into it,
Absolute (Sir) with your most noble pardon,
For this my rude intrusion I am bold
To bring the knowledge of a secret nearer,
By many days (sir) then would it arrive,
In its own proper revelation with you,
Pray turn and fix, do you know yon'd noble goodness,
Tic the first minute my eye blessed me with her,
And clearly shows how much my knowledge wanted,
Not knowing her till now.
She's to be liked then,
Pray view advisedly, there's strong reason,
That I'm so bold to urge it, you must guess
The work concerns you nearer then you think for.
Her glory and the wonder of this secret,
Puts a recipicall amazement on me.
And tic not without worth,
You two must be better acquainted.
Is their cause affinity,
Or any covetous help creation joys in,
To bring that work forward.
Yes, yes, I can show you,
The nearest way to that perfection,
Of a most virtuous one, that joy ere found,
Pray mark her once again you follow me,
And I will show you her, must be your wife (sir.)
The mystery exceeds, or else creation,
Has set that admirable piece before vs,
To choose out chaste delight by.
Please you follow (Sir.)
What heart have you to put in on one object,
And cannot get me off? tic pain to part from it.
If there prove no check in the Magick-glasse.
But by proportion come as fair, and full
Into his eyes as his into mine lately,
You I'm confirmed he is mine for ever.
The very self same that my mirror blessed me, with
From head to foot, the beauty and the habit,
Kept you this place? still did not you remove Lady.
Not a foot (sir.)
Is it possible,
I would have sworn I'd seen the substance yonder,
'T was to that lustre, to that life presented.
Even so was yours to me (sir.)
Pawn, saw you mine.
Perfectly clear, no
Sooner my name used, but yours appeared.
Just so did yours at mine now.
Why stand you idle, will you let time
Cousin you, (protracting time) of those
Delicious benefits, that faith marked to you,
You modest pair of blushing,
Gamesters, and you (Sir) the bashful
I cannot flatter a foul fault in any,
Can you be more then man and wife assign,
And by a power the most irrevocable,
Others that be adventurers in delight,
May meet with crosses, shame or separation
You know the mind of fate, you must be coupled.
She speaks but truth in this,
I see no reason then,
That wee should miss the relish of this night;
But wee are both shamefaced.
How this night (Sir)
Did not I know you must be mine, and therein
Your privilege runs strong, for that loose motion
You never should be, is it not by fortune
To match with a pure mind, then am I miserable,
The Doves and all chaste loving, winged creatures
Have their pairs fit, their desires justly
Mated is woman, more unfortunate, virgin?
The (may of woman) fate has ordained (Sir)
We should be man and wife, has not given
Warrant for aim act of knowledge till
We are so.
Tender eyed modesty, how it grieves at this,
I'm as far off for all this, strange imposture,
As at first enter-view, where lies our game now?
You know I cannot marry by my order.
I know you cannot (sir) yet you
May venture on a contract.
Ho!
Sure you may (sir,)
Without all question so far, without danger
Or any stain to your vow, and that make take her:
Nay do it with speed, sheele think you
Mean the better too.
Be not so lavish of that blessed spring,
You've wasted that upon a cold occasion now,
Would wash a sinful soul white by our love joys,
That motion shall near light upon my tongue more,
Till we're contracted, then I hope your mine.
In all just duty ever.
Then doe you question it?
Pish, then you're man and wife,
All but Church Ceremonies:
Pray let's see it done first,
She shall do reason then:
Now isle enjoy the sport, and cousin you both,
My bloods game is the wages I have
Worked for.
Pawn, I have spoke to the Fat bishop for thee,
Isle get thy absolution from his own mouth:
Reach me my Chair of ease, my Chair of cousinage
Seven thousand pounds in women, reach me that
I love a life to sit upon a bank
Of Heretic gold: Oh soft and gentle (sirrah)
Ther's a foul flaw in the bottom of my bum (pawn)
I near shall make sound soldier, but sound treacher
With any hee in Europe, how now? quality
Thou hast the paultrest fool that ere I met with,
It cannot bear one suckling villain:
Mine can digest a monster without credit,
A finn as weighty as an Elephant,
And never wamble for it.
I, you have been used to it (sir)
That's a great help, the swallow of my conscience
Has but a narrow passage, you must think yet
It lies in the paenitent pipe, and will not down,
If I had got seven thousand pounds by Offices
And gulled down you, the bore would have bin bigger.
Nay, an thou prou'st factious, I shall hug thee,
Can a poore-pocht-soft rear iniquity
So rude upon thy conscience, I'm ashamed of thee,
Had thou betrayed the witness to the black,
Beggard a Kingdom by dissimulation,
Anointed the fair frame of peace, and traffic
Poisoned alleagance, set faith back and wrought
Weomens soft souls even up to the masculine malice,
To pursue truth to death if the cause roused em,
That stairs and parents as first taught to curse thee:
All these and ten times troubled has this brain
Bin parent too, they are my off-springs all.
A goodly brood.
Yet I can jest as lightly,
Laugh and tell strange stories to Court Madams,
(Daughters of myseducements) with alacrity,
As high and heartily, as youths time of innocence
That never knew a sin, to shapea sorrow by;
I feel no tempest, not a leaf wind stirring,
To shake a fault, my conscience is be calmed rather,
I'm sure there's a Whirlwind huffs in mine.
Sirrah, I ha sold the Groom ath stool six times,
And received money of six several Ladies:
Ambitious to take place of Baronets wives▪
To three old money Matrons I have promised,
The mother ship oath maids, I'ue taught our friends
To convey white house gold, to our black kingdom
In cold backed pasties, so cousin Searchers:
For venting halbow'd oil, beads, needles, pardons,
Pictures, veronices, heads in private presses,
That's done one in the habit of a Peddler:
Letters conveyed in roles, Tobaco-roles:
When a restraint comes, by my politic counsel;
Some of our Iesuites turn Gentle-men Ushers:
Some Falkners, some park-keeper, &amp; some hunts-men:
One took the shape of an old Ladies Cooke once,
And dispatcht two chares in a sunday morning,
The Altar and the Dresser: pray what use
Put I my summer recreation too?
But more t'enforme my knowledge in the state
And strength of the white Kingdom? no fortifications,
Haven, Creek, landing place, about the white Coast,
But I got draught, and plot-forme, learned the depth
Of all the Channels, knowledge of all sands,
Shelves, Rocks and Rivers for invasion:
A Catalogue of all the Navy Royal:
The burden of each ship, the brass murderers:
The number of the men, to what cape bound:
Again for the discovery of the Inlands:
Never a Shire but the State better known
To me, then to her best Inhabitants:
What power of men and horse, gentries, revenues,
Who well affected to your side, how ill,
Who neither will nor ill, all the new trality.
Thirty eight souls have been seduced (Pawn)
Since the Ioales vomited with the Pill I gave 'em.
Sure you put oil of toad into physic (sir)
I'm now about a maister-peece of play,
To entrap the Wh. Knight, and with false allurements,
Entice him to our black House, more will follow,
Whilst our Fat Bishop sets upon the Queen
Then will our game lye sweetly.
Hoe's come now (sir.)
Heir's Taxa Penitentiaris Knight,
The book of general pardons, of all prizes:
I have bin searching for his sin this half hour,
And cannot light upon it.
That is strange let me see it.
Wretched as I am, has my rage done that
There is no president of pardon for?
For wilful murder 13. pounds, 4. shillings
and sixe-pence, that's reasonable cheap, for killing,
killing, killing, killing, killing, killing.
Why heir's nothing but killing of this side.
Turn ore the sheet, you shall find adultery
And other trivial sins.
Adultery, oh I'm met now; for Adultery
A couple of shillings, and for Fornication five pence,
Mas these are the good penny-worths,
I cannot see how a man can mend himself, for lying
With Mother, Sister, or Daughter, I marry (sir)
Thirty three pounds, three shillings and three pence,
The sins gradation right paid all in three too.
You have read the story of that monster (sir)
That got his daughter, sister &amp; wife, of his own mother
Symone nine pounds.
They may thank me for that, it was ninteene,
Before I came, I have mitigated many of the sums.
Sodomy six pence, you should have
Put that sum ever on the back side of your book
Bishop.
Ther's few on's very forward (sir)
What's here? a old presidents of encouragement.
I those are ancient notes.
Given as a gratitude for the kiling of an Heretical
Prince, with a poisoned knife ducats 5 thousand.
True (sir) that was payed.
Promised to Doctor Lopus for poisoning the Maiden Queen of the Whit Kingdom, ducats twenty thousand, which said sum was afterwards given as a meritorious alms to the Nunnery at Lisbon, having at this present, ten thousand pounds more at use in the Towne-house of Antwerp.
What's all this to my conscience (worthy Holiness)
I sue for pardon, I have brought money with me.
You must depart, you see there is no president,
Of any price or pardon for that fact.
Most miserable, are fouler sins remitted?
Killing, nay wilful murder.
True, there is instance:
Were you to kill him I'd pardon you:
Ther's president for that, and price set down,
But none for Gelding.
I have picked out understanding now for ever,
Out of the Carbulistique bloody riddle,
I'll make away all my estate and kill him,
And by that act obtain full absolution.
Why Bishop, Knight, wher's your remooues?
Your troops? stand you now idle in the heart of game?
My life for yours black sovereign the game is ours,
I have wrought vnder-hand for the Whit Knight,
And this brave Duke, and find them very cunning
And for their Sanctimonius Queen's surprise,
In that State-puzell, and distracted hurry,
Trust my Arch subtlety with.
Oh Eagle pride,
Never was Game more hopeful of our side.
If Bishop bul-beife, be not snapped at next bout,
As the Game stands, I'll never trust art more.
True noble Duke, fair virtues most endeared one,
Let vs prevent their rank insinuation,
With truth of cause, and cunning meet their plots:
With confident goodness, that shall strike them grauling.
(Sir) all the Gins, traps, and alluring snares,
The Devil he's bin at work since eighty eight,
Are laid for the great hope of this Game only.
The more noble will Truths triumphs bee,
When they have wound about our constant courages,
The glittering serpent, that ever false-hood fashoned;
And glorying most, in his resplendent poisons,
Just Heaven can find a bolt to bruise his head.
Look would see destruction lie a sunning?
In yonder smile sits blood, and treachery basking, Ent.
In that perfidious model of face falsehood: 
Hell is drawn grinning.
What a payne it is
For Truth to fine a little?
Oh fair Knight,
The rising glory of the House of Candor,
Have I so many protestations lost?
Lost, lost, quite lost, am I not worth your confidence?
I that have voyed the faculties of Soul,
Life, spirit, and brain, to your sweet Game of youth,
(Your noble fruitful Game) can you mistrust
Any foul play in me? that have bin ever
The most submiss observers of your virtues,
And no way taunted with ambition.
(Save only to be thought your first admirer,
How often have I changed (for your delight)
The Royal Presentation of my place?
Into a minicke Easter, and become
(For your sake, and the expulsion of sad thoughts)
Of a great state sic, a light son of pastime,
Made three score year a Tomboy, a mere wanton,
Isle tell you what I told a (Sauoy) dame once:
New Wed, high, plumph, and lusting for an issue,
Within the year I promised her a child,
If she would stride over (Saint Rumbants) breeches,
A relic kept at Methlin, the next morning
One of my followers old hose was conueyed
Into her chamber, where she tried the feat,
By that, and a Court friend, after grew great.
Why who could be without thee)
I will change,
To please you, to any shape, and my aim
Has bin to win your love, in all this game.
Thou hast it nobly, and I long to see,
the Blacke-house pleasure, state and dignity.
Of honour you'll so surfeit and delight,
You'll ne'er desire again to see the Whit.
My love, my hope, my dearest, oh he's gon,
Entrapped, ensnard, surprised amongst the black on's,
I never felt extremity like this,
Thick darkness dwells upon this hour, Integrity
Like one of Heavens bright Luminaries now,
By errors dullest element interpose,
Suffers a black eclipse, I never was
More sick of love then now I am of horror:
I shall be taken, the games lost, I'm set upon:
Oh tic the turne-coate Bishop, having watched
Th'advantage of his play, comes now to seize on me:
Oh! I'm hard be set, distressed most miserable.
Tic in vain to stir, remove which way you can:
I take you now, this is the time we have hoped for,
Queen you must down.
No refcue, no deliverer.
The black Kings blood burns for thy prostitution,
And nothing but the spring of thy chaste virtue
Can cool his inflammation: instantly
He dyes upon a pleurisy of Luxury,
If he deflower thee not.
Oh straight of misery.
And is your holiness his divine procurer?
The devils in it, I'm taken by a Ring-doue:
Where stood this Bishop all this while, that I saw him not?
Oh you were so ambitious you looked over me,
You aimed at no less person, then the Queen
(The glory of the Game) if she were won,
The way were open to the Master-Checque,
Which (look you) he and his, lives to give you:
Honour and virtue guide him in his station.
Oh, my safe sanctuary.
Let Heavens blessings
Be no longer mine, then I am thy sure one:
The Doves house is not safer in the Rock,
Then thou in my firm bosom.
I am blessed in it.
Is it that lump of rank ingratitu de,
Swelled with the poison of Hypocrisy:
Could he be so malicious, he has partaken
Of the sweet fertile blessings of our Kingdom, Bishop
Thou hast done our White House gracious service,
And worthy the fair reverence of thy place:
For (thee black Holiness) that works out thy death,
As the blind Moil the prop'rest son of earth,
Who in casting his ambitious hills up,
Is often taken and destroyed in the midst
Of his advanced work: it were well with thee,
If like that verminous labourer, which thou imitatest
In bills of pride and malice, when death puts thee up,
The silent grave might prove the bag for ever:
No deeper pit then that for thy vain ho pe
Of the white Knight, and his most firm assistant,
Two princely pieces, which I know thy thoughts
Give lost for ever now, my strong assurance
Of their fixed virtues, could you let in seas
Of populous untruths against that Fort,
It would burst the proudest billows.
My feare's past then.
Fear? you were never guilty of an injury
To goodness, but in that.
It stayed not with me (sir.)
It was too much, if it usurped a thought,
Place a strong guard there.
Confidence is set (sir.)
Take that prize hence (you reverend of men)
Put covetousness into the bag again.
The Bag had need be sound, or it goes to wrack,
Sin and my weight will make a strong one crack.
HOld, hold,
Is the black Bishops pawn, the Iesuite
Planted for his consecration?
Ass triumphanti, Me fixum Caesaris Art.
Art there (my holy boy) sirah, Bishop
Tumbrle is snapped in the Bag by this time.
Heretici parent sic.
All Latin: Sure the Oration hath infected him:
Away, away make hast: they are coming.
Si quid mortalibus, in vnquam oculis hilarem
Et gratum aperuit diem: Si quid permantibus
Amicorum Animis gaudium attulit perperitùr
Laetitiam (Aquas candidissime pralucentissime,
Falic•m profecto tuum a Dome Candoris ad Domum
Nigritudinis Accessum promissssse peperisse, at tulisse fatemur:
Omnes aduentus Tui Conflagrantissimi, omni qua
Possumus laetitia, Gaudio, Congratulation, Acclamations
Animis obseruantissimis, Affectibus diuotissimis, obsequijs
Uenerabundis Te Sospitim congratulamur?
(Sir) in this short congratulatory speech,
You may conceive how the whole House affects you.
The Colleges and Sanctimonious seed plots.
It is clear and so acknowledged royoll (Sir.)
What Honours, Pleasures, Rarities, Delights
Your noble thought can think.
Your fair eye fix on
That's comprehended in the spacious circuit
Of our black Kingdom, they are your servants all.
How amply you indeere vs?
They are favours that equally enrich the Royal Giver.
As the receiver in the free donation.
Hark,
To enlarge your welcome: from all parts
Is heard sweet-sounding aires, abstruse things
Open of voluntary freeness: And yond Altar,
The seat of adoration, seems t'adore,
The virtues you bring with you.
Ther's a taste of the old vessel still.
The erroneous relish.
Wonder work some strange delight
(This place was never yet without)
To welcome thee the fair White House Knight,
And to bring our hopes about,
May from the Altar Flames aspire,
Those Tapers set themselves on fire.
May senseless things our joys approve, 
And those brazen Statues move:
Quickened by some Power aboue,
Or what more strange to show our Love.
A happy Omen waits upon this hour,
All move portentuously the Right-hand way.
Come let's set free all most choice delights,
That ever adorned Days or quickened Nights.
I see t'was but a trial of my duty now,
Has a more modest mind, and in that virtue
Most worthily hath Fate provided for me,
Ho! tic the bad-man in the Reverend habit,
Dares he be seen again? Traitor to Holiness,
Oh marble fronted Impudence, and knows,
How ill 'has used? I'm ashamed he blushes not,
Are you yet stoard with any women's pity?
Are you the Mistress of so much Devotion?
Kindness, and Charity? as to bestow
An Alms of Love on your poor sufferer yet
For your sake only?
(Sir) for the reverend respect you ought
To give to Sanctity (though none to me)
In being her servant vowed, and wear her livery,
(If I might counsel) you should never speak,
The language of unchastity in that habit:
You will not think how ill it do's with you,
The world's a stage on which all parts are played,
You'd think it most absurd to see a Devil
Presented there not in a Devils shape,
Or wanting one, to send him out in yours,
You'd rail at that for an absurdity,
No College ere committed, for Decorum sake then
For pities cause, for sacred virtues honour,
If you'll persist still in your diulish part,
Present him as you should, and let one
That carries up the goodness of the play,
Come in that habit: and Isle speak with him,
Then will the parts be fitted, and the spectators
Know which is which, they must have cunning judgments,
To find it else, for such a one as you
Is able to deceive a mighty Auditory.
Nay those you have seduced (if there be any
In the assembly) if they see what manner
You play the Game with me, they cannot love you.
Is there so little hope of you to smile (sir)
Yes at your fears, at th'ignorance of your power
The little use you make of time (youths fortune)
Knowing you have a Husband for lusts shelter,
You dare not yet make bold with a friends comfort:
This is the plague of weakness.
So hot burning?
The siliables of sin, fly from his lips,
As if the letter came new cast from Hell.
Well setting aside the dish you love so much,
(Which hath bin heartily tasted by your betters)
I come to marry you to the gentleman
That last enjoyed you, I hope that pleases you.
Ther's no immodest relish in that office.
Strange of all men he should light on him,
To tie that holy knot that sought to undo me,
Were you requested to perform that business (sir)
I name you a sure toaken.
As for that (sir)
Now you're most welcome, and my fair hopes of you
You'd never break the sacred knot you tide once,
With any lewd solicitings hereafter.
But all the ctafts in getting of it knit,
You are all one fire to make your cousning market,
I am the merrier and the man, do you know me?
Do you know me nice Iniquity? strict luxury?
And holy whoredom, I would clap on marriage
With all hot speed to solder up the Game?
So what a strong Fate hath provided for thee,
You were a maid, swear still you're no worse now:
I left you as I found you, have I startled you?
I'm quit with you now for my discovery,
Your outcries, and your Cunning, farewell brookage.
Nay stay, and hear me but give thanks a
Little (if your care can endure a work so gracious,
Then you may take your pleasure.
I have done that.
That power that hath preserved me from this devil.
How?
This that may challenge the chief chair in Hell,
And sit aboue his Master.
Bring in merit.
That suffer him through blind lust to be led,
Last night to the action of some common bed.
Not over common neither.
Ho! what voice was that?
Of virgins be thou ever honoured.
Now you may go, you hear I have given thanks (sir)
Here is a stringed Game indeed, did not I lie with you.
No.
What a devil art thou?
I will not answer you (sir)
After thanksgiving.
You made promise to me
After the contract.
Yes.
Mischief confound thee,
I speak not to thee: and you were prepared for it,
And set your joys more heigh.
Then you could reach (sir)
This is some bawdy P. i'll slit the throat on it.
What me your bedfellow, 
To one that works so kindly without rape.
My bedfellow.
Do you plant your scorn against me?
Why, when I was Probationer at Bruxels.
That Engine was not known; then Adoration
Filled the place, and wonder was in fashion.
Is it turned to the wilde seed of contempt so soon?
Can 5 years stamp a baud? pray look upon me (sir)
I'm youth enough to take it, it is no longer,
Since you were chief agent for the transportation
Of Ladies Daughters, if you be remembered,
Some of their portions I could name, you pursed em too
They were soon dispossessed of worldly cares,
That came into your fingers.
Shall I hear her?
Holy derision yes, till thy ears swell
With thy own venom, thy prophaine lifes vomit:
Whose Niece was she you poisoned with child twice,
And gave her out possessed with a foul Spirit
When t'was indeed your Bastard?
I am taken 
In mine own toils.
Yes, and tic just you should be.
And thou lewd Pawn, the shame of Womanhood.
I'm lost of all hands.
I connote feel
The weight of my affection: now hoe's taken,
It hath not the burden of a Grassehopper.
Thou whore of order, cockatrice in Voto.
Yonder's the Whit Bishops pawn, Isle play it's heart now
Oh bloody vilain, would thou heap a mur∣der,
On thy first foul offences? O merciless bloodhound
It is time that thou were taken▪
Death prevented.
For thy sake▪ and that partner in thy shame,
Isle never know man further then by Name.
You have enriched my knowledge royal (sir)
And my content together.
Steed of royot,
We set you only welcome, surfeit is
A thing that's seldom heard of in these parts.
I hear of the more virtue when I miss on it.
We do not use to bury in our bellies,
Two hundred thousand ducats, and then boast on it:
Or exercise the old Romaine painful idleness,
With care of fetching fishes far from home,
The golden headed Coracine out of Egypt:
The Salpa from Abuses, or the Pelamis,
Which some call summer whiting from Calcedon:
Salmons from Aquitayne, Helops from Rhodes:
Cockles from Chyos, franckt and salted up,
With Far and Sapa flower, and cockted wine,
We cram no birds nor Epicurean like,
Enclose some creeks oath sea, as Sergius Crata did,
Hee, that invented the first stews for Oysters,
And other sea fish? who besides the pleasure of his
Own throat, got large revenues by the invention,
Whose fat example the nobility followed;
Nor do we imitate that Arch Gormandizer,
With twenty two courses at a Dinner;
And betwixt every course, hee and guess
Washed, and used women, then sat down and strengthened:
Lust swimming in their dishes, which no sooner
Was tasted, but was ready to be vented.
Most impious Epicures.
We commend rather
Of two extremes the parsimony of Pertinax,
Who had half Lattices set up to serve again,
Or his successor Iulian, that would make
Three meals of a lean Hare, and after sup
With a greene fig, and wipe his beard (as we can)
The old bewaylers of excess in those days
Complained there were more coin bid for a
Cooke then for a Warre-horse; but now Cooks are
Purchased after the rate of Triumphant, and some
Dishes after the rate of Cooks, which must needs
Make some of th'white house gormundizers, especially
Your wealthy plump Plebeans, like the Hogs
Which Scaliger cites, that could not move for fat,
So insensible of either prick or goad,
That Mice made goles to needle in their buttocks
And they ne'er felt em: There was once a ruler
Cyrenes Governor choked with his own paunch,
Which death, fat Sanctius King of Castle, fearing
Through his infinite mass of belly, rather chose
To be kilt suddenly, by a pernicious herb
Taken to make him lean, which old Cordeba
King of Morocco counselled his fear too,
Then hee would hazard to be stung to death,
As that huge Cormorant that was choked before him.
Well you are as sound a spokes-man for parsimony,
And clear abstinence, and scarce one meal a day
As ever spake with tongue.
Censure him mildly (sir) it was but to find discourse.
Heel talk of any thing.
I shall be half a afraid to feed hereafter.
Or I beshrew my heart: for I fear fatness,
The fog of fatness as I fear a Dragon:
The comeliness I wish for, that's as glorious.
Your course is wondrous strict: I should transgress (sir)
Were I to change my side (as you have wrought me.)
How you misprize? tic not meant to you-ward:
You that are wound up to the hight of feedinh,
By clime and custom are dispensed withal,
You may eat, Cabrito, Calfe, and Ton's:
Eat, and eat every day, twice if you please▪
Nay, the franked hen, fatted with Milk and Corn▪
A riot which the Inhabitants of Delos
Were first inventors of: or the cramb'd Cockle.
Well for the food I'm happily resolved in;
But for the diet of my disposition,
There comes a trouble you will hardly find
Food to please that.
It must be a strange nature,
We cannot find a dish for it, having Policy
(The Moister Cooke of Christendom) to dress it.
Pray name your natures diet.
The first mess, is hot Ambition.
That's but served in puff-paste:
Alas, the meanest of our Cardinals Cooks
Can dress that dinner: Your Ambition (sir)
Can fetch no further compass then the World?
Thats certain (Sir.)
Wee are about that already,
And in the large feast of our vast Ambition,
We count but the white Kingdom (whence you came from)
The Garden for our Cooke, to pick his Salads:
The food's lean France larded▪ with Germany;
Before which comes the the Grave, chaste Signiory
Of Venice, served in (Capon-like) in White-broth:
From our chief Oven Italy the bake-meates:
Savoy the Salt: Genena the chip'd Mancher.
Below the Salt, the Netherlands are placed;
A common dish at lower end a'th table,
For meaner pride to fall too. For our second course,
A spit of Portuguese served in for Plouers:
Indians and Moors for blacke-birds: all this while
Holland stands ready melted to make sauce,
On all occasions, when the Voyder comes;
And with such cheer our full hopes wee suffice,
Zealand says grace, for fashion when we rise.
Her's meat enough in conscience for ambition
If there be any want there is Switzerland,
Polonia, and such pickled things will serve
To furnish out the table.
You say well (sir)
Buthere's the misery▪ when I ha stopped the mouth
Of one vice, ther's another stands gaping for food.
I'm as covetous as a barren womb,
The grave, or what's more ravenous?
Wee're for you (sir)
Call you that hanousnesse, that is good husbandry?
Why when we make money of our faith, our prayers,
We make make the very death bed buy her comforts,
Most dearly pay for all her pious Counsels,
Leave rich revenues for a few weak orisons:
Or else they pass vnreconciled without em,
Did you but view the vaults within our Monasteries,
You'd swear then Pluto (whom the fiction calls)
The Lord of riches, were entombed there.
Is it possible.
You cannot walk for Tuns.
But how shall I bestow the vice I bring, sir,
You quite forget me, I shall be shut out,
By your strict key of life.
Is yours so wild (Sir)
Some that are pleased to make a wanton on it,
Call it infirmity of blood, flesh frailty;
But certain ther's a worse name in your book for it.
The trifle of all vices, the mere innocent,
The very novice of this house of clay, verily
If I but hug thee hard, I show the worst on it,
Tic all the fruit we have here after supper:
Nay, at the ruins of a Nunnery once,
Six thousand Infants heads found in a fish-pond.
How?
I, how? how came they thither think you?
Huldricke Bishop of Ausberg in's Epistle
To Nicholas the first, can telly you how,
(May be hee was at cleansing of the pond)
I can but smile to think, how it would puzzle
All mother maids that ever liver in those parts,
To know their own childes head; but is this all?
Are you ours yet?
One more, and I am silenc'st:
But this that comes now will divide up questionless
Tic ten times, ten times, worse then the fore-runners.
Is it so wild, there is no name ordained for it?
Toads have their titles, and creation gave
Serpents, and Adders those names to be known by.
This of all others bears the hidden'st poison,
The smoothest venom, I am an Arch-dissembler.
How.
Tic my natures brain turn from me (sir,)
The time is yet to come, that ere I spoke
What my heart meant.
And call you that a vice:
Avoid all profanation, I beseech you;
The only prime-state virtue upon earth,
The policy of Empires, oh take heed (Sir)
For fear it take displeasure and forsake you,
Tic a Jewel of that precious value,
Whose word's not known, but to the skilful Lapidary
The instrument that pickes op Princes hearts,
And lockes up our from them, with the same motion:
You never came so near our souls till now.
Now you're a brother to vs.
What we have done, has bin dissemblance ever.
There you lye then:
And the Games ours, wee give the check mate
By discovery, King the noblest mate of all.
I'm lost, I'm taken.
Ambitious, covetous luxurious falsehood.
Dissembler, that includes all.
All hopes confounded.
Miserable condition.
Oh let my arms be blessed,
With this dear treasure,
Truths glorious Master-peece, see Queen of sweetness
He's in my bosom safe, and this fair Stucture
Of comely honour, his true blessed assistant.
May their Integrities ever possess
That powerful Sanctuary.
As it was a Game (Sir)
Won with much hazard, so with much more triumph,
I gave him check mate by discovery (sir.)
Obcurity is now the fittest favour
Falsehood can sue for: it well snits Perdition,
Tic their best course that so hath lost their fame,
To put their heads into the bag for shame;
And there behold the bags mouth (like hell) opens 
To take her due; and the lost sons appear,
Greedily gaping for increase of fellowship
In infamy, the last desire of wretches
Advancing their perdition, branded fore-heads
Like Envies issue, or a bed of Snakes.
Tic too apparent the Game's lost, King taken.
The white House has given vs the bag (I thank em.)
They'd need have given you a whole bag
By your self,
Sfoot this black bishop has so over laid me,
So squelched and squeasde me, I have no Verjuce
Let in me, you shall find all my goodness if you
Look for it in the bottom of the Bag.
Thou Male-part Pawn,
The Bishop must have room, he will have room,
And room to lye at pleasure.
All the Bag I think
Is room too little for your Spalletto paunch.
Down viper of our Order, I abhor thee,
Thou't show thy whorish front.
Yes, monster Holiness.
Contention in the bag? is hell divided.
You'd need have some of Majesty and Power,
To keep good rule amongst you, make room Bishop.
I am not easily moved, when I'm once set,
I scorn to stir for any King on earth.
Here comes the Queen, what say you then to her?
Indeed a Queen may make a Bishop stir.
Room for the greatest Machiauill Politician,
That ere the Devil hatched of a Nuns-egge.
He'll pick a hole in the bag, and get out shortly:
I'm sure to be the last man that creeps out;
And thats the misery of greatness ever.
Room for a sunburned, Tanzy faced beloved,
An Olive coloured Ganimed; and thats all
Thats worth the bagging.
Crowd in all you can,
The Bishop will be still uppermost man
Maugre King, Queen, or Politician.
So let the Bag close now (the fittest womb
For Treachery, Pride and Falshoold, whilst we winner like)
Destroying through Heavens power, what would destroy;
Welcome our white Knight with loud peals of Joy.
MY Mistress (the Whit Queen) hath sent me forth,
And bad me bow thus low, to all of Worth▪
That are true Friends of the White House and Cause,
Which She hopes most of this assembly draws:
For any else, by Envies mark devoted,
To those night-Glow-wormes in the Bag denoted;
Where ere they sit, stand, or in private lurk,
They'll be soon known by their deprauing work:
But She's assured, what they'll commit to bain,
Her white Friends hands will build up fair again.

TVsh, take the wench
I showed thee now, or else some other seek;
What? can your choler no way be allayed?
But with Imperial tytles?
Will you more tytles unto Caesar give?
Great are thy fortunes Narrow, great thy power
Thy Empire limited with natures bounds;
Upon thy ground, the Sun doth set, and rise;
The day, and night are thine:
Nor can the Planets, wander where they will:
See that proud Earth, that fears not Caesars name,
Yet nothing of all this, I envy thee;
But her, to whom the world, unforced, obeys,
Whose eyes more worth then all it looks upon:
In whom, all beauties Nature hath enclosed,
That through the wide Earth, or Heaven are disposed
Indeed the steals, and robs each part of the world,
With borrowed beauties to inflame thine eye;
The Sea, to fetch her Pearl, is dived into:
The Diomond rocks are cut, to make her shine:
To plume her pride, the Birds doe naked sing
When my Enanthe, in a homely gown.
Homely I faith.
I, homely in her gown,
But look upon her face, and that's set out
With no small grace, no veiled shadows help;
Fool; that had rather with false lights, and dark
Beguiled be, then see the ware thou buy est.
Great Queen, whom nature made to be her glory:
Fortune got eyes, and came to be thy servant,
Honour is proud to be thy title; Though
Thy beauties doe draw up my soul; yet still,
So bright, so glorious is thy Majesty,
That it beats down again my climbing thoughts.
Why true;
And other of thy blindness thou see,
Such one to love thou dare not speak unto.
Give me a wench, that will be easily had,
Not wood with cost; And, being sent for, comes,
And when I have her folded in mine arms,
Then Cleopatra sh•, or Lucres is:
Isle give her any title.
Yet not so much her greatness, and estate
My hopes disharten, as her chastity.
Chastity, fool a word not known in Courts:
Well may it lodge in mean, and country homes,
Where poverty, and labour keeps them down,
Short sleeps, and hands made hard with Thuscan Woll.
But never comes to great men's Palaces,
Where ease, and riches, stirring thoughts beget,
Provoking meates, and surfeit wines Inflame:
Where all there setting ford's but to be wooed,
And wooed they would not be, but to be won.
Will one man serve Poppy? Nay, thou shalt
Make her, as soon, contented with an eye.
Whilst Narrow, in the streets, his Pageants shows,
I, to his fair wives chamber, sent for am.
You gracious Stars, that smiled in my birth,
And thou bright star more powerful then them all,
Whose favouring smiles have made me what I am
Thou shalt my God, my Fate, and fortune bee.
How saucily you fellow.
Enters the Empress chamber.
I, and her too? Antonius know thou him?
What? knows the only favourite of the Court?
Indeed, not many days ago thou might,
Have not unlawfully asked that question.
Why? Is he raised?
That have I sought in him,
But never piece of good desert could find:
Hee is Nimphidias son, the freed woman,
Which baseness to shake off, he nothing hath
But his own pride
You Remember, when Gallus, Celsus,
And others too, though now forgotten were
Great in Poppies eyes.
I doe, and did interpret it in them
An honourable favour, she bare virtue,
Or parts like virtue.
The cause is one of theirs, and this mans grace,
I once was great in wavering smiles of Court,
I fell because I knew: Sense have I given
My time to my own pleasures, and would now
Advise thee too, to mean, and safe delights:
The thigh's as soft the sheep back covers
As that which crimson, and with Gold adorned:
Yet cause I see, that thy restraind desires.
Cannot their own way choose, come thou with me
Perhaps Isle show thee means of remedy.
Whither so fast man? whither so fast?
Whither? but where your ears doe lead you;
To Nears Triumphs, and the shouts you hear.
Why? comes he crowned with Parthian overthrow.
And brings he Ʋ•legaesus with him, chai'nd?
Parthian overthrown? why, he comes crowned
For victories which never Roman won;
For having Greece in her own arts overthrown;
In Singing, Dancing, Horse-rase, Stage-playing.
Never, O Rome had never such a Prince.
Yet, I have heard: our ancestors were crowned
For other Victories.
None of our ancestors, were ere like him.
Hark, how th'applauding shouts doe clear the air
This Idle talk will make me loose the sight.
Whither go you? alls done in the Capital,
And Narrow, having there his tables hung,
And Garlands up: is to the Palace gone.
T'was beyond wonder; I shall never see,
Nay, I never look, to see the like again
Eighteen hundred and eight Crowns
For several victories and the place set down
Where, and in what, and whom he overcame.
That was set down it'h tables, that were borne
Upon the Soldiers spears.
O made, and sometimes use to other ends.
But did he win them all with singing.
Faith all with singing, and with stage-playing.
So many Crowns got with a song.
But, did you mark the Greek Musicians
Behind his Chariot, hanging down their heads?
Shamed, and overcome, in their professions,
O Rome was never honoured so, before.
But, what was he that rode'ith' Chariot with him?
That was Diodorus the Minstrel, that he favours.
Was there ever such a Prince.
O Narrow Augustus, the true Augustus.
Nay, had you seen him as he rode along,
With an Olympic Crown upon his head,
And with a Pithian on his arm: you would have thought,
Looking on one he had Apollo seemed,
On the other Hercules.
I have heard my father oft repeat the Triumphs,
Which in Augustus Caesars times were shown,
Upon his Victory ore the Jllirians;
But it seems it was not li•e to this.
Push, it could not be like this.
O Narrow, Apollo, Narrow, Hercules.
Whether Augustus Triumph greater was
I cannot tell; his Triumphs cause I know
Was greater far, and far more Honourable.
What are wee People? or our flattering voices,
That always shame and foolish things applaud
Having no spark of Soul; All Ears, and eyes,
Pleased with vain shows, deluded by our senses
Still enemies to wisdom, and to goodness.
Now fair Poppy, see thy Narrow shine
In bright Achaias spoils, and Rome in him.
The Capital hath other Trophies seen
Then it was wont; Not spoils with blood bedewed,
Or the unhappy obsequies of Death:
But such, as Caesars cunning, not his force,
Hath wrung from Greece; too bragging of her art.
And in this strife, the glories all your own,
Your Tribunes cannot share this praise with you;
Here, your Centurions hath no part at all,
Bootless your Armies, and your Eagles were;
No Navies helped, to bring away this conquest.
Even Fortunes self, Fortune the Queen of kingdoms
(That Wars grim valour graces with her deeds,)
Will claim no portion in this Victory.
Not Bacchus, drawn from Nice down with Tigers,
Curbing with venue rains, their wilful heads,
Whilst some doe gape upon his Ivy Theirs,
Some, on the dangling grapes, that Crown his head,
All praise his beauty, and continuing youth:
So struck, amassed India, with wonder.
As Neroes glories did the Greekish towns
Elis, and Pisa, and the rich Mic••na,
Iunoman Argos, and yet Corinth proud
Of her two Seas; all which ore-come, did yield
To me their praise, and prises of their games.
Yet, in your Greekish journey, we do hear,
Sparta, and Athens, the two eyes of Greece,
Neither beheld your person, nor your skill;
Whether, because they did afford no games,
Or for their to much gravity,
Why? what
Should I have seen in them? but in the one,
Hunger, blacke-pottage, and men hot to di•,
Thereby to rid themselves of misery:
And what in the other? but short Capes, long Beards,
Much wrangling in things needless to be known,
Wisdom in words, and only austere faces,
I will not be A•ecelans, nor Solon.
Narrow was there, where he might honour win,
And honour hath he won, and brought from Greece,
Those spoils which never Roman could obtain,
Spoils won by wit and Trophtis of his skill.
What a thing he makes it to be a Minstrel.
I praise your wit, my Lord, that choose such safe.
Honours, safe spoils, won without dust, on blood.
What, mooke ye me Poppy?
Nay, in good Faith my Lord, I speak in earnest,
I hate that heady, and adventurous crew,
That go to loose their own, to purchase, but
The breath of others, and the common voice,
Them that will loose there hearing for a sound;
That by death only, seek to get a living,
Make skarrs there beauty, and count loss of Limb•
The commendation of a proper man,
And so, go halting to immortality:
Such fools I love worse then they doe their lives.
But now Poppy, having laid apart
Our boastful spoils, and ornaments of Triumph.
Come we, like Ione from Phlegra —
O Giantlike comparison.
When, after all his Fierce, and wandering darts,
He comes to bath himself, in Iunos Eyes:
But thou, (then wrangling Iuno,) far more fair,
Staining the evening beauty of the Sky,
Or the days brightness; shall make glad thy Caesar,
Shalt make him proud such beauties to Enjoy:
Such beauties to enjoy, were happiness,
And a reward sufficient in it self,
Although no other end, or hopes were aimed at:
But I have other; Tic not Poppies arms,
Nor the short pleasures of a wanton bed,
That can extinguish mine aspiring thirst
To Neroes Crown; By her love I must climb,
Her bed is but a step unto his Throne.
Already, wise men laugh at him, and hate him;
The people, though his Minstrelsy doth please them▪
They fear his Cruelty, hate his exactions,
Which, his need, still, must force him to increase.
The multitude, which cannot one thing long
Like, or dislike, being cloyed with vanity,
Will hate their own delights, though Wisdom doe not,
Even weariness, at length, will give them eyes,
Thus, I by Neroes, and Poppies favour,
Raised to the envious height of second place,
May gain the first: Hate must strike Narrow down.
Love make Nimphidius way unto a Crown.
His first beginning was his Fathers death,
His brothers poisoning, and wives bloody end
Came next, his mothers murder closed up all:
Yet hitherto he was but wicked, when
The guilt of greater evils, took away the shame
Of lesser, and did headlong thrust him forth,
To be the scorn, and laughter to the world;
Then first, an Emperor came upon the Stage,
And sung to please Carmen, and Candle-sellers,
And learnt to act, to dance, to be a Fencer,
And in despite of the Majesty of Princes,
He fell to wrestling, and was soiled with dust,
And tumbled on the Earth with servile hands.
He sometimes trained was in better studies,
And had a Child-hood promised other hopes;
High fortunes, like strong wines, do try their vessels.
Was not the Race, and Theater big enough,
To have enclosed thy follies here at home?
O could not Rome, and Italy contain
Thy shame? but thou must cross the Seas to show it?
And make them that had wont to see our Consuls,
With conquering Eagles waving in the field;
Instead of that; behold an Emperor dancing,
Playing of the stage, and what else, but to name
Were infamy.
O Mummius, O Flaminius;
You, whom your Virtues have not made more famous
Then Neros vices; You went ore to Greece,
But t'other wars, and brought home other conquests.
You Corinth, and Mic••• overthrew;
And Perseus self, the Great Achilles race
Ore came; having Mineruas stained Temples.
And your slain Ancestors of Troy revenged
They strove with Kings; and kinglike adversaries.
Were even in their Enemies made happy;
The Macedonian Courage tried of old,
And the new greatness of the Syrian power:
But he for Phillip, and Antiochus,
Hath found more easy enemies to deal with,
Turpuus, Pammenes, and a rout of Fiddlers.
Why all the begging Minstrels by the way,
He took along with him, and forced to strive
That he might overcome, Imagining
Himself Imortall, by such victories.
The Men he carried over were enough
T'haue put the Parthian to his second flight
Or the proud Indian, taught the Roman Yoke.
But they were Neroes men, like Narrow armed
With Luts, and Harps, and Pipes, and Fiddle-cases:
Soldiers to th shadow trained, and not the field.
Therefore they brought spoils of such Soldiers worthy.
But to throw down the walls, and Gates of Rome,
To make an entrance for an Hobby-horse;
To vaunt to the people his ridiculous spoils;
To come with Laurel, and with Olives crowned,
For having been the worst of all the Singers,
Is beyond Patience;
I and anger too,
Had you but seen him in his Chariot ride.
That Chariot in which, Augustus late
His Triumphs ore' so many Nations showed,
And with him in the same a Minstrel placed,
The whilst the people, running by his side,
Hail thou Olimpick Conqueror did cry,
O hail thou Pithian, and did fill the sky
With shame, and voices, Heaven would not have heard.
I saw't, but turned away my Eyes, and Ears,
Angry, they should be privy to such sights.
Why doe I stand relating of the story,
Which in the doing had enough to grieve me?
Tell on, and end the tale, you, whom it pleases;
Me mine own sorrow stops from further speaking.
Narrow, my love doth make thy fault, and my grief greater.
I doe commend in Seneca this passion;
And yet me thinks our Countries misery,
Doth at our hands crave somewhat more then tears.
Pity, though't doth a kind affection show,
(If it end there) our weakness makes vs know.
Let children weep, and men seek remedy,
Stoutly, and like a Soldier, Flauius:
Yet, to seek remedy to a Princes ill,
Seldom, but it doth the Physician kill.
And if it doe Sceuinus, it shall take
But a devoted soul from Flauius,
Which, to my Country, and the Gods of Rome,
Already sacred is, and given away,
Death is no stranger unto me, I have
The doubtful hazard in twelve Battles thrown,
My chance was life.
Why doe we go to fight in Brittany?
And end our lives under an other Sun?
Seek causeless dangers out? The German might
Enjoy his Woods, and his own All is drink,
Yet we walk safely in the streets of Rome:
Bodinca hinders not, but we might live,
Whom, we doe hurt; Them we call enemies,
And those our Lords that spoil, and murder vs.
Nothing is hard to them that dare to die.
This Noble resolution in you Lords,
Heartens me to disclose some thoughts that I —
The matter is of weight and dangerous.
I see you fear vs Seruinus.
Nay, Nay, although the thing be full of fear.
Tell it to faithful Ears, what ear it bee.
Faith let it go, it will but trouble vs,
Bee hurtful to the speaker, and the hearer.
If our long friendship, or the opinion.
Why should I fear to tell them?
Why is he not a Parricide, a Player?
Nay Lucan is he not thine Enemy?
Hate not the Heavens, as well, as men, to see
That condemned head: and you O righteous Gods
Whither so ere you now are fled, and will
No more look down upon th'oppressed Earth;
O severe anger of the highest Gods,
And thou sterne power, to whom the Greeks assign
Scourges, and swords to punish proud men's wrongs,
If you be more then names found out to awe vs,
And that we doe not vainly build you alters,
Aid that just arm, that's bent to execute
What you should doe.
Stay, you're carried too much away Sceuinus.
Why, what will you say for him? hath h• not
Sought to suppress your Poem, to bereave
That honour every tongue in duty paid it.
Nay, what can you say for him, hath he not
Broa'cht his own wives (a chaste wives) breast, and to•no
With Scithian hands his Mothers bowels up,
The Inhospitable Caucasus is mild:
The More, that, in the boiling desert, seeks
With blood of stranger to imbrue his jaws
Upbraids the Roman, now with barbarousnesse
You are to earnest,
I neither can, nor will I speak for him:
And, though he sought my learned pains to wrong,
I hate him not for that, My verse shall live
When Neroes body shall be thrown in Tiber,
And times to come shall bless those wicked arms;
I love th'vnnaturall wounds, from whence did flow▪
Another Ciria, a new Hellicon.
I hate him that he is Romes enemy,
An enemy to Virtue; fits on high
To shame the seat; And in that hate, my life,
And blood, •le mingle on the earth with yours.
My de•ds Sceuinus shall speak my consent.
Tic answered, as I looked for, noble Poet,
Worthy the double Laurel; Flauius,
Good luck I see, doth virtuous meanings aid,
And therefore have the Heavens forborne their duties,
To grace our swords with glorious blood of Tyrants.
HEre waits Poppy her Nimphidius coming,
And hath this garden, and these walks chose out,
To bless her with more pleasures then their own:
Not only Arras hangings, and silk beeds
Are guilty of the faults we blame them for:
Somewhat these Arbors, and you trees doe know,
Whilst you kind shades, you to these night sports show.
Night sports? Faith, they are done in open day,
And the Sun see'th, and envies their play.
Hither have I Loue-sicke Antonius brought,
And thrust him on occasion so long sought:
Showed him the Empress in a thicket by,
Her loves approach waiting with greedy Eye;
And told him, if he ever meant to prove,
The doubtful issue of his hopeless Love;
This is the place, and time wherein to try it,
Women will here the suite, that will deny it.
The suit's not hard that she comes for to take;
Who (hot in lust of men) doth difference make?
At last, loath, willing, to her did he pace;
Arm him Priapus, with thy powerful Mace.
But see, they coming are; how they agree
Here will I harken, shroud me gentle tree.
Seek not to grieve that heart which is thine own,
In Loves sweet fires, let heat of rage burn out;
These brows could never yet to wrinkle learn,
Nor anger out of such fair eyes look forth.
You may solicit your presumptuous suites;
You duty may, and shame too laid aside,
Disturb my privacies, and I forsooth,
Must be afraid even to be angry at you.
What shame is it to be mastered by such beauty?
Who, but to serve you, comes, how wants he duty?
Or if it be a shame, the shame is yours;
The fault is only in your Eyes, they drew me;
Cause you were lovely, therefore did I love:
O, if to Love you, anger you so much,
You should not have such cheeks, nor lips to touch,
You should not have your snow, nor currall spied;
If you but look on vs, in vain you chide,
We must not see your Face, nor hear your speech:
Now, whilst you Love forbid, you Love doe teach.
He doth better then I thought he would.
I will not learn my beauties worth of you,
I know you neither are the first, nor greatest
Whom it hath moved: He whom the World obeys
Is feared with anger of my threatening Eyes.
It is for you a far off to adore it,
And not to reach at it with saucy hands.
Fear, is the Love that's due to Gods, and Princes
All this is but to edge his appetite.
O doe not see thy fair in that false glass
Of outward difference; Look into my heart,
There, shalt thou see thy self, Inthroaned set
In greater Majesty, then all the pomp
Of Rome, or Narrow; Tic not the crouching awe,
And Ceremony, with which we flatter Princes,
That can to Loves true duties be compared.
Sir, let me go, or Isle make known your Love
To them, that shall requite it, but with hate.
On, on, thou hast the goal, the fort is beaten,
Women are won when they begin to threaten.
Your Nobleness doth warrant me from that,
Nor need you others help, to punish me,
Who, by your forehead am condemned, or free.
They, that to be reuendg'd do bend their mind,
Seek always recompense, in that same kind
The wrong was done them; Love was mine offence,
In that revenge, in that seek recompense.
Further to answer, will still cause replies,
And those as ill doe please me, as your self:
If you'll an answer take, that's brief, and true,
I hate my self, If I be loved of you.
What gone? but she will come again sure, no;
It passes clean my cunning, all my rules;
For Women's wantonness there is no rule.
To take her, in the itching of her Lust,
A proper young-man putting forth himself?
Why Fate; There's Fate and hidden providence
In cod piece matters.
O unhappy Man,
What comfort have I now Petronius?
Counsel your self, Isle teach no more but learn.
This comfort yet; He shall not so escape,
Who causes my disgrace, Nimphidius
Whom had I here.—Well, For my true-hearts love
I see she hates me; And shall I love one
That hates me; and bestows what I deserve
Upon my rival? no, Farewell Poppy,
Farewell Poppy, and farewell all Love;
Yet thus much shall it still prevail in me,
That I will hate Nimphidius for thee:
Farewell to her, to my Euanthe welcome,
Who, now, will to my burning kisses stoop,
Now, with an easy cruelty deny,
That, which she, rather then the asker, would
Have forced from her, then begins her self.
Their loves, that list upon great Ladies set;
I still will love the Wench that I can get.
Tigellinus, said the villain Proculus
I was thrown down in running?
My Lord, he said that you were crowned for that
You could not doe.
For that I could not doe?
Why, Elis saw me doet, and do it with wonder
Of all the Judges, and the lookers on:
And yet, to see, A villainy? could not do it?
Who did it better? I warrant you he said
I from the Chariot fell against my will.
He said my Lord, you were thrown out of it,
All crushed, and maimed, and almost bruised to death.
Malicious Rogue, when I fell willingly,
To show of purpose, with what little hurt
Might a good rider bear a forced fall.
How say thou? Tigillinus, I am sure
Thou hast in driving as much skill as he.
My Lord, you greater cunning showed in falling,
Then had you sate.
I know I did; or bruised in my fall?
Hurt! I protest I felt no grief in it.
Go Tigillinus, fetch the villains head,
This makes me see his heart in other things?
Fetch me his head, he ne'er shall speak again.
What doe we Princes differ, from the dirt,
And baseness of the common Multitude,
If to the scorn of each malicious tongue
We subject are: For that I had no skill;
Not he, that his far famed daughter set
A prise to victory, and had bin crowned
With thirteen Suitors deaths, till he at length
By fate of Gods, and servants treason fell,
(Shoulder packed Pelops glorying in his spoils,)
Could with more skill his coupled horses guide.
Even as a Bark, that through the mooing Flood.
Her linen wings, and the forced ayre doe bear,
The Billows some, she smoothly cuts them through;
So past my burning Axeltree along,
The people follow, with their eyes and voice,
And now the wind doth see it self outrun,
And the Clouds wonder to be left behind;
Whilst the void ayre is filled with shouts and noise
And Neroes name doth beat the brazen Sky,
Jubiter cruying, loath doth hear my praise:
Then there greene howes, and Crowns of Olive wre'aths
The Conquerors praise, they give me as my due,
And yet this Rogue saith no we have no skill.
My Lord, the Stage, and all the furnitures
I have no skill to drive a Chariot:
Had he but robbed me, broke my treasury,
The red-Sea's mine, mine are the Indian stones,
The Worlds mine own, then, cannot I be robbed?
But spitefully, to undermine my fame,
To take away my art; he would my life
As well, no doubt; could he told how.
My Lord,
Tegillinus is back come with Proculus head
O cry thee mercy good Neophitus;
Give him five hundred sesterces for amends,
Hast brought him Tegillinus?
Here is his head my Lord.
His tongue had bin enough,
I did as you commanded me my Lord.
Thou toldst not me, though he had such a Nose.
Now are you quiet, and have quieted me;
This tic to be commander of the World,
Let them extol weak pity that doe need it,
Let mean men cry to have Law, and Justice done
And tell their griefs to Heaven, that hears them not
Kings must upon the Peoples headless courses
Walk to security, and ease of mind.
Why what have we to doe with the air names
(That old age, and Philosophers found out,)
Of Justice, and ne'er certain Equity;
The Gods revenge themselves, and so will we;
Where right is scand, Authoritie'is orethrowne,
We have a high pre•ogatiue aboue it;
Slaves may doe what is lust, we, what we please,
The people will rapine, and think it ill,
But they must bear, and praise too, what we will.
My Lord, Cornutus whom you sent for's come.
Welcome good Cornutus
Are all thigs ready for the Stage,
As I gave charge.
They only stay your coming.
Cornutus, I must act to day Orestus.
You have done that already; and too truly —
And when our Scene is done, I mean besides
To read some compositions of mine own,
Which for the great opinion I my self,
And Rome In general, of thy Judgment, hath,
Before I publish them, Isle show them thee.
My Lord, my disabilities
I know thy modesty,
Isle only show thee, now, my works beginning:
Go see Epaphroditus,
Music made ready, I will sing to day.
Cornutus I pray thee, come near,
And let me hear thy Judgment in my pains;
I would have thee more familiar good Cornutus,
Narrow doth prise desert, and more esteems
Them, that in knowledge second him then power,
Mark with what style, and state my work begins.
Might not my Interruption offend
Whats your works name my Lord, what write you of?
I mean to write the deeds of all the Romans
Of all the Romans? a huge argument
I have not yet bethought me of a Title
You Enthral Powers which the wide Fortunes doom he reads
Of Empire crowned, seven Mountaine-seated Rome
Full blown; Inspire me with Machlaean rage,
That J may bellow out Romes Prentisage,
As when the Menades doe fill their Drums
And crooked horns with Mimalonean humm:
And Ennion doe Ingeminate a round
Which reparable Echo doth resound.
How doest thou like our Muses pains Cornutus.
The verses have more in them, then I see;
Your work my Lord I doubt will be too long.
Too long?
Too long?
I, If you write the deeds of all the Romans
How many Books think you t'include it in?
I think to write about four hundred Books.
Four hundred? why my Lord the'yle ne'er be read.
Ho?
Why he, whom you esteem so much Crisippus,
Wrote many more.
But they were profitable to common life
And did Men, Honesty, and Wisdom teach.
Tigillinus?
See with what earnestness he craved my Judgment,
And now he freely hath it, how it likes him?
The Prince is angry, and his fall is near;
Let vs begone, least we partake his ruins.
What should I doe at Court? I cannot lye;
Why did thou call me, Narrow, from my Book?
Did thou for flattery of Cornutus look?
No, let those purple Fellows that stand by thee,
(That admire show, and things that ••ou can give,
Leave to please Truth, and Virtue, to please thee.
Narrow, there's nothing in thy power, Cornutus
Doth wish or fear.
Tic Neroes pleasure that you straight depart
To Giarae, and there remain confined:
Thus he, out of his Princely Clemency,
Hath Death, your due, turned but to banishment.
Why Tigellinus?
I have done, upon your peril go, or stay,
And why should Death? or Banishment be due?
For speaking, that which was required, my thought;
O why doe Princes love to be deceived?
And, even, doe force abuses on themselves?
There Ears are so with pleasing speech beguiled,
That Truth they malice, Flattery, truth account,
And their own Soul, and understanding lost,
Go (what they are) to seek in other men.
Alas, weak Prince, how hast thou punished me,
To banish me from thee? O let me go
And dwell in Taurus, dwell in Ethiop•,
So that I doe not dwell at Rome, with thee.
The farther, still, I go from hence, I know,
The farther I leave Shame and Vice behind.
Where can I go, but I shall see thee, Sun?
And Heaven will be as near me, still, as here.
Can they, so far, a knowing soul exile,
That her own roof she sees not ore her head?
Noble Gentlemen, what thanks, what recompense
Shall hee give you, that give to him the world;
One life to them, that must so many venture,
And that, the worst of all, is too mean paye;
Yet can I give no more; Take that, bestow it
Upon your service.
O Peso, that vouchsafe,
To grace our headless party with thy name;
Whom, having our conductors, we need not
Have feared to go again the well tried valour
Of Iulius, or staidness of Augustus,
Much less the shame, and Womanhood of Narrow;
When we had once, given out, that our pretences
Were all for thee, our end, to make thee Prince,
They thronging came to give their names, Men, Women,
Gentlemen, People, Soldiers, Senators,
The Camp, and City, grew ashamed that Narrow,
And Peso should be offered them together.
We seek not now (as in the happy days
Of the common wealth they did, for liberty;
O you, dear ashes, Cassius and Brutus
That was with you entombed, there let it rest,
We are contented with the galling yoke,
If they will only leave vs necks to bear it;
We seek no longer freedom, we seek life
At least, not to be murdered, let vs die
On Enemies swords; Shall we, whom neither
The Median Bow, nor Macedonian Spear
Nor the fierce Gaul, nor painted Briton could
Subdue, lay down our necks to Tyrants axe?
Why doe we talk of Virtue, that obey
Weakness, and Vice.
Have patience good Sceuinus
Weakness, and servile government we hitherto
Obeyed have, which, that we may no longer,
We have our lives, and fortunes now set up,
And have our cause with Pis•es credit strengthened.
Which makes it doubtful, whether love to him
Or Neroes hatred, hath drawn more unto vs.
I see the good thoughts you have of me, Lords.
Lets now proceed to the purpose of our meeting,
I pray you take your places.
Lets have some Paper brought
Whose within
My Lord
Some Ink, and Paper
Whose that Sceuinus?
It is my freed man Melichus.
Is he trusty?
I for as great matters, as we are about.
And those are great ones.
I ask not that we mean to need his trust.
Gain hath great soueragintie ore servile minds.
O but my benefits have bound him to me.
I, from abondman, have his state not only
Advanced to freedom, but to wealth and credit.
Meli. weir ith'next chamber tell we call.
The thing determinde on our meeting now,
Is of the means, and place, due circumstance,
As to the doing of things it is required,
So done it names the action.
I wonder,
What makes this new resort to haunt our house,
When wonted Lucius Peso to come hither?
Or Lucan, when so oft, as now of late.
And since the field, and open show of arms
Dislike you, and that for the general good,
You mean to end all stirs, in end of him:
That, as the ground, must first be thought upon.
Besides, this coming cannot be for form,
Our visitation, they go aside,
And have long conferences by themselves.
Peso, his coming to your house at Bay
To bathe, and banquet, will fit means afford,
amidst his cups, to end his hated life,
Let him die drunk, that ne'er lived soberly.
O be it far, that I should stain my Table,
And Gods of Hospitality with blood;
Let not our cause (now Innocent) be soiled
With such a blot, nor Pesos name made hateful.
What place can better fit our action
Then his own house? that boundless envied heap,
Built with the spoils, and blood of Citizens
That hath taken up the City, left no room
For Rome to stand on; Romans get you gone
And dwell at Ʋciae, If that Vciae too
This house ore run not.
But twill be hard to doe it in his house,
And harder to escape being done.
Not so,
B•fus the Captain of the Guard's with vs,
And divers other of the Preterian Band
Already made; many, though unacquainted
With our intents, have had disgrace and wrongs,
Which grieve them still; most will be glad of change,
And even they that loved him best, when once
They see him gone, will smile of the coming times,
Let go things past, and look to their own safety:
Besides, th'astonishment and fear will be
So great, so sudden, that twill hinder them
From doing any thing.
No private business can concern them all;
Their countenances are troubled, and look sad,
Doubt and Importance in their face is read.
Yet still I think it were
Safer t'attempt him private, and alone.
But twill not carry that opinion with it,
Twill seem more foul, and come from private malice.
Brutus, and they, to right the common cause,
Did choose a public place.
Our deed is honest, why should it seek corners?
Tic for the people done, let them behold it;
Let me have them a witness of my truth,
And love to the Common-wealth; The danger's greater,
So is the glory. Why should our pale counsels
Tend whether fear, rather then virtue calls them:
I doe not like these cold considerings;
First, let our thoughts look up to what is honest,
Next, to what's safe; If danger may deter vs,
Nothing that's great, or good shall ere be done;
And, when we first gave hands upon this deed
To the commons safety, we our own gave up.
Let not man venture on a princes death,
How bad soever, with belief to escape;
Despair must be our hope, fame, or reward.
To make the general liking to concur
With others, were even to strike him in his shame,
Or (as he thinks) his glory, on the Stage,
And so too truly maked a Tragedy;
When all the people cannot choose but clap
So sweet a close, and twill not Caesar be
That shall be slain, a Roman Prince:
Twill be Alemaeon, or blind Oedipus.
And if it be of public matters, it is not
Like to be talk, or idle fault finding,
On which the coward only spends his wisdom:
These are all men of action, and of spirit,
And dare perform what they determine on.
What think you of Poppy, Tigellinus,
And tho'ther odious Instruments of Court:
Were it not best at once to rid them all?
In Caesars ruin, Anthony was spared:
•ets not our cause with needless blood distain,
One only moved, the change will not appear
When too much licence given to the sword,
Though against ill, will make even good men fear:
Besides, things settled, you at pleasure may
By Law, and public Judgment have them rid.
And if it be but talk oth'State, it is Treason,
Like it they cannot, that they cannot doe:
If seek to mend it, and remove the Prince,
That's highest Treason; change his Councellors,
That's alteration of the government,
The common cloak that Treasons muffled in;
If laying force aside, to seek by suite,
And fair petition, t'haue the State reformed,
That's tutoring of the Prince, and takes away,
The one his person, this his Sovereignty;
Barely in private talk to show dislike
Of what is done, is dangerous; therefore the action
Mislike you, cause the doer likes you not?
Men are not fit to live ith state they hate.
Though we would all have that employment sought,
Yet, since your worthy forwardness, Seruinus,
Prevents vs, And so Nobly begs for danger:
Be this the chosen hand to doe the deed,
The fortune of the Empire speed your sword.
Virtue, and Heaven speed it; O you homeborne
Gods of our country, Romulus, and Vesta,
That Thuscan Tiber, and Romes towers defends:
Forbid not yet at length a happy end
To former evils; Let this hand revenge
The wronged world; enough we now have suffered.
Tush, all this long Consulting's more then words,
It ends not there; th'haue some attempt, some plot,
Against the state: well, Isle observe it farther,
And if I find it, make my profit of it.
I looked Nimphidius would have come ere this,
Makes he no greater hast to our embraces?
Or, doth the easiness abate his edge?
Or, seem we not as fair still as we did?
Or, is he so with Neroes playing won,
That he, before Poppy, doth prefer it?
Or doth he think to have occasion still?
Sill, to have time to waite on our stolen meetings?
But see his presence now doth end those doubts,
What i'st Nimphidius hath so long detained you?
Faith Lady, causes strong enough,
High walls, bard doors, and guards of armed men.
Were you Imprisoned, then, as you were going
To the Theater.
Not in my going Lady,
But, in the Theater, I was Imprisoned:
For, after he was once upon the Stage,
The Gates were more severely looked into
Then at a town besieged; No man, no cause
Was Currant, no, nor peasant; At other sights
The strife is only to get in, but here
The stir was all, in getting out again;
Had, we not bin kept to it so, I think
T'would ne'er have bin so tedious, though I know,
It was hard to judge, whether his doing of it
Were more absurd, then it was for time to doe it.
But wh•• we once were forced to be spectators,
compelled to that, which should have bin a pleasure,
We could no longer bear the wearisomeness:
No pain so irksome, as a forced delight;
Some fell down dead, or seemed at least to doe so,
Under that colour, to be carried forth,
Then death first pleasured men, the shape all fear
Was put on gladly, some clombe ore the walls,
And so, by falling caught in earnest that,
Which the other did dissemble; There were women,
(That being not able to entreat the guard
To let them pass the gates,) were brought to bed
Amidst the throngs of men, and made Lucina
Blush, to see that unwonted company.
If it were so straightly kept, how got you forth?
Faith Lady I came, pretending hast
In Face and Countenance, told them I was sent
For things, bith' Prince forgot about the scene,
Which, both my credit made them to believe,
And Narrow, newly whispered me before.
Thus did I pass the gates, the danger Lady
I have not yet escaped.
What danger mean you?
The danger of his anger, when he knows
How I thus shrunk away, for there stood knaves
That put down in their Tables all that stirred,
And marked in each there cheerfulness, or sadness.
I warrant Isle excuse you: But I pray,
Let's be a little better for your sight;
How did our Princely husband act Orestes?
Did he not wish again his Mother living?
Her death would add great life unto his part:
But come I pray, the story of your sight.
O doe not drive me to those hateful pains;
Lady, I was too much in seeing vexed,
Let it not be redoubled with the telling;
I now am well, and hear, my ears set free;
O be merciful, doe not bring me back
Unto my prison, at least free your self,
It will not pass away, but stay the time;
Wrack out the hours in length; O give me leave,
as one that wearied with the toil at sea,
And now on wished shore hath firmed his foot;
He looks about, and glads his thoughts and eyes,
With sight of the greene clothed ground, and levy trees,
Of flowers that beg more then the looking on,
And likes these other waters narrow shores;
So let me lay my weariness in these arms,
Nothing but kisses to this mouth discourse,
My thought be compassed in those circled Eyes;
Eyes on no object look, but on those Cheeks;
Be blessed my hands with touch of those round breasts,
Whiter and softer then the down of Swans.
Let me of thee, and of thy beauties glory,
And endless tell, but never wearying story.
Come Sirs, I faith, how did you like my acting?
What? wast not as you looked for?
Yes my Lord, and much beyond.
Did I not doe it to the life?
The very doing never was so lively
As now this counterfeiting.
And when I came,
To the point of Agrippa, Cliteunnestras death,
Did it not move the feeling auditory?
They had been stones, whom that could not have moaned.
Did not my voice hold out well to the end?
And served me afterwards afresh to sing with.
We know Apollo cannot match your voice.
By Jove, • think you are the God himself
Come from aboue, to show your hidden arts;
And fill vs men with wonder of your skill.
Nay faith speak truly, doe not flatter me;
I know you need not: flattery's but where
Desert is mean.
I swear by thee O Caesar;
Then whom no power of Heaven I honour more,
No mortal voice can pass, or equal thine.
They tell of Orpheus, when he took his Lute,
And moved the noble Ivory with his touch:
Hebrus stood still, Pang bowed his head,
Ossa then first shook off his snow, and came
To listen to the moouings of his song;
The gentle Poplar, took the Oak along.
And called the Pine down, from his Mountain seat:
The Virgin Bay, although the Arts she hates
Of the Delphic God, was with his voice ore come,
He his twice-lost Euridice bewails,
And Proserpines vain gifts, and makes the shores
And hollow caves of forests now untried
Bear his grief company, and all things teaches
His lost loves name: Then water, ayre, and ground
Euridice, Euridice, resound.
These are bold tales, of which the Greeks have store;
But if he could from Hell once more return,
And would compare his hand and voice with mine,
I, though himself were judge, he then should see,
How much the Latin staines the Thracian liar.
I oft have walked by Tibers flowing banks,
And heard the Swan sing her own Epitaph
When she heard me, she held her peace and died.
Let others raise from earthly things their praise,
Heaven hath stood still to hear my happy airs
And ceased th'eternall Music of the Spheres
To mark my voice, and mend their tunes by mine.
O divine voice,
Happy are they that hear it.
But here comes Tigellinus, come, thy bill,
Are there so many; I see I have enemies.
Have you put Caius in, I saw him frown
And, in the midst of the Emperors act on
Gallus laughed out, and as I think in scorn.
Vespasian too a sleep; was he so drowsy?
Well, he shall sleep the Iron sleep of death
And did Thrice look so sour•lie on vs?
He never smiled, my Lord, nor would vouchsafe
With one applause to grace your action.
Our action needed not be graced by him,
Hoe's our old enemy, and still Maligns vs;
T'will have an end, nay it shall have an end.
Why, I have bin too pitiful too remiss,
My easiness i•laughed at, and contemned,
But I will change it; Not, as heretofore,
By singling out them, one by one to death,
Each common man can such revenges have;
A Princes anger must lay desolate
Cities, Kingdoms consume, Root up mankind.
O could I live to see the general end,
Behold the world en•rapt in funeral flame,
When, as the Sun shall lend his beams to burn
What he before brought forth, and water serve,
Not to extinguish but to •uise the fire:
Then, like the Salamander, bathing me
In the last Ashes of all mortal things
Let me give up this breath: Priam was happy,
Happy indeed, he saw his Troy burnt,
And Illion lye on heaps; Whilst thy pure streams,
(Divine Scamander) did run Phrygian blood
And heard the pleasant cries of Trojan Mothers.
Could I see Rome, so?
Your Majesty may easily,
Without this trouble to your sacred mind.
What may I easily doe? kill thee, or him,
How may I rid you all? where is the Man
That will all others end, and last himself?
O that I had thy Thunder in my hand,
Thou idle Rover, Isle not shoot at trees,
And spend in woods my unregarded vengeance,
Isle sheuire them down upon thtir guilty roofs,
And fill the streets with bloody burials.
But it is not Heaven can give me what I seek;
To you, you hated kingdoms of the night,
You severe powers, that not like those aboue,
Will with fair words, or childrens cries be won,
That have a stile beyond that Heaven is proud off,
Deriving not from Art a makers Name,
But in destruction power, and terror show:
To you I fly for succour: you, whose dwellings
For torments are belied, must give me ease;
Furies, lend me your fires, no they are here,
They must be other fires; material brands
That must the burning of my heat allay;
I bring to you no rude unpractised hands,
Already doe they reeke with mothers blood:
Tush that's but innocents, to what now I mean,
Alas what euell could those years commit,
The world in this shall see my settled wit.
Petroneus, you were at the Theater.
Senica I was, and saw your kingly Pupil
In Minstrels habit, stand before the Judges,
Bowing those hands, which the worlds Sceptre hold,
And with great awe and reverence beseeching
Indifferent hearing, and an equal doom:
Then Caesar doubted first to be oreborne,
And so he joined himself to the other singers,
And straightly all other Laws of the Stage observed,
As not (though weary) to sit down, not spit;
Not wipe his sweat off, but with what he wore;
Mean time how would he eye his adversaries,
How he would seek t'haue all they did disgrac't,
Traduce them privily, openly rail at them:
And them he could not conquer so, he would
Corrupt with money, to doe worse then he.
This was his singing part, his acting now.
Nay even end here, for I have heard enough,
I have a Fiddler heard him, let me not
See him a Player, nor the fearful voice
Of Romes great Monarch, now command in Jest
Our Prince be Aegamemnon in a Play.
Why Seneca, Tic better in Play
Be Aegamemnon, then himself indeed;
How oft, with danger of the field beset,
Or with home mutineys, would he vnbee
Himself, or, over cruel alters weeping,
Wish, that with putting off a vizard, hee
Might his true inward sorrow lay aside;
The shows of things are better then themselves:
How doth it stir this ayrye part of vs,
To hear our Poets tell imagined fights,
And the strange blows, that fained courage gives,
When I Achilles hear upon the Stage
Speak Honour, and the greatness of his soul;
Me thinks I too, could on a Phrygian Spear
Run boldly, and make tales for after times;
But when we come to act it in the deed,
Death mares this bravery, and the ugly fears
Of the other world, sit on the proudest brow,
And boasting valour loses his red cheek.
Fire, fire, help, we burn.
Fire, water, fire help fire.
Fire, where?
Where? what fire.
O round about, here, there, on every side.
The girdling flame, doth with unkind embraces
Compass the City.
How came this fire, by whom?
Wast chance, or purpose?
Why is it not quenched?
Alas there are a many there with weapons,
And whether it be for pray, or by command,
They hinder: nay, they throw on fire-brands.
The fire increases, and will not be staid,
But like a stream that tumbling from a hill,
Orewhelmes the fields, orewhelmes the hopeful toil
Of the husbandman, and headlong bears the woods;
The unwitting Shepherd on a Rock a far,
Amazed, hears the fearful noise; so here,
Danger and Terror strive, which shall exceed,
Some cry, and yet are well, some are kilt silent,
Some kindly run to help their neighbours house,
The whilst their own's a fire: some save their goods,
And leave their dearer pledges in the flame;
One takes his little sons with trembling hands,
Tother his house-Gods saves, which could not him,
All bann the door, and with wishes kill
Their absent murderer.
What? are the Gaules returned?
Doth Brenius brandish fire-brands again.
What can Heaven now unto our sufferings add.
O all goes down, Rome falls from the Roof,
The wind's aloft, the conquering flame turns all
Into it self; Nor doe the Gods escape,
Pleidds burns, Iupiter Stator burns.
The Altar now is made a sacrifice;
An Vesta mourns, to see her Virgin fires
Mingle with profane ashes.
Heaven, hast thou set this end, to Roman greatness?
Were the worlds spoils, for this, to Rome divided,
To make but our fires bigger?
You Gods, whose anger made vs great, grant yet
Some change in misery; We beg not now,
To have our Consul tread on Asian Kings,
Or spurn the quiuerd Suss at their feet;
This, we have had before; we beg to live,
At least not thus to die; Let Cannos come,
Let Allius waters turn again to blood.
To these will any miseries be light.
Why with false Auguries have we bin deceived?
Why was our Empire told vs, should endure
With Sun, and Moon, in time; in brightness pass them,
And that our end should be of the world, and it.
What, can Celestial Godheads double too?
O Rome, the envy late,
But now, the pity of the world thee gets,
The men of Choleos at thy sufferings grieve,
The shaggy dweller in the Scithian Rocks;
The most condemned to perpetual snow
That never wept at kindreds burials,
Suffers with thee, and feels his heart to soften.
O, should the Parthyan hear these miseries,
He would, (his low and native hate apart)
Sit down with vs. and lend an Enemies tear,
To grace the funeral fires of ending Rome.
I, now my Troy looks beauteous in her flames,
The Trirhnen Seas are bright with Roman fires,
Whilst the amazed Mariner a far,
Gazing on th'vnknowne light, wonders what star
Heaven hath begot, to ease the aged Moon.
When Pirrhus, striding ore the cinders, stood
On ground, where Troy late was; and with his Eye
Measured the height of what he had thrown down,
A City, great in people, and in power:
Walls built with hands of Gods; He now forgive
The ten years length, and thinks his wounds well heald,
Bathed in the blood of Priams fifty sons.
Yet am not I appeased, I must see more
Then Towers, and Collomns tumble to the ground;
It was not the high built walls, and guiltless stones
That Narrow did provoke; Themselves must be the wood
To feed this fire, or quench it with their blood.
O my dear Infant, O my Child, my Child;
Unhappy comfort of my nine months pains;
And did I bear thee, only for the fire,
Was I to that end made a Mother?
I, now begins the scene that I would have.
O Father speak yet; no, the merciless blow
Hath all bereft, speech, motion, sense, and life.
O beauteous innocence, witness ill blackt,
How to be made a coal could thou deserve?
O reverend wrinkles, well becoming paleness,
Why hath death now lifes colours given thee,
And mocks thee with the beauties of fresh youth?
Why were thou given me, to be tan away
So soon, or could not Heaven tell how to punish
But first by blessing me.
Why were thy years lengthned so long,
To be cut off untimely?
Play on, play on, and fill the golden skies
With cries, and pity; with your blood; Men's Eyes.
Where are thy flattering smiles, thy pretty kisses,
And arms, that wont to writhe about my neck?
Where are thy Counsels, where their good example?
And that kind roughness of a Fathers anger?
Whom have I now to leave my old age on?
Who shall I now have to set right my youth,
Gods if ye be not fled from Heaven help vs.
I like this Musique well; they like not mine:
Now in the tears of all men, let me sing,
And make it doubtful to the Gods aboue;
Whether the Earth be pleased, or doe complain.
But, may the man, that all this blood hath shed,
Never bequeath to th'earth, an old gray head;
Let him untimely be cut off before,
And leave a course like this all wounds and gore.
Be there no friend at hand, no standers by,
In love, or pity moved, to close that Eye.
O let him die the wish, and hate of all;
And not a tear to grace his Funeral.
Heaven, you will hear (that which the world doth scorn,)
The prayers of misery, and souls forlorn:
Your anger waxes by delaying stronger,
O now for mercy be despised no longer.
Let him, that makes so many Mothers childless,
Make his unhappy, in her fruitfulness.
Let him no issue leave to bear his name
Or some to right a Fathers wronged fame,
Our flames to quit; be righteous in your ire,
And when he dies, let him want funeral fire.
Let Heaven doe what it will this I have done
Already: doe you feel my furies weight,
Rome is become a grave of her late greatness;
Her clouds of smoke have tan away the day,
Her flames the night.
Now vnbeleeuing Eyes what crave you more?
O save your self (my Lord) your Palace burns.
My Palace? how? what traitorous hand?
O fly my Lord, and save your self betimes,
The wind doth beat the fire upon your house,
The eating flame devours your double gates,
Your pillars fall, your golden roofs doe melt,
Your antique Tables, and Greek Imagery:
The fire besets, and the smoke you see
Doth choke my speech, O fly, and save your life.
Heaven, thou dost strive, I see, for victory.
See how Fate works unto their purposed end;
And without all selfe-Industry will raise,
Whom they determine to make great and happy;
Narrow throws down himself, I stir him not,
He runs unto destruction studies ways
To compassed danger, and attain the hate
Of all; Bee his own wish is on his head:
Nor Rome with fire, mo•e then revenges burn•;
Let me stand still, or lye, or sl•epe, I ••se.
Poppy some new favour will seek out
My wakings to salute, I cannot st•rre,
But messengers of new p•eferment meet me:
Now, she hath made me Captain of the Guard,
So well I bear me in these night Allar•••,
That she imagined I was made for Arms;
I now command the Soldier, he the City,
If any chance doe turn the Prince aside,
(As many hatreds, mischiefs threaten him,)
Ours is his wife, his seat and thrown is ours.
He's next in right that hath the strongest powers.
O Troy, and O ye souls of our Forefathers,
Which in your countries fires were offred up,
How near your Nephews, to your foe•tunes come:
Yet they were Grecian hands began your flame;
But that our Temples, and our houses smoke,
Our Marble buildings turn to be our Tombs,
Burnt bones and spurned at Cou•ses fill the streets,
Not Pirrhus, nor thou Hanniball, art Ado•,
Sad Rome is ruined by a Roman hand.
But if to Neroes end, this only way
Heavens Justice hath chose out, and peoples love
Could not but by this feebling ills be moved;
We doe not then at all complain our harms,
On this condition please vs, let vs die,
And cloy the Parthian, with revenge and pity.
My Master hath sealed up his Testament,
Those bond-men which he likes best set free,
Given money, and more liberally then he used:
And now, as if a farewell to the world
Were meant, A sumpteous banquet hath he made;
Yet not with countenance that festers use,
But che eres his friends the whilst himself looks sad.
I have from fortunes Temple tan this sword,
May it be fortunate, and now at least
Since it could not prevent, punish the Evil;
To Rome it had bin better done before,
But though less helping now, they'll praise it more.
Great Sovereign of all mortal actions
Whom only wretched men, and Poets blame,
Speed thou the weapon, which I have from thee.
It was not amidst thy Temple Monuments
In vain reposed, somewhat I know 't hath done:
O with new honours let it be laid up:
Strike boldly, arm so many powerful prayers
Of dead, and living hover over thee.
And though sometimes, with talk impertineur,
And idle fences, he would fine a mirth;
Yet is it easy seen, somewhat is here
The which, he dares not let his face make show of.
Long want of loss hath made it dull, and blunt:
See, Melichus, this weapon better edged.
Sharpening of swords, when must wee then have blows,
Or means my Master, Cato-like, to exempt
Himself from power of Fates, and cloyed with life,
Give the Gods back their unregarded gift,
But he hath neither Catoes mind, nor cause;
A man given ore to pleasures, and soft ease:
Which makes me still to doubt, how in affairs
Of Princes he dares meddle, or desires?
We shall have blows on both sides, Melichus;
Provide me store of clothes to bind up wounds;
What an't be heart, for heart, Death is the worst;
The Gods sure keep it, hide from vs that live
How sweet death is, because we should go on
And be their bailes: There are about the house
Some stones that will stanch blood, see them set up:
This world I see hath no felicity,
Isle try the other.
Neroes life is soft,
The sword's prepared against another breast,
The help for his; it can be no private foe,
For then it were best to make it known, and call
His troupes of bond, and freed men to his aide:
Besides his Counsellors, Seneca,
And Lucan, are no Managers of quarrels.
Me thinks, I see him struggling on the ground,
Hear his unmanly outcries, and lost prayers
Made to the Gods, which turn their heads away.
Narrow, this day must end the worlds desi•es,
And head-long send thee, to unquenched fires.
Why doe I further idly stand debating,
My proofs are but too many, and too pregnant,
And Princes Ears still to suspicions open:
Who ever, being but accused, was quit;
For States are wise, and cut of ylls that may be;
Mean men must die, that t'other may sleep sound,
Chiefly, that rule, whose weakness apt to fears,
And bad deserts of all men, makes them know
There's none but is in heart, what hoe's accused.
THis kiss sweet love, Isle force from thee and this,
And of such spoils, and victories be prouder,
Then if I had the fierce Panonian,
Or gray-eyd German ten times overcome.
Let Iulius go, and fight at end of the world,
And conquer from the wilde inhabitants
Their cold, and poverty; whilst Narrow, here,
Makes other wars, war•es where the conquered gains,
Where to ore-come, is to be prisoner.
O willingly, I give my freedom up;
And put on my own chains;
And am in love with my captivity;
Such Venus is, when on the sand shore
Of Xanthus or on Ides ple•s•n• greene
She leads the da•c•; Her, the Nymphs all are we,
And smiling graces doe accompany.
If Bacchus could his straggling Minion
Grace, with a glorious wreath of shining S•arres;
Why should not Heaven my Poppy Crow•e?
The Northern teem shall move into a round;
New constellations rise, to honour thee;
The Earth shall won thy favours, and the Sea
Lay his rich shells, and treasure at thy feet.
For thee, Hidaspis shall throw up his gold,
Pauchaia breath the rich delightful smells,
The Seres, and the feathered man of Inde
Shall their fine arts, and curious labours bring:
And where the Sun's not known, Poppies name
Shall midst their feasts, and barbarous pomp be sung.
I, now I am worthy to be Queen of the world,
Fairer then Ʋenus, or the Bacchus love:
But you'll anon, unto your cutt-boy, S porus,
Your new made woman; to whom, now I hear
You are wed led too.
I wedded?
I, you wedded;
Did you not hear the words of the Auspices,
Was not the boy in bride-like germ•n•s dressed,
Marriage books sealed, as it were for issue, to
Be had between you, solemn feasts prepared;
While all the Court, with God-giue you Joy, sounds.
It had bin good Domitius your Father
Had ne'er had other wife:
Your froward fool, you're still so bitter, whose that?
One that it seems, my Lord, doth come in hast.
Yet in his face he sends his tale before him,
Bad news thou tell.
It is bad I tell, but good that I can tell it,
Therefore your Majesty will pardon me,
If I offend your ears to save your life.
Why, is my life indangerd?
How ends this circumstance, thou wrackst my thoughts.
My Lord your life is conspired against,
By whom?
I must be of the world excused in this,
If the great duty to your Majesty:
Makes me all other lesser to neglect.
You are a tedious fellow, speak, by whom?
By my Master.
Who's thy Master?
Sceuinus.
Sceuinus, why should he conspire?
Unless he think, that likeness in conditions
May make him too, worthy of the Empire thought.
Who are else in it?
I think Natalis, Subius, Flauius,
Lucan, Seneca, and Lucius Peso,
Aspire, and Quintilianus.
Ha done,
Thou'ilt reckon all Rome anon and so thou moist,
They are villains all, Isle not trust one of them;
O that the Romans had but all one n•cke.
Pesos she creeping into men's affections.
And popular arts, have given long cause of doubt,
And th'others late observed discontents
Risen from misinterpre•ed disgraces,
May make vs credit this rel tion.
Where are they? come they not upon vs yet?
See the Guard doubted, see the Gates shut up.
Why, the'yle surprise vs in our Court anon.
Not so my Lord, they are at Pesos house,
And think themselves, yet safe, and undescried.
Lets thither then,
And take them in this false security;
It were better first publish them traitors.
That were to make them so,
And force them all upon their Enemies;
Now, without stir, or hazard theyle be tan,
And boldly trial dare, and law demand;
Besides, this accusation may be forged
By malice or mistaking.
What likes you, doe Nimphidius, out of hand,
Two ways distract, when either would prevail;
If they suspecting but this fellows absence,
Should try the City, and attempt their friends,
How dangerous might Pesos favour be.
I to himself would make the matter clear,
Which now upon one servants credit stands:
The Cities favour keeps within the bonds
Of profit they'll love none, to hurt themselves;
Honour, and friendship they hear others name,
Themselves doe neither feel, nor know the same;
To put them yet, (though needless) in some fear,
Weal keep their streets with armed companies:
Then if they stir, they see their wives, and houses
Prepared a pray to the greedy Soldier.
Let vs be quick then, you, to Pesos house,
While I, and Tigellinus further sift
This fellows knowledge.
Look to the gates, and walls of the City, look
The river be well kept, have watches set
In every passage, and in every way;
But who shall watch these watches, what if they
Begin, and play the Traitors first? O where shall I
Seek faith, or them that I may wisely trust?
The City favours the conspirators,
The Senate, in disgrace, and feat hath lived;
The Ca•p, wh• most are soldiers that be named
Besides, he knows not all; and like a fool
I interrupted him, else had he named
Those that stood by me; O security.
Which we so much seek after, yet art still
To Courts a stranger, and dost rather choose,
The smoky reeds, and sedgy cottages,
Then the proud roofs, and wanton cost of Kings.
O sweet despised joys of poverty,
A happiness unknown unto the Gods:
Would I had rather in poor Gallij bin,
Or Vlubrae, a ragged Magistrate,
Sat as a Judge of measures, and of corn,
Then the adored Monarch of the world.
Mother, thou did deservedly in this,
That from a private, and sure state, did raise
My fortunes, to this slippery hill of greatness;
Where I can neither stand, nor fall with life.
But since we are discovered, what remains?
But put our lives upon our hands, these swords
Shall try vs Traitors, or true Citizens.
And what should make this hazard doubt success,
Stout men are oft with sudden onsets daunted,
What shall this Stage-player be?
It is not now,
Augustus gravity, nor Tiberius craft,
But Tigellinus, and Crisogorus
Eunucke•, and women that we go against.
This for thy own sake, this for ours we beg,
That thou wilt suffer him to be overcome;
Why should thou keep so many vowed swords
From such a hated throat?
Or shall we fear,
To trust unto the Gods so good a cause.
By this we may, our selves Heavens favour promise,
Because all nobleness, and worth on earth
We see's on our side; Here the Faby's son,
Here the Corvine are, and take that part;
There noble Fathers would, if now they lived;
There's not a soul that claims Nobility
Either by his, or his fore-fathers merit,
But is with vs; with vs the gallant youth
Whom passed dangers, or hot blood makes bold:
Staid men suspect their wisdom, or their faith,
To whom our counsels we have not reueald.
And while (our party seeking to disgrace)
They traitors call vs, Each man treason praises,
And hates faith, when Peso is a traitor.
And at aduenturer what by stoutness can
Befall vs worse, then will by cowardice?
If both the people, and the soldier failed vs,
Yet shall we die at least worthy our selves,
Worthy our ancestors: O Peso think,
Think on that day, when in the Parthian fields
Thou cried to the flying Legions to turn,
And look Death in the face; he was not grim,
But fair and lovely, when he came in arms.
O why, there died we not on Syrian swords?
Were we reserved to prisons, and to chains.
Behold the Galley-asses in every street,
And even now they come to clap on irons;
Must Pesos head be showed upon a pole?
Those members torn; rather then Roman-like,
And Piso-like, with weapons in our hands
Fighting, in throng of enemies to die:
And that it shall not be a civil war
Narrow prevents, whose cruelty hath left
Few Citizens; we are not Romans now,
But Moors, and Jaws, and utmost Spaniards,
And Asiaes refuge that doe fill the City.
Part of vs are already tak'n, the rest
Amazed, and seeking holes; Our hidden ends
You see laid open, Court, and City armed,
And for fear joining to the part they fear.
Why should we move desperate, and hopeless arms
And vainly spill that noble blood, that should
Crystal Rubes, and the Median fields,
Not Tiber colour: And the more your show be
Your loves, and readiness to loose your lives,
The loather I am to adventure them.
Yet am I proud, you would for me have died,
But live, and keep your selves to worthier ends;
No Mother but my own shall weep my death,
Nor will • make by overthrowing vs,
Heaven guilty of more faults, yet from the hopes,
Your own go•d wishes, rather then the thing
Doe make •ou s••, this comfort I receive
Of death un•orst. O friends, I would not die
When I can live no longer; It is my glory,
That free, and willing I give up this breath,
Leaving such courages as you•s untried.
But to belong in talk of dying, would
Show a relenting, and a doubtful mi•d:
By this you shall my quiet though•s intend;
I blame nor Earth, nor H•auen for my end.
O that this noble courage had bin shown,
Rather on enemies breasts, then on thy own.
But sacred, and inviolate be thy will,
And let it lead, and I teach vs;
This sword I could more willingly have thrust
Through Neroes breast; That, fortune denied me,
It now shall through Sceuinus.
What multitudes of villains are here gotten
In a conspiracy; which Hydra like,
Still in the cutting off, increases more.
The more we take, the more are still appeach,
And every man brings in new company.
I wonder what we shall doe with them all,
The prisons cannot hold more then they have,
The Iayles are full, the holes with Gallants stink,
Straw and gold lace together live I think:
It were best even shut the gates of the City up,
And make it all one Jail; for, this I am sure,
There's not an honest man within the walls:
And though the guilty doth exceed the free;
Yet through a base, and fatal cowardice,
They all assist, in taking one another,
And by their own hands are to prison led.
There's no condition, nor degree of men,
But here are met; Men of the sword, and gown,
Plebeans, Senators, and women too,
La•ies that might have slain him with their Eye,
Would use their hands, Philosophers,
And Politicians; Politicians?
Their plot was laid too short; Poets would now,
Not only write, but be the arguments
Of Tragedies: The Emperor's much pleased:
But some have named Seneca, and I
Will have Petroneus, one promise of pardon,
Or fear of torture, will accusers find.
Though Pesos suddenness, and guilty hand
Prevented hath the death he should have had;
Yet you abide it must.
O may the earth lye lightly on his Course,
Sprinckle his ashes with your flowers and tears,
The love and dainties of Mankind is gone.
What only now we can, we will follow thee
That way thou lead, and waite on thee in death,
Which we had done, had not these hindered vs.
Nay, other ends your grievous crimes await,
Ends which the law and your deserts exact.
What have we deserved?
That punishment that traitors unto Princes,
And enemies to the State they live in merit.
If by the State, this government you mean,
I justly am an enemy unto it.
That's but to Narrow, you, and Tigellinus:
That glorious world, that even beguiles the wise,
Being looked into, includes but three, or four.
Corrupted men, which were they all removed,
It would for the common State much better be.
Why, what can you in the government mislike?
Unless it grieve you, that the world's in peace,
Or that our arms conquer without blood.
Hath not his power with foreign visitations,
And strangers honour more acknowldg'd bin,
Then any was before him? Hath not hee
Disposed of frontier kingdoms, with success,
Given away Crowns, whom he set up, prevailing?
The rival seat of the Arsacidae,
That thought their brightness equal unto ours,
Is it crowned by him by him, doth reign?
If we have any war, it's beyond Rheme,
And Euphrates, and such whose different chances
Have rather served for pleasure, and discourse,
Then troubled vs; At home the City hath
Increased in wealth, with building bin adorned;
The arts have flourished, and the Muses sung,
And that, his Justice, and well tempered reign,
Hath the best Judges pleased, the powers divine;
Their blessings, and so long prosperity
Of the Empire under him, enough declare.
You freed the State from wars abroad, but it was
To spoil at home more safely, and divert
The Parthian enmity on vs, and yet,
The glory rather, and the spoils of war
Have wanting bin, the loss, and charge we have.
Your peace is full of cruelty, and wrong,
Laws taught to speak to present purposes,
Wealth, and fair houses dangerous faults become,
Much blood in the City, and no common deaths,
But Gentlemen, and Consulary houses:
On Caesars own house look, hath that bin free?
Hath he not shed the blood he calls divine?
Hath not that nearness which should love beget
Always on him, bin cause of hate, and fear;
Virtue, and power suspected, and kept down:
They whose great ancestors this Empire made,
Distrusted in the government thereof;
A happy state, where Decius is a traitor,
Narcissus true, nor only wast unsafe
T'offend the Prince, his freed men worse were feared,
whose wrongs with such insulting pride were heard,
That even the faulty it made innocent:
If we complained, that was it self a crime,
I, though it were to Caesars benefit;
Our writings pried into, false guiltiness
(Thinking each taxing pointed out it self)
Our private whisperings listened after; nay,
Our thoughts were forced out of vs, and punished:
And had it bin in you, to have taken away
Our understanding, as you did our speech,
You would have made vs thought this honest too?
Can malice narrow eyes,
See anything yet more it can traduce.
His long continued taxes I forbear,
In which he chiefly showed him to be Prince,
His robbing Alters, sale of Holy things,
The Antique Goblets of adored rust,
And sacred gifts of Kings, and people sold.
Nor was the spoil more odious, then the use,
They were employed on, spent on shame, and lust
Which still have bin so endless in their change,
And made vs know a divers servitude.
But that he hath bin suffered so long,
And prospered, as you say: for that, to thee
O Heaven, I turn my self, and cry; No God
Hath care of vs, yet have we our revenge,
As much as Earth may be revenged on Heaven;
Their divine honour Narrow shall usurp,
And prayers, and feasts, and adoration have,
As well as Iupiter.
Away blaspheming tongue
Be ever silent for thy bitterness,
What could cause thee,
Forgetful of my benefits, and thy oath,
To seek my life.
Narrow, I hated thee;
Nor was there any of thy soldiers
More faithful, while thou faith deseru'dst then I,
Together did I leave to be a subject,
And thou a Prince, Caesar was now become
A player on the Stage, a Waggoner,
A burner of our houses, and of vs,
A Parricide of Wife, and Mother.
Villain dost know where, &amp; of whom thou speak?
Have you but one death for him, let it bee
A feeling one (Tigellinus) be it
Thy charge, and let me see thee witty in it.
Come sirrah
Weal see how stoutly you'll stretch out your neck.
Wold thou durst strike as stoutly,
And what's hee th•re?
One that in whispering oreheard
What pity it was, my Lord, that Peso died.
And why wast pity sirrah, Peso died?
My Lord it was pity he deserved to die.
How much this youth, my Otho doth resemble;
Otho, my first, my best love, who is now
(Under pretext of governing) exiled
To Lucitania, honourably banished.
Well, if you be so passionate,
Isle make you spend your pity on your Prince,
And good men, not on traitors.
The Gods forbid my Prince should pity need.
Somewhat, the sad remembrance did me stir
Oath frail and weak condition of our kind,
Somewhat his greatness; then whom yesterday,
The world, but Caesar could show nothing higher;
Besides, some virtues, and some worth he had,
That might excuse my pity, to an end
So cruel, and unripe.
I know not how this stranger moves my mind,
His face me thinks is not like other men's,
Nor doe they speak thus; Oh, his words invade
My weakened senses, and overcome my heart.
Your pity shows, your favour and your will
Which side you are inclined too, had your power,
You can but pity, else should Caesar fear,
Your ill affection then shall punished bee.
Take him to execution, he shall die,
That the death pities of mine enemy.
This benefit at least.
Sad death shall give, to free me from the power
Of such a government; and if I die
For pitying humane chance, and Pesos end,
There will be some too, that will pity mine.
O what a dauntless look, what sparkling eyes,
Threating in suffering; sure some noble blood
Is hid in rags, fears argues a base spirit
In him what courage, and contempt of death,
And shall I suffer one I love to die?
He shall not die? hands of this man, away,
Narrow, thou shalt not kill this guiltless man.
He guiltless, strumpet.
She's in love with the smo•th face of the boy.
Alas my Lord you have slain her.
Help she dies.
Poppaa, Poppaa, speak, I am not angry,
I did not mean to hurt thee, speak sweet love.
Shoe's dead my Lord.
Fetch her again, she shall not die,
Isle op the Iron gates of hell,
And break the imprisoned shadows of the deep,
And force from death this far too worthy pray,
She is not dead.
The crimson red, that like the morning shone,
When from her windows, (all with Roses strewed,)
She peeps forth forsakes not yet her ch•ekes,
Her breath, that like a hony-suckle smelt
twining about the prickled Eglintine,
Yet moves her lips; those quick, and piercing eyes,
That did in beauty challenge heavens eyes
Yet shine as they were wont: O no they doe not,
See how they grow obscure: O see, they close,
And cease to take, or give light to the world.
What stars so ere you are assured to grace
The firmament, (for lo the twinkling fires
Together throng, and that clear milky space
Of storms, and Phiades, and thunder void,
Prepares your room,) doe not with wry aspect
Look on your Narrow, who in blood shall morn
Your luckless fate; And many a breathing soul,
Send af•er you to waite upon their Queen;
This shall begin, the rest shall follow after,
And fill the streets with outcries, and with slaughter.
What means your mourning, this ungrateful sorrow?
Where are your precepts of Philosophy?
Where our prepared resolution,
So many years fore-studied against danger?
To whom is Neroes cruelty unknown?
Or what remained after mothers blood,
But his instructors death? Leave, leave these tears,
Death from me nothing takes, but what's a burden,
A clog, to that free spark of Heavenly fire:
But that in Seneca, the which you loved,
Which you admired, doth, and shall still remain
Secure of death, untouched of the grave.
Weal not belie our tears, we wail not thee,
It is our selves, and our own loss we grieve;
To thee, what loss in such a change can bee,
Virtue is pai• her due, by death alone;
To our own losses doe we give these tears,
That loose thy love, thy boundless knowledge loose,
Loose the vnpatternd sample of thy virtue,
L•ose whatsoeu'r may praise, or sorrow move;
In all these losses, yet of this we glory,
That it is thy happiness that makes vs sorry.
If there be any place for Ghosts of good men,
If (as we have bin long taught) great men's souls
Consume not with their bodies, thou shalt see,
(Looking from out the dwellings of the ayre)
True duties to thy memory performed;
Not in the outward pomp of funeral,
But in remembrance of thy deeds, and words,
The oft recalling of thy many virtues,
The Tomb, that shall th'eternall relics keep
Of Seneca, shall be his hearers hearts.
Be not afraid my soul, go cheerfully,
To thy own Heaven, from whence it first let down,
Thou loath by this imprisoning flesh putst on,
Now lifted up, thou ravished shalt behold
The truth of things, at which we wonder here,
And foolishly doe wrangle on beneath;
And like a God shalt walk the spacious ayre,
And see what even to conceit's denied.
Great soul of the world, that through the parts defused
Of this vast All, guid'st what thou dost inform;
You blessed minds, that from the Pbeares you move,
Look on men's actions not with idle eyes;
And Gods we go to, Aaid me in this strife,
And combat of my flesh, that ending, I
May still show Seneca, and my self die.
Sure this message of the Princes,
So grievous and unlooked for, will appal
Petronius much.
Will not death any man?
It will; but him so much the more,
That having lived to his pleasure; shall forgo
So delicate a life, I doe not marvel
That Seneoa, and such sour fellows, can
Leave that they neu'r tasted: But when we
That have the Nectar of thy kisses felt,
That drinks away the troubles of this life,
And but one banquet make of forty years,
Must come to leave this: but soft, here he is.
Leave me a while, Centurion to my friends,
Let me my farewell take, and thou shalt see,
Neroes commandment quickly obaid in me.
Come let vs drink, and dash the posts with wine▪
Here throw your flowers; fill me a swelling bowl,
Such as Mecenas, or my Lucan drank
On Virgills birth day.
What means (Petroneus) this unseasonable,
And causeless mirth? Why, comes not from the Prince
This man to you, a messenger of death,
Here fair Enanthe, whose plump ruddy cheek
Exceeds the grape, it makes this; here my g•yrle.
And think thou death, a matter of such harm,
Why, he must have this pretty dimpling chin,
And will peck out those eyes that now so wound.
Why, is it not th'extreamest of all il•s?
It is indeed the last, and end of ills;
The Gods, before th'would let vs taste deaths Joys,
Placed vs ith toil, and sorrows of this world,
Because we should perceive th'amends, and thank them,
Death, the grim knave, but leads you to the door,
Where entered once, all curious pleasures come
To meet, and welcome you.
A troupe of beauteous Ladies from whose eyes,
Love, thousand arrows, thousand graces shoots;
Puts forth their fair hands to you, and invites
To their greene arbours, and close shadowed walls,
Whence, banished is the roughness of our years:
Only the west wind blows; Ith ever Spring,
And ever Summer: There the laden bows
Offer their tempting burdens to your hand,
Doubtful your eye, or taste inviting more:
There every man his own desires enjoys;
Fair Lucrese lies, by lusty Tarquins side,
And woos him now again to ravish her.
Nor vs, (though Roman) Lais will refuse,
To Corinth any man may go; no mask,
No envious garment doth those beauties hide,
Which Nature made, so moving, to be spied,
But in bright Crystal, which doth supply all,
And white transparent veils they are attired,
Through which the pure snow underneath doth shine;
(Can it be snow, from whence such flames arise?)
Mingled with that fair company, shall we
On banks of Violets, and of Hiacinths
Of loves devising, sit, and gently sport,
And all the while melodious Musique hear,
And Poets songs, that Musique far exceed
The old Anaicean crowned with smiling flowers,
And amorous Sapho, on her Lesbian Lute
B•a•ties sweet Sca•res, and Cupids godhood sing,
What, be not ravished with thy fancies, doe not
Court nothing nor make love unto our fears.
•st nothing that I say?
But empty words.
Why, thou requir'st some instance of the eye,
Wilt thou go with me then, and see that world?
Which either will return thy old delights;
Or square thy appetite anew to theirs.
Nay; I had rather far believe thee here,
Others ambition such discoveries seek;
Faith, I am satisfied with the base delights
Of common men; A wench, a house I have,
And of my own a garden, Isle not change,
For all your walks, and Ladies, and rare fruits.
Your pleasures must of force resign to these,
In vain you shun the sword, in vain the sea,
In vain is Narrow feared, or flattered;
Hither you must, and leave your purchased houses,
Your new made garden, and your black browd wife,
And of the trees thou hast so quaintly set;
Not one, but the displeasant Cyprus shall
Go with thee.
Faith it is true, we must at length,
But yet Petroneus, while we may, awhile
We would enoioy them, those we have, w'are sure of,
When that you talk of 's doubtful, and to come.
Perhaps thou think to live yet twenty years,
Which may unlooked for be cut off, as mine,
If not, to endless time compared, is nothing
What you endure must ever, endure now;
Nor stay not, to be last at table set,
Each best day of our life at first doth go,
To them succeeds diseased age, and woe;
Now die your pleasures, and the days your pray
Your rimes, and loves, and jests will take away.
Therefore my sweet, yet thou wilt go with me,
And not live here, to what thou would not see.
Would you've me then kill my self, and die,
And go I know not to what places there.
What places dost thou fear?
The'll favoured lake they tell thee thou must pass.
And thy black frogs that croake about the brim.
O pardon Sir, though death affrights a woman;
Whose pleasures, though you timely here divine,
The pains we know, and see,
The pain is lifes, death rids that pain away,
Come boldly, there's no danger in this ford,
Children pass through it: If it be a pain,
You have this comfort, that you past it are.
Y•t all as w•ll as I, are loath to die.
Judge them by deed, you see them do it apace
I, but tic loathly, and against their wills.
Yet, know you not that any being dead,
Ripen•ed them, and would have lived again,
They then there errors saw, and foolish prayers,
But you are blinded in the love of life,
Death is but sweet to them that doe approach it
To me as one that take•n with Delphic rage,
When the divining God his breast doth fill,
He sees what others cannot standing by,
It seems a beauteous, and a pleasant thing;
Where is my deaths Physician?
Here my Lord.
Art ready?
I my Lord.
And I for thee:
Narrow, my end shall mock thy tyranny.
ENough is wept, Poppy, for thy death,
Enough is bled, so many tears of others
Wailing their losses have wiped mine away
Who in the common funeral of the world
Can morn on death?
Besides, your Majesty this benefit
In their deserved punishment shall reap
From all attempts hereafter to be freed,
Conspiracy is now for ever dashed,
Tumult suppressed, rebellion out of heart;
In Pesos death, danger it self did die.
Peso that thought to climb by bowing down,
By giving a way to thrive, and raising others
To become great himself, hath now by death
Given quiet to your thoughts, and fear to theirs
That shall from treason their advancement plot;
Those dangerous heads, that his ambition leand on,
And they by it crept up, and from their meanness
Thought in this stir to rise aloft, are off:
Now peace, and safety waite upon your throne;
Security hath walled your seat about,
There is no place for fear left.
Why, I never feared them.
That was your fault.
Your Majesty must give vs leave to blame
Your dangerous courage, and that noble soul
Too prodigal of it self.
A Princes mind knows neither fear, nor hope,
The beams of royal Majesty are such,
As all eyes are with it amazed, and weakened,
But it with nothing; I at first contemned
Their weak devises, and faint enterprise:
Why, thought they against him to have prevailed,
Whose childhood was from Messalinas spite
By Dragons, (that the earth gave up) preserved,
Such guard my cradle had; for fate had then
Pointed me out, to be what now I am.
Should all the Legions, and the provinces
In one united, against me conspire:
I could disperse them withone angry eye.
My brow's an host of men; Come Tigellinus,
Let turn this bloody banquet, Peso meant vs,
Unto a merry feast, weal drink and challenge
Fortune; whose that Neophilus?
A Currier from beyond the Alps my Lord.
News of some German victory belike,
Or Briton overthrow.
The Letters come from France.
Why smiles your Majesty?
So I smile, I should be afraid there's one
In Arms Nimphidius.
What armed against your Majesty?
Our Lieutenant of the Province, Iulius Vindex.
Who, that guiddy French-man?
His Province is disarmed my Lord, he hath
No legion, not a soldier under him.
One that by blood, and rapine would repair
His state consumed in vanities, and lust.
He would not find out three to follow him.
More news my Lord.
Is it of Vindex that thou hast to say?
Vindex is up, and with him France in Arms.
The Noble men, and people throng to the cause,
Money, and Armour, Cities doe confer,
The country doth send in provision
Young men bring bodies, old men lead them forth,
Ladies doe coin their Jewels into pay,
The sickle now is framed into a sword,
And drawing horses are to manage taught,
France nothing doth but war, and fury breath.
All this fierce talk's, but Vindex doth rebel,
And I will hang him.
How long came you forth after the former messenger.
Four days, but by the benefit of sea,
and weather, am arrived with him.
How strong was Ʋindex at your coming forth?
He was esteemed a hundred thousand.
Men enough,
And soldiers few enough.
Tumultuary troops, vndisciplin'd,
Vntrain'd in service, to wast victuals good,
But when they come to look on wars black wounds,
And but a far off see the face of death.
It falls out for my empty coffers well,
The spoil of such a large and goodly Province,
Enriched with trade, and long enjoyed peace.
What order will your Majesty have taken
For levying forces to suppress this stir?
What order should we take? weal laugh, &amp; drink,
Think thou it fit my pleasures be disturbed
When any French-man list to break his neck?
They have not heard of Pesos Fortune yet,
Let that Tale fight with them.
What order needs: your Majesty shall find
This French heat quickly of it self grow cold.
Come away.
Nothing shall come that this nights sport shall stay.
I wonder what makes him so confident
In this revolt now grown unto a war,
And ensigns in the field, when in the other,
Being but a plot of a conspiracy,
He showed himself so wretchedly dismayed,
Faith, the right nature of a coward to set light
Dangers that seem far off. Peso was here,
Ready to enter at the Presence doote,
And drag him out of his abused chair,
And then he trembled; Vindex is in France,
And many woods, and seas, and hills between.
It was strange that Peso was so soon suppressed,
Strange, strange indeed, for had he but come up,
And taken the Court, in that affright and stir,
While unresolved for whom, or what to doe,
Each on the other had in jealousy
(While as appalled Majesty not yet
Had time to set the countenance) he would
Have hazarded the royal seat.
Nay, had it without hazard; all the Court
Had for him bin, and those disclosed their love,
And favour in the cause, which now to hide,
And colour their good meanings ready were
To show their forwardness against it most.
But for a stranger with a naked province,
Without allies, or friends in the sty•e to challenge
A Prince upheld with thirty Legions
Rooted in four descents of Ancestors,
And fourteen years continuance of reign,
Why it is —
Galba and Spain, what Spain and Gala too?
I pray thee Tigellinus, what furie's this?
What strange event, what accident hath thus
Orecast your countenances?
Down we were set at table, and began
With sparkling bowls to chase our fears away,
And mirth and pleasure looked out of our eyes;
When lo a breathless messenger comes in
And tells how Vindex, and the powers of France
Have Segius Galba chosen Emperor,
With what applause the Legions him receive,
That Spaines revolted; Portugal hath joined;
As much suspected is of Germany;
But Narrow, not abiding out the end,
Orethrew the tables, dashed against the ground
The cup which he so much you know esteemed;
Tears his hair, and with incensed rage
Curses false men, and Gods the lookers on.
His rage we saw was wild and desperate.
O you unsearched wisdoms, which doe laugh,
At our security, and fears alike;
And plain to show our weakness, and your power
Make vs contemn the harms, which surest strike
When you our glories, and our pride undo,
Our overthrow you make ridiculous too.
Slow making counsels, and the sliding year
Have brought me to the long foreseen destruction
Of this misled young man; his State is shaken,
And I will push it on; revolted France;
Nor the conjured Provinces of Spain,
Nor his own guilt, shall like to me oppress him;
I to his easy yielding fears proclaim
New German mutinies, and all the world
Rousing it self in hate of Neroes name;
I his distracted counsels doe disperse
With fresh despairs, I animate the Senate
And the people, to engage them past recall
In prejudice of Narrow, and in brief,
Perish he must, the fates and I resolve it;
Which to effect, I presently will go,
Proclaim a Donatiue in Galbaes name.
Yonders Nimphidius our Commander, now,
I with respect must speak, and smooth my brow;
Captain all •ail.
Antoneus well met,
Your place of Tribune in this Anarchi.
This Anarchy my Lord, i• Narrow dead?
This Anarchy, this yet vnstiled time,
While Galba is un eased of the Empire
Which Narrow h••h forsook.
Hath Narrow then resigned the Empire?
In effect he hath, for he's fled to Egypt.
My Lord you tell strange news to me,
But nothing strange to me,
Who every moment, knew of his despairs,
The Curriers came so fast with fresh alarms
Of new revolts, that he unable quite
To bear his fears, which he had long concealed,
Is now revolted from himself, and fled.
Thrust with reports, and rumours from his seat.
My Lord you know the Camp depends on you
As you determine.
There it lies Antonius,
What should we doe, it boots not to rely
On Neroes stinking fortunes, and to sit
Securely looking on, were to receive
An Emperor from Spain; which how disgraceful
It were to vs, who if we weigh our selves
The most material accessions are
Of all the Roman Empire, which disgrace
To cover we must join our selves betimes,
And thereby seem to have created Gabba;
Therefore Isle straight proclaim a Donatiue,
Of thirty thousand sisterces a man.
I think so great a gift was never heard of.
Galba they say is frugally inclined,
Will he avow so great a gift as this?
How ere he like of it, he must avow it,
If by our promise he be once engaged;
And since the soldiers care belongs to me,
I will have care of them, and of their good.
Let them thank me, if I through this occasion
Procure for them so great a donatiue.
So you be thanked, it skils not who prevail,
Galba, or Narrow, traitor to them both;
You give it out that Neroes fled to Egypt,
Who with the frights of your repotts amazed,
By our device, doth lurk for better news,
Whilst you inevitably doe betray him,
Works he all this for Galba then? not so
I have long seen his climbing to the Empire
By secret practises of gracious women,
And other instruments of the late Court,
That was his love to het that me refused;
And now by this he would give the soldiers favour;
Now is the time to quit Poppies scorn,
And his rivallity; Isle straight reveal
His treacheries, to Galbaes agents here.
You see what issue things doe sort unto,
Yet may we hope not only impunity,
But with our fellows part of the gift proclaimed.
Whether go you, stay my friends;
It is Caesar calls you, stay my loving friends.
We were his slaves, his footstools, and must crouch;
But now, with such observance to his feet,
It is his misery that calls vs friends.
And moves you not the misery of a Prince?
O stay my friends, stay, harken to the voice
Which once ye knew.
Hark to the peoples cries,
Hark to the streets, that Galba, Galba ring.
The people may forsake me without blame,
I did them wrong to make you rich, and great,
I took their houses to bestow on you:
Treason in them hath name of liberty,
Your fault hath no excuse, you are my fault,
And the excuse of others treachery.
Shall we with staying seem his tyrannies
To uphold, as if we were in love with them?
We are excused unless we stay too long,
As forced Ministers, and apart of wrong.
O now I see the vizard from my face
So lovely, and so fearful is fallen off
That vizard, shadow, nothing (Majesty)
(Which like a child acquainted with his fears,
But now men trembled at, and now contemn▪
Narrow forsaken is of all the world.
The world of truth; O fall some vengeance down
Equal unto their falsehoods, and my wrongs;
Might I accept the Chariot of the Sun.
And like another Phaeton consume
In flames of all the world; a pile of Death
Worthy the state, and greatness I have lost.
Or were I now but Lord of my own fires,
Wherein false Rome yet once again might smoke,
And perish, all unpitied of her Gods,
That all things in their last destruction might
Perform a funeral honour to their Lord.
O love dissolve with Caesar, Caesars world;
Or you whom Narrow rather should invoke
Black Chaes, and you fearful shapes beneath,
That with a long, and not vain envy have
Sought to destroy this work of the other Gods;
Now let your darkness cease the spoils of day,
And the worlds first contention end your strife.
Though others, bound with greater benefits
Have left your changed fortunes and doe run
Whither new hopes doe call them, yet come we.
O welcome, come you to adversity,
Welcome true friends, why there is faith on earth.
Of thousand servants, friends, and followers;
Yet two are left: your countenance me thinks
Gives comfort, and new hopes
Doe not deceive your thoughts,
My Lord we bring no comfort, would we could;
But the last duty to perform, and best
We ever shall, a free death to persuade,
To cut off hopes of fiercer cruelty,
And scorn, more cruel to a worthy soul.
The Senate have decreed you're punishable,
After the fashion of our ancestors;
Which is; your neck being locked in a fork
You must be naked whipped, and scourged to death.
The Senate thus decreed? they that so oft
My virtues flattered have, and gifts of mine,
My government prefert'd to ancient times,
And challenge Numa to compare with me;
Have they so horrible an end sought out?
No, here I bear which shall prevent such shame,
This hand shall yet from that deliver me,
And faithful be alone unto his Lord.
Alas how sharpe, and terrible is death;
O must I die, must now my senses close,
For ever die, and ne'er return again,
Never more see the Sun, nor Heaven, nor Earth?
Whither go I? what shall I be anon;
What horrid journey wander thou my soul,
Under th'earth, in dark, damp, dusky vaults?
Or shall I now to nothing be resolved?
My fears become my hopes, O would I might.
Me thinks I see the boiling Phlegeton,
And the dull poole, feared of them we fear,
The dread, and terror of the Gods themselves,
The furies armed with links, with whips, with snakes,
And my own furies far more mad then they;
My mother, and those troops of slaughtered friends,
And now the Judge is brought unto the throne,
That will not leave unto authority,
Nor favour the oppressions of the great
These are the idle terrors of the night,
Which wise men (though they teach, doe not believe)
To curb our pleasures fine, and aide the weak.
Deaths wrongful defamation, which would make
Vs shun this happy haven of our rest,
This end of evils; as some fearful harm.
Shadows, and fond imaginations,
Which now you see on earth; but children fear.
Why should our faults fear punishment from them,
What doe the actions of this life concern
The tother world, with which is no commerce?
Would Heaven, and Stars, necessity compel
Vs to doe that, which after it would punish?
Let vs not after our lives end believe
More then you felt before it.
If any words have made me confident,
And boldly doe, for hearing others speak,
Boldly this night; But will you by example
Teach me the truth of your opinion,
And make me see that you believe your selves,
Will you by dying, teach me to bear death
With courage?
No necessity of death
Hangs ore our heads, no dangers threatens vs,
Nor Senates sharpe decree, nor Galbaes arms.
Is this the thanks then thou dost pay our love?
Die basely as such a life deserved;
Reserve thy self to punishment, and scorn
Of Rome, and of thy laughing enemies.
They hate me, cause I would but live, what was it
You loved kind friends, and came to see my death;
Let me endure all torture, and reproach
That earth, or Galbaes anger can inflict:
Yet hell, and Rodamanth are more pitiless.
Though not deserved, yet once •gain I come,
To warn thee to take pity on thy self;
The troupes by the Senate sent, descend the hill
And come.
To take me, and to whip me unto death:
O whither shall I fly?
Thou hast no choice.
O hither must I fly, hard is his hap,
Who from death only must by death escape,
Where are they yet? O may I not a little
Bethink my self?
They are at hand; hark, thou moist hear the noise.
O Rome farewell farewell you Theaters,
Where I so oft, with popular applause
In song; and action; O they come I die.
So base an end all just commiseration
Doth take away, yet what we doe now spurn,
The morning Sun saw fearful to the world.
You both shall die together, Traitors both,
He to the common wealth, and thou to him,
And worse, to a good Prince; what, is he dead?
Hath fear encouraged him, and made him thus,
Prevent our punishment; then die with him.
Fall thy aspiring at thy Masters feet.
Who though he justly perished, yet by thee
Deserved it not, nor ended there thy treason;
But even thought of the Empire, thou conceiu'st
Galbaes disgrace in receiving that
Which the son of Nimphidia could hope.
Thus great bad men aboue them find a rod:
People depart, and say there is a God.

LEt your tunes, you sweet-voic'd spears,
overtake him:
Charm his fancies, op his ears,
now awake him. begin.
Fancies are but streams
of vain pleasure:
They who by their dreams
true •oies measure;
Feasting, starve; laughing, weep;
playing smart, whilst in sleep
fools with shadows smiling,
wake and and find
hopes like wind,
Idle hopes beguiling.
Thoughts fly away, Time hath past'em
Wake now, awake, see and taste'em.
That I might ever slumber, and enjoy
Contents as happy as the soul's best wishes
Can fancy or imagine, it is a cruelty
Beyond example, to ulurp the peace
I sate enthroned in, who was it plucked me from it.
Young man look hither.
Good; I envy not
The pomp of your high office; all preferment
Of earthly glories are to me diseases,
Infecting those found parts which should preserve
The flattering retribution to my thankfulness;
The times are better to me; there's no taste
Left on the palate of my discontent
To catch at empty hopes, whose only blessedness
Depends on being miserable.
Raybright
Thou drowsed thy great descent from my grand patron the Sun;
whose priest I am.
For small advantage;
Hee who is high-born never mounts von battlemen
Of sparkling stars, unless I bee in spy•it
As humble as the child of one that sweats
To eat the dear-earn'd bread of honest thrift.
Hast thou not flowed in honours?
Honours, I'd not bee baited with my fears
Of loosing em, to bee their monstrous creature
An age together, it is beside as comfortable
To die upon the embrodrie of the grass,
Un••ded, as to ser a world at gaze,
Whilst from a pinnacle I tumble down
And break my neck, to bee talked of, and wondered at.
You have worn rich habits.
Fine Ass-trappings.
A Peddler's heir turned gallant, follows fashion,
Can by a cross-legged Tailor bee transformed
Into a Jack a napes of passing bravery:
It is a stout happiness to wear good clothes,
Yet live and die a fool—mew.
You have had choice
Of beauties to enrich your marriage-bed.
Monkeys and Parakeetoes are as pretty
To play withal, tho not indeed so gentle.
Honestie's indeed a fine jewel, but the Indies
Where it grows is hard to bee discovered, troth sir
I care for no long travels with lost labour.
Pieasures of every sense have been your servants,
When as you've commanded them.
To threaten ruin,
Corrupt the purity of knowledge, wrest
Deters of better life, to those of these
This scurvy one, this life scarce worth the keeping.
It is melancholy, and too fond indulgence
To your own dulled affections: sway your judgment,
You could not else bee thus lost, or suspect
The care your ancestor the Sun takes of ye.
The care, the scorn hee throw; on me.
Fie, fie;
Have you been sent out into strange lands,
Seen Courts of foreign Kings, by them been graced,
To bring home such neglect.
I have reason for it.
Pray show it.
Since my coming home I have found
More sweets in one unprofitable dream,
Then in my lives whole pilgrimage.
Your fantasy
Misleads your judgment vainly, sir in brief
I am to tell you, how I have received
From your Progenitor, my Lord, the Sun,
A token, that he visibly will descend
From the celestial orb to gratify
all your wilde longings.
Very likely, when pray:
The world the whiles shall be beholding to him
For a long night, new married men will curse,
Tho their brides tickle for it, oh! candle and la•thorn
Will grow to an excessive rate in the City.
These are but flashes of a brain disordered.
Contain your float of spleen in seemly bounds,
Your eyes shall bee your witness.
Hee may come.
Hence, hence, thou shame of nature, mankindes foil:
Time whips thee from the world, kicks thee, and scorns thee.
Whip me from the world, why whip? am I a dog, a cur,
a mongrel: bow waw. Do thy worst, I defy thee.
I will roar and squander,
Cozen, and bee dr•nk too;
I will maintain my Pander,
Keep my Horse, and P•nok too;
brawl and scuffle,
sh•ft and shuffle,
Swagger in my Potmeals:
Dams rank with;
do mad•rank with
Roaring bores and o•tmeals,
Pox a time, I care not,
being past it is nothing:
I le be free and spare not▪
sorrows are lives 〈◊〉:
melancholy
is but folly,
Mirth and youth are plet•••.
Time go hang thee,
I will bang thee,
Though I die in co••ers.
And what think you of this, you old doting •oth-eaten beard∣ed
〈◊〉 as I am Folly by the mothers side, and a time-bred
Gentleman, I will sing thee to death, i• thou 〈◊〉 me; Cannot
a man of fashion, for 〈◊〉, put on now and then his
working-day robes of humility, but he must presently be subject
to a Beadles rod of Correction; go mend thy self Caniball, it is
not without need, I am sure the Times were never more beggarly
and proud, waiting-women flint it in Cast-suits, and their Ladies
fall for em; knaves over-brave wise men, while wise men •and
with cap and knee to fools: Pitiful Time! pitiful
Out foul, prodigious, and a bortive birth;
Behold the sand glass of thy days is broke
Bring me another, l'le shatter that too.
No; you have misspent thy hours, lavish fool, like
The circuit of thy life, in ceaseless riots
It is not therefore fit that thou should live
In such a Court as the Suns Majesty
Vouch safes to illuminate with his bright beams.
In any Court, father bald-pate, where my granam the
Moon shows her horns, except the Confistory Court, and there
she need not appear; Cuckolds Carry such sharp Stilettos in
their fore-heads, l'le live here and laugh at the bravery of igno∣rance,
maugre thy scurvy and abominable beard.
Priest of the Sun it is near about the minute,
thy Patron will descend, scourge hence this trifle;
Time is ne'er lost, till in the common Schools
Ofimpudence, time meets with wilful fools.
Farewell 1538, I might have said five thousand, but the
others long enough a Concience to be honest Conditioned, pox on
him; it's anotable railing whipper, of a plain Time whipper.
You heard the charge he left.
I, I, a may give a charge, a has been a petty Court hole∣der
ever since he was a minute old, he took you for a fore-man
of a Jury
Pray sir, what are you?
No matter what, what are you?
Not as you are, I thank my better fates,
I am grand child to the Sun.
And I am Cousin german, some two or three hundred re∣moves
off, to the Moon, and my name is Folly.
Folly, sir of what quality?
Quality; any quality in fashion: Drinkeing, Whoring,
Singing, Dancing, Dicing, Swearing, Roaring 〈◊〉 oisting, Lying▪
Cogging, Canting, lcetero, will you have any more.
you have a merry heart, if you can guide it.
Yes faith; so, so, I laugh not at those whom I fear, I
fear not those whom I love, and I love not any whom I laugh not
at, •ratty strange humour, is it not?
To any one that knows you not, it is.
You must a void.
Away away, I have no such meaning indeed-la.
Hark the fair hour is com, draw to the Alter,
And with a mazement, reverence, and comfort
Behold the broad eyed lamp of heaven descending,—Stand—
Oh brave!
Stand.
Glorious and bright, lo here we bend
Before thy throne, trembling, attend
Thy sacred pleasures, be pleased then
To shower thy comforts down, that men
May freely taste in lifes extremes
The influence of thy powerf•ll dreams.
Let not my fate too swiftly run,
Till thou acknowledge me thy sun.
Oh theres no joy even from the womb,
Of frailty: till we be called home.
Now am I an a•• ant rascal, and cannot speak one word
for my self, if I were hanged.
Ray-bright.
It calls ye, answer.
Lord and Father.
We know thy cares, appear to give release,
Boldly make thy demands, tor we will please
To grant what ere thou say for▪
Fair beamed sir;
I dare not greedily prefer
Eternity of earths delights,
Before that duty which invites
My filial piety, in this
Your love shall perfect my hearts bliss;
If I, but for one only year,
Enjoy the several pleasures here,
With every season in his kind,
Can bless a mortal with.
I find
Thy reason breeds thy appetite, and grant it
Thou master'st thy desire, and shall not want it;
To the spring garden let him bee conveyed,
And entertained there by that lovely maid:
All the varieties the Spring can show,
Be subject to his will.
Lights Lord, wee go.
And I will follow, that am not in love with such fop∣peries.
We must descend, and leav a while our sphere
To greet the world—ha, there does now appear
A circle in this round, of beams that shine,
As if their friendly lights would darken mine:
No let em shine out still, for these are they,
By whose sweet favours, when our warmths decay,
Even in the storms of winter, daily nourish
Our active motions, which in Summer flourish
By their fair quickening dews of noble loves:
Oh may you all like stars, whilst swift time moves,
Stand fixed in firmaments of blessed contents:
Mean while recreations wee present,
Shall strive to please; I have the foremost tract;
Each season else begins and ends an Act.
Welcome the mother of the year, the Spring;
That mother on whose back age ne'er can sit.
For age still waits upon her that Spring the Nurse;
Whose milk the Summer sucks, and is made wanton.
Physician to the sick, strength to the sound;
By whom all things above, and under-round
Are quickened with new heat, fresh blood, brave vigour,
That Spring on thy fair cheeks, in kisses lays
Ten thonsand welcomes, free as are those rays
From vvich thy name thou borrowest: glorious name!
Raybright, as bright in person as in 〈◊〉
Your eyes amazed me first, but •ow mine ears
Feel your tongues charms, in you move all the spears.
Ch Lady! would the Sun, which gave me life,
Had never sent me to you.
Why! all my veins
Shrink up, as if cold Winter were com back,
And with his frozen beard have numbed my lips
To hear that sigh fly from you.
R•not about me
A firmament of such full blessings shine,
I in your sphere seem a star more divine
Than in my Fathers Chariot; should I ride
One year about the world in all his pride.
Oh that sweet breath revives me! if thou never
Part'st hence (as part thou shalt not) bee happy ever.
I know I shall.
Thou to buy, whose state?
Kings would lay down their crowns, fresh Youth wait,
I charge thee, on my darling.
Madam I shall,
And on his smoeth check such sweet roses set,
You still shall sit to gather then, and when
Their colours fade, brave shall spring again.
Thou (without whom they that have hills of gold
Are slaves and wretches) Health that can nor be sold
Nor bought, I charge thee make his heart a tower
Guarded, for there lies the Springs paramour.
One of my hands is writing still in heaven,
(For that's Healths library) t'other on the earth
Is Physics treasurer, and what wealth those lay
Up for my queen, all shall his will obey▪
Mortality sure falls from me▪
Thou! to whose tunes
The five nice Senses dance; thou that dost spin
Those golden threads all women love to wind,
And but for whom, man would cut off mankind.
Delight not base, but noble, touch thy Lire,
And fill my Court with brightest Delphic fire.
Hover, you winged Musicians, in the air;
Clouds leav your dancing, no winds stir but fair.
Leav blustering March—
What bird so sings, yet so does wail,
It is Philomel the Nightingale;
Jug, Jug, Jug, Terue she cries,
And hating earth, to heaven she flies—Cuckoo.
Ha, ha, hark, hark, the Cuckows sing
Cuckoo, to welcome in the Spring.
Brave prick-song; who is it now we hear!
It is the Larks silver leer a leer:
Chirrup the Sparrow flies away;
For hee fell too't ere break of day.
Ha, ha, hark, hark, the Cock•owes sing
Cuckoo, to welcome in the Spring.
How does my sun-born sweet-heart like his queen;
Her court, her train.
Wondrous, such ne'er were seen.
Fresher and fresher pastimes, one delight
Is a di•ease to th'wanton appetite.
Music take Echoes voice, and dance quick rounds
To thine own times in •epercussive sounds.
Enough? I will not weary thee, pleasures change▪
Thou, as the Sun in a free zodiac range.—
A company of rural fellows, faced
Like l•verse of your Laws, beg to bee graced
Before your Highness, to present their sport▪
What is it?
A Morris.
Give them our Court:
Stay, these dull birds may make thee stop thine ear,
Take thou my lightning, none but Laurel here
Shall scope thy blasting; whom thou wilt confound
Smite; let those stand, who in thy choice •it crowned.
Let these then, I may surfeit else on sweets.
Sound sleeps do not still lie in Princes sheets.
Beckon the Rurals in, the Country-gray
Seldom ploughs treason, should thou be stolen away.
By great ones, that's my fear.
Fear it not Lady;
Should all the worlds black sorceries bee laid
To blow me hence, I move not.
I am made
In that word the earths Empress—
Are not these sports too rustic?
No; pretty and pleasing.
My youngest girl•, the violet-breathing May,
Being told by Flora that my love dwelt here,
Is com to do you service, will you please
To honour her arrival.
I shall attend.
On them, and bid my rosie-finger'd May
Rob hills and dales, with sweets to strew his way.
An Empre•s, say thou, fallen in love with me.
Shoe's a great woman, and all great women wish to be
Empresses; her name, the Lady Humour.
Strange name, I never saw her, knew her not:
What kind of creature is she?
Creature! of a skin soft as Pomatum, sleek as Jellie,
white as blanched Almonds; no Mercers wife ever handled yard
with a prettier breath; sweet as a Monkeys; lips of cherries,
teeth of pearl, eyes of diamond, foot and leg as—
And what's thy name?
It is but a folly to tell it, my name is Folly.
Fumorand Folly; to my listening ear
Thy Ladies praises often have been sung,
The trumpet sounding forth her graceful beauties.
Kindles high flames within me to behold her.
Shoe's as hot as you for your heart.
This Lady, called the Spring, is an odd trifle.
A green sickness thing, I came by the way of a hobby∣horse
letter of Attorney, sent by my Lady as a spy to you:
Spring a hot Lady, a few fields and gardens lass, can you feed
upon sallets and tanzies, eat like an Ass upon grass every day at
my Ladies, coms to you now a Goose, now a Woodcock, no∣thing
but fowl; fowl pies, platters all covered with foul, and is
not fowl very good fare?
Yea marry is it sir, the fowl being kept clean.
My admiration wastes it self in longings
To see this rare piece, I'll see her; what are Kings, were not their
Pleasures varied; shall not mine then? should day
Last ever, it would bee loathed as night.
Change is the sauce that sharpens appetite;
The way, I'll to her.
The way is windy and narrow; for look you, I do but
wind this Cornet, and if another answer it, she coms.
Be quick then—
Is this that slower the Spring so dotes upon?
This is that hony-suckle, she sticks in her ruff.
A bedfellow for a Fairy.
Admired perfection!
You let my praises to so high a tune,
My merits cannot reach em.
My heart-strings shall then,
As mine eye gives that sentence on thy person;
And never was mine eye a corrupt Judge,
That Judge to save thee would condemn a world,
And lose mankind to gain thee; it is not the Spring▪
With all her gaudy arbors, nor perfumes
Sent up in flattering incense to the Sun,
For shooting glames at her, and for sending
Whole quires of singers to her every morn,
With all her amorous fires, can heat thy bl•od
as I can with one kiss.
The rose-lipp'd dawning
Is not so melting, so delicious.
Turn me into a bird that I may sit
Still singing in such boughs.
What bird?
A Ring-tayl.
Thou shalt be turned to nothing but to mine,
My Mine of pleasures which no hand shall rifle
But this, which in warm Nectar bathes the palm:
Invent some other tyres; music; stay; none
Hoy-day.
New gowns, fresh fashions, I am not brave enough
To make thee wonder at me.
Not the Moon
Riding at midnight in her crystal Chariot,
With all her Courtiers in their robes of stars
Is half so glorious.
This feather was a bird of Paradise,
Shall it bee yours.
No Kingdom buys it from me.
Being in fools paradise he must not lose his bauble.
I am wrapped.
In your mothers smock.
I am wrapped above mans being, in being sphered
In such a globe of •arities, but say Lady
What these are that attend you.
All my attendants
Shall be to the sworn servants.
Folly is sworn to him already, never to leav him.
Hee.
A French Gentleman that trails a Spanish pike. A Tailor.
Wee Monsieur, hey nimbla upon de cross caper, me
take a de measure of de body from de top a de noddle to de heel
and great toe, oh stish de fine: dis collar is cut out in anger scur∣vie,
ohais beeshes pinch de bum, me put one French yard into
de toder•ose.
N. French yards, they want a yard at least.
Shall I bee brave then?
Golden as the sun.
What's hee that looks so smickly?
A Flounder in a frying-pan, still skipping, one that loves
mutton so well, he always carries capers about him; his brains
lie in his legs, and his legs serve him to no other use then to do
tricks, as if he had bought em of a Juggler, hoe's an Italian dan∣cer,
his name—
Signior Lavolta (Miser mio) me tech all de bella Co∣rantoes,
galliards, piamettaes, capeorettaes, amorettas dolche
dolche to declamante do bone robes de Tu•cana.
I ne'er shall be so nimble.
Yes, if you power quick-silver into your shin-bones, as he
does.
This now?
A most sweet Spaniard.
A Confecianador, which in your tongue is, a Comfit∣maker
of Toledo, I can teach sugar to slip down your throat a
million of ways.
And the throat has but one in all, oh Toledo!
In Conservs, candies, marmalades, sinkadoes, ponadoes,
marablane, Bergamo•u, aranxues muria, lymons, berengenas of
Toledo, oriones, potatoes of Malag•, and ten millions more.
Now it is ten millions, a Spaniard can multiply.
I am your servitor.
My palate pleased to what's this last?
I am a Gun that can roar, two stilettos in one sheath, I
can fight and bounce too, my Lady by me, pre•ants this sword
and belt to you
〈◊〉 Mistress.
Put 〈◊〉 on.
•le dri•• you how to give the lie, and stab in the punto,
if you dare not •ight, then how to vamp a rotten quarrel with∣out
ado.
How: dare not fight! there's in me the Suns fire.
No more of this, dances awake the music▪
Oyes! Music!
No more of this, this sword arms me for battle.
Com then, let th•u and I rise up in arms,
The field embraces, kisses our alarms.
A dancer and a •ailor, yet stand still: strike up-Dance.
Oh! thou enticing strumpet, how durst thou
Throw thy voluptuous spells about a Temple
That's consecrate to me.
Poor Spring, goodie herb-wife;
How dare thou cast a glance on this rich jewel
I ha bought for mine own wearing.
Bought! art thou sold then?
Yes, with her gifts, she buys me with her graces.
Graces! A Witch.
What can she give thee.
All things.
Which I for one bubble cannot add a sea too.
And show him a hobbie-horse in my likeness.
My Raybright, hear me; I regard not these.
What dowry can you bring me?
Dowry! ha! is it com to this? am I held poor and base?
A girdle make, whose buckles stretched to the length
Shall reach from th'artick to th'antartick pole:
What ground soever thou can with that enclose
I'll give thee freely, not a Lark that calls
The morning up, shall build on any turf
But she shall be thy tenant, call thee Lord,
And for her rent pay thee in change of songs.
I must turn bird-catcher.
Do you think to have him for a song?
Live with me still; and all the measures
Plaid to by the spheres, I'll teach thee;
Let's but thus dally, all the pleasures
The Moon beholds, her man shall reach thee.
Divinest!
Here's a Lady.
Is it come to who gives most?
The self same Bay tree into which was turned:
Peneian Daphne, I have still kept green;
That tree shall now be thine, about it sit:
All the old poets with fresh Laurel Crowned,
Singing in verse the praise of chastity;
Hither when thou shalt come, they all shall rise,
Sweet Cantos of thy love, and mine to sing:
And invoke none but thee as Delian King.
Live by singing ballets?
Oh! base, turn poet, I would not be one my self.
Dwell in mine arms, aloft we'll hover,
And see fields of armies fighting:
Oh! part not from me, I will discover
There, all but books of fences writing;
Not far off stands the Hipocrenian well,
Whither i'll lead thee, and but drinking there,
To welcome thee, nine Muses shall appear:
And with full bowls of knowledge thee inspire.
Hang knowledge, drown your muse.
I, •, or they'll drown themselves in Sack &amp; Claret
Do not regard their toys,
Be but my darling, age to free thee
From her curse, shall fall a dying;
Call me their Empress; time to see thee
Shall for get his art of flying.
Oh! my all excellence.
Speak thou for me; I am fainting.
Leave her, take this and travel, tell the world
I'll bring thee in to all the Courts of Kings;
Where thou shalt stay, and learn their languages;
Kiss Ladies, revel out the nights in dancing:
The day, manly pastimes; snatch from time
His glass•e, and let the golden sands run forth
As thou shalt jog them, riot it, go brave;
Spend half a world, my Queen shall bear thee out:
Yet all this while, tho thou climb hills of years,
Shall not one wrinkle sit upon thy brow,
Nor any sickness shake thee; Youth and Health,
As slaves, shall lackey by thy Chariot wheels;
And who, for two such jeweller, would not sell
The East, and West Indies; both are thine, so that—
What?
All lies gallop o'er the world, and not grow old, nor be
sick; a lie; one gallant went but into France last day, &amp; was never
his own man since, another stepped but into the low Countries, and
was drunk dead under the table, another did but peep into Eng∣land,
and it cost him more in good morrows blown up to him
under his window, by Drums and Trumpets, then his whole voi∣age,
besides he run mad upon it.
Here's my last farewell, ride a long with me;
I'll raise by art, out of b•se earth, a palace;
Whither thy self, waving a Crystal stream,
Shall call together the most glorious spirits
Of all the Kings that have been in the world;
And they shall come only to feast with thee.
Rare!
At one end of this palace shall be heard
That Musique which gives motion to the Heaven;
And in the middle Orpheus shall sit and weep,
For sorrow that his Lu•e had not the charms
To bring his fair Euredice from hell;
Then at an other end—
In•e hear no more;
This ends your strife, you only I adore.
Oh! I am sick at heart; un•hankfull man
'•is thou hast wounded me, farewell, she is led in.
Farewell?
Health, recover her; sirrah Youth, look to her.
That bird that in her nest sleeps out the spring
May fly in Summer, but with sickly wing.
I owe thee for this pill, Doctor.
The Spring will Dye sure.
Leather?
If she does, Folly here is a kind of a foolish poet,
And he shall write her Epitaph.
Against the morning
See it then writ, and I'll reward thee for it.
It shall not need.
It is like it shall not need, this is your Folly,
He shall be ever yours.
I hope ever to be mine own folly,
Hoe's one of our fellows.
In triumph now I lead thee; no, be thou Caesar,
And lead me.
Neither; we'll ride with equal state
Both in one Chariot, since we have equal fate▪
Each do his office to this man your Lord;
For tho Delight, and Youth, and Health should leave him,
This Ivory gated palace shall receive him.
OH my deer love the Spring, I am cheated of thee;
Thou had a body the four elements
Dwelt never in a fairer; a mind princely?
Thy language like thy fingers, Musical.
How cool were thou in anger, in thy diet
How temperate, and yet sumptuous; thou would not waste
The weight of a sad violet in excess;
yet still thy board had dishesnumberlesse.
Dumb beasts even loved thee; once a young Lark
Sate on thy hand, and gazing on thine eyes
Mounted and sung, thinking them moving skies—
I ha don my Lord: my Muse has pumped hard for an
Epitaph upon the late departed Spring, and here her lines spring
up.
Read.
Read; so I will, pleas you to reach me your high ears.
Here lie's the blithe Spring,
Who first tanght birds to sing;
Yet in April herself fell a crying:
Then May growing hot
A sweating sickness she got,
And the first of June lay a dying.
Yet no month can say
But her merry daughter May
Stuck her Coffin with flowers great plenty.
The Cuckoo sung in verse
An Epitaph o'er her hearse,
But assure you the lines were not dainty.
No more are thine, thou Idiot; hast thou none
To poison with thy nasti••eggs but mine,
My matchless frame of nature, Creations wonder,
Out of my sight.
I am not in it, if I were, you'd see but s•urvily; you find
fault as Patron• do with books, to give nothing.
Yes balled one, beastly base one, blockish away;
Vex me not fool, turn out a doors your rorer,
French Tailor, and that Spanish ginger-bread,
And your Italian skipper; then sir, your self.
My self! Carbonado me, bastinado me, strapado me,
hang me, I'll not stir; poor Folly, honest Folly, jocundary Foal∣lie
forsake your Lordship; no true Gentleman hates me, and
how many women are given daily to me (if I would take em)
some not far off know; Tailor gon, Spanish fig gon, all you
but I—
My waiters coited off by you, you flea them;
Whence com these thunder-bolts, what furieshaunt you?
You.
She!
Yes, and thou.
Bow waw.
I shall grow old, diseased, and melancholy;
For you have robbed me both of Youth and Health,
And that delight my Spring bestowed upon me:
But for you two, I should be wondrous good;
By you I have been cozened, baffled, and torn
From the embraces of the noblest creature.
Your Spring.
Yes she, even she, only the Spring:
One morning spent with her, was worth ten nights
With ten of the prime beauties in the world:
She was unhappy never, but in two sons,
March a rude roaring fool.
And April a whining puppy.
But May was a fine piece.
Mirror of faces.
Indeed May was a sweet creature, and yet a great raiser
of May-poles.
When will you sing my praises thus?
Thy praises, that art a common creature.
Common!
Yes, common: I cannot pass through any Princes Court,
Through any Country, Camp, Town, City, Village,
But up your name is cried, nay cursed; a vengeance
On this your debauched Humour.
A Vintner spoke those very words last night, to a com∣pany
of roaring boys, that would not pay their reckoning.
How many bastards hast thou?
None.
It is a lie, bee judge by this your squire else.
Squire! worshipful Mr Folly.
The Courtier has his Humour, has he not Folly?
Yes marry has he, folly; the Courtier's humour is to bee
brave, and not pay for it; to bee proud, and no man cares for it.
Brave Ladies have their humours.
Who has to do with that, but brave Lords.
Your Citizens have brave humours.
Oh! but their wives have tickling humour•.
Yet don.
Humour Madam, if all are your bastards that are given to
humour you, you have a company of as arrant rascals to your
children, as ever went to the gallows; a Collier being drunk jose∣sell'd
a Knight into the kennel, and cried it was his humour; the
Knight broke his coxcomb, and that was his humour.
And yet you are not common.
No matter what I am:
Rail, curse, be frantic, get you to the tomb
Of your rare Mistress; dig up your dead Spring
And lie with her, kiss her; me, have you lost▪
And I scorn to be found.
Stay: must I lose all comfort, dearest s•ay;
There's such a deal of magic in those eyes,
I'm charmed to kiss these only.
Are you so? kiss on, I'll be kissed some where I warrant.
I will not leav my Folly for a world.
Nor I you for ten.
Nor thee my love, for worlds piled upon worlds.
If ever for the Spring you do but sigh, I take my bells.
And I my hobby-ho•se,—Will you be merry than, and
jawfand.
As merry as the Cuckows of the spring,
Again.
How Lady, lies the way?
I'll be your convoy,
And bring you to the Court of the Suns queen,
(Summer a glorious and majestic creature)
Her face out-shining the poor Springs, as far
As a sun-beam doe's a lamp, the moon a star.
Such are the spheres I'd move in, attend•: us Folly.
I muse, my nimble Folly stays so long.
Hoe's quick enough of foot, and counts, I swear)
That minute cast away, not spent on you.
His company is music, next to yours;
Both of you are a Consort; and I, your tunes
Lull me asleep, and when I most am sad,
My sorrows vanish from me in soft dreams:
But how far must we travel, is it our motion
Puts us in this heat; or is the air
In love with us, it clings with such embraces,
It keeps us in this warmth,
This shows, her Court
Is not far off, you covet so to see:
Her subjects seldom kindle needless fires,
The Sun lends them his flames.
Has she rare buildings.
Magnificent and curious; every noon
The horses of the day bait there, whilst he
(Who •n a golden Chariot makes them gallop
In twe•ve h•urs o'er the world) alights a while,
To give a love-kisse to the Summer queen.
And shall we have fine sights there?
Oh!
And hear more ravishing music?
All the choristers
That learned to sing in the Temple of the Spring;
But her attain such cunning, that when the winds
Roar and are mad, and clouds in antic gambols
Dance o'er our head, their voices have such charms,
They'll all stand still to listen—
Excellent.
I sweat like a pampered jade of Asia, and drop like a
Cob-nut out of Africa—
Back: whither go you?
Oyes! this way.
None must pass:
Here's kept no open Court; our Queen this day
Rides forth a hunting, and the air being hot,
She will not have rude throngs to stifle her—back
And did break her heart then▪
Yes with disdain.
The heart of my deer mother nurse the Spring,
I'll break his heart for 't• had she not a face,
Too tempting for a Jove.
The graces sate,
On her fair eye-lids ever, but his youth
Lusting for change, so doted on a Lady,
Fantastic, and yet fair; a piece of wonder:
They call her Humour; and her parasite Folly,
He cast the sweet Spring off, and •urned us from him;
Yet his celestial kinsman, for young Raybright
Is the Snns darling: knowing his jorneying hither
To see thy glorious Court, sends me before
To attend on you, and spend all my hours
In care for him—
Obey your charge—oh thou builder,
Of me thy hand maid! Landlord of my life,
Life of my love, throne where my glories sit;
I ride in trynmph on a silver cloud;
Now I but see thee.
Rise; is Raybright come yet.
Not yet.
Be you indulgent over him,
And lavish thou thy treasure—
Our princely Cousin Raybright,
Your darling, and the worlds delight, is come.
who with them.
A goddess in a woman, attended
By a prating saucy fellow, called Folly.
They'll confound him, but he shall run,
Go and receive him.
Your sparkling eyes, and his arrival, draws
Heaps of admirers; earth it self will sweat
To bear our weights; vouchsafe, bright power, to borrow
Winds not too rough from Aeolus, to fan
Our glowing faces
I will: ho Aeolus;
Unlock the jail, and lend a wind or two,
To fan my girl the Summer.
I will.
No rorers.
No.
Quickly.
Fly you slaves, Summer sweats; cool her.
Hay-makers, Rakers, Reapers and Mowers,
Waite on your Summer-Queen,
Dress up with Musk-rose her Eglantine bowers,
Daffodils strew the greene,
Sing dance and play
It is Holy day.
the Sun does bravely shine
on our ears of corn.
Rich as a pearl
coms every girl,
this is mine, this is mine, this is •in;
Let us die, ere away they be born.
Bow to the Sun, to our Queen, and that fair one
com to bebold our sparts,
Each bonny lass here is counted a rare one,
as those in Princes Courts.
these and wee
with Country glee
will teach the woods to resound,
and the hills with eccho's hollow:
skipping lambs
their bleating dams
amongst kids shall trip it round,
for joy thus our wenches we follow.
Wind, jolly Hunts-men, your neat Bugles shrilly,
Hounds make a lusty cry:
Spring up, you Falconers, the Partridges freely,
then let your brave H••ks fly.
Horses amain
ever ridge, over plain,
the Dogs have the Stag in chase;
it is a sport to content a King.
So ho ho, through the skies
how the proud bird flies,
and sousing kills with a grace,
Now the Deer falls, hark how they ring.—
Leav off, the Sun is angry, &amp; has drawn
A cloud before his face▪
He is vexed to see
That proud star shine near you, at whose rising
The Spring fell sick and died; think what I told you,
His coins will kill you else.
It cannot—fair Prince!
Though your illustrious name has touched mine ear:
Till now I never saw you, nor never saw
A man whom I more love, more hate,
Ha Lady!
For him I love you, from whose glittering rai•s
You boast your great name, for that name I hate you,
Because you killed my mother, and my nurse.
Killed he my grandmother, Plenty will never
Hold you byth' hand again.
You have free leave
To thrust your arm into our treasury
As deep as I my self: Plenty shall wait
Still at your elbow, all my sports are yours,
Attendants yours, my state and glorie's yours;
But these shall be as sun-beams from a glass
Reflected on you, not to give you heat
To dote on a smooth face, my spirit's too great,
Divinest!
Let her go.
And I'll go after, for I must and will have a fling at one of
her plum-trees.
I ne'er was scorned till now.
This is that Alteza,
That Rhodian wonder, gazed at by the Sun:
I feared thine eyes should have beheld a face,
The Moon has not a clearer, this! a dowdy,
An Ouzle, this a queen-apple; or a crab she gave you.
She bid's you share her treasure, but who keeps it.
She point's to trees great with child with fruit, but when
delivered grapes hang in ropes, but no drawing, not a drop of
wine: whole ears of corn lay their ears together for bread, but
the devil a bit I can touch.
Be ruled by me once more, leave her.
In scorn, as he doe's me.
Scorn! If I be not deceived, I ha seen Summer go up and
down with hot Codlings; and that little baggage, her daughter
Plenty, crying six bunches of Reddish for a penny.
Thou shalt have nobler welcomes, for I'll bring thee
To a brave and bounteous house-keeper, free Autumn.
Oh! there's a lad—let's go then.
Whore's this Prince, my mother; for the Indies
Must not have you part—
Must not?
No; must not.
I did but chide thee like a whistling wind
Playing with levy dancers: when I told thee
I hated thee, I lied; I dote upon thee.
Unlock my garden of th'Helperides,
By dragoons kept (the Apples being pure gold)
Take all that fruit, it is thin•.
Love but my mother, I'll give thee corn enough to feed
the world.
I need not golden apples, not yourcorn;
What land so ever, the worlds surveyor, the Sun
Can measure in a day, I dare call mine:
All kingdoms I have right to, I am free
Of every Country; in the four elements
I have as deep a share as an Emperor;
All beasts whom the earth bears are to serve me,
All birds to sing to me, and can you catch me
With a tempting golden Apple,
Shee'• too good •or thee;
When she was born, the Sun for joy did rise
Before his time, on•lie to kiss those 〈◊〉,
Which having touched, he stole from them such store
O• ligh•, she shone more bright then ever before:
At which he vowed, when ever thee did die,
He would snatch them u•, and in h•s 〈◊〉 sphere
Place them, since •he had no two stars so clear.
Let him now sna•ch them up away.
Away, and leav this Gypsy.
Oh! I am lost.
Love scorned, of no triumph more then love can boast.
This strump will confound him.
She has me deluded—
Is Raybright gon.
Yes, and his spiteful eyes
Have shot darts through me.
I, thy wounds will cure,
And lengthen out thy days, his followers gon▪
Cupped and Fortune take you charge of him.
Here thou, my brightest Queen, must end thy reign,
Some nine months hence I'll shine on thee again.
YOur entertainment, Autumns bounteous queen,
Have feasted me with rarities as delicate,
As the full growth of an abundant year
Can ripen to my palate.
They are but courtings
Of gratitude to our dread Lord the Sun,
From whom thou draw thy name; the feast of fruits
Our gardens yield, are much too course for thee;
Could we cont•act the choice of natures plenty
Into one form, and that form to contain
All delicates, which the wanton sense
Would relish: or desire to invent to please it,
The present were unworthy far to purchase
A sacred league of friendship.
I have rioted
In •urfets of the ear, with various music
Of warbling birds; I have smelt perfumes of roses,
And every flower with which the fresh-t•im'd earth
Is mantled in: the Spring could mock my senses
With these fine barren lullabies, the Summer
Invited my then ranging eyes to look on
Large fields of ripened corn, presenting trifles
Of waterish petty dainties, but my taste
Is only h•re pleased, t'other objects claim
The y•e of formal, these are real bounties,
〈◊〉 can transcend thy wishes, whom the creatures
Of every age and quality posts, matting
From land to land, and sea to sea to meet,
Shall wait upon thy nod, Fortune and Cupped,
Love yield thy quiver, and thine arrows up
To this great Prince of Time, before him Fortune,
Power out thy mint of trea•uric, crown him sovereign
Of what his thoughts can glory to command:
He shall give payment of a royal prize
To Fortune, Judgment, and to Cupids eyes.
Be a Merchant, I will freight thee
With all store that time is bought for.
Bee a lover, I will wait thee
With success in life most sought for.
Be enamoured on bright honour,
And thy greatness shall shine glorious.
Chastity, if thou smile on her,
Shall grow servile, thou victorious.
Be a warrior, conquest ever
Shall triumphantly renown thee.
Be a Courtier, beauty never
Shall but with her duty crown thee.
Fortunes wheel is thine, depose me,
I'm thy slave, thy power hath bound me.
Cupids shafts are thine, dispose me,
Love loves love, thy graces wound me.
Cup. Live, reign, pi••e is fems jewel;
We obey, oh! be not cruel.
You ravish me with infinites, and lay
A bounty of more sovereignty and amazement,
Then the Atlas of mortality can support—
Whats here.
Nay pray observe.
Be my hearts Empress, build your kingdom there.
With what an earnestness he complies.
Upon my life he means to turn Costermonger, and is pro∣jesting
how to forestall the market; I shall cri• Pippins
rarely.
Till now, my longings were ne'er satisfied,
And the desires my sensual appetite
Were only fed with barren expectations,
To what I now am filled with.
Yes we are filled and must be emptied, these wind fruits have
distended my guts into a Lenten pudding, theres no fat in them, my
belly swells, but my sides fall away, a month of such diet would
make me a living Anatomy.
These are too little, more are due to him,
That is the patterned of his fathers glory;
Dwell but amongst us, industry shall strive,
To make another artificial nature;
And change all other seasons into ours.
Shall my heart break, I can contain no longer.
How fares my loved Humour?
A little stirred, no matter, i'll be merry:
Call for some Music, do not; i'll be melancholy.
A sullen humour, and common, in a decor that has lost all
his money.
Lady! I hope it is no neglect of Conrtesie
In us, that so disturbs you, if it rise
From any discontent, reveal the cause,
It shall be soon removed.
Oh! my heart, help to unlace my gown.
And unlace your petticoat.
Saucy, how now! it is well you have some sweet heart,
some new fresh sweet heart; i'm a goodly fool to be thus play•
on, stalled, and foiled.
Why Madam?
We can be courteous without stain of honour;
It is not the raging of a lustful blood
That we desire to tame with satisfaction:
Nor hath his masculine graces in our breast
Kindled a wanton fire, our bounty gives him
A welcome free, but chaste and honourable.
Nay it is all one, I have a tender heart,
Come, come, l••'s drink.
A humour in fashion with gallants, and brought out of the
low Countries.
Fie! there's no music in thee, let us sing.
Here'• humour in the right trim, a few more such toys
would make the little world of man run mad, as the Puritan
that sold his conscience for a May pole—
The m•aning of this mirth.
My Lord is coming.
Let us attend, to humble our best thanks,
For these high favours—
My dearest Lord, according to the injunction
Of your command, I have with all observance,
Given entertainment to this noble stranger.
The Sun-born Raybright, minion of my love,
Let us be twins in heart, thy grandsires bea•es
Shine graciously upon our fruits, and vines:
I am his vassail-servant, tributary:
And for his sake, the knigdomes I possess,
I will divide with thee, thou shalt command
The Lidian Tmolus, and Companion mounts,
To nod their grape-crownd heads into thy bowls,
Expressing their rich juice: a hundred grains
Both from the Baltic and Sicilian fields,
Shall be Congested for thy sacrifice
In Ceres fane, Tiber shall pay thee Apples,
And Sicyon Olives, all the Choicest fruits,
Thy Fathers heat doth ripen.
Make me but treasurer
Of your respected favours, and that honour
Shall equal my ambition.
My Pomona,
Speed to prepare a banquet of novelties;
This is a day of rest, and wo•th whiles,
Will sport before our friends, and shorten time
With length of wonted revels.
I obe• y:
Will it please you Madam, a retirement
From these extremes in men, more tolerable,
Will better fit our modesties.
I'll drink, and be a Bacchanalian; no, I will not;
Fe'ne what humour pleases.
Raybright, a health to Phoebus—Drinks.
These are the Peans which we sing to him,
And ye wear no bays, our cups are only
Crowned with Lyeus blood, to him a health—
I must pledge that too.
Now one other health
To our grand Patron, called, good fellowship;
Whose livery, all our people hereabout
A•e called in.—
I am for that too.
It is well, let it go round, and as our custom i•
Of recreations of this n•ture, join,
Your voices, as you drink, in lively notes;
Sing Ios unto Baccus.
Hey hoes, a god of winds, there's at least four and twenty
of them imprisoned in my belly; it I sigh not forth some of them,
the rest will break out at the back door; and how sweet the Music
of their roaring will be, let an Irishman judge.
He is a songster too.
A very foolish one; my Musiques natural, and came by
inheritance; my father was a French Nightingale, and my mother
an English wagtail; I was born a Cuckoo in the Spring, and lost
my voice in Summer, with laying my eggs in a sparrows nest;
but I'll venture for one, fill my dish; every one take his own, and
when I hold up my finger, off with it.
Begin.
Cast away care, hee that Loves sorrow,
Lengthens not a day, nor can buy to morrow:
Money is trash, and he that •ill spend it,
let him drink merrily, Fort•no will send it.
Merrily, Merrily, Merrily, Ohho.
Play it off stiffly, we may not part so: merrily &amp;c.
Wine is a Charm, it heats the blood too,
Cowards it will arm, if the wine be good too;
quickens the wi•, and makes the back able;
scorns to submit to the watch or C•nstable.
M••r•lie, &amp;c.
Pots fly about, give us more Liquor;
Brothers of a rowt, our brains will flow quicker;
empty the Cask, score up, wee care not,
fill all the Pots again, drink on, and spare not,
Merrily, &amp;c.
Now have I more air then ten Musicians, besides there is a whirl∣wind
in wind in my brains, I could both caper and turn round.
Oh! a Dance by all means,
Now cease your healths, and in an active motion
Bestir ye nimbly, to beguile the hours.
I am for you in that too, twill jog down the lees of
these rouses into a freer passage; but take heed of sure footing, it is
a slippery season; many men fall by rising, and many women
are raised by falling—
How likes •ur friend this pastime?
Above utterance,
Oh! how have I in ignorance and dullness,
Run through the progress of so many minutes;
Accusing him, who was my lifes first author,
Of slackness and neglect, whilst I have dream't
The folly of my days in vain expense,
Of useless taste and pleasure; pray my Lord
Let one health pass about, whilst I be think me
What course I am to take, for being denison
In your unlimited courtesies.
Devise a round,
You have your liberty.
A health to Autumns self.
And here let time hold still his restless glass,
That not another golden sand may fall
To measure how it passes.
Continue here with me, and by thy presence
Create me favourite to thy fair progenitor;
And be mine heir.
I want words to express
my thankfulness.
What ere the wanton Spring,
When she doth diaper the ground with beauti•s,
Toils for, comes home to Autumn, Summers sweats
•ether in pasturing her furlongs, reap•ng
The crop of bread, ripening the fruits for food,
Autumns garners house them, Autumns jollities
Feeds on them; I alone in every land
Traffic my useful merchandise, gold and jewels,
Lo•dly possessions, are for my commodities
Mo•gaged and los•, 〈◊〉 Chief moderator
Between the che•k-parch'd Summer, and the extremes
Of Winters tedious frost; nay, in my self
I do con•aine another teaming Spring▪
Surety of health prosperity of life
Belongs to Autumn, if thou then can hope
To •nherit immortality in frailty,
live here 〈◊〉 time be spent, yet be not old.
〈◊〉 the Sun, you are the years great emperor.
On now, to new variety of feasts;
Prince•lie contents are fit for princely guest•, Exit—
My Lord I'll follow; sure I am not well.
Surely I am half drunk, or monstrously mistaken, you
mean to stay here belike.
Whither should I go else?
Nay, if you will kill your self in your own defence, I'll
not be of your Jury—
You have had precious pleasures, choice of drunkenness;
will you be gon?
I feel a war within me,
And every doubt that resolution kills
Springs up a greater in the years revolution;
There cannot be a season more delicious,
When Plenty (Summers daughter) empties daily
Her cornucopia, filled with choicest viands.
Plenties horn is always full in the City.
When temperate heat of•ends not with extremes;
When day and night have their distinguishment
With a more equal measure.
Ha! in contemplation.
Troubling himself with this windy-gutts; this belly∣eking
Autumn; this Apple Iohn Kent, and warden of Fruiterers
hall.
When the bright Sun, with kindly distant beams
guilds ripened fruit.
And what fine meditation transports you thus,
You study some Encomium
Upon the beauty of the gardens Queen,
You'd make the paleness to supply the vacancy
Of Cinthia's dark defect.
Madamllet but a green sickness chamber-maid be through∣lie
steeled, if she get not a better color in one month, I'll bee
force•ited to Autumn for ever, and fruite-eate my flesh into a con∣sumption.
Come Raybright, whatsoer'e suggestions
Have won on thy apt weakness, leave th•se empty
And hello• sounding pleasures, that include
Only a windy substance of delight,
Which every 〈◊〉 alters into ayre:
I'll stay no longer here.
I must.
You shall not,
These are adulterate mixtures of vain follies; I'll bring thee
Into the Court of
Winter, there thy food:
Shall not be sickly fruits, but healthful broathes,
Strong meat and dainty.
Pork, Beef, Mutton, (very sweet Mutton, veale Venson,
Capon, fine •at Capon, part•edge, Snit, plover, larks, Teale
admirable Teale, my Lord.
Mystery there, like to another nature,
Confesses the substance of the chois•st fruits,
In a rich candy, with such imitation
Of form and colour, twill deceive the eye:
Until the taste be ravished.
Comfits and Caraways, Marchpaines and Marmalades
Suger-plums and P•ppin-pies, ginger bread and Walnuts
Nor is his bounty limited, he will not spare
T'exhaust the treasure of a thousand Indies.
Two hundred pound suppers, and neither fiddlers nor broken
glasses reckoned, be•ides, a hundred pound a throw, ten times to∣gether,
if you can hold out so long.
You tell me wonders!
Be my conductresse, l'le fly this place in secret;
Three quarters of my time is almost spent,
The last remains to crown my full content.
Now if I fail, let man's experience read me;
It was Humour, joined with Folly, did mislead me.
Leav this naked season,
Wherein the very trees shake off their locks,
It is so poor and barren.
And when the hair fall's off, I have heard a Poet say, it is
no good sign of a sound body.
Com let's go taste old Winter's fresh delights,
And • well with pleasures our big appetites.
The Summer, Autumn, and the Spring,
As it were conjoined in one conjugal ring;
An emblem of four Provinces we sway,
Shall all attend our pastimes night and day;
Shall both be subject to our glorious state,
While wee enjoy the blessings of our fate:
And since wee've notice that some barbarous spirits
Mean to oppose our entrance, if by words
They'll not desist, we'll force our way with swords.
HEar you the news neighbor?
Yes, to my grief neighbor; they say our Prince Ray∣bright
is coming hither, with whole troops and trains of Cour∣tiers;
wee'r like to have a fine time on it neighbor•.
Our Wives and Daughters are, for they are sure to get by
the bargain, tho our barn be emptied, they will be sure to bee
with barn for it: Oh! these Courtiers, neighbours, are pesti•ent
knaves; but ere l'le suffer it, l'le pluck a Crow with some of em.
Faith neighbor let's lay our heads together, and resolve to
die like men, rather then live like beasts.
I, like horn-beasts, neighbor; they may talk and call us
Rebels, but a fig for that, it is not a fart matter; let's be true
amongst our selves, and with our swords in hand resist his en∣trance—
What such murmurings does your gall bring •orth,
Will you prov't true, no good coms from the North;
Bold saucy mortals, dare you then aspire
With snow and ice to quench the sphere o• fire:
Are your hear•s frozen like your clime, from thence
All temperate heat's fled of obedience:
How durst you else with force think to withstand
Your Princes entry into this his land;
A Prince who is so exc•ll•ntly good,
His virt•e is his honour, more then blood;
In whose clear natu•e, as two •uncle, do rise
The attributes of Merciful, and Wise:
Whose laws are so impartial, they must
Be counted heavenly, cause they are truly just:
Who does with princely moderation give
His subj•cts an example how to live;
Teaching their erring natures to direct
Their wills, to what it ought most to affect:
That as the Sun does unto all dispense
Heat, light, nay life from his full influence,
Yet you wilde fools, possessed with giant rage,
Dare, in your lawless fury, think to wage
War against heaven, and from his shining throne
Pull Jove himself, for you to tread upon;
Were your head• circled with his own green Oak,
Yet are they subject to his thunder-stroak;
And he can sink such wretches as rebel,
From heaven's sublime height, into the depth of hell.
The devil a can as soon, we fear no colours, let him do his
worst; there's many a tall fellow besides us, will die rather then
see his living taken from them, nay even eat up; all things are
grown so dear, there's no •nduring more mouths then our own,
neighbor.
You're a wise fellow, neighbor, prate is but prate; they
say this Prince too would bring new laws upon us, new rights
into the Temples of •ur gods, and that's abominable, we'll all
bee hanged first—
A most fair prete•ce,
To found rebellion upon conscience;
Dull stubborn fools, whose perverse judgments still
Are governors•rn'd by the malice of your will,
Not by indifferent •eason, which to you
Coms, as in droughs •he elemental dew
Does on the parched earth, twits, but does not give
Moisture enough•h to ma•e the plants to live:
Things void of soul, can you conceive that he,
Who•e every thought's an act of piety,
Who's all religious, furnished with all good
That ever was comprised in flesh and blood,
Cannot direct you in the fi••est way
To serve those powers, to which himself does pay
True zealous worship▪ nay's so near allied
To them, himself must needs be deified—
Save you Gentlemen! '•is very cold, you live in frost,
you've Winter still about you.
What are you sir?
A Courtier sir; but you may go•••, a very •oolish one,
to leav the bright beams of my Lord, the Prince, to travel hither;
I have an Ague on me, do you not see me shake: Well, if our
Courtiers, when th•y com hither, have not warm young wenches,
good wines, and fires to heat their bloods, twill fre•z into an A∣popl•xie;
farewell frost, l'le go seek a fire to thaw me, l'me all
ice I fear already.
Farewell and be hanged, ere such as these shall eat what we
have •went for, we'll spend our bloods; com neighbours, let's go
call our company together, and go meet this Prince he talks
so of.
Some shall have but a sour welcome of it, if my Crab • tree
cudgel hold here.
It is, I see,
Not in my power to alter destiny:
You're mad in your rebellious minds, but hear
What I presage, with understanding clear:
As your black thoughts are misty, take from me
This as a true and certain augury,
This Prince shall com, and by his glorious side
Lawrel-crown'd conquest shall in triumph ride,
Armed with the justice that attend's his cause,
You shall with penitence embrace his laws:
Hee to the frozen northern clime shall bring
A warmth so temperate, as shall force the Spring
Usurp my privilege, and by his Ray
Nigh• shall bee changed into perpetual day.
Plenty and happiness shall still increase,
As do•s his light, and Turtle-fo•t•d Peace
Dance like a Fairy through his realms, while all
That envy him shall like swift Comets fall,
By their own fire consumed, and glorious he
Ruling, as it were, the force of destiny,
Shall have a long and prosperous reign on earth,
Then fly to heaven, and give a new star birth.
But se•, our star appea•'•, and •rome his eye
Fly thousand beams of sparkling majesty.
Bright son of Phebus! welcome, I begin
To feel the ice fall from my cris•ed skin;
For at your beams the Waggoner might thow
His Chariot, axell'd with Rephean snow;
Nay, the slow moving North-star having felt
Your temperate heat, his i•isles would melt.
What bold rebellious Catives dare disturb
The happy progress of our glorious peace▪
Contemn the Justice of ou• equal laws,
Profane those sacred rights, which still must bee
Attendant on monarchal dignity.
I came to frolic with you, and to cheer
Your drooping souls by vigour of my beams;
And have I this strange welcome! reverend Winter!
I'm come to be your guest; your bounteous free
Condition does assure, I shall have
A welcome entertainment.
Illustrious sir! I am ignorant
How much expression my true zeal will want
To entertain you fitly, yet my love,
And hearty duty, shall be far above
My outward welcome, to that glorious ligh•
Of heaven, the Sun which cha•es hence the night;
I am so much a vastaile, that I'll strive,
By honouring you, to keep my faith alive
To him, brave Prince, tho you, who do inherit
Your fathers cheerful heat, and quickening spirit;
Therefore as I am Winter, wo•no and spent
So far with age, I am Times monument;
Antiquities example, in my zeal,
I, from my youth, a •pan of Time will steal
To open the free treasures of my Court,
And swell your soul with my delights and sport.
Never till now
Did admiration beget in me truly
The rare matched twins at once, pity and pleasure;
So royal, so abundant in earth's blessings,
Should not partake the comfort of those beams,
With which the Sun beyond extent doth cheer
The other seasons, yet my pleasures with you,
From their false charms, doth get the start as far
As heaven's great lamp from every minor starr.
Sir! you can speak well, if your tongue deliver
The message of your heart, without some cu•ing
Of restraint, we may hope t• enjoy
The lasting riches of your presence hence,
Without distrust or change
Winters sweet bride,
All Conquering Bounty, queen of harts, life's glory,
Natures perfection; whom all love, all serve;
To whom Fortune, even in extreame's a slave,
When I fall from my duty to thy goodness,
Then let me be ranked as nothing.
Come you, flatter me.
I flatter you! Why Madam? you are Bounty;
Sole daughter to the royal throne of peace.
He minds not me now.
Bounties self!
For you he is no soldier dares not fight,
No Scholar he, that dares not plead your merits,
Or study your best Sweetness, should the Sun,
Eclipsed for many years, forbear to shine
Upon the bosom of our naked pastures,
Yet where you are, the glories of your smiles
would warm the barren grounds, arm hartless misery,
And cherish desolation. Deed I honour you,
And as all others ought to do, I serve you▪
Are these the rare sights, these the promised Complements.
Attendance on our revels, let delight
C•njoyn the day with sable-footed night;
Both shall forsake their orbs, and in one sphere
Meet in soft mirth, and harmless pleasures here;
While plump Lyeus shall, with garland crowned
Of triumph-Ivie, in full cups abound
Of Cretin wine, and shall dame Ceres call
To waite on you, at Winters festival:
While gaudy Summer, Autumn, and the Spring,
Shall to my Lord their Choicest viands bring.
We'll rob the sea, and from the subtle ayre,
Fetch her inhabitant, to supply our fare.
That were Apecious here, he in one night
Should sate with danties his strong appetite.
Begin our revels then, and let all pleasure
Flow like the Ocean, in a boundless measure—
Wit and pleasure soft attention,
Grace the sports of our invention.
Conceit peace, for Detraction
Hath already drawn a faction,
Shall deride thee.
Antic leave me;
For in laboring to bereave me
Of a sch•lars praise, thy dotage:—Shall be hist at.
Here's a hot age;
When such petty p•nmen covet
Fame by folly, on, l'le prove it
Scurvy• by thy par•, and try thee
By thine own wit.
I defy thee,
Here are nobler Judges, wit
Cannot suffer where •hey sit.
Prithee foolish Conceit, leave off thy set-spe•ches, and
come to the conceit if self in plain languages; what goodly thing
is it, in the name of laughter?
Detraction doe thy worst, Conceit appears,
In honour of the Sun, their fellow-friend,
Before thy censure; know then that the spheres,
Have for a while resigned their orbs, and lend
Their seats to the Four Elements, who joined
With the Four known Complexions, have atoned
A noble I ague, and severally put on
Material bodies; he•e amongestem none
Observes a difference; Earth and Ayre alike
Are sprightly active; Fire and Water seek
No glory of pre-eminence; Phlegm and Blood,
Choler and Melancholy, who have stood
In c•ntrari•ties, now meet for pleasure,
To enterain Time in a courtly measure.
Impose•ble and inproper; first to personate insensible
C•eatures, and next to compound quite opposite humours; fie, fie,
fie, in•s oboe•enable.
Fond ignorance! how dare thou vainly scan
Imp•ssibility; what reigns in man
Without disorder; wisely mixed by nature,
To fashion and preserve so high a creature.
Sweet sir! when shall our mortal eyes behold this new
pe•ce of wonder;
We must gaze on the stars for it doubtless,
See, thus the cl•uds fly off, and run in chase,
When the Sun's bounty lends peculiar grace.
Fine in faith; pretty, and in good earnest; but sirrah scholar;
will they come down too?
Behold em well, the foremost represents
Air, the most sportive of the Elements,
Animble rascal, I warrant him some Aldermans son;
wondrous giddy and light-headed; one that blew his patri∣money
away in feather and Tobacco.
The next near him is Fire.
A choleric gentleman, I should know him, a younger
brother and a great spender, but seldom or never carries any mo∣ney
about him; he was begot when the sign was in Taurus, for
a rores like a Bull, But is indeed a Bell-weather.
The third in rank is Water.
A phlegmatic cold piece of stuff, his father me thinks
should be one of the Dunce-table, and one that never drunk strong
beer in's life but at festival times, and then he caught the heart-burning
a whole vacation and half a Term after.
The fourth is Earth.
A shrewd plodding-pated fellow, and a great lover of
news; I guess at the rest, Blood is placed near Air, Choler near
Fire, Phlegm and Water are sworn brothers, and so are Earth
and Melancholy.
Fair nymph of Harmony, be it thy task
To sing them down, and rank them in a mask.—
See the Elements conspire,
Nimble Air doe's court the Earth,
Water doe's commix with Fire,
To give our Princes pleasure birth;
Each delight, each joy, each sweet,
In one composition meet.
All the seasons of the year,
Winter doe's invoke the Spring,
Summer doe's in pride appear,
Autumn forth its fruits doth bring,
And with •mulation pay
Their tribute to this Holy-day;
In which the Darling of the Sun is •om,
To make this place a new Elifium.
How do these pleasures please?
Pleasures!
Live her•,
And be my Lord's friend, and thy sports shall vary
A thousand ways, invention shall b•get
Conceits as curious •s the thoughts of change•
Can aim at.
Trifles: progress o'er the year
Again my Raybright, therein like the Sun,
As he in heaven runs his circular course,
So thou on earth run thine, for to be fed
With stale delights, breeds dullness and contempt;
Think on the Sp•ing.
She was a lovely Virgin.
My royal Lord!
Without offence, be pleased but to afford
Me give yo• my true figure, do not scorn
My age, nor think, cause I appear forlorn,
I serve for no use, it is my sharper breath
Doe's purge gross exhalations from the earth;
My frosts and snows do purify the air
From choking fogs, makes the sky clear and fair:
And though by nature cold and chill I be,
Yet I 〈◊〉 warm in bounteous charity;
And can, my Lord, by grave and sage advice,
Bring you to the happy shades of Paradise.
•hat wonder; Oh! can you •bring me thither?
I can direct and point you out a path
But whore's the guide?
Quicken thy spirits, Raybright, I'll not leav thee,
We'll run the self same race again, that happiness
These lazy, sleeping, tedious winters nights
Become not noble action.
To the Spring
I am resolved—Oh! what strange light appears;
The Sun is up sure.
Wanton Darling look, and worship with amazement.
Os! gracious Lord.
Thy sands are numbered, and thy glass of frailty
〈…〉 out to the last: here in this mirror
Le• man behold the circuit of his fortunes;
The 〈◊〉 of the Spring dawns like the Morning,
Bedewing Childhood with unrelish'd beauties
Of gaudy sights; the Summer, as the Noon,
Shines in delight of Youth, and ripens strength
To Autumns Manhood, here the Evening grows,
And knits up all felicity in folly;
W•nter at last draws on the Night of Age;
Yet still a humour of some novel fancy
Untested, or untried, puts off the minute
Of resolution, which should bid farewell
To a vain world of weariness and sorrows.
The powers from whom man do's derive his pedigree
Of his creation, with a royal bounty
Give him heal•h, youth, delight for free attendants
To rectify his carriage: to be thankful
Again to them, Man should cashier his riots,
His bosom whorish sweet-heart, idle Humour;
His Reasons dangerous seducer, Folly; then shall
Like four straight pillars, the four Elements
Support the goodly structure of mortality;
Then shall the four Compl•xions, like four heads
Of a clear river, streaming in his body,
Nourish and comfort every vein and sinew.
No sickness of contagion, no grim death
Of deprivation of h•alths real blessings
Shall then affright the creature built by heaven,
Reserved to immortality, henceforth
In peace go to our Altars, and no more
Question the power of supernal greatness,
But give us leav to govern as w•e please
Nature, and her dominion, who from us,
And from our gracious influence, hath both being
And preservati•n; no replies but reverence.
Man hath a double guard, if time can win him;
Heavens power above him, his own peace within him.

IS Appius sent for, that we may acquaint him
with the decree of the Senate?
He is, my Lord, and will attend
your Lordships presently.
Lictor, did you tell him that our business
was from the Senate?
I did, my Lord, and here he is at hand.
My Lords, your pleasure?
Appius, the Senate greet you well,
and by us do signify unto you
that they have chosen you one of the Decemviti.
My Lords, far be it from the thoughts
of so poor a Plebeian, as your unworthy servant
Appius, to soar so high: the dignity of so
eminent a place would require a person
of the best parts and blood in Rome.
My Lords, he that must steer at the head of an
Empire, ought to be the Mirror of the times
for Wisdom and for Policy, and therefore
I would beseech the Senate to elect one.
worthy of the place, and not to think of
one so unfit as Appius.
My Lord, •…y Lord▪ you •…ally with your wits.
I have seen children oft eat sweet meats thus,
as fearful to devour them
you are wise and play the •…oddest 〈◊〉 right
to make so many 〈◊〉 of •…our delight
•…t yo•… must •…ow, what •…e have once concluded
cannot for any private mans affection
be slighted: take your choice then with best judgement
of these two proffers, either to accept
the place prop•…'d you, or be b•…nished Rome
immediately: Lictors •…e wa•…: we expo•…
you•… •…piety re•…olution.
Noble cozen,
you wrong your self extremely to refuse
so Eminent a place.
It is a means
to raise your kindred. Who shall dare t'oppose
himself against our Family, when yonder
shall sit your power, and frown?
Or banis•…t Rome!
I pray forbear a little. Marcus.
Sir.
How dost thou like my cunning?
I protest
I was be-agued, fearing le•…t the Senate
should have accepted at your feigned refusal.
See how your kindred and your friends are must•…red
to warm them at your sun-shine. Were you now
in prison, or arraigned before the Senate
for some suspect of treason, all these swallows
would fly your stormy winter, not one •…ing:
their Music is the Summer and the Spring.
Thou observe•…t shrewdly: well, •…e fit them •…ort.
I must be one of the Decemvir•…,
or banished Rome. Banish•… laugh, my trusty Marcus,
I am enforced to my ambition.
I have heard of cunning footmen that have worn
shoes made of lead some ten days fore a race
to give them nimble and more active feet:
so great men should, that 〈◊〉 eminent place,
load themselves with excuse and •…aint deny•…ll,
that they with more speed may perform the trial:
Mark his humility says one; how far
his dreams are from ambition▪ •…eyes another:
he would not show his Eloquence, lest that
should draw him into office: and a third
is meditating on some thrifty suite
to beg before dinner. Had I as many hands
as had Briarius, I'd extend them all
to catch this office; it was my sleeps disturber,
my diets ill digestion, my melancholy
past physics cure.
The Senators return.
My Lord, your answer.
To obey my Lord, and to know how to rule
doe differ much: to obey by nature comes,
but to command by long experience.
Never were great men in so eminent place
without their shadows. Envy will attend
on greatness till this general frame takes end.
Twixt these extremes of state and banishment,
my mind hath held long conflict, and at last
I thus return my answer, noble friends,
we now must part, necessity of State
compels it so.
I must inhabit, now a place unknown,
you see it compels me leave you. Fare you well.
To banishment, my Lord?
I am given up
to a long travel full of fear and danger,
to waste the day in sweat, and the cold night
in a most desolate contemplation,
banished from all my kindred and my friends,
yea banished from my self; for I accept
this honourable calling.
Worthy Appius,
the gods conduct you hither: Lictors, His robes.
We are made for ever, noble kinsman,
it was but to fright us.
But my loving kinsmen,
mistake me not, for what I spake was true,
bear witness all the gods: I told you first,
I was to inhabit in a place unknown;
it is very certain, for this reverend seat
receives me as a pupil, rather gives
ornament to the person, then our person
the least of grace to it. I showed you next
I am to travel; it is a certain truth:
Look by how much the labour of the mind
exceeds the bodies, so far am I •…and
with pain and industry, beyond the toil
of those that sweat in war, beyond the toil
of any Artisan, pale cheeks, and sunk eyes,
a head with watching dizzied, and a hair
turned white in youth, all these at a dear rate.
we purchase speedily that tend a State.
I told you I must leave you, it is most true.
Henceforth the face of a Barbarian
and yours shall be all one, henceforth Isle know you
but only by your virtue: brother or father
in dishonest suite shall be to me
as is the branded slave. Justice should have
no kindred, friends, nor foes, nor hate, nor love,
as free from passion as the gods above.
I was your friend and kinsman, now your Judge,
and whilst I hold the scales, a downy feather
shall as soon turn them as a mass of Pearl
or Diamonds.
Excellent, excellent Lapwing,
there's other stuff closed in that subtle breast.
He sings and beats his wings far from his nest.
So Gentlemen, I take it, here takes end
your business; my acquaintance, fare you well.
Here is a quick change, who did expect this cloud?
Thus men when they grow great doe strait grow proud.
Now to our present business at the camp:
the army that doth winter before Agidon,
is much distressed we hear: Minutius,
you with the levies and the little corn
this present dearth will yield, are speedily
to hasten thither, so to appease the mind
of the intemperate soldier.
I am ready
the levies doe attend me, our Lieutenant
send on our Troops.
Farewell Minutius.
the gods go with you, and be still at hand
to add a triumph to your bold command.
Noble Icilius. welcome, teach your self
a •…older freedom here, for by our love
your suite to my fair Niece doth parallel
her kindreds wishes. There's not in all Rome
a man that is by honour more approved
nor worthier, were you poor, to be beloved.
You give me (noble Lord) that character
which I cood never yet read in my self:
but from your censure shall I take much care
to adorn it with the fairest ornaments
of unambitious virtue: here I hold
my honourable pattern, one whose mind
appears more like a ceremonious chapel
full of sweet music, then a thronging presence.
I am confirmed, the court doth make some show
fairer then else they would doe; but her port
being simple virtue, beautifies the court,
It is a flattery (my Lord)
you breath upon me, and it shows much like
the borrowed painting which some Ladies use,
it is not to continue many days;
my wedding garments will outwear this praise.
Thus Ladies still foretell the funeral
of their Lords kindness.
But my Lord, what news?
Virginius, my Lord, your noble brother
disguised in dust and sweat, is new arrived
within the City: troops of artisans
follow his panting horse, and with a strange
confused noise, partly with joy to see him,
partly with fear for what his hast portends,
they show as if a sudden mutiny
orespread the City.
Cozen take your chamber.
What business from the camp?
Sure Sir it bears
the form of some great danger, for his horse
bloody with spurring, shows as if he came
from forth a battle: never did you see
amongst quails or cocks in fight a bloodier Heel,
then that your brother strikes with. In this form
of orespent horseman, having as it seems,
with the distracting of his news, forgot
house, friends, or change of raiment, he is gone
to th'Senate house.
Now the gods bring us safety,
the face of this is cloudy, let us haste
to'th Senate house, and there enquire how near
the body moves of this our threatened fear.
My Lord.
Thor trouble me.
My hand's as ready armed to work your peace
as my tongue bold to inquire your diseontents.
Good my Lord hear me.
I am at much variance
within my self, there's discord in my blood,
my powers are all in combat, I have nothing
left but sedition in me.
Trust my bosom
to be the closet of your private griefs.
Believe me, I am uncranied.
May I trust thee?
As the firm centre to endure the burden
of your light soot, as you would trust the poles
to bear on them this airy canopy,
and not to fear their shrinking. I am strong,
fixed and unshaking.
Art thou? Then thine ever: I love.
Ha ha he.
Can this my ponderous secrecy
be in thine ear so light? seems my disturbance
worthy such scorn that thou deride my griefs?
Believe me, Clodius, I am not a twig
that every gust can shake, but it is a tempest
that must be able to use violence
on my grown branches. Wherefore laugh thou then?
Not that you're moved, it makes me smile in scorn
that wise men cannot understand themselves,
nor know their own proved greatness. Clodius laughs not
to think you love, but that you are so hopeless
not to presume to enjoy whom you affect.
What's she in Rome your greatness cannot awe
or your rich purse purchase? Promises and thr•…ats
are statemens Lictors to arrest such pleasures
as they would bring within their strict commands;
why should my Lord droop, or deject his eye?
can you command Rome, and not countermand
a women's weakness? Let your Gr•…ce 〈◊〉
your purse and power on me. I'll prostrate you.
Ask both and lavish them to purchase •…ie
the rich fee-simple of Virginia's heart.
Virginia's!
Hers.
I have already found
an easy path which you may safely tread,
yet no man trace you.
Thou art my comforter.
Her father's busied in our foreign wars,
and there hath chief employment; all their pay
must your discretion scantly: keep it back,
restrain it in the common Treasury.
Thus may a states-man'gainst a soldier stand,
to keep his purse weak, whilst you arm his hand.
Her father thus kept low, gifts and rewards
will tempt the maid the sooner; nay happily draw
the father in to plead in your behalf.
But should these •…ail, then siege her Virgin Tower
with too prevailing engines, fear and power.
Go then and prove a speeding advocate;
Arm thee with all our bounty, oratory,
variety of promise.
L. Appius, the Decemvirate entreat
your voice in this days Senate. Old Virginius
craves audience from the camp with earnest suite
for quick dispatch.
We will attend the Senate.
Be gone.
We sent to you to assist us in this counsel
touching the expeditions of our war.
Ours is a willing presence to the trouble
of all State cares. Admit him from the camp.
Speak the camps will.
The camp wants money, we have store of knocks,
and wounds Gods pl•…nty, but we have no pay,
this three months did we never house our heads,
but in yon great star-chamber; never bedded
but in the cold field-beds, our vittaile fails us,
yet meet with no supply; we're fairly promised,
but soldiers cannot feed on promises;
all our provant, apparel's torn to rags,
and our Munition fails us: Will you send us
to fight for Rome like beggars? Noble Gentlemen,
are you the high State of Decemviri,
that have those things in manage? Pity us,
for we have need on it. Let not your delays
be cold to us, whose bloods have oft been heated
to gain you fame and riches. Prove not to us
(being our friends) worse foes then we fight with:
Let's not be starved in kindness. Sleep you now
upon the bench, when your deaf ears should listen
unto the wretchlesse clamours of the poor?
Then would I had my Drums here, they might rattle,
and rouse you to attendance. Most grave Fathers,
show your selves worthy stewards to our Mother
fair Rome, to whom we are no bastard sons,
though we be soldiers. She hath in her store
food to maintain life in the Camp, as well
as surfeit for the City. Do not save
the foe a labour; send us some supply,
lest ere they kill us, we by famine die.
Shall I (my Lords) give answer to this soldier?
Be you the Cities voice.
Virginius, we would have you thus possessed,
we sit not here to be prescib'd and taught,
nor to have any suitor give us limit,
whose power admits no curb. Next know, Virginius,
the Camp's our servant, and must be disposed,
controlled and used by us, that have the strength
to knit it or dissolve it. When we please
out of our Princely grace and clemency
to look upon your wants, it may be then
we shall redress them: But till then, it fits not
that any petty fellow waged by us
should have a tongue found here before a Bench
of such grave Auditors. Further,—
Pray give me leave,
Not here? pray Appius, is not this the Judgment seat?
Where should a poor mans cause be heard but here?
To you the Statists of long flourishing Rome,
to you I call, If you have charity,
if you be humane, and not quite given ore
to Furs and Metal, if you be Romans,
if you have any soldiers blood at all
flow in your veins, help with your able arms
to prop a sinking camp, an infinite
of fair Rome's sons, cold, weak, hungry, and clothles,
would feed upon your surfeit. Will you save them,
or shall they perish?
What we will, we will,
be that your answer: perhaps at further leisure
We will help you, not your merit but our pleasure.
I will not curse thee, Appius, but I wish
thou were in the camp amongst the Mutineers
to tell my answers, not to trouble me.
Make you us dogs, yet not allow us bones?
Oh what are soldiers come too! Shall your camp.
the strength of all your peace, and the iron wall
that rings this Pomp in from invasive steel;
shall that decay? Then let the foreign fires
climb o'er these buildings; let the sword and slaughter
chase the gowned Senate through the streets of Rome.
to double dye their robes in Scarlet; let
the enemies stripped arm have his crimsoned browns
up to the elbows in your traitorous blood;
Let Ianus Temple be devolved, your Treasures
ripped up to pay the common adversaries
with our due wages. Do you look for less?
the rottenness of this misgoverned State
must grow to some Disease, incurable
save with a sack or slaughter.
You're too bold.
Know you our extremities?
We do.
And will not help them?
Yes.
When?
Hereafter.
Hereafter? when so many gallant spirits
that yet may stand betwixt you and destruction,
are sunk in death? Hereafter? when disorder
hath swallowed all our Forces?
We will hear no more.
Peace, fellow peace, know the Decemviri,
and their Authority; we shall commit you else.
Do so, and I shall thank you; be relieved
and have a strong house o'er me, fear no Alarms
given in the night by any quick perdue.
Your Guilty in the City feeds more dainty
then doth your General. It is a better Office
to be an under Keeper then a Captain;
The gods of Rome amend it.
Break up the Senate.
And shall I have no answer?
So farewell.
What Slave would be a soldier to be censured
by such as ne'er saw danger? To have out pay,
our words and merits •…allano'd in the scale
of base moth-eaten peace. I have had wounds
would have made all this Bench faint and look pale
but to behold them searched. They lay their heads
on their soft pillow•…, pore upon then bags,
grow fat with laziness and resty 〈◊〉.
And us that stand betwixt them and disaster
they will not spare a Drachma. O my soldiers,
before you want, I'll sell my small possessions
even to my skin to help you, Plate and Jewels
all shall be yours. Men that are men indeed,
the earth shall find, the Sun and air must feed.
Your daughter, noble brother, heating late
of your arrvial from the Camp, most humbly
prostrates her filial Duty.
Daughter rise.
And brother I am only rich in her,
and in your love, link'•… with the honoured friendship
of those fair Roman Lords. For you Icilius,
I hear I must adopt you with the title
of a new son; you are Virginia's chief,
and I am proud she hath built her fair election
Upon such store of virtues. May you grow,
although a Cities child, to know a soldier
and rate him to his merit.
Noble father,
(for henceforth I shall only use that name)
Our meeting was to urge you to the process
of our fair contract.
Witness Gentlemen,
here I give up a fathers interest,
but not a fathers love, that I will ever
wear next my heart, for 〈◊〉 was born with her
•…d grows still with my age.
Icilius,
receive her: witness noble Gentlemen.
With all my heart. I would Icilius could do as much
for me; but Rome affords not such another Virginia.
I am my fathers daughter, and by him
I must be swayed in all things.
Brother, this happy Contract asks a Feast,
as a thing due to such solemnities.
It shall be at my house, where we this night
will sport away some hours.
I must to horse.
What, ride to night?
Must see the Camp to night.
It is full of trouble and distracted fears,
and may grow mutinous. I am bent to ride.
To night?
I am engaged: short farwels now must serve,
the universal business calls me hence,
that touches a whole people. Rome, I fear,
thou wilt pay use for what thou dost forbear.
SIrrah, go tell Calpharina, I am walking
to take the air: entreat her company.
Say I attend her coming.
Madam, I shall: but if you could walk abroad, and get an Heir, it were better, for your father hath a fair revenue, and never a son to inherit.
You are, sirrah—
Yes I am sirrah: but not the party that is born to do that; though I have no Lorships, yet I have so much manners to give my betters place.
Whom mean you by your betters?
I hope I have learnt to know the three degrees of comp∣rison: for though I be bonus, and you melior as well as mulier; yet my Lord Icilius is optimus.
I see there's nothing in such private done,
but you must inquire after.
And can you blame us (Madam) to long for the merry day, as you do for the merry night?
Will you be gone sir? (•…nd.
Oh yes, to my Lady 〈◊〉. I remember my er-
My father's wondrous 〈◊〉, and withal
with a suppressed rage left his house displeased,
and so in post is hurried to the camp:
it sad me much; to expel which melancholy,
I have sent for company.
This opportunity was •…ely waited,
it is the best part of a politician
when he would compass ought to fame his industry
wisely to waite the advantage of the hours,
his happy minutes are not always present.
Express your greatest art, Virginia hears you,
Oh I conceive the occasion of this harmony.
Icilius sent it, I must thank his kindness.
Let not Virginia wate her contemplation
so high, to call this visit an intrusion;
for when she understands I took my message
from one that did compose it with affection,
I know she will not only extend pardon,
but grace it with her favour.
You mediate excuse for courtesies,
as if I were so 〈◊〉 of civ•…y,
not to esteem it worthy of my thanks;
assure your self I could be longer patient
to hear my ears so feasted.
Join all your voices till you make the air
proud to usurp your no•…s, and to please her
with a sweet echo; serve Virginias pleasure.
As you have been so full of gentleness
to hear with patience what was brought to serve you
so hearken with your usual clemency
•…o the relation of a lovers sufferings:
your figure still does revel in his dreams,
he banquets on your memory, yet finds
not thoughts enough to satisfy his wishes,
as if Virginia had composed his heart,
and fills it with her beauty.
I see he is a miser in his wishes,
and thinks he never has enough of that
which only he possesses: but to give
his wishes satisfaction, let him know
his heart and mine do•… 〈◊〉 so near together,
that hourly they converse, and guard each other.
Is fair Virginia confident she knows
her favour dwells with the same man I plead for?
—Unto Icilius.
Worthy fair one,
I would not wrong your worth so to employ
my language for a man so much beneath
the merit of your beauty: he I plead for
has power to make your beauty populous,
your frown shall awe the world, and in your smile
great Rome shall build her happiness;
honour and wealth shall not be styled companions,
but servants to your pleasure.
Then shall Icilius (but a refined Citizen)
boast your affection, when Lord Appius loves you.
Bless his great Lordship, I was much mistaken,
let thy Lord know, thou Advocate of lust,
all the intentions of that youth are honourable,
whilst his are filled with sensuality.
And for a final resolution know,
our hearts in love like twins alike shall grow.
Had I a wife, or daughter that could please him
I would devote her to him, but I must
shadow this scorn, and sooth him still in lust.
What news yet of Virginius return?
Not any.
O the misery of Soldiers!
They doubly starve us with fair promises.
We spread the earth like hail, or new reaped corn
in this fierce famine; and yet patiently
make our obedience the confined •…isle
that starves us:
Soldiers, let us draw our swords
while we have strength to use them.
It is a motion
which nature and necessity commands.
You're of Virginius Regiment.
We are.
Why doe you swarm in troops thus? to your quarter.
Is our command grown idle? to your trench.
Come I'll divide you, this your conference
is not without suspect of mutiny.
Soldiers, shall I relate the grievances.
of the whole Regiment.
Boldly.
Then thus my Lord.
Come, I will not hear thee,
Sir you shall:
Sound all the Drums and Trumpets in the camp,
to drown my utterance, yet above them all
I'll rear our just complaint. Stir not my Lord,
I vow you are not safe if you but move
a sinew till you hear us.
Well sir, command us: you are the General.
No my Lord, not I,
I am almost starved; I wake in the wet trench,
loaded with more cold iron then a Jail
would give a murderer, while the General
sleeps in a field bed, and to mock our hunger
feeds us with scent of the most curious fare
that makes his tables crack, our pay detained
by those that are our Leaders: and at once
we in this sad, and unprepared plight,
with the Enemy, and Famine daily sight.
Doe you threaten us?
Sir you shall hear him out.
You send us whips, and iron manackles,
and shackles plenty, but the devil a coin.
Would you would teach us that caniball trick, my Lord,
which some rich men in the City oft doe use:
shall's one devour another?
Will you hear me?
O Rome you are grown a most unnatural mother,
to those have held thee by the golden locks
from sinking into ruin; Romulus
was fed by a she wolf, but now our wolves
instead of feeding us devour our flesh,
carouse our blood, yet are not drunk with it,
for three parts of 't is water.
Your Captain,
noble Virginius is sent Rome,
for ease of all your grievances.
It is false.
I, It is false.
Hoe's stolen away from his, never to return,
and now his age will suffer him no more
deal on the Enemy, belike he will •…rne
an usurer, and in the City air
cut poor men's throats at home sitting in's chair.
You wrong one of the honorablest Commanders.
Honourable Commander?
Commander? I my Lord, there goes the thrist
in victories, the General and Commanders
share all the honour as they share the spoil;
but in our overthrows, where lies the blame?
the common soldiers fault, ours is the shame.
What is the reason that being so far distant
from the affrighted enemy? wee lie
in the open field, subject to the sick humours
of heaven and earth: unless you cood bestow
two summers of us? shall I tell you truth,
You account the expense of Engines, and of swords,
of horses and of armour dearer far,
then soldiers lives.
Now by the gods you doe.
Observe you not the ravens and the crows
have left the City surfeit, and with us
they make full banquets. Come you birds of death,
and fill your greedy croppes with humane flesh;
then to the City fly, disgorge it there
before the Senate, and from thence arise
a plague to choke all Rome. Omnes. And all the Suburbs▪
Upon a soldiers word, bold Gentlemen,
I expect every hour Virginius
to bring fresh comfort.
Whom? Virginius?
Now by the gods, if ever he return,
we'll drag him to the slaughter by his locks,
turned white with riot and incontinence,
and leave a president to all the world,
how Captains use their soldiers.
See, hoe's returned▪
Virginius, you are not safe, retire,
your troops are mutinous, we are begirt
with Enemies more daring, and more fierce,
then is the common foe.
My Troops, my Lord?
Your life is threatened by these desperate men,
betake you to your horse.
My noble Lord,
I never yet p•…oiest to teach the art
of •…ying. 〈◊〉, out troops grown mutinous?
he dares not look on me with half a 〈◊〉
that spread this wildfire. Where is our Lieutenant?
My Lord.
Sirrah, order our companies.
What do you mean, my Lord?
Take air a little, they have heated me.
Sirrah, i'st you will mutiny?
Not I Sir.
Is your gall burst, you Traitor?
The gods defend Sir.
Or is your stomach sea sick, doth it rise?
I'll make a passage for it.
Noble Captain, I'll dye beneath your foot.
You rough porcupine, ha.
do you bristle, do you shoot your quills you rogue?
They have no points to hurt you, noble Captain.
Wast you (my nimble shaver) that would whet
your sword against your Commanders throat, you sirrah?
My Lord I never dream't on it.
Slaves and cowards,
what are you choleric now? by the gods
the way to purge it were to let you blood.
I am in the center of you, and I'll make
the proudest of you teach the Aspen leaf
to tremble, when I breath.
A strange Conversion.
Advance your pikes. The word,
Advance your pikes.
See noble Lord these are no Mutineers,
these are obedient soldiers, civil men:
You shall command these, if your Lordship please,
to fill a ditch up with their slaughtered bodies,
that with more ease you may assault some Town.
So now lay down your Arms. Villains and Traitors,
I here cashier you. Hence from me my poison,
not worthy of our Discipline: Go beg,
go beg, you mutinous rogues, brag of the service
you ne'er durst look on; it were charity
to hang you, for my mind gives, you're reserved
to rob poor market women.
O Viginius.
I do beseech you to confirm my sentence,
as you respect me. I will stand my self
for the whole Regiment, and safer far
in mine own single valour, then begirt
with cowards and with traitors.
O my Lord, you are too severe.
Now by the gods, my Lord,
you know no discipline, to pity them.
Precious devils? no sooner my back turned,
but presently to mutiny?
dear Captain.
Refuse me if such traitorous rogues
would not confound an Army. When doe you march?
when doe you march, gentlemen?
My Lord, we'll starve first,
we'll hang first, by the gods, doe any thing
ere we'll forsake you.
Good Virginius,
limit your passion.
Sir, you may take my place,
not my just anger from me: these are they
have bred a dearth in the camp: I'll wish our foes
no greater plague then to have their company:
show but among them all so many scars
as stick upon this flesh, I'll pardon them.
How now, my Lord, breathless?
By your favour. I ha said.
Mischiefs confound me if I could not wish
my youth renewed again, with all her sollies,
only to'ave breath enough to rail against
these—It is too short.
See Gentlemen, what strange distraction
your falling off from duty hath begot
in this most noble soldier: You may live
the meanest of you to command a Troop,
and then in others you'll correct those faults,
which in your selves you cherished, every Captain
bears in his private government that form,
which Kings should ore their Subjects, and to them
should be the like obedient. We confess
you have been distressed: but can you justly challenge
any commander that hath surfeited,
while that your food was limited? You cannot.
My Lord, I have shared with them an equal for▪
hunger, and cold, marched thorough watery fens, tune,
borne as great burdens as the pioneer,
when scarce the ground would bear me.
Good my Lord, give us leave to proceed;
the punishment your Captain hath inflicted
is not sufficient; for it cannot bring
any example to succeeding 〈◊〉
of penance worth your faulting: happily
it may in you beget a certain shame;
But it will in others a strong hope
of the like lenity. Yet gentlemen,
you have in one thing given me such a taste
of your obedience; when the fire was raised
of fierce sedition, and the cheek was swollen
to sound the fatal Trumpet, then the sight
of this your worthy Captain did disperse
all those unfruitful humours, and even then
convert you from fierce Tigers to stayed men:
we therefore pardon you, and doe restore
your Captain to you, you unto your Captain.
The gods requite you, noble General.
My Lord, my Lord:
Your pardon noble Captain.
Well, you are the General, and the fault is quit,
a soldiers tears, an elder brothers wit
have little fault in them, nor doe they season
things worth observing, for their want of reason.
Take up your arms and use them, doe I pray,
ere long you'll take your 〈◊〉 to run away.
And what supply from Rome?
Good store of corn.
What entertainment there?
Most honourable,
especially by the Lord Appius.
There is great hope that Appius will grow
the soldiers patron: with what vehemence
he urged our wants, and with what expedition
he hasted the supplies, it is almost
i•…redible. There's promised to the soldier
besides their corn a bounteous donative;
but it is not certain yet when't shall be paid.
How for your own particular?
My Lord,
I was not enter•…d fully two pikes length
into the Senate, but they all stood bare,
and each man offered me his seat: The business
for which I went dispatcht, what gifts, what favours
were done me, your good Lordship shall not hear,
for you would wonder at them, only this,
it would make a man fight up to'th' neck in blood,
to think how nobly he shall be received
when he returns to'th' City.
It is well,
give order the provision be divided
and sent to every quarter.
Sir, it shall.
Thus men must flight their wrongs, or else conceal them,
when general safety wills us not reveal them.
Pray is your Lord at leisure?
What is your suite?
To accept this poor Petition which makes known,
my many wrongs in which I crave his Justice,
and upright sentence to support my cause,
which else is trod down by oppression.
My Lords hand is the prop of Innocence,
and if your cause be worthy his supportance
it cannot fall.
The gods of Rome protect him.
What, is your paper too petitionary?
It leanes upon the Justice of the Judge,
your noble Lord, the very stay of Rome.
And surer basis, for a poor mans cause,
she cannot yield. Your papers I'll deliver,
and when my Lord ascends the Judgement seat,
you shall find gracious comfort.
Whore's your Lord?
Icilius? fair Virginia's late betrothed?
Your ears, I hope, you have not forfeited,
that you return no answer. Whore's your Lord?
It's study.
I desire admittance to him.
Please you attend, I'll know his Lordships pleasure.
Icilius? I pray heaven she have not blabbed.
Attend? a petty Lawyer t'other day,
glad of a fee, but called to eminent place,
even to his betters, now the word's, Attend.
This gowned office, what a breadth it bears?
how many tempests waite upon his frown?
All the petitioners withdraw. L. Appius
must have this place more private▪ as a favour,
reserved for you, Icilius. Here's my Lord.
Be gone, this place is only spared for us,
and you Icilius. Now your business.
May I speak it freely?
We have suffering ears,
A heart the sof•…est down may penetrate.
Proceed.
My Lord.
We are private, Pray your courtefie.
My duty.
Leave that to the public eye
of Rome, and of Romes people. Clodius there.
My Lord.
Place me a second Chair; that done,
remove your self. So now, your absence Clodius.
Icilius sit, this grace we make not common
unto the noblest Roman, but to you
our love affords it freely. Now your suit?
It is, you would be kind unto the Camp.
Wherein, Icilius, doth the Camp touch thee?
Thus: Old Virginius, now my father in Law,
kept from the public pay, consumes himself,
sells his Revenues, turns his plate to coin,
to wage his soldiers, and supply the Camp,
wasting that useful substance which indeed
should rise to me, as my Virginia's Dowry.
We meet that opposition thus Icilius.
The Camps supplies doth not consist in us,
but those that keep the common Treasury;
speak or entreat we may, but not command.
But Sir, I wonder, you so brave a Youth,
son to a thrifty Roman, should ally you,
and knit your strong arms to such falling branches;
which rather in their ruin will bear down
your strength, then you support their rottenness.
Be swayed by me, fly from that ruinous house.
whose fall may crush you; and contract with mine,
whose bases are of Marble, deeply fixed
to •…uger all gusts and impending storms.
Ca•… off that beggars daughter, poor Virginia,
whose dowry and beauty, I'll see trebled both,
in one •…lly'd to me. Smile you Icilius?
My Lord, my Lord, think you, I can imagine
your close and sparing hand can be profuse
to give that man a Palace, whom you late
denied a cottage? Will you from your own coffers
grant me a treble Dowry, yet interpose me
a poor third from the common Treasury?
You must move me by possibilities,
for I have brains; give first your hand and Seal,
that old Virginius shall receive his pay
both for himself and soldiers, and that done,
I shall perhaps be soon induced to think,
that you who with such willingness did that—
Is my Love mispriz'd?
Not to Virginia.
Virginia?
Yes Virginia, Lustful Lord.
I did but trace your cunning all this while.
You would bestow me on some Appian Trull,
and for that dross to cheat me of my Gold;
for this the Camp pines, and the City smarts.
All Rome fares worse for thy incontinence.
Mine boy?
Thine Judge. This hand hath intercepted
thy Letters, and perused thy tempting guests,
these ears have heard thy amorous passions, wretch,
these eyes beheld thy treacherous name subscribed.
A Judge, a Devil.
Come In•…hear no more.
Sit still, or by the powerful Gods of Rome
I'll nail thee to the Chair. But suffer me,
I'll offend nothing but thine ears.
Our Secretary.
Tempt not a Lovers fury, if thou dost
now by my vow, insculpt in heaven, I'll send thee.—
You see I am patient.
But withal revengeless.
So, say on.
Hope not of any grace, or the least favour,
I am so covetous of Virginia's love,
I cannot spare thee the least look, glance, touch.
Divide one bare imaginary thought
into a thousand, thousand parts, and that
I'll not afford thee.
Thou shalt not.
Nay, I will not.
Had thou a Judges place above those Judges
that judge all souls, having power to sentence me,
I would not bribe thee, no not with one hair
from her fair temples.
Thou should not.
Nay, I would not.
Think not her Beauty shall have leave to crown
thy lustful hopes with the least spark of bliss,
or have thine ears charmed with the ravishing sound
even of her harshest phrase.
I will not.
Nay, thou shalt not.
Shoe's mine, my soul is crowned in her desire,
to her I'd travel through a land of fire.
Now have you done?
I have spoke my thoughts.
Then will thy fury give me leave to speak?
I pray say on.
Icilius, I must chide you, and withal
tell you, your rashness hath made forfeiture
even of your precious life, which wee esteem
too deer to call in question. I•… I wished you
of my alliance, graft into my blood,
condemn you me for that? Oh see the rashness
and blind misprision of 〈◊〉 youth!
As for the Maid Virginia, wee are far
even in least thought from her; and for those Letters,
Tokens and Presents, wee acknowledge none.
Alas, though great in place, wee are not gods.
If any false impostor hath usurped
our hand or greatness in his own behoof,
can wee help that? Icilius, there's our hand,
your rashness we remit; let's have hereafter
your love and best opinion. For your suit,
repair to us at both our better leisures,
we'll breathe in it new life.
I crave your •…don.
Granted ere craved, my good Icilius.
—Morrow.
It is no more indeed. Morrow Icilius.
If any of our servants wait, without,
command them in.
I shall.
Our Secretary,
we have use for him. Icilius, send him hither.
Again good morrow.
Go to thy death, thy life is doomed and cast.
Appius be circumspect, and be not rash
in blood as you are in lust: Be murderous still,
but when thou strik'st, with unseen weapons kill.
My Honourable Lord.
Deride me, dog?
Who hath stirred up this tempest in your brow?
Not you? Fie, you?
All you Pantheon Gods,
confound me, if my soul be accessory
to your distractions.
To send a ruffian higher,
even to my closet, first, to brave my Greatness,
play with my beard, revile me, taunt me, hiss me;
nay after all these deep disparagements,
threat me with steel, and menace me unarmed,
to nail me to my seat, if I but moved:
all these are slight, slight toys.
Icilius do this?
Ruffian Icilius, he that in the front
of a smooth Citizen, bears the rugged soul
of a most base Bandetto.
He shall die for it.
Be not too rash.
Were there no more men to support great Rome,
even falling Rome should perish, ere he stand:
I'll after him, and kill him.
Stay, I charge thee.
Lend me a patient ear; To right our wrongs,
we must not menace with a public hand;
we stand in the worlds eye, and shall be taxed
of the least violence, where we revenge:
We should smile smoothest where our hate's most deep,
and when our spleen's broad waking, seem to sleep.
Let the young man play still upon the bit,
till we have brought and trained him to our lure;
Great men should strike but once, and then strike sure.
Love you Virginia still?
Do I still live?
Then she's your own. Virginius is, you say,
still in the Camp.
True.
Now in his absence will I claim Virginia
to be the daughter of a bond woman,
and slave to me; to prove which, I'll produce
firm proofs, notes probable, sound Witnesses;
then having with your Lictors summoned her,
I'll bring the cause before your Judgement Seat,
where, upon my infallid evidence,
you may pronounce the sentence on my side,
and she become your Strumpet not your Bride.
Thou hast a copius brain, but how in this
shall we dispose Icilius?
If he spurn
clap him up close, there's ways to charm his spleen.
By this no scandal can redound to you;
the Cause is mine; you but the Sentencer
upon that evidence which I shall bring.
The business is, to 'ave Warrants by Arrest.
to answer such things at the Judgment Bar
as can be laid against her; Ere her friends
can be assembled, ere her self can study
her answer or scarce know her cause of summons
to descant on the matter, Appius may
examine, try, and doom Virginia.
But all this must be sudden.
Thou art born
to mount me high above Icilius scorn.
I'll leave it to thy manage.
WHat was that you said, Nurse?
Why, I did say thou must bestir thy self.
I warrant you I can bestir my stumps as soon as ano∣there, if fit occasion be offered; but why do you come upon me in such haste? is it because (Nurse) I should come over you at leisure?
Come over me, thou knave? what dost thou mean by that?
Only this, if you will come off, I will come on.
My Lord hath strangers to night: you must make ready the Parlour, a table and lights; nay when, I say?
Me thinks you should rather wish for a bed then for a board, for darkness then for lights; yet I must confess you have been a light woman in your time: but now.
But now? what now, you knave?
But now I'll go fetch the table and some lights presently.
Some lights to usher in these Gentlemen,
Clear all the rooms without there. Sit, pray sit.
None interrupt our conference.
Ha, whose that?
My most—child, if it please you.
Fair Virginia, you are welcome.
The rest forbear us till we call. Sweet cozen,
our business, and the cause of our discourse
admits you to this Council. Take your place.
Ieilius we are private, now proceed.
Then thus; Lord Appius doth intend me wrong,
and under his smooth calmness cloaks a tempest,
that will ere long break out in violence
on me and on my fortunes.
My good cozen,
you are young, and youth breeds rashness. Can I think
Lord Appius will do wrong, who is all Justice,
the most austere and upright Censurer
that ever sate upon the awful Bench?
Icilius, you are near to me in blood,
and I esteem your safety as mine own.
If you will needs wage eminence and state,
Choose out a weaker opposite, not one
that in his arm bears all the strength of Rome.
Besides Icilius,
know you the danger what it is to scandal
one of his place and sway?
I know it kinsmen, yet this popular Greatness
can be no bug-bear to affright mine innocence.
No his smooth crest hath cast a palped film
over Romes eyes. He juggles, a plain Juggler.
Lord Appius is no less.
Nay, then Cozen,
you are too harsh, and I must hear no more.
It ill becomes my place and gravity,
to lend a face to such reproachful terms
against one of his high presence.
Sit, pray sit.
to see me draw his picture before your eyes,
to make this man seem monstrous, and this god
Rome so adores, a devil, a plain devil.
This Lord, this Judge, this Appius, that professes
to all the world a vestal chastity,
is an incontinent, loose Lecher grown.
Fie cozen.
Nay it is true. Daily and hourly
he tempts this blushing Virgin with large promises,
with melting words and Presents of high rate,
to be the stale to his unchaste desires.
Is it possible?
Possible?
It is actual Truth, I pray but ask your Niece.
Most true, I am extremely tired and wearied
with messages and tokens of his love;
no answer, no repulse will satisfy
the tediousness of his importunate suit.
And whilst I could with modesty and honour,
without the danger of reproach and shame,
I kept it secret from Icilius;
but when I saw their boldness found no limit,
and they from fair entreaty grew to threats,
I told him all.
True: understanding which
to him I went.
To Appius?
To that Giant,
the high Colossus that bestrides us all;
I went to him.
How did you bear your self?
Like Appius, at the first, dissemblingly,
but when I saw the coast clear, all withdrawn,
and none but we two in the Lobby, then
I drew my Poinyard, took him by the throat,
and when he would have clamoured, threatened death,
unless he would with pa•…ence hear me out.
Did he, Icilius?
I made him that he durst not squeak,
not move an eye, not draw a breath too loud,
nor stir a finger.
What succeeded then?
Keep fast the door there: Sweet Cos not too loud.
What then succeeded?
Why, I told him all,
gave him his due, called him lascivious Judge,
(a thousand things which I have now forgot)
showed him his hand a witness against himself,
and every thing with such known circumstance,
that he might well excuse, but not deny.
How parted you?
Why Friends, in outward show.
But I perceived his heart: that Hypocrite
was born to gull Rome, and deceive us all.
He swore to me quite to abjure her love;
yet ere my self could reach Virginia's chamber,
one was before me with regreets from him,
I know his hand. The intent of this our meeting
was to entreat your counsel and advice:
The good old man her Father is from home,
I think it good that she now in his absence
should lodge in secret with some private friend,
where Appius nor his Lictors, those blood-hounds
can hunt her out. You are her uncle Sir,
I pray counsel the best.
To oppose our selves
now in this heat against so great a man,
might in my judgment to our selves bring danger,
and to my Niece no safety. If we fall
she cannot stand; lets then preserve our selves
until her father be discharged the Camp.
And good Icilius, for your private ends,
and the dear safety of your friends and kindred,
against that Statist, spare to use your spleen.
I will be swayed by you. My Lords, it is late,
and time to break up conference. Noble Uncle
I am your growing Debtor.
Lights without there.
I will conduct Virginia to her lodging.
Good night to all at once.
The Gods of Rome protect you all, and then
we need not fear the envious rage of men.
bestow your selves in some close shops,
about the forum, till you have the sight
of fair Virginia, for I understand
this present morning she'll come forth to buy
some necessaries at the Sempsters shops:
how ere accompanied be it your care
to seas her at our action. Good my friends,
disperse your selves, and keep a careful watch.
It is strange that Ladies will not pay their debts.
'It were strange indeed, if that our Roman Knights.
would give them good example and pay theirs.
The Calender that we Lictors go by, is all dog days.
Right, our common hunt is still to dog unthrifts.
And whats your book of common-prayer?
Faith only for the increase of riotous young Gentlemen in the country, and banquerouts in the City.
I know no man more valiant then we are, for wee
back Knights and Gentlemen daily.
Right, we have them by the back hourly: your French fly ap∣plied to the nape of the neck for the French Rheum, is not so sore a drawer as a Lictor.
Some say that if a little timbered fellow would just•…e a great lo∣gerhead, let him be sure to lay him in the kennel; but when we shoulder a Knight, or a Knights fellow, we make him more sure, for we ken∣nil him in the counter.
Come, lets about our business.
You are grown wondrous amorous of late,
why doe you look back so often?
Madam, I go as a Frenchman rides, all upon one buttock.
And what's the reason?
Your Ladyship never saw a Monkey in all your life time have a clog it's tail, but hoe's still looking back to see what the devil it is that follows him.
Very good, we are your clogs then.
Your crest is grown regardant; here's the beauty▪
that makes your eyes forgetful of their way.
Beauty? O the gods! Madam I cannot endure her com-
Why sir, what's my complexion? (plexion.
Thy complexion is just between a moore &amp; a french woman.
But she hath a matchless eye sir,
True, her eyes are not right matches, besides she is a widow.
What then, I pray you?
Of all waters I would not have my beef powdered with a widows tears.
Why, I beseech you?
O they are too fresh Madam, assure your self they will not last for the death of fourteen husbands above a day and a quar∣la; besides, if a man come a wooing to a widow, and invite her to a banquet contrary to the old rule, she will sooner fill her eye then her belly. Besides that, if he look into her estate, first, look you, Here are four fingers, first the charge of her husbands funeral, next debts, and legacies, and lastly the reversion; now take away debts and lega∣cies, and what remains for her second husband?
I would some of the Tribe heard you.
There's a certain fish, that as the learned divulge, is called a shark. Now this fish can never feed while he swims upon's bell∣lie, marry when he lies upon his back, oh he takes it at pleasure.
Well sir, about your business, make provision
of those things I directed.
Sweet Lady, these eyes shall be the clerks of the kitchen for your belly; but I can assure you Woodcocks will be hard to be spoke with, for there's a great feast towards.
You are very pleasant.
And fresh cod is taken down thick and threefold, women without great bellies go together by the ears for it, and such a number∣ber of sweet toothed ca•…ers in the market, not a calves head to be got for love or money; Muttons mutton now.
Why, was it not so ever?
No Madam, the sinners in the Suburbs had almost tan the •…me quite away from it, it was so cheap and common: but now it is at a sweet reckoning, the Term time is the muttonmonger in the whole calender.
Doe your Lawyers eat any sallet•… with their mutton.
Yes, the younger revellers use capers to their mutton, so long till with their shuffling and cutting some of them be out at heals again. A bountiful mind and a full purse ever attend your Lady∣ship.
O I thank you.
See, yon's the Lady.
I will buy up for your Ladyship all the young cuckoos in the market.
What to doe?
O it is the most deli•…attest dish Isle assure you, and newest in fish on: not a great feast in all Rome without a cuckoo.
Virginia. Verge. Sir.
Mistress you doe not know me,
yet we must be acquainted: follow me.
You doe salute me strangely. Follow you.
Doe you hear sir, me thinks you have followers enough. Many Gentlemen that I know, would not have so many tall followers as you have for the price often 〈◊〉 geldings, I'll assure you.
Come, will you go?
Whither? by what command?
By warrant of these men, and privilege
I hold even on thy life. Comeye proud dame,
you are not what you seem.
Uncivil sir,
what makes you thus familiar and thus bold?
Unhand me villain.
What Mistress, to your Lord?
he that can set the raso•… to your throat,
and punish you as freely as the gods,
no man to ask the cause? Thou art my slave,
and here I seas what's mine.
Ignoble villain,
I am as free as the best King or Consul
since Romulus. What dost thou mean? Unhand me.
Give notice to my uncle and Icilius,
what violence is offered me▪ Clod. Doe, doe.
Doe you press women for •…diers, or do you beg women, instead of other commodities; to keep your hands in •…e? By this light if thou hast any ears on thy head, as it is a question, I'll make my Lord pull you out by the ears, though you take a Castle.
Come, will you go along?
Whither should she go sir? here's pulling and haling a poor Gentlewoman.
Hold you your prating reverence, the whip
shall cease on you for your smooth cozenage.
Are not you servant to Lord Appius.
How ere I am your Lord, and will approve it
before all the Senate.
Thou wilt prove thy self
the cursed pander for another lust,
and this your plot shall burst about your Ears
like thunderbo•…ts.
Hold you that confidence,
first I will 〈◊〉 you by 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 co•… of l•…,
And then I'll •…alke with you.
How now, fair 〈◊〉
How now, Gen•…?
What's the offence of fair Virginia,
you bend your weapons on us?
Sir stand back, we fear a rescue.
There's no need of fear,
where there's no cause of rescue: what's the matter?
O my Icilius! Your incredulity
hath quite undone me, I am now no more
Virginius daughter, so this villain urges;
But published for his bond woman.
How's this?
It is true my Lord,
and I will take my right by course of Law.
Villains set her free,
or by the power of all our Roman gods,
I'll give that just revenge unto my rage
which should be given to Justice. Bondwoman?
Sir, we doe not come to fight, we'll deal
By course of Law. My Lord we fear a rescue.
A rescue? never fear't, here's none in presence
but civil men. My Lord, I am glad to see you.
Noble Icilius, we shall ever love you.
Now Gentlemen reach your Petitions.
My Lord, my Lord.
Worthy Icilius, if you have any business defer't
until tomorrow, or the afternoon,
I shall be proud to pleasure you.
The Fox is earth't, my Lord you cannot wind him yet.
Stools for my noble friends.—I pray you sit
May it please your Lordship.
Why uncivil sir?
have I not begged for bearance of my best
and dearest friends, and must you trouble me?
My Lord, I must be heard, and will be heard,
were all the gods in Parliament, I'd burst
their silence with my importunity,
but they should hear me.
The fellow's mad;
we have no leisure now to hear you sir.
Hast now no leisure to hear just complaints?
Resign thy place O Appius, that some other
may doe me Justice then.
We'll hear't to morrow.
O my Lord,
Deny me Justice absolutely, rather
them feed me with delays.
Good my Lord hear him,
and wonder when you hear him, that a case
so full of vile Imposture, should desire
to be unfolded.
I my Lord, it is true,
the Imposture is on their parts.
Hold your prating,
away with him to prison, clamorous fellow.
Suspect you our uprightness?
No my Lord:
but I have mighty Enemies, my Lord,
will overflow my cause. See, here I hold
my bondwoman that brags her self to be
descended of a noble family.
My purse is too scant to wage Law with them,
I am infor•…'t be mine own advocate,
not one will plead for me. Now if your Lordship
will doe me justice so, if not then know
high hills are safe, when seas poor dales or▪ eflow.
Sir, I think it fit to let you know,
ever you proceed in this your subtle suite,
what penalty and danger you acrne,
if you be found to double. Here's a virgin
famous by birth, by education noble,
and she forsooth, happily but to draw
some piece of money from her worthy father,
must needs be challenged for a bondwoman.
Sir take heed, and well bethink your self,
I'll make you a president to all the world,
If I but find you tripping.
Doe it freely.
and view on that condition these just proofs.
Is that the Virgins nurse.
He•… milc•… Nurse my Lord, I had a sore hand with her for a year and a quarter, I have had somewhat to doe with her since too, for the poor Gentlewoman hath been so troubled with the green sickness.
I pray thee Nurse entreat Sertorius
to come and speak with me.
Here is strange circumstance, view it my Lord,
if he should prove this, it would make Virginius
think he were wronged.
There is a devilish cunning
expressed in this black forgery.
Icilius and Virginia, pray come near,
compound with this base fellow. You were better
disburse some trifle then to undergo
the question of her freedom.
O my Lord!
she were not worth a handful of a bride,
if she did need a bribe.
Nay, take your course,
I only give you my opinion,
I ask no fee for it. Do you know this fellow?
Yes my Lord, he's your servant.
You're in the right:
But will you truly know his character?
he was at first a petty Notary,
a fellow that being trusted with large sums
of honest Citizens, to be employed
in the trade of usury; this Gentleman,
couching his credit like a tilting staff
most cunningly it brake, and at one course
he ran away with thirty thousand pound,
returning to the City seven year after,
having compounded with his creditors
for the third moity, he buys an office
belonging to our place, depends on us,
in which the oppression and vile injuries
he hath done poor suitors, they have cause to rue,
and I to pity: he hath sold his smiles
for silver, but his promises for gold,
his delays have undone men.
The plague that in some folded cloud remains,
the bright Sun soon disperses; but observe,
when black infection in some dunghill lies,
there's work for bells and graves, if it doe rise.
He was an ill prop to your house, my Lord.
Tic true my Lord, but we that have such servants,
are like to Cuccolds that have riotous wives,
we are the last that know it: this is it
makes noblemen suspected to have done ill,
when the oppression lies in their proud followers.
My Lord, it was some soothing sicophant,
some base detracting Rascal that hath spread
this falsehood in your ears.
Peace Impudence, did I not yester day, no longer since
surprise thee in thy Study counterfeiting.
our hand?
It is true, my Lord.
Being subscribed
unto a Letter filled with amorous stuff
unto this Lady?
I have asked your pardon,
and gave you reason why I was so bold
to use that forgery.
Did you receive it?
I did my Lord, and I can show your Lordship
a packet of such Letters.
Now by the Gods,
I'll make you rue it. I beseech you Sir,
show them the reason moved you counterfeit
our Letter.
Sir, I had no other colour.
to come to speak with her.
A goodly reason!
Did you until this hour acquaint the Lady
with your intended suit?
At several times,
and would have drawn her by some private course
to have compounded for her liberty.
Now by a Virgins honour and true birth,
it is false, my Lord, I never had a dream
so terrible as is this monstrous devil.
Well Sir, referring my particular wrong
to a particular censure, I would know
what is your suit?
My Lord, a speedy trial.
You shall obtain't with all severity,
I will not give you longer time to dream
upon new slights to cloak your forgery,
Observe you this Chameleon, my Lords.
Isle make him change his colour presently.
My Lord, although the uprightness of our cause
needs no delays, yet for the satisfaction
of old Virginius, let him be present
when we shall crave a trial.
Sir it needs not:
Who stands for father of the Innocent,
if not the Judge? Isle save the poor old man
that needless travel.
With your favour Sir,
we must entreat some respit in a business
so needful of his presence.
I do protest,
you wrong your selves thus to importune it.
Well, let it be to morrow, I'll not sleep
till I have made this thicket a smooth plain,
and given you your true honour back again.
My Lord, the distance twixt the Camp and us
cannot be measured in so short a time.
Let us have four days respit.
You are unwise;
rumour by that time will have fully spread
the scandal, which being ended in one hour
will turn to air: To morrow is the Trial,
in the mean time, let all contented thoughts
attend you.
My Lord, you deal unjustly
thus to dismiss her; this is that they seek for,
before to morrow they'll convey her hence
where my claim shall not seize her.
Cunning knave,
You would have bond for her appearance? say.
I think the motions honest.
Very good.
Icilius shall engage his honoured word
for her appearance.
As you please, my Lord,
But it were, fitting her old Uucle there
were jointly bound with him.
Well Sir, your pleasure
shall have satiety. You'll take our word
for her appearance; will you not Sir, I pray?
Most willingly my Lord.
Then Sir you have it,
and in the mean time I'll take the honoured Lady
into my guardianship, and by my life,
I'll use her in all kindness as my wife.
Now by the Gods you shall not.
Shall not, what?
Not use her as your wife Sir.
O my Lord, I spake it from my heart.
I very likely.
She is a Virgin Sir, and must not lye
under a mans forth coming; do you mark?
not under your forth coming, lecherous Appius.
Mistake me not, my Lord: Our Secretary,
Take bonds for the appearance of this Lady.
And now to you sir, you that were my servant,
I here cashier you; never shalt thou shroud
thy villainies under our noble roof,
nor scope the whip, or the fell hangmans book
by warrant of our favour.
So my Lord,
I am more free to serve the Gods, I hope,
now I have lost your service.
Hark you sir,
who shall give bonds for your appearance, ha?
to justify your claim?
I have none, my Lord.
Away, commit him prisoner to his chamber:
I'll keep you safe from starting.
Why my Lord?
Away, I will not hear you.
A Judges heart here in the midst must stand,
and move not a hairs breadth to either hand.
O were thy heart but of the self same piece
thy tongue is, Appius; how blessed were Rome!
Post to the camp Sertorius, thou hast heard
th'effect of all, relate it to Virginius.
I pray thee use thy ablest horsemanship,
for it concerns us near.
I go my Lord.
Sure all this is damned cunning.
O my Lord,
seamen in tempests shun the flattering shore,
to bear full sails upon it were danger more.
So men o'er born with greatness still hold dread,
false seeming friends that on their bosoms spread:
for this is a safe truth which never varies,
He that strikes all his sails seldom miscarries.
Must we be slaves both to a tyrants will,
and confounding ignorance at once?
Where are we, in a mist, or is this hell?
I have seen as great as the proud Judge have fell:
the bending Willow yielding to each wind,
shall keep his rooting firm, when the proud Oak.
braving the storm, presuming on his root,
shall have his body rent from head to foot;
Let us expect the worst that may befall,
and with a noble confidence bear all.
Here, bear this packet to Minutius,
and privately deliver't, make as much speed
as if thy father were deceas'di'th' Camp,
and that thou went to take th'Administration
of what he left thee. Fly.
I go my Lord.
O my trusty Clodius.
My dear Lord,
let me adore your divine policy.
You have poisoned them with sweet meats, you have my Lord.
But what contain those Letters?
Much importance.
Minutius is commanded by that packet
to hold Virginius prisoner in the Camp
on some suspect of Treason.
But my Lord, how will you answer this?
Tush, any fault
or shadow of a Crime will be sufficient
for his committing: thus when he is absent
we shall in a more calm and friendly sea
sail to our purpose.
Mercury himself
could not direct more safely.
O my Clodius,
Observe this rule, one ill must cure another;
as Aconi•…um a strong poison, brings
a present cure against all Serpents stings.
In high attempts, the soul hath infinite eyes,
and it is necessity makes men most wise.
Should I miscarry in this desperate plot,
this of my fate in after times be spoken,
I'll break that with my weight on which I am broken.
Why how now Corbulo? thou wast not wont to be of this sad temper. What's the matter now?
Times change, and seasons alter, some men are born to the Bench, and some to the halter. What do you think now that I am?
I think thee to be Virginia's man, and Corbulo.
No, no such matter: guess again, tell me but what I am, or what manner of fellow you imagine me to be?
I take thee to be an honest good, fellow.
Wide of the •…ow hand still•… Corbulo is no such man.
What art thou then?
Listen, and I'll describe my self to you: I am something better then a Knave, and yet come shor•… of being an honest man; and though I can sing a •…ble, yet•…m accounted b•… 〈◊〉 one of the base, being indeed, and a•… the ca•… stands with me at this present, in∣feriour to a rogue, and three degrees worse then a Rascal.
How comes this to pass?
Only by my services success. Take heed whom you serve. Oh you serving Creatures; for this is all I have got by serving my Lady Virginia.
Why, what of her?
She is not the woman you take hee to be; for though she have borrowed no money, yet she 〈◊〉 entered into bonds; and though you may think her a woman not sufficient, yet it is very like her bond will be taken. The truth 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 challenged to be a bond woman; now if she be a bond woman and a slave, and I her servant and Vassal, what did you take me to be? I am an A•…, a Coat, a worm, a Wood∣cock amongst birds, a Hodmond•…d amongst flies, amongst Cu•…s a trindle tale, and amongst fishes a poor Ipèr; but amongst Serving men worse, worse then the mans man to the under Yeomen Few•…∣rer.
But is it possible, thy Lady is challenged to be a slave? What witness have they?
Witness these Fountains, these Flood-gates, these Well∣springs: the poor Gentlewoman was Arrested in the open Market; I offered, I offered to bail her; 〈◊〉 (though she was) I could not be taken. The grief hath gone so •…are my heart, that 〈◊〉 I be made free, I shall never be mine own man. The Lord Appius hath com∣meted her to Ward, and it is thought she shall neither lye on the Knight side, not in the Troping Ward, for if he may have his will of her, he means to put 〈◊〉 in the Hole. His Warrant hath be•… out for her, but how the case stands with him, or how matters will be taken up with her, •…s yet uncertain.
When shall the Trial be?
I take it to be as soon as the morning is brought a bed of a new son and 〈◊〉
And when is that▪
〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 every morning you know brings forth a new •…n, b•… they 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 short lived, for every night she drovvns them in the Western •…ea. But 〈◊〉 •…hese 〈◊〉, as too high for your d•…ll app•… 〈◊〉. Shall 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 you at the Trial to morrow?
By 〈◊〉 •…lp 〈◊〉 •…e there.
And I, if I li•…▪
And I, if I dye for 〈◊〉: Here's my hand I'll meet you. It is thought my old master will be there at the Bar; for though all the timber of his house yet stand, yet my Lord Numitorius hath sent one of his Posts to the Camp to bid him spur cut and come to the sen∣tence. Oh we have a house at home as heavy as if it were covered with lead. But you will remember to be there.
And not to fail.
If I chance to meet you there, and that the Case go against us, I will give you a quart, not of Wine, but of Tears; for instead of a new Role, I purpose to break my Fast with sops of sorrow.
THanks to my noble friends, itnow appears
that you have rather loved me then my fortune,
for that's near shipwrecked: chance you see still ranges,
and this short dance of life is full of changes.
Appius! how hollow that name founds, how dreadful?
It is a question, whether the proud Lecher
will view us to our merit; for they say,
his memory to virtue and good men
is still carousing Leth•…. O the Gods,
not with more terror do the souls in hell
appear before the seat of Rhadamant,
then the poor Client yonder.
O Virginius.
Why do you wear this habit? it ill fits
your noble person, or this reverend place.
Thats true, old man, but it well fits the case
thats now in question. If with form and show
they prove her slaved, all freedom I'll forgo•….
Noble Virginius,
put out a bold and confident defence:
search the Imposture, like a cunning Tryer,
false me•…else bear the touch, but brook not fire:
their brittleness betrays them; let your breath
discover as much shame in them, as death
did ever draw from Offenders. Let your truth
nobly supported, void of fear or art,
welcome what ever comes with a great heart.
Now by the Gods, I thank thee noble youth.
I never feared in a besieged Town
Mines or great Engines like you Lawyers Gown.
O my dear Lord and father, once you gave me
a noble freedom, do not see it lost
without a forfeit; take the life you gave me
and sacrifice it rather to the gods
then to a villains Lust. Happy the Wretch
who born in bondage lives and dies a slave,
and sees no lustful projects bent upon her,
and neither knows the life nor death of honour.
We have neither Justice, no nor violence,
which should reform corruption sufficient
to cross their black premeditated doom.
Appius will seize her, all the fire in hell
is leapt into his bosom.
O you Gods,
extinguish it with your compassionate tears,
although you make a second deluge spread,
and swell more high then Tenerif•…'s high head.
Have not the Wars heaped snow sufficient
upon this aged head, but they will still
pile winter upon winter?
Is he come? say.
Now by my life I'll quit the General.
Your reverence to the Judge, good brother.
Yes Sir, I have learnt my complement thus,
Blessed mean estates who stand in fear of many,
and great are cursed for that they f•…are not any.
What is Virginius come?
I am here my Lord.
Where is your daughter?
Here my reverend Lord.
Your habit shows you strangely.
O it is fit,
it suits both time and cause. Pray pardon it,
Where is your Advocate?
I have none my Lord.
Truth needs no Advocate, the unjust Cause
buys up the tongues that travel with applause
in these your thronged Courts. I want not any,
and count him the most wretched that needs many.
May it please your reverend Lordships?
What are you Sir?
Of counsel with my Client Marcus Clodius.
My Lord, I undertake a desperate combat
to cope with this most eloquent Lawyer:
I have no skill in the weapon, good my Lord;
I mean, I am not travelled in your Laws.
My suit is therefore by your special goodness
they be not wrested against me.
O Virginius, the gods defend they should.
Your humble servant shall ever pray for you.
Thus shall your glory be above your place,
or those high titles which you hold in Court,
for they die blessed that die in good report.
Now Sir I stand you.
Then have at you Sir.
May it please your Lordships, here is such a Case
so full of subtlety, and as it were,
so far benighted in an ignorant mist,
that though my reading be sufficient,
my practice more, I never was entangled
in the like pursenet. Here is one that claims
this woman for his daughter. Here is another
affirms she is his Bond-slave. Now the Question
(with favour of the Bench) I shall make plain
in two words only without circumstance.
Fall to your proofs.
Where are our papers.
Here Sir.
Where Sir? I vow you're the most tedious Client.
Now we come to it my Lord. Thus stands the Case,
the Law is clear on our sides. Hold your prating.
That honourable Lord Virginius,
having been married about fifteen year,
and Issuless, this Virgins politic mother
Seeing the Land was likely to descend
to Numitorius. I pray Sir listen.
You my Lord Numitorius attend,
we are on your side. Old Virginius
employed in foreign wars, she se•… him 〈◊〉
she was with child; observe it, I beseech you,
and note the trick of a deceitful woman:
she in the mean time fai•… the passions
of a great b•…llyed woman, counter•…s
their passions and their 〈◊〉 and verily
all Rome held this for no •…posterous stuff.
What's to be done now? here is a rumour spread
of a young Heir, gods bless it, and belly
bombasted with a cushion: but their wants,
(What wants there?) nothing but a pretty babe,
bought with some piece of money, where it skils not,
to furnish this supposed lying in.
I protest my Lord, the fellow in the night cap
hath not spoke one true word yet.
Hold you your prating woman till you are called.
It is purchased. Where? From this mans bond-woman
The money paid. What was the sum of money?
A thousand Drachmas.
Good, a thousand Drachmas.
Where is that bond-woman.
She's dead, my Lord.
O dead, that makes your Cause suspicious.
But here's her deposition on her death bed,
with other testimony to confirm
what we have said is true. Wilt please your Lordship
take pains to view these writings. Here, my Lord,
we shall not need to hold your Lordships long,
we will make short work on it.
My Lord.
By your favour.
If that your claim be just, how happens it
that you have discontinued it the space
of fourteen years?
I shall resolve your Lordship.
I vow this is a practised Dialogue:
comes it not rarely off?
Peace, give them leave.
It is very true, this Gentleman at first
thought to conceal this accident, and did so,
only revealed his knowledge to the mother
of this fair bond-woman, who bought his silence
during her life time with great sums of Coin.
Where are your proofs of that?
Here, my good Lord, with depositions likewi•….
Well, go on.
For your question
of discontinuance. Put case my slave
run away from me, dwell in some near City
the space of twenty years, and there grow rich,
it is in my discretion, by your favour,
to seize him when I please.
That's very true.
Cast not your nobler beams, you reverend Judges
on such a putrefied dunghill.
By your favour, you shall be heard anon.
My Lords, believe not this spruce Orator.
Had I but feed him first, he would have told
as smooth a tale on our side.
Give us leave.
He deals in formal glosses, cunning shows,
and cares not greatly which way the Case goes;
Examine I beseech you this old woman,
who is the truest witness of her birth.
Soft you, is she your only witness?
She is, my Lord.
Why, is it possible
such a great Lady in her time of child birth,
should have no other Witness but a Nurse?
For ought I know the rest are dead, my Lord.
Dead? no my Lord, belike they were of counsel
with your deceased Lady, and so shamed
twice to give colour to so vile an act.
Thou Nurse observe me, thy offence already
doth merit punishment beyond our censure,
pull not more whips upon thee.
I defy your whips, my Lord.
Command her silence Lictors.
O injustice! you frown away my Witness;
Is this Law? is this uprightness?
Have you viewed the Writings?
This is a trick to make our slaves our heirs
beyond prevention.
Appius, wilt thou hear me?
You have standred a sweet Lady that now sleeps
in a most noble Monument. Observe me,
I would have taken her simple word to gage
before his soul or thine.
That makes thee wretched.
Old man, I am sorry for thee that thy love,
by custom is grown natural, which by nature
should be an absolute loathing. Note the Sparrow,
that having hatched a Cuckoo, when it sees
her brood a Monster to her proper kind,
forsakes it, and with more fear shuns the nest,
then she had care in the Spring to have it dressed.
cast thy affection then behind thy back, and think.—
Be wise, take counsel of your friends.
You have many soldiers in their time of service
father strange children.
True: and Pleaders too,
when they are sent to visit Provinces.
You my most neat and cunning Orator,
whose tongue is Quick-silver, Pray thee good Janus
look not so many several ways at once,
but go to the point.
I will, and keep you out
at points end, though I am no soldier.
First the oath of the deceased bond-woman.
A very virtuous Matron.
Joined with the testimony of Clodius.
A most approved honest Gentleman.
Besides six other honest Gentlemen.
All Knights, and there's no question but their oaths will go for currant.
See my reverend Lords,
and wonder at a Case so evident.
My Lord, I knew it.
Observe my Lord how their own Policy
confounds them. Had your Lordship yesterday
proceeded as it was fit, to a just sentence,
the Apparel and the Jewels that she wore,
more worth then all her Tribe, had then been due
unto our Client: now to cousin him
of such a forfeit, see they bring the maid
in her most proper habit, bond-slave like,
and they will save by the hand too. Please your Lordships,
I crave a sentence.
 My Lord.
Lord Appius.
Now by the Gods here's juggling.
Who cannot counterfeit a dead mans hand?
Or hire some villain•… to swear forge•…ies?
Clodius was brought up in your house my Lord,
and that's suspicious.
How is it probable,
that our wife being present at the child-birth,
whom this did nearest concern, should ne'er reveal it?
Or if ours dealt thus cunningly, how haps it
her policy, as you term it, did not rather
provide an Issue male to cheer the father?
I'll answer each particular.
It needs not,
Here is witness, most sufficient witness.
Think you, my Lord, our Laws are writ in snow,
and that your breath can melt them?
No my Lord,
We have not such hot livers: Mark you that?
Remember yet the Gods, O Appius,
who have no part in this. Thy violent Lust
shall like the biting of the envenomed Aspic,
steal thee to hell. So subtle are thy evils,
in life they'll seem good Angels, in death devils.
Observe you not this scandal?
Sir, It is none.
I'll show thy Letters full of violent Lust
sent to this Lady.
Wilt thou breath a lye
before such a reverend Audience?
That place
is sanctuary to thee. Lye? see here they are.
My Lords, these are but dilatory shifts.
Sirrah I know you to the very heart,
and I'll observe you.
Do but do it with Justice.
Clear thy self first, O Appius, ere thou judge
our imperfections rashly, for we wot
the Office of a Justice is perverted quite
when one thief hangs another.
You are too bold.
Lictors take charge of him▪
It is very good.
Will no man view these papers? What not one?
Jove thou hast found a Rival upon earth,
his nod strikes all men dumb. My duty to you.
The Ass that carried •…sis on his back,
thought that the superstitious people kneeled
to give his dullness humble reverence.
If thou think so, proud Judge, I let thee see
I bend low to thy Gown, but not to thee.
There's one in hold already. Noble youth
fetters grace one being worn for speaking truth;
I'll lye with thee, I swear, though in a dungeon;
the injuries you do us we shall pardon,
but it is just the wrongs which we forgive,
the gods are charged therewith to see revenged.
Come, you're a proud Pleb•…ian.
True my Lord.
Proud in the glory of my Ancestors,
who have continued these eight hundred years:
the Heralds have not known you these eight months.
Your madness wrongs you, by my soul I love you.
Thy soul?
O thy opinion old Pythagoras,
Whither, O whither should thy black soul fly,
into what ravenous bird or beast most vile?
only into a weeping Crocodile.
Love me? Thou loy'st me (Appius) as the earth loves rain,
thou fain would swallow me.
Know you the place you speak in?
I'll speak freely.
Good men too much trusting their innocence
do not betake them to that just defence
which Gods and Nature gave them; but even wink
in the black tempest, and so fondly sink.
Let us proceed to sentence.
Ere you speak
One parting farewell let me borrow of you
to take of my Virginia.
Now my Lords,
we shall have fair confession of the truth.
Pray take your course.
Farewell my sweet Virginia, never, never
shall I taste fruit of the most blessed hope
I had in thee. Let me forget the thought
of thy most pretty infancy, when first
returning from the Wars, I took delight
to rock thee in my Target, when my Girl
would kiss her father in his burganet
of glittering steel hung'bout his armed neck;
and viewing the bright metal, smile to see
another fair Virginia smile on thee.
When I first taught thee how to go, to speak,
and when my wounds have smarted, I have sung
with an unskilful, yet a willing voice,
to bring my Girl asleep. O my Virginia,
when we begun to be, begun our woes,
increasing still, as dying life still grows.
This tediousness doth much offend the Court.
Silence: attend her Sentence.
Hold, without Sentence I'll resign her freely,
since you will prove her to be none of mine.
See, see, how evidently Truth appears.
Receive her Clodius.
Thus I surrender her into the Court
of all the Gods. And see proud Appius see,
although not justly, I have made her free.
And if thy Lust with this Act be not fed,
bury her in thy bowels, now shoe's dead.
O horrid act!
Lay hand upon the Murderer.
Oh for a ring of pikes to circle me.
What? have I stood the brunt of thousand enemies
here to be slain by hang-men? No. I'll fly
to safety in the Camp.
Some pursue the villain,
others take up the body. Madness and rage
are still the Attendants of old doting age.
Is our Hut swept clean?
As I can make it.
It is betwixt us two;
but how many think thou, bred of Roman blood,
did lodge with us last night?
More I think then the Camp hath enemies,
they are not to be numbered.
Comrague, I fear Appius will doom us to Actions death,
to be worried by the Cattle that we feed.
How goes the day?
My stomach has struck twelve.
Come see what provant our knapsack yields.
This is our store, our Garner.
A small pit•…ance.
Feeds Appius thus, is this a City feast?
This crust doth taste like date stones, and this thing
if I knew what to call it.
I can tell you: cheese struck in years.
I do not think but this same crust was baked
and this cheese frighted out of milk and whey
before we two were soldiers: though it be old
I see 't can crawl; what living things be these
that walk so freely 'tween the •…end and pith?
for here's no sap left.
They call them Gentles.
Therefore it is thought fit,
that Soldiers by profession Gentlemen
should thus be fed with Gentles. I am stomach sick,
I must have some strong water.
Where will you hav't?
In you green ditch, a place which none can pass
but he must stop his nose, thou know it well,
there where the two dead dogs lye.
Yes I know it.
And see the Cat that lies a distance off
be flayed for supper. Though we dine to day
as Dutch men feed their soldiers, we will sup
bravely like Roman Leaguerers.
Sir, the General.
We'll give him place,
but tell none of our dainties, lest we have
too many guests to supper.
Most sure it is so, it cannot otherwise be,
Either Virginius is degenerate
from the ancient virtues he was wont to boast,
or in some strange displeasure with the Senate;
Why should these letters else from Appius
confine him a close prisoner to the Camp?
and which confirms his guilt, why should he fly?
needs then must I incur some high displeasure
for negligence to let him thus escape;
which to excuse, and that it may appear
I have no band with him, but am of faction
opposed in all things to the least mildeed,
I will cashier him, and his Tribuneship
bestow upon some noble Gentleman
belonging to the Camp. Soldiers and friends,
you that beneath Virginius Colours march•…,
by strict command from the Decemvirat,
we take you from the charge of him late 〈◊〉,
and his Authority, Command, and Honour
we give this worthy Roman. Know his Colours,
and prove his faithful Soldiers.
Warlike General,
my courage and my forwardness in battle,
shall plead how well I can deserve the title,
to bee a Roman Tribune.
Now, the news?
Virginius in a strange shape of distraction,
enters the Camp, and at his heels a legion
of all estates, growths, ages, and degrees,
with breathless paces dog his frighted steps.
It seems half Roo•…'s unpeopled with a train
that either for some mischief done, pursue him,
or to attend some uncouth novelty.
Some wonder our fear promises. Worthy soldiers,
martial your selves, and entertain this novel
within a ring of steel: Wall in this portent
with men and harness, be it ne'er so dreadful.
Hoe's entered by the clamour of the camp,
that entertains him with these echoing shouts.
Affection that in Soldiers hearts is bred,
survives the wounded, and out lives the dead.
Have I in all this populous Assembly
of soldiers that have proved Virginius valour,
one friend? Let him come thrill his partisan
against this breast, that through a large wide wound,
my mighty soul might rush out of this prison
to fly more freely to yon crystal palace,
where honour sits inthronis'd. What, no friend?
Can this great multitude then yield an enemy
that hates my life? Here let him seize it freely.
What, no man strike? am I so well beloved?
Minutius then to thee. If in this camp
there lives one man so just to punish sin,
so charitable to redeem from torments
a wretched soldier, at his worthy hand
〈◊〉 a death.
What means Virginius?
O•… if the Generals heart be so obdu•…,
to an old begging soldier, Have I here
no honest Legionary of mine own Troo•…
at whose bold hand and sword, if not 〈◊〉.
I may command a death?
Alas good Captain.
Virginius, you have no command at all,
your Companies are elsewhere now bestowed.
Besides, we have a Charge to 〈◊〉 you here.
and make you the Camps prisoner.
General, thanks.
For thou hast done as much with one harsh word
as I begged from their weapons. Thou hast killed me
but with a living death.
Besides, I charge you
to speak what means this ugly face of blood,
you put on your distractions? Whats the reason
all Rome pursues you, covering those high 〈◊〉,
as if they dogged you for some damned act?
What have you done?
I have plaid the Pa•…cid,
Killed mine own child,
Virginia?
Yes, even she.
These rude hands ripped her, and her innocent blood
flowed above my elbows.
Killed her willingly?
Willingly, with advice, premeditation,
and settled purpose; and see still I wear
her crimson colours, and these withered arms
are died in her heart blood.
Most wretched villain?
But how? I loved her life. Lend me amongst you
one speaking Organ to discourse her death;
It is too harsh an imposition
to lay upon a father. O my Virginia!
How agrees this? love her, and murder her?
Yes, Give me but a little leave to 〈◊〉
a few red tears, (for soldiers should weep blood)
and I'll agree them well. Attend me all.
Alas, might I have kept her chaste and free,
this life so oft engaged for ungrateful Rome,
lay in her bosom. But when I saw her pulled
by Appius Lictors to be claimed a sl•…ve,
and dragged unto a public Sessions house,
divorced from her fore Spousals with Icilius,
a noble youth, and made a bond-woman,
enforced by violence from her fathers arms
to be a Prostiture and Permour
to the rude twinings of a lecherous Judge;
Then, then, O loving Soldiers, (I'll not deny it)
for it was mine honour, my pa•…ernal pity,
and the sole act, for which I love my life.
Then lustful Appius, he that sways the Land,
slew poor Virginia by this fathers hand.
O villain Appius.
O noble Virginius.
To you I appeal, you are my Sentencers:
Did Appius right, or poor Virginius wrong?
Sentence my Fact with a free general tongue.
Appius is the Parricide.
Virginins guiltless of his daughters death.
It this be true, Virginius as the moan
of all the Roman fry that follows you
confirms at large, this cause is to be pitied,
and should not die revengelesse.
Noble Minutius,
Thou hast a daughter, thou hast a wife too,
so most of yôu have Soldiers. Why might not this
have happened you? Which of you all, deer friends,
but now, even now, may have your wives deflowered,
your daughters slaved, and made a Lictors prey?
Think them not safe in Rome, for mine lived there.
It is a common cause.
Appius shall die for it.
Lets make Virginius General.
A General, a General, lets make Virginius General.
It shall be so. Virginius take my Charge,
the wrongs are thine, so violent and so weighty
that none but he that lost foe 〈◊〉 a child,
knows how to punish. By the Gods of Rome,
Virginius shall succeed my full command.
What's honour unto me, a weak old man,
weary of life, and covetous of a grave?
I am a dead man now Virginia lives not,
the self same hand that dared to save from shame
a child, dares in the father 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉
Stay noble General
You much for•… •…nge, Virginias.
Who, if you dye, will take your •…ause in hand,
and proscribe Appius, should you p•…each thus?
Thou ought Minutius. Soldiers, so ought you.
I'm out of fear, my noble wife's expired,
My daughter (of blessed memory) the object
of Appius lust, lives 〈◊〉 the Ely•…an Vestals,
my house yields none fit for his Lictors spoil.
You that have wives lodged in you prison Rome,
have Lands unri•…ed, houses yet 〈◊〉;
your freeborn daughters yet unstrumpeted,
prevent these mischiefs yet while you have time.
We will by you our noble General.
He that was destined to preserve great Rome.
I accept your ch•…▪ in hope to guard you all
from my inhumane sufferings. Be•… my pride
that I have bred a daughter whose chaste blood
was spilt for you, and for Romes la•…ing good.
IS Appius then committed?
So it is 〈◊〉.
How will you bear you in this turbule•… state?
You are a Member of that wretched Faction.
I wonder how you scope imprisonment?
Let me alone, I have learnt with the wi•… Head•…og.
to stop my cave that way the •…pest drives.
Never did Bear-whelp •…bling down a hill
with more art shrink his head betwixt his claws
then I will work my safety Appius
is in the sand already up to the chin,
and shall I hazard landing on that shelf?
Hoe's a wise friend that first 〈◊〉 himself.
What is your course, of 〈◊〉?
Marry this 〈◊〉
Virginius with his Troops is entering Rome,
and it is like that in the market place
my L. Icilius and himself shall meet.
Now to encounter these, two such great Armies,
where lies my Court of Guard?
Why in your heels.
There are strange dogs uncoupled.
You are deceived,
I have studied a most eloquent Oration,
that shall applaud their fortune, and distaste
the cruelty of Appius.
Very good Sir.
It seems then you will rail upon your Lord,
your late good Benefactor.
By the way Sir.
Protest Virginia was no bond-woman,
and read her noble Pedigree.
By the way Sir.
Could you not by the way too find occasion
to beg Lord Appius Lands?
And by the way
perchance I will. For I will gull them all
most palbably.
Indeed you have the Art
of flattery.
Of Rhetoric you would say.
And I'll begin my smooth Oration thus,
Most learned Captains.
Fie, fie, thats horrible, most of your Captains.
are utterly unlearned.
Yet I assure you,
most of them know Arithmetic so well,
that in a Muster to preserve dead pays,
they I make twelve stand for twenty.
Very good.
Then I proceed,
I do applaud your fortunes, and commend
in this your observation, noble shake-rags.
The Helmet shall no more harbour the spider,
but it shall serve to carouse Sack and Cider.
The rest within I'll study.
Farewell Proteus,
and I shall wish thy eloquent bravado
may sh•…eld thee from the whip and Eastinado.
now in this furious tempest let us glide,
with folded sails at pleasure of the Tide.
Stand.
Make a stand.
A p•…rly with Virginius.
We will not trust our General twixt the Armies,
but upon terms of hostage.
Well advised!
Nor we our General: who for the leaguer?
Our self.
Who for the City?
Numitorius.
How is it with your sorrow noble brother?
I am forsaken of the gods, old man.
Preach not that wretched doctrine to your self,
It will beget despair.
What doe you call
a burning Fever? Is not that a devil?
It shakes me like an earthquake. Wilt a, wilt a
give me some Wine?
O it is hurtful for you!
Why so? are all things that the appetite
of man doth covet in his perfect'st health,
what ever Art or Nature have invented,
to make the boundless wish of man contented,
Are all his poison? Give me the Wine there.—When?
Do you grudge me a poor cup of drink? Say, Say.
Now by the gods, I'll leave enough behind me
to pay my debts, and for the rest, no matter
who scrambles for it.
Here my noble brother I
Alas, your hand shakes. I will guide it to you.
It is true, it trembles. Welcome thou just palsy,
it were pity this should doe me longer service,
now it hath slain my daughter. So I thank you;
now I have lost all comforts in the world,
it seems I must a little longer live;
be it but to serve my belly.
O my Lord,
this violent Fever took him late last night,
since when, the cruelty of the disease,
hath drawn him into sundry passions
beyond his wonted temper.
It is the gods
have powered their Justice on him.
You are sadly met my Lord.
Would we had met
in a cold grave together two months since,
I should not then have cursed you.
Ha! Whats that?
Old man, thou hast showed thy self a noble Roman,
but an unnatural Father; thou hast turned
my Bridal to a Funeral. What devil
did arm thy fury with the Lions paw,
the Dragons tail, with the Bulls double horn,
the Cormorants beak, the Cockatrices eyes,
the Scorpions teeth? and all these by a father
to be employed upon his innocent child?
Young man, I love thy true description;
I am happy now, that one beside my self,
doth teach me for this act. Yet were I pleased,
I could approve the deed most Just and noble;
and sure posterity, which truly renders
to each man his desert, shall praise me for it.
Come, it was unnatural and damnable.
You need not interrupt me. Here's a fury
will doe it for you! You are a Roman Knight.
What was your oath when you received your Knighthood?
a parcel of it is, as I rememember,
rather to die with honour, then to live
in servitude. Had my poor girl been ravished,
in her dishonour, and in my sad grief,
your love and pity quickly had taken end.
Great men's misfortunes thus have ever stood,
they touch none nearly, but their nearest blood.
What do you mean to do? It seems, my Lord,
now you have caught the sword within your hand,
like a madman you'll draw it to offend
those that best love you; and perhaps the counsel
of some loose unthrifts, and vile male contents
hearten you to it: go to, take your course,
my faction shall not give the least advantage
to murderers, to banquerouts, or thieves,
to fleece the common Wealth.
Do you term us so?
Shall I reprove your rage, or is it your malice?
He that would tame a Lion, doth not use
the goad or weird whip, but a sweet voice,
a fearful stroking, and with food in hand
must ply his wanton hunger.
Want of sleep will do it better then all these, my Lord.
I would not have you wake for others ruin,
lest you turn mad with watching.
O you gods!
You are now a General; learn to know your place,
and use your noble calling modestly.
Better had Appius been an upright Judge,
and yet an evil man, then honest man,
and yet a dissolute Judge; for all disgrace
lights less upon the person, then the place.
You are in the City now, where if you raise
but the least uproar, even your Fathers house
shall not be free from ransack. Piteous fires
that chance in Towrs of stone, are not so feared
as those that light in Flax shops; for there's food
for eminent ruin.
O my noble Lord!
Let not your passion bring a fatal end
to such a good beginning. All the world
shall honour that deed in him, which first
grew to a reconcilement.
Come my Lord,
I love your friendship; yes in sooth I do,
but will not seal it with that bloody hand.
Join we our armies. No fantastic copy,
or borrowed President will I assume
in my revenge. There's hope yet you may live,
to outwear this sorrow.
O Impossible.
A minutes joy to me, would quite cross nature,
as those that long have dwelt in noisome rooms,
swoon presently if they but scent perfumes.
to the Senate. Come, no more of this sad tale,
for such a tel-tale may we term our grief,
and doth as it were so listen to her own words,
Envious of others sleep, because she wakes.
I ever would converse with a grieved person
in a lunge journey to beguile the day,
or winter evening to pass time away.
March on, and let proud Appius in our view
like a tree rotted, fall that way he grew.
The world is changed now. All damnations
seize on the Hydra headed multitude,
that only gape for innovation.
O who would trust a people?
Nay, who would not,
rather then one reared on a popular suffrage,
whose station's built on Avees and Applause?
There's no firm structure on these airy Bases.
O fie upon such Greatness.
The same •…ands
that yesterday to hear me conscionate.
and Orarorize, rung shrill Plaudits forth
in sign of grace, now in contempt and scorn
hurry me to this place of darkness.
Could not their poisons rather spend themselves,
on the Judges folly, but must it needs stretch
to me his servant, and sweep me along?
Curse on the inconstant rabble.
Grieves it thee
to impart my sad disaster?
Marry doth it.
Thou shared'st a fortune with me in my Greatness,
I ha•…'d thee after when I climb my State,
and shrink'st thou at my ruin?
I loved your Greatness,
and would have traced you in the golden path
of sweet promotion; but this your decline
sowrs all these hoped sweets.
It is the world right.
Such gratitude a great man still shall have
that trusts unto a temporising slave.
Slave? Good. Which of us two in our dejection
is basest? I am most sure
your loathsome dungeon is as dark as mine,
your conscience for a thousand sentences
wrongly denounced, much more oppressed then mine.
then which is the most slave▪
O double baseness,
to hear a drudge thus with his Lord compare!
Great men disgraced, slaves to their servants are.
Soldiers, keep a strong guard whilst we survey
our sentenced prisoners: And from this deep dungeon
keep off that great concourse, whose violent hands
would ruin this stone building and drag hence
this impious Judge peace▪ meal, to tear his limbs
before the Law convince him.
See these Monsters,
whose fronts the fair Virginias innocent blood
hath visarded with such black ugliness,
that they are loathsome to all good men's souls.
Speak damned Judge how can thou purge thy self
from Lust and blood?
I do confess my self
guilty of both: yet hear me, noble Romans,
Virginius, thou dost but supply my place,
I thine. Fortune hath lift thee to my Chair,
and thrown me headlong to thy pleading bar.
If in mine eminence I was stern to thee;
shunning my rigour, likewise shun my fall.
And being mild where I showed cruelty,
establish still thy greatness. Make some use
of this my bondage. With indifference
survey me, and comp•…e my yesterday
with this sad hour, my height with my decline,
and give them equal balance.
U•…certain fate, but yesterday his breath
•…'d Rome, and his least •…ved frown was death:
I cannot choose but pity and lament,
So high a rise should have such low descent.
He's ready to forget his injury.
(Oh too relenting age!) Thinks not Virginius,
if he should pardon Appius this black deed,
and set him once more in the Ivory Chair,
he would be wary to avoid the like,
become a new man, a more upright Judge,
and deserve better of the Common Weal?
It is like he would.
Nay, if you thus begin,
I'll fetch that shall anatomize his 〈◊〉.
Virginius, you are •…oo 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉
deeds of this nature. You must fashion now
your actions to your place, not to your passion,
severity to such acts is as necessary
as pity to the tears of innocence.
He speaks but Law and Justice.
Make good the streets, with your best men at arms:
Valerius and Horatio know the reason
of this loud uproar, and confused noise.
Although my heart be melting at the fall
of men in place and Office, we will be just
to punish murdrous Acts, and censure Lust.
Icilius, worthy Lord, bears through the street
the body of Virginia towards this prison;
which when it was discovered to the people,
moved such a mournful clamour, that their cries
pierced heaven, and forced tears from their sorrowing eyes.
Here comes Icilius.
Where was thy pity when thou slowest this maid,
thou would extend to Appius? Pity? See
her wounds still bleeding at the horrid presence
of you stern Murderer, till she find revenge;
nor will these drops stench, or these springs be dry
till theirs be set a bleeding: Shall her soul
(whose essence some suppose lives in the blood)
still labour without rest? Will old Virginius
murder her once again in this delay?
Pause there Icilius.
This sight hath stiffened all my operant powers,
ic'd all my blood, benumbed my motion quite.
I'll power my soul into my daughters belly,
and with a soldiers tears embalm her wounds.
My only dear Virginia!
Leave this passion,
proceed to your just sentence.
We will. Give me two sword•…. Appius grasp this,
You Clodius that. You shall be your own hang-men,
do Justice on your selves. You made Virginius.
•…uce his own blood: lodged in his daughters breast,
which your own hands shall act upon your selves.
If you be Romans, and retain their spirits,
redeem a base life with a noble death,
and through your 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 yo•… •…ath.
Virginius is a noble Justicer,
had I my crooked paths levelled by thine.
I had not swayed the balance. Think not Lords,
but he that had the s•…it to oppose the Gods,
dares likewise suffer what their powers inflict:
I have not dreaded famine, fire, no•… strange,
their common vengeance, poison in my cup,
nor dagger in my bosom, the revenge
of private men for private injuries;
nay more then these, not fe•…'d to commit evil,
and shall I tremble at the punishment?
Now with as much resolved constancy,
as I offended, will I pay the mulct,
and this black stain laid on my family,
then which a nobler hath not place in Rome,
Wash with my blood away. Learn of me Clodius,
I'll teach thee what thou never studiest yet,
thats bravely how to die. Judges are termed
the Gods on earth; and such as are corrupt
read me in this my ruin. Those that succeed me
that so offend, thus punish. This the sum of all,
Appius that •…in'd, by Appius hand shall fall.
He dyed as boldly as he basely erred,
and so should every true bred Roman do.
And he whose lise was odious, thus expiring;
in his death forces pity. Clodius thou
wast follower of his fortunes in his being,
therefore in his not being imitate
his fair example.
Death is terrible
unto a conscience that's oppressed with guilt.
They say there is Elizium and Hell,
the first I have forfeited, the latter fear.
My skin is not sword proof.
Why dost thou pause?
For mercy, mercy I entreat you all.
Is it not sufficient for Virginia slain
that Appius suffered; one of noble blood,
and eminence in place, for a Plebeian?
Besides, he was my Lord and might command me:
If I did ought, it was by compulsion, Lords,
and therefore I crave mercy.
Shall I doom him?
Do, good Icilius.
Then I sentence thus:
Thou had a mercy, most unme•…riting slave,
of which thy base birth was not capable,
which we take off by taking thence thy sword.
And note the difference twixt a noble strain,
and one bred from the rabble: both alike
da•…'d to transgress, but see their odds in death:
Appius died like a Roman Gentleman,
and a man both ways knowing; but this slave
is only sensible of vicious living,
not apprehensive of a noble death.
Therefore as a base Malefactor (we)
and timorous slave, give him (as he deserves)
unto the common Hangman.
What, no mercy?
Stop's mouth,
away with him: the life of the Decemviri
expires in them. Rome thou at length art free,
restored unto thine ancient liberty.
Of Consu•…: which bold Iunius Brutus first
begun in Tarquins fall. Virginius you
and young Icilius shall his place succeed,
so by the peoples suffrage it is decreed.
We martial then our soldiers in that name
of Consuls, honoured with these golden baize.
Two fair, but Ladies most unfortunate,
have in their ruins raised declining Rome,
Lucretia and Virginia, both renowned▪
for chastity. Soldiers and noble Romans
to grace her death, whose life hath freed great Rome,
march with her Course to her sad Funeral Tomb.

