WHat doe wee act to day?
Agaves frenzy
With Penth•us bloody end.
It skils not what
The times are dull, and all that wee receive•
Will hardly satisfy •he days Expense•.
The Greeks (to whom we owe the first invention
Both of the buskind scene and humble stock)
That reign in every noble f•mile
Declaim against vs: and our Amphi•heater.
Great Pomps work, that hath given full delight
Both to the eye, and ear of fifty thousand
Spectators in one day, as if it were
Some unknown desert, or great Room unpeopled,
Is quite forsaken.
Pleasures of worse nature•
Are gladly entertained, and they that shun vs,
Practise in private sports the Stews would blush at.
A Litter borne by eight Liburnian •••ues,
To buy Diseases from a glorious st•umpet,
The most censorious of our Roman •entry,
Nay of the guarded robe the Senators,
Est•eme an easy purchase,
Y•t grudge vs
(That with delight join profit and endeavour
To build their minds up fair, and on the Stage
D•cipher to the life what honours waite
On good, and glorious actions, and the shame
That treads upon the heals of vice. The salary
Of six Sestertij:
For the profit Paris,
And mercenary gain they are things beneath vs
Since while you hold your grace, and power with Caesar•
We from your bounty find a large supply,
Nor can one thought of want ever appro•ch vs,
Our aim is glory, and to leave our names
To after times.
And would they give vs leave
There ends all our ambition.
Wee have enemies
And great ones too, I fear. It is given out lately
The Consul Aretinus (Caesars spy)
Said at his Table ere a month expired
(For being gald in our last Comedy)
He would silence vs for ever.
I expect
No favour from him, my strong Auentine is
That great Domi•ian, whom we oft have cheered
In his most •ullen moods will once return,
Who can repair wi•h ease, the Consols ruins.
It is fr•quent in the City, he h•th subdued
The Catti, and the Daci, and ere long,
The second time will enter Rome in triumph.
Jove hasten it, with vs? I now believe
The Consul• threats AEsopus.
You are summoned
T'appeare to day in Senate.
And there to answer
What shall be urged against you.
We obey you.
Nay droop not fellows, innocence should be by•lt
We that have personated in the Scene
The ancient Heroes, and the falls of Princes
With loud applause, being to act our selves,
Must doe it with undaunted confidence.
What ere our sentence be think it is in sport.
And though condemned lets hear it without sorrow
As if we were to live again to morrow.
It is spoken like your self.
Whether goes Paris?
He's cited to the Senate.
I am glad the State is
So free from matters of more weight and trouble
That it has vacant time to look on vs.
That reverend place, in which the affairs of Kings.
And provinces were determined, to descend
To the censure of a bitter word, or jest,
Dropped from a Poets pen I peace to your Lordships
We are glad that you are safe.
What times are these?
To what is Rome fallen? may we being alone
Speak our thoughts freely of the Prince, and State,
And not fear the informer.
Noble Lamia,
So dangerous the age is, and such bad acts
Are practised every where, we hardly sleep
Nay cannot dream with safety. All our actions
Are called in question, to be nobly borne
Is now a crime; and to deserve too well
Held Capital treason. Sons accuse their Fathers,
Fathers their sons; and but to win a smile
From one in grace in Court, our chastest Matrons
Make shipwreck of their honours. To be virtuous
Is to bee guilty. They are only safe
That know to sooth the Princes appetite,
And ser•e his lusts.
Tic true; and tic my wonder
That two sons of so different a nature,
Should spring from good Vespatian. We had a Titus,
Stilt juice•lie the d•light of all mankind,
Who did esteem that day lost in his life
In which some one or other tasted not.
Of his magnificent bounties. One that had
A ready tear when he was forced to sign
The death of an offender. And so far
From pride, that he disdained not the converse
Even of the poorest Roman.
Yet his brother
Domitian, that now sways the power of things,
Is so inclined to blood, that no day passes
In which some are not fas•end to the hook,
Or thrown down from the Gemonies. His freemen
Scorn the Nobility, and he himself
As if he were not made of flesh and blood,
Forgets he is a man.
In his young years
He showed what he would be when grown to ripens:
His greates• pleasure was being a child
With a sharp pointed bodkin to kill flies,
Whose rooms now men supply. For his escape.
In the Vitellian war he raised a Temple
To Iupiter, and proudly placed his figure
In the bosom of the God. And in his edicts
He does not blush, or s•art to stile himself
(As if the name of Emperor were base)
Great Lord, and God Domitian.
I have letters
He's on his way to Rome, and purposes
To enter with all glory. The flattering Senate
Decrees him divine Honours, and to cross it
W•re death with studied torments; for my part
I will obey the time, it is in vain
To strive against the torrent
Lets to the Curia
And though unwillingly grieve our suffrages
Before we are compelled.
And since we cannot
With safety use the active, lets make use of
The passive fortitude, with this assurance
That the state ficke in him, the gods to friend,
Though at th• worst will now begin to mend.
To me this reverence?
I pay it Lady
As a debt due to her thats Caesars mistress.
For understand with joy he that commands
All that the Sun gives warmth to, is your servant.
Be not amazed, but fit you to your fortunes.
Think upon state, and greatness, and the Honours
That waite upon Augusta, for that name
Ere long comes to you: still you doubt your vassal,
But when you have read this letter, writ, and signed
With his imperial hand, you will be freed
From fear, and jealousy and I beseech you,
When all the beauties of the earth bow to you,
And Senators shall take it for an honour,
As I doe now to kiss these happy fe•te;
When every smile you give is a preferment,
And you dispose of Provinces to your creatures,
Think on Parthenius.
Rise. I am transported,
And hardly dare believe what is assured here.
The means, my good Parthenius, that wrought Caesar
(Our God on earth) to cast an eye of favour
Upon his humble handmaid!
What but your beauty?
When nature framed you for her master p••ce,
As the pure abstract of all rare in woman,
She had no other ends but to design you
To the most eminent place. I will not say
(For it would smell of arrogance to insinuate
The service I have done you) with what zeal
I oft have made relation of your Virtues,
Or how I have sung your goodness or how Caesar
Was fired with the relation of your stori••
I am rewarded in the act, and happy
In that my project prospered.
You are modest,
And were it in my power I would to be thankful.
If that when I was mistress of my self,
And in my way of youth, pure, and untainted,
The Emperor had vouchsafed to seek my favours,
I had with joy given up my virgin fort
At the first summons to his soft embraces:
But I am now another, not mine own.
You know I have a husband, for my honour
I would not be his strumpet, and how law
Can bee dispensed with to become his wife.
To mee's a riddle.
I can soon resolve it.
When power puts in his Plea the laws are silenced,
The world confesses one Rome, and one Caesar,
And as his rules is infinite, his pleasures
Are vnconfin'd; this syllable his will
Stands for a thousand reasons,
•ut with safety,
Suppose I should consent, how can I doe it,
My husband is a Senator of a temper,
Not to be jested with.
As if hee durst
Be Caesars rival. Here he comes, with ease
I will remove this scruple.
How! so private!
M•no own house made a brothel • Sir how durst you,
Though gau•ded with your power in Court, and greatness,
Hold conference with my wife? as for your Minion
I shall hereafter treat.
You are rude, and saucy,
Nor know to whom you speak.
This is fine i faith!
Your wife? but touch her, that respect forgotten
That's due to her, whom mightiest Caesar favours
And think what it is to die. Not to loose time.
She's Caesars choice. It is sufficient honour
You were his taster in this heavenly nectar,
But now must quit the office.
This is rare.
Cannot a man be master of his wife
Because she's young, and fair, without a patent.
I in mine own house am an Emperor,
And will defend whats mine, where are my knaves?
If such an insolence escape unpunished.
In your self Lamia. Caesar hath forgot
To use hi• power, and I his instrument,
In whom though absent, his authority speaks,
Have lost my faculties.
The Guard! why am I
Designed for death?
As you desire my favour
Take not so rough a course.
All your desires
Are absolute commands. Yet give me leave
To put the will of Caesar into act.
Heir's a bill of Divorce between your Lordship,
And this great Lady. If you refuse to sign it,
And so as if you did it uncompelled,
Won to it by reasons that concern your self,
Her honour to untainted. Here are Clerks.
Shall in your best blood write it new, till torture
Compel you to perform it.
Is this legal?
Monarchs that dare not doe unlawful things,
Yet bare them out are Constables, not King•
Will you dispute?
I know not what to urge
Against my self, but too much dotage on her
Love and observance.
Set it under your hand
That you are impotent, and cannot pay
The duties of a husband, or that you are mad
(Rather then want just cause we'll make you so)
Dispatch, you know the danger else, deliver it
Nay on your knee. Madam you now are free
And Mistress of your self.
Can you Domitia
Consent to this?
It would argue a base mind
To live a servant, when I may command.
I now am Caesar•, and yet in respect
I once was yours, when you come to the Palace,
(Provided you deserve it in your service)
You shall find me your good Mistress, waite me Parthonius
And now farewell poor Lamia.
To the Gods
I bend my knees, (for tyranny hath banished
Justice from men) and as they would deserve
Their Altars, and our vows, humbly inuoke'em
That this my ravished wife may pro•e as fatal
To proud Domi•ian, and her embraces
Afford him in the end as little joy,
As wanton Hell•n brought to him of Troy.
Fathers conscript may this our meeting be
H••p•e to Caesar and the common wealth.
Silence.
The purpose of this fr•quent Senate
Is 〈◊〉 to give thanks to the Gods of Rome,
T•at •o• ••e pr•pagation of the Empire,
Vouchsafe vs one to govern it like themselves•
In height of courage, depth of vnders•anding,
And all those virtues, and remarkable graces,
Which make a Prince most eminent, our Domitian
Transcend's the ancient Romans. I can never
Bring his praise to a period. What good man
That is a friend to truth, dares make it doubtful,
That he hath Fabius stay'dnesse, and the courage
Of bold Marcellus, to whom Hanibal gave
The stile of Target, and the Sword of Rome.
But he has more, and every touch more Roman
As Pompey's dignity, Augustus state,
Antonies bounty, and great Iulius fortune.
With Catoes resolution. I am lost
In th'Ocean of his virtues. In a word
All excellencies of good men in him meet,
But no part of their vices.
This is no flattery!
Take heed, you'll be observed.
It is then most fit
That we (as to the Father of our Country,
Like thankful sons, stand bound to pay true service
For all those blessings that he showers upon vs)
Should not connive, and see his government,
Deprau'd and scandalised by meaner men
That to his favour, and indulgence owe
Themselves and being.
Now he points at vs.
Cite Paris the Tragedian.
Here.
Stand forth.
In thee, as being the chief of thy profession,
I doe accuse the quality of treason,
As libellers against the state and Caesar.
Mere accusations are not proofs my Lord,
In what are we delinquents?
You are they
That search into the secrets o• the time,
And under feigned names on the Stage pr•sent
Actions not to be touched at; and traduce
Persons of rank, and quality of both Sexes,
And with Satirical. and bitter jests
Make even the Senators ridiculous
To the Plebeans.
If I free not my self,
(And in my self the rest of my profession)
From these false imputations, and prove
That they make that a libel which the Poet
Writ for a Comedy, so acted too,
It is but Justice that we undergo
The heaviest censure.
Are you on the Stage
You talk so boldly?
The whole word being one
This place is not exempted, and I am
So confident in the justice of our cause,
That I could wish Caesar, in whose great name
All Kings are comprehended sate as judge,
To hear our Plea, and then determine of vs.
If to express a man sold to his lusts,
Wasting the treasure of his time and Fortunes,
In wanton dalliance, and to what sad end
A wretch thats so given over does arrive at,
Deterring careless youth, by his example,
From such licentious courses; laying open
The snares of bawds, and the consuming arts
Of prodigal strumpets, can deserve reproof,
Why are not all your golden principles
Writ down by grave Philosophers to instruct vs
To choose fair Virtue for our guide, not pleasure,
Condemn unto the fire?
There's spirit in this.
Or if desire of honour was the base
On which the building of the Roman Empire
Was raised up to this height; if to inflame
The noble youth with an ambitious heate
T'indure the frosts of danger, nay of Death
To be thought worthy the triumphal wreath
By glorious undertakings, may deserve
Reward, or favour, from the common wealth.
Actors may put in for as large a share
As all the sects of the Philosophers;
They which could precepts (perhaps seldom read)
Deliver what an •onourable thing
The active virtue is. But does that fire
The blood, or swell the veins with emulation
To be both good, and great, equal to that
Which is presented on our Theaters?
Let a good Actor in a lofty Scene
Show great Alcides honoured in the sweat
Of his twelve labours; or a bold Cancillus
Forbidding Rome to be redeemed with gold
From the insulting Gal's; or Scipio
After his victories imposing Tribute
On conquered Carthage. I• done to the life,
As if they saw their dangers, and their glories,
And did partake with them in their rewards,
All that have any spark of Roman in them
The slothful arts laid by, contend to bee
Like those they see presented.
He he's put
The Consuls to their whisper,
But it is urged
That we corrupt youth, and traduce superiors:
When doe we bring a vice upon the Stage,
That does go off unpunished? doe we teach
By the success of wicked undertakings,
Others to tread, in their forbidden steps?
We show no arts of Lidian Panderism,
Corinthian poisons, Persian flatteries,
But mulcted so in the conclusion that
Even those spectators that were so inclined,
Go home changed men. And for traducing such
That are aboue vs, publishing to the world
Their secret crimes we are as innocent
As such as are borne dumb. When we pre•ent
An heir, that does conspire against the life
Of his dear parent, numbering every hour
He lives as tedious to him, if there be
Among the auditors one whose conscience tells him,
He is of the same mould we cannot help it.
Or bringing on the stage a loose adulteress,
That does maintain the riotous expense
Of him that feeds her greedy lust, yet suffers
The lawful pledges of a former bed
To starve the while for hunger, if a Matron
However great in fortune, birth, or titles,
Guilty of such a foul unnatural sin,
Cry out tic writ by me, we cannot help it:
Or when a covetous man's expressed, whose wealth
Arithmetic cannot number, and whose Lordships
A Falcon in one day cannot fly over•
Yet he so sordid in his mind, so griping
As not to afford himself the necessaries
To maintain life, if a Patrician,
(Though honoured with a Consulship) find himself
Touched to the quick in this• we cannot help it.
Or when we show a Judge that is corrupt•
And will give up his sentence as he favours,
The person, not the cause, saving the guilty
If of his faction, and as oft condemning
The innocent out of particular spleen,
If any in this reverend assembly,
Nay even your self my Lord, that are the image
Of absent Caesar feel something in your bosom
That puts you in remembrance of things past,
Or things intended tic not in vs to help it.
I have said, my Lord, and now as you find cause
Or censure vs, or free vs with applause.
Well pleaded on my life I never saw him
Act an Orators part before.
We might have given
Ten double fees to Regulus, and ye•
Our cause delivered worse.
What shout is that?
Caesar our Lord married to conquest, is
Returned in triumph.
Lets all hast to meet him.
Break up the Court, we will reserve to him
The Censure of this cause
Long life to Caesar.
Stand back the place is mine.
Yours• am I not
Great Titus daughter, and Domitians niece
Da•es any claim precedence?
I was more
The mistress of your father, and in his right
Claim duty from you.
I confess you were useful
To please his appetite.
To end the controversy,
For Isle have no contending, Isle be bold
To lead the way my self.
You Minion•
Yes
And all ere long shall kneel to catch my favours.
Whence springs this flood of greatness?
You shall know
To soon for your vexation, and perhaps
Repent too late, and pine with envy when
You see whom Caesar favours
Observe the sequel.
As we now touch the height of humane glory,
Riding in triumph to the Capitol,
Let these whom this victorious arm hath made
The scorn of Fortune, and the slaves of Rome,
Taste the extremes of misery. Bear them off
To the common prisons, and there let them prove
How sharpe our axes are.
A bloody entrance•
To tell you, you• are happy in your Prince
Were to distrust your love, or my desert
And either were distasteful. Or to boast
How much, not by my Deputies, but my self,
I have enlargd the Empire; or what horrors
The Soldier in our conduct hath broke through,
Would better suite the mouth of Plautus braggart,
Then the adored Monarch of the world.
This is no boast.
When I but name the Daci,
And gray eyed Germans whom I have subdued,
The Ghost of Iulius will look pale with envy,
And great Vespatians, and Titus triumph,
(Truth must take place of Father and of Brother)
Will be no more remembered. I am aboue
All honours you can give me. And the •tile
O• Lord, and God, which thankful subjects give me
(Not my ambition) is deserved,
At all parts
Celestial Sacrifice is fit for Caesar
In our acknowledgement.
Thanks Aretinus
Still hold our favour. Now• the God of war,
And famine, blood, and death, Bellonas Pages
Banished from Rome to Thrice in our good fortune.
With justice he may taste the fruits of peace,
Whose sword hath plowd the ground, and reaped the harvest
Of your prosperity. Nor can I think
That there is one among you so ungrateful,
Or such an enemy, to thriving virtue,
That can esteem the jewel he holds dearest
Too good for Caesars use
All we possess.
Our liberties.
Our children.
Wealth.
And throats
Fall willingly beneath his feet.
Base flattery.
What Roman could endure this?
This calls on
My love to all, which spreads it self among you.
The beauties of the time I receive the honour
To kiss the hand, which reared up thus, holds thunder
To you it is an assurance of a calm.
Iulia my niece and Caenis the delight
Of old Vespatian, Domitilla to
A princess of our blood.
Tic strange his pride
Affords no greater curtsy to Ladies
Of such high birth and rank.
Your wives forgotten
No she will bee remembered fear it not
She will bee graced and greased.
But when I look on
Divine Domitian, me thinks we should meet
(The lesser gods applauding the encounter)
As Iupiter the Giants lying dead
On the Phlegraean plain embraced this Iuno
Lamia it is your honour that she's mine.
You are too great to be gainesaid.
Let all
That fear our frown, or doe affect our favour,
Without examining the reason why,
Sal•te her (by this kiss I make it good)
With the title of Augusta.
Still your servant,
Long live Augusta great Domitians Empress.
Paris my hand.
The Gods still honour Caesar.
The wars are ended, and our arms laid by
We are for soft delights. Command the Poets
To use their choicest, and most rare invention
To entertain the time, and be you careful
To give it action, We'll provide the people
Pleasures of all kinds. My Domitia think not
I flatter, though thus fond, On to the Capitol
Tic death to him that wears a sullen brow:
This tic to be a Monarch when alone
He can command all, but is awed by none
My son to tutor me. Know your obedience
And question not my will.
Sir were I one
Whom want compelled to wish a full possession
Of what is yours. Or had I ever numbered
Your years, or thought you lived to long, with reason
You then might nourish ill opinions of me.
Or did the suite that I prefer to you
Concern my self, and aimed not at your good
You might deny, and I sit down with patience,
And after never pre•se you,
In the name of Pluto
What would thou have me doe?
Right to your self,
Or suffer me to doe it. Can you imagine
This nasty hat, this tattered cloak, rent shoe,
This sordid linen can become the master
Of your fair fortunes? whose superfluous means
(Though I were burdensome) could cloth you in
The costliest Persian silks, studded with jewels
The spoils of Provinces, and every day
Fr•sh change of Tirian purple.
Out upon thee,
My monies in my coffers melt to hear thee.
Purple, hence Prodigal. Shall I make my Mercer
Or Taylor my heir, or see my Jeweller purchase•
No, I hate pride.
Yet decency would doe well.
Though for your outside you will not be altered,
Let me prevail so far yet, as to win you
Not to deny your belly nourishment;
Neither to think you have feasted when it is crammed
With mouldy barley bread, onions, and leekes,
And the drink of bondsman water.
Would thou have me
Bee an Apicius, or a Lucullus,
And riot out my state in curious sauces?
Wise nature with a little is contented,
And following her, my guide, I cannot err.
But you destroy her in your want of car•
(I blush to see, and speak it) to maintain her
In perfect health and vigour, when you suffer
(Frighted with the charge of Physic) Rheumes, Catars,
The Sc••fe, Ach in your bones to grow upon you,
And has•en on your fate with too much sparing.
When a cheap Purge, a Vomit and good diet
May lengthen it, give me but leave to send
The Emperors Doctor to you.
Isle be borne first
Half rotten to the fire, that must consume me,
His Pills, his Cordials, his Electuaries,
His Sirrups Iulips, Bezerstone nor his
Imagined Unicorns horn comes in my belly,
My mouth shall be a draught first, It is resolved.
No; I'll not less•n my dear golden heap.
Which every hour increasing does renew.
My youth, and vigour, but if lessened, then,
Then my poor hartstrings crack. Let me enjoy it,
And brood ore's while I live, it being my life,
My soul, my all. But when I turn to dust,
And part from what is more esteemed by me
Then all the Gods, Romes thousand Altars smoke to,
Inherit thou my adoration of it,
And like me serve my Idol.
What a strange torture
Is Avarice to it self! what man that looks on
Such a penurious spectacle but must
Know what the fable meant of Tantalus,
Or the Ass whose back is cracked with curious viands
Yet feeds on thy••les. Some course I must take,
To make my Father know what cruelty
He uses on himself.
Sir with your pardon,
I make bold to enquire the Emperors pleasure,
For, being by him commanded to attend
Your favour may instruct vs what's his will.
Shall be this night presented?
My loved Paris,
Without my intercession you well know
You may make your own approaches, since his ear
To you is ever open.
I acknowledge
His clemency to my weakness, and if ever.
I doe abuse it, lightning strike me dead,
The grace he pleases to confer upon me
(Without boast I may say so much) was never
Impoly'd to wrong the innocent, or to incense
His fury.
It is confessed many men owe you
For Provinces they ne'er hoped for; and their lives
Forfeited to his anger, you being absent,
I could say more.
You still are my good Patron.
And lay it in my fortune to deserve it,
You should perceive the poor•• of your clients
To his best abilities thankful.
I believe so.
Met you my Father?
Yes Sir, with much grief.
To see him as he is. Can nothing work him
To be himself?
O Paris it is a weight
Sits heavy here, and could this right hands loss
Remove it, it should off but he is deaf
To all persuasion.
Sir with your pardon,
I'll offer my advice! I once observed
In a Tragedy of ours, in which a murder
Was acted to the life, a guilty hearer
Forced by the terror of a wounded conscience,
To make discovery of that, which torture
Could not wring from him. Nor can it appear
Like an impossibility, but that
Your Father looking on a covetous man
Presented on the Stage as in a mirror
May see his own deformity, and loath it.
Now could you but persuade the Emperor
To see a Comedy we have that's stilt
The Cure of Avarice, and to command
Your Father to be a spectator of it,
He shall be so Anatomized in the Scene,
And see himself so personated; the baseness
Of a self torturing miserable wretch
Truly described that I much hope the object
Will work compunction in him.
There's your fee
I ne'er bought better counsel. Be you in readiness
I will effect the rest.
Sir when you please
We'll be prepared to enter. Sir the Emperor.
Rapine at vs?
Tic, more, or my informers
That keep strict watch upon him are deceived
In their intelligence there is a list
Of malcontents, as Iunius Rusticus
Palphurius, Sura, and this AElius, Lamia,
That murmur at your triumphs as mere Pageants;
And at their midnight meetings tax your justice
(For so I stile what they call tyranny)
For Paetus Thrasea's death, as if in him,
Virtue her self were murdered; nor forget they
Agricola (who for his service done
In the reducing Brittany to obedience)
They dare affirm to be removed with poison,
And he compelled to write you a cohaeyre
With his daughter, that his testament might stand,
Which else you had made void. Then your much love
To Iulia your niece, censured as incest,
And done in scorn of Titus your dead brother;
But the divorce Lamia was forced to sign
To her, you honour with Augusta's title,
Being only named, they doe conclude there was
A Lucrece once, a Collatine, and a Brutus,
But nothing Roman left now, but in you
The lust of Tarquin.
Yes. His fire, and scorn
Of such as think that our unlimited power
Can be confined, dares Lamia pretend
An interest to that which I •all mine?
Or but remember, she was ever his
That's now in our possession? fetch him hither.
I'll give him cause to wish he rather had
Forgot his own name then ever mentioned hers.
Shall we be circumscribed? let such as cannot
By force make good their actions, though wicked
Conceal, excuse or qualify their crimes:
What our desires grant leave, and privilege to
Though contradicting all divine decrees,
Or laws confirmed by Romulus, and N•ma,
Shall be held sacred.
You should else take from
The dignity of Caesar.
Am I master
Of two and thirty Legions, that awe
All Nations, of the triumphed world,
Yet tremble at our frown, yield an account
Of whats our pleasure to a private man?
Rome perish first, and Atlas shoulders shrink,
Heavens fa•rique fall; the Sun, the Moon, the Stars
Loosing their light, and comfortable heate,
Ere I confess, that any fault of mine
May be disputed.
So you preserve your power
As you should equal, and omnipotent here,
With Iupiters aboue.
Thy suite is granted
What ere it be Parthenius for thy service
Done to Augusta. Only so? a trifle.
Command him hither. If the Comedy fail
To cure him, I will minister something to h•m
That shall instruct him to forget his gold,
And think upon himself.
May it succeed well
Since my intents are pious.
We are resolved
What course to take, and therefore Arctinus
Inquire no farther. Go you to my Empress,
And say I doe entreat (for she rules him
Whom all men else obey) she wo•lt vouchsafe
The music of her voice, at yonder window,
When I advance my hand thus. I will blend
My cruelty with some scorn, or else tic lost.
Revenge, when it is unexpected falling,
With greater violence; and hate clothed in smiles,
Strikes, and with horror dead the wretch that comes not
Prepared to meet it. Our good Lamia welcome.
So much we owe you for a benefit
With willingness on your part conferd upon vs,
That '•is our study we that would not live
Engaged to any for a curtsy,
How to return it.
It is beneath your fate
To be obliged that in your own hand grasp
The means to be magnificent.
Well put off
But yet it must not doe, the Empire, Lamia,
Divided equally can hold no weight,
If balanced with your gift in fair Domitia.
You that could part with all delights at once,
The magazine of rich pleasures being contained
In her perfections, uncompelled delivered.
As a Present fit for Caesar. In your eyes
With tears of joy, not sorrow, it is confirmed
You glory in your act.
Derided too!
Sir this is more.
More then I can requite
It is acknowledged Lamia. There's no drop
Of melting n•ctar I taste from her lip,
But yields a touch of immortality
To the blessed receiver; every gre•e and feature,
Prized to the worth, bought at an easy rate;
If purchased •or a Consulship. Her discourse.
So ravishing, and her action so attractive,
That I would part with all my other senses
Provided I might ever see, and hear her.
The pleasure• of her bed I dare not trust
The winds or ayre with, for that would draw down
In envy of my happiness, a war
From all the Gods upon me.
Your compassion
To me i• your forbearing to insult
On my calamity which you make your sport,
Would more appease those Gods you have provoked
Then all the blasphemous comparisons,
You sing unto her praise.
I sing her praise?
It is far from my ambition to hope it.
It being a debt she only can lay down,
And no tongue else discharge. Hark. I think promped
With my consent that you once more should hear her,
She does begin. An universal silence
Dwell on this place. It is death with lingering torments
To all that dare disturb her. Who can hear this
And falls not down and worships? in my fancy,
Apollo being judge on Latinos hill,
Fair haired Calliope on her ivory Lute
(But something short of this) sung Ceres praise•
And gre••lie Pluto's rape on Proserpine.
The motion of the Spheres are out of time
Her musical notes but heard. Say Lamia, say,
Is not her voice Angelical?
To your ear.
But I alas am silent.
Bee so ever,
That without admiration can hear her.
Malice to my felicity strikes thee dumb,
And in thy hope, or wish to repossess
What I love more then Empire, I pronounce thee
Guilty of tresaon. Off with his head. Doe you stare?
By her, that is my Patronise, Minerua,
(Whose Statue I adore of all the Gods)
If he but live to make reply thy life
Shall answer it. My fears of him are freed now
And he that lived to upbraid me with my wrong
For an offence he never could imagine
In wantonness removed. Descend my dearest.
Plurality of husbands shall no more
Breed doubts or jealousies in you. It is dispatched
And with as little trouble here, as if
I had kilt a fly. Now you appear and in
That glory you deserve, and these that sloop
To doe you service in the act much honoured.
Iulia forget that Titus was thy Father,
Cae•is and Domitilla ne'er remmeber
S•binus, or Vespatian. To be slaves
To her, is more true liberty then to live
Parthian or Asian Queens. As lesser stars
That waite on Phoebe in her full of brightness,
Compared to her you are (thus I seat you)
By Caesa•s side. Commanding these that once
Were the adored glories of the time
To witness to the world they are your vassals
At your feet to attend you.
Tic your pleasure
And not my pride. And yet when I consider
That I am yours, all duties they can pay
I doe receive as circumstances due
To her you please to honour.
Caesars will
Commands you hither, nor must you gainsay it.
Loose time to see an Interlude? must I pay to
For my vexation?
Not in the Court,
It is the Emperors charge.
I shall endure
My torment then the better.
Can it bee
This •ordid thing Parthenius is thy Father?
No actor can express him. I had held
The fiction for impossible in the Scene,
Had I not seen the substance. Sirrha •it ••ill,
And give attention, if you but nod
You sleep for ever. Let them spare the Prologue,
And all the Ceremonies proper to our sell•e
And come to the last act, there where the cure
By the Doctor is made perfect. The swift minutes
Seem years to me Domiti• that divorce thee
From my embraces. My desires increasing
As they are satisfied all pleasures else
Are tedious as dull sorrows. Kiss me, again:
If I now wanted heate of youth, these fires
In Priams veins would thaw his frozen blood,
Enabling him to get a second Hector
For the defence of Troy.
You are wanton?
Pray you forbear. Let me see the Play.
Begin there.
O master Doctor he is past recovery
A lethargy hath ceased him. And however
His sleep resemble death his watchful •are•
To guard that treasure he dares make no use of,
Works strongly in his soul.
What's that he holds
So fast between his 〈◊〉?
The key that opens
His iron chests cramn'd with accursed gold,
Rusty with long imprisonment. There's no duty
In me his son, nor confidence in friends,
That can persuade him to deliver up
That to the trust of any.
He is the wiser
We were fashioned in one mould.
He eat• with it,
And when devotion calls him to the Temple
Of Mammon, whom of all the Gods he kneels to
That held thus still, his orisons are paid;
Or will he though, the wealth of Rome were pawned
For the restoring of it for one short hour
Be won to part with it.
Still, still my self.
And if like me he love his gold, no pawn
I• good security.
I'll try if I can force it.
It will not be. His auaritious mind
(Like men in rivers drowned) makes him gripe fast
To his last gasp what he in life held dearest.
And if that it were possible in nature
Would carry it with him to the other world.
As I would doe to hell rather then leave it.
Is he not dead?
Long since to all good actions
Or to himself, or others, for which wise men
Desire to live. You may with safety pinch him,
Or under his nails stick needle, • yet he stirs not,
Anxious fear to loose what his soul dotes on
Renders his flesh insensible. We must use
Some means to rouse the sleeping faculties
Of his mind, there lie• the Lethargy. Take a Trumpet
And blow it into his ears, tic to no purpose
The roaring noise of thunder cannot wake him•
And yet despair not I have one trick yet left
What is it?
I will cause a fearful Dream
To steal into his fancy, and disturb it
With the horror it brings with it, and so free
His bodies Organs.
It is a cunning fellow,
If he were indeed a Doctor as the play says,
He should be sworn my servant, govern my slumbers
And minister to me waking.
If this fail
I'll give him ore. So with all violence
Rend op this iron chest. For here is life lies
Bound up in fetters, and in the defence
Of what he values higher, twill return
And fill each vein and artery. Louder yet.
It is open, and already he begins
To stir, mark with what trouble.
As you are Caesar
Defend this honest thrifty man, they are thieves,
And come to rob him.
Peace the Emperor frowns.
So now power out the bags upon the Table,
Romoue his jewels, and his bonds, again.
Ring a second golden peal, his eyes are open.
He stares as he had seen Medusas head,
And were turned marble. Once more.
Murder, murder,
They vs murder, murder. My son in the plot?
Thou worse then parricide if it bee death
To strike thy Fathers body, can all tortures,
The furies in hell practise, be sufficient
For thee that doest assassinate my soul?
My gold! my bounds! my jewels! dost thou envy
My glad possession of them for a day?
Extinguishing the Taper of my life
Consumed unto the snuff?
Seem not to mind him.
Have I to leave thee rich denied my self
The joys of human being? Scraped and horded
A mass of treasure, which had Solon s•en•
The Lidian Cr••us had appeared to him
Poor a• the beggar Irus. And yet I
Solicitous to increase it, when my entrails
Were climbed with keeping a perpetual fast,
Was deaf to their loud windy cries, as fearing
Should I disburse one penny to their use,
My h•ire might curse me. And to save expense
In outward ornaments, I did expose
My naked body to the Winters cold,
And summers scorching heate. Nay when• diseases
Grew thick upon me, and a little cost
Had purchased my recovery, I chose rather
To have my ashes closed up in my urn,
By hasting on my fate, then to diminish
The gold my prodigal son, while I am living,
Carelessly scatters.
Would you would dispatch and die once.
Y••• Ghost should feel in hell, that is my slave
Which was your master.
Out upon thee varlet.
And what then follows al your cark, and caring,
And self affliction when your •taru'd trunk is
Turned to forgotten dust? This hopeful youth
Urines upon your monument. Ne'er remembering
How much for him you suffered. And then tells
To the companions of his lusts, and riots,
The hell you did endure on earth to leave him
Large means to be an Epicure, and to feast
His senses all at once, a happiness
You never granted to your self. Your gold then
(Got with vexation, and preserved with trouble)
Maintains the public stews, panders, and ruffians
That quaff damnations to your memory,
For living so long here.
'T will be so, I see it.
O that I could red•eme the time that's past
I would live, and die like my self; and make true use
Of what my industry purchased.
Covetous men
Having one foot in the grave lament so ever.
But grant that I by Art could yet recover
Your desperate sickness, lengthen out your life
A dozen of years, as I restore your body
To perfect health, will you with care endeavour
To rectify your mind
I should so live then
As neither my heir should have just cause to think
I lived too long for being close handed to him,
Or cruel to my self.
Have your desires
Phoebus assisting, me I will repair
The ruined building of your health, and think not
You have a son that hates you; the truth is
This means with his consent I practised on you,
To this good end, it being a device
In you to show the Cure of Avarice.
An old fool to be gulled thus I had he died
As I resolve to doe, not to be altered,
It had gone off twanging.
How approve you sweetest,
Of the matter, and the Actors?
For the subject
I like it not, it was fileh'd out of Horace,
Nay I have read the Poets but the fellow
That played the Doctor did it well by Venus;
He had a tunable tongue and neat delivery,
And yet in my opinion he would perform
A lovers part much better. Prithee Caesar
For I grow weary let vs see to morrow
Iplus and Anaxerete.
Any thing
For thy delight Domitia. To your rest
Till I come to disquiet you. Wait upon her.
There is a business that I must dispatch
And I will straight be with you.
Now my dread Sir
Endeavour to prevail.
One way or other.
We'll cure him never doubt it. Now Philargus
Thou wretched thing, hast thou seen thy sordid baseness?
And but observed what a contemptible creature
A covetous miser is? dost thou in thy self
Feel true compunction! with a resolution
To be a new man?
This crazed bodies Caesars,
But for my mind.
Tri•le not with my anger.
Can thou make good use of what was now presented?
And imitate in thy sudden change of life•
The miserable rich man, that expressed
What thou art to the life.
Pray• you give me leave
To dye as I have lived. I must not part with
My gold, it is my life. I am past cure.
No; by Minerua thou shalt never more
Feel the least touch of avarice. Take him hence
And hang him instantly. If there be gold in hell
Enjoy it, thine here and thy life together
Is forfeited.
Was I sent for to this purpose?
Mercy for all my service, Caesar mercy
Should Jove plead for him. It is resolved he dyes,
And he that speaks one syllable to dissuade me,
And therefore tempt me not. It is but justice.
Since such as wilfully, will hourly dye,
Must tax themselves, and not my cruelty.
No Domitilla, if you but compare
What I have suffered with your injuries,
(Though great ones I confess) they will appear
Like molehils to Olimpus.
You are tender
Of your own wounds, which makes you loose the feeling
And sense of mine. The incest he committed
With you, and publicly professed, in scorn
Of what the world durst censure may admit
Some weak defence, as being borne headlong to it.
But in a manly way to enjoy your beauties.
Besides won by his perjuries that he would
Salute you with the title of Augusta,
Your •aint denial showed a full consent,
And grant to his temptations. But poor I
That would not yield, but was with violence forced
To serve his lusts, and in a kind Tiberius
At Copra never practised, have not here
One conscious touch to rise up my accuser
I in my will being innocent.
Pardon me
Great Princesses, though I presume to tell you
Wasting your time in childish lamentations,
You doe degenerate from the blood• you spring from:
For there is something more in Rome expected
From Titus daughter, and his uncles heir,
Then womanish complaints after such wrongs
Which mercy cannot pardon. But you'll say
Your hands are weak, and should •ou but attempt
A just revenge on this inhumaine monster.
This prodigy of mankind bloody Domitian,
Hath ready words at his command as well
As Islands to confine you to remove.
His doubts, and fears, did he but entertain
The least suspicion you contrived or plotted
Against his person.
It is true Stephanos.
The legions that 〈◊〉 Hierusalem
Under my Father Titus are sworn his,
And I no more remembered.
And to loose
Our selves by building on impossible hopes,
Were desperate madness.
You conclude too fast.
One single arm whose master does contemn
His own life holds a full command ore his,
Spite of his guards. I was your bondsman Lady,
And you my gracious patronise; my wealth•
And liberty your gift, and though no soldier,
To whom or cus•ome, or example makes
Grimm death appear less terrible, I dare dye
To doe you service in a fair revenge•
And it will better suite your births and honours
To fall at once, then to live ever slaves
To his proud Empress that insults upon
Your pa•ient sufferings. Say but you go on,
And • will r•tch his heart, or perish in
The noble undertaking.
Your free offer
Confi•mes your thankfulness, which I acknowledge
A satisfaction for a greater debt
Then what you stand engaged for: but I must not
Upon uncertain grounds hazard so grateful,
And good a servant. The mortal powers
Protect a Prince though sold to impious acts,
And seem to slumber till his roaring crimes
Awake their justice: but then looking down
And with impartial eyes, on his contempt
Of all religion, and moral goodness,
They in their secrets indgements doe determine
To leave him to his wickedness, which sinckes him
When he is most secure.
His cruelty
Increasing daily of necessity
Must render him as odious to his soldiers,
Familiar frien••, and freemen, as it hath done
Already to the Senate; then forsaken
Of his supporters, and grown terrible
Even to himself, and her, he now so dotes on,
We may put into act, what now with safety
We cannot whisper,
I am still prepared
To execute when you please to command me:
Since I am confident he deserves much more
That vindicates his country from a tyranny,
Then he that saves a citizen.
O heere's Cae•is.
Whence come you?
From the Empress who seems moved
In that you wa•te no better. Her pride• grown
To such a height that she disdains the service•
Of her own women; and esteems her self
Neglected? when the Princesses of the blood
On every course employment, are not ready
To stoop to her commands.
Where is her greatness?
Where you would little think she could descend
To grace the room or persons.
Speak; where is she?
Among the Players, where all state laid by,
She does enquire who acts this part, who that•
And in what habits? blames the tire-women
For want of curious dressings; and so taken
She is with Paris the Tragedians shape
That is to act a Lover, I thought once
She would have courted him.
In the mean time
How spends the Emperor his hours?
As ever
He hath done heretofore in being cruel
To innocent men, whose virtues he calls crimes.
And but this morning if it be pos•ible
He hath out-gone himself, having condemned
At Aretinus his infor•ers suite,
Palphuri•s Sura, and good Iunius Rusticus,
Men of the best repute in Rome for their
Integrity of life; no fault obicted
But that they did lament his cruel sentence
On Paetu• Thras••s the Philosopher
Their Patron and instructor.
Can Jove see this
And hold his thunder!
Narrow and Caligula
Commanded only mischiefs• but our Caesar
Delights to see'em.
What we cannot help,
We may deplore with silence.
We are called for
By our proud mistress.
We a while must suffer.
It is true fortitude to stand firm against
All shocks of fate, when cowards faint and dye
In fear to suffer more calamity.
They are then in fetters.
Yes Sir. But
But? What?
I'll have thy thoughts. Deliver them.
I shall Sir.
But still submitting to your God-like pleasure•
Which cannot be instructed?
To the point.
Nor let your sacred Majesty believe
Your vassal, that with dry eyes looked upon
His Father dragged to death by your command,
Can pity these, that durst presume to censure
What you d•creed.
Well. Forward.
It is my z•ale
Still to preserve your clemency admi'rd
Tempered with justice, that emboldens me
To offer my advice. Alas I know Sir
These Bookmen, Rusticus, and P•lphuriu• Sura,
Deserve all tortures. Yet in my opinion,
They being popular Senators, and cried up
With loud applauses of the multitude,
For foolish honesty, and beggarly virtue,
T'would relish more of policy to have them
Made away in private, with what exquisite torments
You please it skils not, then to have them drawn
To the degrees in public; for it is doubted
That the sad object may beget compassion
In the giddy rout, and cause some sudden uproar•
That may disturb you.
Hence pal• spirited coward
Can we descend so far beneath our self
As, or to court, the peoples love, or fear
Their worst of hate? Can they that are• as dust
Before the whirlwind of our will and power,
Add any moment to vs? Or thou think
If there are Gods aboue, or Goddesses,
(But wise Minerua that's mine own and sure)
That they have vacant hours to take into
Their serious protection, or care.
This many headed monster? mankind lives
In few, as potent Monarchs, and their Peers,
And all those glorious constellations
That doe adorn the firmament, appointed
Like grooms with their bright influence to attend
The actions of Ki•gs, and Emperors,
They being the gr•ate• wheels that move the l•sse.
Bring forth those condemned wretches• let me see
One man so lost, as but to pity 'em
And though there lay a million of souls
Imprisoned in his flesh• my Hangmens •ookes
Should rend it off and give 'em liberty.
Caesar hath said it.
It is great Caesars pl•asure
That with fixed eyes you carefully observe
The peoples looks. Charge upon any man
That with a sigh, or murmur does express
A seeming sorrow for these traitors deaths,
You know his will, perform it.
A good bloud-hound,
And fit for my employments.
Give vs leave
To dye fell tyrant.
For beyond our bodies
Thou hast no power.
Yes I'll afflict your souls.
And force them groaning to the S•igian lake
Prepared for such to howl in, that blaspheme
The power of Princes, that are Gods on earth;
Tremble to think how terrible the dream is
After this sleep of death.
To guilty men
It may bring terror, not to vs, that know
What it is to dye, well taught by his example
For whom we suffer. In my thought I see
The substance of that pure untainted soul,
Of Thraseas our ma•la made a star,
That with melodious harmony invites vs
(Leaving this dunghill Rome, m•de hell by thee,)
To trace his heavenly s•eps, and fill a Sphere
Aboue yon Crystal Canopy.
Doe invoke him
With all the aids his sanctity of life
Have won on the rewarders of his virtue•
They shall not save you• Dogs doe you grin? torment 'em.
So take a leaf of Seneca now and prove
If it can render you insensible
Of that which but begins here. Now an oil
Drawn from the Stoics frozen principles
Predominant over si•e were useful for you.
Again, again. You trifle. Not a groan,
Is my rage lost? What cursed charms defend 'em!
Search deeper villains. Who looks pale? or think•
That I am cruel?
Over merciful.
`Tic all your weakness Sir.
I dare not show
A sign of sorrow, yet my sinews shrink
The spectacle is so horrid.
I was n•for
Overcome till now. For my sake roar a little,
And show you are corporeal, and not turned
Aerial spirits. Will it not do. By Pallas
It is unkindly done to mock his furl
Whom the world stiles omnipotent. I am tortured
In their want of feeling torments. Mar••• story
That does report him to have sate vnmou'd
When cunning Surgeons rip'd his art•ries,
And veins, to •ur his gout compared to this
Deserves not to bee named. Are they not dead?
If so, wee wash an AEthiope.
No, wee live.
Live to deride thee, our calm patience treading
Upon the neck of tyranny. That securely,
(As it were a gentle slumber,) we endure
Thy hangmens studied tortures, is a debt
Wee owe to grave Philosophy, that instruct's vs
The flesh is but the clothing of the soul
Which growing out of fashion though it bee
Cast of, or rent, or torn, like ours, it is then
Being it self divine, in her best luster.
But unto such as thou, that have no hopes
Beyond the present, every little scar;
The want of res•; excess o• heate or, cold
That does inform them, only they are mortal,
Pierce through, and through them.
We will hear no more,
This only, and I go•• •hee warning of it.
Though it is in thy will to grind this earth,
As small as Atoms, they thrown in the Sea to.
They shall seem recollected to thy sense,
And when the sandy building of thy greatness,
Shall with its own weight totter; look to see me
As I was yesterday, in my perfect shape,
For I'll appear in horror.
By my shaking
I am the guilty man, and not the Judge.
Drag from my sight, these curs•d ominous wizards,
That as they are now like to double faced Ianus
Which way so ever I look, are furies to me.
Away with 'em. First show them death• then leave
No memory of their ashes• I'll mock fate.
Shall words fright him, victorious armies circle?
No, no, the fever does begin to leave me.
Or were it deadly, from this living fountain
I could renew the vigour of my youth,
And be a second Verbius. O my glory!
My life I command I my all!
As you to me are.
I heard you were sad; I have prepared you sport
Will banish melancholy. Sirrha, Caesar,
(I hug my self for it) I have been instructing
The Players how to act, and to cut off
All tedious impertinence, have contracted
The Tragedy, into one continued Scene.
I have the art of't, and am taken more
With my ability that way, then all knowledge
I have but of thy love.
Thou art still thy self,
The sweetest, wittiest.
When wee are a bed
I'll thank your good opinion. Thou shalt see
Such an Iphis of thy Paris, and to humble
The pride of Domitilla that neglects me•
(How ever she is your cousin) I have forced her
To play the part of Anaxerete.
You are not offend•d with it?
Any thing
That does content thee yields delight to me.
My faculties, and powers are thine.
I thank you
Prithee lets take our places. Bid'em enter
Without more circumstance, how doe you like
That shape? me thinks it is moss• suitable
To the aspect of a despairing lover.
The seeming late fallen, count•rfeited tears
That hang upon his cheeks, was my device.
And all was excellent.
Now hear him speak.
That she is fair (•nd that an Epithet
To foul to express her or descended nobly,
Or rich, or fortunate, and certain truths
In which poor Iphis glories. But that these
Perfections, in no other Virgin found,
Abused, should nourish cruelty, and pride,
In the divinest Anaxarete,
Is, to my loue-sicke languishing soul, a riddle,
And with more difficulty to be dissolved,
Then that, the monster Sphinx from the steepy rock
Offered to Oedipus. Imperious love,
As at thy ever flaming Altars Iphis
Thy never tyred votary hath presented
With scalding tears whose Hecatombes of sighs,
Preferring thy power, and thy Paphia• mothers•
Before the thunderers, N•ptunes, or Pluto's
(That after Saturn did divide the world
And had the sway of things) yet were compelled
By thy un•uitable sha•ts to yield
And sight under thy ensigns, be auspicious
To this la•• trial of my sacrifice
Of love, and service.
Do's he not act it rarely?
Observe with what a feeling he delivers
His orisons •o Cupped; I am raped with it.
And from thy never emptied quiver take
A golden arrow, to transfix her heart
And force her love like me, or cure my wound
With a leaden one, that may beget in me
Hate and forgetfulness, of what's now my Idol.
But I call back my prayer, I have blasphemed
In my rash wish. It is I that am unworthy,
But she all merit, and may in justice challenge•
From the assurance of her excellencies
Not love, but adoration. Yet bear witness
All knowing powers, I bring along with me
As faithful advocates to make intercession
A loyal heart, with pur•, and holy flames
With the foul fires of lus• never polluted.
And as I touch her threshold (which with tears
My limbs benumbed with cold, I o•t have washed)
With my glad lips I kiss this earth grown proud
With frequent favours from her delicate feet.
By Caesars life he weeps. And I foe•bear
Hardly to keep him company.
Blessed ground thy pardon
If I profane it with forbidden steps.
I must presume to knock, and yet attempt it
With such a trembling reverence as if
My hands held up, for expiation
To the incensed Gods to spare a kingdom.
Within there, ho•? something divine come forth
To a distressed mortal.
Ha! Who knocks there?
What a churlish look this knave has
Is it you Sirrha?
Are you come to pull and whine? avaunt, and quickly.
Dogwhips shall dri•e you hence else•.
Churlish devil?
But that I should disturb the Scene, as I live
I would tear his eyes out.
It is in jest Domitia,
I doe not like such jesting, if he were not
A flinty hearted sla•e, he could not use
On• of his form so harshly. How the toad swells
At the others sweet humility!
It is his part
Let 'em proceed.
A Rogues part, will ne'er leave him
As you have gentle Sir, the happiness
(When you please) to behold the figure of
The master peace of nature, limned to the life,
In more then humane Anaxeret•,
Scorn not yo•r servant, that with suppliant hands
Takes hold upon your knees, conjuring you
As you are a man, and did not suck the milk
Of Wolves, and Tigress, or a mother of
A tougher temper, use some means these eyes
Before they are wept out, may see your Lady.
Will you be gracious Sir?
Though I loose my place for it
I can hold out no longer.
Now hee melts
There is some little hope hee may die honest
Madam.
Who calls? what object have we here?
Your cousin keeps her proud state still I think
I have fitted her for a part.
Did I not charge thee
I ne'er might see this thing more?
I am indeed
What thing you please, a Worm that you may tread on,
Lower I cannot fall to show my duty,
Till your disdain hath dug a grave to cover
This body with forgotten dust, and when
I know your sentence, cruelest of women)
I'll by a willing death remove the object
That is an eyesore to you.
Wretch thou dare not.
That were the last, and greatest service to m••
Thy doting love could boast of. What dull soole
But thou could nourish any flattering hope
One of my height, in youth, in birth and fortune
Could ever desend to look upon thy lowness?
Much less consent to make my Lord of one
I would not accept, though offre'd for my slave,
My thoughts stoop not so lowe.
There's her true nature
No personated scorn.
I wrong my worth
Or to exchange a syllable or look,
With one so far beneath me.
Yet take heed,
Take heed of pride, and curiously consider
How brittle the foundation is, on which
You labour to advance it. Niobe
Proud of her numerous issue durst contemn
Latonas double burden but what followed?
She was left a childless mother, and mourned to marble.
The beauty you o're-prize so, time, or sickness
Can change to loathed deformity, Your wealth
The prey of thieves; Queen Heccuba Troy fired
Vlisses bond-woman. But the love I bring you
Nor time, nor sickness, violent thieves, nor fate
Can ravish from you.
Could the Oracle
Give better counsel.
Say will you relent yet?
Revoking your decree that I should dye?
Or shall I doe what you command? resolve
I am impatient of delay.
Dispatch then
I shall look on your Tragedy vnmou'd,
Peradventure laugh at it, for it will prove
A Comedy to me.
O devil! devil!
Then thus I take my last leave. All the curses
Of lovers fall upon you; and hereafter
When any man like me contemned, shall study
In the anguish of his soul to give a name
To a scornful cruel mistress, let him only
Say this most bloody woman is to me.
As Anaxorite was to wretched Iphis.
Now feast your tyrannous mind, and glory in
The ruins you have made: for Hymens bands
That should have made vs one, this fatal halter
For ever shall divorce vs; at your gate
As a trophy of your pride, and my affliction,
I'll presently hang my self.
Not for the world.
Restrain him as you love your lives.
Why are you
Transported thus Domitia? it is a play,
Or grant it serious, it at no part merits.
This passion in you.
I ne'er purposed Madam
To do the deed mearnest, though I bow
To your care, and tenderness of me.
Let me Sir,
Entreat your pardon, what I saw presented
Carried me beyond my self.
To your place again
And see what follows•
No I am familiar
With the conclusion, besides upon the sudden
I feel my self much indisposed.
To bed then
I'll be thy Doctor.
There is something more
In this then passion, which I must find out,
Or my intelligence freezes.
Come to me Paris
To morrow for your reward
Patronise hear me
Will you not call for your share? sit down with this,
And the next action like a Gadita•e strumpet
I shall look to see you tumble.
Prithee be patient.
I that have suffered greater wrongs bear this
And that till my revenge my comfort is.
Why it is impossible Paris?
You observed not
(As it appears) the violence of her passion,
When personating Iphis, he pretended
(For your contempt fair Anaxerete)
To hang himself.
Yes, yes, I noted that;
But never could imagine it could work her
To such a strange intemperance of affection,
As to dote on him.
By my hopes I think not
That she respects though all here saw, and marked it
Presuming she can mould the Emperors will
Into what form she likes, though we, and all
Th'informers of the world conspired to cross it.
Then with what eagerness this morning urging
The want of health, and rest, she did entreat
Caesar to leave her.
Who no sooner absent
But she calls Dwarse (so in her scorn she ••isles me)
Put on my pantofles, fetch pen, and paper
I am to write, and with distracted looks,
In her smock, impatient of so short delay
As but to have a mantle thrown upon her,
She sealed I know not what• but it was indor•'d
To my loved Paris.
Add to this I heard her
Save, when a page received it; let him waite me
And carefully in the walk, called our retreat,
Where Caesar in his fear to give offence,
Unsent for never enters.
This being certain
(For these are more then jealous suppositions)
Why doe not you that are so near in blood
Discover it?
Alas you know wee dare not.
Twill be received for a malicious practise
To free vs from that slavery, which her pirde
Imposes on vs. But if you would please
To break the ice on pain to be sunk ever
We would aver it.
I would second you,
But that I am commanded with all speed
To fetch in Ascletario the Chaldaean•
Who in his absence is condemned of treason
For calculating the nativity
Of Caesar, with all confidence fore-telling
In every circumstance when he shall die
A violent death. Yet if you could approve
Of my directions I would have you speak
As much to Aretinus, as you have
To me delivered. He in his own nature
Being a spy, on weaker grounds no doubt
Will undertake it, not for goodness sake
(With which he never yet held correspondence)
But to endea're his vigilant obseruings
Of what concerns the Emperor, and a little
To triumph in the ruins of this Paris
That crossed him in the Senate house. Here he comes
His nose held up, he hath something in the wind,
Or I much err already. My designs
Command me hence great Ladies, but I leave
My wishes with you.
Have I caught your greatness
In the trap my proud Augusta?
What is it •aps him?
And my fine Roman Actor? is it even so?
No courser dish to take your wanton palate
Save that which but the •mperour none durst •ast off?
It is very well. I needs must glory in
This rare discovery, but the rewards
Of my intelligence, bid me think even now,
By an edict from Caesar I have power,
To tread upon the neck of slavish Rome,
Disposing offices, and Provinces,
To my kinsmen, friends and clients.
This is more
Then usual with him,
Aretinus?
How?
No more respect and reverence tendered to me
But Aretinus! it is confessed that title
When you were Princesses, and commanded all
Had been a favour; but being as you are
Vassals to a proud woman, the worst bondage,
You stand obliged with as much adoration
To entertain him, that comes armed with strength,
To break your fetters, as tand gallie-slaues
Pay such as doe redeem them from the oar
I come not to entrap you, But aloud
Pronounce that you are manumiz'd, and to make
Your liberty sweeter, you shall see her fall,
(This Empress, this Domitia, what you will)
That triumphed in your miseries.
Were, you serious
To prove your accusation, I could lend
Some help.
And I.
And I.
No atom to me.
My eyes, and ears are every where, I know all,
To the line and action in the play that took her;
Her quick dissimulation to excuse
Her being transported, with her morning passion;
I bribed the boy that did convey the letter,
And having perused it, made it up again:
Your griefs, and angers, are to me familiar;
That Paris is brought to her, and how far,
He shall be tempted.
This is aboue wonder.
My gold can work much stranger miracles
Then to corrupt poor waiters. Here join with me
It is a complaint to Caesar. This is that
Shall ruin her, and raise you. Have you set your hands
To the accusation.
And will justify
What we have subscribed to.
And with vehemence.
I will deliver it.
Leave the rest to me then
Let our Lieutenants bring vs victory,
While we enjoy the fruits of peace at home,
And being secured from our intestiue foes,
Far worse then foreign enemies, doubts, and fears,
Though all the sky were hung with blazing meteors,
Which fond Astrologers give out to be
Assured presages of the change of Empires,
And deaths of Monarchs, wee undaunted yet
Guarded with our own thunder, bid defiance,
To them, and fate, we being too strongly armed
For them to wound vs.
As thou art
More then a man.
Let not thy passions bee
Rebellious to thy reason.
But receive
This trial of your constancy, as vnmou'd
As you go to, or from the Capitol,
Thanks given to love for triumphs?
Ha!
Vouchsafe
A while to stay the lightning of your eyes.
Poor mortals dare not look on.
There's no vein
Of yours, that rises high with rage, but is
An earthquake to vs.
And if not kept closed
With more then human patience in a moment
Will swallow vs to the center.
Not that we
Rapine to serve her, are we her accusers.
But that she's fallen so low.
Which on sure proofs
We can make good.
And Show she is unworthy
Of the least spark of that divine• fire
You have conferred upon her.
I stand doubtful.
And unresolved what to determine of you.
In this malicious violence you have offered
To the Altar of her truth, and pureness to me,
You have but fruitlessly laboured to sully
A white robe of perfection, black mouthed envy
Could belch no spot on. But I will put off
The deity, you labour to take from me,
And argue out of probabilities with you
As if I wear a man. Can I believe
That she, that borrows all her light from me,
And knows to use it, would betray her darkn•sse
To your intelligence, and make that apparent.
Which by her perturbations in a play
Was yesterday but doubted and find none,
But you that are her slaves, and therefore hate her
Whose aids she might employ to make way for her?
Or Aretinus whom long since she knew
To be the Cabinet counsailor, nay the key
Of Caesars secrets? could her beauty raise her
To this vnequald height to make her fall
The more remarkable? or must my desires
To her, and wrongs to Lamia be revenged
By her, and on herself that drew on both?
Or she leave our imperial bed to court
A public actor?
who dares contradict
These more then human reasons, that have power
To cloth base guilt, in the most glorious shape
Of innocence?
To well she knew the strength,
And eloquence of her patron to defend her,
And thereupon presuming fell securely,
Not fearing an accuser, nor the truth,
Produced against her, which your love and savour
Will ne'er discern from falsehood.
I'll not here
A syllable more that may inuit a change
In my opinion of her. You have raised,
A fiercer war within me by this fable,
(Though with your lives you vow to make it story)
Then i•, and at one instant all my legions
Revolted from me, and came armed against me.
Here in this paper are the swords predestined
For my destruction; here the fatal stars
That threaten more then ruin; this the deaths head
That does assure me, if she can prove false
That I am mortal, which a sudden fever
Would prompt me to believe, and faintly yield to.
But now in my full confidence what she suffers,
In that, from any witness• but my self,
I nourish a suspicion she's untrue,
My toughness returns to me. Lead on Monsters,
And by the forfeit of your lives confirm
She is all excellence, as you all b•s•n•sse,
Or let mankind for her fall, boldly swear
There are no chaste wives now, nor ever were.
Say we command, that none presume to dare
On forfeit of our favour, that is life,
Out of a saucy curiousness to stand
Within the distance of their eyes, or ears,
Till we please to be waited on. And sirrha
However you are excepted, let it not
Beget in you an arrogant opinion
It is done to grace you.
With my humblest service
I but obey your summons, and should blush else
To be so near you.
It would become you rather
To fear, the greatness of the grace vouchsafed you
May overwhelm you, and twill doe no less•
If when you are rewarded, in your cups
You boast this privacy.
That were mightiest Empress
To play with lightning.
You conceive it right.
The means to kill, or save, is not alone
In Caesar circumscribed, for if incensed
We have our thunder to, that strikes as deadly.
It would ill become the lowness of my fortune
To question what you can doe, but withal
Humility to attend what is your will,
And then to serve it.
And would not a secret
(Suppose we should commit it to your trust)
Scald you to keep it?
Though it raged within me
Till I turned cinders, it should ne'er have vent.
To be an age a dying, and with torture
Only to be thought worthy of your counsel,
Or actuate what you command to me
A wretched obscure thing, not worth your knowledge,
Were a perpetual happiness.
We could wish
That we could credit thee, and cannot find
In reason but that thou whom oft I have seen
To personate a Gentleman, noble, wise,
Faithful, and gainsome, and what virtues else
The Poet pleases to adorn you with
(But that as vessels still partake the odour
Of the sweet precious liquors they contained)
Thou must be reallie in some degree
The thing thou dost present. Nay doe not tremble,
We seriously believe it, and presume
Our Paris is the volume in which all
Those excellent gifts the Stage hath seen him graced with
Are curiously bound up.
The argument
Is the same great Augusta, that I acting,
A fool, a coward, a traitor or cold cinique
Or any other weak, and vicious person
Of force I must be such. O gracious Madam,
How glorious soever, or deformed,
I doe appear in the Scene, my part being ended,
And all my borrowed ornaments put off,
I am no more, nor less then what I was
Before I entered.
Come you would put on
A wilful ignorant, and not understand,
What it is we point at. Must we in plain language,
Against the decent modesty of our sex•
Say that we love thee• love thee to enjoy thee,
Or that in our desires thou art preferred•
And Caesar but thy second? thou in justice
If from the height of Majesty we can
(Look down upon thy lowness and embrace it,)
Art bound with fervor to look up to me.
O Madam hear me with a patient ear
And be but pleased to understand the reasons
T•at doe deter me from a happiness
Kings would be rivals for. Can I that owe,
My life, and all that's mine to Caesars bounties
Beyond my hopes, or merits showered upon me,
Make• payment for them with ingratitude,
Falsehood, and treason? Though you have a shape
Might tempt Hyppollitus, and larger power
To help, or hurt, then wanton Phaedra had,
Let loyalty, and duty plead my pardon
Though I refuse to satisfy.
You are coy
Expecting I should court you, let mean Ladies
Use prayers, and entreaties to their creatures
To rise up instruments to serve their pleasures;
But for Augusta so to loose her self
That holds command o'er Caesar, and the world,
Were poverty of spirit. Thou must, thou shalt,
The violence of my passions knows no mean,
And in my punishments, and my rewards
I'll use no moderation. Take this only
As a caution from me. Thread-bare Chastity,
Is poor in the advancement of her servants,
B•t wantonness magnificent; and it is •requent
To have the Salary of vice weigh down
The pay of virtue. So without more trifling
Thy sudden answer.
In what a straight am I brought in•
Alas I know that the denial's death
Nor •an my grant discovered threaten more.
Yet to dye innocent, and have the glory
For all posterity to report that I
Refused an Empress to preserve my faith
To my great master, in true judgment must
Show fairer then to buy a guilty life,
With wealth, a•d honours. It is the base I build on,
I dare not, must not, will not.
How contemned?
Since hopes, nor fear•s in the extremes prevail not
I must use a mean. Think who '•is sues to thee
D•no not that yet which a brother may
Grant to his sister: as a testimony
I am not scorned. Kiss me. Kiss me ago•e.
Kiss closer. Thou art now my Trojan Paris
And I thy Helen.
Since it is your will.
And I am Monelaus. But I shall be
Something I know not yet.
Why lose we time
And opportunity. These are but sall•d•
To sharpen appetite. Let vs to the feast.
Where I shall wish that thou were Iupiter
And I Alcmena, and that I had power
To lengthen out one short night into three,
And so beget a Hercules.
While A•phitri•
Stands by, and draws the curtains.
Oh? —
Betrayed?
No, taken in a not of Vulcans filing,
Wherein my self the Theater of the Gods
Are sad spectators, not one of em daring
To witness with a smile he does desire
To be so shamed for all the pleasure that
You have sold your being for. What shall I name thee?
Ingrate•ull, treacherous, insatiate, all
Invectives, which in bitterness of spirit
Wronged men have breathed out against wicked women,
Cannot express thee. Have I raised thee from
Thy lowe condition to the height of greatness,
Command, and Majesty in one base act
To render me (that was before I hugged thee)
An adder in my bosom, more then man
A thing beneath a boast? did I force these
Of mine own blood as handmaids to kneel to
Thy pomp, and pride, having my self no thought.
But how with benefits to bind thee mine;
And am I thus rewarded? not a knee?
Nor tear? nor sign of sorrow for thy fault?
Break stubborn silence. What can thou allege
To stay my vengeance?
This. Thy lus• compelled me
To be a strumpet, and mine hath returned it
In my intent, and will, though not in act
To cu•kcold thee.
O impudence I take her hence,
And let her make her entrance into hell.
By leaving life with all the tortures that
Flesh can be sensible of. Yet stay. What power
Her beauty still holds o'er my soul that wrongs
Of this unpardonable nature cannot teach me
To tight my self and hate her • - Kill her. - Hold•
O that my dotage should increase from that
Which should breed detestation. By Minerua
If I look on her longer. I shall m•lt
And sue to her. My injuries forgot
Again to be received into her favour
Could honour yield to it! Carry her to her Chamber,
Be that her prison till in cooler blood
I shall determine of her.
Now step I in
While he's in this calm mood for my reward•
Sir, if my service hath deserved.
Yes. Yes,
And I'll reward thee, thou hast robed me of
All re•t, and peace, and bin the principal means
To make me know that, of which if again
I could be ignorant of. I would purchase it
With the loss of Empire; strangle him, take these hence to
And lodge them in the dungeon, could your reason
Dull wretches •latter you with hope to think
That this discovery that hath showered upon me
Perpetual vexation should not fall
Heavy on you? away with 'em, stop their mouths
I will hear no reply, O Paris. Paris
How shall I argue with thee? how begin,
To make thee understand before I kill thee,
With what grief and unwillingness it is forced from me?
Yet in respect I have favoured thee. I will here
What thou can speak to qualify, or excuse
Thy readiness to serve this woman• lust.
And wish thou could give me such satisfaction
As I might bury the remembrance of it:
Look up. We stand attentive;
O dread Caesar,
To hope for life, or plead in the defence
Of my ingratitude were again to wrong you.
I know I have deserved death. And my suit is
That you would hasten it: yet that your highness
When I am dead (as sure I will not live)
May pardon me I'll only urge my frailty,
Her will, and the temptation of that beauty
Which you could not resist. How would poor I then
Fly that which followed me, and Caesar sued for?
This is all. And now your sentence.
Which I know not
How to pronounce, O that thy fault had bin
But such as I might pardon; if thou had
In wantonness (like Narrow) •ir'd proud Rome
Betrayed an army, butcherd the whole Senate,
Committed Sacrilege, or any crime
The justice of our Roman laws calls death,
I had prevented any intercession
And freely signed thy pardon.
But for this
Alas you cannot• nay you must not Sir
Nor let it to posterity be recorded
That Caesar unrevenged, suffered a wrong,
Which if a private man should sit down with it
Cowards would baffle him.
With such true feeling
Thou arguest against thy self, that it
Works more upon me, then if my Minerua
(The grand protectress of my life, and Empire,)
On forfeit of her favour, cried aloud
Caesar show mercy. And I know not how
I am inclined to it. Rise. I'll promise nothing,
Yet clear thy cloudy fears and cherish hopes,
What we must doe, we shall doe; we remember
A Tragedy, we oft have seen with pleasure,
Called, the False Servant.
Such a one we have Sir.
In which a great Lord takes to his protection
A man forlorn, giving him ample power
To order, and dispose of his estate
In his absence•, he pretending then a journey.
But yet with this restraint that on no terms
This Lord suspecting his wives constancy
(She having played false to a former husband)
The servant though solicited should consent
Though she commanded him to quench her flames.
That was indeed the argument.
And what
Did thou play in it?
The false servant Sir.
Thou did indeed. Do the Players waite without?
They doe Sir and prepared to act the story
Your Majesty mentioned.
Call 'em in. Who presents
The injured Lord?
It is my part Sir,
Thou did not
Doe it to the life. We can perform it better.
Off with my Robe, and wreath, since Narrow scorned not
The public Theater, we in private may
Disport our selves. This cloak, and hat without
Wearing a beard, or other property
Will fit the person.
Only Sir a foil
The point, and edge rebutted, when you act
To doe the murder. If you please to use this
And lay aside your own sword.
By no means.
In jest nor earnest this parts never from me.
We will have but one short Scene. That where the Lady
In an imperious way commands the servant
To be unthankful to his patron when
My cue's to enter prompt me nay begin
And doe it sprightly though but a new Actor,
When I come to execution you shall find
No cause to laugh at me.
In the name of wonder
What's Caesars purpose?
There is no contending.
Why when?
I am armed.
And stood grim death now within my view and his
Vneuitable dart aimed at my breast
His cold embraces should not bring an ague
To any of my faculties, till his pleasures
Were served, and satis•ied, which done Nestors years,
To me would be unwelcome.
Must we entreat,
That were borne to command, or court a servant
(That owes his food and clothing to our bounty)
For that, which thou ambitiously should kneel for?
Urge not in thy excuse the favours of
Thy absent Lord, or that thou standst engaged
For thy life to his Charity; nor thy fears
Of what may follow, it being in my power
To mould him any way.
As you may me
In what his reputation is not wounded
Nor I his creature in my thankfulness suffer.
I know you are young, and fair, be virtuous t•o
And loyal to his bed, that hath advanced you
To th'height of happiness.
Can my lovesick heart
Be cured with counsel? or durst reason ever
Offer to put in an exploded plea
In the Court of Venus. My desires admit not
The least delay. And therefore instantly
Give me to understand what I shall trust to.
For if I am refused, and not enjoy
T•ose ravishing pleas•res from thee, I run mad for;
I'll swear unto my Lord at his return
(Making what I deliver good with tears)
That brutishly thou would have forced from me
What I make suit for. And then but imagine
What it is to dye with these words slave, and traitor,
With burning corrosives writ upon thy forehead,
And live prepared fort.
This he will believe
Upon her information. It is apparent
And then I am nothing. And of two extremes
Wisdom says chose the less. Rather then fall
Under your indignation, I will yield
This kiss, and this confirms it.
Now. Sir now.
I must take• them at it.
Yes Sir, be but perfect.
O villain! thankless villain • I should talk now•
But I have •orgot my part. But I can doe,
Thus, thus, and thus.
Oh, I am slain in earnest.
It is 〈◊〉, and it was my purpose my good Paris
And yet before life leave thee, let the honour
I have done thee in thy death bring comfort to thee
If i• had been within the power of Caesar
His dignity preserved he had pardoned thee.
But cruelty of honour did deny it.
Yet to confirm I loved thee? it was my study
To make thy end more glorious to distinguish
My Paris from all others, and in that
Have shown my pity. Nor would I let thee fall
By a Centurions sword, or have thy limbs
Rent piece meal by the hangmans hook however•
Thy crime deserved it: but as thou did live
Romes bravest Actor, it was my plot that thou
Should dye in action, and to crown it dye
With an applause enduring to all times,
By our imperial hand. His soul is freed
From the prison of his flesh, let it mount upward.
And for this trunk when that the funeral pile
Hath made it ashes, we will see it enclosed
In a golden urn. Poets adorn his hearse
With their most ravishing sorrows, and the stage
For ever morn him, and all •uch as were
His glad spectators weep his sudden death,
The cause forgotten in his Epitaph.
Keep a strong guard upon him, and admit not
Access to any, to exchange a word,
Or syllable with him, till the Emperor pleases
To call him to his presence. The relation
That you have made me Stephanos of these late
Strange pa•sions in Caesar, much amaze me.
The informer Aretinus put to death
For yielding him a t•ue discovery
Of th'Empresse wantonness; poor Paris kilt first
And now lamented; and the Princesses
Consigned to several Islands, yet Augusta
The machine on which all this mischief moved•
Received again to grace?
Nay courted to it.
(Such is the impotence of his affection)
Yet, to conceal his weakness he gives out
The people made suit for her, whom they hate more
Then civil war, or famine. But take heed
My Lord, that nor in your consent nor wishes
You lent or furtherance, or favour to
The plot contrived against her, should she prove it,
Nay doubt it only you are a loft man
Her power o'er doting Caesar being n•w
Greater then ever.
It is a truth I shake at.
And when there's opportunity.
Say but doe
I am yours, and sure.
I will Stand one trial more
And then you shall hear from me.
Now observe
The fondness of this tyranne, and her pride.
Nay ell's forgotten.
It may be on your part.
Forgiven to Domitia it is a favour
That you should welcome with more cheerful looks
Can Caesar pardon what you durst not hope for
That did the injury, and yet must sue
To her whose guilt is washed off by his mercy
Only to entertain it?
I asked none,
And I should be more wretched to receive
Remission (for what I hold no crime)
But by a bare acknowledgement then if
By sl•eg•ting, and contemning it, a• now
I dat'd thy utmost fury. Though thy flatterers
Persuade thee, that thy murders, lusts, and rapes
Are virtues in thee, and what pleases Caesar
Though never sown just is right, and lawful;
Or work in thee a false belief that thou
Art more then mortal, yet I to thy teeth
(When circled with thy Guards, thy rods, thy axes,
And all the ensigns of thy boasted power)
Will say Domitian, nay add to it Caesar
Is a weak feeble man, a bondsman to
His violent passions, and in that my slave,
Nay more my slave, then my affections made me
To my loved Paris.
Can I live, and hear this?
Or hear and not revenge it? come, you know
The strength that you hold on me, doe not use it
With too much cruelty, for though it is granted
That Lidian Omphale had less command
O'er Hercules, then you usurp ore me,
Reason may teach me to shake off the yoke
Of my fond dotage.
Never, doe not hope it
It cannot be. Thou bring my beauties captive
And not to be redeemed, my Empire's larger
Then thine Domitian, which I'll exercise
With rigour on thee, for my Paris death.
And when I have forced those eyes now red with fury
To drop down tears, in vain •pent to appease me
I know thy sernor such to my embraces
(Which shall be, though still kneeled for, still denied thee)
That thou with langui•hment sh•lt wish my Actor
Did live again, so thou might be his second
To feed upon those delicates, when he's sated.
O my Minerua•
There she is invoke her
She cannot arm thee with ability
To draw thy sword on me, my power being great•
Or only say to thy Centurions
Dare none of you doe what I shake to think on?
And in this women's death remove the furies
That every hour afflict me? Lamias wrongs
When thy lust forced me from him, are in me
At the height revenged, nor would I out-liue Paris
But that thy love increasing with my hate
May add unto thy torments, so withal
Contempt I can I leave thee.
I am lost
Nor am I Caesar, when I first betrayed
The freedom of my faculties, and will
To this imperious Siren, I laid down
The Empire of the world, and of my self
At her proud feet. Sleep all my ireful powers?
Or is the magique of my dotage such
That I must •till make suite to hear those charms
That doe increase my thraldom? wake my anger,
For shame break through this Lethargy, and appear
With usual terror, and enable me
(Since I wear not a sword to pierce her heart,
Nor have a tongue to s•y this let her dye)
Though it is done with a feauer-shaken hand
To sign her death, assist me great Minerua
And vindicate thy votary. So shoe's now
Among the list of those I have prescribed•
And are to free me of my doubts, and fears,
To dye to morrow.
That same fatal book
Was never drawn yet, but some men of rank
Were marked out for destruction.
I begin
To doubt my self.
Who waits there?
Caesar.
So.
These that command armed troupes quake, at my frowns
And yet a woman sleights 'em. Whore's the Wizard
Wee charged you to fetch in?
Ready to suffer
What death you please t'appoint him.
Bring him in.
We'll question him our self. Now you that hold
Intelligence with the stars, and dare prefix•
The day and hour in which we are to part
With life and Empire, punctually fore-telling
The means, and manner of our violent end,
As you would purchase credit to your art
Resolve me since you are assured of vs
What fate attends your self?
I have had long since
A certain knowledge, and assure as thou
Shalt dye to morrow being the fourteenth of
The Kalenda of October, the hour five
Spite of prevention, this carcass shall be
Torn and deuourd by dogs, and let that stand for a firm prediction.
May our body wretch
Find never nobler Sepulchre if this
Fall ever on thee. Are we the great disposer
Of life, and death yet cannot mock the stars
In such a trifle? Hence with the impostor,
And having cut his throat, erect a pile
Guarded with soldiers, till his cursed tree••cke
Be turned to ashes, upon forfeit of
Your life, and theirs, perform it.
It is in vain,
When what I have foe•etold is made apparent
Tremble to think what follows.
Drag him hence
And doe as I command you. I was never
Fuller of confidence, for having got•
The victory of my passions, in my freedom
From proud D•mitia (who shall cease to live
Since she disdains to love) I rest vnmou'd
And in defiance of prodigious meteors,
Chaldeans vai•e predictions, jealous fears
Of my near fri•nd•, and freemen, certain hate
O kindred, and alliance, or all terrors
The soldiers doubted faith, or peoples rage
Can bring to shake my constancy I am armed.
That scrupulous thing stilled Conscience is seared up
And I insensible of all my actions
For which by moral and religious sooles
I stand condemned, as they had never been
And since I have subdued triumphant love
I will no• deify pale captive •care
Nor in a thought receive it. For till thou
Wisest Minerua that from my first youth,
Hast been my sole protectress, dost forsake me
Not Iunius Rusticus, threatened apparition,
Nor what this Southsayer but even now foretold
(Being things impossible to humane reason)
Shall in a dream disturb me. Bring my couch there
A sudden but a secure drowsiness
Invites me to repose my self. Let Music
With some choice ditty second it. I the mean time
Rest there dear book, which opened when I wake
Write my name
In his bloody scroll Parthenius? the feare's idle
He durst not, could not.
I can assure nothing
But I obe•eru'd when you departed from him
After some little passion, but much fury,
He drew it out, whose death he signed I know not
But in his looks appeared a resolution
Of what b•fore he staggerd at. What he hath
D•termin'd o• is uncertain, but too soon
Will •all on you, or me, or both, or any
H•s pl•asure known to the Tribunes, and Centurions.
Who never use to enquire his will but serve it.
Now i• out of the confidence of your power,
The blonde Catalogue being still about him
As he sleep• you dare peruse it, or remove it
You may instruct your self or what to suffer,
Or how to cross it.
I would not be caught
With too much confidence. By your leave Sir. Ha!
No motion! you lye uneasy Sir,
Let me mend your Pillow.
Have you it?
It is here.
Oh.
You have waked him, softly gracious Madam
While we are unknown, and then consult at leisure.
Defend me goddess, or this horrid dream
Will force me to distraction. Whether have
These furies borne thee? Let me rise! and follow
I am bathed o'er with the cold sweat of death,
And am deprived of organs to pursue
These sacrilegious spirits. Am I at once
Robbed of my hopes, and being? No, I live
Yes live, and have discourse to know my self
Of Gods, and men forsaken. What accuser
Within me cries aloud, I have deserved it,
It being just to neither. Who dares speak this?
Am I not Caesar? how I again repeat it?
Presumptuous traitor thou shalt dye, what traitor?
He that hath been a traitor to himself
And stands convicted here. Yet who can sit
A competent Judge ore Caesar? Caesar. Yes
Caesar by Caesar's, sentenced• and must suffer
Miuerua cannot save him. Ha! Where is she?
Where is my goddess? vanished! I am lost then
No it was no dream, but a most real truth
That Iunius Rusticus, and Palphurius Sura,
Although their ashes were cast in the sea
Wereby their innocence made up again.
And in corporeal forms but now appeared.
Waving their bloody swords aboue my head,
As at their deaths they threatened. And me thought
Minerua ravished hence whispered that she
Was for my blasphemies disarmed by Jove
And could no more protect me. Yes it was so,
His thunder does confirm it, against which
However it spare the laurel, this proud wreath
Is no assurance. Ha! come you resolved
To be my executioners?
Allege•ance
And faith forbid that we should lift an arm
Against your sacred head.
We rather sue
For mercy.
And acknowledge that in justice
Our lives are forfeited for not performing
What Caesar charged vs.
Nor did we transgress it
In our want of will, or care, for being but men
It could not be in vs to make resistance,
The Gods fighting against vs.
Speak in what
Did they express their anger? wee will here it
But dare not say undaunted.
In brief thus Sir.
The Sentence given by your imperial tongue
For the Astrologer Ascl•tario's death
With speed was put in execution.
Well.
For his throat out, his legs bound, and his arms
Pinioned behind his b•cke, the breathless trunk
Was with all scorn dragged to the field of Mars
And there a pile being raised of old dry wood,
Smeared o'er with oil, and brimstone, or what else
Could help to feed, or to increase the fire
The Carcass was thrown on it; but no sooner
The stuff, that was most apt, began to flame;
But suddenly to the amazement of
The •eareless• soldier, a sudden flash
Of lightning breaking through the scattered clouds
With such a horrid violence forced its passage
And as disdaining all heate but it self
In a moment quenched the artificial fire.
And before we could kindle it again
A clap of thunder followed with such noise,
As if then Jove incensed against mankind,
Had in his secret purposes determined
An universal ruin to the world.
This horror past, not at Deucalions flood
Such a stormy shower of rain (and yet that word is
To narrow to express it) was ever seen
Imagine rather Sir, that with less •urie
The Waives rush down the Cataracts of Nile;
Or that the Sea spouted into the ayre
By the angry Orke, endangering tall ships
But sailing near it, so falls down again,
Yet here the wonder ends not, but begins
For as in vain we laboured to consume
The witches body, all the Dogs of Rome
Howling, and yelling like to famished wolves
Brake in upon vs, and though thousands were
Kilt in th'attempt some did ascend the pile
And with their eager fangs ceased on the carcass.
But have they torn it?
Torn it, and devoured it.
I then am a dead man since all predictions
Assure me I am lost; O my loved soldiers
Your Emperor must leave you: yet however
I cannot grant my self a short reprieve
I freely pardon you. The fatal hour
Steals fast upon me. I must dye this morning
By five my soldiers, that's the latest hour
You ever must see me living.
Jove avert it
In our swords lies your fate, and we will guard it.
O no, it cannot be, it is decreed,
Aboue, and by no strengths here to be altered.
Let proud mortality but look on Caesar
Compassed of late with armies, in his eyes
Carrying both life, and death, and in his arms
Fathoming the earth; that would be •tilde a God,
And is for that presumption cast beneath
The low condition of a common man,
Sinking with mine own weight,
Doe not forsake,
Your self we'll never leave you.
VVe'll draw up
More cohorts of your Guard, if you doubt treason.
They cannot save me. The offended Gods
That now sit judges on me, from their envy
Of my power and greatness here, conspire against me.
Endeavour to appease them.
Twill be fruitless
I am past hope of remission. Yet could I
Decline this dreadful hour of five, these terrors
That drive me to despair would soon fly from me
And could you but till then assure me,
Yes Sir,
Or we'll fall with you, and make Rome the urn•
In which we'll mix our ashes.
Tic said nobly,
I am something comforted. Howere to dye
Is the full period of calamity.
You see we are all condemned, there's no evasion,
We must doe or suffer.
But it must be sudden
The least delay is mortal.
Would I were
A man to give it action.
Could I make my approaches though my sty∣ture
Does promise little, I have a spirit as daring
As hers, that can reach higher.
I will take
That burden from you Madam. All the art is
To draw him from the Tribunes that attend him
For could you bring him but within my swords reach
The world should owe her freedom from a tyranne,
To Stephanos.
You shall not share alone
The glory of a deed that will endure
To all posterity.
I will put in
For a part my self.
Be resolute, and stand close.
I have conceived a way, and with the hazard
Of my life I'll practise it to fetch him hither.
But then no trifling.
We will despatch him fear not
A dead dog never bites.
Thus then at all
How slow paced are these minutes • in extremes
How miserable is the least delay•
Could I jump feathers to the wings of time
Or with a• little ease command the Sun
To scourge his coursers up heavens eastern hill
Making the hour• I tremble at past recalling
As I can move this dials tongue to six,
My veins, and arteries emptied with fear
Would fill and swell again. How doe I look?
Doe you yet see death about me:
Think not of him
There is no danger all these prodigies
That doe affright you rise from natural causes,
And though you doe ascribe them to your self•
Had you ne'er been, had happened•
It is well said,
Exceeding well brave• soldier. Can it be
That I that feel my s•lfe in health and strength
Should still bell•eve I am so near my end,
And have my guards about me? perish all
Predictions. I grow constant they are false
And built upon uncertainties.
This is right.
Now Caesar's hard like Caesar.
We will to
The Camp, and having there confirmed the soldier
With a large Donatiue, and increase of pay
Some shall. I say no more.
All happiness
Security, long life attend upon
The Monarch of the World.
Thy looks are cheerful,
And my relation full of joy and wonder.
Why is the care of your imperial body
My Lord neglected the feared hour being past
In which your your life was threatened.
Is it past five?
Past six upon my knowledge, and injustice
Your Clock master should die• that hath deferd
Your peace so long. There is a post new lighted
That brings assured intelligence, that your legions
In Siria have won a glorious day,
And much enlarged your Empire. I have kept him
Concealed that you might first partake the pleasure
In private, and the Senate from your self
Be taught to understand how much •hey owe
To you and to your fortune.
Hence pale fear then
Lead me Parthenius.
Shall we waite you?
No
After losses Guards are useful, know your distance.
How strangely hopes delude m•n, as I live
The hour is not yet come.
Howere we are
To pay our duties, and observe the sequel.
I hear him coming, be constant.
Where Parthenius is this glad messenger.
Make the door fast. Here, a messenger of whore∣roar.
How! betrayed?
No taken tyranne.
My Domitia in the conspiracy!
Behold this book.
Nay then I am lost. Yet though I am unarmed
I'll not fall poorly.
Help me.
Thus, and thus.
Are you so long a falling?
It is done, it is done basely.
This for my Fathers death.
This for my Paris,
This for thy Incest
This for thy abuse of Domitilla.
Force the doors. O Mars!
What have you done.
What Rome shall give vs thanks for.
Despatch'd a Monster.
Yet he was our Prince
How ever wicked, and in you this murder
Which whosoe're succeeds him will revenge,
Nor will we that served under his command
Consent that such a monster as thy self
(For in thy wickedness, Augusta's title
Hath quite forsook thee) thou that were the •round•
Of all these mischiefs, shall go h••ce unpunished.
••y hands on her. And drag her to sentence,
We will refer the hearing to the Senate
Who may at their best leisure censure you
Take up his body. He in death hath paid
For all his cruelties. Heere's the difference
Good Kings are mourned for after life, but ill
And such as governed only by their will
And not their reason. Unlamented fall
No Goodmans tear shed at their Funeral.

SHame and dishonour to the Roman name
A triumph held at Alexandria
Only to honour Cleopatraes pride?
Ah Marcus, this Egyptian Queen was made
〈◊〉 be the ruin of Antonius.
〈◊〉 be the pleasure of Antonius.
•ow can you jest Canidius, on a theme
〈◊〉 sad?
〈◊〉 Plancus can you prophecy
〈◊〉 sadly on so merry an occasion,
As is the love of Ladies?
Let Canidius
Have his own way, Munatius, tic in vain
To talk to him.
Would you could let me have
Antonius his way, upon condition
I suffered you to censure gravely of it,
And prophecy my ruin. But my Lords,
You were as good be merry too, and take
Your share of pleasure in th'Aegyptian Court.
You'll do no good with these persuasions.
He loves the Queen, and will do so in spite.
Of our morality.
Tic too too true,
That face of hers, that beauty in the bud
Not fully blown, in years of innocence
(If any years of hers were innocent)
Set off with no adulterisme of art,
Nor clothed with state and pompous Majesty,
But in a fortune clouded and distressed
A wretched prisoner in her brother's Court,
Yet then I say that charming face could move
The manly temper of wise Julius Caesar,
That Ma•• in heat of all his active war,
When he pursued the flying Pompey hither,
His sword yet reeking in Pharsa•i•es slaughter
At sight of her became a dot•ng Lover:
And could we think that our Antonius
A man not master of that temperance
That Caesar had, could find a strength to guard
His soul against that beauty now set off
With so much wealth and majesty?
No surely.
I did not think Antonius was an Eunuch.
Nor could I have believed he had been worthy
To be a successor in Caesa• power,
Unless he had succeeded him in her.
Great Julius noble acts in war and state
Assured the world that he was wise and valiant:
But if he had not fallen in love with her
I should have much suspected his good nature.
Nay then, Canidius, it shall be yours.
Or what indeed were greatness in the world
If he that did possess it, might not play
The wanton with •t? this Egyptian Queen
Is a state beauty, and ordained by fate
To be possessed by them that rule the world.
Great Pompey's son enjoyed her first, and plucked
Her Virgin blossom. When that Family,
Whose ruin filled the World, was overthrown,
Great Iul•us next came in as conqueror
To have his share, and as he did in power,
Succeeded him in Cleopatra, love.
Now our Antonius takes his turn, and thinks
That all the legions▪ all the swords, that came
To make his greatness up when Julius died,
Could give no greater privilege to him
Then p•were to be the servant to this Queen.
Thus whosoere in Rome be conqueror
His laurel wreath is Cleopatraes love.
And to speak justly of her, Nature teem'd
To build this woman for no meaner height.
Her soul is full of greatness, and her wit
Has charms as many as her beauty has.
With Majesty beyond her sex she rules
Her spacious Kingdoms, and all neighbour Princes
Admire her parts. How many languages
Speaks she with elegance? Ambassadors
From the Aethiopians, Arabs, Troglodytes,
From the Hebrews, Syrians, Medes, and Parthians
Have in amazement heard this learned Queen
Without the aid of an interpreter
In all their several tongues return their answers;
When most of her dull predecessor Kings
Since Ptolemaeus Philadelphus time
Scarce understood the Egyptian tongue, and some
Had quite forgot the Macedonian.
How well Canidius descants on this theme!
I'll lay my life it pleases him; the man
Is deep in love, and pity tic he has
So great a rival as Antonius.
Well use your wit upon me; but I doubt
If any man could search your secret thoughts,
Tic envy, not morality that makes
You tax his love, how gravely ere you talk.
But can Canidius think it should be just
In our Antonius to forsake for her
His lawful wife the good Octavia?
Then like a Roman let me answer, Marcus.
Is it become a care worthy of us
What woman Antony enjoys? have we
Time to dispute his matrimonial faults,
That have already seen the breach of all
Romes sacred laws, by which the world was bound?
Have we endured our Consuls state and power
To be subjected by the lawless arms
Of private men, or Senators proscribed,
And can we now consider whether they
That did all this, may keep a wench or no?
It was the crime of us, and Fate it self
That Antony and Caesar could usurp
A power so great; beyond which we can suffer
No more worth thinking of. Nor were it to us
Any great fortune if Antonius
Were honest of his body.
Have we then,
Who have been greatest Magistrates, quite lost
All show of liberty, and now not dare
To counsel him?
A show of liberty
When we have lost the substance, is best kept
By seeming not to understand those faults
Which we want power to mend. For mine own pa••
I love the person of Antonius;
And through his greatest looseness can discern
A nature here, honester then Caesars.
And if a war do grow twixt them (as surely
Ambition would ere long find out a cause
Although Octavia had not been neglected)
Rather then Rome should still obey two Lords,
Could wish that all were Anthony's alone.
Who would, I think, be brought more easily
Then Caesar, to resign the government.
Would I could think that either would do so.
Here comes her servant Mardio.
Noble Lords,
The Queen by me entreats your company
At supper with the Lord Antonius.
Marcio return our humble services,
Wee 'll instantly attend her. Now my friends,
Can you a while put off austerity,
And rigid censures, to be freely merry?
It may be so. We'll try what wine can do.
Glaucus, let more of this perfume be got.
I have enough in readiness; or else
It would be too late to think on it now, the Queen
Is upon entrance.
Charmio, art thou sure
Those tapers stand just as the Queen commanded?
Tic the same order that Antonius
When last he feasted here, so much admired;
And said amongst all the curiosities
That he had seen, the placing of those lights.
Did not the least affect him.
Though the Romans
In power and warl•ke state exceed us far,
Yet in our Court of Egypt they may learn
Pleasure and bravery, but art thou sure
That all things here are well?
As exquisite
As the Queens wish would have it. Hark they come.
To say, my Lord, that you are welcome hither
Were to disparage you, who have the power
To make your self so, what ere you see
In Egypt is your own.
What Egypt holds
If I be judge, not all the world besides
Can equalise.
Will it please you take
Your place, and these your noble Roman friends?
Father Achoreus, sit you near to me.
Your holy Orders, and great age, which shows
The Gods have loved you well, may justly challenge
A reverence from us.
Great Julius Caesar
Did love my father well; he oft was pleased
At hours of leisure to confer with him
About the nature of our Nile, of all
The mysteries of Religion, and the wonders
That Egypt breeds.
He had a knowing soul,
And was a master of Philosophy
As well as War.
How like the spangled sky
These tapers make the high-arch'd roof to show?
While Cleopatra like bright Cynthia
In her full orb more guilds the cheerful night.
Shoe's still at full; yet still me thinks she vexes,
And grows more fair and more majestic.
My Lords, you Romans, whose victorious arms
Have made you Masters of the world, possess
Such full and high delights in Italy,
That our poor Egypt can present no pleasure
Worth your acceptance: but let me entreat
You would be freely merry, and forgive
Your entertainment.
It is an entertainment
That might invite and please the Gods. Me thinks,
Jove should descend, while Cle•patra's here,
Disguised for love, as once for fear he was,
When bold Typh••us scaled the starry sky,
And all the Gods disguised in Egypt lurked.
Love were a nobler cause then fear to bring him,
And such a love as thine.
If I could think
That ere great Jove did play such feats as those,
I'd now believe that he were here disguised,
And took the noble shape of Anthony
This complement so far transcends, it leaves
No answer for a wit so dull as mine.
NOt hee, that knows how to acquire
But to enjoy, is blessed.
Nor does our happiness consist
In motion, but in rest.
The Gods pass man in bliss, because
They toil not for more height;
But can enjoy, and in their own
Eternal rest delight.
Then, Princes, do not toil, nor care;
Enjoy what you possess.
Which whilst you do, you equalise
The Gods in happiness.
Minutius Plancus, I was thinking now
How Hannibal was charmed at Capua,
When that delicious place had mollified
His rough and cruel soul, and made him learn
The lessons of soft love, and luxury.
There was no cause, Marcus, for such a thought.
For our Antonius in the heat of all
His active life knew how to revel well.
Let this soft Musique cease, and louder sound.
This second course is mine. Call in Lucilius.
Fair Cleopatra, for addition
To what thou hold, the world-commanding Rome
Presents these Crowns, and by my hand invests
Thee, Cleopatra Queen of wealthy Cyprus,
Of Coelosyria, and Phoenicia.
Blush no•, my Love, nor let Romes bounty force
Thy modesty▪ these Crowns from thy fair brow
Receive more lustre then they can bestow.
I think he need not greatly fear her blushing.
No Marcus no; alas these petty Kingdoms
(Though too too great to be so ill bestowed)
Are not the scope of her ambitious aims!
My Lord, I dare not make excuse, or plead
Unworthiness, where once Antonius wisdom
Has made election to confer his favours.
Admire not, friends; the God-like power of Rome
Is more declared by what it gives away
Then what it holds. But these are still our own
And Cleopatra Romes deserving friend.
I cannot choose but think how fit a state
For Cleopatra Cyprus Kingdom is;
And shall believe that it was ominous
That noble Julius Caesar after all
Those four rich triumphs which he held at Rome
When he resolved with like magnificence
To build a Temple to the Goddess Venus,
From whom his house derive their pedigree
Within his stately Temple, to express
The Image of that Goddess, he set up
Fair Cleopatraes figure in the place
Supposing her to be the Queen of Love.
You know my Lord Antonius, this is true,
And Cyprus ever was fair Venus Isle.
It was well observed noble Canidius.
Fill me some wine. Health to the Cyprian Queen.
Drink it to me Canidius; and I thank thee.
Let it go round, my ftiends.
I ever thought
My self much bound to brave Canidius
Since I was happy in his company.
How fit it is, no other Cyprian Queen,
But Cleopatra shall the Poëts know,
Whose fancies now shall raise that Kingdom higher.
More amorous now will Paphos mountains show,
And all those flowery Meads▪ the Fields of love,
Ore which no winds but Western ever blow.
The air it self will yield a sweeter breath
While Cleopatra reigns the Cyprian Queen.
How amorous in his language he is grown.
The times, I fear Minutius, will require
A rougher language shortly. We shall hear
As soon as any news can come from Rome.
But long ago was I enforced to know
That Cleopatra was the Queen of love,
When first I met thee in Cilicia,
And down the silver stream of Cydnus, thou
In Venus shape came sailing, while the air
Was ravished with thy Music, and the winds
In amorous gales did kiss thy silken sails.
Thy maids in Graces habits did attend,
And boys, like Cupids, painted quivers bore,
While thousand Cupids in those starry eyes
Stood ready drawn to wound the stoutest hearts.
You came like Mars himself in threatening arm•
To ruin me, and my poor Country then.
I took that shape, because I knew no strength
No power on earth was able to resist
The conquering fury of Antonius.
That face of thine resisted me, and did
So sweetly conquer, I was proud to yield;
And more rejoiced in that captivity,
Then any Roman in a triumph did.
How now, what news with thee?
Letters from Rome, my Lord.
From whom?
Geminius.
To morrow we'll peruse them. No affairs
Of what import or height so ere, shall have
Power to disturb the pleasures of this night.
Our theme to night is love, which oft has made
The Thunderer himself a while lay by
The weary burden of his government.
Come lead away.
It were fit to read them now.
None knows what gain a little time may be
You may peruse them Titius; lead away.
Can no affairs of what import so ere
Break one nights pleasure? well Antonius,
The tottering state thou holdst, must be supported
By nobler virtues, or it cannot stand.
Cyprus, Phoenice, Coelosyria,
Three wealthy Kingdoms got with Roman blood,
And our forefathers valour, given away
As the base hire of an adulterous bed.
Was Cyprus conquered by the sober virtue
Of Mar•us Cato, to be thus bestowed?
This act will please young Caesar.
Twill displease
The Senate, Marcus, and Antonius friends.
Alas, he knows not what true friendship means,
But makes his friends his slaves, and which is worse
Slaves to his lusts and vices; could he else
Slight our advise so? men, whom Rome has seen
Wearing her highest honours, and of birth
As great as his. Unless he change his mind
I shall believe my friendship was ill placed,
And strive to place it better.
This last act
Will quickly be at Rome.
They have enough
Already, noble Plancus; think you not
It will be censured that the Roman name
Was much dishonoured by that base surprise
Of Artuvases the Armenian King?
Whom through the streets of Alexandria
He led in triumph bound with golden chains
Forcing the captive King, (if all his threats
Could have enforced so much) prostrate to adore
Proud Cleopatra, as if all his acts,
And all the honour of his arms were due
To her and not to Rome. Calvisius too
In Senate late accused him for bestowing
On Cleopatra that so far renowned
And famous Library of Pergamus,
In which there were two hundred thousand Books.
How many such wilde actions have her charms
Enforced his weakness to?
His Testament,
Which now at Rome the Vestal Virgins keep,
Of which we two are privy to the sealing,
Should it be known, would stir all Romans hate,
Willing his body, though he died at Rome,
To be interred at Alexandria.
But if a war twixt him and Caesar grow
(As needs it must, although not yet declared)
For Caesar now is levying men and money
Through Italy, Spain, France and Germany,
Against what foe can his design be bent
But our Antonius? if a war I say
Twixt them should happen, tell me, noble Titius,
What should we do?
Fight for Antonius.
True friend, were he himself, or were there hope,
Or possibility he could be so.
But shall our valour toil in sweat and blood
Only to gain a Roman Monarchy
For Cleopatra, and th'eff•minate rout
Of base Canop•? shall her timbrels fright
Romes C•p toll, and her advanced pride
Tread on the no•ks of captive Senators?
Or, which 〈◊〉 more, shall the earths Imperial seat
Remove from Rome to Aegypts swarthy sands?
For who can tell if mad Antonius
Have promised her, as C••us Marius once
Promise•d• the Samnites, to transfer the state?
It may be so, his dotage is enough
To grant it her, her pride enough to ask it.
Manutius Plan•us, in this whole discourse
Thou speak my very thoughts no more, here comes
•ucilius, whither so fast?
My Lords,
•own to the Fort to wait upon the Consuls,
•he Roman Consuls both, Titus Domitius,
•nd Caius S•ssius are from Rome arrived
•ere at Pelusium, what the matter is
•s not yet known.
We'll go along with thee;
This now begins to look like business, Marcus.
Tic not the place, nor marble walls that make
A Senate lawful, or decrees of power,
But convocation of the men themselves
The sacred order by true Magistrates.
Then Rome is here; here both her Consuls are,
Here are her axes, and her falces born,
And no small number of that sacred order
Are here assisting, when the barbarous Gaules
Had taken Rome, when all the Senate fled,
And with Cam•llus their Dictator then
At Veii lived, Rome then at Veii was,
As now in Egypt. Fathers, know the face,
Of your assembly, know your lawful power.
Consult, decree, and act what ere may be
Happy, and prosperous tor the Common-wealth.
Whilst power of laws, whilst reverence of the Senate,
And due respect to a Consuls dignity
Could give protection to the Consuls persons
We did maintain thy cause Antonius
Against proud Caesars faction. Now since laws
Are put to silence, and the Senate forced,
The Consuls sacred privilege infringed
By rage and lawless arms, we are expelled,
And suffer banishment to be restored,
And re-indeniz'd by thy conquering sword.
Now justly draw it. Fate approves thy cause,
And on thy conquest sets a glorious prize,
Greater then all thy former wars could give▪
Sextus Pompeius, Marcus Lepidus
Are ruined both, and all competitors
Are tan away; Fortune has left but one
To share the world with thee; nor can thou share
The world with him, his pride would bar thy right▪
And Caesar's glory dim Antonius light.
Thou can not shine unless alone thou shine.
Or all the world, or nothing must be thine.
The Consulship, that was designed to thee,
The Senate have revoked, and decree
Against Cleopatra war, but meant against thee.
What would their malice dare Antonius,
Had Fortune frowned, thy Kings and Provinces
Revolted from thee, that dare now p•ovoke
Thy growing fortunes and assisting Gods?
Their injury has made thy quarrel just.
Be speedy then, and lose no time of action:
Caesar is needy; his Italian soldiers
Are apt to mutiny for want of pay,
And might with ease be tempted to revolt.
We need them not; our strengths are greater far
Then Caesar's are; our praeparations readier.
Nought but delay can question our success.
Shall we decree the war?
•tay noble Romans;
•before we publish a Decree, or show
•he reason our arms so justly tan;
•eigh but with me the means and strength we have.
•now worthy friends it is no desperate war
•our valours are engaged in; briefly thus:
•ur Roman strength is nineteen Legions.
•en Kings in person will attend our Camp,
•he Kings of Africa, Comagena, Thrice,
•pper Cilicia, Paphlagonia,
•f Cappadocia, Pontus, Palaestine,
•f rich Arabia, and Galatia.
•ur strength at Sea five hundred fighting ships
•ell rigged and manned: our treasuries are full;
•nd twenty thousand talents to the war
•os Cleopatra freely contribute.
•hy speak I more? the Crown of all my strength,
•ur loves and spirits are. The injuries
〈◊〉 which we ground our just and lawful war,
〈◊〉 briefly these. Caesar unjustly holds
•hose Provinces, and armies all, that late
••longed to Pompey and to Lepidus
••fusing to divide them, or deliver
•he moity which appertains to me
••ough oft demanded by my friends at Rome,
And letters from my self▪ besides he levies
Both men and money ore all Italy,
Which country, as you know, by our agreement
Belongs to both, and should be held in common.
Most true.
These wrongs are past all sufferance.
Thy war is but defensive, to regain
Thine own unjustly taken.
The warre's just.
And Caesar the beginner of these broils
From whom the wrong first sprung, most justly may
Be judged an enemy to the peace of Rome.
If Fortune aid us in a cause so just,
And we return victorious, noble Romans,
I make a vow, and let it be recorded,
Within two months after the war is ended,
I will lay down the government I hold,
And freely then resign my power again
Unto the Senate and the people of Rome.
Let it be six months rather; for two months
Will be too short a time to settle it.
S•ssius speaks well, my Lord.
Let it be so,
And all the Gods assist me as I mean
A just and true performance.
All the Gods
Preserve Antonius father of his Country.
Author and Champion of our liberty.
•et them believe that list; for me, I think
The resignation of a power so great
•ill be a temperance too great for him
•re to express.
•r if he would, he must
•ke leave of Cleopatra, and her pride
•ill hardly grant him that.
•or will I fight
To make her Mistress of the world and him▪
•ave you considered, noble friend of what
•e lately spake?
•nd am resolved Marcus.
•he friends and followers we shall bring with us
•ill make us welcome guests to Caesars side.
〈◊〉 seems the City favours Caesar much
•hat both the Consuls fled from Rome for fear.
•or is our action base; the scorns and wrongs
〈◊〉 have endured at Cleopatraes hands
•old tempt a moil to fury, and both sides
•tand equal yet.
•ome let's away; tic time.
•gypped farewell.
•arewell Antonius.
How suddenly the Scene is changed here
From love and banquets to the rough alarms
And threatening noise of war!
The change, Seleucus
Is not so sudden as you speak; this storm
Has been expected long; the two great Lords
Of all the Roman world, Antonius
And Caesar have in heart been enemies
These many years; and every man has wondered
'T has been withheld so long, considering
How much complaining has been daily made
By them, their friends, and factions against each other
Whose cause is justest let the Gods determine.
No other justice then ambition
Makes them to draw their swords; no other cause
Then that the world cannot endure two Suns.
The thing that troubles me, Seleucus▪ is
I hear it spoken in the Court, the Queen
Her self in person will associate
Antonius to the war.
I hear that rumour;
But hope it is not true, how nakedly
And in what great confusion would this land
Be left! and what addition can her person
Among so many Roman Legions
Bring to Antonius?
Let us enquire
The certainty; I fain would be resolved.
〈◊〉 necessity must know, before
•he Queen can go, that order may be taken
•bout the Fort I keep, what strength she means
•o leave within it in her absence.
•rue,
•hat reason will excuse thee for enquiring.
•oble Canidius, I'll entrust no more,
•or use more circumstances; for I know
•o whom I have referred my business,
•nd trust your wisdom.
•oyall Cleopatra.
〈◊〉 so fortified with reasons now
•hat maugre Sossius and Domitius
•ith all their best persuasions, I'll prevail
〈◊〉 shall not stay behind; fear it not Madam.
•ave Roman, wear this jewel for my sake;
•nd be possessed of Cleopatraes love.
••cond my suit, there lies not in my power
••thing to grant I should deny Canidius.
•he favours, Madam, you can give, have power
〈◊〉 oblige the greatest Monarchs of the World.
〈◊〉 ready, worthy friend; he'll straight be here.
•one but Canidius has the power to work
•ntonius in this action, which the rest
••ll all oppose, I know; a thing on which
•y state, my hopes, and fortunes all depend.
He must persuade Antonius to take
Me with him to the war; for if I stay
Behind him here, I run a desperate hazard;
For should Octavia interpose her self
In this great war (as once before she did)
And make her brother, and her husband friends
Wher's Cleopatra then? but here he comes.
Sweet Cleopatra, I should plead excuse
For leaving thee awhile, but that the cause
Is of a nature so immense and high,
And brings effects of such advantage home,
That thou I know art pleased it should be so;
And with a patience can resolve to bear
So small an absence, that my wished return
May call thee mistress of the subject world.
Cannot Antonius then be fortunate
If Cleopatra go? •s there in me
So bad an Omen? did I think there were,
Not for the world would I desire to bear
You company but rather die at home.
Far are my thoughts from giving entertainment
To such fond dreams. I would not venture thee.
My life and fortunes both depend on yours.
As much in Egypt will my danger be,
As in your army, and my torment more,
To die each hour for fear: and to remain
In sad suspense till messengers can bring
The news so far: but if my company
Distaste my Lord, I cannot wish his grief.
Can Cleopatra think her heavenly presence,
Can be distasteful, or not valued more
Then all joys else; parted from thee I think,
All places sad, all lands disconsolate,
Before this life I prize thy company,
But must not have it now, do not entreat;
〈◊〉 have denied it to my self already.
•nd in the Camp should be ashamed to rise
•rome Cleopatraes arms, when wars •ough noise
Shakes all the world, when Kings and Senators
Are venturing lives and fortunes in my service.
Oh stay behind! and let thy presence make
Egypt a place, to which I would desire
•f Caesar's fortune conquer, to retire.
•f that should happen (which the Gods avert)
What land, alas! could comfort me, or lend
A safe retreat to vanquished Antony?
Thou would disdain to draw a wretched breath,
And I as much should scorn captivity.
But I had thought the Roman Antony
Had loved so great a Queen with nobler love;
Not as the pleasure of his wanton bed
Or mistress only of some looser hours,
But as a partner in his highest cares,
And one whose soul he thought were fit to share
In all his dangers, all his deeds of honour.
Without that love I should disdain the other.
Do not mistake me, noble Queen, I know
Thy breast is full of high heroike worth.
How can you think it so, that could so long
•n times of peace and pleasure recreate
Your self with me in Egypt Court; yet now
When honour calls, reject my company?
I should desire it rather then my life;
But that my Roman friends are all against it.
See here they come, if they agree tic done.
Now noble friends on whose oraculous counsels
And matchless valour my whole fate depends,
Speak what you think, should Cleopatra go
In person to the war, or stay behind?
I have delivered my opinion,
And so has my Colleague.
What thinks Canidius?
I think tic fit, my Lord, the Queen, whose bounty
Has brought so great assistance to the war,
Should not be left behind, besides her presence
Will much encourage her Egyptian soldiers,
Of which a great part of the fleet consists.
Tic true Canidius.
Let not my sex
Disparage me, for which of all those Kings
That now in person serve Antonius
Have more experience in affairs of weight
Then I, my Lord, which have so long been privy
To your high counsels, and in love to you
And your designs who should compare with me?
What think you friends? you hear Canidius.
If you be pleased, I will subscribe.
〈◊〉 I,
〈◊〉 things go so.
〈◊〉 wishes are effected.
〈◊〉, and Plancus are both fled to Caesar.
〈◊〉 shall not need their help my Lord, at all.
〈◊〉 me, let's away.
〈◊〉 strengths are ready all,
〈◊〉 wait but your command.
••ok like Bellona.
•••idius, return you to your charge
〈◊〉 bring those sixteen Cohorts down to sea; Plutarch.
〈◊〉 me at Samos with them, both the Consuls
〈◊〉 go along with me. Great Father Mars,
〈◊〉 all you Gods, that from the skies behold
〈◊〉 Roman labours, whose propitious aid
••vanc'd my fortunes to so great an height,
••ke perfect that, which you your selves begun.
〈◊〉 is the swords last work, the judging hour
〈◊〉 Nations fates, of mine and Caesar's power.
〈◊〉 which the stars and destinies attend,
〈◊〉 all the fortunes of Mankind depend.
•hat dire portents sent from the wrathful Gods?
•hreaten th'astonish'd world? What plagues are those
•hich in the skies prodigious face I read?
•umultuous Nature teems with monstrous births,
〈◊〉 if the throws would break her labouring womb.
What ruin less then Chaos shall involve
The mourning face of Nature? what great fate,
What kind of mischief is it? oh ye Gods,
Why did you add to wretched men a care
So past their strength to bear, to let them know
By sad presages their ensuing woe?
Unknown and sec•et let your vengeance be,
And none foresee their following misery;
But hope as well as fear. Jove hide thy dooms;
Keep shut, oh fates, your adamantine books!
Let not the bainfull curiosity
Of humane knowledge search your secret counsels,
And read your purposes, to nourish so
A killing fear before the danger grow.
That Comet's gone.
It moved directly upward,
And did not vanish till it seemed to reach
The firmament.
What talk you of my sons?
That Comet, father, ore the Grecian Sea.
It was a strange one both for form and greatness,
And bodes some mischief whersoere it light.
The Gods avert it from our Aegypts coast.
Pinnarius Scarpus had received news
That Italy and Rome it self are filled
With prodigies: an ugly Owl of late
Did fly into the house of Concord first,
Thence being driven away it perched again
Within the Temple of the peoples Genius.
There, though all strived, it neither could be caught,
Nor driven away, but flew at leisure out.
A sacred Trophy on Mount Aventine,
Victories Image on the Theater
By sudden tempests were thrown down and broken.
In Rome and other parts of Italy
Sudden and strangely kindled fires have done
Exceeding waste; and we are certified
That now Sicilian Aetna nourishes
More horrid flames then usually it does,
And farther casts his scorching entrails forth,
Blasting the fields and burning up the corn.
A two-legged Dragon in Etruria
Full fourscore foot in length was lately seen,
Which after much annoyance of the Country
•t self with lightning was consumed at last.
But these portents do threaten Italy.
Alas, my son, there need no prodigies
To show the certain loss of Italy.
For on both sides do Roman Eagles stand,
And Rome must bleed who ere be conqueror,
Besides her liberty for ever lost
When this sad field is fought: but that's not all,
What clime so far, what region so remote,
But that the Roman fortune reaches thither?
All nations share in this.
What hast thou got
By all thy conquest Rome, by all the blood
Which thy ambition through the world has shed,
But raised a power, which now thou can not rule,
Nourished a Lion to devour thy self?
Would none but Roman blood might quench the fire
Of Romes dissentions, and no land beside
Be forced to pay the forfeit of their pride.
With evil Omen did Aeneas first
Transport the relics of Troys fatal fire
To Italy, that kindled greater there
It might at last like lightning through the world
Rend every Nation. Was it not enough,
That first your conquests strewed the earth with slaugh¦la
And died all Regions with their natives bloods,
But your dissentions still must tear the world?
I'll go within, and make an offering
To great Osiris.
Well may it succeed.
Egypt will flourish if Antonius conquer.
If he should fall, the fury of the war
Would light on Egypt most, and we should rue
That ere Antonius loved this haplesse land.
Oh Gentlemen, the strongest news, that ere
Was seen in Egypt.
What's that Mardio?
Thousands of people with astonishment
And fear beheld it: on those fruitful plains
That Southward lie from Alexandria,
Where never rain was known to fall before,
〈◊〉 whole showers of blo•d, whose colour set
A purple die upon those verdant fields;
And in the clouds that horrid noise was heard
That meeting armies make, beating of drums.
Shrill trumpets sound, armour against armour clashing,
As if the blood that fell, dropped from the wounds
Those aëry battles made.
This is more strange
Then all the rest: this is our own Seleucus.
Well Gentlemen, I'll to Pelusium,
And fortify the town to keep our foes,
•f foes be conquerors, from entering there.
Yes, and our friends, if they be vanquished,
Keep out our friends, Seleucus, if their presence
May pluck a war, and ruin on our heads.
As there's occasion we'll determine that.
Avert your ange•, Gods, if all too late
Our prayers came not now.
What is it father?
•our looks, I see, are full of ruth and wo.
〈◊〉 wretched Egypt, ah unhappy land
〈◊〉 what hast thou so stored the wrath of heaven?
•he grieved God refused his offering
•allowing aloud that all the Temple rung,
•nd from his sacred eyes the tears run down.
•old I could contradict, or not believe
•he skill which surest observations teach.
•his signifies a change of government.
What heaven is pleased to send, we much endure.
True son; and let a wise man place his strengths
Within himself, nor trust to outward aids.
That whatsoever from the Gods can come
May find him ready to receive their doom.
Tic not Antonius, worthy soldiers,
But Rome herself to whom you owe your valours
What he could claim, you have performed already;
And served him truly, whilst he was to you
A General, to Rome a Magistrate.
You are discharged from all obedience
You owed to him, by fate it self, and may
Nay, ought to follow him, whom Roman fates
Appoint your General, the noble Caesar
Great Julius heir, not to his name alone
But spirit and fortunes, which have both appeared
In this so great and final a defeat
Given to Antonius. Before we knew not
•o whom the Gods and Fortune had assigned
Our service soldiers; now they have declared.
•nd let us follow where they please to lead.
•or faith is impious striving to sustain
That side, whose fall the Gods themselves ordain.
••esar, Caesar, Caesar.
•our judgments guide you right; for could you think
•o small a strength as ours could raise again
The desperate state of fallen Antonius,
•nder whose ruin all those legions sunk?
•hat madness were it, soldiers to prefer
A hopeless civil war before the weal
And peace of Rome? and desperately provoke
The prosperous fortunes of victorious Caesar?
〈◊〉 have already to Cornelius Gal•us
By letter signified our purposes.
Who sent from Caesar now is marching hither,
To join his strength with ours: but ha•k his Drum
Give notice of his coming.
Hail Pinnarius.
Ah hail Cornelius Gallus,
Most wished for, an most happily arrived
At Paraetonium.
Victorious Caesar
With love and favour greets Pinnarius Scarpus,
Caesar, then whom the world acknowledges
No other power; whom Fortune now has made
•whole Lord of all.
I, and my soldiers
With Paraetonium are at Caesar's service.
Whither's Antonius fled?
Hither to Egypt
With Cleopatra? It was a victory
So strangely given away, as not the like
In former times I think has ere been heard;
On which especially so great a price
As the sole sway of all the world depended.
The Fleets encountered both, while with the Camps
On either shore stood to behold the fight,
Heer the Caesarian, there the Antonian Fleet
With equal hopes came on, with fury equal.
And long maintained a sharpe and cruel fight,
With mutual slaughter, while the Oceans face▪
Was forced to lose his colour, and rceive
A crimson die. The ships Antonius had
Were tall, and slowly did like Castles move.
But Caesar's small, yet quick and active, stirred
On every side with all advantages.
Long fortune doubted, and bright victory
Knew not which way to lean, but kept them both
In equal balance; till Antonius
Himself at last betrayed his glorious hopes.
For when his Mistress Cleopatra fled,
Although a while within his manly breast
The Roman honour strove against wanton love,
Love got the conquest, and Antonius
Fled after her, leaving his soldiers there
To sell their lives in vain; who many hours
Though he were fled, made good the naval fight.
And had Antonius stayed, it may be feared
Caesar had not prevailed: at last the Fleet
Wanting their Admiral, though not without
Much slaughter, fled, or yielded all to Caesar.
But what became of all his strength on land?
Nay, there's the wonder, there's Antonius madness,
And such a madness as will strike amazement
To all that hear it told: after his flight
He ne'er returned, though in the camp he had
Under the conduct of Canidius
And other Captains nineteen legions
Fresh and unfought, which might with reason hope
Had he been there, to have recovered all.
They still remained encamped, and though oft
•ollicited by Caesar to revolt
Were kept from yielding, by Canidius
•n hope of Antony's return. Until
•anidius fearing his own soldiers minds
•nd Caesar's anger fled away by night,
They then despairing yielded all to Caesar.
Who by this time I think's arrived in Egypt.
About Pelusium.
Will you view the town?
With all my heart, noble Pinnarius.
•ntonius then with Cleopatra's fled
To Alexandria.
Tic certain, Caesar.
They say the vanquished Queen most cunningly:
(Fearing it seems, to be excluded else
From her own Kingdom) feigned her self victorious,
Landing in Egypt with triumphant songs
Her ships all crowned with laurel, to deceive
The credulous people: where being entered once
She leaves unpractised no strange tyranny;
And, as we hear, to win the Pardon King
Unto her side, beheaded Artavasdes
King of Armenia, and the Parthians •o,
Who was her prisoner, that Artavasdes,
Whom Anthony so basely had surprised.
Caesar, it were fit to take Pelusium
Before we march to Alexandria.
It was our intent, good Titius, not to leave
A town of that import behind our backs.
Go Proculeius, summon it, and know
W•e her the Governor will yield or no.
What news with thee?
Caesar, a messenger
From Cleopatra craves admittance.
Bring him.
Queen Cleopatra to great Caesar wishes
All health and victory; and humbly proffers
Her self and all her fortunes to his service:
In token of which she here presents by me
This Crown and Sceptre.
•rave and ominous.
•umbly entreating Caesar's noble favour
To her and hers; the rest of her desires
•o please it Caesar to peruse the same,
This letter holds.
• warrant a love-lettet.
But tell me first, where is Antonius?
••ll truly tell (though it may seem to some
•ncredible) that great Antonius
A man of late in conversation
•o free, and full of jollity, in a strange
Deep melancholy has retired himself
To Pharos Isle; where like Athenian Timon,
Who did profess a hatred to mankind,
And fled all company, he lives alone;
And on the solitary shore has built
A little house to feed his frantic humour,
And imitate that Timon's life, whose name
He takes unto himself: no friends at all
Nor servants are admitted to his presence,
But only two, Roman Lucilius
And Aristocrates the Grecian.
Not Cleopatra? then I doubt the man
Grows weary of these worldly vanities.
• never heard of such a change as this.
Give me the letter. I'll peruse it now
Here the woman writes
That for her liberty, and to confirm
The Crown of Egypt to her self and children
To gratify my favour she has hid
Within her palace a great mass of gold.
Unknown to Antonius.
It is like enough,
For Cleoptraea's rich, and long has been,
Besides the sacrilege she lately did
In robbing all the Temples of the Gods
About these parts.
I would not lose this gold,
Nor willingly let Cleopatra die
Before her person have adorned my triumph.
That will be hard to bring to pass, and must
Be wrought with subtlety: you must not send
A threatening message back; for if you do,
Ell's lost, her life, her gold and all are vanished.
For Cleopatra, as in all her acts
It has appeared, is of a wondrous spirit,
Of an ambition greater then her fortunes
Have ever been, though she so long have swayed
A sovereignty ore half the Roman world,
Trod on the necks of humbled Kings, and ruled
Antonius as her slave: her haughty spirit
Will never stoop so much as to a thought
Of such captivity.
I do not mean
To let her know my mind, or once suspect
〈◊〉 I can help it, but I have it now.
•hyreus come hither; I must now rely
•pone thy wisdom, care, and diligence
〈◊〉 an employment that concerns me nearly.
•ut I am confident: go with this fellow
To Alexandria; use to the Queen
Thy best and most persuasive Oratory.
Tell her I love her, and extremely dote
On her admired beauty, thou art wise
•nd need no great instructions; the success
〈◊〉 do not doubt, the woman's credulous,
•nd thinks all men are bound to be in love
With that ensnaring face; if thou perceive
•he will be wrought on, win her to betray
•ntonius to my hand: the way to woo her
〈◊〉 leave good Thyreus to thy eloquence
And cunning working of it: spare thy reply
•id him come hither. Commend my hearty love
To Cleopatra; bid her fear no ill
From me at all. What I desire from her
My freed man Thyreus has commission
To utter to her self. Epaphroditus,
So see him well rewarded.
Health to Caesar.
The Governor is stout, and does resolve
To stand the extremest hazard of the war
Before he yield Pelusium.
Let him rue
His stubborn loyalty, soldiers make ready
For the assault; it is shame so small a town▪
Should stay our fortune in the full career.
Here buried do I lie; thou gentle wave
Keep hateful man from treading Ti∣mons grave.
Reader be gone; enquire no more of me,
A curse upon thee whatsoere thou be.
Good, good; oh Timon, Athens ne'er could boast
A wise philosoher but thee. Thou knew
The nature of all men, that all were false;
True Timon, true, they are all Knaves indeed.
Thou wisely hat'st that wicked thing called man,
Whom other forced Philosophers admire,
And call a noble creature, and partaker
Of divine nature: they were fools, fools Timon,
All other Sects were fools, and I will follow
No sect but thine; I am a Timonist.
That's not enough, Timon himself I am.
Yonder he sits, see Aristocrates
How much unlike that great Antonius,
Whose person late so many legions guarded,
So many Kings attended as their Lord.
Antonius, where? thou art deceived Lucilius,
That's Timon man.
How can thou jest at this
This woeful passion, which alone's enough
To melt his foes and Caesar into tears.
We feed this foolish passion, to give way,
•nd keep aloof thus. I'll go to him. Timon.
•a! what art thou? be gone I say from me.
•et you to Caesar man: I hate you all.
〈◊〉 hate thee, Timon; dost thou think it is love
•as brought me hither? I am come to vex thee.
Oh welcome, what's thy name? i'st Alcibi•des?
Hast thou forgot me?
Dost thou hate all men?
Why dost thou think me so unnatural
To love a man? but may we not love women?
Yes, they may be beloved; provided always
That they be false.
True Timon, wicked women
May be beloved, because they ruin men.
Right, right; and now I better think upon it
I'll set no gallowses or gibbets up
As I intended once, for men to come
And hang themselves, I'll keep a bawdy house.
A better way by far, twill ruin more,
I wonder, Timon, at that foolish plot
That I have heard, that in thy gardens once
In Athens thou did set up gallowses
For men in discontent to hang themselves.
How few think thou would be so mad to do it?
But to a wench they'll come, and then the office
That thou shalt have will be of more account.
For where have you a man of any fashion
That now adays turns hangman; but a Pander
Is on employment that befits a Statesman,
A thing requires good parts and gravity.
I'd try that course; but tic too slow a plot.
Oh for a speedy way to kill the world
I have done somewhat in my days; my wars
And bloody battles were not made in vain.
For I was once Antonius, and a Roman,
As in the wars of Troy Pythagoras
Before that transmigration of his soul,
Had been Euphorbus.
Thou art like him still.
And when I was Triumvir first at Rome,
That was a time indeed, then I could hear
Of those good deeds, which must be still a comfort
To your good consciences, though they be past.
When Rome was filled with slaughter, flowed with blood.
But they perchance were Knaves that were proscribed▪
And might have done more mischief had they lived.
No, they were honest men; I looked to that.
It was well, and carefully.
Behold the list.
But one among the rest most comforts me,
That talking fellow Cicero, that used
To tax the vicious times, and was forsooth
A lover of his Country.
Out upon him,
Then he was rightly served: for is it fit
In a well governed state such men should live
As love their Country? had 't not been for him
Catiline's plot had thrived.
Tic true, I'm sure
Caesar was on that side, he favoured it.
Yes, Caesar understood himself; ther's hope
That this young Caesar too will prove as good
A Patriot as ere his father was.
He will do reason man: he is of nature
Cruel enough; in that proscription
•t did appear; but now he'll reign alone.
Oh for such factions as were then a foot
To rend the state, and fill the world with slaughter.
Oh, let me hug thee Alcibiade•.
•s that he yonder? w••t strange shape is that?
None talks with him but Aristocrates,
Who following his own way, and suiting just
With his conceit thinks to reclaim him so.
The news, that I shall bring, will make him worse,
And fright that little reason that is left
Quite from his breast.
It cannot so Canidius;
Perchance to hear th'extremity of all
Will cure his fit; it cannot make him worse.
For death it self were better and more noble.
How weak a thing is man that seats his hopes
In fortunes slippery, and inconstant favours,
And seeks no surer strengths to guard his soul?
Wanting a strong foundation, he is shaken
With every wind, orethrown by every storm.
And what so frequent as those storms in fortune?
Whose fairest weather never brings assurance
Of perpetuity but come what will
I'll tell him all.
Do, good Canidius.
Well Alcibiades, I am resolved
I'll to the wars again, and either conquer
Mine enemies, or take a course to starve
And kill up my own soldiers, and so be
Revenged on some body: One of these two
May easily be brought to pass. How think thou?
Yes, yes: but lets to Court, and there consult.
See who comes here, now for our bawdy project▪
Here is a servant I must needs prefer
Well versed in bawdry, Master of the art.
Come near brave Mardio, come.
My business
Is not to you;
Mark him but well, and tell me
How he would execute the place.
My Lord,
The Queen entreats your presence at the Palace,
The grieved Queen, who in your absence pines,
Who suffers in your grief.
Well urged old Eunuch.
Ha! what of her? will she revolt to Caesar?
She's far from that, my Lord.
What i'st he says?
He says the constitution of her body
Cannot hold out unless you visit her.
The Queen shall know it, Aristocrates.
Did you not say she pined and languished Sir,
And what's the difference? tell your tale yourself.
What does she say? does she not hate me man?
Oh no my Lord, she loves you as her life.
No spite of fortune that she has endured,
Or can hereafter fear, grieves her so much
As does your absence and strange melancholy.
Well Mardio, thou art fittest for the place.
My Lord Antonius?
Ha! mo men upon us?
I come to bring thee heavy news Antonius.
The forces all, which thou did leave encamped
At Actium, horse and foot are gone to Caesar.
And all the auxiliary Kings; no strength
At all is left thee, but what here thou hast
At Alexandria.
Ha!
This sinks into him.
It makes a deep impression in his passion.
And may perchance expel his other fit.
All you here yet! then I have friends I see.
But tell me, can you be so merciful
As to forgive that most unmanly fit
I have been in? oh, I am all in blushes.
My Lord, take better comfort.
Dearest friends.
I will be proof against any fortune now.
Come let's together to the Court, and there
Drown sadness in rich cups of Meroë wine,
And laugh at Fortunes malice, for your sight
More cheers my spirits, then her frowns can dull them.
MAdam, all drugs with pain and torment kill
That kill with speed. No easy way to death
Is wrought but by a slow and lingering course,
Where Natures strength is by degrees subdued,
And yielding so decays insensibly.
No art at all can make a drug that's quick
And gentle too. No poison but the Asp
Of all the mortal brood of Libyaes Snakes
Kills with a sudden, and yet easy death
As if brought forth to contradict our skill
By envious Nature, who disdains frail man
Should hope to find her secrets wholly out.
None but that Serpent, Madam, can effect
What you desire; of which I here have brought.
Leave it good Glaucus; leave the potion too.
Tic quick, thou say.
Yes Madam; but too painful
And violent.
Well leave them both with me.
Let none adventure on prosperity
But with a spirit still prepared to die.
Let them keep certain death still in their power
That dare be great and happy, nought but that
Frees states when they are fallen. Well did wise
And liberal Nature on mankind bestow
A gift so sovereign as power to die,
An Antidote against Fortunes cruelty,
That is the dear preservative, that must
Control the spite of Fortune, and redeem
A woeful life from loathed servitude.
One venome's gentle; tother rough and cruel.
But tic not safe to trust mine honour so,
On doubtful props: the poisons both may fail▪
Or differ far from what vain fame reports
Their operation. Tic experience
That must confirm me. Mardio is returned.
Here are two men, Madam, condemned for murder
To cruel death, and are to die to morrow.
Come nearer both, and tell me, dare you die?
Great Queen, necessities strict law imposes
That doom upon us; in forced actions
Courage can have no trial.
Dare you die
A less dishonourable way, to scope
The common hangman's hand, and from a Queen
Receive your death, and that an easier death?
Most willingly, great Queen; we are prepared.
Give them their lots, Mardio; the shortest lot
Is to die first.
That lot is mine.
The Asp shall be thy fate: now Asp confirm
What fame reports of thee; stay thou thy draught
Till he be dead: feel thou no pain?
A faintness seizes me, and I would sleep.
How gently he lies down? and scarcely strives
Against his death at all.
I think he's dead
Already. Sure he feels but little pain.
I am confirmed.
He's dead and stiff already.
We'll try no more, as for thy draught of poison
Thus we discharge thee of it, and from death
Doomed by the law our royal pardon frees thee.
Publish it Mardio.
The Gods preserve
Royal and gracious Cleoptrae's life.
I am resolvd'; nought but the Lybian Asp
Shall be renowned for Cleopatraes death.
Thou precious worm, that can redeem alone
The loss of honour at a rate so easy,
That kill as gently as the hand of age,
And art miscalled a plague of Africa,
Since thou alone make barren Afrike envied,
By other lands, though fruitful, wanting thee.
Who cross the Seas, and hence at highest price
Transporr the Asp as choicest Merchandise.
On thee I trust, one gentle touch of thine
Can free this life from loathed servitude,
From Caesar's triumph, the base peoples mocks,
Proud Liviaes scorn, and mad Octaviaes spite.
But why are all my thoughts turned to despair?
Why think I now of death? me thinks my Genius
Checks this cold fear, and Fortune chiding tells me
I am ungrateful to distrust, her now.
My race of life and glory is not run,
Nor Cle•patraes fortunes yet arrived
At that great height that must eternize her,
And fix her glorious name aboue the stars.
I long to hear what answer Caesar sends.
I do not know his temper, but he's young;
And why should I desp•ir? are Cupid's fires
Extinguished quite? are all his arrows spent?
Or is this beauty, that can boast the conquest
Of Julius Caesar; and great Antony,
So waned now, it cannot move the temper
Of one, whom youth makes fit for Cupid's conquest?
Madam, your gifts were more graciously received,
And Caesar with a smiling brow returned
All seeming love and friendship; he has sent
His free'dman Thyreus to attend your highness,
And to impart his counsels to your ea•e.
He's welcome to us. What's great Caesar's will.
Caesar's best wishes, royal Cleopatra,
None but your fairest self can ratify.
No power on earth can give what Caesar wants
But you, great Queen. For let your Majesty
Give credit to poor Thyreus though the meanest
Of all the servants that attend on Caesar,
Ther's none about him is more near in trust
To whom he's pleased to impart his thoughts▪
And secret wishes: nothing but your love
Can crown his happiness.
We are no subject
For Caesar's mocks though in our worst of fortune
You are the Queen of Fortune, and still ho••
A lasting Sceptre ore that fickle Goddess
(Fickle to others, to you true and constant)
Your radiant light lends that blind Goddess eyes▪
And guides her to your service, making all
Actions, nay losses steps to greater honour.
The late defeat at Actium, which your error
Perchance miscals a loss, was Fortunes labour
To make you greater, and remove your brightness
Which was ill placed (as Diamonds coursly set)
From old Antonius to young Caesar's love,
A fitter sphere for those fair eyes to shine in.
Without these courtings, Thyreus, if great Caesar
Please to embrace our friendship, we and Egypt
Shall do him faithful service.
Mighty Queen,
If my rude speech have erred, I humbly beg
That you would please to think it zeal in me
To do my master service, and such service
As he esteems the best, to gain your love,
I oft have heard him (let your Majesty
Not be offended with that truth I utter)
Ravished with fame of your perfections,
And noble spirit; call Antonius happy,
Whom fortune brought to Egypt, to behold
That Queen, whom he so much desired to see.
But when his ey• beheld your portraiture
Drawn by a skilful, and a faithful hand;
He oft would say it was a likely seat
To hold those Graces. Such perfections
Were fit for none but Caesar's to admire.
There was a Caesar, loved me once; but I
Am not so proud to think it was my merit,
Though he would say I did deserve far more
Then he could utter, that great Julius,
Whose name and actions filled the triple world.
Though all in him were great, yet nothing greater
Then his adopting so divine an heir.
This Caesar, Madam, for your dearest love,
Besides that power and greatness, which the world
Both knows and fears, brings such a youth and beauty
To plead for him, as in a mean estate
Might move a Princess love: which that your eyes
may better read, I here from him present
His true, and most unflattered portrairure.
The fairest form that ere these eyes beheld.
Where all the best of each best model meets,
Cupid's sweet smiles, lodged in the eye of Mars,
Ga•ymed's che•k the Imperial brow of Jove
Where love and majesty are proud to dwell.
His age, great Queen, is yet not thirty years.
I ne'er till now saw beauty: but Thyreus
May we repose a confidence in thee
As our true friend? we will deserve thy love.
To do divinest Cleopatra service
Is all poor Thyreus pride: in serving you
I best discharge my duty to my master.
Then briefly thus; because I would not have
Any take notice of long privacy
Twixt thee and me, and instantly w'expect
Antonius here, I will devise some means
How to deserve great Caesar's love, and act
What he shall thank us for: mean while stay here
With us, good Thyreus, for we cannot yet
Dispatch thee with that message we entend.
I will attend your highness.
Till anon
Farewell, good Thyreus: but be near about us.
What more then this could all the fates contrive?
What more then Caesars love could I have wished
On which all power, all state, and Glories wait.
But oh the weak and fluctuating state
Of humane frailty still too much depressed
Or raised too much twixt fears and flattering hopes!
But hence base fear; a Princely confidence
Fits Cleopatraes mind and beauty better.
My dearest Lord.
Ah sweetest Cleopatra,
In this embrace, and this Ambrosiake kiss
I am again possessed of all my wealth,
Of all my fortunes. Had the angry Gods
Purposed to wreak their fury fully on me
They had not left my life so sweet a comfort.
Possessed of you I stand above the reach
Of Fortunes threatening, or proud Caesar's power.
Nought but your grief, and melancholy had
Power to deject my spirits.
Thy true worth
Deserves a happier friend, that could bestow
Not take alone his happiness from thee.
In thy sweet love, and these my faithful friends
I still am happy, I have lost no friends.
All that are gone from me to Caesar's side,
Ungrateful Titius and Domitius.
Plancus, Silanus, Dellius and Hipparchus,
Were Fortunes friends not mine.
Let's in and feas•▪
This day we'll dedicate to mirth and freedom:
To crown your welcome hither.
Sweetly spoken.
Let not a woman teach us soldier•
To be magnanimous.
Thy? feast we'll stile
The feast of fellow-dyers: for no band
No tie of friendship is so firm as that
They live in love that mean to die together.
Grave Arius, in thy troubled looks I read
Fear for thy native Alexandria;
But banish fear, and know thy power with Caesar,
If they obey our summons, none shall die.
But though to the utmost they resist, thy will
Shall rule our Justice.
Humble Arius.
Is too much honoured in great Caesar's favour.
We give but what we owe, a debt so great
As mine to thee can ne'er be overpayed.
Great Alexander, whose victorious hand
Founded that City, whose eternized name
For ever honours it, though in great deeds
He past our glory far, shall not exceed
Caesar in piety: he oft would say
He ought a better being to his Master
Then to father; one mere natural,
The other mental, and diviner far.
Who's that?
Fergusiu• the Philosopher
Condemned to death by you.
Dispatch him then.
He craves a word with Arius ere he die.
What is it brother?
Ah good Arius,
Wisemen, if truly wise, save wise men still.
Most mighty Caesar.
Arius, no more,
I know what thou desire; Fergusius live;
That thou know him has saved thee.
Victory,
And fame still wait on Caesar.
Let's away
And march with speed to Alexandria.
Caesar, your horse are weary: it is not fit
Too much to toil them, for I fear a sally
From Alexandria.
They dare not man.
Antonius is strong in well-provided
And skilful horsemen; and despair of favour
(Since twice you have refused his propositions)
Will put another valour into him.
What conquest can Antonius hope for here?
His hopes (as ne'er as I conjecture them)
Are to break through your troops, and get to Sea.
For yet he has a Fl•et, that may transport him
To other lands, to gather new supplies.
But any fortune would prove higher far
To him, then staying here, without all hope
To be shut up in a besieged town.
In my opinion let your march be 〈◊〉▪
And gentle; that the horse may be refreshed.
And we prevent the worst.
Let it be so.
How formless is the form of man the soul,
How various still how different from it self?
How falsely called Queen of this little world?
When she's a slave, and subject not alone
Unto the bodies temperature, but all
The storms of Fortune.
What occasion
Make thee thus offer at Philosophy?
Where hast thou lived thou should not know the occa∣zion?
The fits and changes of Antonius
Are theme enough: how strange a loving soul
Is the late hater of mankind become!
That is not strange, he's out of breath with cursing
And now it is time to stop his mouth with kissing.
But what can he conceive of this same Thyreus
That holds such secret conference with her?
He cannot choose but see it.
Unless love
Have blinded him, she carries it so plainly.
Well, I shall think if there be knavery in it,
(As knavery there must be) that Cleopatra
Is not so subtle as we took her for.
He must be told it, if he will not see
Upon my life there is some plot of treason
Which yet may be discovered.
Heer they come
Let us go fetch Antonius if we can.
Pelusium shall be rendered up to Caesar
By our command to our Lieutenant there
Seleucus, whose obedience we not doubt.
Noblest of Queens, you make Imperial Caesar
As much a debtor to your curtsy
As he's already captive to your beauty.
Nor do we wrong Antonius at all
In giving up a town which is our own▪
It may be thought tic done to weaken him▪
Alas, Antonius is already fallen
So low, that nothing can redeem him now
Nor make him able to contest with Caesar.
He has not only lost his armies strength
But lost the strength of his own soul, and is not
That Antony he was when first I knew him.
I can do Caesar now no greater service.
Though I shall never want a hear• to do it.
But we shall quickly see the event of things;
Antonius now is desperate, and puts
His hopes upon the fortune of one sally,
Which will be suddenly performed, before
That thou can bear a message back to Caesar.
Hands on that Thyreus there, to prison with him.
To prison!
Yes; away with him I say.
Caesar would not have used your messenger
So ill.
Thou were no Messenger to me.
For my sake dearest Lord.
Oh for your sake?
I cry you mercy Lady, bear him hence.
I had forgot that Thyreus was your servant.
But what strange act should he perform for you?
Is it to help you to a happier friend?
Can you suspect it? was my truest love
So ill bestowed? Can he, for whose dear sake
A Queen so highly born as I preferred
Love before fame, and fondly did neglect
All names of honour when false Fulvia,
And proud Octavia had the name of wives,
Requite me thus? ungrateful Anthony;
For now the fury of a wronged love
Justly provokes my speech.
Oh Cleopatra,
It is not Thyreus but this heart of mine
That suffers now, deep wounded with the thought
Of thy inconstancy: did Fortune leave
One only comfort to my wretched state
And that a false one? for what conference
Could thou so oft, and in such privacy
With Caesar's servant hold, if true to me?
Which with the rack I could enforce from him.
But that I scorn to do.
You do not scorn
To wrong with base unworthy jealousies
A faithful heart: but if you think me false
Heer sheath your sword: make me the subject rather
Of manly rage then childish jealousy.
It is a nobler crime, and fitter far
For you to act, easier for me to suffer.
For live suspected I nor can nor will.
The lovely Asp, which I with care have kept▪
And was intended a preservative
Against Caesar's cruelty, I now must use
Against Antonius baseness a worse foe
Then Caesur is: farewell, till death approve
That I was true, and you unjust in love.
Stay Cleopatra, dearest Love, forgive me
Let not so small a wind have power to shake
A love so grown as ours: I did not think
That thou were false: my heart gave no consent
To what my tongue so rashly uttered.
Nor could I have outlived so sad a thought.
Let Thyreus be releast, and sent to Caesar.
Now is the time to sally forth, my Lord,
The foe is tired with marching, and your horse
Are ready all, and wait the signal only.
The least delay loses the action.
I come Canidius; dearest Love farewell.
Few hours will tell thee what Antonius is.
How timorous is guilt? how are my thoughts
Distracted sadly now? on every side
My dangers grow: for should Antonius
Return in safety home, and know what past
Twixt me and Thyreus, I have lost his heart,
And cannot choose but fear him: if he die
I am not confident of Caesar's love.
It was but a servants tongue I built upon.
It is best to make all sure: within there, Ei•a.
Madam!
Are all things ready in the tomb?
Yes, Madam; Carmi•'s there and Mar•io.
Then thither will I go, if fate contrive
A future state of happiness for me,
It is my castle: if my death they doom,
I am possessed already of a tomb.
DEfeated are my troops, my fleet revolted,
The Seas and Lands are lost; and nothing now
Is left Antonius but a Roman hand,
A sword and heart to die. You truest servants,
Whose faith and manly constancy upbraids
This wicked age, and shall instruct the next,
Take from a wretched hand this legacy.
Fortune has made my will, and nought but this
Can I bequeath you. Carry it to Caesar;
If he be noble, it contains enough
To make you happier then Antonius can.
My glass of life and Empire now is run,
And from this hand expects a period.
My Lord, take fairer hopes.
Fie, fie, Lucilius;
Lose not thy former merits in persuading
A man, whom once thou lov'dst to such a shame
As to prefer a loathed captivity
Before a noble death.
Thy looks speak grief
Speak Eros, wher's the Queen?
She's dead my Lord.
When those unhappy tidings came to her
Of your defeat, she straight shut up her self
Within her tomb, and died.
Oh Cleopatra,
Why have I lingered thus, that thou a woman
Should teach so old a soldier how to die?
Fortune, I blame not thee; I have enjoyed
What thou coldest give, and on the envied top
Of thy proud wheel have long unshaken stood.
Whom Kings have served, and Rome her self obeyed;
Whom all the Zones of earths diffused Globe,
That know inhabitants, have known, and feared.
Nor is my fall so much degenerate.
My strength no arms but Roman arms subdue, Plutarch.
And none, but Monarch of the world succeeds.
Glutted with life and Empire now I go
Free and undaunted to the shades below.
Here Eros, take this sword, perform the promise
Which thou hast made, to kill me whensoere
I should command: make no reply in words.
I will be true or die. Stand fair; your Eros
Will be your Usher to th'Elizian fields.
What hast thou done unfaithful faithful Eros
Too kindly cruel, falsely virtuous?
I'll trust no more, to be no more directed
By such examples: but we must be speedy.
The gates ere this time are set op to Caesar.
Fair Cleopatra, I am coming now
To dwell with thee, and ever to behold
Thy heavenly figure, where nor time nor death
Shall make divorce of our eternal loves.
Thus, thus I come to thee: unfaithful sword▪
I never knew thee slow in giving death
Till this sad hour, some friendly hand lend aid▪
And with another wound release my soul.
Where is my Lord Antonius? Oh sad sight
The Queen enclosed in her tomb desired
To take her last leave of you.
Is she living?
Tic welcome news, convey me quickly, friends,
Oh quickly thither, that I may expire
That breath that's left in Cleopatrae's arms.
Go you, Epaphroditus, and besiege
The Palace, to surprise Antonius;
You Proculeius, and Cornelius Gallus,
Go presently to Cleopatraes tomb,
Wo her with all your art and eloquence
With all assurances of Caesar's love
To leave that place, and yield her person to him.
Spare no attempts of force or policy
To draw her thence: for you the Citizens
Of Alexandria, cheer your fainting hearts,
I'll mediate in your behalf to Caesar,
To spare the City.
Thanks to the most noble
And good Agrippa.
Heer he comes himself.
The paleness of your fear declares your guilt.
But that, though ne'er so great, shall not exceed
Our clemency, to let you know it was
Your happiness to be subdued by us.
Mercy shall rule our just severity.
First for your founder Alexanders sake,
Next for the love of reverent Arius
Our Master heer• whose goodness far out-weighs
All your offences and rebellions.
Caesar in goodness, as in greatness, bears
Equality with Jove.
Hail mighty Caesar.
What's he?
Ashore•us, Osiris Priest,
A good and holy man.
We dare believe thee,
And therefore welcome him.
Please it great Caesar,
To give Achoreus leave to wait on him
Into the ancient Temples of our Gods
To show the Egyptian rites and mysteries,
And all the Deities that we adore.
Most willingly Achoreus, I would see
Gods, but not Oxen.
He has blanked the Priest.
I fain would see great Alexander's hearse
The mansion once of so divine a soul
A spirit greater then the world it self,
Whom the world feared but could not satisfy.
Within the vault of our Pyramids
His body yet all whole may Caesar see.
And all the bodies of our Ptolomeys.
I'd see Kings only, not dead carcasses.
But see, Epaphroditus is returned.
Speak man, where is Antonius?
Slain, my Lord.
How? slain? what hand durst do it?
His own hand.
That was our fear: cruel Antonius.
Too cruel to thy self, to Rome, and me
How white a day have all the people lost?
How great might Caesar's happiness have been
Had but the fates permitted me to lay
These conquering arms aside, and once again
Embrace thee, dear Antonius, as a friend
Thou worthy eider of my infant fortunes,
Thou brave revenger of great Julius death,
Witness these tears, though I were forced to war
(Whilst thou preferring foreign love before
Caesar's alliance, did reject my kindred,
And scorn my love) I still could honour thee.
But since too cruel fate denies to me
So great an happiness as to express
This love to thee alive, let thy dear ghost
Behold my Piety, and see the honours
Caesar will do to thy sad funeral.
Most royal Caesar-like dissimulation.
I hope how ere twill serve our turns Lucilius.
Now is the fittest time.
What men are these?
Two of Antonius truest servants, Caesar,
Who bring a letter from their dying Lord.
Let me peruse it well, it shall be granted.
Your lives and fortunes both are safe, and since
We ever loved fidelity, you shall
If so you like, be welcome to our service,
It is our desire; our lives and fortunes ever
Shall do great Caesar true and faithful service
As they before did to Antonius.
Where did he die?
In Cleopatraes arms
By her with ropes let up into the tomb,
After his deadly wound.
Is she there still?
Now I shall know; speak Gallus, what's the news?
We came and called at Cleopatraes tomb,
Who from above made answer, and denied
To yield herself, but upon Caesar's word.
When I with best persuasions strove to win her,
And held her talk awhile, whilst Proculeius
On tother side the tomb espied a place
That open stood, by which the Queen received
Dying Antonius, which he scaling entered
Behind the Queen: but had he not been speedy
She there had slain herself: a maid of hers
Spied Proculeius entering, and aloud
Cried out oh Queen thou art surprised alive.
She drawing a short poniard was restrained
By Proculeius, who both held her hand
And spake her fair; at last obtained so much
By strong persuasions of your clemency
He drew her thence, and got her to the Palace.
Where now she is, and Proculeius stays.
But her desire is still to speak with you.
Till when from us she will admit no comfort.
We will in person presently go see her.
Protect me Pallas against false Venus charms.
Known mischiefs have their cure; but doubts have none,
And better is despair then fruitless hope
Mixed with a killing fear: my thoughts are now
More black and baleful then this sad attire.
If Caesar come, I do not fear his chiding
I have a certain Antidote against that.
It is not his anger, but his love afflicts
My doubting soul, whether that love will prove
Fained or true, yet may straight apppear.
He's not so old, nor I so ignorant
But that his actions, gestures, words, and looks
Will make his heart lie open to my view.
How sweet a sorrow dwells upon that brow!
How would she look in smiling dalliance?
Oh pardon me thou powerful God of love,
That durst presume to tempt thy Deity.
Forgive my confidence. I now excuse
Antonius weakness, but stay there my heart,
My virtuous Livia is more fair then she,
Hail mighty Prince; for that high name the Gods.
Who reft me of it, have bestowed on thee.
Rise Cleopatra, Caesar's victory
Takes nought from you.
Oh let me never rise
Till Caesar grant my suit.
Good Queen stand up,
And freely speak what you desire:
I beg
A boon but small, which Caesar ne'er denied
His greatest enemies.
And can you think
I should deny it you? Do but express it▪
That thou would kill me Caesar; I have lived
These many years too long: I should have died
When that great Worthy, that renowned Caesar
Was basely murdered in Romes Capitol.
Surviving him was my unhappiness.
But I have lived to see his son inherit
His state and Empire, and control the world.
Be cheery Cleopatra, fear no wrong
At Caesar's hands.
Death is no wrong at all.
I have deserved it, Sir.
But can you think
That we, whose clemency so many men
And stubborn enemies so oft have proved,
Should now at last be cruel to a Queen?
But we must chide you, that so long together
Have sided with Antonius, and with him
Conspired the wrack of Rome.
That's soon excused.
If it were a crime to love Antonius
(Which I confess I did, and his large favours
Truly deserved it) think it was not mine
But fates own crime, that first allotted me
To his protection: had your share of rule
In Egypt lain, I had been Caesars friend.
Besides with men and money you give aid
To Caius Cassius in Philippe field
Who murdered Caesar in the Capitol.
Caesar, as false as truth it self is true.
I was accused to Antonius
For that before; but in Cilicia
I quickly cleared those causeless jealousies,
Witness thou glorious star, which the great soul
Of noble Julius, when he left the earth,
Added to heaven, how innocent I am
From any fault in that: but Caesar know
Against thy father not the act alone,
But even suspicion shall be purged with death.
I can no longer live.
What have I done?
I fear my rashness has too far betrayed
My thoughts to Cleopatra: gentle Queen
Be comforted; expect at Caesar's hand
Nothing but love and friendship: do not wrong
My goodness with unjust suspicion
All former grievances are quite forgot.
Your port and state shall be maintained at full.
Your household servants not diminished.
Epaphroditus, see the Queen attended
As fits her stare and honour; and till next
We visit you, rest with a full assurance
Of our best love and friendship.
All the payment
That my poor fortunes can return to Caesar
Is thanks and service.
Epaphroditus.
Caesar.
Yes. whisper on; you cannot over-reach
My jealousies: no signs of love at all,
No smile, nor amorous glance, I was deceived,
And merely coosen'd by base Thyreus.
But I must hide my fears, and clear this brow
The better to effect my purposes.
How fares your Majesty?
Never so well
As now I am, I did not think great Caesar
Had been so full of love and curtsy.
Oh Madam, Caesar's the unexampled mirror
Of royalty, and does as far exceed
All petie Kings in goodness as in power.
And if my humblest services in ought
May give content to royal Cleopatra
I shall be proud to be commanded still.
Thanks good Epaphroditus.
That love is true that's showed in mis•rye.
But what have I forgot? I had a note
Of some particulars I meant to give
To Caesar's hand and quite forgot it here.
Nor would I trust the carriage of a thing
Of so great consequence to every hand.
Will you command my service?
I shall rest
Indebted to your love; Caesar will thank you.
It much concerns both his estate and mine.
Be speedy good Epaphroditus, for
I long to hear his answer.
Fear not Madam.
A quick performance, it rejoices me
To see her look so cheerily again.
So now my trouble is removed, I come,
I come my dearest Lord Antonius,
Never till now thy true and faithful love.
My much abused Lord, do not disdain
Or blush t'acknowlege Cleopatra's name
When tears and blood have washed her spotted soul▪
Were thou alive again, not all the world
Should shake my constancy, or make divorce
Twixt thee and me: but since too late, alas,
My tears of sorrow come, I'll follow thee,
And beg thy pardon in the other world.
All crimes are there for evermore forgot.
There Ariadne pardons Theseus falsehood.
Dido forgives the perjured Prince of Troy,
And Troilus repentant Cressida.
Though false to thee alive, I now am come
A faithful lover of thy dust and comb.
Marcus Agrippa, I have here provided
As Caesar gave in charge two Lybian Psyls.
All Afrik yields not fitter for his purpose.
They look like likely ones.
They have been proved,
And have already on my soldiers,
When they were bit by Serpents, done strange cures,
Past all belief or hope, recalled fled life
Back to his mansion, and beyond the power
Of Aesculapius have sucked and charmed
The mortal venom from their dying limbs.
These two, Agrippa in their infancy
Their doubting sires to try their lawful births
(As Eagles try their Eaglets against the Sun)
Exposed to mortal Serpents, and were so
Confirmed in what they sought, the trembling Snakes
Durst not assault the Infants.
Here he comes.
Are those the men?
Yes, Caesar.
Carry them
To Cleopatraes Palace; let them wa••
Near to Epaphroditus. What's the news?
How fares the Queen?
Never more cheery Sir.
Her looks express her hopes; nor in her words
Can she conceal her inward cheerfulness.
But one thing, Sir, she said she had forgot,
Which nearly did concern both you and her;
And that in such a cause she durst not trust
A common messenger, requesting me
To give it to your hands.
She has deceived thee,
And all of us; the worst that I could fear
Is come to pass: oh run Epaphroditus,
I'll follow thee with all the speed I can.
But all too late, I fear, our speed will come.
This is my second Coronation day;
But nobler then the first, and fuller far
Of real honour, and magnificence.
Nor till this pompous hour was Cleopatra
A perfect Queen, alas, I did not sway
A Sceptre over fortune, or command
As now I do, the destinies themselves.
I wore a painted honour, a mere shadow
Of Royal state, and such a feeble Crown
As war could threaten, treason undermine,
And every puff of Fortune blow it off.
My state is constant now, my thoughts above
The fear of dangers or opposing foes.
What new addition has she got off state?
I cannot tell, nor can I guess her meaning.
Glaucus and Mardio, leave the room a while.
Come hither Girls, I will no longer hide
My joys from you; in such attire as this
I go to meet my dear Antonius.
Madam, he's dead.
Alas, thou art deceived.
He lives my Charmio in the other world,
And stays for me; I have been too too slack
In coming to him: this that here lies dead
Was but the house that lodged my dearest Lord,
That earthly Mansion, that did once contain
The kindest, noblest, and the truest soul
That ever lived; and this our second meeting
Is far more sweet, and full of noble love
Then when we first met in Cilicia,
When our magnificence and pomp did fill
The world with wonder and astonishment.
Why weep you girls? is it to see your Mistress
Greater then ere in Glory? if you loved me,
You'd weep to see great Cleopatra led
A wretched captive through the streets of Rome
Before proud Caesar's chariot, mocked and flouted,
And from a Queen become Octaviaes drudge.
No, no, my girls, I will be still my self
And from this seat of state look down in scorn
On Rome, and Caesar's threats as things below me.
Nor heer shall my attendance leave you, Madam,
I'll wait upon you to th'Elisian shades.
Nor will poor Charm• be left behind.
My earthly race is run, and I descend
As great a ghost as Theban Simile,
When her ambitious love had sought and met
The Thunderers embraces, when no Pile
Of earthly wood, but Jove's celestial fire
Consumed her beauties relics, and sent down
Her soul from that Majestic funeral.
Farewell thou fading remnant of my Love.
When I am gone, I'll leave these earthly parts
To keep thee company: never to part,
But dwell together, and dissolve together.
Come Asp, possess thy mansion; freely feed
On these two hills, upon whose snowy tops
The winged Cupped oft has taken stand,
And shot from thence the proudest hearts on earth.
Corruption now, and rottenness must seize
This once admired fabric, and dissolve
This flesh to common elements again▪
When skilful nature, were she strictly bound
To search through all her store-house would be posed
To tell which piece was Cleopatra once.
Sweet Asp, I feel thy▪ touch, and life begins
From these cold limbs to take her gentle flight.
A slumber seizes me; farewell my girls.
Thus let the Romans find me dead, and know
Maugre the power of Rome, and Caesar's spleen
That Cleopatra lived, and died a Queen.
She's dead, and Eira too. I hear a noise.
There is no dallying now; I must bespeedy,
And use the common and sure way to death.
We come too late, and all in vain I fea•
Our care has been.
Here lies her servant bleeding,
Not dead: speak Charmio, how died the Queen?
A death that well beseemed her royal birth.
See Caesar, see; the mark upon her breast,
And here the fatal author.
It was the Asp.
Be speedy now, and use your utmost power
You skilful Psyls, call back this royal soul
To her fair seat, and take from Caesar's bounty
Above your wish: suck thou the wounded place,
And mutter thou thy strongest charms to fright
Pale death from thence, and you in•ernall Gods,
If ere to humane prayers you could lend
An exorable ear, it is Caesar begs,
Caesar, whose sword has sent to your black shades
A hundred thousand souls, and still has power
T'enlarge your Empire, begs in lieu of all
But restitution of one soul alone.
How royally she died?
No conquered Prince.
Did ever find a nobler way to death.
Had feeble Perseus known so brave a course,
He had redeemed his captive life from shame.
And not deprived the Conqueror of fame.
Is there no hope?
She's gone past all recovery.
We will no longer strive against destiny.
Though thou art dead, yet live renowned for ever;
And let this action speak thee to the world
A foe not shaming Caesar's victory.
No other Crown or Sceptre after thine
Shall Egypt honour: thou shalt be the last
Of all the reigning race of Ptolomey:
And all, and more then what thy letter craved
Will Caesar grant with dead Antonius
In richer state then ere proud Memphis saw
Her Kings interred shall Cleopatra lye.
Thy dying figure carved in fairest stone
Shall my triumphant chariot wear, for all
To gaze and wonder at thy form and worth.
Egypt no more a Kingdom, now a Province
Cornelius Gallus, is thy government.
And here let Caesar sheath the civil sword,
Whose fatal edge these twenty years has ripped
The bleeding •ntrails of afflicted Rome.
Heer let our labours end: advance brave friends
Our prosperous Eagles home to Italy,
To reap the fruit of all our wars and toils,
And fill great Rome with conquered Aegypts spoils.

THe noble courtesies I have received
At Lisbon worthy friend, so much engage 〈◊〉
That I must dye indebted to your worth,
Unless you mean to accept what I've studied.
Although but partly to discharge the sum▪.
Due to your honoured love.
How now Sebastiano will you forfeit
The name of friend then I did hope our love
Had outgrown complement.
I speak my thoughts,
My tongue and heart are relatives, I think
I have deserved no base opinion from you;
I wish not only to perpetuate
Our friendship, but to exchange that common name
Of friend, for
What? take heed, do not profane;
Would thou be more then friend? It is a name,
Virtue can only answer to, could thou
Unite into one, all goodness whatsoever
Mortality can boast of, thou shalt find,.
The circle narrow bounded to contain
This swelling treasure; every good admits
Degrees, but this being so good it cannot:
For he's no friend is not s •perlative,
Indulgent parents, brethren •, kindred, tied
By the natural flow of blood; alliances,
And what you can imagine, is to light,
To weigh with name of friend: they execute
At best, but what a nature prone •••i'm to,
Are often less then friends, when • they remain
 •ur kinsmen still, but friend is never lost.
Nay then Antonio you mistake, I mean not
To leave of friend, which with another title
Would not be lost, come them Isle tell you Sir,
I would be friend and brother, thus our friendshi •
Shall like a diamond set in gold not loose
His sparkling, but show fairer; I have a pair
Of sisters, which I would commend, but that
I might seem partial their birth and fortunes
Deserving noble love; if thou be free
From other fair engagement, I would be proud
To speak them worthy, come shalt go and see them▪
I would not beg them suitors, fame hath spread
Through Portugal their persons, and drawn to Ave •o.
Many affectionate gallants.
Cata •lina and Berinthia
The same.
Repo •t speaks loud their beauties, and no less •
Virtue in either well, I see you strive
To leave no 〈◊〉 where you mean to honour,
I 〈◊〉 otherwise escape the censure
Of •no ungrateful, but by waiting on you
Home to  ••ero
You shall honour me,
And glad my noble Father, to whom you are
No stranger, your own worth before, hath been
Sufficient preparation.
Ha?
I have not so much choice Sebastian,
But if one S •ster of Antonios,
May have a commendation to your thoughts,
I will not spend much Art in praising her,
Her virtue speak it self, I shall be happy,
And be confirmed you brother, though I miss
Acceptance at Avero.
Still you out doe me, I could never wish
My service better placed, at opportunity
Isle visit you at Eluas, in the mean time
Lets hast to Avero, where with you Isle bring
My double welcome, and not fail to second
Any design.
You shall teach me a lesson
Against we meet at Eluas Castle sit.
What gallants •irra are they newly entered?
Count de Monte Negro my Lord, and Don Valasco,
Give your observance then, I know their business;
Catalina and Berinthia are the stars
Direct them hither, Gaspars house shall give
Respect to all, but they are two such Jewels,
I must dispose maturely, I should else
Return ingratitude upon the heavens
For leaving me such pledges, not am I,
Like other fathers carried with the stream
Of love toth youngest, as they were in birth
They had my tenderness, Catalina then
Is eldest in my care, Berinthia
Her child's part too, both fair and virtuous;
But daughters are held losses to a family,
Sons only to maintain honour and stem
Alive in their posterity, and I now think on it,
My son Sebastiano hath been slow
In his return from Lisbon, oh that boy
Renews my age with hope, and hath returned
My care in educa •ion, weight for weight
With noble ••ai •tie, will beloved ••th best
O •h Dons in Spain and Portugal, whole loves
Do often threaten his absence to such length
As 〈◊〉 hath been.
 〈◊〉 •eres my eldest daughter
With her amorous Count, Isle not be seen,
You have been absent long my noble Count,
 •eshrew me but I dreamt on you last night.
Ha ha, did you so, I tickle her in her sleep I perceive;
Sweet Lady I did but like the valiant beast,
Give a little ground, to return with a greater
 〈…〉, now by my fathers sword
And gauntlet thart a pretio •s piece of virtue,
But p •other what did dream of me last night?
Nay it was an idle dream, not worth the repetition,
Thou dreamst I warrant thee, that I was fighting
For thee up to the knee • in blood, why I dare do it,
Such dreams are common with Count de monte
Negro, my sleeps are nothing else but rehearsals of
Battles and wounds and ambuscadoes, Donzell Delphebo
Was 〈◊〉 of valour, R •sicbeere a pu •fe;
My dreams deserve to be ith Chronicles,
Why, now my dream is out,
What?
I dreamt that you were •ighting.
So.
And that in single combat, for my sake
You slew a giant, and you no sooner had
Re •cued my honour, but there crept a pygmy
Out of the earth, and kilt you.
Very likely, the valliantst man must dye,
What by a pygmy?
I, thats another giant, I remember Hercules
Had a conflict with'em, oh my Dona
 •atalina I well would I were so happy once to
Maintain some honourable duel for thy sake, I shall
Ne'er be well, till I have kilt some body; fight, tic true
I have never yet fleshed my self in blood▪ no body
Would quarrel with me, but I fi •de my spiri • prompt
If occasion would but wink at me, why not 〈◊〉 has
Nature given me these brawny arms, this manly bulk,
And these Collossian supporters nothing but to •ling
The sledge, or pitch the bare, and play with
Ax •etrees; if thou love me, do but command me
Some worthy service; pox a dangers I weigh 'em 〈◊〉
More than fleabitings, would some body did hate that
Face, now I wish it with all my heart.
Would you have any body hate me?
Yes, Id hate 'em, Id but thrust my hand into their
Mouth down to the bottom of their bellies, pluck
Out their lungs and shake their insides outward.
Noble Sir, you need not heap more protestations,
I do believe you love me,
Doe you believe I love, and not accept it?
Yes I accept it too, but apprehend me
As men doe gifts, whose acceptance does not
Bind to per •orme what every giver craves;
Without a stain to virgin modesty
I can accept your love, but pardon me,
It is beyond my power to grant your suite.
Oh you too much subject a natural gift,
And make your self beholding for your own:
The Sun hath not more right to his own beams,
With which he gilds the day, nor the Sea lord
Of his own wa •es.
Alas, what first to own a passion
Without power to direct it, for I move,
Not by a motion I can call my own,
But by a higher r •pture, in obedience
To a father, and I have yet no freedom
To place affection, so you but endear me
Without a merit.
Here my sister.
And Don Valasco, how now, are thy arrows feathred?
Well enough for roving.
Roving I thought to.
 〈…〉 hope fair.
 〈…〉 home then, Valasco I have
 〈…〉 my miseris with a paper of verses, see she
 〈…〉 'em.
 〈…〉 make em thy self
 〈…〉 money did, what an idle question is that? as tho we
That are great men, are not furnished with stipendary
 〈◊〉 am sure for my own part I can buy 'em
Cheap 〈◊〉 can make 'em a great deal, would
You have learning have no reward, she laughs
 〈…〉 am glad of that.
They 〈…〉our o • a true Poetic fury.
Do you smell nothing, something hath some savour.
But this li •• my think hath more more feet than the rest.
 〈◊〉 run the better for that Lady, I did it a purpose.
But here is another lame.
That was my conceit, my own invention, lame
Halting •••ses, theres the greatest Art, besides I
T 〈…〉hy give you to understand, that I am valiant,
 〈…〉 legs and arms at all times and make 'em
Go halting home that are my enemies, I am
An •ambographier now it i • out.
For honours sake what's that?
One of the sourest versifiers that ever crept out of
 〈◊〉 when I set on it. I ••n make any body hang himself
With 〈◊〉 Iambic •, I can fetch blood with Ass •p •ads
 〈…〉st ••ad • with hexameter and pentameter, and
Yet I have a trimeter 〈◊〉 for thee my Dona Catalina
Conclude a peace sir with your passion.
I am sorry love hath been unkind to you.
To p 〈…〉 at me, who, till the first have knit
The sacred knot of marriage am forbid
To think of love.
But I cannot desist,
I am in love with every thing you say,
This your denial as it comes from you
Bids me still love you, pardon fair Berinthia,
Valasco hath not power to rule himself;
Be you less fair, or virtuous, perhaps
I may abate my service.
Old Gaspars house is honoured by such guests,
Now by the tomb of my progenitors,
I envied, that your fame should visit me
So oft without your person, Sebestiano
Hath been long happy in your noble friendship,
And cannot but improve himself in virtues,
That lives so near your love.
Don Antonio de Riviero.
The same.
With whose noble worth
You oft have filled discourse, thought your self happy
In his choice friendship; if his body cary
So many graces, it is heaven within,
Where his soul is.
Sebastiano, thou hast largely recompene'd
Thy tedious absence, you shall dishonour me,
Unless you think your self as welcome here,
As at your Eluas Castle, Vilarezo
Was once as you are sprightly, and though I say it
Maintained my fathers reputation,
And honour of our house with actions
Worthy our name and family, but now,
Time hath let fall cold snow upon my hairs,
Ploughed on my brows the furrows of his anger
Disfurnishd me of active blood, and wrapped me
Half in my sear cloth, yet I have mind
That bids me honour virtue, where I see it
Bud forth and spring so hopefully,
You speak all nobleness, and encourage me
To spend the gre •nenesse of my rising years
So to 〈◊〉, that at last I may
Be old like you.
Daughters speak his welcome, Catalina.
Sir, you are most welcome.
 〈…〉 she says he is most welcome, he were
Not best love her, she never made me such a reverence
For all the kisses I have bestowed upon her since
I first opened my affection, I do not like this
Follow, I mus be fair to use doctor Sharkins cunning,
I • we •e not truly noble to affront him;
My blood boils in me, it shall I cool again,
The place 〈◊〉 venerable by her presence,
And I may be deceived, Valasco then
Keep 〈◊〉 with thy fears.
How now Antonio, where hast thou loft thy self?
Struck dead with Ladies eyes? I could star-gaze
For ever thus, oh pardon love, against whom
I often have profaned, and mocked thy fires,
Thy flames now punish me, let me collect:
They are both excellent creatures, there is
A Majesty in Catalin •s eye, and every part carries ambition
Or Queen upon it, yet B •rinthi •s
 〈…〉 something more than all this praise, though she
Command the world, this hath more power ore me▪
Here I have lost my freedom, not the Queen
 〈…〉 could thus have wounded poor Antonio'
 〈◊〉 speak to her; Lady I'm an Novice, 〈◊〉 in love.
It may be so.
She •acts at me, yet I should be proud to be
Your servant.
I entertain no servants that are proud.
Divine Berinthia!
She checks my rudeness that so openly
I •gem to court her, and in presence too
 〈…〉 that have engaged themselves perhaps
 〈◊〉 already.
Come let us in, my house spreads to receive you,
Which you may call your own, Isle lead the way.
Please you walk Sir.
It will become me thus to waite on you.
Does not the fool ride us both?
What fool? both, whom?
That fool, both us, we are but horses and may
Walk one another for ought I see before the door, when he
Is alight and entered, I do not relish that same
Novice, he were not best gull me; hark you Don
Valasco, what shells doe?
Doe, why?
This Antonio is a suitor to one of 'em.
I fear him not.
I do not fear him neither, I dare fight with him, and
He were ten Antonios, but the Ladies Do •, the Ladies.
Berinthia, to whom
I pay my love devotions, in my ear
Seemed not to welcome him, your Lady did.
I but for all that he had most mind to your 〈◊〉,
And I do not see but if he pursue it,
There is a possibility to scale the fort, Ladies
Minds may alter, by your favour, I have less
Cause to fear of the two; if ht love not Catalin •
My game is free, and I may have a course in
Her Park the more easily.
Tic true, he preferred service to Berinthia,
And what is she then to resist the vows
Antonio if he love, dare heap upon her?
He's gracious with her father, and a friend
Dear as his bosom to Sebastiano,
And may be is directed by that brother
To aim at her, or if he make free choice,
Berinthias beauty will draw up his soul.
And yet now I think on it, he was very sawey
With my love to support her arm, which she
Accepted too familiarly, and she should
But love him, it were as bad for me, for tho he care
Not for her, I am sure she will never abide me after it,
By this hilts I must kill him, theres no remedy,
I cannot help it.
Isle know my destiny.
And I my fate but here he comes.
The strangest resolution of a father
I ever heard, I was covetous
To acquaint him with my wishes, pried his leave
I might be servant to Berinthia,
But thus he briefly answered, until
His eldest daughter were disposed in marriage
His youngest must not love, and therefore wished me
Unless I could place Catalina here,
Leave off soliciting, yet I was welcome,
 •u •fed on nothing but Berinthia,
From whose fair eyes love threw a thousand flames
 •nto Antonio • heart, her cheeks betraying
As many amorous blushings, which brake out
Like a forced lightning from a troubled cloud,
Discovering a restraint, as if within
She were at conflict, which her colour only
Took liberty to speak, but soon fell back,
And as it were checked by silence.
Isle stay no longer, sir a word with you, are you desperate?
Desperate, why sit?
I ask and you be desperate, are you weary of your
Life, and you be, say but the word; some body can tell
How to dispatch you without a physician, at a minuets
warning.
You are thē noble Count de monte Negro.
I care not a Spanish fig what you count me, I must
Call you to account sir; in brief the Lady
Dona Catalina is my mistress, I do not mean to be bass •ed
While this tool has any steel in it, and I have some
Mettle in my self too.
The Dona Catalina? do you love her?
She is a Lady in whom only lives
Natures and Arts perfection, borne to shame
All former beauties, and to be the wonder
Of all succeeding, which shall fade and wither
When she is but remembered.
I can endure no more, Diablo, he is mortally in love
With Catalina.
Tic so, he's tan with Catalinaes beauty.
Sir I am a servant of that Lady, therefore eat up
Your words, or you shall be sensible that I am Coun •
De monte Negro, and she's no dish for Don Antonio.
Sir I will do you right.
Or I will right my self.
He did direct those praises unto me
This doth confirm it.
He cannot so soon alter,
I shall discover a passion through my eyē▪
Thou show thy self a noble Gentleman, the
Count is now thy friend.
Does it become me sir, to prosecute
Where such a noble Count is interested,
Upon my soul I wish the Lady yours,
Here my suite false, with tender of my servicē;
Would you were married, nay in bed together
My honourable Count.
Your face is cloudy sir, as you suspected
Your presence were not welcome; had you nought
But title of a brothers friendship, it were
Enough to oblige us to you, but your worth
In Catalinaes eyes, bids me proclaim you
A double acceptance.
Oh you are bounteous Lady.
Sir—
Doe not fear me,
I am not worthy your opinion,
It shall be happiness for me to kiss
This Ivory hand,
The whilst I kiss her lip and be immotall.
Antonio my father is a rock,
In that he first resolved, and I account it part of my
Own unhappiness, I hope you hold me not suspected,
I were unworthy such a friend, his care
Becomes him nobly; has not yonder Count
Some hope of Catalina.
My father thinks that sister worthy of
More than a bare Nobility.
Isle back to Eluas noble sir,
This entertainment is so much above
Antonio • merit, if I leave you not
I shall be out of hope to —
Nay then you mock me sir, you must not leave me
Without discourtesy so soon, we trissle time,
This night you are my guest, my honoured Count,
My Don Val •sco.
Yes my Lord, we'll follow.
Ha I am resolved, like Barge-men when they row.
Isle look auother way then that I go.
ANsilv • yon observe with curious eye
All Gentlemen that come hither, whats your opinion.
Of Don Antonio?
My opinion Madam, I want Art.
To judge of him.
Then without Art your judgement.
He is one of the most accomplished Gentlemen
Ansilva ere beheld, pardon Madam.
Nay, it doth not displease, 'yare not alone,
He hath friends to second you, and who dost think
Is cause he tarrries here.
Your noble father will not let him go.
And can thou see no higher? then thou art dull.
Madam, I guess at something more.
What?
Love?
Of whom?
I know not that.
How not that? You would bring thy former truth
Into suspicion, why tic more apparent
Then that he loves.
If judging eyes may guide him,
I know where he should' choose, but I have heard
That love is blind.
Ha?
Virtue would direct him Madam unto you, I know not his
Obedience, I shall repent if I offend.
Tha'rt honest, be yet more free, hide not a thought
that may concern it.
Then Madam I think he loves my Lady Berinthia;
I have observed his eyes roll that way,
Even now I spied him
Close with her in the Arbour, pardon me Madam.
You have done me faithful service, be yet more vigilant,
I know thou speak all truth, I doe suspect him,
My sister, ha? Dare she maintain contention?
Is this the duty binds her to obey
A fathers precepts, tic dishonour to me.
Madam, here is a pretty handsome stripling new alight,
Enquires for Don Antonio.
Let me see him, twill give me good occasion to be
My own observer;
Whom would you sir?
I am sent in quest of Antonio.
He speaks like a Knight errant, he comes in quest,
I have heard it a little virtue in some Spaniels to
Quest now and then Lady.
But you are none.
My Mr. cannot beat me from him Madam, I am one of
The oldest appurtenances belonging to him, and yet I
Have little moss in my chin.
The more to come, a witty knave.
No more wit then will keep my head warm, I beseech
you amiable Virgin help my Master Antonio to some intelli∣gence
that a servant of his waits to speak with him from
his sister Madonna Castabella.
It shall not need sir, Isle give him notice my self,
Ansilva Entertain time with him.
A promising young man.
Doe you waite on this Lady?
Yes sir.
Wee are both of a tribe then, though wēe differ in
our sex, I beseech you tax me not of immodesty, or want
of breeding, that I did not salute you upon the first view of
your person, this kiss be as good as presse-mony to bind
me to your service.
'Yare very welcome, by my virginity.
Your virginity a good word to save an oath, for all
she made me a curs •e, it was not good manners to leave me
so soon 'yare very welcome by my virginity; was she afraid
of breaking, it may be she is cracked already, but here she is
again.
May I beg your name sir?
No beggar sweet, would you have it at length, then
My name is Signior Baltazaro Clear Mautado,
But for brevities sake they call me Diego.
Then Signior Diego once more you are welcome •.
Bazelez manes Signiory, and what my tongue is not
able to express, my head shall; it seems you have lived long
a Virgin.
Not above seven or eight and thirty years.
By Lady a tried Virgin, you have given the world
A large testimony of your virginity.
I should be thu • a disobedient daughter
A Fathers Hests are sacred.
But in love
They have no power, it is but tyranny,
Plain usurpation to command the mind
Against its own election; I am yours,
Vowed yours for ever, send me not away
Shipwrecked in the harbour, say but you can love me,
And I will waite an age, not wish to move
But by commission from you, to whom
I render the possession of my self:
Ha? we are betrayed, I must use cunning,
She lives in you, and take not in worse sense;
You are more gracious, in that you are
So like your eldest sister, in whom lives
The copy of so much perfection,
All other seemē to imitate.
Does he not praise me now?
But here she is,
Madam, not finding you in the garden,
I met this Lady.
I came to tell you
A servant of yours attends with letters from
Your sister Madonna Castabella.
Diego what news?
Sir, my Lady remembers her love, these letters in∣form
you the state of all things.
What serious conference had you sister with that
Gentleman.
Would you had heard them sister, they concerned
your Commendations.
Why should he not deliver them to my self.
It may be then
You would have thought he flattered.
I like not this rebound,
Tic fairest to catch at fall.
Sister, I hope
You have no suspicion, I have courted
His stay or language on my life no accent
Fell from me, your own ear would not have heard
With acceptance.
It may be so, and yet I dare acquit you,
In duty to a Father, you would wish me
All due respect, I know it.
Diego.
Sir.
You observe the waiting creatures in the black,
Hark, you apprehend me.
With as much tenacity as a servant.
I hope sir, now we shall enjoy you lunge •▪
The gods would sonner be sick with Nectar, than Intone •
Crow weary of such fair society;
But I am at home expected, a poor sister,
My fathers care alive, and dying was
His Legacy, having out-staid my time
Is tender of my absence.
My Lord Antonio means to take his leave.
Although last night you were inclined to go,
Let us prevail this morning.
A servant of his, he says, brought letters
To hasten departure.
Why sir, will you rob us of your master.
Not guilty my Lord.
Sir, if you'll needs go, we will bring you on your way.
I humbly thank your honour, Isle not be so trouble some.
Would you were gone once, I doe not mean to
trouble my self so much I warrant thee.
I have now a charge upon me, I hope it may
Excuse me, if I hasten my return.
Tic fair, and reasonable, well sir, my son
Shall waite on you of the way, if any occasion
Draw you to Avero, lets hope you'll see us,
You know your welcome.
My Lord the favours done me, would proclaim
I were too much unworthy not to visit you,
Oft as I see Avero; Madam I part with some unhappiness
To lose your presence, give me leave I may
Be absent your admirer, to whose memory
I write my self a servant,
Pox on your complemênt, you were not best write
In her table-bookes.
You doe not know
What power you have o'er me, that but to please you
Can frame my self to take a leave so soon.
What think you of that my Lord?
Why, she says she has power to take her leave
So so •e, no hurt ath' world in it, I hope she is an
Innocent Lady.
The shallow rivers glide away with noise,
The deep are silent, fare you well Lady.
I told you he is a shallow fellow.
I know not what to think on it Berinthia.
Gentlemen happiness and success in your desires.
Isle see you a league or two.
By any means, nay sir.
Diego.
My Lord I have a suite to you before I go.
To me Diego, prithee speak it.
That while other Gentlemen are happy to divide
their affections among the Ladies, I may have your honours
leave to bear some good-will to this Virgin: Cupped hath
thrown a dart at me, like a blind buzzard as he was, and
theres no recovery without a cooler; if I be sent into these
parts, I desire humbly I may be •old to rub acquaintance
with Mistress Ansilva.
With all my heart Diego.
Madam, I hope y •u will not be an enemy to a poor
Fly that is taken in the fl •me of the blind god.
You shall have my consent sir.
But what say a Ansilva, hast thou a mind to a husband?
I fear I am too young seven years hence were time
enough for me.
Shees not full forty yet sir.
I honour the Antique •tie of her maidenhead, thou
Mistress of my heart.
Come lets away Diego our horses—
We will bring you to the ga •e.
Yes, we'll bring him out of doors, would wee
were shut of him.
Hay ho, who would have thought I should have
benne in love with a stripling, have I seen so many maiden-heades
snffer before me, and must mine come to the block at
forty years old, if this Diego have the grace to come on, I
shall have no power to keep my self chaste any longer; how
many maids have been overrun with this love? but
 •eres my Lady.
Sir, you love my sister.
With an obedient heart.
Where do you think Don Antonio hath made choice
To place his love?
There where I wish it may grow older in desire,
And be crowned with fruitful happiness.
Hath your aff •ction had no deeper root,
That tic rent up already, I had thought
It would have stood a Winter, but J see
A Summer storm hath killed it, fare you well sir.
How's this, a Summers storm!
Lady by the honour of your birth,
Put off these clouds, you maze me, take off
The wonder you have put upon Valasco,
And solve these riddles.
You love B •rinthia.
With a devoted heart, else may I die
Contempt of all mankind, not my own soul
Is dearer to me.
And yet you wish Antonio may be crowned
With happiness in his love, he loves Birinthia.
How?
Beyond expression, to see how a good nature
Free from dishonour in it self, is backward
To think another guilty, suffers it self
Be poisoned with opinion, did your eyes
Empty their beams so much in admiration
Of your Berinthias beauty, you left none
To observe your own abuses,
Doth not Antonio dedicare his thoughts
To your acceptance, it is impossible,
I heard him praise you to the heavens, above 'em;
Made himself hoarse but to repeat your virtues
As he had been in ecstasy; love Birinthia?
Hell is not blacker than his soul, if he
Love any goodness but your self.
That lesson he with impudence hath read
To my own ears, but shall I tell you sir?
We are both made but properties to raise
Him to his partial ends, flattery is
The stalkeing horse of policy, saw you not,
How many flames he shot into her eyes
When they were parting, for which she paid back
Her subtle tears, he wrung her by the hand,
Seemed with the greatness of his passion
To have been o'er borne, Oh cunning treachery!
Worthy our justice, true be commended me;
But could you see the Fountain that sent forth
So many c •zening streams, you would say Styx
Were Christ all to it, and wast not to the Count,
Whom he supposed was in pursuit of me;
Nay, whom he knew did love me, that he might
Fire him •he more to consummate my marriage
That I disposed he might have of access
To his beloved Berinthia, the end
Of his desires I can confirm it, he pried
To be so happy with my fathers leave
To be her amorous servant, which he nobly
Denied, partly expressing your engagements;
If you have least suspicion of this truth:
But dee' think she love you?
I cannot challenge her, but she has let fall
Something to make me hope, how think you shoe's
Affected to Antonio?
May be
Luke warm as yet, but soon as as shees caught,
Inevitably his, without prevention.
For my own part I hate him in whom lives
A will to wrong a Gentleman, for hee was
Acquainted with your love, it was my respect
To tender so your injury, I could not
Be silent in it▪ what you mean to doe
I leave to your own thoughts.
Oh stay sweet Lady, leave me not to struggle
Alone with this universal affliction;
You speak even now Berinthia would be his
Without prevention, oh that Antidote,
That Balsam to my wound.
Alas I pity you, and the more, because
I see your troubies so amaze your judgement,
Isle tell you my opinion sir of the sudden;
For him, he is not worth Valasco's anger;
Only thus, you shall discover to my Father,
She promised you her love, be con •ident
To say you did exchange faith to her; this alone
May chance assure her, and if not I hav't:
Steal her away, your love I see is honourable,
So much I suffer when de sert is wounded,
You shall have my assistance, you apprehend me,
I am devoted yours, command me ever.
Keep smooth your face, and still maintain your worship
With Berinthia, things must be managed
And struck in the maturity, noble sir; J •wish
You only fortunate in Berinthias love.
Words are too poor to thank you, I look on you
As my safe guiding star.
But I shall prove a wandering star, I have
A course which I must finish for my self.
Glide on thou subtle mover, thou hast brought
This instrument already for thy aims,
Sister, Isle break a Serpents egg betimes,
And tear Antonio from thy very bosom,
Love is above all law of nature, blood,
Not what men call, but what that bides is good.
Be not so careful Cousin, your brothers well.
Be confident if he were otherwise
You should have notice, whom hath he to share
Fortunes without you? all his ills are made
Less by your bearing part, his good is doubled
By your communichaing.
By this reason
All is not well, in that my ignorance
What fate hath happened, bars me off the portion
Belongs to me sister, but my care
Is so much greater, in that Diego whom
J charged to put on wings, if all were well,
Is dull in his return.
His Master happily hath commanded him
To attend him homewards, this is recompensed
Already, look they are come;
You're welcome sir.
Oh sister, ere you let fall words of welcome,
Let me unlade a treasure in your ear
Able to weigh down man.
What treasure brother, you amaze me,
Never was man so blessed,
As heavens had studied to enrich me here,
So am I fortunate.
You make me covetous.
I have a friend.
You have a thousand sir, is this your treasure?
But I have one more worth then millions,
And he doth only keep alive that name
Of friendship in his breast, pardon Villandros,
Tic not to strain your love, whom I have tried,
My worthiest cozen.
But where is this same friend, why came he not
To Eluas with you, sure he cannot be
Dear to you Brother, to whom I am not indebted
At least for you.
I have many dear friends too, my Taylor is one
To whom I am indebted
His Commission
Stretched not so far, a Fathers tie was on him,
But I have his noble promise, er't be long,
We shall enjoy him.
Brother I hope
You know how willingly I can entertain
Your bliss, and make it mine, pray speak the man
To whom we owe so much.
It were not charity to starve you thus with shadows,
Take him and with him in thy bosom locke
The Mirror of fidelity, Don Sebastiano.
I oft have heard you name him full of worth,
And upon that relation have laid up,
One dear to my remembrance.
But he must be dearer Castabella, hark you sister,
I have been bold upon thy virtue, to
Invite him to you, if your heart be free.
Let it be empty ever, if he doe not
Fill it with noblest love, to make relation,
What zeal he gave of a worthy nature,
At our last parting (when betwixt a son,
And friend he so divided his affections
And out did both) you would admire him: were
I able I would build a temple where
We took our leave,
The ground it self was hallowed
So much with his own piety, Diego saw it.
Yes sir, I saw, heard, and wondered.
Come I will tell you all, to your chamber sister,
Diego▪ our plot must on, all time is lost
Until we try the moving.
If the plot please you sir, let me alone to play my part
I warrant you.
Come Castabella, • and prepare to hear
A story not of length but worthy your ear.
You have not dealt so honourably sir,
As did become you, to proceed so fa •e
Without my knowledge, give me leave to tell you
You are not welcome.
My Lord I am sorry,
If I have any way trangrest, I was not
Respectless of your honour, nor my fame,
Valasco shall be unhappy, if by him
You shall derive a stain, my actions fair,
I have done nothing with Berinthia,
To merit such a language, it was not ripe,
For me to interrupt the father, when I knew not
What grace I hold with her.
Hell on her grace, is this her duty? ha,
I can forget my nature if she dare
Make so soon for feit of her piety;
Oh where is that same awful dread of Parent,
Should live in children; tic her ambition
To out run her sister, but Isle curb her impudence,
Retire your self, this passion must have way,
This works as I would have it, fear nothing sir,
Obscure.
Isle cloister her, and starve this spirit
Makes her deceive my trust; Catalina
Upon thy duty I command thee, take
Her custody on thee, keep her from the eye
Of all that come to Averro, let her discourse
With pictures on the wall, I fear she hath
Forgot to say her prayers, is she grown sensual?
But my Lord.
Oh keep thy accents for a better cause, •
She hath contemd us both, thou caust not see
What blemish she derives unto our name.
Yet these are sparks, he hath a fire within,
Will turn all into flames, wheres Valasco?
Good sir, a much afflicted worthy Gentleman,
At your displeasure.
Thou art too full of pity, nay you are cruel
To thy own fame, he must not have access
To prosecu •e, it was my doting sin,
Of too much confidence in Berinthia,
Gave her such liberty, on my blessing punish it,
Twill be a virtuous act, the snow I thought
Was not more innocent, more cold, more chaste
Why my command bound her in ribs of ice,
But shees dissolved, to thee Isle leave her now,
Be the maintainer of thy Fathers vow,
Why I am undone now,
Nothing less, this conflict
Prepares your peace, I am her guardian,
Love smiles upon you, I am not inconstant,
Having more power to assist you, but away,
We must not be descried, expect ere long
To here what you desire.
My bliss I remember.
Berinthia, you're my prisoner, at my leisure
Isle study on your fate, I cannot be
Friend to my self, when I am kind to thee.
welcome honest Diego, your Master Antonio is in
health I hope.
He commanded me, remember his service to you, I
have obtained his leave for a small absence to perfect a suite I
lately commenced in this Court.
You follow it close me thinks Berinthia, I see this cloud
Vanish already, be not deject d,soon
Isle know the depth ont▪ should the world forsake thee,
Thou shalt not want a brother dear Berinthia.
This is my Lady Berinthia, prithee let me show
Some manners, Madam my Master Antonio speaks his
Service to you in this paper: alas Madam, I was but
Half at home, and I am returned to see if I can recover
The tother piece of my self, so, was it not a reasonable
Complement.
Antonio, he's constant J perceive.
So, we are alone, sweet Mistress Ansilva, J am bold
To renew my suite, which least it should either
Fall or depend too long having past my declaration,
I shall desire to come to a judgement.
My cause craves noshing but justice,
That is, that you would be mine; and now since
You self is judge also, I beseech you be not partial
In your own cause, but give seatence for the plaintiff, and
I will discharge the fees of the Court on this fashion.
Here is a haven yet to rest my soul on,
In midst of all unhappiness, which I look on,
With the same comfort a distressed Sea man
A •are off, views the coast he would enjoy,
When yet the Seas doe toss his reeling bark,
Twixt hope and danger, thou shalt be concealed.
Here is my Lady Berinthia.
What care I for my Lady Berinthia, and she thinks
Much, would she had one to stop • her mouth.
But I must observe her, upon her fathers displeasure,
She is committed to my Ladies custody, who hath made
Me her keeper, she must be locked up.
Ha locked up.
Madam, it is now time you would retire to your own
Chamber.
Yes, preth •e doe A •self in this gallery,
I breathe but too much air, oh Diego you'll have
An answer I perceive, ere you return.
My journey were to no purp •se else Madam▪ I appre∣hend
her • isle waite an opport •nity, alas poor I eddy, is my
sweet heart become a j •ylor, there's hope of an office with∣out
money.
Diego I spy my Lady Catalina coming this way, pray
shroud your self behind this cloth, I would be loath she
should ice us here together, quickly, I hear her treading,
Ansilva.
Madam.
Who's with you?
No body Madam.
Was not Diego with you, Antonioes man?
He went from me Madam half an hour ago,
To visit friends in the City.
He hath not seen Berinthia I hope.
Unless he can pierce stone walls Madam, I am sure▪
Direct Don Valasco hither by the back stairs,
I expect him.
I shall Madam.
H •, whats this? a Letter to Berinthia▪ from whom
Subscribed? Antonio, what devil brought this hither?
Furies torment me not, ha, while I am Antonio▪ expect
Not I can be other then thy servant, all my thoughts
A •e made sacred with thy remembrance, whose hope
Sustains my life, oh I drink poison from these fatal accents,
Be thy soul blacker then the ink that staines
The cursed paper, would each drop had fallen
From both your hearts, and every Character
Been tex •d with blood, I would have tired mine eyes
To have read you both dead here, upon my life
Diego hath been the cunning Mercury
In this conveyance, J suspect his love
Is but a property to advance this suite.
But I will cross um all;
Don Valasco, you are seasonably arrived,
I have a Letter for you.
For me?
It does concern you.
Ha.
How doe you like it sir?
As I should a Punyard sticking here, how came
You by it?
I found it here by accident oth'ground,
I am sure it did not grow there, I suppose
Diego, the servant of Antonio
Who colorably pretends affection
To Ansilva, brought it, hes the agent for him.
Now the design appears, day is not more conspicuous
Then this cunning.
I am resolved,
For what?
Antonio or I must change our ayre,
This is beyond my patience▪ sleep in this
And never wake to honour, oh my fates,
He takes the freehold of my soul away,
Berinthia, and it, are but one creature,
I have been a tame fool all this while,
Swallowed my poison in a fruitless hope,
But my revenge, as heavy as Ioves wrath,
Wrapped in a thunderbolt is falling on him,
Now you appear all nobleness, but collect
Draw up your passions to a narrow point
Of vengeance, like a burning glass that fires
Surest ith smallest beam, he that would kill,
Spends not his idle fury to make wounds,
Far from the heart of him he fights withal,
Look where you most can danger, let his head
Bleed out his brains, or eyes, aim at that part
Is dearest to him, this once put to hazard,
The rest will bleed to death.
Apply this Madam.
The time invites to action, isle be brief,
Strike him through Berinthia.
Ha.
Mistake me not, I am her sister,
She is his heart, make her your own, you have
A double victory, thus you may kill him
With most revenge, and give your own desires,
A most confirmed possession, fighting with him,
Can be no conquest to you, if you mean
To strike him dead, pursue Berinthia,
And kill him with the wounds he made at you,
It will appear but justice, all this is
Within your fathom sir.
Tic some divinity hangs on your tongue.
If you consent Berinthia shall not see,
More suns till you enjoy her.
How dear Madam.
 〈◊〉 you shall steal her away▪
Oh •hen'
Provide
 〈…〉 friends, but let it not be known
Upon your honour, I assist you in it.
And after 〈◊〉 when soft s •up hath charmed
All senses 〈◊〉 the Garden gate.
Which shall to open for you, to know her chambe •
A candle shall direct you in the Window,
 〈◊〉 shall attend too, and provide
To give you entrance, thence take Berinthia,
And soon convey her to what place you think
 〈◊〉 and most convenient, in small time
You may pr •cure your own conditions▪
But sir you must engage your self to use her
With honourable respects, she is my sister,
Did not I think you noble, for the world
I would not run that hazard.
Let heaven forsake me then, was ever mortal
S • bound to women's care, my mothers was
Half paid her at my birth, but you have made me
An everlasting debtor.
Select your friend, bethink you of a place
You may transpose her.
I am all wings.
So, when gentle physic w •ll not serve, we mus •
 •pply more active, but there is
Yet a •eceipt behind; Va •as •os shallow,
And will be planet struck, to se • Berinthia
Dye in his arms: tic so, yet he himself
Shall carry the suspicion, if art,
Or hell can furnish me with such a poison,
 •leepe thy last sister, whilst thou livest I have,
No 〈◊〉 in my s •lfe, my rest thy grave.
Go thy ways, and the devil wants a brerder thou
Art for him, one spirit and her self are able to furnish
Hell and it were unprovided; but I am glad I heard all
I shall love hangings the better while I live:
I pereeive some good may be done behind em▪
But isle acquaint my Lady Berinthia,
Here is her chamber I observed: Madam, Madam
Berinthia,
Whose there?
Tic I Diego, I am Diego.
Honest Diego, what good news,
Ya •e undone, undone lost, undone for ever; it is time
now to be serious.
Ha,
Wheres my Master Antonioes Letter.
Here, where, ha, alas, I fear I have lost it.
Alas you have undone your self, and your sister, my
Lady Catalina hath found it, and is mad with rage, and envy
against you; I overtheard your destruction, she hath showed
it to Don Valasce, and hath plotted that he shall steal you a∣way
this night, the doors shall be lest open the hour after
twelve.
You amaze me, tic impossible.
Doe not cast away your self, by incredulity, upon my
life your fate is cast, nay more, worse then that.
Worse?
You must be poisoned too, oh shees a cunning devil,
and she will carry it so, that Valasco shall bee suspected for
your deat •, what will you doe?
I am overcome with amazement?
Madam remember with what noble love my Master
Antonio does honour you, and now both save your self, and
make him happy, how.
I am lost man.
Fear not, I will engage my life for your safety,
Seem not to have knowledge or suspicion, be careful
What you receive, least you be poisoned, leave the
Rest to me, I have a crotchet in my pate s •all spoil
Their music, and prevent all danger I warrant you,
By any means be smooth, and pleasant, the devils
A knave, your sisters a Traitor, my Master is your noble
Friend, I am your honest servant, and Valasco shall
Shake his ears like an animal.
It is not to be hoped for.
Then cut of my ears, slit my nose, and make a devil
of me, shall I about it say, tic done.
Any thing thou art honest, heaven be near,
Still to my innocence, I am full of fear.
Spur cut and away then.
Scarabeo.
Sir.
Is the door tongue tide, scrue your self half out a •
one of the crevices, and give me notice what patient approa∣these
me.
I can run through the key hole sir.
This  •ucus bears
A lively tincture, oh the check mnst blush
That wears it, their deceived that say
Art is the ape of nature.
Sir.
Who first?
My Ladies apronstrings, Mistress Ansilva her chamber∣maid.
Admit her.
How now raw head and bloody bones, wheres the
Doctor Sharkino? oh here he is.
How does your virtuous Lady.
In good health sir.
Wheres the Fucus, and the Powder.
All is prepared here.
To see what you can doe, many make legs, and you
make faces sir.
Variety of faces is now in fashion, and all little enough
for some to set a good face on it, oh Ladies may now and then
commit 〈◊〉 and have some colour for it, but these are but
 〈…〉 of our art, the things we can prescribe to be ta∣ken
inwardly, are pretty curiosities, we can prolong life.
And kill too can you not?
Oh any that will go to the price.
You have poisons I warrant you, how doe they look▪
pray lets see one.
Oh natural and artificial, Nessas blood was milk
To em, an extraction of Toads and Vipers, look
Here is a parcel of Claudius Caesars posit,
Given him by his wife Agrippina here is some of
Hannibals medicine he carried always in the
Pummel of his sword, for a dead lift, a very active
Poison, which passing the Orifice, kindles
Strait a fire inflames the blood, and makes th • marrow
Fly, have you occasion to apply one.
In truth we are troubled with a rat in my Ladies
Chamber.
A Rat, give him his bane, would you destroy a City, I
have probatinus of Italian Sallets, and our own Country figs
shall doe it rarely, a Rat, I have scarce a poison so base, the
worst is able to kill a man, I have all sorts, from a minute to
seven years in operation, and leave no marks behind em, a
Rats a Rat.
Pray let me see a remover at twelve hours, and I would
be loath to kill the poor thing presently.
Here, you may cast it away upon it, but tic a disparage∣meant
to the poison.
This will content you.
Because it is for a Rat you shall pay no more, my ser∣vice
to my Lady, my poisons howsoever I give them, variety
of operations are all but one. 
Honest Rats bane in severall-shapes, their virtue is common,
and will not be long in killing; you were best look it be a
Rat, Scarabeo.
Sir here is a Gallant enquires for Doctor Sharkino
Usher him in, it is some Don.
Is your name Signior Sharkin • the famous Doct •r.
They call me Sharkino.
Doe you not know me?
Your gracious pardon.
 〈…〉 Monte Negro.
Your honours sublimity doth illustrate this habitation▪
Is there any thing wherein Sharkino may express
 〈…〉 service? if ought within the circumference
Of a medicinal or Mathematical science,
May have acceptance with your cel •itude,
 •t shall devolve it self.
Devolve it self, that word is not in my Table book;
what are all these trinkets?
Take 〈◊〉 I beseech your hon •ur, they are dangerous,
this is the devis 〈◊〉,
A pox oath devil, wh •t have I doe with him,
It is a dreadful circle of conjuration, fortified
With sacred characters against the power
Of infer •l spirits, within whose round I can tread
Sa •ely, when hell burns round about me.
Not unlikely.
Will you see the devil sir?
Ha, the devil? not at this time, I am in some hast,
Any thing but the devil I durst fight with all, hark
You Doctor, letting these things pass, hearing
Of your skill, I am come in my own p •rson, for
A fragment of your art, hark you, have you any
 〈◊〉 to procure love sir?
All the degrees of it this is ordinary.
Nay I would not have it too strong, the Lady I in∣tend
it for, is pretty well taken already, an easing working
thing does it.
Here • a powder whose ingrediences were fetched
From Arab •• the happy, a sublimation of the Phoenix
Ashes, when she last burned her self, it bears the
Colo •r of sinamon, two or three souples put into
A cup of wine, fetches up her heart 〈◊〉 can scar •e
Keep it in, for running out of her mouth to you
My nob •e Lord.
That, let me have that, Doctor I know tic dear,
Will that gold buy it?
Your honour is bountiful, there needs no circumstance,
Minister it by whom you please, your intention binds it to operation.
So, so Catalina, I will put your mornings draught
In my pocket— 
Doctor, I would not be seen.
Please you my Lord obscure your self behind these
hangings then, till they be gone, Isle dispatch'em the sooner;
or if your honour think fit, tic but clouding your person with
a simple cloak of mine, and you may at pleasure pass with∣out
discovery, my Anatomy shall waite on you.
Prithee come back yet.
Oh by any means go loins.
Dost thou think it possible that any man can tell where
thy things are, but he that stole 'em, hoe's but a juggling impo∣ster,
a my conscience, come back again.
Nay now wee are at furthest, be not ruled by him, I
know he is a cunning man, he told me my fortune once when
I was to go a journey by water, that if I escaped drowning, I
should doe well enough, and I have iiv'd ever since.
Well I will try, I am resolved; stay, here hee is Pedro,
you are acquainted with him, break the ice, he is alone.
Bless you Mr. Doctor; sir presuming on your Art, here
is a fellow of mine, indeed the Butler, for want of a better;
has lost a dozen of Diaper spoons, and half a dozen of sell∣ver
Napkins yesterday, they were seen by all three of us in
the morning between six and seven set up, and what spirit
of the Buttery hath stollen'em before eight, is invisible to our
understanding.
He hath delivered you the case right: I beseech you sir
doe what you can for a servant, that is like to be in a lament∣ble
case else, here is a gratuity.
Now we shall see what the devil can do, hey, here is one
of his spirits I think.
Between 7 and 8. the hour; the 1 Luna, the 2 Saturn,
the 3 Iupiter, the 4 Mars, the 5 Sol, the 6 Ven •s, the
7 Mercury, ha then it was stolen, Mercury is a thief, your
goods are stolen.
Was Mercury the thief, pray where dwells he?
Mercury is above the Moon man.
Alas sir tic a great way thither.
Did not I tell you you would be gulled.
Well you're a servant, Isle doe something for you;
What will you say, if I show you the man that stole your
Spoons and Napkins presently, will that satisfy you.
Isle desire no more, oh good Mr. Doctor.
If he does that, isle believe he has cunning.
Go to, hears a glass.
Lo you there now.
Stand your backs North, and stir not till I bid you;
What see you there?
Here is nothing.
Look again, and mark, stand yet more North.
Now I see somebody. 1 And I.
Mark this fellow mu •fled in the cloak, he hath stolen
your spoons and Napkins, does he not skulk.
 •Foot tic strange, he looks like a thief, •this Doctor •
see is cunning.
Oh rogue how shall's come by him, oh for an Officer,
Yet stir not,
Oh hes gone, where is he?
Be not too rash, my Art tells me there is danger in it,
you must be blinfold all, if you observe me not, all is to no
purpose, you must not see till you be forth a doors, shut your
eyes, and lead one another, when you are abroad open them
and you shall see again.
The thief?
The same, then use your pleasures, so, be sure you see
not, conduct them Scarabeo.
Oh Mr. Doctor I have got this opportunity to come
to you, but I cannot stay, here is my water, pray sweet Mr.
Doctor, tell me, I am in great fear that I have lost—
What?
My maidenhead sir, you can tell by my water.
Dost not thou know?
Oh I doe some what doubt my self, for this morning
when I rose, I found a pair of breeches on my bed, and I
have had a great suspicion ever since, it is an evil sign they
say, and one does not know what may be in those breeches
sometimes; sweets Mr. Doctor, am I • maid still or no, I
would be sorry to loose my maiden head ere I were aware, I
fear I shall never be honest after it.
Let me see Urine meretrix; the colour is a strumpet,
but the contents deceive not, your maiden head is gone.
And is there no hope to find it again?
You are not every body, by my Art, as in other things
that have been stolen, he that hath stolen your maiden head
shall bring it again.
Thank you sweet Mr. Doctor, I am in your debt for
this good news; oh sweet news sweet Mr. Doctor.
Cry your honour mercy, good my Lord.
Out you slaves, oh my toes.
What ails your Lordship?
Doctor, I am out of breath, where be these worms
crept, I was never so abused since I was swaddled: hark you;
those 3. Rogues that were here even now, began to lay hold
of me, and told me I must give them their Spoons and Nap∣kins;
they made a thief of me, but I think I have made
their flesh jelly with kicks and bastinadoes; oh I have no
mercy when I set on it, I have made e •mall poor Iohns, im∣pudent
varlets; talk to me of Spoons and Napkins.
Alas one of them was mad, and brought to me to cure
him.
Nay they were all mad, but I think I have matted
i'm; I fear J have kicked two or three out of their lives; alas
poor Wretches I am sorry for it now, but I have such an hue∣more
of beating &amp; kicking when my foots in once: hark you
Doctor, is it not within the compass of your physic to take
down a mans courage a thought lower; the truth is, I am
apt of myself to quarrel upon the least affront in the world, I
cannot be kept in, chains will not hold me: totherday for a
less matter than this, I kicked half a dozen of high Germans,
from one end of the street to the other, for but offering to
shrink between me and wall; not a day goes o'er my
head but I hurt some body mortally; pox a these rogues, I
am sorry at my heart I have hurt i'm so, but I can not for∣bear.
This is strange.
How? I can scarce forbear striking you now,
for saying it is strange; you would not think it: oh the
wounds J have given for a very look; well hark you,
if it be not too late, I would be taken down, but I fear tic
impossible, and then every one goes in danger of his life
by me.
Take down your spirit, look you, dee see this inch
and a half, how tall a man doe you think he was? He was
twelve cu •its high, and three yards compass at the waste
when I took him in hand first, isle draw him through a ring
ere I have done with him: I keep him now to break my
poisons, to eat Spiders and Toads, which is the only
dish his heart wishes for; a Capon destroys him, and the
very sight of beef or mutton makes him sick; look, you
shall see him eat his supper, come on your ways, what say
you to this Spider? look how he leaps.
Oh dainty.
Here, saw you that? how many legs now for the
haunch of a Toad.
Twenty, and thank you sir, oh sweet Toad, oh
admirable Toad.
This is very strange, I ne'er saw the like, I never
keew Spiders and Toads were such good meates before;
will he not burst now?
It shall ne'er •well him, by to morrow hee shall be an
inch abated, and I can with an other experiment plump
him and heighten him at my pleasure; isle warrant isle take you
down my Lord.
Nay but dee here, doe I look like a Spider-catcher,
or Toade-eater.
Far be it from Shirkino, I have gentle pellets for your
Lordship, shall melt in your mouth, 'and take of your valour
insensibly; Lozenges that shall comfort your stomach, and
but at a week restrain your fury two or three thoughts;
does your honour think I would forget my self, I show you
by this Rat what I can doe by Art: your Lordship shall have
an easy composition, no hurt in the world in it; here take
but half a dozen of these going to bed, ever morning; it shall
work gently, and in the virtue appear every day after∣ward.
But if I find myself braking out into fury, I may
take i'm often; here is for your pillars of Lozenges, what
rare physic is this? Isle put it in practise presently, fare∣well
Doctor.
Happiness wait on your egregious Lordship, my phy∣sick
Shall make your body soluble, but for working on your
spirit, believe it when you find it; with any lies we must set
forth siour'mples and compositions to utter them: so this is a
good days work; lean chaps lay up, and because you have
performed hamsomly, there is some silver for you, lay up my
properties: Tic night already, thus we knaves will thrive,
when honest plainness know not how to live.
Art sure she has tan it?
As sure as I am alive? she never eat with
Such an appetite, for I found none left, I would
Be loath to have it so sure in my belly, it will work
R •rely twelve hours hence.
Thus we work sure then, time runs upon
The appointed hour, Valasco should rid me of all my
Fears at once, upon thy life be careful to direct
Him at his first approach, I am sick till she
Be delivered; be secret as the night, isle to my
Chamber, be very careful.
Art sure thou hast the time right.
Doubt not, yonder's her chamber, the light
speaks it; softly.
Whose there? Vallasco?
I.
That way, make no noise, things are prepared, softly
So, so, this is good I hope and weight too, my Lady
Berinthia will be sure enough anon, I shall ne'er
Get more higher, I had much ado to persuade her
To the spice, but I swore it was a cordial my Lady
Used her self, and poo •e fool she has •wallowed it
Sure.
Madam fear not I am your friend.
Who are you?
Stop her mouth, away.
So, so, they are gone, alas poor Valasco I pity thee,
But we creatures of politic Ladies must hold the
Same bias with our Mistresses, and tic some policy
To make them respect us the better, for fear our
Teeth be not strong enough to keep in our tongues:
Now must I study out some tale by morning to salute
My old Lord withal.
Ansilva?
Some body calls me, who is it?
It is I Valasco
What comes he back for? I hope the poison does
Not work already, where have you disposed her.
Disposed whom?
My Lady Berinthia.
Let me alone to dispose her, prithee whore's the light?
Show us the way.
What way?
The way to her chamber? come, I know what
You are sick of, here each minute is an age till
I possess Berinthia.
This is pretty, I hope my lady is well.
Well?
My Lady Berinthia sir.
Doe you mock me?
I mock you?
I shall grow angry, lead me to
Berinthias chamber, or—
Why sir, were not you here even now, and hurried
Her away, I have your gold well fare all good tokens;
I have performed my duty already sir, and you had my
Lady.
I am abused you are a cunning Devil, I hear and had
Berinthia, tell me, or with this pistol, I will soon
Reward thy treachery, where Berinthia?
Oh I beseech you doe not fright me so, if you were
Not here even now, here was another that called
Himself Valasco, to whom I gave access, and
He has carried her away.
Am I awake? or doe I dream this horror:
Where am I? who does know me, are you friends
Of Don Valasco?
Doe you doubt us sir?
I doubt my self, who am I
Our noble friend Valasco,
Tic so, I am Valasco, all the Furies
Circle me round, oh teach me to be mad,
I am abused, infufferably tormented,
My very soul is whipped, it had been safer
For Catalina to have plaid with Serpents.
Thou talk of wonders, where is Valasco?
He was here even now.
Who named Valasco?
It was I, Catalina, here.
Could you pick none out of the stock of man
To mock but me, so basely?
Valasco be your self, resume your virtue.
My thoughts are clear from your abuse, it is
No time to vent our passions, fruitless rages,
Some hath abused us both, but a revenge
As swift as lightning shall pursue their flight:
Oh I could fear my brains, as you respect
Your honours safety, or Berinthias love;
Haste to your lodging, which being ne'er our house,
You shall be sent for; seem to be raised up,
Let us alone to make a noise at home,
Fearful as thunder; try the event, this cannot
Doe any hurt, you Ansilva shall
With clamours wake the household cunningly,
While I prepare my self.
I will suspend awhile.
Help, help, thieves, villains, murder my Lady:
Help oh my Lord, my Lady, murder thieves help.
What fearful cry is this, where are you?
Here oh I am almost killed.
Ansilva where art hurt?
All over sir, my Lady Berinthia is carried away
By Ruffians, that broke into her chamber, alas
Sees gone.
Whether? which way?
My sister Berinthia is violently tan out of her
Chamber, and here is Ansilva hurt, see look about,
Berinthia sister.
How Berin. gone • call up the servants,
Ansilva, how wast?
Alas Madam, I have not my senses about me, I am so
Frighted, vizards, and swords, and pistols, but my
Lady Berinthia was quickly seized upon, shees gone.
What villains durst attempt it?
I fear Valasco guilty of this rape.
Run one to his lodging presently, it will appear
I know he loved her, oh my Lord, my sister Berinthias lost,
How? foot my physic begins to work, isle come
to you presently.
Wheres Diego? he is missing, run one to his cham∣ber,
here is Valasco.
It is apparent sir, Valascoes noble.
Berinthias stolen away.
Ha?
Her Chamber broken op •, and she tan thence thy •
night.
Confusion stay the these.
So, so, as you were saying, Berinthia was stolen •
Way by some body, and—
Diego is not in his chamber.
Did break op the door?
I did, and found all empty.
How, Diego gone? thats strange, oh it workers a∣gain,
Isle come to you presently.
I doe suspect—
This some plot of Antonio,
Diego, a subtle villain,
Confirms himself an instrument by this absence;
What think Ansilva?
Indeed I heard some of them name Antonio.
Seb.
Ha?
Tic true upon my soul, oh false Antonio.
Unworthy Gentleman.
Let •one have the honour to revenge, but I the wronged
Val •sco, let me beg it sir.
Antonio, boy up before the day,
Upon my blessing I command thee post
To Eluas Castle, summon that false man
To quit his shameful action, bid him return
Thy sister back, whose honour will be lost
For ever in it, if he shall dare deny her,
Double thy Fathers spirit, call him to
A strict account, and with thy sword enforce him,
Oh I could leap out of my age me thinks,
And combat him my self •be thine the glory,
This stain will never wash off, I feel it settle
On all our blood, away, my curse pursue
This disobedience.
I had an interrest in Berinthia,
Why have not I commission, I have a sword,
Thirsleth to be acquainted with his veins;
It is too mean a satisfaction
To have her rendered, on his heart Id write
A most just vengeance.
Sir she is my sister, I have a sword dares tent
A wound as far as any; spare your valour
I have a trick to be rid of this fool, my Lord
Doe you accompany my brother, you
I know are va •lant.
Any whither, Isle make me ready prese •tly.
My most unhappy sister.
Oh I could surfeit, I am confident
Antonio hath her, tic revenge beyond
My expectation, to close up the eyes
Of his Berinthia, dying in his arms,
Poisoned maturely, mischief I shall prove
Thy constant friend, let weakness virtue love.
THe welcom'st guest that ever Eluas had
Sister, Villandras yare not sensible what treasure
You po ••esse, I have no loves, I would not here divide.
Indeed Madam, yare as welcome here, as are my mo∣there
was.
And you are here as safe, as if you had an army for your
Guard.
Safe armies, and guard; Berinthia ya •e a Lady,
But I mean not to court you: guard •node, here's
A Toledo, a •d an old arm, tough bones and sinews,
Able to cut off as stout a head as wags upon a shoulder,
Thart Antonios guest, welcome by the old bones
Of his Father, you have a wall of bra ••e about thee
My young D •ffodill.
Nor think my noble cozen means you any disho∣nor
here.
Dishonour, it is a language I never understood, yet
Throw off your fears Berinthia, yare in the power
Of him that dares not think
The least dishonour to you.
True by this bus jerkin, that hath looked ith face o •
an Army, and he lies like a termagant, denies it, Antonio is
Lord of the Castle, but isle command fire to the guns, upon •
any Renegade that confronts us, set thy heart at rest my gillo∣flower,
we are all friends I warrant thee, and hes a Turk
that does not honour thee from the hair of thy head, to thy
pettitoes.
Come b • not sad.
Put on fresh blood, yare not cheerful, how doe you?
I know not how, nor what to answer you,
Your loves I cannot be ungrateful to,
Yare my best friends I think, but yet I know not
With what consent you brought my body hither.
Can you be ignorant what plot was l •id
To take your fair life from you.
If all be not a dream, I doe remember
Yo •r servant Diego told me wenders, and
I owe you for my preservation, but—
Sh •ote not at Buts, Cupids an etcher, here a fair
mark, a f •oles bolts soon shot, my names Sforza still, my
double Daisy.
It is your happiness you have escaped the malice of
your sister.
And it is worth
A noble gratitude to have been quit,
By such an honourer as Antonio is
Of fair Berinthi •.
Oh but my Father, under whose displeasure I ever sink,
You are secure
As the poor Dear that being pursuid, for safety
Gets up a rock that over hangs the Sea,
Where all that she can see, is her destruction,
Before the waves, behind her enemies
Promise her certain ruin.
Fine not your self so haplesse my Berinthi •,
Ralse your dejected thoughts, be merry, come,
Think I am your Antonio.
It is not wisdom
To let our passed fortune, trouble us,
Since were they bad the memory is sweet,
That we have past them, look before you Lady,
The future most concerns.
You have awaked me, Antonio pardon,
Upon whose honour I dare trust my self,
I am resolved if you dare keep me here,
T'expect some happier issue.
Dare keep thee here? with thy consent, I dare
Deny thy Father, by this sword I dare,
And all the world.
Dare, what giant of valour dates hinder us, from da∣ring
to slit the weasands of them that dare say, wee dare not
doe any thing, that is to be dared under the poles, I am old
Sforza, that in my days have scoured rogues faces with hot
balls, made em cut cross capers, and sent them away with a
powder, I have a company of roaring bulls upon the walls, shall
spit fire in the faces of any ragamus •ian that dares say, we dare
not fight pell mell, and still my name is Sforza.
Sir your noble friend don Sebastionc is at the castle gate
Your brother Lady, and my honoured friend,
Why doe the gates not spread themselves, to open
At his arrival Sforza, tic Berinthiaes brother,
Sebastiano the example of all worth
And friendship, is come after his sweet sister,
Alas I fear.
Be not such a coward Lady, he cannot come
Without all goodness waiting on him, Sforza,
Sforza I say, what precious time we lose,
Sebastiano, I almost lose my self
In joy to meet him, break the iron bar •
And give him entrance.
Isle break the walls down, if the gates be too little.
I much desire to see him.
Sister, now hes come, he did promise me
But a short absence, he of all the world
I would call brother, Castabella more
Then for his sisters love, oh hes a man
Made up of merit, my Berinthia
Throw off all clouds, Sebastianoes come.
Sent by my Father to—
What, to see thee? he shall see thēe hēre.
Respected like thy self, Berinthia,
Attended with Antonio, begirt with armies of thy servants
Oh my friend.
Tic yet in question sir, and will not be
So easily proved.
No sir, weal make you prove your self our friend.
What face have you put on? am I awake?
Or doe I dream Sebastiano frowns.
Antonio I come not now to Complement,
While you were noble, I was not least of them
You called your friends, but you are guilty of
An action that destroys that name.
Bones a your Father, does he come to swagger,
My name is Sforza then.
No more,
I guilty of an action so dishonourable
Has made me unworthy of your friendship;
Come you're not in earnest, tic enough I know
My se'fe Antonio.
Add to him ungrateful.
It was a foul breath delivered it, and were any
But Sebastiano, he should feel the weight
Of such a falsehood.
Sister you must along with me.
Now by my Fathers soul, he that takes her hence
Unless she give consent, treads on his grave,
Sebas •iano, you're unnoble then,
Tic I that said it.
So it seem •.
Antonio, for here I throw of all
The ties of love, I come to fetch a sister,
Dishonourably taken from her father;
Or with my sword to force thee render her:
Now if thou be a Soldier redeliver,
Or keep her with the danger of thy person •,
Thou ca •st •ot be my brother, till we first
Be allied i • blood.
Promise me the hearing,
And •hat have any satisfaction,
Becomes my fame.
So, so, he will submit himself, it will be our honour.
Were in your power, would you not account it
A precious victory, in your sisters cause,
To dye your sword with any blood of him,
S •v'd both her life and honour?
I were ungrateful.
You have told your self, and I have argumēnt to
prove this.
Why would you have me think, my sister owes to
you such preservation?
Oh Sebastiano,
Thou dost not think what devil lies at home
Within a sisters bosom, Catalina,
(I know not with what worst of envy) laid
Force to this goodly building, and through poyso •
H •d robed the earth of more then all the world,
Her virtue.
You must not beat my resolution off
With these inventions sir.
Be not consent,
With your credulity, for my blood, I value it
Beneath my honour, and I dare by goodness,
I • such a quarrel kill thee: but hear all,
And then you shall have fighting your heart full.
Valasco was the man, appointed by
That goodly sister to steal Berinthia,
And Lord himself of this possession,
Just at that time; but hear and tremble at it,
She by a cunning poison should have breathed
Her soul into his arms, within two hours,
And so Valasco should have borne the shame
Of thest and murder; how doe you like this sir.
You amaze me sir.
Tic true by honours self, hear it confirmed,
And when you will, I am ready.
Pity such valour should be employed,
Upon no better cause, they will inform him.
Hark you sir, dee think this is true?
I dare maintain it.
Thats another matter, why then the case is
Altered, what should we doe fighting, and lose
Our lives to no purpose.
It seems you are his second.
I am Count de Monte Negro.
And my names Sforza sir, you were not best to co •e
here to brave us, unless you have more legs and arms •t
home, I have a saza shall pick holes in your doublet, a •d firk
your shanks, my gallimau •rye.
I cannot but believe it, oh Berinthi •,
I am wounded ere I fight.
Holds your resolve yet constant▪ if you have
Better opinion of your sword, then truth,
I am bound to answer, but I would I had
Such an advantage against another man,
As the justice of my cause, all valour fights
But with a sail against it.
Take a time to inform your father sir, •my noble
Cozen is to be found here constant.
But will you back with me then?
Excuse me brother, I shall fall too soon
Upon my sisters malice, whose foul guilt
Will make me expect more certain ruin,
Now Sebestiano
Puts on his judgement, and assumes his nobleness,
Whilst he loves equity.
And shall I carry shame
To Villarezoes house, neglect of father,
Whose precepts binds me to return with her,
Or leave my life at Eluas, I must on,
I have heard you to no purpose, shall Berinthi •
Back to Avero.
Sir she must not yet, tic dangerous.
Choose thee a second then, this Count and •
Mean to leave honour here.
Honour me sir.
Tic done, Sebastiano shall report
 〈◊〉 just and noble, Sforza swear
Upon my Sword, oh doe not hinder me
If victory crown Sebastianoes arm.
I charge thee by thy honesty restore
This Lady to him, on whose lip I seal
My unstained faith.
Vmh, tic a rare physician, my spirit is abated.
Brother.
Brother.
And wilt •thou be dishonourd?
Oh doe not wrong the Gentleman, believe it
Dishonour ne'er dwelt here, and he hath made
A most religious vow, not in a thought
To stain my innocence, he does not force me
Remember, what a noble friend, you make
A most just enemy, he saved my life,
Be not a murderer, take yet a time,
Run not your self in danger for a cause
Carries so little justice.
Faithsir, if you please take a time to think on it, a
month or two or three, they shall not say but wee are hono∣rabble.
You gave him to my heart a Gentleman, Seb whisp.
Complete with goodness, will you rob the world
And me at once, alas I love him.
Never man fought with a lesser heart, the conquest
Will be but many deaths, he is her brother,
My friend, this poor girls joy.
With all my heart, Isle post to Avero presently.
Let it be so Antonio.
Alas pore Castabella, what a conflict
Feast thou within thee, their fight wounds thee,
And I must die, who ere hath victory:
Then friend again, and as Sebastiano,
I bid him welcome, and who loves Antonio
Must speak that language.
Enough, not a Misty upon the Castle wall •
But shall bark too, I congratulate thee, if thou
Beelest friend to the Castle of Eluas, and still my name
Is Sforza.
Well said my brave Adelautado, come Sebasti •••,
And my Birinthia by to morrow we shall know
The truth of our felicity.
What are the Nobles more than common men •
When all their honour cannot free them from
Shame and abuse; as greatness were a mark
Stuck by them but to give direction
For men to shoot indignities upon them?
Are we called Lords of riches we possess,
And can defend them from the ravishing hand
Of strangers, when our children are not safe
From thieves and robbers, none of us can challe •ge
Such right to wealth and fortuues of the world,
Being things without us; but our children are
Essential to us, and participate
Of what we are: part of our very nature,
Our selves but cast into a younger mold,
And can we promise, but so weak assurance
Of so near treasures. O Villarezo shall
Thy age be trampled on, no, it shall not,
I will be known a father, Portugal
Shall not report this infamy unrevenged,
It will be a bar in Vilarez •es arms
Past all posterity;
Come Cat •lina, thou wilt stay with me,
Prepare to welcome home Sebastiano,
Whom I expect with honour, and that baggage
Ambitious girl Berinthia.
Alas sir; censure not her too soon,
Till she appear are guilty.
Here is thy virtue still,
To excuse her Catalina, no believe it,
Shes nought, past hope, I have an eye can see
Into her very heart, thou art too innocent.
Valasco welcome too, Berinthia
Is not come home yet, but we shall seē her
Brought back with shame; and first not justice ha?
What can be shame enough?
Your daugh •er sir?
My daughter? doe not call her so, she has not
True blood of Vilarezo in her veins;
She makes her self a bastard, and deserves
To be •ut off like a disordered branch,
Disgracing the fair tree she springs from.
Lay not so great a bourthen on Berinthia,
Her nature knows not to degenerate;
Upon my • life she was not yielding, to
The injurious action; if Antonio
Have played the thief, let your reven •e fall there,
Which were I trusted with, although I doubt not
Sebastianoes f ••y; he should feel it
More heavy than his Castle, what can be
Too just for such a sin?
Right, right Valasco, I doe love thee fort,
Tic so, and thou shalt see I have a sense
Worthy my birth and person.
'T will beco •e you; but I marvel we hearē nothing
Of their success •e at Elu •s. by this time
I would have sent Antonio to warm
His fathers ashes, doe you not think sir?
Sebastiano will not be remiss,
A gentle nature is abused with tales,
Which they know how to colour; here is the Count.
How, the Count? I sent him thither to be rid on him;
The fool has better fortune than I wished him,
But now I shall hear that which will more comfort me,
My sisters death most certainly.
My Lord, I have rid hard, read there, your son
And daughter is well.
Ha, well?
Madam.
How does my sister?
In good health, she has commendations to you
In that letter.
And is Antonio living?
Yes, and remembers his service to you,
Has he then yielded up Berinthia?
He will yield up his ghost first, I know not we were
Going to flesh baste one another, I am sure but the
Matter of felony hangs still, who will cut it down;
I know not, Madam theres notable matter against you.
Me?
Upon my honour there is, be not angry with me,
No less than theft and murder, that letter is charged
Withal, but you'll clear all I make no question, they
Talk of poisoning.
Am I be •rayed?
Well, I smell, I smell.
What do you smell?
It was but a trick of theirs to save their lives,
For we were bent to kill all that came against us.
Catalina read here, Valasco, both of you,
And let me read your faces, ha? they wonder.
Howe • this, I steal Berinthia?
I poison my sister.
This doth amaze me.
Father, this letter says I would have poisoned my
poor sister, innocence defend me.
It will, it shall, come Jacquit you both,
They must n •t thus fool me.
Madam I thought as much, my mind gave me, it
Was a l •e, yes, you look like a poisoner, as much
As I look like a Hobby-horse.
Was ever honest love so abused, have I
So poor reward for my affection.
It shall be so.
Madam I know not how the poison came in, but I
Fear some have betrayed our plot.
And how came you off my noble Count.
As you see without any wounds, but much against
My will I was but one, Sebastiano, that was the
Principal, took a demur upon their allegation:
It seems, and so the matter is raked up in the Embers.
To make a greater fire, were you so cold
To credit his excuse, Antonio,
I should not have been so frozen,
As you love honour and revenge, give me
Some interest now, and if I doe not
Show my self faithful, let Valasco have
No name within your memory, let me beg▪
To be your Proxy sir, pity such blood,
As yours should be ignobly cast away;
Madam speak for me.
No, J had rather lost this fool.
And you can get their consents.
You cannot sir in honour now go back.
J shall not think you love me, if my father
Point you such noble service to refuse it.
You hear what she says.
Count Monte negro.
I am all fire with rage.
Valasco, you may accompany the Count,
There may be employment of your valour too;
Tell me at your return, whether my son
May prove a soldier, here is new warrant for
Antonioes death, if there be coldness urge it,
Tic my desire, isle study a better service.
I shall.
Away then both, no complement, I wish you aide •
Had a Pegasus, be happy, my old blood boils, this
Must my peace secure, such sores as these must
Have a desperate cure.
This honour Madam of your self and brother,
Make me unhappy, when I remember, what
I came for, not to feast thus but to fight.
Pity true friendship should thus suffer.
Ha?
Music.
Some conceit of Sforza the old Captain▪
Lets entertain it, some soldiers device,
A mask of Soldiers.
 •odamercy Sfor ••.
To your stations now my brave brats of Military
Discipline, enough, Sforza honours you, look to your
Charge Bullies, and be ready upon all occasions,
My invincible dub a dub knights of the Castle,
Queen vala.
We must speak with Don Sebastiano.
Must? You are a Mushrumpe, mustin the Castle of El •••,
Monte negro gives a letter.
Friends; Sforza.
W •at, courting Ladies, by this time it was expected
You would have courted fame sir, and wood her to you;
You shall know me better.
I doubt you'll never be better, •ou shall now owe me
More than you shall account for.
Or else my curse, that word cries out for death.
My feats perplex me.
Madam I doe wonder
You can forget your honour, and reslect
On such unworthiness, wherein hath Valasco
Showed you less merit.
Sir it becomes not me
To weigh your words, nor would I learn of you
How to preserve my honour.
Sister.
Villandra •.
Then J must take my leave, for I am sent for,
I am sorry for your fate, Madam I am exepected
By a father your virtue hath made me yours.
Oh admirable physician •
Sfor ••, there is no remedy, but by all honour doe it,
Sister, I am to waite on him, oh my poor girl
 〈…〉 be with thee, for a
 〈…〉 my absence.
You may w •lke sir.
A ••onio I must but now look on, you were
Bes • take 〈…〉 to out live him.
 〈◊〉, I know not with what soul
 • draw my sword against thee
An •onio I am driven in a storm
To 〈◊〉 my self on thee, if not, any curse—
We must on sir.
Rare man of art Sharkino.
Guard thee Count.
Treacherous Sfor •a, hast thou brought us hither, to
be stroke dead?
Hold Gentlemen, give me audience.
Whats the matter my Lord.
 〈…〉 I had forgot my self,
This is my ague day.
How?
Yes a sextile ague, look you, doe you not see me
shake, 〈◊〉 Doctor, it will be as much as my life is worth
if • should fight a stroke.
Hell on such baseness, v •cele engage no more;
Let our •words try it out.
Sebast ••o hold, thart not so ill be friended,
Exchange a person, isle leap the battlement.
Withal my heart, I am sorry it happens so ••∣for •nately,
oh rare phis •teen!
Good cozen grant it.
What faies  〈◊〉.
I conjure you by all honour.
It is granted;
He shall nor go.
Me •e him my Lord, you will become his place of a
Spectator best.
Sebastiano brother.
Antonio, here me.
Guard thee Valasco then.
O brother spare him for my sake.
Sebastiano every wound thou give him,
Draws blood from me.
Sebastiano, remember hes thy friend.
Antonio tic my brother, with whose blood
Thou die thy sword.
When thou liv'st again shalt be more honourable
Sebastiano doe you observe the advantage,
Yet think upon it.
It is not in my power. I value not the odds.
Hold, Antonio, is this thy love to me, it is not noble.
So thy death makes the scale even.
Antonio hold, Berinthia dyes.
Sebastiano, Castabella sinks for sorrow, murder, help
I will leap down.
Where art Berinthia, let me breath my last upon thy
lip, make haste, least I die else.
Antonio before tho • die cut off my hand, art won∣ded
mortally?
To die by thee is more then death, Sforza be honest,
But love thy sister for me, I me past hope,
Thou hast undone another in my death.
Antonio stay oh cruel brother▪
Berinthia thy lip farewell, and friend, and all the
world.
The gate is open, I am sworn to render.
Hes not dead, his lips are warm, have you no bal∣some,
a Surgeo •; dead, some charitable hand send my soul af∣la
him.
Away, away.
It will be easy to die,
All life is but a walk in misery.
MY friend, my noble friend, that had deserved
Most honourably from me, by this hand
Divorced from life, and yet I have the use ont,
Haplesle Sebastiano; oh Berinthia,
Let me for ever lose the name of Brother,
Wilt thou not curse my memory, give me up
To thy just hate a murderer.
Ha, this must not be Sebastiano,
I shall be angry if you throw not off
This melancholy, it does ill become you,
Doe you repent your duty, were the action
Again presented to be done by thee:
And being done, again should challenge from thee
A new performance, thou would show no blood
Of Vilarezoes, if thou did not run
To act it, though all horror, death and vengeance
Dogged thee at thy heals; come I am thy Father,
Value my blessing, and for other peace
Isle to the King, let me no more see thee cloudy.
That was his Father.
No more, farewell, be all silence.
Sir.
Hes newly gone that way, may soon ore take him
My business points at you sir.
At me, what news? thou hast a face of horror, more
welcome speak it.
If your name be Don Sebastiano, sir
I have a token from a friend.
I have no friend alive boy, carry it back,
Tic not to me, I've not another friend
In all the world.
He that hath sent you sir this gift, did love you,
You'll say your self he did.
Ha, name him prithee.
The friend I came from was Antonio.
Thou lie, and thart a villainy, who hath sent thee
To tempt Sebastianoes soul to act on thee
Another death, for thus afrighting me.
Indeed I doe not mock, nor come to affright you
Heaven knows my heart, I know Antonioes dead,
But it was a gift he in his life designed
To you, and I have brought it.
Thou dost not promise cozenage, what gift is it?
It is my self sir, while Antonio lived, I was his boy,
But never did boy loose so kind a Master, in his life he
Promised he would bestow me, so much was his love
To my poor merit, on his dearest friend,
And named you sir, if heaven should point out
To overlive him, for he knew you would
Love me the better for his sake, indeed
I will be very honest to you, and
Refuse no service to procure your love
 ••d good opinion to me.
Can it be
Thou were his boy, oh thou should hate me then,
You are false, I dare not trust thee, unto him
Thou show thee now unfaithful to accept
Of me, I kilt him thy Master, it was a friend
he could commit thee to, I only was,
Of all the stock of men his enemy,
His cruelest enemy.
Indeed I am sure it was, he spoke all truth,
And had he lived to have made his will, I know
He had bequeathed me as a legacy
To be your boy; alas I am willing sir
To obey him in it, had he laid on me
Command, to have mingled with his sacred dust,
My unprofitable blood, it should have been
A most glad sacrifice, and 'thad been honour
To have done him such a duty sir, I know
You did not kill him with a heart of malice,
But in contention with your very soul
To part with him.
All is as true as Oracle by heaven,
Dost thou believe so?
Indeed I doe.
Yet be not rash;
T •is no advantage to belong to me,
I have no power nor greatness in the Court,
To raise thee to a fortune, worthy of
So much observance as I shall expect
when thou art mine.
All the ambition of my thoughts shall be
To doe my duty sir.
Besides, I shall afflict thy tenderness
With solitude and passion, for I am
Only in love with sorrow, never merry,
Wear out the day in telling of sad tales,
Delight in sighs and tears; sometimes I walk
To a Wood or River purposely to challenge
The boldest Echo, to send back my groans
In the height I break i'm, come I shall undo thee.
Sir, I shall be most happy to bear part
In any of your sorrows, I ne'er had
So hard a heart but I could shed a tear
To bear my Master company.
I will not leave thee if thou'lt dwell with me
For wealth of Indies, be my loved boy,
Come in with me, thus Isle begin to do
Some recompense for dead Antonio.
So I will dare my fortune to be cruel,
And like a mountanous piece of earth that sucks
The balls of hot Artillery, I will stand
And weary all the gunshot; oh my soul
Thou hast been too long icy Alps of snow;
Have buried my whole nature, it shall now
Turn Element of fire, and fill the ayre
With bearded Come •s, threatening death and horror
For my wronged innocence, contemned, disgrace •d,
Nay murdered, for with Antonio
My breath expired, and I but borrow this
To court revenge for justice, if there be
Those furies which doe waite on desperate men,
As some have thought, and guide their hands to mischief.
Come from the womb of night, assist a maid
Ambitious to be made a monster like you;
I will not dread your shapes, I am disposed
To be at friendship with you, and want nought
But your black aide to seal it.
First isle locke up thy
Tongue, and tell thee my honourable meaning, so,
To tell you the truth, it is a love-powder, J had it of the
Brave Doctor, which I would have thee to sugar
The Ladies cup withal, for my sake wo't do it:
And if I marry her shat find me a noble
Master, and thou shalt be my chief Gentlewoman
In Ordinary; keep thy body loose, and thou shalt
Want no gown I warrant thee; wo't do it.
My Lord, I think my Lady is much taken with your
worth already, so that this will be superfluous,
I Nay think she has cause enough, but I have a great
Mind to make an end on it, to tell you true, there are
Half a dozen about me, but I had rather she should have
Me than an other; and my blood is grown so boisterous
For my body, thats another thing; so that if thou wilt
Doe it Ansilva, thou wilt doe thy Lady good service,
And live in the favour of Count de Monte Negro •;
I will make thy children kin to me, if thou wo't
Do it.
I am your honours handmaid, but—
Here is a Diamond, prithee wear it, be not modest.
It is done my Lord, urge it no further.
But be secret too for my honours sake, we great men
Doe not love to have our actions laid open to the
Broad face of the world, Isle get thee with child,
And marry thee to a Knight, my brave Ansilva, take
The first opportunity.
If there be any virtue in the powder, prepare to
Meet your wishes my noble Lord.
Thy Count de monte negro expect to be a Lady.
Ansilva.
Madam.
Nay you need not hide it, I heard the conference,
And know the virtue of the powder, let me see it
Or isle discover all.
I am undone.
No, here take it again, isle not prevent
My sisters happiness and the Counts desire,
I am no Tell-tale good Ansilva gived her,
And heavens succeed the operation,
I beg on my knee; fear not Ansilva,
I am all silence.
Indeed Madam, then she shall have it presently.
Sir, if the opportunity I use
To comfort you be held a fault, and that
I keep not distance of a servant, lay it
Upon my love; indeed if it be an error
It springs out of my duty.
Prithee boy be patient;
The more I strive to throw off the remembrance
Of dead Antonio, love still rubs the wounds
To make them bleed afresh.
Alas they are past,
Bind up your own for honours sake,
And show love to your self, pray do not lose your reason,
To make your grief so fruitless; I have procured
Some music sir to quiet those sad thoughts,
That makes such war within you.
Alas good boy, it will but add more weights
Of dullness on me, I am stung with worse
Than the Tarantula, to be cured with music
'T has the exactest unity, but it cannot,
Accord my thoughts.
Sir this your couch
S •emes to invite so small repose;
Oh I beseech you taste it, isle beg
A little leave to sing;
Sweet sleep charm his sad senses, and gentle
Thoughts let fall your flowing numbers, here round
About hover cae •estiall Angels with your wings
That none offend his quiet, sleep begins
To cast his nets o'er me too, isle obey,
And dream on him, that dreams not what I am.
Nature doth wrestle with me, but revenge
Doth arm my love against it, justice is
Above all tie of blood Sebastiano
Thou art the first shalt tell Antonioes ghost
How much I loved him.
Oh stay thy hand Berinthia? no
You have don't, I wish thee heavens forgiveness, I cannot
Tarry to hear thy reasons, at many doors,
My life runs out, and yet Berinthia
Doth in her name give me more wounds then these,
Antonio, oh Antonio, we shall now
Be friends again.
Hes dead, and yet I live, but not to fall
Less then a conftellation, more flames must
Make up the fire that Berinthia
And her revenge, must bathe in.
Sebastiano, sister.
murder.
Theres wild-fire in my bowels, sure I am poisoned;
Oh Berinthia.
Ha, ha.
Help me to tear Ansilva, I am poisoned by
The Count and this fury.
Ha, ha.
Doe you laugh hereat.
Yes queen of hell to see thee
Sink in the glory of thy hope for bliss:
But art sure the art poisoned, ha?
Nay I have my part on it, I did but sip, and my belly
Swelleto •; call you this love-powder, Count Monte
Negro hath poisoned us both.
You're a pair of witches, and because
Isle keep your potion working, know you're both
Poisoned by me, by me Berinthia,
Being thus tormented with my wrongs,
I armed my self with all provision
For my revenge, and had in readiness
That faithful poison which in the opportunity
I put upon Ansilva for the exchange
Of the amorous powder; oh fools, my soul
Ravish thy self with laughter, politsion
My eldest devil sister, does the heate
Offend your stomach, troth charity, a little charity
Th'onely Antidote, thats cold enough:
Look here is Sebastiano;
Now horror strike thy soul, to whose fearless heart
I sent this punyard, for Antonioes death;
And if that piece of thy damnation
Ansilva had not don't, I meant to have writ
Revenge with the same point upon thy breast;
But I doe surfeit in this brave prevention:
Sleep, sleep Antonioes ashes, and now op
Thou marbell chest to take Berinthia
To mingle with his dust.
I have not so much heart as to curse, must I die?
Here my Lord, alas hes dead, my Sebastiano
Catalina.
I am poisoned.
Ha, Defend good heaven, by whom.
I am poisoned too.
Rack not my soul amazement, tic a dream sure.
Your Love-powder hath poisoned us both.
What will become of me now, I would I were hanged
To be out of my pain, by this flesh, as I am a Count.
I bought it of the Doctor for good love-powder;
But Madam I hope you are not poisoned in earnest.
The devil on your fooleship, oh I must walk
The dark foggy way that spits fire and brimstone,
No physic to restore me? send for Sharkino, a cooler
A cooler, there • a Smiths forge in my belly, and the
Devil blows the Bellows, Snow-water, Berinthia
Has poisoned me, sink by mine own engine;
I must hence, hence, farewell, will you let me die so?
Confusion, torment, death, hell.
I am glad with all my heart that Berinthia has
Poisoned her, yet—
Oh it becomes thee bravely, hear me sir.
Antonioes death and my dishonours now
Have just revenge; I stabbed Sebastiano, poi •oned my sister,
Oh but they made too soon a fury of me,
And split the patience, from whose dreadful breach
Came these consuming fires, your passions fruitless;
My soul is reeling forth I know not whether;
Oh father my heart weeps tears, for you I dye, oh see
A maids revenge with her own Tragedy.
Ansilva, oh thou dull wretch, hell on thy cursed
Weakness, thou gave me
The poison, but I like earth, hold, a gentleman
Usher to support me, oh I am gone, the poison
Now hath torn my heart in pieces, Moritur.
I am Planet struck, a direful Tragedy, and have
I no part in it: how doe you like it, ha? wast not
Done to the life? they are my own children; this was
My eldest girl, this Berinthia the Tragedian,
Whose love by me resisted, was mother of all this
Horror; and theres my boy too, that slew Antonio
Valiantly, and fell under his sisters rage, what
Art thou boy?
Isle tell you now I am no boy,
But haplesse Castabella, sister to
The slain Antonio, I had hoped to have
Some recompense by Sebastianoes love,
For whose sake in disguise I thus adventured
To purchase it, but death hath ravished us,
And here I bury all my joys on earth.
Sweet lady, here is Count de Monte negro alive
To be your servant.
Hence dull greatness.
Were you a friend of Sebastiano then?
Isle give you testimony.
No, I believe you, but thou can not be my daughter;
Tic false, he lies that says Beriathia
Was author of their deaths, it was Villarez •,
A fathers wretched curiosity, dead, dead, dead.
And I will leave the world too, for I mean
To spend the poor remainder of my days
In some Religious house, married to heaven,
And holy prayers for Sebastianoes soul,
And my lost brother.
Will you so?
I pray let Castabella have the honour
To enshrine his bones, and when my breath expires,
For sorrow promises I shall not live
To see more Suns, let me be buried by him
As near as may be possible, that in death
Our dust may meet, oh my Sebastiano,
Thy wounds are mine.
Come I am armed, take up their bodies, Castabella you
Are not chief mourner here, he was my son,
Remember that, Berinthia first, she was the
Youngest, put her in the pithole first, then Catalina;
Strew, strew flowers enough upon em, for they
Were maids; now Sebastiano, take him
Up gently, he was all the sons I had; now
March, come you and I are twins in this days
Unhappiness, we'll match together, follow close
We'll overtake em, softly, and as we go,
We'll dare our fortune for another woe.

WEll done my Masters, ye bestir your selves, I see we shall feast to morrow.
Your worship shall want no Wood-cocke• at the Wedding.
Thou hast as many as thou can carry, and thirteen to the last dozen.
Isaac.
Sir.
Have you been careful, to inuit those friends, you had direction for?
Yes sir, I have been a continual motion ever sin•• I rise.
I have not said my prayers to day.
We shall want no guests then.
I have commanded most on'em.
How sir?
I ha'bid 'em sir, there's two in my list, will not fail to dine w'ee.
Who are they?
Master Rawbone, the young usurer.
Oh hes reported a good Trencher-man,
He has a tall stomach, he shall be welcome.
They say, he has made on Obligation to the Devil, if e∣for he eat a good meal at his own charge, his soul is forfeit.
How does he live live?
Upon his money sir.
He does not eat it.
No the Devil choke him, it were a golden age, if all the Usurers in London should ha'no other diet; hee has a thingut waits upon him, I think, one of his bastards, be got upon a spy∣der, I hope to live, to see 'em both drawn through a ring.
Who is the other?
The other may be known too, the barrel at Heidelberg was the pattern of his belly, Master Lodam sir.
Hoe's a great man indeed.
Something given to the wast, for he lives within no rea∣sonable compass I'm sure.
They will be well met.
But very ill matched to draw a Coach, yet at pro•••der, there will be scarce an Oat between the lean •ade, and the fa• Gelding.
How lives he?
Religiously sir; for hee that seeds well, must by conse∣quince live well, hee holds none can be damned but lean men, for f•t men he says must needs bee saved by the faith of their body.
Mr. Beauford and Captain Landby: Isaac, call forth my Daughter.
Sir Iohn, I hope you make no stranger of me,
To morrow, I shall change my title for
Your son, soon as the holy rites shall make me
The happy husband to your daughter, in the mean time
It will become me wait on her.
I possess nothing but in trust for thee,
Gratiana makes all th•no.
I shall presume to follow.
Your friendship noble Captain to Mr. Beauford,
Makes your person most welcome,
Had you no other merit, pray enter.
Heaven hath already crowned my gray hairs!
I live to see my daughter married
To a noble hue•band, the envy of our time,
And exact pattern of a Gentleman,
As hopeful as the Spring, I am grown proud,
Even in my age.
Dost hear firra?
I •irra.
Is Master Beauford within?
No sir.
I was informed he came hither, is he not here?
Yes sir.
Thou say he's not within.
No sir, but tic very like he will be to morrow night sir.
How is this?
Would you have him be within before he is married.
Witty Groom, pret•ee inuit him forth; say here's a friend
Now you talk of inviting, I have two or three guests to in∣uite yet: let me see.
Why dost not move?
And you make much ado, isle inuit you: pray come to the▪ Wedding to morrow.
Tic hee.
You were my happy prospect from the window, Coose you are a most welcome guest.
Mr. Marwood, you have been a great stranger to the City, or my house for the course entertainment you received, hath been unworthy of your visit.
It was much oboe•e my desert sir: Captain.
I congratulate your return.
Beauford, Gentlemen enter my house,
And perfect your embraces there: I lead the way.
Pray follow.
Your pardon.
We know you have other habit,
You were not wont to affect ceremony.
How?
I do not like his present countenance,
It does threaten somewhat; I wo'd not prophecy.
Good Captain,
Excuse my absence to our friends within,
I have affairs concerns me with my kinsman,
Which done, we both return to wait on 'em.
I shall sir.
Now proceed.
We are kinsmen.
More we are friends.
And shall I doubt to speak to Beauford any thing,
My love directs me to?
What needs this circumstance?
Wee were not wont to talk at such a distance,
You appear wild.
I have been wilde indeed
In my vngouernd youth, but have reclaimd it,
And am to laden with the memory of former errors,
Tha• I desire to be confessed.
Confessed? I am no Ghostly father.
But you must hear, you may absolve me too:
If thou hast any discontentments prithee take other time
For their discourse, I am in expectation of Marriage,
I would not interrupt my joys.
I must require your present hearing,
A concerns vs both, as near as fame, or life.
Ha! what is it?
Wee shall have opportunity at your lodging,
The streets are populous and full noise,
So please you walk, Isle wait one you.
Ime your servant.
Milisent. Whore's my daughter?
In complement with Mr. Rawbone, who is newly entered sir.
O there's a piece of folly.
A thing made up of parchment and his bonds
Are of more value then his soul and body,
Were any man the purchaser, only wise
In his hereditary trade of usury,
Understands nothing but a scrivener,
As if he were created for no use
But to grow rich with interest, to his ignorance,
He he's the gift, of being impudent,
What will he grow to, if he live, that is
So young a monster?
With your favour sir
If you hold no better opinion of this Citizen
It puzzles, me why you inuit him, to your house
And entertainment, he pretending affection to your daughter,
Pardon me sir if I seem bold.
As some men Milisent
Do suffer spiders in their Chamber, while
They count them profitable vermin.
But he's most like to scatter poison sir,
Your fame is precious, and your family
Not mingling with corrupted streams, hath like
An entire River, still maintained his current
Chaste, and delightful.
Shall it receive my bosom,
Isle sooner match her with an Ethiope,
Then give consent, she should disgrace our blood;
And herein I but try her strength of judgment
In giving him access; if she have lost
Remembrance of her birth, and generous thoughts▪
She sucked from her dead mother, with my care
Isle strive to reinforce her native goodness,
Or quite divorce her from my blood: and Milisent
Isle use your vigilance.
Sir command.
I will,
Not urge how I received you first a stranger,
Nor the condition of your life, with me,
Aboue the nature of a servant, to
Obliege your faith: I have observed thee honest.
You are full of noble thoughts.
Though I suspect not
The obedience of my daughter, yet her youth
Is apt to err, let me employ your eye
Upon her still, and receive knowledge from you,
How she dispenses favours, you shall bind
My love the stronger to you.
Sir, I shall be ambitions to deserve your favour
Withal the duties of a servant, and
I doubt not, but your Daughter is so full
Of conscience, and care in the conformity
Of her desires to your will, I shall
Enrich my sight with observation,
And make my intelligence happy.
How now: what's he?
Tic Mr. Rawbones squire.
Pray is not my Masters worship here?
Your Masters worship!
What's that, his Spaniel?
No sir, but a thing that does follow him.
In what likeness,
I hope he does not converse with spirits.
Heel not entertain an Angel,
But he will weigh him first, indeed
I am all the spirits that belong to him.
So I think, but none of his familiar.
What's thy name?
Chameleon.
Good; did ever eat?
Yes once.
And then thou caught'st a surfeit,
thou could ne'er endure meat since: were it ever christened.
Yes twice, first in my infancy,
And the last time about a year ago,
When I should have been prentice to an Anabaptist.
Does thy Master love thee?
Yes, for, and I would gold I might have it,
But my stomach would better digest beef, or mutton,
If there be any such things in nature.
Here is his Master sir, and Mistress Iane.
How now Chameleon, hast dined?
Yes sir,
I had a delicate fresh ayre to dinner.
And yet thou look as thou had eat nothing this se'night, here provide me a Capon, and half a dozen of Pidge∣once to supper, and when will your worship come home, and taste my Hospitality.
When you please sir,
Yet now I think on it,
I must feed more sparingly.
More liberally in my opinion.
Would not any body in the world think so? did you e∣for see two such eare-wigges as my man and I: doe wee not look• like.
I think the picture of either o'your faces in a ring, with a Memento morse, would be as sufficient a mortification, as lying with an Anatomy.
The reason why wee are so lean and consumed, is no∣thing, but eating too much: Chameleon now I think on•t, let the Pigeons alone, the Capon will bee enough for thee and I.
The rump would last vs a se'night.
I tell you forsooth, I ha brought my self so low, with a great diet, that I must be temperate, or the Doctor says there's no way but one wo'me.
That's not the way of all flesh I'm sure.
It is a shame to say, what we eat every day.
I think so.
By this hand: if it would bear an oath: wee have had nothing this two days but half a Lark; which by a mis-chance the Cat had kilt too, the Cage being open: I will provide my belly another Master.
Now Isle interrupt em Master Rawbone.
I hope your Worship will repinie my boldness,
Tic out of love to your daughter.
Sir, I have a business to you, a friend of mine upon some necessity would take up a hundred pounds.
Isle pawn some ounces to pleasure him.
It is more friendly said then I expected.
So he bring me good security, some three or
Four, or five sufficient and able Citizens, for
Mortalities sake, isle lend it him.
Will you not take an honest mans word.
Few words to the wise, I will take any mans word to owe me a hundred pound, but not a Lords to pay me fifty.
Well: tic courtesy.
He shall pay nothing to me but lawful confederation from time to time, beside the charges of th'ensealing, because he is your friend.
This is extremity, can you require more?
More? whats eight in the hundred to me? my Scriuenes knows, I have taken forty and fifty in the hundred vijs̄ and mod•s of my own kins-men, when they were in necessity.
I apprehend the favour.
How now Isaac?
My master commends his love to you sir, and does desire your presence together with your Daughter and Nephew, at the arraignment of my young mistress to morrow.
How knave?
She is to be married or arraigned, ith'morning, and at night to suffer execution and loose her head.
Return our thanks, and say we'll waite upon the Bride Iane.
Dear Master Rawbone, I doe beseech you bee at these Sessions.
Thou did inuit me before.
I know it, but our Cock has a great mind, that sen∣tence should likewise pass upon the roast, the boiled, and the baked, and hee fears unless you be a Commissioner, the meat will hardly bee condemned to morrow, so that I can never often enough desire your stomach to remember, you will come.
Dost think I won •t keep my word?
Alas, wee have nothing, but good cheer to entertain you, I beseech you sir howsoever to feast with us, though you go away after dinner.
There's my hand —
I thank you.
Is master Justice gone, and mistress Iane too? follow me Chameleon. Isle take my leave when I come again.
Is•ac.
My l•ttle wit, thou wo't come with thy master tomorrow, Isle reserve a bottle of wine to warm thy sconce.
I cannot promise.
If I durst stay three minutes, I would venture a cup with thee irh'buttery, but tic a busy time at home:
Farewell M•l•sent.
Marriage as much joy waite upon the Bride,
As the remembrance of it brings me sorrow,
A woman has undone me, when I dye
A Coffin will enclose this misery.
You prepare me for some wonder.
I doe:
And ere I come to the period of my Story,
Your understanding will admire.
Teach my soul the way.
I am not Cos ith'number of those friends
Come to congratulate your present marriage.
Ha?
I am no flatterer, the blood you carry
Doth warm my veins, yet could nature be
Forgetfu•l and remove it self, the love
I owe your merit, coth oblige me, to
Relation of a truth which else would fire
My by o•no with concealment. I am come
To divide your s•u•e, ravish all your pleasures,
Poison the very ayre maintains your breathing,
You must not marry.
Must not? though as I
Am mortal I may be compelled within
A pair of minutes to turn ashes, yet
My soul already Bridegroom to her virtue,
Shall laugh at Death that would unmarry vs,
And call her mine eternally.
Death is
A mockery to that divorce I bring,
Come you must not love her.
Did I hope thou could
Give me a reason, I would ask one.
Do not,
I will too soon arrive, and make you curse
Your knowledge, could exchan•e thy temper for
An angels▪ at the hearing of this reason,
It would make you passionate, and •urn man again.
Can there be reason for a sin so great,
As changing my affection from Gratiana?
Namen, and reach me how to be a monster,
For I must loose humanity▪ oh Marwood,
Thou leadst me into a Wilderness, she is —
False, sinful, a black soul she has.
Thou hast a hell about thee, and thy language
Speaks thee a Devil, that to blast her innocence
Dost belch these vapours: to say thou lie,
Were to admit, thou hast but made in this
A humane error, when thy sin hath aimed
The fall of goodness. Gratiana false?
The snow shall turn a Salamander first
And dwell in fire; the ayre retreat, and leave
An emptiness in nature, angels be•
Corrupt, and bribed by mortals sell their charity
Her innocence is such, that were thou Marwood
For this offence condemned to lodge in flames,
It would for ever cure thy burning fever,
If with thy sorrow thou procure her shed
One tear upon thee, now, thou art lost for ever,
And armed thus, though with thousand furies guarded,
I reach thy heart.
Stay Beauford,
Since you dare be so confident of her chastity
Hear me conclude, I bring no idle fable
Patched up between suspicion, and report
Of scandalous tongues, my ears were no assurance
To convince me without my eyes.
What horror!
Be more particular:
I did prophecy,
That it would come to this, for I have had
A tedious struggling with my nature, but
The name of friend ore-ballanc'd the exception:
Forgive me Ladies, that my love to man
Hath power to make me guilty of such language,
As with it, must betray a women's honour:
You torture me, be brief.
Then, though it carry shame to the reporters,
Forgive me heaven, and witness an unwelcome truth.
Stay, I am too hasty for the knowledge
Of something thou prepar'st for my destruction,
May I not think what tic, and kill my self?
Or at least by degrees, with apprehending
Some strange thing done, infect my fancy with
Opinion first, and so dispose my self
To death? I cannot, when I think of Gratiana
I enterrayne a heaven: the worst, Isle hear it.
It will enlarge it self too soon, receive it;
I have enjoyed her.
Whom?
Gratiana sinnefully, before your love
Made she and you acquainted.
Ha? you have kept thy word thou ca•st so poison all
My comfort▪
Your friendship I ha•preferred
To my own fame, and but to save you from
A lasting shipwreck, noble Beauford, think
It should have rotted here, she that will part
With Virgin honour, ne'er should wed the heart.
Was ever woman good, and Gratiana
Vicious? lost to honour? at the instant
When I expected all my Harvest ripe.
The golden Summer tempting me to reap
The well grown ears, comes an impetuous storm
Destroys an ages hope in a short minute,
And lets me live, the copy of mans frailty:
Surely, some one of all the female sex,
Engrossed the virtues, and fled hence to Heaven,
Left woman-kind dissemblers.
Sir, make use
Of reason, tic a knowledge should rejoice you,
Since it does teach you to preserve your self.
Enjoyed Gratiana sinnefully, tic a sound
Able to kill with horror; it infects
The very air, I see it like a mist
Dwell round about, that I could vncreate
My self, or be forgotten, no remembrance
That ever I loved woman: I have no
Genius left to instruct me—it grows late:
Within—
Waite o'my kinsman to his Chamber,
I shall desire your rest, pray give me leave
To think a little—
Cousin: I repent
I have been so open breasted, since you make
This severe use on it, and afflict your mind
With womanish sorrow, I have but cautioned you
Against a danger, out of my true friendship:
Prosper me goodness as my ends are noble▪
Good-night, collect your self, and be a man.
And why may not a kinsman be a Vilaine?
Perhaps he loves Gratiana, and envying
My happiness, doth now traduce her chastity
To find this out, time will allow but narrow
Limits: His last words bad me be a man.
A man? yes I have my soul, t'does not become
A manly resolution to be tame thus,
And give up the opinion of his mistress
For one mans accusat on; —ha: ith'morning?
Proper. Y•s Marwood I will be a man:
His 〈◊〉d, shall either make past the sense
Of this affliction. or mine en•orce
A true•h•f•on him, if thou be•st wronged Gratiana
Isle• ye th• Mar•ire, bu• if false, in this
I gain to •ye, not hue a sacrifice.
To the Taylors man, run.
To the Taylors man,
Why not to his master?
The Wedding clothes not brought
Home yet, fie, fie.
W'o would trust of women's Taylor, take measure so long before of a Gentle-woman, and not bring home his commode∣tie, there's no conscience in it.
The arrant Shoe-maker too.
Master Hide, is not he, come yet I called upon him ye∣ster-day, to make hast of my M•stress•s shoes, and he told me, he was about the upper leather, he would be at her heals pre∣sently, I left his foot in the stirrup, I thought he would have rid post after me.
Prithee Isa•c, make hast, how tedious you are, hast not thou been there yet.
Oh yes, and here again, de'e not see me, you are so light your self.
As thou goosed, call upon Cod the Persumer, tell him he uses vs sweetly, has not brought home the gloves yet. — and dost hear? when you are at the Peacock remember to call for the sprig, by the same token I left my fan to be mended:—and dost hear? when you are there, tic but a little out of the way, to run to the Devil, and bid the V••tener make hast with the run∣lets of Claret, w• shall ha no time to burn it.
You need not if it come from Devil, me-thinkes that Wine should burn it self.
Run I prithee.
Taylors, Shoe-makers, Perfumers, Feather-makers, and the Devil and all, what a many occupations does a woman run through, before she is married.
Fie upon it what a perplexity is about a Wedding, I might have been thus troubled for a child of my own, if good luck had served.
—Within. Cardona.
I come Lady-bird.
Was this your purpose.
This place of all the Park affords most privacy.
Nature has placed the trees to imitate
A Roman Amphitheater.
We must be the sword-players.
Draw, imagine all
These trees were Cypress, the companions of
Our funeral, for one or both must go
To a dark habitation, me-thinkes
We two, are like to some unguided men,
That having wandered all the day in a
Wild unknown path, at night walk down into
A hollow grot, a cave which never Star
Durst look into, made in contempt of light
By nature, which the Moon did never yet
Be-friend with an• melancholy beam:
Oh Cousin thou hastled me, where I never•
Shall see day mo•e.
This is the way to make it
A night indeed, but if you recollect
Your self, I brought you beams to let you see
The horror of that darkness you are going to,
By marrying with Gratiana.
That name
Awakes my resolution, consume not
Thy breath •oo idly, you have but a small time
For th'use om't, either employ it in the vnsaying
Thy wrong to Gratiana, or thou hastens
Thy last minute.
I must tell Beauford them,
He is ungrateful to return so ill
My friendship, have I vnder-va'ued
My shame in the relation of a truth,
To make the man I wooed preserve, my enemy:
Why dost thou tempt thy destiny with so
Much sin? dost thy•ke I were a sword I dare
Not manage? or that I can be enforced
To a revolt? I am no Rebel Beauford:
Again• I must confirm Gratianaes honour
Stained, the treasures of her chastity
Rifled, and lost, it was my unhappiness
To have added that, unto my other sins
Ith'wildnesse of my blood, which thou may punish.
Thou hast repeated, but the same in
Substance touching Gratiana.
Truth is ever constant
R•mains upon her square, firm, and unshaken.
If what thou hast affirmed be true, why should
We fight, be cruel •o our selves, endanger
Our e•ernity, for the enough• of
One frail woman• let our swords exp•ct
A nobler cause. What man hath such assurance
In any women's faith, that he should run
A desperate hazard of his soul? I know
Women are not borne angels, but created
With passion and temper like to vs,
And men are apt to err, and louse themselves
Caught with the soul of wanton beauty, fetterd
Even •ith their mist••sses hair
I like this well.
He has a handsome presence and discourse,
Two subtle charms to tempt a women's frailty,
Who must be governed by their eye or ear
To love, beside my kinsman hath been taxed.
F•r being •oo prompt in wantonness, this confirms it
Then farwe•l woman kind.
This d•es become you.
Why should we fight, our letting blood wo'no•
Cure her, and make her honour white again:
We are friends, •epen• thy sin, and marry her.
Whom?
Gratiana.
How Sir, marry her?
Why can tho add to it another crime,
By a refusing to repair the ruins
Of that chaste temple, thou had violated?
Her Virgin tapers are by thee extinct,
No odour of her chastity, which once
Gave a perfume to Heaven, and and did refresh
Her innocent soul, they that have spoiled virginity,
Do half restore the treasures they took thence
By sacred marriage.
Marriage, with whom?
Gratiana.
Should I marry a whore?
Thou lie, and with a guilt upon thy soul,
Able to sink thee to damnation,
Isle send thee hence; a whore? what woman
Was ever bad enough to deserve that name?
Salute some native fury, or a wretch
Condemned already to hells tortures by it,
Not Gratiana; you have awakened justice,
And given it eyes to see thy treachery,
The depth of thy malicious heart, that word, hath
Dis-inchanted me.
Are you serious?
How have I fined in my credulity
Against virtue, all this while? what charm bound up
My understanding part, I should admit
A possibility, for her to carry
So black a soul; though all her sex beside
Had fallen from their creation? thou hast
Not life enough to forfeit, what an advantage
To fame and goodness had been lost.
Will you fight?
Were thou defen•'d with circular fire, more
Subtle then the lightning, that I knew would ravish
My heart, and marrow from me, yet I should
Neglect the danger, and but singly armed,
Fly to revenge thy calumny: a whore—come on sir.
You are wounded: ha?
Mortally, fly Beauford, save thy self, I hasten to the dead.
Oh stay a while, or thou wilt loose vs both,
Thy wound I cannot call back, now there is
No dallying with heaven, but thou pulsed on thee
Double confusion, leave a truth behind thee,
As thou would hope rest to thy parting soul,
Hast thou not wronged Gratiana?
Yes, in my lust, but not in my report,
Take my last breath, I sinfully enjoyed her,
Gratiana is a blotted piece of alabaster:
Farewell least some betray thee, heaven forgive
My offence, as I do freely pardon thine.
I cannot long survive,—
Is there no hope thou moist recover?
Oh!
Farewell for ever then, with thy short breath
M•y all thy ills conclude, mine but begin
To muster, life and I shall quickly part,
I feel a sorrow will break Beaufords heart.
There are Cony-stealers abroad sir.
These whoreson Rabbit suckers
Will ne'er leave the ground.
In my walk last night, I frighted some on em.
Pox a these vermin, would they were all destroyed.
So we may chance to keep no Dear.
Why so?
An old Cony stops a knaves mouth sometimes.
That else would be gaping for Venison.
Oh.
Whose that?
Here's a Gentle-man wounded.
Ha?
He has bled much.
How cam• you hurt si•? no,
Not speak? if he be not past h•pe, let vs
Cany him to my lodge▪ my wife is a
Pe•ce of a Su•g•on, has been fortunate
In some cures: tear a piece of thy shirt Raph,
To bind his wound quickly: —so, so, alas
Poor Gentle-man, he may hue to be dressed, and tell
Who has done this mis-fortune: gently
Honest Raph, he has some breath yet:
Would • had my blood-hound here.
You're welcome Mr Landby, and mistress Iane.
Whore's the young Captain si• your Nephew?
He went betimes to waite upon the Bridegroom.
They are inseparable friends, as they had
Divided hearts, they both are glad, when either
Me•e a good fortune.
Isle be bold to see your daughter.
Do mistress Iane, she has
Her maids blush yet, she'll make you amends for this,
And ere't be long I hope dance at your wedding.
I wish you many joys sir by this marriage:
Your daughter ha made discreet election,
She'll h•ue a hopeful Gentle-man.
Master Lan•by,
It would refresh my age to see her fruitful to him,
I should find a blessing for a young
•eaufor•, and be glad to d•ndle him, the
First news of a boy borne by my daughter
Would set me back seven years: O Master Landby,
Old men do never truly dote, until
Their children bring em babies.
Master Rawbone▪ isle be bold to present you
With a piece of Rose-mary, we ha such cheer.
Honest Isaac.
Pray do you belong to Master Rawbone?
Yes sir.
You have eat something in your days.
Why prithee?
Nothing, nothing,
Do ye understand nothing, you shall eat nothing:
Unless some Benefactors like my master,
In pity of your bellies once a year
Do warm it with a dinner, you must never
Hope to see roast, of sod; he has within
This twelve month to my knowledge
Made seven men immortal.
How?
Yes, he has made spirits on em,
And they haunt such men's houses as my masters,
Spirits ath'buttery, let me counsel ye
To cram your corpse to day, for by his Almanac
There's a long Lent a coming.
Never see me,
But when you are invited.
Alas I h•d
Rather eat a piece of cold Capon at home,
Th•n be troublesome abroad. I hope forsooth
Mist••sse Iane is as she shut be.
She is •n •ealth:
You've a fresh servant master Rawbone,
A proper fellow, and maintains himself
Handsomely.
And he wot not ha maintained
Himself, I had never entertained him.
Whore's Chameleon?
I ha preferred him Isaac.
How?
Turned him away last night,
And took this stripling.
Morrow sir Iohn, where is the early Bridegroom?
Came not you from him?
We expect him sir, every minute.
Not yet come? his servants▪ told me
He went abroad before the morning blushed.
We ha not seen him, pray heaven
He be in health.
I wonder at his absence.
Captain Landby, young man of war, I do
Salute thee with a broad-side.
Do ye hear, they
Say you come a wooing to my Cousin,
That day you marry her, isle cut your throat,
Keep't to your self.
Thou art a noble fellow; things may prosper.
You come hither to wish C•n give em joy now.
Yes marry do I.
You do lye, you come to
Scour your dirty maw with the good cheer,
Which will be damned in your lean Barathruw,
That kitchen stuff devourer.
Why shut you
Say so Captain? my belly did ne'er think
You any harm.
When it does vomit up thy heart
Isle praise it, in the mean time would
Every bit thou catst to day, were steeped
In Aqua fortis.
What is that Jasper?
It is strong water.
Noble Captain, thanks in faith heartily:
I was afraid you had been angry.
Isle ha thee sowed up in a
Mony-bagge, and boiled to jolly.
You shall ha me at your service,
And my bags too, upon good security:
Is not this better then quarrelling, Jasper, —
Is not the Bridegroom come yet, sure he has over slept himself, there is nothing but wondering within, all the maids are in uproar, one says he is a slow thing, another says, she knows not what to say, but they all conclude, if ever they marry, they'll make it in their bargain to be sure of all things before matrimony, fie upon him, if I were to be his wife, i'd show him a trick for it, ere a year came about, or it should cost me a fall, I warrant him.
Sir Iohn you're troubled.
Can you blame me sir:
I would not have our mornings expectation
Frustrate— I know not what to think.
Sir, fear not.
The morn grows old.
Himen has long tapers.
What should procure his absence; he departed
But oddly yesterday.
Marwood had engaged him,
They promised to return.
But we see neither.
They'll come together, make it not your fear,
Beauford• a Gentle-man, and cannot be
Guilty of doing such affront, unless
Some mis-fortune—
That's another jealousy.
Where is Sir Iohn Belfare?
Ha? Master Lodam,
W•lcome.
I congratulate.—
Saw you master Beauford sir.
Yes I saw him, but—
But what?
I kn•w not how he does,
Where is the Lady that must be undone to night,
Your daughter?
My daughter undone, name what unhappiness,
My heart already doth begin to prophecy
How 〈…〉, name what disaster, give it
Expression pray, what is the news?
The news?
Why wo'd ye know the news? tic none a'ch best.
Be temperate then in your relation.
What first?
They say for certain,
There were foe•e and twenty Colliers cast away,
Coming from New-Castle tic cold news in the City,
But there is worse news •broad.
Doth it concern my knowledge? trifle not.
They say that Canary sack, m•st dance
Again to the Apothecaries, and be sold for
Physic, in hum-glasses, and thin bless▪ that the
Spaw-water must be transported hither, and
Be drunk instead of French wines:
For my part, I am but one.
Big enough for two.
This citadel may endure as long a siege
As another, if the pride of my flesh must be
Pulled down, farewell it t'has done me
Service this forty year: let it go.
Saw you master Beauford?
Yes Sir Iohn,
I saw him but — it was three days ago.
Hee is ridiculous.
Doe not afflict your self,
He will give a fair account at his return.
Pray heaven hee may:
My daughter.
Sir, I desire to be acquainted with you.
I have no stomach sir to your acquaintance,
You are a thought too lean.
And you a bit too fat.
Dost not wonder girl at Beaufords absence?
Not at all sir, I am not now to learn
Opinion of his nobleness; and I hope
Your judgements will not permit you sin so much
To censure him for this stay. Fair morning
To master Landby, noble Captain, master
Lodam, and the rest.
I am so little
She cannot see me, give you joy forsooth,
I hope it is your destiny to be married.
And yours to bee hanged.
How sir.
No harm,
He wishes you long life.
A long halter he does,
What to bee hanged.
Las sir he knows you ha no flesh to burden you,
Light at a feather, hanging will ne'er kill you,
If he had wished sir master Lodam hanged.
Then, isle to him and thank him;
But here's mistress Iane.
You shall command me as your servant.—sir.
I did but ask her how she did, I said
Never a word to her: Pox upon his bouncing
I am as fearful of him as of a Gun,
He does so powder me.
We have not seen
You sir, this great while, you fall away me-thinkes.
Loosing Lodam I.
You are not the least welcome sir.
I do give you great thank, and do mean to dance at your Wedding for it, I doe marvel Master Beauford is not earlier, I shut ha been here with musique Lady, and have fiddled you too, before you were up, these lean Lovers, ha nothing in em, slow men of London.
Gratiana.
Who's this? she has a mortal eye.
Chameleon? How now turned away your master.
No, I sold my place; as I was thinking to run away, comes this fellow, and offered me a breake-fast for my good will to speak to my Master for him, I took him at his word, and re∣signed my Office, and turned over my hunger to him immediately; now I serve a man, Isaac.
Isaac.—
I do fore-see a fall of this tower already,
Love begins to vnder-mine it.
Mistress, a word in private.
Jasper has't a sword.
Yes sir.
That's well, let it alone:
Did see this paunch affront me?
He did it in love to the Gentle-woman.
In love? let me see the sword again.
Wo'd it were in his belly — put it up,
Thou deserust a good blade, tic so well kept.
Master Beauford, master Beauford.
Where?
Hard by, within a stones cast a my
Mistress, here sit here.
My dearest Beauford, where hast bin so long?
Oh Gratiana.
Are you not in health?
Not well, tic then no time to chide:
How fare you sir?
I have a trouble at my heart: pardon
The trespass of your patience Gentle-men,
He publish the occasion of my absence,
So first, you give me leave, to unlade it here;
But with your favour, I desire I may
Exempt all ears, but Gratianaes, till
A short time ripen it for your knowledge.
Ha?
Lets leave 'em then a while.
Into the Garden Gentle-men.
Withal my heart:
In my conscience the 'ile be honest together.
This begets my wonder, master Lodam.
Good sir Iohn, isle waite upon you,
It is dinner time.
I have not time to dwell on circumstance,
I come to take my last leave, you and I
Must never meet again.
What language do I hear,
If Beauford it should strike me dead?
This day, I had designed for marriage, but I must
Pronounce wee are eternally divorced:
Oh Gratiana, thou hast made a wound
Beyond the cure of Surgery, why did nature
Empty her treasure in thy face, and leave thee
A black prodiglous soul?
Defend me goodness!
Call upon darkness, to obscure thee rather,
That never more thou moist be seen by mortal,
Get thee some dwelling in a mist, or in
A wild forsaken earth, a Wilderness,
Where thou moist hide thy self, and dye forgotten.
Where was I lost name what offence provoked
This heavy doom, dear Beauford, be not so
Unjust, to sentence me, before I know
What is my crime, or if you will not tell
What sin it is, I have committed, great,
And horrid, as your anger; let me study,
Isle count em all before you, never did
Penitent, in confession, strip the soul
More naked, isle vnclaspe my book of conscience,
You shall read ore my heart, and if you find
In that great Volume, but one single thought
Which concerned you, and did not end with some
Good prayer for you: Oh be just and kill me.
Be just, and tell thy conscience, you have abused it
False woman, why dost thou increase thy horror?
By the obscuring a mis-deed, which wo'd
Were all thy other sins forgiven, undo thee
Oh Gratiana, thou art. —
What am I?
A thing I would not name, it sound so fearfully,
It would make a Devil blush, to be saluted
By that, which thou must answer to.
I fear—
That fear betrays thy guilt, tell me Gratiana
What did thou see in me to make thee think
I was not worthy of thee, at thy best
And richest value, when thou were as white
In soul, as beauty? for sure, once thou were• so:
Had thou so cheap opinion of my birth,
My breeding, or my fortunes, that none else
Could serve for property of your lust, but I?
Dear Beauford hear me.
A common father to thy sinne-got issue,
A patron of thy •ifled, unchaste womb?
Oh tho• were cruel, to reward so ill
The heart that truly honoured thee: thy name
Which sweetened once the breath of him that spake it,
And musically charmed the gentle ear;
Shall sound here-after like a Screech-owles note,
And fright the hey•er; Virgins shall lament
That thou hast shamed their chaste society,
And oft as Himen lights his tapers up,
At the remembrance of thy name, shed tears,
And blush for thy dishonour: from this minute,
Thy friends shall count thee desperately si•ke,
And whensoere thou goosed abroad, that day
The maids and matrons, thinking thou art dead,
And going to the grave, shall all come forth
And waite like mourners on thee.
Ha ye done?
Then hear me a few syllables, you have
Suspicion that I am dishonourd.
No,
By heaven I have not, I have too much knowledge
To suspect thee sinful, but in the assurance
Of it, I must disclaim thy heart for ever:
Gratiana my opinion of thy whiteness
Hath made my soul, as black as thine already;
Weep till thou wash away thy stain, and then,
I•h'other world, we two, may meet again.
Weep inward eyes, hither your streams impart,
For sure, I have tears enough, to drown my heart.
You amaze me Beauford, Gratiana false?
I shall suspect the truth of my conception,
And think all women monsters, though I never
Loved with that nearness of affection
To marry any, yet I morn they should
Fall from their virtue, why may not Marwood
Injure her goodness?
What, and damme his soul?
Shall I think any with his dying breath
Would shipwreck his last hope? he mixed it with
His prayers, when in the stream of his own blood,
His soul was launching forth.
That circumstance takes away al suspicion again,
Where left you Marwood?
In the Park.
Quite dead?
Hopeless, his weapon might have proved so happy,
To have released me of a burden too;
And but that man-hood, and the care of my
Eternity forbids, I would force out
That which but wearies me to carry it,
Unwelcome life?
Would he were buried,
My fears perplex me for you; though none see
You fight, the circumstance must needs
Betray you: what's he.
I would borrow your ear in private.
We are but one to hear, his love hath
Made him? to great a part of my affliction:
Speak it.
The body is taken thence.
Ha.
I cannot be deceived sir: I beheld
Too plain a demonstration of the place;
But he that suffered such a loss of blood,
Had not enough to maintain life till this time,
Which way so ere his body was conveyed:
I must conclude it short lived, I am sorry
I could not serve you.
Sir,—I thank you,
You deserve I should be grateful:
It must be so—
What fellow's this?
A Surgeon.
Dare you trust him?
Yes, with my life.
You have done that already in your discovery.
Pray heaven he prove your friend.
You must resolve for flight, ye shall take ship—
Never.
Will you ruin your self? there's no security—
There is not Captain,
Therefore Isle not change my ayre.
How?
Unless thou can instruct me how to fly from
My self, for wheresoever else I wander,
I shall but carry my accuser with me.
Are you mad?
I have heard in Africa•, is a tree, which tasted
By travellers, it breeds forgetfulness
Of their Country, can direct me thither?
Yet it were in vain, unless it can extinguish,
And drown the remembrance I am Beauford:
No — Isle not move, let those poor things that dare not
Dye, obey their fears, I will expect my fate here.
This is wildness,
A desperate folly, pray be sensible:—
Whose this, tic Gratiana.
Ha, farewell.
You shall stay now a little.
I will not hear an accent, I shall loose
My memory, be charmed into belief
That she is honest with her voice, I dare not
Trust my frailty with her.
She speaks nothing,
Is all a weeping Nyobe, a st•tu,
Or in this posture, doth she not present
A water Nymph▪ placed in the midst of some
Fair Garden, like a Fountain to dispense
Her Crystal streams upon the flowers? which cannot
But so refreshed, look up, and seem to smile
Upon the eyes that feed em:
Will she speak?
Though by the effusion of my tears, you may
Conclude, I bring nothing but sorrow with me,
Yet hear me speak, I come not to disturb
Your thoughts, or with one bold and daring language
Say how unjust you make my sufferings:
I know not what
Hath raised this mighty storm to my destruction,
But I obey your doom, and after this,
Will never see you more. First I release
And give you back your vows; with them, your har•▪
Which I had locked up in my own, and cherished
Better, mine I'm sure does bleed to part with it,
All that is left of yours, this Cabinet
Delivers back to your possession,
There's every jewel you bestowed •pone me,
The pledges once of love.
Pray keep em.
They are not mine, since I have lost the opinion
Of what I was, indeed I have nothing else,
I would not keep the kisses, once you gave me,
If you would let me pay them back again.
All women is a labyrinth, we can,
Measure the height of any star, point out
All the dimensions of the earth, examine
The Seas large womb, and sounds its subtle depth,
But art will ne'er be able to find out,
A demonstration of a women's heart,
Thou hast enough undone me, make me not
More miserable, to believe thou can be virtuous:
Farewell, enjoy you this, I shall find out
Another room to weep in.
Lady I would ask you a rude question:
Are you a maid?
Do I appear so Monstrous? no man will
Believe my iuiury: has heaven forgot
To protect innocence, that all this while
It hath vouchsafed no miracle, to confirm
A Virgins honour?
I am answered:
I do believe shees honest; Oh that I could
But speak with Marwoods ghost now, and thou be
In hell, I'd meet thee half way, to converse
One quarter of an hour with thee, to know
The truth of all things, thy Devil Jailer
May trust thee without a waiter, he has security
For thy damnation in this sin alone,
I me f•ll of pity now, and spite of man-hood
Cannot forbear, come Lady, I am confident,
I know not which way —that you're virtuous—
Pray walk with me, isle tell you the whole story;
For yet you know not your accuser.
I am an exile hence, and cannot walk
Out of my way, Beauford farewell, may Angels
Dwell round •bout thee, live un•ill thou find,
When I am dead, thou hast bin too unkind.
May I believe thee Milisent, that my father
Though hee give such respect to him I hate,
Intone•s no marriage? thou hast releast
My heart of many fears, that I was destined
To be a sacrifice.
It had been sin
That Milisent should suffer you perplex
Your noble soul, when it did consist in
His discovery, to give a freedom
To your labouring thoughts, tic now no more a secret,
Y•ur father makes a trial of your nature,
By giving him such countenance.
What thanks shall I give?
Your virtue hath both unsealed
My bosom, and rewarded me.
Oh Milisent:
Thou hast deserved my gratitude; and I cannot
But in exchange of thy discovery
Give to thy knowledge, what I should tremble
To let another hear; for I dare trust thee with it.
If I have any skill
In my own nature, shall ne'er deceive
Your confidence, and think my self much honoured,
So to be made your treasurer.
Tic a treasure,
And all the wealth I have, my life, the sum
Of all my joys on earth, and the expectation
Of future blessings too depend upon it.
Can I be worthy of so great a trust?
Thou art, and shalt receive it, for my hear•
Is willing to discharge it self into thee:
Oh Milisent! though my father would ha been
So cruel to his own, to have wished me marry
Him, it was not in the power of me obedience
To give consent to it, for my love already
Is dedicate to one, whose worth hath made
Me, but his steward of it, and although
His present fortune doth eclipse his lustre,
With seeming condition of a servant,
He has a mind derived from honour, and
May boast himself a Gentle-man: is not
Thy understanding guilty of the person
I point at? •ur thou can not choose but know him.
Not I.
Then look upon him Milisent.
Ha?
My master, mistress Iaue sent me before,
To say, be comes to visit you.
But thou art before him in acceptance, nay
You stand discovered here, in Milisent you may
Repose sa•e trust.
Her language makes me confident,
You are a friend.
To both a fervent.
I shall desire your love.
But whore's this man of mortgages?
We shall be troubled now
I left him chawing the cud, ruminating
Some speech or other, with which, he means to
Arrest you.
He is entered.
I have prepared her.
Fortune be my guide then.
And she's a blind one.
Mistress Iane, I would talk with you in private, I have fancied a business, I know you are witty, and love invention, tic my own, and no-body else must hear it —
Be it known to all men by these presents.
This is like to be a secret.
That I Jasper Rawbone Citizen, and House-keeper of London.
A very poor one I'm sure.
Do owe to mistress Iane, Lady of my thoughts, late of London Gentle-woman.
Is she not still a Gentle-woman?
Still a Gentle-woman good-man Coxcomb? did I not say she was Lady of my thoughts? where was I now?
At good-man Coxcomb sir.
— Do owe to mistress Iane, Lady of my thoughts, late of London Gentle-woman, my true and lawful heart of Eng∣land —to be paid to his said mistress, her executors, or assigns.
To her executors? what will you pay your heart, when she is dead?
Tic none of my fault, and she will dye, who can help it? thou dost nothing but interrupt me: I say to be paid, to his said mistress, her executors, or assigns, whenever she demand it, at the font-stone of the Temple—
Put it, the top of Paules and please you; your conceit will be the higher.
Which payment to bee truly made and performed, I
bind, not my heirs, but my body and soul for ever.
How your soul sir?
Peace fool, my soul will shift for it self, when I am dead that will be sure enough: — In witness whereof, I have here-vnto put my hand and seal, which is a handsome spiny youth, with a bag of money in one hand, a bond in the t'other, an In∣denture between his legs, the last of the first merry month, and in the second year of the reign of King Cupped.
Excellent! but in my opinion, you had better give her possession of your heart, I do not like this owing: faith pluck it out, and deliver it in the presence of vs.
Thou talk like a puisne, I can give her possession of i•, by delivery of two-pence wrapped up in the wax, twill hold in Law man; —and how, and how do ye like it? I could have come over you with Verse, but hang Ballads, give me Poetical prose, every Mounte-banke can time, and make his lines cry twang, though there be no reason in em.
What Musique have I heard?
Musique? Oh rare!
Hee has Medusaes noble countenance,
His hairs do curl like soft and gentle Snakes:
Did ever puppy smile so? or the Ass
Better become his ears? oh generous beast
Of sober carriage, sure he's valiant too,
Those blood-shot eyes betray him, but his nose
Fishes for commendation.
What does she mean Jasper?
Do ye not see her love sir? why she does dote upon you, Which makes her talk so madly.
Forsooth I know you are taken with me, alas these things are natural with me, when shall we be married forsooth?
With your licence sir—
Do ye not observe her? you must first procure a Licence.
You shall hear more from me, when I come again— Jasper —
My heart doth breath it self upon your hand—
Your father and Master Lodam▪—
Sir I doe love your daughter:— I thought it necessary to acquaint you first, because I would go about the business in∣dicially.
You obliege vs both.
Isle promise you one thing.
What▪s that?
Isle bring your daughter no wealth.
Say you so: what then you promise her nothing.
But I will bring her that which is greater then wealth.
What's that?
My self.
A fair jointure.
Nay, isle bring her more.
It shu'not need, no woman can desire mo•e of a man.
I can bring her good qualities, if sh• want any: I ha tra∣uail'd for em.
What are they?
The Langu•ges.
You susp•ct she will want tongue: —let me see— Parlez franzois monsieur.
Diggon a cam•ag.
That's We•ch.
Poses palabras.
That's Spanish.
Troth I have such a confusion of languages in my head, you must even take em as they come.
You may speak that more exactly—Hauelar spagni•l Signior?
Serge-dubois, —Calli-mancho, et Perpetu-ana.
There's stuff indeed, since you are so perfect, Isle trust you for the rest. I must refer you sir unto my daughter, if you can win her fair opinion, my consent my happily follow: so
She is in presence —
Me•cie Madame—
This fellow looks like the principal in Usury, and this Rat follows him like a pitiful eight in the hundred: —come hither s•ra, your name is Chameleon.
It is too true sir.
You did live with master Rawbone.
No sir, I did starve with him, and please you:
I could not live with him.
How doe you like your change?
Never worse.
Master Lodam wants no flesh.
But I doe: — I ha no Justice sir, my lean master would eat no mea•e, and my fat master eats up all — is your Worships house troubled with Vermin?
Something at this time.
Peace and isle catch a mouse then. —
My nephew turned Gentle-man Usher.
Sir Iohn Belfares daughter.
Alas poor Gentle-woman,
I compassionate her unkind destiny.
Let vs entreat a word in private sir—
I cannot tell how you stand affected, but if you can love a man, I know not what is wanting, greatness is a thing that your wisest Ladies have an itch after: for my own part I was no∣for in love before, and if you have me not, never will be again. Think on it between this and after dinner, I will stay o'purpose for your answer.
You're very short.
I wot not be kept in expectation aboue an hour, for love is worse then a Lent to me, and fasting is a thing my flesh abhors, if my do•blet be not fi•'d, I know who fa•es the worse for it. I would keep my flesh to swear by, and if you and I cannot agree upon the matter, I would loose nothing by you.
You're very resolute.
Ever while you live, a fat man, and a man of resolution go together: I doe not commend my self, but there are no such fiery things in nature.
Fiery?
Tic proved, put em to my action, and see, if they do not smoke it, they are men of mettle, and the greatest melters in the World, one hot service makes em roast, and they have enough in em to bast a hundred — you may take a lean man, marry your self to famine, and beg for a great belly, you see what be∣came of sir Iohns daughter: —come I would wish you be well advised, there are more commodities in me, then you are aware of, if you and I couple, you shall fare like an Empress.
That will be somewhat costly.
Not a token. I have a privilege: — I was at the Ta∣uerne tother day, in the next room I smelt hot Venison, I sent but a D•awer to tell the Company, one in the house with a great belly, longed for a corner, and I had half a pasty sent me immediately: I will hold intelligence with all the Cooks in the Town, and what dainty, but I have greatness enough to command?
I like it well: — be as wel-come here, as at your Fa∣theirs. Milisent —make it your care to waite upon this Gentle∣woman, but conceal she is our guest. I should rejoice to see this storm blown over. —Nephew attend her to her Chamber.
I ha bin about it—
Next time you ride post, wind your horn, that one may get out a'the way.
What's the matter Iane.
Tic guts, if I durst, my teeth waters to strike him.
What ha you done?
Let him take heed another time.
Take such an affront before your mistress.
I have a good stomach —
That's well said.
I could eat him.
Oh is it that?
Let me alone, no-body hold me.
Isle have an action of battery.
Whoreson mole-catcher —
Come not near me Weasel.
Prithee Jasper do not thrust me upon him—
I do not fear you sit.
Again shall I kick thee to pieces.
Let him b•ffu•lie•e—to him—
I do not fear you.
Iane remove your self.
Master Rawbone, I am sorry for your hurt.
She jeers you.
For this time I am content with kicking of thee.
My master desires another word w'ee sir.—
You must fight with him—
Who I fight?
You spider catcher, ha you not enough? you see I doe not draw.
Very well.
By this hand, you shall challenge him then, if hee dare accep•t, isle meet him in your clothes.
Will ye. Hum —I do not fear you—satisfaction—
That's the word.
That's the word—you'll meet me guts.
Meet thee by this flesh, if thou dost but provoke me: —you do not challenge me—do not—do ye long to be minced?
At Finsbury —
At Finsbury.
To morrow morning —
To morrow morning—you shall find I dare fight.
Say but such another word.
Finsbury, to morrow morning, there tic again —
I cannot contain my laughter, ha, ha, ha.
So, lets begone• quickly, before he threaten me, yo• made me challenge him, look to it.
Fear not, I warrant you.
Sir Nouerint, if I can but prove, thou dost come with in three furlongs of a wind-mill, isle set one a top of Paules to watch thee—shall it forfeit thy soul, and isle cancel thy body worse then any debtor of thine did his obligation—hoe's gone—and now I think upon the matter, I have somewhat the worst on it, for if I should kill him, I shall never bee able to fly, and hee has left a piece of his scull, I think, in my shoulder — whither am I bound to meet him, or no? I will consult some of the sword men, and know whether it be a competent challenge— Chameleon.
Sir.
Has the Rat, your master that was, any spirit in him?
Spirit? the last time hee was in the field, aboy of seven years old, beat him with a Trap-sticke.
Say thou so? I will meet him then, and hew him to pieces.
I have an humble suite—if it be so, that you kill him, let me beg his body for an Anatomy, I have a great mind to eat a piece on him.
Tic granted, follow me, isle cut him up I warrant thee.
I have a letter.
From whom?
Gratiana.
I would forget that name, speak it no more.
She is abused, and if you had not been
Transported from vs, with your passion,
You would ha changed opinion, to have heard
How well she pleaded.
For her-selfe.
You might,
With little trouble gather from her tears
How clear she was, which more transparent, then
The morning dew, or crystal, fell neglected
Upon the ground: some cunning Jeweller
To ha seen em scattred, would a thought some Princess
Dropped em, and covetous to enrich himself,
Gathered them up for Diamonds.
You are then converted.
Oh you were too credulous.
Marwood has played the Vilaine, and is damned for it▪
Could but his soul be brought to hear her answer
The accusation, she wo'd make that blush,
And force it to confess a treason, to
Her honour, and your love.
You did believe her.
I did, and promised her to do this service,
She begged of me at parting, if she sent
A letter, to convey it to your hand,
Pray read, you know not what this paper carry•.
Has she acquainted you?
Not me, I guess,
It is some secret, was not fit for my
Relation, it may be, worth your knowledge;
Do her that justice, since you would not hear
What she could say in person, to peruse
Her paper.
It can bring nothing to take off
The offence committed.
Sir you knew not
What satisfaction it contains▪
Or what she may confess in it▪ for my sake—
To him that was — what?
Confident of her Virtue
Once an admirer, now a mourner for
Her absent goodness: she has made the change.
From her that was, would 〈◊〉 become this paper
Had she conseru'd her first immaculate whiteness,
It had been half profane, not to salute
Her letter with a kiss, and touch it, with
More veneration then a Sybil• leaf•▪
But now all Ceremony must be held
A superstition, to the blotted scroll,
O a more stained writer — Isle not read:
If unprepared, she win with her Discourse,
What must she do, when she has time, and study,
To apparel her defence?
Deny her this.
Well, I will read it.
Here's Sir Iohn Belfare.
Say any thing t'excuse me, beet your care
That none approach the Chamber.
So, so, now unrip the seal.
Not speak with him, he must have stronger guard
To keep me out: whore's Beauford?
Here.
Then there's a Villain.
That's course language.
I must not spin it finer, till you make me
Understand better, why my daughter, and
In her, my family is abused.
She has not then accused her self—Isle tell you,
I did expect your daughter would have been
My Virgin bride; but she reserved for me
The ruins of her honour, I wot not speak
In the rude dialect, you may sooner collect,
An English.
Is she not honest, will you
Make her then a whore?
No• I, her own sin made her.
Thou lie, nor can my age make me appear
Unworthy a satisfaction• from thy sword.
Does not he call my young mistress whore?
Keep me not from him Captain he has in this
Given a fresh wound, I came t'expostulate,
The reason of a former suffering,
Which unto this was charity, as thou art
A Gentle-man, I dare thee to the Combat:
Contemn not Beauford my gray hairs, if t'has•
A Noble soul, keep not this distance; meet me,
Thou art a Soldier: for heavens sake, permit me
Chastise the most uncharitable slander
Of this bad man.
I never injured you.
Not injured me? what is there then in nature,
Left, to be called an injury? did not mock
Me, and m• poor fond girl with marriage?
Till all things were designed, the very day
When Hymen should have worn his saffron robe:
My friends invited, and prepared to call
Her Bride; and yet, as if all this could not
(Summed up together) make an injury:
Does thy corrupted soul at last conspire
To take her white name from her? —give me leave
To express a Father, in a tear, or two,
For my wronged child. O Beauford! thou hast rob•
A father, and a daughter—but I wo not
Usurp heavens justice, which shall punish thee
Above my weak arm; may thou live, to have
Thy heart as ill rewarded, to be a father
At my years, have one daughter, and no more
Beloved as mine, so mocked, and then called Whore.
Alas good old man.
My afflictions
Are not yet numbered in my fate, nor I
Held ripe for Death.
Now read the Letter.
Yes, it cannot make me know more misery.
Beauford, I dare not call thoe mine, though I could not hope,
(while I was living,) thou would believe my innocence, deny me•
no• this favour after Death, to say I once loved thee—
H• death? Captain is she dead?
I hope she employed not me, to bring this news.
Yes, Death — ha?
Prithee read the rest: there's something
In my eyes, I cannot well distinguish
Her small Characters.
My Accuser by this time, knows the reward of my injury•
Farewell, I am carrying my Prayers for thee to another World—
her own Martyr, drowned Gratiana.
Read all.
I have.
It cannot be, for when thou make an end,
My heart should give a tragic period,
And with a loud sigh break: drowned•
It was no sin aboue heavens pardon▪
Though thou had been false,
To thy first vow, and me, I wot not had
Thee dyed so soon▪ or if thou had affected
That death, I could ha drowned thee with my tears,
Now they shall never find thee, but be lost
Within thy watery Sepulchre.
Take comfort.
Art dead?
Then here isle Coffin up my self, until
The Law vnbury me for Marwoods death,
I wo••t hope for life, mercy sha' not save
Him, that hath now a patent for his Grave.
Tic his command to whom I owe all service,
I should attend you.
You are too diligent:
I prithee leave me.
I should be unhappy
To be offensive in my duty; yet
Had I no charge upon me, I should much
Desire to waite.
On me?
I know not why,
Your sorrow does inuit me.
You are too young,
To be acquainted wo't.
I know, it wot not
Become my distance, to dispute with you,
At what age, we are fittest to receive
Our griefs impression.
Leave me to my self—
I must, if you will have it so.
Me thought
I saw him drop a tear, come back again:
What should he mean by this unwillingness
To part; he looks, as he would make me leave
My own mis-fortune to pity his:
Thy name?
I am called Milisent.
Dost thou put on that countenance to imitate
Mine? or hast a sorrow of thy own, thou
Would express by it.
Mine does become my fortune.
Yet yours does so exactly paint out misery
That he, that wanted of his own, would morn
To see your picture.
Mine is aboue
The common level of affliction.
Mine had no example to be drawn by,
I would they were a kin, so I might make
Your burden less by mine own suffering.
I thank thy love.
And yet I prophecy,
There's something would make mine a part of yours,
Were they examined.
Passion makes thee wild now.
You have encouraged me to boldness, pardon
My ruder language.
Did thou ever love?
Too soon•, from thence sprung my unhappiness.
And mine.
My affliction riper then my years,
Hath brought me so much sorrow, I doe not think
That I shall live, to be a man.
I like thy sad expression, weal converse
And mingle stories.
I shall be too bold.
Wee lay aside distinctions, if our fates
Make vs alike in our mis-fortunes; yet
Mine will admit no parallel: ha! we are interrupted:
Lets with-draw, and isle begin.
You may command, and when
Your stories done, mine shall maintain the Scene.
To maintain such bliss I will,
Wish to bee transformed still:
Nor wilt bee a shame in love,
Since I imitate but Jove;
Who from heaven hath strayd, and in
A thousand figures worse then mine,
Wood a Virgin, may not I,
Then for thee a servant try:
Yes for such a maid as thee,
Vary as many shapes as hee;
Rawbone clothes my out-ward part,
But thy livery my heart:
Hauer, ha: young Hauer?
This Letter I found in my Daughters prayer Book, is this your Saint? how long ha they conspired thus? Report gave out, hee was gone to travail: It seems he stays here for a Wind, and in the mean time would rigge up my Daughter: hee is a Gentle∣man well educated; but his Fortune was consumed by a prodigal father, ere he was ripe, which makes him I suspect; borrow this shape to court my Daughter; little does Rawbone think his ser∣uaunt is his rival: I find the juggling, and will take order they shanot steal a marriage.
Nephew, I ha news for you.
For me sir.
You are a Soldier, there's a duel to
Be fought this morning, will you see it?
It does not sir become a Gentle-man
To be spectator of a fight, in which
Hoe's not engaged.
You may behold it Cousin,
Without disparagement to your honour; Rawbone
Has challenged Mr. Lodam, the place Fins•ury —
They fight? a doublet, stuffed with straw, advancing
A bull-rush, were able to fright em both
Out a'their senses, tha'not soul enough
To skirmish with a field-mouse; they point a duel?
At Hogs-don, to show fencing upon Cream
And cake-bread, murder a quaking Custard,
Or some such daring enemy.
Did not
Affairs of weight compel me to be absent,
I would not miss the sight, on it; for the Usurer
Hath got his man Jasper t•appear for him
In his apparel.
Jasper.
For mirths sake
You may behold it, and let me entreat,
At your return, perfect relation
Of both their valours.
You shall Sir.
And Cos—
If it be possible, procure em hither
Before they shift, I much desire to see em.
Promise your self they shall: I will defer
My conference with Gratiana, and
Intertayne this recreation.
So: I have a fancy,
This opportunity will give it birth,
If all hit right, it may occasion mirth.
Which part of my discourse compels thee to
This suffering?
Your pardon Lady, I
Did prophecy what now I find, our stories
Have dependence•
How prithee?
That Marwood
Whom you report thus wounded had a near
Relation to me, and it was my fortune
To come to close his eyes up, and receive
His last breath.
Ha?
I know more then Beauford,
And dying he obliged my love to tell t'him
When ere wee met.
You beget wonder in me:
Did he survive his slander? there is hop•
He did reca•t the injury he did me.
He did confirm, he had enjoyed your person,
And bad me tell Beauford hee left behind
A living witness of the truth he dyed for:
Naming a Gentle-woman Cardona,
That bred you in your fathers house, whom he
Affirmed, betrayed your body to his lust.
Cardona?
Piety has forsaken earth:
Was ever woman thus betrayed to sin,
Without her knowledge?
W•'d he had not been
My kinsman, I begin to fear him:
Wherein had I offended Marwood,
He should alive, and dead so persecute
My fame? Cardona too in the Conspiracy,
Tic time to dye then.
My heart mourns for you
In the assurance of your innocence,
And were I worthy to direct you—
Has, mali•e
Found out another murderer?
Would you be pleased to hear me, I could point
You out a path, would bring you no repentance
To walk in, if (as I am confident)
Your goodness fears not, what Cardona can
Accuse your honour with, let her be
Examined, the• her knowledge will quit you,
Or make yo•r s•ffe•ing appear in•t, this is
An easy trial, and since Marwood had
A stubborn soul, for though he were •y kins-man
I prefer justice, and held •ham to check
His own report, women have softer natures,
And things may be so managed, if there be
A treason, to info•ce confession from her:
Would you please t'imploy me in this •eruice,
And though unworthy be directed by me,
I beg it from you, isle engage my being
You shall find com•ort in it.
Doe any thing;
But I am lost already.
You much honour me.
Cam, see and if he be come yet, bring me word hither.
I see one lying of the ground —
Is there so? lets steal way before we be discovered, I do not like when m•n lye p•rdue, beside, there may be three or four of a heap, for ought we know: lets back I say.
Tic a horse.
Hang him jade, I knew it could bee nothing else: is the coast clear Chameleon?
I see nothing but five or six.
Five or six: treachery! an ambush, tic valour to run.
They bee Wind-mill•.
And yet, thou wo•'st persuade me, it was an ambush for me.
I?
Come thou were afraid, and the truth were known; but be valiant: I have a sword; and if I doe draw▪ it shall—be against my will: is he not come yet?
And hee were between this and More-gate, you might sent him.
If he come, some body sha•l smell •ll •a∣uouredly, •re he and I part:—ha! by this •••sh tic he; Cam, go •ell him I am sick.
Master Lodam.
A brace of bullets to my hear.
Here can I stand and behold the Champions.
I have expected you this two hour•s, which is more then I had one to all the men I ha fought withal, since I slew the high Germaine in Tutle.
Wh•rson, moale-cather.
Draw Spider.
Well• ••y• toad.
Let vs c•nferre a little.
Con•erie me no conferrings: I will have no more mercy on thee, then an Infidel: and t'hadst been wise, thou might ha kept thee at home, with thy melanchol•y Cat, that keeps thy Study, with whom thou art in Commons, and doest feed on Rats a Sundays; then perhaps a leg or an arm, with thy Jaws ears had satisfied me, when I met thee next: draw I say, why doest not draw?
I come to give you satisfaction.
What with words?
Sir Tartar, my Fox shall scratch thy guts out, which I will send to the bear-garden: Doest hear Vsuring dog, isle tell thee my resolution. I doe mean to give thee as many Wounds before I kill thee, as a Surgeons sign has; and when I am weary of skar∣rifying thy flesh, isle bore thy heart — which done: mark what I say; I will divide thy quarters: observe and tremble; then will I ha thee put into a tub or Barrel, and powder thee, and after three days in pickle, this thing that was thy servant, this Caco∣demon whom thou did statue once, Chameleon, shall in revenge of his pitiful famine, eat thee up, devour thee, and grow fat in the ribs again with thy flesh. Mammon —
I hungrily thank your Worship.
What have I s•apt?
Which is more, after thou art dead, I wonot leave thy
soul quiet, isle torment thy Ghost: for I will straight to thy house where I will break open thy Chests, lined with white and yellow mettle, which I will cast away on pious uses: then summon all thy debrors by a Drum, and give em in, all their Bills, Bonds, E∣uidences, Indentures, Defesances, Mortgages, Statutes.
I shall be undone.—
And there were a million on em.
Isle home, and shut up my doors, for fear he kill Jasper and use me so indeed.
If thou doest offer to look home again, till they ha done, isle cut thee off at thigh.
Ah—
Draw I say.
Since there is no remedy.
His sword appears Cam.
If he were a coward you were able to conjure a spirit in∣to him, with those threatenings.
Pox a'my dulues: dost hear scoundrel, if I should in∣clean to mercy, what submission? ha? let me see — I, I, live, thou shalt upon thy knees confess thy rascality, and ask me for∣giuenesse in private, in the presence of mistress Iane, and the twelve Companies which at thy charge shall be feasted that day, in More-fields.
That must not be.
Then say when thou art dead, thou were• offred conditions for thy life: Cam, thou shalt feed, and feed high Chameleon,— let me see; —come tic my foolish nature to ha compassion of the, I know you are sorry, shat only confess thy self a rascal under thy hand then, and stay my in ended revenge which else would ha been immortal.
Let me consider.
Oh• Cam.—
Both cowards, we shall have no skirmish.
Now I think on it, what if my man Jasper, should be va¦liant and kill Lodam—umh? what pickle were I in: worse-worse, he will run away, I shall bee taken and hanged for the Conspiracy.
Ah— Jasper, •ogue that I was, where were my brains to chal∣lenge him—he wonot hear — a stubborn knave, he looks as if he meant to kill: ah Jasper.
I ha seen a dog look like him, that has drawn a Wicker bottle, rattling about the streets, and leering on both sides, where to get a quiet corner to bite his tail off.
I doe imagine my self apprehended already: now the Constable is carrying me to New-gate—now, now▪ I me at the Sessions house, in the Dock:—now I'm called—not guilty my Lord:— the Jury has found the enticement Bill vera— now, now comes my sentence.
I am resolved sir.
Ha.—
You shall have what acknowledgement, this pen of steel will draw out in your flesh, with red ink, and no other, dear master Lodam.
How?
So, so.
Now I'm in the Cart, riding up Holborn in a two wheeled Chariot, with a guard of Halberdiers: there goes a proper fellow says one: good people pray for me: now I am at the three Wot∣den stilts.—
Is this Rawbone the Coward?
Doest hear thing— consider what thou doest, come among friends, thy word shall bee as good as a note under thy ••nd, 〈◊〉 not my fury—wot I were off, with asking him forgive∣ness.
Hey! now I feel my toes hang in the Cart:
Now tic drawn away, now, now, now,
I am gone—
You must show your fencing.
Hold: I demand a par••e.
How?
Tic not for your reputation to deal with a
Gentle-man upon unequal terms.
Where lye the odds?
Howes this?
Examine our bodies:
I take it I am the fairer mark, tic a disadvantage: feed till you be as fat as I, and isle fight w'ee as I am a Gentle-man.
It sha not serve your turn.
Hold, murder, murder.
I'm dead, I'm dead.
Whoreson puffe-paste, how he winks and barks: How now Gentle-men, master Lodam.
Captain, shut a come but a little sooner, and ha seen good sport, by this flesh hee came up handsomely to me; a pretty spark faith Captay•e.
How sir?
But if you be his friend, run for a Surgeon for him, I have hurt him under the short ribs, beside a cut or two ith'shoul∣der: would I were in a Millars sack yonder, though I were ground for it, to be quit onem.
You wonot use me thus?
I were best deliver my sword ere I be compelled too't— a pretty fellow, and one that will make a soldier, because I see you have a spirit, and c•nst use thy Weapon, isle bestow a dull blade upon thee Squirrel.
Deliver up your Weapon:
In love in love Captain, hea's a spark a my reputation, and worthy your acquaintance.
Thou mully-puffe, were it not justice to kick thy guts out.
When I am dis-arm'd.
Take it, again you sponge—
What? when I have geent thee: tic at thy service, and it were a whole Cutlers shop: be confident.
My Ague• has not left me yet▪ there's a grudging a'the halter still:
Master Rawbon•, I repent my opinion of your Co∣wardize.
I see you dare fight, and shall report it to my Cousin:
You shall walk home, she'll take it as an honour,
And present your prisoner.
Jasper, lets go home and shift, do not go—honest Jasper.
You will be prattling sir—Isle waite upon you Cap∣tayne: Master Lodam—
I will accompany thee, you are noble, and fit for my con∣uersation, honest master Rawbone — a pox upon you.
Nay, you shall waite a your master with his leave, good Jasper
How now Jasper?
Are these the herbs you strew at Funerals.
Yes sir.
Tic well, I commend your care,
And thank ye; ye have expressed more duty
Im not enquiring wherefore I command
This strange employment, there in the very
Act of your obedience: my chamber
Looks like the Spring now? ha'yee not art enough
To make this Ewe •ee grow here, or this Baize?
The emblem of our victory in Death?
But they present that best when they are withered:
Have you been careful that no day break in
At any Window, I would dwell in night,
And have no other star-light but these tapers:
If any ask to speak with you,
Shall I say, you are abroad.
No, to all do enquire with busy faces
Pale or disturbed, give free access.
What do I differ from the dead? would not
Some fearful man or woman seeing me,
Call this a Church-yard, and imagine me
Some wakeful apparition among the graves;
That for some treasures buried in my life,
Walk up and down thus? buried? no it was drowned,
I cannot therefore say, it was a chest,
Gratiana had ne'er a Coffin, I have one
Spacious enough for both on's, but the waives
Will never yield too't, for it may bee they
Soon as the northern Wind blows cold upon em,
Will freeze themselves to marble over her,
Least she should want a tomb:
Thy business.
Hee dyed this morning:
A friend of his and yours did practise on him
A little Surgery, but in vain; his last
Breath did forgive you: but you must expect
No safety from the Law: my service sir.
I have left direction, that it cannot miss me:
And had thou come to apprehend me for it?
With as much ease thou might; I am no states-man
Officious, servants makes no suitors waite
My doors unguarded; tic no labyrinth
I dwell in; but I thank thy love, there's something
To reward it: justice cannot put on
A shape to fright me.
I am sorry sir,
Your resolution carries so much danger.
What can life bring to me, that I should court it:
There is a period in nature, first not
Better to dye and not be sick; worn in
Our bodies, which in imitation
Of ghosts, grow lean, as if they wooed at last
Be immaterial too; our blood turn jolly
And freeze in their cold channel, let me expire
While I have heat and strength to tug with death
For Victory.
You may disburden there,
But gently, tic a chest of value, mistress—
Isle give him notice, where is Beauford?
Here.
What place do ye call this?
Tic a Bridal chamber.
It presents horror.
Ha you anything
To say to me?
Yes.
Proceed.
I come to visit you.
You are not welcome then.
I did suspect it, and have therefore brought
My assurance wo'me, I must require
Satisfaction for a kinsmans death,
One Marwood.
Ha?
Your valour was not noble,
It was a course reward to kill him for
His friendship: I come not with a guard of
Officers to attach your person, it
Were too poor and formal, the instrument
That sluc'd his soul out, I had rather shut
Sacrifice to his ashes, and my sword
Shall do it, or yours be guilty of another,
To waite upon his ghost.
Young man be not
Too rash without the knowledge how our quarrel
Rise to procure thy self a danger.
Make it
Not your fear, I have heard the perfect story,
And ere I fight with thee shat see thy error;
Acknowledge thou hast kilt a friend, I bring
A perspective to make those things that lye
Remote from sense, familiar to thee, nay
Thou shat confess thou know the truth of what
Concerns him, or Gratiana.
When my soul
Throws off this upper Garment, I shall know all.
Thou shat not number many minutes, know
`It was my mis-fortune to close up the eyes
Of Marwood, whose body I vowed never
Should to the earth without revenge; or me
Companion to his grave: I ha therefore brought it
Hither, tic in this house.
Ha?
His pale corpse
Shall witness my affection.
Thou did promise
To inform me of Gratiana.
And thus briefly:
Marwood reueal'd at death another witness
Of his truth, for Cardona hee corrupted
To betray Gratiana to him.
Ha Cardona!
Heaven continue her among the living,
But half an hour.
I ha saved ye trouble,
She waits without, in your name I procured
Her presence, as you had affairs with her
She's unprepared, a little terror will
Enforce her to confess the truth of all things.
Thou doest direct well.
Still remember Beauford
I am thy lenemy, and in this doe but
Prepare thy conscience of misdeed to
Meet my just anger.
I am all wonder.
He's now at opportunity.
Sir you sent
To speak with me.
Come nearer, I hear say
You are Baud; tell me how go Virgins
In the sinful market; nay I must know hell-ca•
What was the price you took for Gratiana•s:
Did Marwood come off roundly with his wages▪
Tell me the truth, or by my fathers soul
Isle dig thy heart out.
Help.
Let me not hear
A syllable that has not reference
To my question—or—
Isle tell you sir:
Marwood—
So.
Did viciously affect her:
Won with hi• gifts and flatteries, I promised
My assistance, but I knew her virtue was not
To bee corrupted in a thought.
Ha.
Therefore—
What do ye study—
Hold—I would deliver
The rest into your ear, it is too shameful
To express it louder then a whisper—
With what unwillingness, we discover things
Wee are ashamed to own: Cardona shudst
Ha used but half this fear in thy consent.
And thou had ne'er been guilty of a sin
Thou art so loath to part with though it be
A burden to thy soul: how boldly would
Out innocence plead for vs; but sha• done.
Then was Gratiana•s honour saved.
Untouched.
Where am I lost: this story is more killing
Then all my jealousies: Oh Cardona
Go safe from hence, but when thou come at home,
Locke thy self up and languish, till thou dye
Thou shalt meet Marwood, in a gloomy shade,
Give back this salary,
Have I made good
My promise, do you find your error.
No I ha found my horror—has the chaste
And innocent Gratiana drowned her self?
What satisfaction can I pay thy ghost?
Now doe me right sir.
Shoe's gone for ever,
And can the earth still dwell a quiet neighbour
To the rough Sea, and not it self bee thawed
Into a river; let it melt to waives
From hence-forth, that beside th'inhabitants,
The very Genius of the World may drown,
And not accuse me for her: Oh Gratiana.
Reserve your passion, and remember what
I come for.
How shall I punish my unjust suspicion?
Death is too poor a thing to suffer for her▪
Some spirit guide me where her body lies
Within her watery urn, although feal'd up
With frost, my tears are warm and can dissolve it,
To let in me, and my repentance to her.
I would kiss her cold face into life again
Renew her breath with mine, on her pale lip
I do not think, but if some artery
Of mine were opened, and the c•im•o• flood
Conveyed in•o her v•ins, it would agree
And with a gentle gliding steal it self
Into her heart, in li•no her dead faculties,
And with a flat•ery, tice her soul again,
To dwell in her fair tenement.
You loose
Your sell•e in these wild fancies; recollect
And doe me justice.
I am lost indeed,
With fruitless passion: I remember thee
And thy design again; I must account
For Marwoods death first not? alas thou art
Too young, and can not fight, I wish thou were
A man of tough and active sinews, for
Thy own revenge sake, I would praise thee for
My death, so I might fall but nobly by thee:
For I am burdened with a weight of life—
Stay, did not tell me thou had brought hither
The body of young Marwood—
Yes.
Since a mistake, not malice did procure
His ill fate, I will but drop one funeral
Tear upon his wound, and soon finish
To doe thee right.
Ye shall.
Does this enclose his corpse? how little room
Doe wee take up in death, that living, know
No bounds? here without murmuring wee can
Be circumscribed, it is the soul, that makes vs
Affect such wanton, and irregular paths;
When that's gone, wee are quiet as the earth,
And think no more of wandering: oh Marwood
Forgive my anger, thy confession did
Inuit thy ruin from me, yet upon—
My memory forsake me, tic Gratiana's
Spirit, hast thou left thy Heavenly dwelling
To call me hence? I was now coming to thee:
Or but command more hast, and I will count it
No sin to strike my self, and in the stream
Of my own blood to imitate how thou
Did drown thy self.
I am living Beauford.
I know thou art immortal.
Living as thou art.
Good angels doe not mock mortality.
And came—
To call me to my answer how I durst
Suspect thy chastity, isle accuse my self
And to thy injured innocence give me up
A willing sacrifice.
Oh my Beauford, now
I am ouer-blest for my late sufferings;
I have solicited my Death with prayers:
Now I would live to see my Beauford love me.
It was thy friend induced me to that letter,
To find if thy suspicion had destroyed
All seeds of love.
Art thou not dead indeed,
May I believe? her hands is warm,—she breathes
Again—and kisses as she wont to doe
Her Beauford, art Gratiana? Heaven
Let me dwell here until my soul exhale.
One sorrow's cured Milisent begone,
Thou hast bin too long absent from thy own.
Oh my joy ravished soul, but whore's the youth
Brought me this blessing? vanished Gratiana
Where is hee? I would hang about his neck
And kiss his cheek, he we not leave me so:
Gone? sure it was some angel, was hee not,
Or doe I dream this happiness, wot not thou
Forsake me to?
Oh never.
Within there—
Bid the young man return, and quickly, least
My joy aboue the strength of natures sufferance,
Kill me before I can express my gratitude:
Ha ye brought him?
Mr. Beauford, I am sorry wee are
Commanded to apprehend your person.
Officers ha?
You are suspected to have slain a
Gentle-man, one Marwood.
Have I still my essence ha?
I had a joy was able to make man
Forget he could be miserable.
Come sir.
If ere extremities did kill, wee hath
Shall dye this very minute.
You shanot go.
Our authority will force him.
You're villains, murderers:
Oh my Beauford!
Leave me Gratiana.
Never, isle dye with thee.
What can wee say unto our misery,
Saved in a tempest that did threaten most,
Arrived the harbour, ship, and all are lost.
To the next Justice.
Whether art fled Gratiana? that I can
Converse with none to tell me thou art still
A mortal? taken hence by miracle?
Though angels should entice her hence, to heaven,
She was so full of piety, to her father,
She would first take her leave.
There he is sir, he cannot choose but talk idly,
For he has •o• slept since the last great mist.
M•st?
I sir▪ his daughter, my young mistress went away in it, and we can hear no tale nor tidings of her, to tell you true, I w•uld not disgrace my old master, but hee is little better then mad.
Unhappy Gentle-man.
Tic so, hee murdered her;
For he that first would rob her of her honour,
W•uld or fear after-ward to kill Gratiana,
He shall be arrangn'd for it; —but where shall wee
Get honest men enough to make a Jury?
That dare be conscionable, when the Judge
Looks on, and frowns upon the Verdict, men
That will not be corrupted, to favour
A great man evidence, but prefer justice
To ready money? •h this age is barren—
Master Beauford's newly
Apprehended for some fact, and carried
Fore Justice Landby, in my passage hither
I met him guarded.
Guarded for what?
Some did whisper hee had kilt—
Gratiana.
Oh my girl, my Gratiana,—Isaac, Beauford is taken, tic apparent he hath slain my daughter, and shanot I revenge her Death? Isle prosecute the Law with violence against him, not leave the Judge, till hee pronounce his sentence, then Isle dye, and carry Gratiana the news before him. Follow me▪
I expect Iane thou wot reward my care
With thy obedience, he's young and Wealthy,
No matter for those idle ceremonies
Of wit and court-ship.
Doe I hear my father?
He will maintain thee gallant, City wives
Are fortunes darlings, govern al, their husband•
Variety of pleasure, and apparel
When some of higher title are oft fine
To pawn a Lady-ship: thou shat have Rawbone.
Virtue forbid it, you are my father sir,
And lower then the earth I have a heart
Prostrates it self, I had my being from you,
But I beseech you, take it not away
Again, by your severity.
How's this? I like it well.
You have read many lectures to me, which
My duty hath received, and practised, as
Prec•pts from heaven, but never did I hear
You preach so ill, you heretofore directed
My study to bee careful of my fame,
Cherish desert, plant my affection on
Nobleness, which canonely be sufficient
To make it fruitful, and d's counsel now
To marry a disease?
Good! my own girls—
What first you said? ha?
For the man himself
Is such a poor and miserable thing—
But 〈◊〉 another word, and I take off
My blessing: how now Iane?
〈◊〉, I fear
He is in earnest, marry me to my grave,
•o that you shall have my consent, oh do not
Enforce me to be guilty of a fall•e
Vow, both to Heaven and Angels; on my knees—
Humble your heart, 〈◊〉 and correct your sullenness,
I am resolved, would you be sacrificed
To an unthrift, that will 〈◊〉 away his skin,
Rather then want to stake at Ord•aries?
Consume what I have gathered at a breake-fast,
Or mornings draugh? and when you ha teem'd for him
Turn Semptr••le to find milk and clouts for babies:
Foot stockings, to maintain him in the Counter?
Or if this •aisle, erect a bandy Citadel,
Well manned, which fortified with ••my-Cannon
Tobacco pipes, may raise you to a fortune,
Together with the trail—
Oh my cruel stars!
S••rre me no stars, isle have my will—
One minute hath ruined all my hope, Milisent
Was cruel thus to mock me.
Vnde—
You hear, now he talks.
But I ha found the way, tic but procuring
Acquaintance with the fore-man of the Jury,
The Sessions bell-weather, he leads the rest
Like sheep when hee makes a gap, they follow
In huddle to his sentence.
Speak to him sir.
God save you sir Iohn Belfare.
I am a little serious—do not trouble me.
Do ye not know me?
I n•yther know, nor care for you, unless
You can bee silent.
I me your neighbour—
Master Doctor—
Away fool.
No sir, a Physician.
A Physician? can you cure my daughter?
I sir, where is she?
Cannot you find her out by art? a good
Physician, shut be acquainted with the Stars:
Prithee erect a figure, grave Astronomer,
Sh'at ha the minute she departed; turn
Thy Ephemerids a little, isle lend
Thee Ptolomy, and a nest of learned Rabbis
To judge by: te•l me whither she be a live,
Or dead, and thou shalt bee my Doctor, isle
Give thee a round per Annum pension,
And thou shalt kill me for it.
He has a strange De lyrium.
I sir.
A Vertigo in's head.
In his head.
What says the Raven?
He says, you have two hard words in your head sir.
Have you forgot me sir, I was but late
Familiar to your knowledge.
Ha'your pardon gentle sir I know you now,
Impute it to my grief, it had almost made me
Forget my self.
I come to visit you.
And cannot but bee sorry, to behold
You thus afflicted.
Doctor I am sick,
I'm very sick at heart loss of my daughter
I fear, will make me mad, how long do ye think
Mans nature able to resist it, can
Your love or art prescribe your friend a Cordial?
No, no, you cannot.
Sir, bee comforted.
Wee have our manly virtue given vs,
To exercise in such extremes as these.
As these? why do you know what tic to
Loose a daughter? you converse with men, that
Are diseased in body; punished with a gout
Or fever: yet some of these are held
The shames of physic, but to th'mind you can
Apply no salutary medicine:
My daughter sir, my daughter—
Was too blame
To leave you so, loose not your wisdom for
Your daughters want of piety.
Speak well
A'th dead, for living she would not be absent
Thus from me, she was ever dutiful
Took pleasure in obedience: oh my child,
But I have strong suspicion, by whom
She's made away. Beauford—
How?
He that pretended marriage—he gave her
A wound before.
Jasper? what case am I in?
Be wise a•d keep your counsel, is not all for your honour?
Lady 〈…〉 by this time, you are able to distinguish
A difference 〈◊〉 Ra•bone and my self.
I fi•d• 〈◊〉.
You shall doe n•ble sir.
Mr. Rawbone, the only man in my wishes:
My nephew gives you valiant, your merit
O•e-ioyes me, and to show how much I value
Your worth my daughter yours, isle see you
Married this morning ere we part, receive him
Into your bosom Ian•, or loose me ever.
I obey sir: will my father cozen himself?
Ha, doe I dream?
Dream quoth, this is a pretty dream.
Master Lodam, I hope you'll not rapine at his fortune.
But Rawbone will pine, and rapine if this be not a dream?
I allow it▪ and will dine with you.
And I.
Jasper: no, will no body know me?
Let's loose no time, I have no quiet tell
I call him son.
Master Justice, do me right,
You do not know who I am—I am—
An ass sir, Are you not? what make you prattling?
Sir,—
Noble Captain, a word, I am—
A Coxcomb.
Your man is fancy sir.
Then I am a— sleep.
I forget Gratiana
Cousin, you shall supply my place at Church, while I pr•pare for your return, some guests wee must have—nay, nay haste, the mo••e grows old, we'll have it a Wedding day.
Here's a blessing beyond hope.
Sure I am sleep, I will cene walk with 'em till my dream be out.
Mr. Beauford, welcome and Gratiana—
You will repent your courtesy, I am
Presented an offender to you.
Yes, and please your worship, he is accused.
How?
Sir, you have charity, believe em not,
They doe conspire to take away his life.
May it please you understand, he has kilt
A Gentle-man, one Marwood, in our Park,
I found him wounded mortally, though before
He dyed, he did confess.
Urge it no farther,
Isle save the trouble of examination,
And yield my self up guilty.
For heavens sake
Believe him not, hee is an enemy
To his own life; dear Beauford, what do ye mean
To cast your self away, you're more unmerciful
Then those that doe accuse you, then the Law
It self, for at the worst, that can but find
You guilty at the last, too soon for me
To bee divided from you.
Oh Gratiana, I call heaven to witness,
Though my mis-fortune made me think before,
My life a tedious and painful trouble,
My very soul a luggage, and too heavy
For me to carry, now I wish to live,
To live for thy sake, till my hair were silvered
With age; to live till thou wodst ha me dye,
And were a weary of me: For I never
Could by the service of one life, reward
Enough thy love, nor by the suffering
The punishment of age and time, do penance
Sufficient for my injury, but my fate
Hurries me from thee, then accept my death
A satisfaction for that sin, I could not
Redeem alive, I cannot but confess
The accusation.
Justice, justice, I will have justice:
Ha Gratiana!
Oh my dear father—
Art a live, oh my joy, it grows
To mighty for me, I must weep a little
To save my heart—
My young mistress alive.
If ever you loved Gratiana, plead for Beauford,
He has been abused, by a villain, alls discovered,
W'aue renewed hearts, and now I fear, I shall
Loose him again, accused here for the death
Of Marwood, that was cause of all our suffering.
I ha not wept enough for joy Gratiana
That you are alive yet — I understand nothing
Beside this comfort.
Dear sir recollect,
And second me.
The fact confessed, all hope
Will be a pardon sir may be procured:
Sir Iohn—you're come in a sad time.
What is the worst you charge him with?
He has slain a Gentle-man.
No common trespass.
He has done justice.
How?
A public benefit to his Country in it.
Killing a man? her sorrow ouer-throwes
Her reason.
Hear me, Marwood was a Villain,
A rebel unto virtue, a profaner
Of friendships sacred laws, a murderer
Of virgin chastity, against whose malice
No innocence could hope protection;
But like a 〈…〉 by an Eagles talent,
It grow•ng dyes.
What punishment can you inflict on him,
That in contemp of nature, and religion,
Enforces breach of love, of holy vows?
Sets them at war•e whose hearts were married
In a 〈◊〉 congregation of Angel•:
I know you will no• say, but such deserve
To dye yet Marwood being dead, you reach
Your fury to his hey•t, that did this benefit.
Oh G•ati••• if I m•y not live
To 〈◊〉 thee here, Il would thou had been dead
Indeed so in a little time, we shu'd
〈…〉 each other in a better World?
But since I go before thee, I will carry
Thy 〈◊〉 along, and if my soul forget not,
What it hath 〈◊〉, when it conversed with men,
I will so talk of thee among the blessed.
That they shall be in love with thee, and descend
In holy shapes, to woe thee to come thither,
And be of their society doe not 〈◊〉 thy beauty
With such a shower, keep this soft rain,
To water some more lost, and ba•ren garden,
Least thou destroy the spring, which na•ur made
To be a wonder in thy cheek
Where is Marwoods body?
Here sir.
A live!
Ha Marwood?
A live, as glad to s•e thee, as thou art
To know thy self 〈◊〉 for my 〈◊〉;
Which I of purpose by this honest friend,
To whose cure, I owe my life, made you believe,
I increase our joy at meeting: for you Lady,
You are a woman,—yet you might ha been
Less violent in your p•eating, do not
Eng•ge me past respects of mi•e, or your own honour.
Mine is aboue thy malice, I ha•e a breast
Impenetrable, against which, thou ••ndly aiming,
Thy arrows, but recoil into thy bosom,
And leave a wound.
Fri•nd we have found thy error—
L•t it be mine, we have had sto•mes already.
Tel• me injurious man for in this presence
You must acquit the honour you accuse•d,
Discharge thy poison here, in humane Traitor —
Thou wo•t a•ke her now so given•, she's al chastity.
Why do ye tempt me t•us?
It was ill done sir —
Accuse her to her face.
So so, you see, I am silent still.
You are t•o f•l of guilt to excuse your treachery.
Then farewell all respect, and hear me tell
This bold and insolent woman, that so late
Made triumph in my death.
Oh sir proceed not,
You do not declare your self of generous birth,
Thus openly to accuse a Gentle-woman,
Were it a truth.
He may throw soil at heaven,
And as soon stain it.
Sir boy, who made you so peremptory
He would be whipped.
With what? I am not armed
You see, but your b•g language would not fright
My youth, were it be friended with a sword;
You should find then I would dare to prove it
A false• hood, on your person.
How now Milisent?
Hath my love made me thus ridiculous?
Beauford, that you will suffer such a boy
To affront me? then against all the world
I rise an enemy, and defy his valour
Dares justify Gratiana virtuous.
Believe your eyes.
My daughter alive?
Oh my dear heart.
You are come oppor•unely,
Cardona speak the truth, as thou would not
Eat my p••nerd, is not Gratiana
A sinful woman.
What means Marwood, ha?
I am in a labyrinth?
H•lt, I confess —
Y•u never did enjoy Gratiana.
Ha?
Let not our sh•m• be pub•icke, sir, you shall
Have the whole truth, oh that my tears were able
To wash my sin away—won wi•h your promises,
I did, in hope to mark my self a fortune,
And get a husband for my child, with much
B•ask oratory, woe my daughter to
Supply Gratianaes bed, whom with •hat
Circumstance, you enjoy•d, tha• you b•leeu'd
It was the virgin you desired.
First possible?
I am •t a confession, whore's this daughter?
She with the fear (as I conceive) of her
Dishonour, taking a few jewels with her,
Went from me, I know not whither, by this time
Dead if not more unhappy in her fortune.
Into how many sins h•th lust engaged me?
Is there a hope you can forgive, •nd you,
And she whom I have most dishonoured
I never had a conscience till now,
To be grieved for her, I will hide my self
From all the World.
Stay sir—
You hear this Beauford, father —
This she co•fest to me, though I concealed
From thee the error, Marwood dead, their shame
Would not ha given my life advantage, now
We have ore-come the malice of our fate:
I hope you'll call me son.
Both my loved children.
I congratulate your joy.
Beauford, Gentle-men,
This is a woman, Lucibol your daughter,
The too much injured maid: oh pardon me,
Welcome both to my knowledge, and my heart.
Oh my child.
My servant prove a woman?
You le marry her.
I shall begin my recompense:
Lea• you to Church we will find the P•jest more work.
He has do•e some already, for by this time
I have a daughter married to young Hauer.
That walked in Rawbones li•e•y,—they are returned.
Father your pardon, though you meant me not
Your son, yet I must call your daughter, wife:
Here I resign my Citizen.
Young Hauer.
My blessing on you both,
I meant it so: a letter took off this
Dis••uise before; nay here are more couples,
Enoug• to play at Barly-break▪
Ma••e• Lodam, you and I are in Hell,
How?
You and I are friends.
I knew, by instinct, I had no quarrel to thee:
Art thou Rawbone?
I am not •runke—
No, but thou art disguised shrewdly.
I wonot believe, I am awake:
This is not possible.
Leave off to wonder Captain.
Sir• this is a dream.
As sure, as you are there Captain, alas wee doe but walk and talk in ou• sl•epe, all this while.
Away, away.
I to dinner bullies.
Do ye hear Gentle-men, before you go, does no-body know me? who am I? who am I?
You are master Rawbone fit, that would have married my daughter, that is now wise, I take it, to this Gentle-man, your seeming servant.
Dream on, dream on: Jasper, make much a'the wench now you have got her, am not I finely gulled?
I think so.
Dream on together, a good jest in faith, he thinks all this is true now.
Are not you then, awake fit?
No marry am I not sir.
What do ye think a'tha• sir.
That sir? now do I dream that I am kicked.
You doe not feel it then.
Kick, kick your hearts out.
Say you so, let my foo•e be in too then.
Sure I shall cry out in my sleep—what a long night tic.
Set on.
I, I, we may come back, and take him napping.
Come Gratiana,
My soul best half, lets tie the sacred knot,
So long deferred, never did two lovers,
Meet in so little time so many changes;
Our Wedding day is come, the s•rrowes past
Shall give our present joy more heavenly taste.
GEntle-men: Pray he favourable to wake a Fool Dormant I •on•st ye; • ha been kicked, and kick• to that purpose, may be, they knocked at the wrong door, my brains are a sleep in the Garret▪ I must appeal from their feet to your hands, there is no way but one, you must clap me, and clap me soon•lie d•e• hear▪ I shall hardly come to my self else.
Oh since my case without you desperate stands,
Wake me with the loud Music of your hands.

