SI quisquam est, queen placer se stu•…at bones Quam plurim•…s, 〈◊〉 mini•…e multos laedere, In his 〈◊〉 hic nomen profit•…ur suum.
What? shall wee have Latin a∣gain? Master 〈◊〉 yongster. I pRay you go to the University, and set up your Stage there.
What, Mist•…esse Lily Spinster? content yourself, I now repeat that which is past, I doe not represent that which is present.
I pray you then tell vs so much in honest English.
I will, for your sake.
For mine? nay, for every she,
Whom here you see:
And for our honest neig•…bours, many a good man that never
Was infected with this raving latin•… ever.
Keep silence, thou party-col•…ured chattering Mappy.
•…en speak sense, thou iabbe•…ing al▪ black Jackdaw, with a greene coxcom•…e.
Good men, good wives, good •…nds, 〈◊〉 •…ds, good boys.
I many, this 〈◊〉 for my stomach, •…me in the •…ber of the fourth rank.
Who meet, to see, and hear our childish t•…yes.
Well said, such easy drops sink well into our br•…ins.
Of late ye know, if ye have not mistook vs.
I doe not •…istake you now, you take vs very well with your pl•…no dealing English Poetry.
Wee acted Comic Terence his Eunuebus.
Eunuchus! Out upon him, and thee too, and all of his kin. I have heard my brother say, that this same Eunuchus is a man and no man,
The very scorn and hate of w•…men.
I'll be sure, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, d•…awe and quarter him; and for my part, si•… Prologue, 
I •…ad rather ye should •…at vs,
〈◊〉 thus defeat vs,
〈◊〉 vs,
Then 〈◊〉 v•…
For my 〈◊〉 dame Loll, I doe but act my part, you must not 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
I will n•…t 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 you, unless you name that h•…tefull belting 〈◊〉. O what a queame he hath cast over my stomach with that filthy word.
But now w•… 〈◊〉 with mild audacity,
In vul•…are language unto low capacity.
See you •…old on your vulgar tongue, and bring not hither your latin vulgars, and lessons which you have chanced in the school.
We come not with old worn common Thais,
•…y •…rade the sister of Corinthian Lais.
L•…is? Thais? W•…lke where your way is,
And t•…ll vs what this Play is.
Nor Parmen•…, nor scolding Pythias.
Thou pithless ass, dost thou tell vs of scolding?
This wasp had almost put me out. Out 〈◊〉 he•….
But in a nearer circle now we walk,
Where with our selves, and of our selves we talk.
Our School imagine here new built and dight,
This Scene our forms, our d•…y this candle light.
Sir Prologue, I fear thou talk English extrum∣pery besides thy part, only to beguile me, I doubt there is Latin in his budget.
I enough to thee, jealous Lily, that this same school∣lers feast is dressed in English.
I dare not trust you, for you say you are here in the school. And you scholars must not speak Eng∣lish in the school.
We are not now at ou•… task, but wee have leave to play, and we play at our best game.
What? Blow point? or Span-counter? or trappe out may hap?
Take heed you grow not Outish.
No Tomboy, no. Nor scourge-top, nor Truss, nor Leap frog, nor Nine holes, nor Mumble the pig: But a more Noble recreation, where we have more lookers on, then gamesters.
What play call you it?
Take out thy fe•…ue, and spell here, in this one∣leaved book. Tell the stitches in this sample•… of black and white.
A. P. ap.
A. P. ap? Thou fumbling Ape. A. per se, A. P. O. L. pol.
A. per se, A. P. O. L. pol, L. O. lo. Apollo. On my maidenhead this is Latin. We shall bee choked with a dogrell Latin Play for all this.
I tell thee, this is Greek, Latin, and English too.
This Apollo is he an English man? I'll deal with none but my own Country-men. I wont have to doe, so I wont, with these outlandish people that speak gibberish.
It is a proper name, it signifies the Lord and Ma∣ster of the Muses. His Throne and Court here repre∣scented is the shop and staple of learning.
A proper name? As you are a proper man, let none but English wares bee sold in this shop, or else you have no customer of me.
Nay, read on what followos.
S. H. R. O. shro. I'll none of this. What, doe you call vs shroues?
Thou a•…t not worthy to go a shrouing, that can not spell it.
V I. N. G. avenge, shrouing I'm gl•…d of that. Now I like this Apollo well: he will go a gossipping with vs. does Apollo come a shrouing to vs, or shall wee go a shrouing to him?
All which we on this Stage shall act or say,
Doth 〈◊〉 Apollas shrouing day.
Whilst thus we greet you by our words and pens,
Our sorouing bodeth death to none, but bens.
Pens? hens? Me thinks the feathers of hens should not make good pens. I doe not like the death of hens. As I'm a true housewife, I wondered what made our •…enne roost so empty, and see the scholars have goon them.
I prethy, hold thy peace, thou goosed beyond thine office, thou'lt have the first word and the last too, thou show thy sell•…e to be a true Lily.
But whilst I chat with her, the time grows late, I'll six this banner at Apollos gate. 
As I'm a true woman, I'll trust you slippery scholars no further then I see you. I wont away, till I taste of the first dish of Apollos shrouing seast, and know whether it was an English Cooke that dressed it.
I see a black coat come in, I'll know whether hee be a true Britain.
Ass vigil nitido 〈◊〉 ab ortu
Purpureas aurora fores, et plane rosarum
Atria. Dissugiunt stellae, quorum agmina cogit
Lucifer, &amp; coeli station nouissimus exit.
Iungere equos Titan velocibus 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
I can hold no longer. False play. I bar your dice. Body o'me, I thought how we should be served.
What bold Nymph is this, that durst intrude a∣amongst the Muses?
O'my life, this is no English. My Mother never spoke it. I proclaim to all of my sex, they have leave to depart. I'd rather spin at home, then hear these Barbarians spout Latin, Unless we had some kind scholar to tell vs what they say. What a foppery is this, that we must laugh for company, and then ask what we laugh at.
Ignorant suspicious soul, be content, I will bee thine Interpreter.
If you doe not interpret to me, I'll make you plumme the play, you shant be able to go on your part.
Then so.
Now gins the fair dew dabbling blushing morn
To open to the earth heavens Eastern gate,
Displaying by degrees the new borne light.
The stars have •…ac'd their dance, and unto night
Now •…id good night.
The young days Sentinel the morning slarre
Now drives before him all his glittering slocke,
And bids them rest within the •…old 〈◊〉
Till with his whistle Hesper call them forth.
Now Titan up and ready calls aloud,
And bids the rolling hours bosti•…e them quick
And harness up his p•…auncing foaming steeds
To hurry out the suns bright Chariot.
O now I hear their trampling feet approach:
Now now I see that glorious lamp to dart
His nearer beams, and all bepaint with gold
The over peeping tops of highest hills.
Trust you upon your word? Did not you promise to interpret? Heir's •…insey-woolsey •…ian, where every English thread is ouer-cast with a thick 〈◊〉 len wool of strange words, which have so deep a nap, that the plain ground cannot be seen. I pray you what have you said all this while?
I have said but one word, Lu•…cit, •…t is morning.
And could you not have told me that in one word, by bidding me good morrow?
I give no morrow unto thee, but to the Muses, and my self.
I have as good part it h day light, as the best min•…g Muse of them all.
Welcome fair light, most welcome unto me, When these thy beams reflect upon my book.
Now I understand you better. I hope hee •…∣mend.
O how it joys my watchful eyes and heart, To crop the first fruits of the virgin morn.
Crop the first fruits of Virgins▪ I'll•… take heed of him.
And spend that precious stock of common light
Upon this Authors lines, and such bookeware.
The morning is the Muses gainest friend.
Surely this scholar loves to come first to school▪
O how my blood doth warmely sweetly thrill,
My senses luld, my heart inwrapt with joy,
To see these plains, this fair two-headed hill,
Those bowers, these towers, those winding banks,
These shady laurels, and that Temple gate
The seat, the throne, the nest, the rest, the school
Of great Apollo, and his darlings nine.
Well, I see now it will bee English. It shall go hard but I'll get a part amongst them. I'll into the tyreing house, and scamble and rangle for a man•… part. Why should not women act men, as well as boys act women? I will wear the breeches, so I will. 
NO Court of King, no Palace stately rich,
Though proud of marble feet &amp; gilded head
Can outbid these for true and sweet content.
Let others grovel and embrace the earth,
(The earth the whole worlds basest sediment)
Let them there dig their mothers bowels out,
And thence •…ache gold (the earths worst excrement)
Let muddy minds •…oard up, and hug, and •…de,
And sit upon the eggs of au•…rice:
Thence hatching vipers of their stinging care•….
Let others sell their lives away in sport,
Or play the Parasites in fickle Court.
Let others swell with greatness, burst with pride.
And others luck and s•…ort in lazy sleep,
Or d•…inch and soak themselves in Bacchus sudds,
Or wallow in the mire of pleasures lewd:
These seats, these bowers, are to Philoponus
True pleasure, riches, honour, kingdom, rest.
But now fair Phoebus with his rising rays
Strikes on his own bright Temples battlements,
The watchword for the daily sacrifice.
The suns first heate, that warmes this temples top,
Calls for the Altar to be warm below.
Now now Musaeus his observant Priest
With other sc•…uiters bestir them quick
To fe•…d that neuer-ceasing sacred fire.
My part must be in that devotion,
To take from thence a blessing for the day.
Our actions hence have their prosperity,
By timely worshipping the deity.
what is he gone? I so. He keeps out wonted time, and now is well employ∣ed in doing sacred homage to Apollo. There lays he the foundation of his studious diligence. There s•…re he misses me, and says unto himself. Where is my Amphibius? Why keeps he not his accuostomed hour? What, shall I after Philoponus into the tem∣ple?
It is with the latest now. And (to confess the truth) alas I dare not there appear to present my self before Apollos Altar. Nor have I now the bold∣ness to look my dear Philoponus in the face. His settled countenance and grave gesture give a che•…ke unto my levity. His very silence reads unto me a •…e∣cture of reprehension. My passions so deep inthrald another way, bid me now rather to withdraw from such society, and hide my self in shades and g•…os, and solitude▪
Alas Amphibius, though having •…id himself to the mast of safety by the by•…ds of temperance, yet breaks loose, and leaps into the sea of danger. A∣las hee cannot hold. This Sirens song is so attractive. I yield, I come And yet how can I? shall I •…un a∣way from the worthy trade whereto I am bound ap∣prentice? My name is enroled in Apol•…os register, and shall I rase it out, and be recko•…ed among the fugi∣tiues and renegados? Not so. And yet and yet it will be so. O how my v•…y book seems now a burden unto me, and that which heretofore did elevate my soul, and give it wings to fly aloft, sweet contem∣plation of nature and of arts, that now alas lays on me the heavy load of upbraiding, I fly, I fly, I hast into the by ways of these thickest groves
What dark some ca•…e will give me shelter, and hide me from the light of mortal eyes, and of the immortal eye of this world the all-vu•…ewing Phoe•…us.
ANd now me thinks my spirits lighter are,
My soul more clear, my wits more active far
Since I received from grave Mulaeus hand
Apollos benediction for this day.
But where is my Amphibius? hee promised to overtake me at this morning sacrifice. I hasted not, I did pro∣tract till Phoebus (whose swist Chariot no hand can stay) by his visible messenger called for our common duty and devotion.
What will he thus leave me alone? And yet even thus alone I am not. Nunquam minus solves quam cum solves. My books and meditations are my companions, that never fail me. With me they walk and talk, with them I rest at home: and other while when I travel abroad and converse with contemplation, how short and easy are the ways? yea, and how safe too? I can fear no the eves: the Muses are my guard. And in very truth, what can the eves rob me of? My purse is light, and so my heart. My true riches treasured up in the cabinet of this breast, no lurching hand by stealth, no robbing rover by force can seize upon. My Father hath no land to leave me. I think his mean estate is the better means of my happiness. This education which he astoo•…ds me, I take for a more goodly and durable inheritance, then if he could have left me thousands of stocks and acres, without any bringing up in quality other then the gentle vanities of the times.
I envy not our spruce gallant Gingle, that now forsooth scorns to be our schoole-fellow any longer. Our sa∣ble robe is too homely for such gaudy butterflies.
But ho Philoponus whither dost thou range? These flies not worth the gazing on would seduce me out of my way. Away ye fluttering moths that fain would eat holes in the Muses robes.
Come wi•… Philosophers, come soule-plying Orators. Nay to you I come; ye are my home, the true centre whereon my circling thoughts doe rest. O melliflu∣os Tully. O streaming overflowing Ouid. O May∣stique Virgil. Grave Quintillian. Sententious Isocra∣tes. Virtuous Sentta Plentiful Plutarch. Profound A∣ristotle. Divine Plato. My solace, my guides, my instru∣cters. O how your words distill into my thirsting soul, like to immortalising Nectar.
Where left we last, sweet numbersome Isocrates?
O here, where thy lamp burns bright.
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉. Isocrat ad Demonic.
This rule he delivers, Think not to walk unseen when thou goosed about any wickedness. For, though no man o∣uerspye thee, thine own conscience keeps watch over thee. O the divine power of unbred conscience? Suitable to this is that of Seneca. Quid prodest non habere con∣scium habenti conscientiam? When Amphibius and I discoursed on this point at our private reading of Se∣neca, I remember how affectionately he would take the book into his bosom, and hug it, and protest that this one sentence is able to make vs honest men. I will seek him out, that we may mutually kindle the sparks of conscience in our breasts, 
COme away, come away.
Now clearly shines our shrouing day.
Now are we fresher then in May,
Come, come awar, our work is play.
Apollos solemn shrouing feast,
Inuiteth all from cast to west:
Come away, come make no slay,
No Muses friend can say vs nay.
Apollos ye•…ely visitation
You know begins with Proclamation,
Come mouthing Praeco, clear thy threat,
And chant the law in twanging note.
O yez.
He may cry O yez till his belly burst. But, for ought I see, heir's no body to hear him.
No body? I hat's none of our fault. All may come if they will, Apollo keeps open sessions. Look Praeco, can thou see no audience?
Nor man, nor mouse.
If I see any body, I would I were the Muses Tan∣kard-bearer.
That's a punishment would no near to beggar you. For I am sure you would be licking up the Ca∣stalian d•…ops that fall from the Muses tankard, and that would make you turn ryming Poet.
I wish I had no better fortune, then to be a pret∣tie water Poet wi•…h a bi•…h forehead like I. T. that acts the swan by the banks o•… Thames in England.
I cursed my self happily.
What is that acting the swan?
I mean the swans, or gooses broad paddle feet, the natural prime pattern of the artificial oar.
O que, I have him. He means the easy smooth voluminous untaught Poet, that will row you over the Thames in rime, every stroke of his oar cuts out the capering feet of his verses.
Would we had him in Parnassus. Hee would stroke our Mistresses the Muses gently with his oar, and make their worships very merry, with his paper Wherry.
Paper Wherry? you mean by a metaphor, that his papers and verses carry a mans attention as smooth as a wherry.
No, I mean his sailing in a Paper Boat, and poetising upon that and other his own aduen∣tures.
Hee shall have my voice to be admitted into the third form of the Ushers part in Parnassus school, if he will lay his claim for it in solemn session.
I'll register his name with a witness,
If he bring evidence of his fitness.
This Poetical Boat hath made vs sail out of our way. Drudo look down there between the Tem∣ple and the hill, see if you spy any body. And you Praeco, put on you spectacles, and look into the Grove.
Neither bird nor feather.
Neither fish nor finn.
We shall forfeit our liberties, if wee can get no audience to listen to our Proclamation. Praeco, up that bank, nay mount up that tree.
It is more wholesome mounting that one tree, then some other three trees, compact in a Greek Pee.
See thou any body now?
Abundance. O multitude! O variety!
What be they? discover them to vs.
Men. Boys.
Who else?
Item there be others, shall I discover them too?
Why not?
I am too bashful to uncover them. They are women.
On prattling Prison.
Men, women, young, old, black, white, blew, sitting, standing, looking, laughing.
Whence think thou come they, and what would they?
No doubt they come a shrouing to Apollo. If the Muses have not provided for their palate, what shall we doe?
It is hard to dress a shRouing dish to please so ma∣ny several tastes. They must be content to take such as they find or bring, like good gossips.
Well sir Prison, for the first service, let them hear the Proclamation. Begin.
O yez, O yez, O yez.
All manner of scholars and students|
All manner of scholars and students|
With their Retainers|
With their Retainers| and appurtenances| that hold or pretend to hold | in Capite | any learning, art or science | of the grand Lord our sovereign Apollo | or of the mean Land. Ladies | the nine sister Muses | or of any of them | Let them appear this day in the
afternoon | at the great lowrell on the western top of Parnassus | there to doe their homage luite and service | and to give account to our said Lord Apollo | or to his high steward Muss us | of the expense of their time | in their several trades | •…nd mysteries | of the Muses | also there and then | upon the oath of homagers | strict inquiry and search is to bee made | concerning all encroachments | intrusions | and Nu∣essences | done or suffered to be done | upon the in∣heritance | rites and royalties | pertaining to the manner of Parnassus | All that will accuse, shall bee heard | and all that will answer | shall have liberty | of defence | by themselves | or by their counsel | lear∣ned in the Muses laws.
Keep Apollos peace, and then he end the Muses pros∣per you.
Come down now Praeco from your chair of stare, and walk with vs mortals here below.
Iauriger think you that any of those, whom Praeco oueruiewed, will lay in any action at Apollos Court to day?
Why not? perhaps some of them hold for life some paper Tenement belonging to Apollos •…n∣ner. And thereupon may crave admitionce to it O∣theirs upon their experience may inform Apollos in∣rye what wast hath been made of the trees in Parnas∣suss grove with cropping off laurel garlands to adorn the light head of every ballad belching Po•…. Or what delapidations have in process of time grown upon the Muses cells. So that Bores whistles ever∣loud in their ears when they are retired to contem∣plation.
These and all other informations shall be firely heard. We know that is our Lord Apollos express mandate.
Now return wee up the Mount, and acquaint Mus•…us what we have done. 
REnowned Father of fashions, Count of cour∣tesies, Marquess of modern motions, Duke of debonair deportments, Chief Justice of ges•…icu∣lotions.
Go on with the Alphabet of my Titles. Comp∣troller.
I have it, Comptroller of Conges, Compactor of Cringes, Fea•… Framer of •…ian phrases.
O wonderful: this is a brave man. Wee have no such dainty words in our school.
Dainty? I tell thee, Novice, we have store of this plumporridge at our house every day. (little else.)
Sir, you forget the Titles given me by the great Mogul, when I went Ambassador to him from the King of Calecut, a golden •…mpet sounded them in the Persian language.
That trumpet could speak Persian well, I can hardly hit upon them in the original. Varletto, p•…one, manigoldo.
You masque unknown, unseen. Descend I say to the apprehension of the base vulgar. Give vs them •…n translation.
Indoctrinate of young Nobility. Accompli•…r of Kings Courts, chief engineer of cap and knee. clock-keeper of 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, and finally, ingrosser of all saylable,
available addresses, garbs, faces, graces in all places.
Yet gooder and gooder. O admirable! This man is for vs to the heavens.
It is well, somewl at toward the superlative of my wo•…h and pro•…ssion But Imp. I like not that word finally. When you rehearse me before the Lady Mu∣ses, they will think wee are at the wall, that thou hast told all my virtues, and offices. I tell thee, not thou, nor the loud long tongue blab •…am, can give the inuentary of my perfections. Think thou with the small wherry boat of thy short memory, to arrive at the Terra incognito of the virtues and in∣dowments o•… mighty Captain Complement?
O eloquence. I see now that Tully and Ouid are but cou•…se w•…e.
I tell thee, and thou shalt find, that tittle tattle Tully is but browne bread, if hee be laid near our Marchp•…e.
Ergo therefore my nimble Imp. take away that padlock finally, and in stead of the aforesaid, add to the •…egg end of my Catalogue, that endless chain which the vulgar Gramatians call e•… c•…ra.
Indeed M•…ster I have heard you say, that you would have your title like the great Western Mo∣narches •…e, with a long tail behind it.
True: And therefore you know, the motto which I subscribe in banner is plus ultra.
My sweet friend, Master Implement, you told me that you would speak—
I marry, and so I doe.
For me to the mighty man. All you have yet said to him, is but in the vocatiue case. And that case makes no sentence, as I have learned when I was in the second •…orme. You know I gave you▪
What did you give me? Nothing but a dozen of rotten •…ke points. You must tag them better ere I t•…e up your request.
I le steal my mothers Peacock, and bring it you.
A Peacock? That's well. You may make vs latter by it; but you cannot make vs prouder.
What talk you of a Peacock?
Sir, this young •…ntleman presents you with a Pea∣cock. It ha•… a tail▪ he ha•… a small request to your worship.
I dare as well hee hanged as steal the Peacock. My mother loves it so well, and feeds it every day, and pricks the feathers of it in her sanne.
Where is this Peacock?
What shall I dee? I have none.
I mistook a Peacock for a Woodcock.
I have never a Woodcock neither.
Sir he would fine present you with a Woodcock every day. His suit is to be your scholar for an hour in a day. He would dedicate himself to fine fashions and quaint quallicoms.
What Nobiliy? What achievements embolden him to obe•… upon vs with such a request? An hour in a day? I tell thee, young chicken, great Prin∣ces have not made such a motion unto me without an Ambassador, and a present of a gold chain, or diamond ring, or s•…me such tri•…e.
Wo•…'s me! Alas. I have no hope now, I think I must even return to my old trade again, &amp; repeat In nova 〈◊〉 animus, and Tityre tu pa•…lae. O sweet Imp. be my •…aithfull •…mplement to your Master. I'll doe any thing for thee, or for any of thy kin.
Will you steal me your fathers dagger with the ailuer hast?
And my mothers silver bodkin too.
They shall prick forward thy cause. I gallop to save thy life. I will beg a pardon for thee of this Judge. Relent heroic soirit, relent. For my sake entertain Master Novice into your school.
Thou know our school is thronged. My hands are full. The truth is, my virtuous faculty, joined with a strange dexterity, is so attractive, that I have scholars come flocking unto me, not only from the Theater and Venus Court, but also from Apollos se∣minarie. I swell, I swell with the stuffings of the Gram∣mar broo•….
I am one of those that lest the fescue trade, to page it thus in state.
Nay, Logic and Philosophy doth often break up shop, and come to set up at my stall.
Indeed Master of late we have had very good do∣ings. The Usher of our school has had for fees of young gentlemen at their entrance, aboue an hundred crowns within this 12. months, besides his yearly stipend.
I'll beg hard, but I'll get a crown of my Mo there, and twelve pence for thee honest I•… Imple∣meant.
As for money for stipend or entrance, I doe not much stand upon it, neither would I take any, but that I will not imbase my facult?.
Indeed Master, if you should not take some fair see, the gentlemen would not think it such a repute∣tion to be your Prentiles.
Truly the more cost, the mo•…e worship. A wise saying. Write you that in your table book Master Novice upon my authority.
And their Parents would scorn our ware, and say
it were like s•…inking fish it hend of a market.
Again for me good Imp.
I pray you sir let him be admitted. He will be con∣tent to stand next the door of our school. I warrant you sir, he will be fedfat for a whole year, with two or three of the easiest plain tricks, of •…g the hat▪ or the gambrell •…th hams, the ma•… in the toe, an•… the gudiron in the forehead. He will bee pleased with these till hee can come to higher points of the Retort, the •…e, the Catastiophe, the Anti∣s•…ropho.
I could bee content to enrol him in our petty form, but that I doubt •…ome excep•…ns will be taken at the confluence of so many of that tribe, to ou•… part. Master Philoponus a sour sloicalll scholar, told me to my teeth, that Apollo should bee complained unto, and I accused of robbery, for stealing away his best hopes.
Sir, I see no reason but you may entertain him as well as another. One s•…one more will not make the boat sink.
One kernel more put in the sac•…e
Will not break the M•…s 〈◊〉.
Good sir consider o•… me. Though I be not borne to so much land as master Ging•…e my forme-fellow, yet I shall learn b•… tricks as well as he. There is Mumble and Tri•…ram, Trump, and Iobbart, and nim∣ble Nichol. I see not, but I may leave the •…atchell as well as they, and turn fine gentleman.
Indeed they have •…ofited very well with vs. For they have torn out the leaves of all their books to light tobacco pipes, and they can i•…me, &amp; effame, and resume with gentle pos•… M•…ester Nimble can at one time, and wah one 〈◊〉 p•… •…his hat
with his right hand in due circumference, and bran∣dish a baton in's left hand, and suck a suming to∣basso pipe in's mouth without any hand, all at once.
They say th•… old gray beard Mus•…us sets up in∣quisition, and •…at Apollo keep•… Court to day. My sweet Siren sent me word this morning, that I know not how many of vs should be indi•…ed for encroach∣ing upon Apollo•… liberties.
Indeed sir, and't please you, this Philoponus is the best scholar among vs, but he is but a tell tale. There can't one of vs play the tron't, or run away from school for recreation, or so, but presently hee tells Musaeus of it. But I care nor, I had rather stick to you, and show Apollo a fair pair of heals.
He that sticks to vs must bring some glow: And money is a binder.
Imp. are these young mans friends rich? Will they lard vs with a fat pension?
His father's but a plain Farmer; but hoe's called the rich Chuff•…. Hee keeps three ploughs, and four∣teene yoke of Oxen.
But will his Oxen give down their milk?
•…aith his m•…there will stroke hard for it. She is a gentlewoman ot'h left side. I have heard her say, that she would like her son better in a scarce and ruffled boots, then in a gown with a •…ardell of books.
Well said, enough. You young man. My servant hath entreated hard for you. I am content to enter∣taine you upon probation.
I am overjoyed, ouetioyed.
Overjoyed? What a plain packs•…affe phrase is that? you must sublimate your joy in triumph thus. Hold me down left I hit my head against a cloud.
Hold me down lest I hit my head against a cloud.
O what a bran world is this, all made of o•…meal: I'm now in the way of preferment and gallantry. I'll presently run to my mother for some cash for my entrance. I'm all now for Masks, Revels, Court. sh•…p. Poor Apollo farewell. 
Sir Imp. I honour thee with thanks, a whole bushel, heap measure.
I, with such light co•…e and husks am I sed.
I enrich thee with thanks. Thou hast brought a pretty fat foul to our net.
We shall make him a flat fool.
Is not the hour come appointed by me to give access and interviw to Sir Orgolio?
Yes sir, the sun and clock says so. (And my clock tells me it is breakfast time. If I could tell where to lunch.)
Why then Vamos. I set my legs in due array, and march on foot down to the plain.
So you had need. For all your horses have ten toes. 
OR this, or that. This is my duty. So. And though so, yet why not rather that? I o that mine incline∣tion draws me. O strange Monster, worse then ever nature did bring forth. A man in whom the light of reason shines, to walk in the cloudy night of tem∣pestuous passions, to live at once in two contrary eel∣mints. Glorious Apollo I fine would still rrmaine chine. And yet. And yet sweet Hedo•…e, I cannot di∣uorce my self from thee.
PArnassus plains. I he banks of Hippocrene, The laurel grove, all walked, all searched by me: and yet I find him not. O here not hoped, yet now found. Found? Is this he? Is this my Amphibius? Where a•…t thou? Who art thou? Look up and show thy friendly brow. I Hope no distaste estranges thee •…om thy Philoponus. What have we here: The walking ghost of Amphibius? Where is his soul, his life, his look, his speech?
A wandering soul.
Wandering? I know no by way can call thee off from me. These groves, these banks, and shades, O •…ow oft have they bin companions and witnesses of our friendship, and discourses of earth, of sea, of stars, of spheres, of motions, of rest, of beasts, of plants, of all Dame natures works, and wondrous art, by which this All stands thus composed, and framed in most exact proportion. Awake I say, the Muses call vs to our task.
Worthy Philoponus. I love thoe. I admire tho•…. I envy thee.
I know thou can not envy me. Thy heart is so generous, and my worth so mean, thou love me I know, for the parity of our dispositions and studies.
Would I were like thee now, as heretofore I have been, then should I not bee thus dashed with shame.
What Amphibius, you are always modest. Hic virtutis color. Blushing is virtues scarlet robe.
Alas, I am now like a cropped flower, which fades and hangs the head, I am pulled from the stalk on which I grew.
What blast hath thunder-strucken thee? Whence art thou fallen?
I must vntwist.
I hope, not from our bond of friendship.
No: but from my bond of service to Apollo.
Thou from Apollo? First may the stars be plucked from heaven. Why but how?
In a word, I am turned soldier.
Soldier? Which of the furies pluck't thee from our wonted peace and quiet in Apollos service, now to pitch thy tent in Marses field?
O how the drums and trumpets sound alarm. What strokes, what shrieks, what fierce incoun∣ters, wounds and deaths!
O Tragedy! What Scene is this? On what Stage dost thou tread?
Alarm, alarm, to war. I fight, I fight.
With whom?
I must maintain the quarrel on both sides.
Both sides? Who are the Cumbattants?
Amphibius, and Amphibius. Never till now a true Amphibius As I am▪ Apollos and thine. I walk and march with thee, I fight under the Muses colours against ignorance, idleness and voluptuousness. But as I am another self, my left side walks another way. O force. O compulsion. I yield.
What force compels?
Fatis agimur, cedite fatis.
The destinies are powerful. If the fates say I, who
dares say no?
Our fates? Speak ri•…ht, and say, our faults. They ouer-rule and ouer-turne vs, when wee are willing to be conquered, and then to colour our follies, wee put on the mask•… o•… tragic exclamation upon our stars, our fates, our cross inexorable adamantine destinies.
Far easier is it to mock my misery then to cure it.
Cure it? I will cure it. Let me feel thy pulse. O what boiling and beating waives of passion! W•… thou calm them?
O could I! or coldest thou my Esculapius?
Recipe a •…iletto or •…aylors bodkin; make but one eyelet hole under the left pap, three inches deep: your blood would be cooled; and you shall fall into a sweet sleep, and presently bee transported into the Elision fields. T•…obatum est.
Facile est miserum irridere.
Not I, but—you fate mon•…ers teach you this. But in earnest I advise thee thus. Give over parling and combating: blow away your enemy out of the field with one blast. One word will doe it.
What potent charm is that? I pray you teach it me.
Only this sloutly said N•…lo.
Oft have I thought and said it, but another word crowds in withal, and makes a counter charm. Volo.
What? doe you blow hot and cold at once, at once will and nill?
Vos testor omnes Colitis, hoc quote volo, Me notte.
O Sir, doe you think Medea a sit pattern for you? Have you no better a Mistress to instruct your wavering soul, then monstrous Medea?
Yes, another Mistress ouer-awes me, more po∣werfull then that Enchantress.
Ouer-awes? O faint fondling, not worthy to march under the Muses banner, whose Escuch•…on is Virtue Argent, crowned Or. And the two supporters, win∣general Victory, and winged all-eyed, all-eared, all-ton∣guide Fame.
When this all-conquering Queen, sends sorth her mandates, alas virtue melts into an aercall con∣templation, and fame vanishes into an empty sound.
What mandates other then usurped Tyranny? What conquests other then by voluntary yielding to false allurements?
O valiant Sir, can I, can you, can any mortal wight stand out and rebel when hee is apprehended by this Queens writ?
What writ? what arrest? you need not obey it. At least you might lurk and withdraw your self, and make them return a Non est inuentus:
O but these arrests doe not so much command by authority, as convince &amp; persuade by argument and reason.
Reason? what other reason then vt cum ration insa∣nias, that you may be reasonably raving mad?
Tu si hic esses, aliter sentires, the case would be al∣tered, and you would plead as hard on my side.
Then let all the nine Muses hiss at me, and ba∣nish me out of Apollos school.
The Muses? Apollos school? I tell you the argue∣mints by which I am convinced, are translated out of the Records of the Muses, and cite every where Apollos Parliaments.
What are these forged patches which plead their workmanship from the Muses looms? Have you
bin weaving them in your sequestered studies?
Alas not mine, but on higher hand hath spun and twisted them. The Queen her self vouchsafed with her own wit and hand to compose this some∣reign Nepenthe to embalm my soul in most desi∣rabble content. Queen Hedone her self wrote this lar•…e mellifluous letter to me, poor me. I thought she had not known me: but (O generous sweet gre∣tiousnesse) to this mean negected Amphibius, she (that high and mighty sovereign of delights) sent this amiable garland of choicest flowers, culled by her own delicious hand; that hand, which the chie∣fest Poets labour to paint cut, and the highest gods affect to kiss.
O how Pocticall you are grown, and fantastical? I think that paper hath infected you. But by what hand was it conueyed to you?
By whom, but by her worthy maid of honour Dame Si•…en, whole voice with one warble can thaw the most frozen affections
Nay then I perceive he is handsomely caught.
I pray you view these lives. You will confess they are strong lines.
I have heard of strong lines, admitted by weak judgements, and derided by the judicious.
I p•…ay you read. El•…e you rob me of my defence, and your self of care pleasing▪ soule-conquering suavity!
To my not so dear, as worthy to be far dearer, Amphibius the flower of youth—
(Meaning me.)
Honour and envy of his rank.—
(Meaning me, very good still)
Accomplisher of virtue•…—
(O complete!)
In nothing wanting, but that he is indebted,—
(Yet she does not arrest me for money debt, No)
Indebted to himself, in infinite sums of most currant delights, over chu•…shly neglected by him.
Had these title been of my own devising, modesty would not have suffered me, to hear them read. But what Queen Hedone says, is a law; and it is a part of my obedience to accept the honour she confers upon me by her own hand. She trusts no Secretary when she writes to me. I think the Mu∣ses will woos me for copies of this letter, they will imitate it, when they sing hymns in praise of Apollo.
O forgery O soppery!
Why? what?
Think thou that Queen Hedone wrote this lever to thee? I think she never heard of Amphi∣bius.
Why? Am I not in the endorsement? I never•… heard of any other Amphibius. I will be this Amphibi∣us till you find another Amphibius.
See how thy good nature is wrought upon. This inscription i•… none of Queen Hedones hand. See thou the character nothing a kin to the letter within
Perh•…ps endorsements and names of note, are written in another hand for excellence. That is the Court stile.
Let me tell thee a short tale. Thou hast heard o•… Burching-lane in London.
London? Whore's that? In England?
So. And there are many volumes of Appárell made at large by guess for no man, and for every man, for all, whom they may fit, or who will buy them.
What then? I buy none there.
An honest rural guest coming thither, is hailed into a shop, and ca•…ed with a suite which though too wide, too long or short, hoe's persuaded '•…was made foe•… him and none else, he pays, and goes, and after finds it s•…inkes.
What's this to me?
Yes to thee. Mutato nomixe de te Fabula narratur. Thou art this new come guest, gazing on and admi∣ring the varnished wares, set out in the deceitful shop of Hedone. She cuts out and tackes together, large de∣clamations in folio. In laudem voluptatis. These she sends abroad by the •…nd of her Broker Siren: Who, lo•…den with these blank letters, rambles up &amp; down: and, when she lights upon any credulous soul, pre∣sently she adds an endorsement, and makes the re∣ceiuer believe that •…even Hedone her self doth woo him. Against the concourse of this solemn day this Siren, hovering here for gain, now seiseth on thee. And thou believe that this paper garment was cut out and sowed and laced for Amphibius. I•… she meet with me, verily I shall have another the same letter, endorsed, To her dear, her only dear Philopo∣nus. Then shall I bee the flower of youth, and what not?
Admit sir this, that my name, was put in by the bearer upon general instructions only. Yet the po∣werfull contents of the letter enforce in themselves the conclusion of my yielding.
Thy yielding? And why not mine as well?
Yes brother, and thine, and anies else, whose heart is not hewn out of a marble rock. Mine is of flesh, I call a woman Mother.
I •…m of the same •…old with thee. But I bethink
my self, Why hath Reason the Sceptre in her hand, if rebel Passion may bee suffered to crowd into the Throne.
True, no Oracle more certain. But alas. But I know not what within this melting breast cries out louder, and says, Amphibius, Thou shalt now to this case dispense with those severe rules.
Where is thy Logic? thy Philosophy? Art thou an Orator to persuade others to that which they know not, and can thou not persuade thy self, in that which thou acknowledge?
Nay, the Arguments used by Hedone, are not emptily blown up with passion, but soundly groan∣ded on Philosophy, Logic and Oratory. S•…en told me that her Lady Hedone is near allied to Manto, Cassandra, Aspasia, and the ancient Roman Tanaquil. That this Hedone, better then Lesbian Sapph•…, might pretend to be the tenth Muse.
Why then comes she not now to Apollos Court at this solemn assem•…lie, to l•…y in her claim for it?
Siren tells me, she had done so, but that she knew not of the set day, and now resides in one of the fortunate Lands in the Atlantique sea f•…rye oft from Thessaly. And besides all this, she is invited to a feast of four or five gods by Mercury into Ethiopia.
Such draste of si•…ens by thy feast.
For the cause of her absence I pass not much But I'm sure shoe's learned, and deeply read. That s•…ee shows by the reasons and Authorities heaped in her letter.
What slout reasons? What authorities?
Even those which we read and admire in Apollos school. What say you to Tully, Plutarch, Aristotle, Sc∣neca, Socrates, Horace, &amp;c.
I am sure these afford impenctrable a•…more against the •…ssaults of Hedone. And now are they brought on the other side against their wills?
Read but this line here in the bottom of the se∣cond page. Attend what your 〈◊〉 Tully saith, Dan∣du•… aliquid atat•…. No•… s•…mper •…ncat ratio, &amp;c.
This time and place s•…s not to examine these par∣ticulars. Come lets to the lau•…ell Grove. There will we gage to the bottom this farthel of false wares.
ONe tells me I must study next my heart. That troubles my br•…no too much. Another tells me it is good to e•…te bread and butter next my heart. That sumes sumes into my head too much. And to say the true•…h, my stomach is not yet up. For I'm but new up my self, and I hope that will not be so saucy as to tread on his Masters heals. But I say still, it is best playing next ones heart. That is to me both study and breakfast. Once again cross and pile, handy dandy, which hand will you have?
O for some Companions. O for some •…ood play fellows! Gingl•… hoe's grown so proud, he tells me hoe's not for boys play now. And Slug I could not get him up. I boune'd with my bag of counters against his door. And he answered me nothing but whough, pooh: Hee outsnorts nine horses, and outsleepes ten dormice. I will go find out Novice. Hoe's a young fat gosling to pull. 
when wee had signified to our Lord A∣polo our publishing of his Mandates, he was pleased to say that there was never more need of warning a Court, then now, that abuses and vsur∣potions have crept into his dominions. And therefore he charged vs that this inquiry should be more strict then heretofore. 
But look you now. There is one of the worms and Cat•…pillars of our harvest.
I know her, though I never saw her before. By her few∣ning gesture and inchan•…ing wand, shoe's that famous infamous Siren, which so troubles and bewilders some of our society. She hooks at all she meets. It's marvel if she reach not at me.
TO thee, renowned Lauriger,
I come a happy messenger,
From Hedone, Queen Hedone, sweet Hedone,
The Goddess of delight and pleasure,
The life of life, the worl is best treasure,
Perform what I advise,
And thou shalt be more wise,
Then all the rest that follow
Your mighty god Apollo.
Apollos t•…ske torments your brains,
Abates your spirits, dries your vain•…s.
Vain is your labour little profit,
No quiet by it, no end of it.
O cast away that laurel bow,
And crown thy head with roses now,
Now whilst thy frolic•… youth gives leisure
To bath thy self in choicest pleasure.
Thy time doth go,
As rivers flow.
Ere long, you know,
Gray hairs will grow.
Then shalt thou sigh, and say with tears,
Why lost I so my youthful years?
My spring is past, yet fine I would,
(But cannot) bud in winters cold.
Come then before age bids good night,
Spend youthful day in sweet delight.
Is this the lecture you read to vs? Is this all you can say? A flourishing glossing poetical Theme, that hath neither truth nor substance in it. An empty sounding painted drum, fit •…or children to hear and follow with their rattles and hobby horses. Go Gill flourish, go set up your Peddlers shop in Venus Court. There shall you have those that will dance to your music.
No man so learned, wise, or strong,
But may be conquered by my song.
I can hear thee no longer. Avaunt thou Circa. Think thou to transform me into a swine? I fly. 
If hee gone? I will not leave him so. A letter
from the goddess her self may pierce deeper with him, as it did with Amphibius. 
IVgge Rubbish, what, Jug Rubbish. Come and bring hi•… g•…dl.
Here forsooth.
Have you warmed it?
I can find none but seacole fire to warm it:
Out upon thee slut Seacoale? I cannot abide to have any of that brimstone fume to come about the body of my child. Go kindle some Charcoal, and warm it well on both sides. 
What Mother can think it any pain to bring forth so precious a fruit? O my living walking joy, thy fathers picture, and thy Mothers self, why shouldest thou be weaned from my lap?
Sweet Mother. If I were to choose a Mother,
Thou and no other
Should be my Mother.
Sweet Child, when thou speak, me thinks the M•…ses, if there were nine times nine of them, are but Oysterwomen and Kitchinsluffe.
Honourable Mother Indulgence, I must be no more prentice to Apollos trade. Must I?
No my Child, thou art in a better trade. We are higher slowne now.
I like this new Master better then Musaeus. Wee
have no terrible sceptre shaken over vs in the Cap∣taines school.
Out upon that bloody butcherly weapon. What a base thing it is, that a man should bee armed against children? What natural Mother can suffer her own flesh and blood to bee torn by these black gown? Cannibals? He that rancheth the flesh of my child, had as good kiss—
Mother, I have heard that he was hanged that in∣uented burch.
I, and he that invented books escaped by bur∣ning in the hand. 
I have almost scorched my fingers with warming it:
Shrink in while I buckle it, that you may bee gaunt and fine in the wast.
Mother. When you go in your coach up Parnassus hill, I must sit in your lap, must I not? and hold Tisbies left ear in my hand with two fingers thus Must I not? O it is the finest Puppy.
I, darling, and hold my fan in thy other hand, and sometime shake it at the common people when we pass by them.
Indeed Mother, these are very Gentlemanlike feats. I wonder the Captain has not read any le∣cture to me of them.
The Captain is to teach thee more souldierlike tricks. I can teach thee these at home. Why Jug doe you see how the rose is ruffled on the top of his spur∣leather, set it better with your poking finger. (valour.
He has already taught me one soldierly trick of
What is that my sweet Babby?
When you are in your Coach, if any horses, though never so well bred (except the horses of Apollos own Chariot) shall presume to take the wall or upper
hand of any of your Coach-horses, I must straight leap out of the Coach, and with my poniard stab one of those uncivil horses through both the ears at once.
I see Captain Complement is an excellent Master, he will make my child be called the son of Mars and Bellona. Hee deserves more stipend then I allow him for thee. Why son Gingle, this will be an action not only of valour, but of honour and duty to me.
If I thus venture my self in duty to you, I pray you forget not your duty to me. You know my Fa∣ther's a man of great worth, and lands, and I am his heir apparent.
I pray you in good company, call not me plain son Gingle, or son Iohn, or so, but Master Iohn, or Ma∣ster Gingle my son, or so. Others will doe me the more honour for it.
True my honourable child Master Iohn Gingle or so. If thou be used with such respect by me, how great honour will others yield me that bare thee? But son I doubt, if the horses be tall, thou can not have them by the ears with thy poniard. Thou shall▪ have thy Fathers long guilt Rapier. That will reach them, unless they fly as high as Pegasus.
O for that Rapier. If I had it, the Captain would teach me in one day and a half, how to wear it, how high the pummel must sit aboue the chape, and how to wind it about when I salute.
I preethy, sweet son, let me see thee once act the fine gestures, which the Captain hath taught you. You doe them by your self alone in the chamber, and the door shut to you. I looked in yesterday at the key-hole, and me thought it did me good to see thee repeat some of them in the presence of a Candlestick,
and Bed-staffe that were set upon the table.
Are you •…uis'd of that Mother? That is a secret, which the Captain tells me, that I must show my feats to none till I am well practised. And another secret, better then that, is, in my private practising to set up imagined spectators for the whetting of my care and diligence. And therefore sometime I set up∣on my table, a full auditory of Cushion, Candlestick, Slippars, Bellows, and Chamber-pot.
See my son Master Gingle, see what wrong you doe me then. You will not allow me that favour, which you doe to your Bellows, and that which is be∣low Bellows.
As I am a Gentleman Mother, I cannot doe with∣all as yet. You know when you put me to this migh∣tie Master, you charged me upon your blessing to o∣bay him, and follow his instructions, rather then the precepts of Musaeus or Apollo himself. But by the next month, I think the Captain will give me leave to repeat my postures before you. I will doe your Mothership the favour to bee in the first form of my Spectators.
Next month? I cannot tarry till next day. Hold, heir's a crown, carry to him for his favour, to make me a spectator without delay. It may be in your re∣petting, I shall teach you some gestures that the Captain thinks not of.
But Mother, I hope you will not fail my Master Captain. You will be a suitor to Apollo for him, that he may continue his school of fine feats here near our door.
Why child to that end have I called to have my Coach made ready. Apollos great hall is almost a flight shot off on the top of Parnassus, I cannot get up
thither without my four foure-footed prancers. Jug bid my Coachman lay the Coach bed backward, for we are to climb the hill. But I must in to dress me better, and set my face in Court fashion. 
Valorous sir, I pray you clear your brow. What cloud of discontent enuelops your heroic soul?
I tell 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. I am duloros•…, I am fumbled and sud•…led, and stu•… with two horn•…, grief &amp; anger.
Hath S•… •…ned on you?
Now b•…y I have her love and shall.
(Well you may, you p•…y dear for it.) I hope Sir you are not angry with me sir, your diligent Im∣plement.
With thee? Thou shrub, thou scrub. Thou art below my wrath. The thunderbolt of my indign∣tion, where it •…lteth foe•…th—
(My Masters bolt is soon shot)
Bestunds the tallest oaks: it strikes not at such daisies as thou art, dandiprat.
But Master, if you'll give me leave, I dare ask who dares make your choler boyle.
Sir boy, I'm angry with my self, and with a cer∣taine Knight errant.
Errant? An errant ass he is, that angers you. I'll lay my cap against my dinner (that's odds against a cheese paring) some Knight has taken the wall of you,
and has challenged you into the field. And now me think, your anger makes you tremble.
learn this of me, no fear, but ange•…, makes men of valour tremble. For anger is the wherstone of fortitude, as sometime said Sir Harry Tottle, my fell∣low Knight and Philosopher.
Woe to that Knight, which conjured up that spright. Your angry spirit will not be coniut'd down, without blood shed. (The reason is, my Master loves black puddings well.) But I pray you Master, what knight? I'll be your second. My keen weapon feeds on bloodshed. But I shall have the worst in this bloody combat. (For nothing but the pudding skins and knotted threads, will fall to my share.)
Did thou mark even now when Sir Orgoli•… came to me, desirous to be intoll'd my scholar?
I remember you went aside: but I could not per∣ceiue so much as an angry look between you.
No. He was well pleased: but little to my case. The truth is, for fashions sake, I had him to dinner a∣against to morrow at my lodging. And he.—
(Hes enjoined penance by it)
And he, like an vnnurtur'd swain,—
Would have you dine with him.
NO. No, Imp. The swain accepted my p•…sser. Was I so kind and generous to inu•…te him, and he be so unkind as to come?
Indeed that's plain Count•…y fashion, unfit for vs.
I tell thee Imp I hate him for it, and if he come, I'll sauce him for it. He shall dine•…s last. I'll temper the salad with my own hands.
So you had need, (foe•… we h•…ue no Co•…ke to doe it. My Master and I are all the off•… in the house) But Master, is it so hateful and deadly to accept
a dinner at another man•… table? How are you then alive? Me thinks the Lords and Knights should have poisoned you long since.
Thou hast a pestilent cross wetted brain. I think thy conceits doe caper the cross point within thy P•…icranion. But •…ee how fa•…e thy reach comes short of mine.
(I me sane to reach far•…e sometime, else I may s•…arue.)
Such young cubs as thou, though wily, yet can∣not extinguish. I extinguish t•…us upon the point. A man may be said to eat another meat upon inuita∣tion, o•… sans inuitat•…on. Which the vulgar call not in∣uited▪ 〈◊〉 walk the second way. I will not be invited. My wo•…th, my gentle faculty, My brave profession, They are the Orato•…s, the Messengers, the Sergeants that inuit, and drive, and draw me to the tables of the best.
I would not be that Porter that should keep you out (in a cold hungry day when we have fasted over night.)
I tell thee, my presence adds honour to the place where I come. Where ere I dine, my virtues pay my share, and where I sit, I leave behind me the •…weet perfume of court•…sie.
(A sweet perfume quoth he. Hee has forgot at the French Ordinary when two L•…quies fell out, and on•… of them drew his poniard, who was it fell in a swoon•… and le•…t such a perfume behind him, that the Cham∣berlaine spent six pence in Frankincense.)
But hoe, where is this fly? My Imp. I doe vouch∣safe to stoop so low as to ask thy counsel. It in∣haunceth my wisdom, to choose such a servant, as is able to advise his Master. The wise Commanders in
the wars sometimes listen to the counsel of a com∣mon souldi•…r, as D•…n Plato saith in his politickes. What •…yst thou Imp. What shall I doe •…o beat this dog from my d•…ore, it he come to morrow?
Let him come, and b•…rke 〈◊〉 hunger: the cudgel of my wit shall •…ang him away
So you 〈◊〉 my honour, •…aithfull Imp. to thee I leave this 〈◊〉, But 〈◊〉 I would know the medi∣cine whereby thou woulded purge this distemper out of me.
I was now temperin•… and preparing it. List how the hammers •…eat in t•…e 〈◊〉 of my brain. Thump. I'll none of that. •…ump again. I like that better.
I long to see the bi•…th of the child of thy brain.
What if you s•…nd him word, that this day upon 〈◊〉 call, the whole Academy of •…os stu∣dents arriving here, the Captain of your Comple∣mental school Count 〈◊〉 Go•…o, takes up the chief Inn in Parnassu•….
O, at the sign o•… the flying horse Pegasu•….
And there makes his pro•… •…ast with a Mask, that must last till midnight.
I prithee doe not hold •…e till midnight in the unmasking thy advise. What's this to m•…e and Sir Orgolio?
And thereupon that the foresaid Don hath over in∣treated your honourable worship to be the Herald and Earl Marshall to set every guest in•… place, and every di•… in•… rank.
That none can doe but I, and those that learn of me.
Otherwise the Cooks and Sewers will make a •…ay with spy•… and choppi•…g knives: and among the guests the•… will be a mortal fight for p•…ecedency in place.
Well said my boy. I have it now. Therefore Ergo. th•… Exclusion is, that, as he would prevent murder, he expect not to have me stay at home that day.
That is a charitable exclusion, and tends unto the preservation of Apollos peace.
But how if Sir Orgolio say then he will co•…e thither too, and be my shadow there, and play the under▪ Marshall at my beck?
He cannot be so uncivil, as to intrude, vnbid, un∣cooth, unkissed.
He that would be so uncivil, as to come invited, I dare not trust him where he is not called.
Let him come at his own peril, yet our house shall be thus acquit of him.
What •…f he return me word that hee will come and dine with me next day?
If so, then rather then fail, I'll blaze it all abroad, that your lodging is set on fire with 〈◊〉 of whole showles and legions of p•…ouision for entertainment.
That will bee for mine honour, that my great Chamber of entertainment is in combustion with the fumes of my hospitality.
And for your thrift too, that none shall hereafter think to be your guest. (Great Chamber? We have never a •…come bigger then a Cobblers stall; and as for fire, it blases no further then a tobaccopipe with vs.)
What say thou?
I say non•… but the son of a Cobbler would bee so uncourteous, as to reply against this answer; and none so witless, if ever he refined his brains with tobacco
O how hast thou raised up my heavy heart, I wa•…∣rant I weigh ten pound lighter then I did e•…e while.
Lighter ten pound of lead. (For I never kn•… him weigh heavy ten pound of silver. I think the
Faryes run away with his money. Hee sucks the young Gentlemen's purses, and yet we sty•…ue at home.)
Now is the time that Master Gingle is to me•…e with vs on Parnassus downs to act his trampling par•… Uamos. 
A Man had need to have a long fork, to keep off this Siren. After I had repulsed her insinuating song, she follows me still, and delivers me a letter, sent from the Lady Hedone (to me, she says) &amp; shows a fair endorsement in gilded letters. To the grand supporter of Apollos Court, La•…rigour. And so •…orth as foal∣lowes in that un•…st title, When I had read the super∣scription, she by violence would needs embrace me. I vouchsafed not so much as to open the letter. Where∣upon with hateful heart, and spiteful look, she vow∣ed revenge. Now who but •…he has contrived to catch •…e in a sna•…e. A message is brought to me by a see∣ming •…riend, o•… proctoring a pension from Captain Complement, to procure a patent from Apollo to hold on his apish trade within these walls.
The Broker told me, that, of Lauriger, that gold would make me Auriger, that t•…is Captain fetching over divers of our yonglings, and cheating them of their money, we, by way of reprisal, may take this p•…si∣on, that it is no b•…ibery to receive it, but an act of in∣stice: that he that robs a thief, hath earned not one∣lie pardon, but also praise.
Now Lauriger summons his wits, and says, this is a trap to bring thee in disgrace, and to endanger thy office in Apollos Court. •…ay a straw there Lauriger. Consi∣der that this 〈◊〉 hobby-horse lives but in al un∣gry fashi•…n. All he can •…crotch by cheating, he spends on that witch Siren. He every quarter to aloe•… 〈◊〉 pension of •…iue crowns, that can sca•…ce allow him∣self five dinners, or an honest floe•…kebed to repose his vaulting bones? Lay another straw th•…e, Lauri∣ger, •…t his straw M•…sse.
I Think I rose not on the right side today. I have rambled up and down, and can get no playfellowes.
Nay this snare which they have laid for me, when•… me the mo•…e to accuse them both anon at Apollos Judgment seat.
No•…ice is so taken up with the Captain, that hee cannot be for me all this day.
First I will plead he is a corrupter of youth, and turns them from humane shape into Baboons.
Will no body take pity on a de•…olate gam•…ster? Will you play with me? will you?
Secondly, he •…obese them of their patrimonies.
Come you it'h bl•…w jacket, I'll try with you at this, or that, or these.
Thirdly, he pulls away the sweetest nu•…ngs from the Muses breasts.
At length well hit, I have found now. Ho. Sir Lau∣rigour, I challenge you at bull, bear, and horse.
You will be ho•…st at school for this. Will not a snatch in the afte•…noon se•…ue you, and then buckle to your book again, but you must lavish out the cream of the morning so prodigally, and hold on thus till noon?
I tell thee, I had rather have this then cream with sugar. I taste my play: all else is unsavoury to me.
If Mus•…us hear of this, Apollos curse will light upon thee.
Apollo is our great Lord. And yet I have heard that 〈◊〉 loves boys play, and therefore he still conti∣nues a boy.
Peace thou babbling •…avenge tongue.
What is he else? I am sure he has no beard.
Thou ignorant •…ondling, that is hieroglificall. His beardless flourishing youth, signifies the never fa∣ding s•…me which is gotten by his service.
I, but 〈◊〉, by your leave, I have read, that Apollo was wont to play at Quoits.
The gods may be said to Quoit when they cast into the lap of fortune, the lots and fates of mortal men. This is the moral of it.
I say Apolloplaid at Quoits, as we doe. And his play-fellow was young Cyparissus, a boy about my pitch and years, but that he had not so manly a look, as my self, but simpered somewhat womanishly.
Cyparissus that •…as turned into a Cypress tree▪
Apollo plaid with him, by a good token, their Quoits were knockers, heavier then horse shoes, I think. For the poor boy was brained with one of them.
Doth not our Ouid Naso,
That never told lye, say so?
A good token? that's a bad token.
O how it gueues n•…y heart to think of that honest lad. Ah p•…ore •…rissus. When I learned th•… lesson in Ouid, I could have corn that lease out of my book, for very grief, that such a mischance should fall out at the worthy exercise of Quo•…ng. Out alas, if my trade did not employ me better, I could weep my pocket full.
You may take a better lesson thence, then wee∣ping. The meaning of that fable is, that shrode hoyes must beware of spending their time in play, lest some mischief befall•… them: Nay lest Apollo himself brain them.
You construe false to vs, so you doe.
But I say still,
And so I will.
I gather thence and will lay odds,
That sport and play beseems the gods.
Else our good Master Apollo would never himself have plai at Quoits in his own proper person, with a palt•…y boy, like one of vs. I have writ this note in the margin of my book. And I think verily if Ouid were alive again, and should see my wholesome lines, he would turn them into verse, and add them to that story.
Ouid had never been so good a Poet, if hee had spent his school time idly in play as you doe.
Ouid loved play well. I have heard that hee played with Corynna.
How this Lad p•…ates? Ludio I tell thee that was no boys play.
By your leave sir, Ouid hath honoured my exerci∣ses. He describes in verse our boys play.
Porno tabella copied ternos vtrinque lapillos,
Twice three stones, set in a crossed square where he wins the game
That can set his three along in a row,
And that is sippeny moral, I trow,
This boy consters that true, which many a man understood not. Verily thou reddest books only where they speak of play.
I doe not think that if he were here, he would entreat Apollo to play at Quoits with me or check stone, or spurnepoint.
Good Sir Lauriger, you are better acquainted with Apollo then I. I pray you entreat him to play with me this great play day. This is his fat remedy at his shrouing∣feast they say. I challenge him at all games from blow∣point upward to football, and so on to mumchance, and ticketacke.
How this boys fancy makes him saucy. Is it not e∣nough sir, that you trouble me thus with your idle chat, but you must be so bold with great Apollo? Hee thinks the gods can enjoy no greater bliss then ga∣ming.
Sir, doe you hear? rather than sit out, I will give Apollo three of the nine at Ticketacke. I doe not think but I shall take him at a why not every other game. His mind will be so on the Muses, &amp; upon his verses.
Apollo and his Musaeus take you too often with a Why-not at-schoole. You know what should follow thereupon. Why-not, &amp;c.
Threaten me not. I tell thee, no torture can make me bate an ace of my play. You would not think it, but, as I am true Ludio whenever I am trembling under the hand of the executioner, If I doe but think on my play, then even then, those back blows, (which others think so rueful) seem to me nothing,
but threshing hens at Shrouetide. He that spend•… his life in play, keeps Shrouetide all the year.
Belike you think play to be Apollos Shrouetide
I that I doe: elsw why play wee now in honour o•… Apollo?
I tell thee this our play if it be weighed right, i•… three ounces study, and but one ounce play. This fla•… of recreation is not kindled without a spark of dili∣gence. Our playing now is a kind of study, whereas a•… thy seeming study is nothing but playing or ploddin•… how and where and with whom to play. Thy trade i•… to be prodigal of (the chiefest riches which is in o•… power) time. Thou art a very bankrupt of thy own•… time: and love to pull others into the same losses.
What speak you of losses? Hee that loses at o•… time may win at another. I can tell you of o•… young Oleo, he got of Ganeo the Elder, all his poin•… hatband, garters, and a gold ring, and five crown•… in money; and yet in two hours to see to, see ho•… fortune came with a windlace about again.
Peace thou brat, whose mouth is armed with bale of dice, instead of a stall of teeth. What prate•… thou of recovering lost rings and money? The shi•… wrack that thou make is vnrecoverable.
Lost days can never be recalled. Time steals away, a•… thou art a stealer of time. See now how thou hast i•… croached upon my precious time, whilst I hear a•… speak, with such a canker of good hours. Awa•… away.
You bid me away, because you dare not play wi•… me.
Dost thou dare me thou elf? I will.
I know you'll venture no money, nor points.
must play with you for nothing. Come on therefore at hide and seek, o•… blind man buff.
Come, I will once boy it again at either for a crash
Why then at bl•…ndman buff you shall bee first blinded.
Nay sir boy, if you challenge and choose the game too, you must be first blinded. But what tools have wee?
Borrow one of these Gentlewoman's masks:
Nay then you will look through the holes. Will you gull me so?
If I once look through the holes, then say Ludio is set in the Pillo•…y. but rather then want •…ew, here take my ga•…la, and tie my sachell about my face.
O with what wicked bombast i•… his sachell slust? I thought it was not true begotten books, that made the belly of it swell so big.
It has cast calfe now. You must tie me to these winckers.
I had rather tie thee to one of our school posts, or hang our great dic•…ary at thy heel, for a clog to keep thee from gadding to play.
Talk not to me of Dick snary, nor Richard-sna∣rye; I care not how little I come near them. But sir you must have this Morice-bell tied to your point, that I may hear where you go. Else you will have too much odds of me.
Will you make me act hobby horse, or Master Gin∣glee? For once I will.
Now that is on, come and tie me.
So, you are tied, now I must turn you about thrice. Sic deluditur Ludre. 
I doe not hear the bell. Lauriger stands still I
doubt. Nay gentle playfellow, you must stir up and down, •…e we shall have no sport.
I Hope to find more game here. O yonder's a •…h 〈◊〉. I think he is caught in our net already. So, so, Verily Cup•… hath blinded him for our purpose.
O I have him. I have him. But where is your bell? untie•… me now 〈◊〉 your 〈◊〉 to be blinded O what ha•…d 〈◊〉 Vndow me, undo me.
I have but the un•…oing of many in my days. But I 〈◊〉 met with so forward a guest, that would beg hi•… own undoing.
I have over come it now. What now? Hee turned to She? 〈◊〉 Lauriger, me thinks your looks are grown very long on the sudden. Has he served me thus?
How well art thou serve•…d, when such a Nymph is at thy service?
It tho•… be at my service, s•…ache thy silken coat, and golden •…and, against my garters and hat. Lift who shall deal.
Itell thee, I use little plain dealing. I must shuffle and cut too.
Both? Nay that's against law.
Yet will i deal plainly with thee. I have neither skill nor mind to play with thee.
Can any sweet Nymph be a stranger to Ludio? I have heard that Nymphs love to play at more games then I know.
I doe not refuse, because thou art a stranger, but be∣cause thou art our friend; Thou a•…t ours already. What need wee spend bi•…me upon those wanton sparrows, that are in our cage already? S•…t 〈◊〉 Ludio, thou art a member of our fa•…il Queen He done gets good acces•…e by thee. Go on with all thy thrifty wares to get in more letters up in our trade. Go to sir G•…biano, make him pay for thy acquain∣tance.
Gentle goldilockes. I would doe so, but that I am now employed against my wont in studying •…n ore∣tion to save my head from a blow, which Apollos vi∣sitation may now bring upon me. 
Novice, you know you must appear too.
I have cited him according to law.
What is the matter, think you?
I heard a bird sing (hark in your ear) that theres an accusation against you for misspending your time with Captain Complement.
I doe but as others doe. I am not alone.
What strange guest is yon? A female I think. Who but Siren that has made such turmoils here o•… late. Pr•…co have you cited •…er?
Shoe's in my •…owl, I'm glad I have met with her. Dame Siren, thou art •…ndited by the name of Siren for subverting Apollos subjects; You must along with me, and appear to answer such matters
as shall be objected against you, on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord Apollo.
Thou arrest me, who have arrested thy betters? I tell thee, I will be there. I have good friends in A∣pollos Court. I will not be hired to tarry away. But be∣fore I go, I must deliver a message to you from a great goddess.
A goddess to me?
I•…o thee, and thee, and to you all.
Say what thou must, or can.
Hedone, Queen Hedone, sweet Hedone,
Dame natures care, and noblest birth,
The i•…y, and crown of heaven, and earth,
The aim, and center of desire,
The fuel of most sacred fire,
By me, and this, and this
She sends you all her bliss.
Among the gods she hath her ply•…e,
They all stand gazing on her face.
The clouds d•… from her presence fly,
It is sunshine where she casts her eye.
Where are she treads on earth below,
A rose or •…ely up doth grow.
Her breath a gale of spy•… brings:
Mute are the Muses when she sings.
What ere she touches turns to N•…are,
What man, but can, and must affect her?
No heart so hard, but needs must melt,
When once her kindly warmth is felt.
She, she vouchsafe, to call you to her,
And wooing prays you now to woo her.
By study soon, fresh youth doth break,
The fair grow foul, the strong grow weak:
Leave leave this musing bookish trade:
Enjoy your selves before youth fade.
Time must be gone,
Old age creeps on.
She puts her message home, me thinks.
I have arrested her; and I think she will are∣rest vs.
I like her song well, I'll get a copy of it. If A∣polo give me leave, I will have more acquaintance with her. Me thinks this Siren would make a good wife for my Master, Captain Complement, and so she shall be my Mistress. O fair Hedone, sweet honey Hedone, more sweet then Marmalet, or Quidony.
Away thou glossing slatterer. Wee are no game for thee. Let vs about our business. Praeco doe your office, carry her away. Let her chant this song before Apollo. The Muses will out-sing her, and tear her s•…earing lockes. I will go cite Slug. 
GEntle sir Gingle, the flower of my school, re∣turn my thanks to the honourable Dame Indulgence thy high deserving Mother, for the glitte∣ring token the sent me. I shall deserve it in my readi∣ness to accomplish thee. But where ended we yester∣day?
You were instructing me how to salute a Lady, or so, if she had a Monkey, or so, and wept, or so.
This is but so, so.
In case you find a Lady weeping and •…ournfull, for that her M•…nkey is sick of the mum••, 〈◊〉 say.
Fair •…eddy weep not for your Monkey.
This is bare and vulgar. Rather •…sh your salutation thus. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Claret•…na.
•…t as can be. T•… is Claret•…na was courted by the Knight of the sun. My Mother has •…ad that book to me. Si•… your s•…le is very h•…h and lo•….
Ves sir, my master and I have gone over many •…s high a stile, when we went to rob orchards for our dinners.
Twice d•…ble worthy dubbed Maddaine—
Twice d•…ble dubbed. What doth she wear a double•… 〈◊〉 Ladies •…e to wear doublets now?
You vnde stand not. There was of late years a fashion, when h•… fire, &amp; hic mulier were in request. But gentle Gingle, though thou dost stand under me, yet thou dost not understand me. Twice doubly be∣cause she hath two 〈◊〉 to her honour. The full a title of law which she hath from •…et •…u band who was dubbed Knight with an vnbloody sword. The second The second What •…'st. h•…m h•…, the second. Oh I have it, because the is rich•… in clothes then •…n jointer. But proc•… we in your approach.
Oh s•… you have wonderfully 〈◊〉 •…dm.
I have wipe •…and cla•…d the dull spectacle of thy intellect with the Nap•… of my Comment.
Indeed now me thinks •…espy her clearly w•… put a looking-glasse. But how should I forbid her to weep?
To weep? Madame I forbid the ba•…es between you and s•…ow.
I, the Knights name Sorrow?
Perhaps hoe's a o•…y knight, (like my master)
What Imp. you are too nimble. Are you so saucy to step before me?
(I was sane to step before him when we stole hens together, and he put me fir•… into the hen•…oozed.)
Truly Captain me thinks Implement suggests very 〈◊〉 would willingly forbid those banes.
Forbidding banes? Away with this forbidding banes. It is a bane•…ull ominous word, not besetting the wooing 〈◊〉. You shall mould all up in the sine pull past of poetry thus.
Twice double worthy dubbed Madame,
Whose virtues not the longest tongue can sadome.
I think La•…es garments are measured by the•…ll and by the yard, but measuring their virtues by the •…atom, I never heard o•… before.
Twice double worthy dubbed Madame, Whose long tongue no man can sadome.
O dismal. O dangerous! Take heed of stumbling so with your tongue when you speak of female tongues. Whose virtues not the longest tongue can fathom.
Whose virtues not the longest tongue can fathom.
Right and straight. Then on.
Souse not thy glittering globy eyne
In d eary teary salt sea brine.
Globy eyne? What's that?
Know•…st thou not what globy is? I perceive then thou a•… no traveller, thou hast not (as I have done) travelled about the globe of the earth. Know not what eyne be? I see thou art no Poet, thou hast never read Chau•…r. Hast thou never heard of eyne tu•…in?
Souse not. This word will not down with me.
Mr. Gingles queasy slomacke cannot digest souse.
The Lady will think, I use to converse with Tripe∣wives, if I talk to her of souse.
Mr you once courted a sousing Dame, (a fulsome Kitchinwench.)
Peace thou squeaking pig; or else the bandogs of these hands shall lug thy lagging ears. Souse not thy globyeyne. I tell thee this is not such as it is vulgar∣lie taken. It is not a butcherly word, it is not descended from the Tripe wife, nor hath it affinity with the fryingpan.
Nor did it ever hang cheek by iole with a black pudding.
Mark the Philosophy of the phrase. The roaring dashing element, the sea is salt, and brine is salt, and trickling tears are s•…lt.
And P. I. S. is salt.
The sea, the brine, the tears, the tears, the brine, the sea. Why may they not all three thus da∣shing, soaking, sousing lye? It is a martial word. I use it often my self, I tell thee.
I too often when you tell me you'll give me a souse on the ear.
Souse not, &amp;c. Fit. wondrous fit, as my persumed glove for my sweethand. It she wept for sorrow be∣fore, I shall now make her weep for joy to hear this eloquence.
But my Masters, you leave the poor Monkey too long in distress. Heelle dye of the Mumps, unless we relieve him the sooner.
It is true. Pray go on. I am to say your Monkey will recover. Master Prompter doe your part.
Then thus. Your sour legged, two-leg'd, Man∣imitating, two-handed, long-tayled play fellow, shall be readuanced to his pristine integrity of limbs.
He had need put in sound of wind and limb, for the Mumps lay siege to his throat, and breed more danger to his weazand, then to his ten bones.
Two-foot, foure-foot? how can that be? Hath hee six feet?
Six feet? six to one my Master puts the trick of the louse upon him. I have known when hee has blown them in a quill upon better men this this.
Thou art not worthy to be numbered among the two-footed, but rather art to bee imbased unto the foure-footed. If thou dost not understand how Apes and Monkeys are two-leg'd and two-handed; some∣time they creep on all four. Imp. show him how, sometime they stalk on tiptoe. Thus.
If I had bin an Ape I should have climbed plum∣trees bravely.
Let me see how you can imitate this.
Sometime they trace on all four thus.
Sometime they ride upon a mastiff dog thus. I want nothing now but my whip to keep this Lol∣lard hound in awe.
Come off Imp. Enough of this. We will send him hereafter for instruction to Paris Garden, where hee shall learn not only Apetrickes, but the whipping o•… blind Bears.
Paris Garden? O sin•…l Paris they say is a •…no Ci∣tie in France. I am glad he will send me thither. No man can be a complete Gentleman till he have learnt their cringes and crinkling in the hams: which is in ex∣cellent request to the heavens now adays.
Good sir, I hope my self, and such men of worth as I, have transported thence already plentiful loads of this French ware, that you shall save the la∣bore and cost of living there at their dear Ordina∣ries and precious dancing-schooles, you must there∣fore in your stipend to me allow me, for that which I spent among Counts, Nobles, Knights and Monsiers there; sometime it'h five pound Ordinary, I tell you.
An horrible profitable lye My Master ne'er dyn'd there but with O•…llers and Vintners boys.
I tell you it cost me sour Nobles to the Usher of the dancing school to learn one trick, which they cal Le Turn fuseau It wheels a man about, as a boy does a stone in a ho•…pe, and makes him appear as round and uniform, as a loin•…s turned bed post.
I pray you learn me that whi•… legig trick.
You are not come to that. Be not so hasty, you are yet but in the Rudiments, and to tell you plain, you must refund to me some charge for other proficiency before we aspire so high.
There was another vaulting trick called the •…ur.
The base vulgar in English call it the hoister.
It lifts a man up till•… he grow less and less like a Hawk after a Heron. Shaw. It cost me. Let me see.
how much?
Upon mine honour thirty Crowns.
I think it was but twenty.
By your leave master, I know better then you. Doe not I keep your Count Book? I'm sure two•… that week that you bought the Jewellers rich Diamond that was refused by so many Nobles. They could not reach the price of it.
O it was the late Queen Mothers Jewel. Thou didstill thou forgetful brat to leave it behind. I should have worn it at this public show. All Parnos∣suss would have admired it.
Master, you lost the key of your Cabinet. I durst not break it op (The devil a Jewel we have, but one that was bought of a Peddler, and in the Country Towns he makes a great show with it at Bear. bai∣tings, but in such civil places as this is, he durst not be seen with it.)
I pray you when I am in the humour of buying Jew∣else, let me have the refusal of it.
Thou shalt, because thou art an ingenious Gen∣tleman 〈◊〉 Imp. Remember to set down a caveat in the Margent of my Inuentary, that no man el•…e •…y so much as look on it or have any price set of it.
M•…ster Gingle I pray you pay me ten groars foreign∣tring this Caveat in mine •…ffice. My see my see sir.
Come to me at my lod•… 〈◊〉, and I will lay •…alt on this birds •…yle dor fear o•… flyingg away.
I tell you Master Gingle. It will go near to cost you the manner of Foolingham.
Let oaks and lands fly. I mean to gl•…tter bright in Diamond▪ dearly dight.
You must add.
That men and dames may gaze, and say,
Wh•…t 〈◊〉 is that, that glides along this way?
What starts is that, &amp;c O excel•… All the world could never have furnished me with such a Tutor.
Say rat er all the habitable circumference of this muddy masly earthy globe could not have afforded and suppeditated unto me so melli•…uous an Indoctri∣nator, as is the curious Captain Complement.
O that I could by Metamorphasis be transformed into this eloquent man.
Thou had better bee transformed with Apuleius •…o a golden Ass.
I tell thee I have written a large book of instru∣ctions how a man should wear his clothes, on which side his p•…e should lye in his pocket, which •…ocking he should draw on first upon ominous days.
Indeed 〈◊〉 I have heard you often tell of a man that brake his leg because hee pulled on his left stocking first on one of the dog days.
I sir, and there was another, that had the tooth∣ach seven years after, because he pic•…t his teeth with the south end of his picktooth, in stead of the north, while he was in his chamber meditating a discourse to be offred up before a beny of Ladies.
Is there south and no•…n a picktooth?
I, it was touched with a loadstone.
I would rather have picked my teeth with my knife thus, then have run into such a mischief.
What say you? what doe you? doe you wear a knife about you?
I'm sure it cost me a Mark, and I got mine arms graven upon the blade, three hobby-horses or, prancing in a field▪ or, b•…idled and saddled argent.
Then I must n•…s tell you my mind. I hoped well that you would prove under my hands, but now I doubt you are no Gentleman, I fear you le never prove fashionable, I will rather employ my pains a∣bout other my scholars who have vowed never to wear knives.
What? wear a knife. Nay I have done with you.
Nay, good sir, I pray you doe not cast me off, I'll rather cast away this clownish tool.
I may take it up and wear it. No knife can wound my gentry.
We burn day light. I must hast, and muster up my friends and advocates to plead for me in this Court. Sir Imp. run to Mistress Gingle, tell her, now it is time.
I will be your Remembrancer to her: She shall protect you, else she is no mother for me.
I Have bin mending my hedges, which the scurvy boy Ludio broke down. And now when I would rest at home, and take my nooning-nap, I must bee vexed with my son, my wretched son. They say that Apollo keeps visitation to day. I will lay my son at his Palace gate, perhaps this feast day wee may get some favour, some drop of his clemency. 
IV. ge Rubbish What Jug? bring away the loo∣king gla•…e. Thou dirty Rubbish, thy singers have defiled the lace of my Cuffs. Will not cuffing a∣bout the ears make you more cleanly?
The lace is so thick, that I was fine to tug hard at it. I know not what can foul it, unless the smoo∣thing-iron cast a rusty colour through the paper
Out upon thee for an old rusty liar. The glass▪ Hold it on the other side. You know I doe not love to behold that mole on this cheek. Thou spiteful baggage, more yet on the left hand. Is that the left hand?
Heere's my left hand.
I, but the other side is my left hand. You must con∣form
your eyes and hands to your▪ Mistress, and for∣get which is your own right or left. Do's my Veil hang in true proportion?
I can say nothing •…or any portion, but in hangs just behind you.
Unless I be set all in print, the Poetical Mus•… will make times on me, when they see me in A•… Judgment Hall. But Jug, what had my son to breakfast this morning?
A Pullets wing.
That's not forsooth. What nothing else?
Forsooth a piece of Pie too But so sooth Mistress, if you give me leave, I'll tell you what they say o•… him.
What? who? Why?
Marry forsooth P•…ponus, and others eke also d•… say, if you feed him so much, that he will never p•…u: a scholar.
Prove scholar? Doe they think my child is so low borne as to be made a •…y scholar? Shall such a keen rosined w•…t be dul'd and imbased, by plodding on a book? What is Philoponus but a Bookeworme, an Inkhorn squirt, a botching pitcher of Latin shred•… What is this learning, but a little gibberish in the tongue, a sheepish look in the face, and penniless famine in the purse? I he more scholar a young man is, the less like to speed of a rich wife. I will have my son the mark and wish of the most renowned Dames.
I doe not so hate scholars, but that I could •…no in my heart to ma•…y Phil•…us at a venture.
I will, as man•…early as I may, tell Apollo that it is an honour to his school, that such a one as my son was of it, though but for a taste of the Muses dish, a
gentle touch of the verge of their garment. I, but is my Coach ready?
One of the horses is very unruly, the Coachman. talks like a rogue, and says that nothing but a wise will tame him.
This lewd horse-rubbers tongue must be tamed I doubt he is three quarters drunk.
That's no news.
I must away, the hour runs with swifter race then my horses. 
Keep on thy way, dost thou not see? hold on that path. See thou not how my staff doth wise thee the way? I think thou came backward in∣to the world, that now art damned to this crab-like pace. Shall I never be rid of this office? So: stand still Now me thinks I see the portch of great Apollos temple. O great Apollo, if my son have thus deser∣ued to be punished, yet what hath guiltless Geron, what hath he offended?
O. terg. ollota nodra•…. 〈◊〉.
Tnou dost well to humble thy self before great Apollo. But why to pardon vs? Why me?
Rethaf, O. rethaf.
What say thou to thy Father?
Ti. saw. ruoy. tlaf.
What say thou? Was it my fault?
Voy. tes. em. ta. ot. ih, a koob.
Did I set you 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 •…high a book? You were too proud of your 〈◊〉, and would needs slide over the •…udiments, and leap at first into an higher form, then your capacity would reach unto.
〈◊〉. rehtom. Im. •…thom.
Thy Mother, thy Mother. I, it is true, thy Mo∣there would needs have it so. I must needs say it was her fault, not mine. She 〈◊〉 ioggd me, and told me, that her Rowland was as good a scholar, as his Ma∣ster, and that the 〈◊〉 est book did best befit his •…gh 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 now 〈◊〉 thy long long 〈◊〉 〈1 line〉 •…nonce unto me, then to thy 〈1 line〉 two years have I bin 〈◊〉 〈1 line〉 at home. It grieves &amp; g•…ates m•…e 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 this backward language imposed by Apollos doom on my wretched child. It wounds mine eyes to see these backward steps. And yet re∣mains a 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 for me,
To be the scorn and by word of this ply•…e.
Old Gerons overforward child
Retorted foe•… his •…astinesse,
Is made the prou•… 〈◊〉 of these times.
And likened to soon •…ipe soon •…oaten fruit▪
〈◊〉 how long time remains yet vnexpir'd
〈◊〉 this unnatural preposterous task?
〈◊〉 •…o. Rey. Sa•…. Norey.
〈◊〉 I, so, it is one whole livelong year.
•…each thy poor father (spent with tears and grief)
•…arce hopes now to ou•…last. Alas
The candle of my days is almost spent,
It waueth in th•… snuffed, and little oil
Is left to make it flame.
And yet alas too soon these blasts of sighs
Will puff it out▪ •…es tears will drown it quite.
Rethaf. reed. Rethaf.
What say thou my dear son, too dear to me, that hast me cost so deep a punishment.
Tel. su. geb so. whole•… pa.
Well What shall we beg of Apollo?
Ot, nodrap. su. sibt. •…ey.
To pardon this year to vs, and release thee? I fear thy wishes are far larger then ou•… hopes.
Irr•…m. ollopa.
Merry Apollo? I doubt his ears are stopped, and I have heard the gods v•…e not to recall their dooms, which they have once pronounced.
Keps. o•… suesu•…n.
What? would thou have me speak to Musaeus Apollos Priest, to intercede for thee for this remission?
Os ot. mih.
IN good time here he comes forth.
But son I dare not approach to him.
O what a trembling reverence doth possess
My limbs, and all benums my chill cold blood,
When I behold his awful gravity.
Let vs retire beside this shady tree
This mossy ban•…ke will rest my weary limbs,
And give me time to recollect my spirits.
Grave guide of •…ender youth, Interpreter
Of great Apollos laws chief secretary
Unto the learned Muses, all your words
Are lodged safe in this laborious breast.
Think your comment's no sooner said then done▪
Careful Philoponus, I approve your pains
And have already recommended you
Unto Apollos self. O that the rest
Of those, that undertake this worthy task•…,
Pretending to the liberal sciences,
Could so acquit themselves.
But 〈◊〉 all seeing 〈◊〉 in circling round
About boat•… Hemispheres of this large world,
Hath spied that some (O too too great a sum)
Have s•…lie crept within the verge and pa•…
Of his dominions. In truth they strangers are,
Nay enemies and rebels to his laws;
Yet would be counted Natiues of his school,
By them his tender plants corrupted are,
Distorted, brui•…ed, hindered of their growth.
Think they that these •…oundations have bin l•…
These Cells erected, and those Temples dight
To harbour such foul el•…es? Shall snorting sloe•…
Think here to nestle, fixed to his bed,
As is the slow-pac'd snail unto his shell?
Shall wanton pleasure think to revel •…ere?
Shall toying apish p•…ating Complement
Outface the Muses, tear Apollos lockes,
Entice away the tender brood, with shows
Of empty words, and bubbles vanishing?
Shall shifting sharks defraud their innocence?
Shall hasty heady Novices outl•…ap their masters lo•…,
Presuming on their wit, and undertake
To read a lecture to their teacher? No.
It is well that some have heretofore for this
Bin made examples of such hastiness.
Nay let them backward go, that thus have run.
Alas poor child, I see, he means thee.
Have pity on vs great Apoll•…s Priest.
Worthy Philoponus entreat Mus•…us for my child.
Does your child desire so much?
D•…g. ris keps. ros. em.
Speak for him good sir.
His language is so harsh, that I will speak, if it be but to rid my ears of this preposterous sound. Vene∣rabble Mus•…us. May it please our Lord Apollo, now after two years penance to remit the remaining year.
If there be evidence that in this time, he hath retired and plied what formerly he overslipped in his rudiments.
My self can partly witness that.
It may be that Apollo will consider him. But let vs hast up to Per•…accuse top. The time is come, the Court must now begin.
My heart is warm with hope to follow them.
STill I say and swear upon my virtues, that you are mistaken. Have you bin so long my scholar, and are you yet unacquainted with the Calendar of my stipend book?
My bargain was to allow you five crowns a mo∣neth, and will you now wire-draw me to thirteen months in the year? When I was Apollos scholar, 〈◊〉 sure Musaeus reckoned but quarterly, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 but twelve months in the year.
Apollos Priest must follow his Masters walk, the suns yearly passage through the twelve signs of the Zodiake. I will have nothing to doe with Astro∣nomy.
I, but our Almanacs every year reckon but twelve months.
What dost thou tell me of Almanacs? Usurer•… go by the Almana•…ke. I scorn that griping trade. My month is 〈◊〉 weeks •…used, you may remember them by the changing your shirts, every fourth shirt determines my pay.
I reckon 〈◊〉 month by one shirt.
Who shall be •…judge between vs?
Judge between vs? Am not I thine instructor▪ I'll be thy judge. For every one of my months I te•…ch thee a several strain of Curtsy And so thou hast of me in the year, documents accordingly, their∣teene to the dozen.
My Masters father was a Baker, and therefore he allows an odd call of curtsy, no•…lie chipt.
Si•…a Imp. draw out the Catalogue and number them.
The first month, the Semicircle.
I, with my hat thus. To make just half a circum∣ference.
Remember always the drop withal.
In my motion, my gold hatband must fall down, thus.
I cry fallings: this is my see, I trow.
It is an excellent emblem, and signifies that for love of your friend, you will cast away your gold, and trample it under your feet, and that's the reason that Gentlemen now adays wear their hatbands loose. Register proceed.
The second month the Calue-claspe.
Perform it with Imp. that I may view you the better. Doe you remember that in arching your arm over his shoulder, you must never touch his band or garment behind, but apprehend the calfe with your first touch entirely.
I warrant you, I am old dog at that.
If I had known you had bin an old dog, I would not have trusted you with my Calfe. Ba.
And before I dismiss the calfe, I give it the gen∣tle nip or prosy thus.
Ba, ba. No Butcher nips a Calfe more neatly in the rump.
Which shows your fervency of love, that you are loath to be unclasped from your friends intimity.
I have it to a hai•…e.
Register walk on your monthly pace.
The third month, the gentle shrug.
I must tell you, you have not got that perfect yet.
Not my shrug sir? That was my last lesson.
Indeed sir I was by, when Signior Gosso in that action smiled, and asked if you were not lousy.
O there's your fault, gentle Gingle. A hundred to one you shrugged but with one shoulder.
I would advise you hereafter to shrug by a loo∣king-glasse, that you may see after what manner you doe it.
Indeed my looking-glasse is broken with dancing with it in my hand, to mark the postures of my face when I capered. But I'll buy another.
Nay, you must buy two, that one may reflect up∣on the other, and then may you at once see your mo∣tion in your shrug both before and behind.
O excellent! for this double glass, I'll give you
a double fee. But, I pray you sir, wherein is my shrug faulty?
My dear scholar, thou must know, there are di∣uers kinds of shrugges, there is the Misers shrug, and that is accompanied with the scratching of the elbow: the•…e is the Beggars shrug, and that's done with a quick motion, •…atching, to make a six▪ foo∣ted bandogge leave his hold.
My Master and I act that at home sometimes, when we are loath to part with an old friend, our linen.
There is a winter shrug, and that's performed with the hands ensconced in a Must, &amp; a Foxe-surr'd co•… close go•…t. There is a drowsy shrug, and that sometime befalls a gallant, when he has set up al night at Card•…, and saved the pulling off his boo•…es. This shrug is commonly performed with displaying out the arms, and yawn•…ng with the mouth, which re∣presents a kind of •…ibbards face. And lastly, there is a gentle Italian shrug.
I pray you sir let me go with you Let me see. The Misers shrug, the winter shrug, the drowsy shrug, the lousy shrug. I shall hardly carry away all these.
Nay, you must carry away none of these. You must leave them all behind you. The last and only gentle shrug, is your Italian shrug.
O the Italian shrug. The•…e it is. How's that? I shrug with desire to learn it.
That shrug is performed by lifting up both shoulders exactly together with one uniform mote∣on, somewhat swift, and holding them a while in suss∣pence, with the neck somewhat couching, and the chin thrust out, then the shoulders are to bee let down again, as it were by a double pulley, with a
slow motion, which by degrees vanishes. And if you will accomplish it with a grace, you must all the while cast your eyes into a leering posture.
O excellent school of virtue! But when must I use this shrug?
Upon divers occurring cases, very vsefully. But especially when you are asked a question, which you cannot deny with safety, nor assent unto with honour. In such a tu•…forked dilemma, the shrug relieves you, and you come off with reputation of wisdom.
This is an oracle to me, I pray you expound by example.
Put case that some fair and honourable Lady were mentioned at the Table, and thereupon some busy curious Gentleman should ask you whether there past no terms of love between you and her. To deny it, were a derogation from your honou•…. To love or be beloved is honourable. For you to acknow∣ledge it, were perhaps dangerous. Some of the com∣pany may be your Rival, and so rusty iron may leap out of the Ecle-skin, and prick your skin. Thus Venus may be exchanged for Mars. And of the two, hes the most dangerous companion to a mans na∣ked side. One shrug quits all this, by which you seem to say, I am not to bee examined upon this Intergatory. I stand upon my guard, all armed in si∣lent wisdom.
Incomparable dogments. Mus•…us never taught me so good a lesson.
But high time it is for vs to appear, the Sessi∣on is begun by this. The villain Pr•…co i•… like death, and will spare none. Me think•… I hey•…e him 〈◊〉, Captain Complement appear. Go Coach it up with your Mother. I and my
will march up the hill on foot. Here•…ir, I ap∣pear sir.
Here sir, at hand. 
SEe how thy soul was sna•…'d with sophistry.
No Author here alleged for Hedone,
But quills those poisons with their Antidotes.
Mark Tully in that place doth smoothly plead
For youthful Calius, so to palliate
His Clients true objected vanities.
There Tully plaid the Lawyer for his fee.
Behold him now a sage Philosopher:
Discoursing of Old Age, he there concludes,
In voluptatis regno virtutem non posse •…onsistere,
That virtue cannot stand where pleasure reigns.
〈◊〉 was a wanton Epicure,
A glossing Poet, but •…with Moralist:
He sold his soul to Uenus and her son,
Such writers we for stile, not matter read.
Siren from Terence pleads, that in young men
Deep quaffing, rooting, whooring, is no fault.
Doth not that Poet represent the par•…s,
The passions, and several enormities
Of cockering doting fathers, of lewd sons,
Of cheating slaves, and cogging parasites?
Thus he describes the vices of those times,
That readers might them hate, no•… imitate.
S•…, Comique Poets set out drunkenness
In him that pleads for 〈◊〉, and the while
Doth swagger, stagger, swallow, wallow, snort,
The soul▪ that this picture is, the more
That swinish vice breeds loathing of it self.
If I would on a Comique slage display
Virtue in conflict stoutly labouring,
And then in conquest honoured by 〈◊〉;
First would I personate her enemy
In some such busy guiles and forgery,
As this lewd Siren represents to thee.
The rest of Authors, Motives, Arguments,
Which in that letter you so stood upon,
Are of no better stamp, as I have shown.
And can fa•…re more at large.
But why should I distrust thy judgment so?
You have, •…udicious Philoponus,
More hardly in the grove, more briefly here,
Dispel'd those mists, which that enchanting witch
Had cast before mine eyes. I see, I see
The light of reason, then eclipsed quite,
But now reuiueing my recovered sight.
O how I loath, and hate that jug•…ling hand,
That wrote, or •…each't to me these baleful lines.
What sacrifice to Virtue can I yield
More •…r, then thus to tear that •…obe, wherein
That poison was conveyed, to be to me
As was the deadly shirt to Hercules?
So would I also her.
Your best revenge on her will be henceforth,
No more to speak with her by word or pen, Weomens fair words work deep with passive men
What heaps of thanks owe I, and cannot pay, To such a faithful other self, whose hand Hath reached forth that Ariadnes thread Which me out of this Labyrinth hath led.
Com•… let vs up into Apollos Court. The Session 〈◊〉 long since begun. There shall you more confirm your resolution, by hey•…ing Apollo himself in his judge∣meant seat. 
I Tell thee again, I have no great hope of it. You have suffered so many repulses, that if I were in your case—Where is he. So ho. Come along, mend your pace. What? have you the gout?
Alas in foot, and hand too. My father and grand∣site had so.
Stand up for shame. Else how will you appear in Apollos presence, so much as to present your re∣quest.
Well. I'll stretch my limbs so far, though I bee already tyred with ou•… long journey.
A long journey from your Cottage to Apollos Court? when your Tent is fixed but on the other side of the wall. A man may fling a horse loase so far.
I'll rather bee fed with horse bread, then tra∣uaile so far again to fetch whitebread. But I
pray you let vs sit down. I shall talk much wiser, sitting then standing.
Why so?
Doe not Judges sit•… as now Apollo does there. And I hope they are wiser, then those that stand to hear them.
I judge standing, that thou hast little•… vnderstan∣ding that art such an enemy to standing.
But sir Drud•…, why doe you discourage me from hope of admittance?
The truth is, I see no great reason why you should be admitted. I'm su•…e for these seven years, every visitation day you have bin shut out of doors by Mu∣saeus as soon as ever hee espied you lying upon the bench in Apollos Court. And for the most part, when your name hath bin called aloud by P•…co, you have bin asleep, and were fine to be ioggd and shook a∣gain before you would answer.
Out upon thee, what art thou in a L•…thargy? I think thy mother was asleep when thou wast begotten. So by. So by. I tell thee again, after seven repulses, why shouldest thou knock at Apollos gate.
I dare not knock at this gate▪ the hammer that hangs on it, is so cold and heavy. And why should I disquiet the Muses with such a noise? Perhaps some of them are asleep in Apollos lap.
Thou Dormouse, thou liu•…st in a perpetual winter: think thou them like to thee?
I cannot climb this hill. I pray fetch Apollo hi∣there. Or be you Apollo.
What shall Drude be so bold. No. But say what thou can. Apollo sees and hears all things in all ply∣ces.
Why then Apollo. Drudo, I crave admittance.
What is your claim?
I am the top of my kin. I am Slim Slugge, Sluggy Sluggorum.
What's that to your plea? Are you a kin to the Muses.
I have long prescription time out of time. I have bin entertain d evermore by some of Apollos print∣ses. They have kept me and sed me in their chambers, and hugged me in their bed. I never wanted among them, those that would rather rest with me in a cold morning, then dance after the Muses pipe with be∣num'd hands and chattering teeth.
All Wines have some •…ees,
All Bee-hiues some D•…oanes.
Think thou that such prescription shall get thee ad∣mittance?
I am weary of sitting. I think it were better for me to lye down upon this bank. I shall talk much wiser yet when my head lies lower then my heals, for then all my spirits and wi•…s sink down into my brain. So •…'le tell thee now what learned counsel I gave to a young scholar, when he told me that his Master chid him for keeping his bed. Why (quoth I to him) then answer your Master, I pray you sin, would you have me •…ll my bed? your law, that you give vs, is, Nil dabis, aut vendes.—
Very learnedly applied to the purpose.
When I read lecture to my auditors.—
Surely then thou giu'st a deep nod at every s•… point.
I enjoin them, Sell your Books, sell your Ink∣horns, sell your Candlesticks, sell your Points, but never sell your beds. The bed is the seat and throne of a scholar. For contemplation requires quietness. And when is a man more quiet, then when he is in 〈◊〉 bed? Ergo.
Spoken like a Philosopher, but of the Epicures sect.
Nay you shall have Philosophy up to the elbows. The bed is the beginning and end of a man. When we come into the world, are not our Mothers said to be brought to bed? When we dye, are not we on our death bed? Whilst we live, when are we more inno∣cent then when we are asleep in our bed? then wee think no body any hurt. When are mischiefs done by men, but when they are awake, and employ them∣selves most busily? Ergo.
It seems so by thee, for thou art seldom awake thus long, but to doe some such mischief at to talk in this manner.
The best Philosophers have said, and I have heard it in Apollos school. Motus fit propter quietem. Nature intends motion, that it may attain rest. And all scholars know, that what is desired, as the end, is bet∣la then that, which is ordained as the means to it.
Nay siria, the best of them say, that motion is better then rest. For the heavens move continually, and the earth, which is the dregs of the world, that rests, and slugs like thee. The day is for labour, and the night for rest. And I hope the day is far better then the night. Ergo.
Well. I have all the earth on my side: I'm safe e∣nough. Go you and dance after the stars. I'll hold my rest here.
Enough of this Philosophy. Thou lolling lubber, lasy Bough, get up, Rise old huncks, rise drunken Bear, or I'll go in without thee.
A Bear? no. I'm a worthier beast, by my hardly rising. I am like an Elephant.
I wood thou had a Castle upon thy back, then I wood hang thee out for a sign, and it should bee called the drowsy Inn. Come away, your name it called ere this at the Session, and Prac•… woon't sa∣uour you. You will be in, forty Marks in issues.
My turn is always last. 
S•…spbu. Scopes. Come away with the Cull•…. Lay that Carpet smoother. When were these Cushions brushed. Sir. ha?
I have heard say, that too much brushing will we are them out.
Thou Losel. Hath Slugge infected you? Why doe you give such kind entertainment to that cob∣web?
It shall have Tom Drums entertainment. A flap with a Fox tail.
For the preparing this Judgment seat. I pro∣nounce judgment of banishment against all pre∣sumptuous Cobwebs. The Court will rise, and
come upon vs ere we are aware. Scopes go see how forward they are, and bring away the Frankincense.
where are they, tha•…ay that Iudio is the Canker of the school? I have pro∣nounced a knocking Apology before Apollo and all his Court.
What, nimble Ludio, is the Session so far on?
Unto thee, O Thur•…er, I am the Nuntio, to tell thee, that Apollo and his Actors are by this time come to Actus quintus, Scena qua•… a. Pr•…o told me they will all com•… down hither to Act Scen•… •…ima.
I shall be ready for them. But I pr•…, I•…dio, how did Mistress Gingle behave her self?
She never•… •…sed crying out to Apollo, O the •…e∣nerous Captain Complement! O that he may bold •…is •…e∣nement. Apollo himsel•… was fine to command her silence.
Did not Siren creep into the souls of the au∣ditory?
My friend Siren slid on smoothly, like my feet upon the ice. I think she has unbent Apollos bow. She will have a good day of it, I hope. Young Gingle in his trial stood much upon his gentry, and carried himself like a fine dancing Courtier. When I heard Slugge called, I thought we should tarry long, and so away came peelegarlicke Ludio, to get him a room before hand here.
But thou tell me nothing all this while of thy own trial. Were you not put to it shrewdly?
I trow I put Apollo and all his Muses to it. There can no sentence pass against me. My defence was so strong and vnanswerable.
I am sorry that my office called me away from hearing you, will you doe me the honour to impart to me some of your discourse?
I have it here •…grossed and recorded.
I wonder how you could borrow so much time from play, as to compose so large a declaration?
I have a •…end in a corner, I teach him the knacks of gaining, how to cut a bum card, how to help a dye, and such like, and he in kind requi•…all has drawn an Apology for me in form of Law, ac∣cording to the stile or Apollos Court.
Could you before all them pronounce it lustily, as if it had bin your own making?
I have a certain virtue called audacity. I hat did bear me our where my wit or memory failed.
I •…ng to hear some of it. Can you say it?
So, •…o: As we doe our lessons, with a casting a leer eye sometime upon my paper.
It is l•…ge. I will n•… 〈◊〉 •…le thee to say it over. Only read I pray you some of the principal points.
I tell thee here be aboue a dozen of points. You sh•…l have a touch of the fore-point thus.
I have known the time when you have had nei∣there fore not •…d point, when you have returned from •…purne point.
First, I looked gravely like Cato, and withal, cheerfully like Pu•…rilis And then to show what con∣fidence I had in my cause, I strok't up my foretop with the comb of my finders thus. My sister had
sprinkled it with rose water, and my lips too, to make my Rhetoric the sweeter.
No doubt rose water added a sweet sound to your words.
Then I made obe•…ysance thrice, with a nimble low stoop which I learned when we plaid at Duck Fryer. Then 〈◊〉 •…m, •…em to clear my voice, and to provoke the Auditory to answer me with their gentle expectation.
Here is a large Entry to a low house.
Then displaying my naked protesting hands, I said. O thou lovely Lord of learning, beauteous, bounteous Apollo.
O thou ever moving Phoebus,
Whose golden lockes and silver bow,
Embellish heaven and earth below.
O ye assistant sisters •…no,
Attend this just de•…ence of mine.
What law, what justice, what reason can pronounce a against Ludio the sentence of expulsion? Is not Apollos School stiled lotus literarius. Is it not Sc•…whole from 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 otium, remedy, play, relaxation? What talk we of Apollos Court. The whole world is made free of Ludios Trade, and dances after his pipe.
What is our life but a game, wherein some win, some lose, some idly look on, some have good fortune, and will not be known of their winnings, others have bad luck, and curse their stars and fates; Some cheat and •…ke, and others are befooled?
All Dame Natures lump is a true Ludio. If you banish Ludio, you must banish the heavens and elements.
What? is this brat become a Philosopher?
The highest fixed stars, what doe they all the year but dan•…e their measures, and kee•… there•…
their stately distances, and, to show their mirth and wantonness, they with their glaring eyes twinckle on their spectators. The Planets have variety of dances, sometime grave Pains, otherwhile •…mble G•…rds.
•…e Sellingers round.
Now a pace forward, now retiring backward.
Like a new Corranto.
What say thou Thuriger? did not I play the A∣stronomer well?
Better then sixteen Almanac•…e-makers, with all their Sextile aspects, and siery triplicities.
But now sir here was I put to my trumps, when I came to bring in our Lord Phoebus himself for an example, in my own defence, in his own presence. Th•… •…fore I begun with c•…avenge pardon. O May∣s•… Lord of the day, Moderator of the year, R•…ng-leader of all the glittering lamps; give poor Ludio leave to show that in the work o•… thy bright Regiment, thou can not be without him. Dost thou not all the year long recreate thy self by taking the ayre about the hill of heaven in thy gilded Caroch, drawn with four prancing horses?
Some mortals now adays have in their Coach more horses then Don▪ P•…oebus.
In this thy yearly journey thou art so frolic e∣very spring, that thou gives our mother earth a greene •…own.
That is (our Virgins say)
A pretty kind of play.
And in thy journal circle when thou come and goosed, every day and night, me thinks thou playact at 〈◊〉▪ peep, and Hide and seek.
All night it our all hid. But in the day
We seek about. For what, say I, but play?
O Impudence! How durst thou base slay, skip thus high into Apollos face. Did thou not fear to be pierced through with the least dart of his beams?
The truth is, one of Apollos learned Council had like to pulled me down, when he told me that it was against law to produce the Judge for a witness. Else I had gone on to allege his playing at Quoits with Cy∣parissus.
He would have cond you small thank for that. But, how did our Lord Apollo look upon you all this while?
Me thought hee put his hand toward his quiver, and withal, shaked his golden lockes. Then thought I, it was time for me to glide down lower, and talk of Lady Lu•…a. Mistress Moon (quoth I) what is her monthly task, but to run a gossipping through∣out all the twelve signs in the high street of the So∣diacke?.
The sign of the Ram, the Bull: the Lion, and the rest, they are Taverns set up by Bacchus, for the gods to feast in. Are they not?.
She knocks at every door, &amp; tarryes two days at the least in each of those houses. And as the Sun courts her, she makes cur•…es in her round walk, sometimes ba•…fully putting on her Mask.
That is in conjunction.
Otherwhile she shows her half face very de∣murely.
Half moon; like my cheese.
And after that appears her broad Owls face, to allure Endymion to be in love with her.
The Shepherd with the bu•…h of thorns has prevented sleepy Endymion, and gotten up thit•… before him.
The waives in the sea, what doe they, but play at truss and leapsrogge on one another back? The winds in the are perform one perpetual exercise, and that is blow-point.
Sometimes they blow the points of •…ee∣ples, and this is a very high point, worth concede∣ration.
They play very merrily: and therefore wee often hear them •…g and which•…le.
Leave o•… now your rehearsal Ludio. Why pr•…∣ted you of the stars and wind•…? What's this to you, and to those creatures that have bound them∣selves to the school trade? Doe the Mules play?
Yes undoubtedly, the Nine Muses play at Nine∣holes: every Muse hath her hole
Yes, and every Hate hath her Muse. But what then becomea o•… the 〈◊〉 h•…e?
That's a great one 〈◊〉 Apollo their Master and ours.
Think t•…ou, that Apollo will bee moved with these reasons, to let such a ve•…mine harbour in the pi∣geon house 〈◊〉 the M•…?
Doe •…u think that I will suck their eggs? Doe I look like•… a su•… 〈◊〉? I am sure the Auditory did entertain 〈◊〉 speech 〈◊〉 th•… si•…no of approba∣tion▪ hum, hum, hum.
That 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 but the yo•…er sort, and those that stood at the lower end of the Session hall.
I am much 〈◊〉 •…akin if Apollo himself did not in the end hum and 〈◊〉.
I think rather Apollo frowned on you.
I think rather that Mercury frowned on me.
Why Mercury? he is not there.
I'll tell thee, honest Thuriger, Whilst I was in
the hear of my pleading, some Villain, borne under the Planet Mercury, nims away my sachell that lay behind me.
What loss suffered you in that vessel?
The Shipwreck of all my best household-stuff, and tools of my trade. What think you, Thuriger, does this forebode ill luck to me?.
I think it had bin better luck, if you had bin robed of those Commodities seven years ago. But see yonder comes my Scopes.
THey are coming hard by. Here is the fran∣kinsence. Put it in your self.
This fire is almost out, stir it up.
Laurel wood doth soon spend.
Apollos judgment seat
Makes all things pure and neat. 
COme along, come on in rank.
On before, On before▪ Hold up the book. Give room, room, more room.
We must have room, more then the whole Ci∣tie of Rome.
Clio, you must sit down, and you E•…erpe. Musaeus cross your assistance.
P•…o doe your office.
Silentium: et Tace•…e. Our Lord Apollo by his de∣putted Judge, the venerable Musaeus, doth command silence, and charge all, whom it may concern, to attend the Court, and hear the charge
Ou•… great Apollos Palace seems like
A spacious gard'n set with choicest flowers,
Wherein creep up by small vnleene degrees
Vnu•…ull, hurt•…ull, and unsavoury weeds;
Which overgrow and choke the better plant•…,
And make the tender flowers to hang the head.
Himself chief Gardner hath, from yonder top
Of this our sacred •…ll, even now •…viewed
All that his herbage, and with cutious eye
Discerned and designed by his doom,
What must be cherished, and what weeded out.
Me, his unworthy servant, he appoints,
As vnder-gardiner, with that wholesome hook.
To check, or nip, or toot up what he damned.
〈◊〉 by oracle he did unfold,
What lot attends on every name enroled.
Pr•…co, read the Record, and cite the names.
Memorandum. On Apollos Shroueday, being the eight and twentieth of Aquarius, in the great hall of the western top of Par•…accuse. Our sovereign Lord Apollo sitting in person upon over and terminer, after full hearing of all parties, did then and there ado•… the Court, to be presently continued at the foot of the said h•…, under the Laurel, at the Temple gate, and to be there consummate by his reverend Judge Musaeus.
Nominee Reorum.
The names of the parties sentenced by Apollo.
Siren,the first is Siren. Appear Siren Spinster.
She spinnes nothing but spiders webs, to catch flies.
Siren come out What doe you lu•…ke? Appear in your likeness, and hear your doom.
Vous •…viz Si•….
I have a great deal more to say for myself, and for my Lady Hedone. I hope, I shall be heard.
You would fine be heard; because you think your tongue enchants. There is no pleading now. A∣pollos doom is past.
You must hear the Judge, or else bee pressed to death presently.
Siren, then thus for Siren.
Record the sentence Praeco.
My pen is as nimble as your tongue.
Siren must first be sea•…cht.
Sacred dispenser of Apollos justice, I hope you will not suffer a poor Nimp•… to be used so immodest∣lie. If I must be renc•…, I p•…y you let it be done by a Jury of Muses. The three Graces, empanneld with them, will make up the whole number of twelve good women, and true.
If I be made fore-woman of your jury,
You shall be doomed by justice, not by fury.
We Mus•… envy no man,
Much less will wrong a woman.
Wee shall not need to trouble you noble Clio▪ nor you sweet Euterpe. This search is only of her up∣per garment. I auriger lift up •…er va•…le.
Come, I must love, and court thee now.
O ugly a filthy fi•…es tail.
Pull off her head of yellow lockes.
O black b•…stles. O nasty Vermin!
This seeming glossing Nymph is nothing else, but an ugly sea▪ Monster. She is damned to return to the sea, and there to be tossed, and do•…ssed, together with S•…ylla, that monstrous shame of nature. But, be∣fore you •…icke her out, let her take a message to car∣rye to Dame Head•…e, if ere they meet again. That is, that Hedone shall ever vnseparably bee manacled to Lupe.
O just d•…ome, that pleasure shall bee always 〈◊〉 to pain. Which also this false Siren proves. •…erst, a face see•…ing fair to meet with: but if you further go, turpem 〈◊〉 in pisc•… mule•… formos•… superne.
Out with her.
I will have one kick more at her for inueigling me: Out Bitch.—Exit Siren.
On Pr•…co. Who is next?
The next is Ludio. Appear Ludio Gamester. Vous b•…viz Lute•….
Here appears poor banckrout Ludio. I hau•… suffered losses by misfo•…tune.
What misfortune? fire? or thieves?
I sir. Thieves, they have robed me of all my brass•… coin, and unbound paper books. I must set up with a new stock.
The 〈◊〉 means his cards and counters.
Thou bold else, that can •…ot at thy trial for
get thy play. Apollo fit•… thee with a doom, that thou shalt pl•…y uncessantly.
I'm glad of that A 〈◊〉 play-day.
And thou sh•…lt •…ue fifty 〈◊〉.
So much good company doe•… the b•…tter.
They are the fi•…tie daughte•…s of 〈◊〉; whose play is still to fetch and fetch water in a sieve. Thou must play still at dice.
At dice? that's well▪ I•…e che•…te all those fifty wenches.
But thus. Thy dice 〈◊〉 must put into a boat∣tomlesse box. So, when 〈◊〉 throw, they fall to the ground: and thou must t•…ke them up: they fall a∣gain, thou 〈◊〉 again. Thy•… 〈◊〉 the M•…ll h•…e∣ring, wherein thou must 〈◊〉 •…not eternally.
He that would find Lu•…, must seek •…im at the sign of the Labour in va•…e.
O would I had s•…died when I played▪ rather then thus to play at lost labour 〈◊〉. 
Mistress Indi•…ence 〈◊〉.
Blind fortune h•…th quit he•… o•… that; but she i•… true to her name 〈◊〉.
Mistress 〈◊〉 Gin•…le. Spy•…ster.
All the wool and fl•…xe, t•…at 〈◊〉 she spun, I will eat and fear no choking.
Doth she not appear?
She scoured awa•… in her Coach with her son, and said she would dwell no longer in Thess•…lie, i•… her sons best instructor be not suffered here. And a•… she fled, her Coach ove•…ned.
Let her four w•…eels carry Apollos curse with her, that none of her kindred shall ever get aboue the petty form of Apollos school. Pass o•… 〈◊〉.
Io•…n Gingle, Gentleman Woo'd-be.
Apollo pronounces that his lot must be, before he be forty years old, to spend all his five Manors upon the five Senses: Except the Mansion house of •…oolingham, which is entailed to the heirs of his by∣die wo•…fully begotten.
For •…y part I will not be of counsel to cut off th•… en•…ail.
Complement, p•…attended Captain, alias Captain Comp. Fashion•…nger.
He is •…led, •…s •…hear.
Fled with 〈◊〉 witness. For he flew like a bird up in the air.
Then has he saved vs a labour. For Apollo had doomed him to be blown up with Vulcans bellow•… into the middle Region of the ayre.
The boys in the outer-court of Apollos Palace, when they 〈◊〉 by Mistress Gingles discontent, that the Captain was like to be banished, they pre∣uented execution, by tying squibs to his •…kirts; which being fired, this light •…usball mounted up into the ay•… as high as a •…arc.
One boy said, that this was the Captains losty cap•…ring trick.
And whither did this whi•…le wind carry him?
Who knows? But most do•… think to the Island of Coxcombria, a place thick impeopled with such riff•… •…affe.
Jack Implement, Page to the aforesaid Comple∣meant. Vous hauez Implement.
Here sir, at hand. I pray you Master Musaeu•… be good to a poor Page. I had but a hard service under him My bed and board was sc•…rs to the mountenance of a water-Spanniell. I would sane go to school a∣gain•….
How right this boy meets with Apollos 〈◊〉 Thy lot i•… for the school again: but there for one whole year thou must smooth out the dogs care•… of all thy fellows books; And vow to ply thy book as nimbly as ever thou did thy Mast•… Ap•…rye, or the haughty vaulting horse.
I vow, and will. Elle let me •…id our blind horse that kicks vs on the back•….
What Slugge, could you not come along with vs? You must be lag. An hour will s•…arce serve you, though your journey be short, and down th•… hill.
Soft fire, 〈◊〉
The next name 〈◊〉.
Slim Sl•…gge.
Answer to your name.
Hum. ha▪
He will not answer, unless you give him all his titles. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉. Sl•…e of Slugge-ha•…l.
Why then Slim Slugge, 〈◊〉 Sluggorum, Slug•… of Slugge-hall, S•…eper.
Here sir.
Vous hau•…z Slugge. Stand forth and attend the sentence.
Thou night-bird, in whose •…sly nest all Books and Inkehornes, and all things else are m•…ul∣die, but thy bed. Yet there dost thou pig in, and pig out, without molesting the feathers by con∣cussion.
Stand upright, and leave thy yawning.
Thou that never may infect the Muses habit∣tion, Apollo doth banish thee into Lubberland.
Lubberland? I'm glad of that. I shall earn my fourteen pence a day there by sno•…ting. But who shll carry me th•…there?
Nay, you must foot it thither, there lies the ma•…ow of your punishment.
O that I had Tom Co•…ats everlasting shoes! But ho which is the way to Lubberland? Has none of you bin 〈◊〉 Will y•…u go with me? will you in the frizz coat? It is a fine Country. There are rivers of Mu kad•…e, and bridges of Brawn, parks of Ven•…▪ son Pasties, paled about with puddings and sausages. H•…y for our town, hey for Lubberland.
〈◊〉, I think thou dr•…amassed of Lubberland. Why d•… not y•…u p•…sse on?
Yon•… No•…ice, Apprentice.
Here. I p•…ay sir, save me: I'll get my Mouth•… to end y•…. 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 a couple of Capon•….
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 fre•… man, and thy follies come of simple 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, and are not de•…pely rooted in thee, there is hope o•… thy 〈◊〉. •…or three ye•…es thou shalt p•…y but an hour in the week, and all thy scho•…le 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 fr•…m the presence and •…dance of Ph•…onus. Observe•… and imitate his pam∣•…ll diligence•…: so shalt thou get the Muses love, and •…ord Apollo fau•…ur.
Thanks, 〈◊〉▪ thanks to him, and thee for this your 〈◊〉.
Good your Wo•…ship, be good to my son, hi•… Mother will run 〈◊〉 for gre•….
Thy son•…▪ Come hither Retro.
I•…em doo•…is.
Mercy sir, mercy.
Apollo ha•… ass•…pted thy submission, and cu•… o•… the third year•… of thy punishment. Ari•…e, and s•…ew
thy face, Thy tongue may now run right, &amp; speak as others doe. You may be a forward child.
Thanks, O most forward thanks, for the resto∣ring of my distorted limbs and tongue.
Retiring Crab farewell. Welcome humane pace.
But see thou holdst the scholars even path, nor st•…iding f•…st, nor wandr•…ng from the way.
I hankes sacred Priest I shall bring •…y wife joy∣full news.
Now is Apollos garden weeded quite,
Composed in order, swept, and cleanly dight.
Now may each tender plant, and goodly flower
Grow up, and th•…e, by heavens assisting power.
Pr•…co, dissolve the Session.
Oyez, Our sovereign Lord Apollo, having held and finished his Visitation, discharges all suitors, par∣ties, and homagers from their attendance in this place; and licenseth all his subjects and servants, to depa•…t to their sever all habitations.
Uincat Apollo. Regnet Apollo.
It joys my heart, that we poor Mus•…s,
Now have redress of our abuses.
Before alas I mou•…nd and wept:
But now I joy: our school is swept.,
Vincat Apo•…o, Regnet Apollo.
RIght Worthy Burgomasters, gentle Dames,
Accept (we pray) our hasty huddled games;
Who thus employ our parts, ou•… pains most gl•…dly,
In hope to please our Mother Town of Ha•…y.
And thus with this our homely shrouing dish,
A merry Shrove•…tide to you all we w•…h.
T•…s late▪ Me thinks I spy some dro•…ie head,
Whose yawning, nodding toles a peal•… to bed▪
If any such be here, we'll take them n•…pping,
And all •…o box their ears with loud hand-clapping.

YOu bring your welcome with you.
Sir, I find it
In every circumstance.
Again most welcome.
Yet give me leave to wish (and pray you excuse me)
For I must use the freedom I was borne with)
The great Dukes pleasure had commanded you
To my poor house upon some other service,
Not this you are designed to; but his will
Must be obeyed, how ere it ravish from me
The happy conversation of one
As dear to me as the old Romans held
Their household Lars, whom they believed had power
To bless and guard their Families.
It is received so:
On my part Signior; nor can the Duke
But promise to himself as much as may
Be hoped for from a Nephew. And it were weakness
In any man to doubt, that Giovanni
Trained up by your experience and care
In all those Arts peculiar, and proper
To future Greatness, of necessity
Must in his actions being grown a man
Make good the Princely education
Which Hee derived from you.
I have discharged,
To the utmost of my power, the trust the Duke
Committed to me, and with joy perceive
The seed of my endeavours was not sown
Upon the barren sands, but fruitful glebe,
Which yields a large increase; my noble Charge,
By his sharp wit, and pregnant apprehension
Instructing those that teach him; making use
Not in a vulgar and pedantique form
Of what's read to him, but it is straight digested
And truly made his own. His grave discourse,
In one no more indebted unto years,
Amazes such as hear him; horsemanship
And skill to use his weapon are by practise
Familiar to him; as for Knowledge in
Musique, He needs it not, it being borne with him,
All that He speaks being with such grace delivered
That it makes perfect harmony.
You describe
A wonder to me.
Sir, he is no less,
And that there may be nothing wanting that
May render him complete, the sweetness of
His disposition so wins on all
Appointed to attend him, that they are
Rivals even in the coursest office, who
Shall get praecedencie to doe him service.
Which they esteem a greater happiness
Then if they had been fashioned, and built up
To hold command o'er others.
And what place
Does he now bless with his presence?
He is now
Running at the ring, at which he's excellent.
He does alott for every exercise
A several hour, for Sloth the Nurse of vices
And rust of action, is a stranger to him.
But I fear I am tedious, let us pass
If you please to some other subject, though I cannot
Deliver him as he deserves.
You have given him
A noble character.
And how I pray you
(For we that never look beyond our villa's
Must be inquisitive) are State affairs
Carried in Court?
There's little alteration.
Some rise, and others fall; as it stands with
The pleasure of the Duke, their great disposer.
Does Lodovica Sanazarro hold
Weight, and grace with him?
Every day new honours
Are showered upon him, and without the envy
Of such as are good men. Since all confess
The service done our Master in his wars
Against Pisa, and Sienna, may with justice
Claim what's conferred upon him.
It is said nobly.
For Princes never more make known their wisdom
Then when they cherish goodness, where they find it,
They being men, and not Gods, Contarino;
They can give wealth and titles, but no virtues;
That is without their power. When they advance
(Not out of judgement, but deceiving fancy)
An undeserving man, how ere set of
With all the trim of greatness, state, and power,
And of a creature even grown terrible
To him from whom he took his Giant form,
This thing is still a Comet, no true star;
And when the bounties feeding his false fire
Begin to fail, will of it self go out,
And what was dreadful, proves ridiculous.
But in our Sanazarro it is not so.
He being pure and tried gold, and any stamp
Of grace to make him currant to the world
The Duke is pleased to give him, will add honour
To the great bestower, for he though allowed
Companion to his Master, still preserves
His Majesty in full lustre.
Hee indeed
At no part does take from it, but becomes
A partner of his cares, and eases him,
With willing shoulders, of a burden, which
Hee should alone sustain.
Is Hee yet married?
No Signior, still a Bachelor, how ever
It is apparent, that the choicest Virgin
For beauty, bravery, and wealth in Florence,
Would with her Parents glad consent, be won
(Were his affection, and intent but known)
To be at his devotion.
So I think too.
But break we off. Here comes my Princely charge.
Make your approaches boldly, you will find
A courteous entertainment.
Pray you forbear
My hand, good Signior. It is a ceremony
Not due to me. It is fit we should embrace
With mutual arms.
It is a favour Sir
I grieve to be denied.
You shall overcome.
But tic your pleasure, not my pride that grants it.
Nay pray you Guardian, and good Sir, put on:
How ill it shows to have that reverend head
Be uncovered to a Boy?
Your Excellence
Must give me liberty to observe the distance
And duty that l'owe you.
Owe me duty?
I doe profess, and when I'doe deny it
Good fortune leave me; You have been to me
A second Father, and may justly challenge
(For training up my youth in Arts, and Arms)
As much respect, and service, as was due
To him that gave me life. And did you know Sir
Or will believe from me, how many sleeps
Good Charomonte hath broken in his care
To build me up a man, you must confess
Chiron the Tutor to the great Achilles
Compared with him, deserves not to be named.
And if my gracious Uncle the great Duke
Still holds me worthy his consideration,
Or finds in me ought worthy to be loved,
That little rivulet flowed from this spring,
And so from me report him.
Fame already
Hath filled his Highness ears with the true story
Of what you are, and how much bettered by him.
And it is his purpose to reward the travail
Of this grave Sir with a magnificent hand.
For though his tenderness hardly could consent
To have you one hour absent from his sight,
For full three years he did deny himself
The pleasure Hee took in you, that you, here
From this great Master might arrive unto
The Theory of those high mysteries
Which you by action must make plain in Court.
It is therefore his request (and that from him
Your Excellence must grant a strict command)
That instantly (it being not five hours riding)
You should take horse, and visit him. These his letters
Will yield you farther reasons.
To the Court!
Farewell the flower then of the Countries garland.
This is our Sun, and when Hoe's set, we must not
Expect or Spring, or Summer, but resolve
For a perpetual Winter.
Pray you observe
The frequent changes in his face.
As if
His much unwillingness to leave your house,
Contended with his duty.
Now he appears
Collected and resolved.
It is the Duke!
The Duke upon whose favour, all my hopes
And fortunes doe depend. Nor must I check
At his commands for any private motives
That doe invite my stay here, though they are
Almost not to be mastered. My obedience
In my departing suddenly shall confirm
I am his Highness creature. Yet I hope
A little stay to take a solemn farewell
For all those ravishing pleasures I have tasted
In this my sweet retirement, from my Guardian,
And his incomparable daughter, cannot meet
An ill construction.
I will answer that,
Use your own will.
I would speak to your Sir
In such a phrase as might express the thanks
My heart would gladly pay. But. ???
I conceive you:
And something I would say, but I must doe it
In that dumb rhetoric, which you make use of;
For I doe wish you all. ??? I know not how
My toughness melts, and spite of my discretion
I must turn woman.
What a sympathise
There is between em.
Were I on the Rack
I could not shed a tear. But I am mad,
And ten to one shall hang my self for sorrow
Before I shift my shirt. But hear you Sir,
I'll separate you. When you are gone, what will
Become of me?
Why thou shalt to Court with me.
To see you worried?
Worried Calandrino?
Yes Sir. For bring this sweet face to the Court
There will be such a longing among the Madams,
Who shall engross it first, nay fight and scratch for it,
That if they be not stopped, for entertainment
They'll kiss his lips off. Nay, if you'll soap so
And not be tempted to a farther danger,
These Succube are so sharp set, that you must
Give out you are an Eunuch.
Have a better
Opinion of Court-Ladies, and take care
Of your own stake.
For my stake it is past caring,
I would not have a bird of unclean feathers
Hansell his Limetwig, and so much for him.
There's something else that troubles me.
What's that?
Why how to behave my self in Court, &amp; tytely
I have been told the very place transforms men,
And that not one of a thousand, that before
Lived honestly in the Country, on plain Salads,
But bring him thither, mark me that, and feed him
But a month or two with Custards and Court Cakebread,
And he turns Knave immediately. I would be honest;
But I must follow the fashion, or die a beggar.
And if I ever reach my hopes, believe it
We will share fortunes.
This acknowledgement
Binds me your debtor ever. Here comes one
In whose sad looks you easily may read
What her heart suffers, in that she is forced
To take her last leave of you.
As I live
A beauty without parallel
Must you goo then
So suddenly?
There's no evasion, Lydia,
To gain the least delay, though I would buy it
At any rate. Greatness with private men
Esteemed a blessing, is to me a curse.
And we, whom for our high births, they conclude
The only free men, are the only slaves:
Happy the golden mean I had I been borne
In a poor sordid Cottage; not nursed up
With expectation to command a Court:
I might, like such of your condition (Sweetest)
Have took a safe and middle course, and not
As I am now against my choice compelled
Or to lye grovelling on the earth, or raised
So high upon the pinnacles of State,
That I must either keep my height with danger,
Or fall with certain ruin.
Your own goodness
Will be your faithful guard.
O Lidia.
So passionate!
For had I been your equal
I might have seen and liked with mine own eyes,
And not as now with others; I might still,
And without observation, or envy,
As I have done, continued my delights
With you, that are alone in my esteem
The abstract of Society; we might walk
In solitary Groves, or in choice Gardens;
From the variety of curious flowers
Contemplate natures workmanship, and wonders.
And then for change, near to the murmur of
Some bubbling fountain, I might hear you sing,
And from the well-tun'd accents of your tongue
In my imagination conceive
With what melodious harmony a Quire
Of Angels sing above, their Makers praises.
And then with chaste discourse, as we returned,
Imp feathers to the broken wings of Time,
And all this I must part from.
You forget
The hast impoi'd upon us.
One word more
And then I come. And after this, when with
Continued innocence, of love, and service,
I had grown ripe for Hymeneal joys
Embracing you, but with a lawful flame
I might have been your husband.
Sir, I was
And ever am your servant, but it was,
And it is far from me, in a thought to cherish
Such saucy hopes: If I had been the heir
Of all the Globes and Scepters mankind bows to,
At my best you had deserved me; as I am
How ever unworthy, in my virgin zeal
I wish you as a partner of your bed,
A Princess equal to you, such a one
That may make it the study of her life,
With all th'obedience of a wife to please you.
May you have happy issue, and I live
To be their humblest handmaid.
I am dumb,
And can make no reply.
Your Excellence
Will be benighted.
This kiss bathed in tears
May learn you what I should say.
Give me leave
To wait on you to your horse.
And me to bring you
To the one half of your journey.
Your love puts
Your age to too much trouble.
I grow young
When most I serve you.
Sir, the Duke shall thank you.
HIs Highness cannot take it ill.
However,
We with our duties shall express our care
For the safety of his Dukedom.
And our loves
To his person. Here he comes. Present it boldly.
What needs this form? we are not grown so proud
As to disdain familiar conference
With such as are to counsel, and direct us.
This kind of adoration showed not well
In the old Roman Emperors, who forgetting
That they were flesh &amp; blood, would be styled gods,
In us to suffer it were worse. Pray you rise.
Still the old suit, with too much curiousness
You have too often searched this wound, which yields
Security and rest, not trouble to me.
For here you grieve, that my firm resolution
Continues me a Widower; and that
My want of issue to succeed me in
My government, when I am dead, may breed
Distraction in the State, and make the name
And family of the Medices, now admired,
Contemptible.
And with strong reasons Sir.
For were you old and past hope to beget
The model of your self; we should be silent.
But being in your height and pride of years
As you are now great Sir, and having too
In your possession the daughter of
The deceased Duke of Vrbin, and his heir,
Whose Guardian you are made, were you but pleased
To think her worthy of you, besides children
The Dukedom she brings with her for a dower,
Will yield a large increase of strength and power
To those fair territories, which already
Acknowledge you their absolute Lord.
You press us
With solid arguments we grant, and though
We stand not bound to yield account to any
Why we doe this or that (the full consent
Of our Subjects being included in our Will)
We out of our free bounties will deliver
The motives that divert us. You well know
That three years since to our much grief, we lost
Our Duchess, such a Duchess, that the world
In her whole course of life, yields not a Lady
That can with imitation deserve
To be her second: in her grave we buried
All thoughts of woman: let this satisfy
For any second marriage. Now whereas
You name the heir of Vrbin, as a Princess
Of great revenues, it is confessed she is so;
But for some causes private to our self,
We have disposed her otherwise. Yet despair not,
For you ere long with joy shall understand,
That in our Princely care we have provided
One worthy to succeed us.
We submit,
And hold the counsels of great Cozimo
Oraculous.
My Sanazaro. Nay,
Forbear all ceremony. You look sprightly friend,
And promise in your clear aspect some novel
That may delight us.
O Sir, I would not be
The Harbinger of ought that might distaste you.
And therefore know (for it were a sin to torture
Your Highness expectation) your vice-admiral
By my directions hath surprised the Galleys
Appointed to transport the Asian tribute
Of the great Turk, a richer Prize was never
Brought into Florence.
Still my Nightingale,
That with sweet accents doest assure me, that
My Spring of happiness comes fast upon me.
Embrace me boldly. I pronounce that wretch
An enemy to brave and thriving action,
That dares believe, but in a thought, we are
Too prodigal in our favours to this man,
Whose merits, though with him we should divide
Our Dukedom, still continuous his debtor.
It is far from me.
We all applaud it.
Nay, blush not Sanazarro, we are proud
Of what we build up in thee, nor can our
Election be disparaged; since we have not
Received into our bosom and our grace
A glorious lazy Droane, grown fat with feeding
On others toil, but an industrious Bee
That crops the sweet flowers of our enemies,
And every happy evening returns
Laden with wax and honey to our Hive.
My best endeavours never can discharge
The service I should pay.
Thou art too modest,
But we will study how to give, and when,
Before it be demanded. Giovanni!
My Nephew; let me eye thee better Boy.
In thee me thinks my Sister lives again:
For her love I will be a Father to thee,
For thou art my adopted Son.
Your Servant
And humblest Subject.
Thy hard travail Nephew
Requires soft rest, and therefore we forbear
For the present an account, how thou hast spent
Thy absent hours. See Signiors, see, our care
Without a second bed provides you of
A hopeful Prince. Carry him to his Lodgings,
And for his farther honour Sanazarro
With the rest doe you attend him.
All true pleasures
Circle your Highness.
As the rising Sun
We doe receive you.
May this never set,
But shine upon you ever.
Contarino!
My gracious Lord.
What entertainment found you
From Carolo de Charamonte?
Free
And bountiful. He's ever like himself
Noble and hospitable.
But did my Nephew
Depart thence willingly?
He obeyed your summons
As did become him. Yet it was apparent
But that he durst not cross your will, he would
Have sojourned longer there, he ever finding
Variety of sweetest entertainment;
But there was something else, nor can I blame
His youth, though with some trouble he took leave
Of such a sweet companion.
Who was it?
The daughter sir of Signior Carolo,
Fair Lidia, a virgin at all parts,
But in her birth and fortunes, equal to him.
The rarest beauties Italy can make boast of,
Are but mere shadows to her, she the substance
Of all perfection. And what increases
The wonder Sir, Her bodies matchless form
Is bettered by the pureness of her soul.
Such sweet discourse, such ravishing behaviour;
Such charming language, such enchanting manners,
With a simplicity that shames all Courtship,
Flow hourly from her, that I doe believe
Had Circa, or Calipso her sweet graces,
Wandering Vlisses never had remembered
Penelope, or Ithaca.
Be not raped so.
Your Excellence would be so had you seen her
Take up. Take up. But did your observation
Note any passage of affection
Between her and my Nephew?
How it should
Be otherwise between 'em, is beyond
My best imagination. Cupids arrows
Were useless there, for of necessity
Their years and dispositions doe accord so
They must wound one another.
Umh! Thou art
My Secretary Contarino, and more skilled
In politic designs of State, then in
Thy judgment of a beauty; give me leave
In this to doubt it. Here. Go to my Cabinet, 
You shall find there Letters newly received touching the state of Vrbin.
Pray you with care peruse them, leave the search
Of this to us.
I doe obey in all things.
Lydia! A Diamond so long concealed,
And never worn in Court! of such sweet feature?
And he on whom I fix my Dukedoms hopes,
Made Captive to it! Vmh! it is somewhat strange,
Our eyes are every where, and we will make
A strict enquiry, Sanazarro!
Sir!
Is my Nephew at his rest?
I saw him in bed Sir.
It is well, and does the Princes Fiorinda
(Nay, doe not blush, she is rich Vrbins heir)
Continue constant in her favours to you?
Dread sir, she may dispense the?? as she pleases,
But I look up to her as on a Princess
I dare not be ambitious of, and hope
Her prodigal graces shall not render me
Offended to your Highness.
Not a scruple.
He whom I favour as I doe my friend,
May take all lawful graces that become him.
But touching this hereafter; I have now
(And though perhaps it may appear or trifle)
Serious employment for thee.
I stand ready
For any act you please.
I know it friend,
Have you ne'er heard of Lidia the daughter
Of Carolo Charamonte?
Him I know sir
For a noble Gentleman, and my worthy friend,
But never heard of her.
She is delivered
And feelingly to us by Contarino
For a master-peece in nature, I would have you
Ride suddenly thither to behold this wonder:
But not as sent by us, that's our first caution:
The second is, and carefully observe it,
That though you are a Bachelor, &amp; endowed with
All those perfections that may take a virgin,
On forfeit of our favour doe not tempt her.
It may be her fair graces doe concern us.
Pretend what business you think fit, to gain
Access into her Fathers house, and there
Make full discovery of her, and return me
A true relation, I have some ends in it
With which we will acquaint you.
This is Sir
An easy task.
Yet one that must exact
Your secrecy, and diligence. Let not
Your stay be long.
It shall not sir.
Farewell,
And be, as you would keep our favour, careful.
HOw does this dressing show?
It is of itself
Curious and rare: but borrowing ornament
As it does from your Grace, that deign sto wear it,
Incomparable.
Thou flatter me.
I cannot,
Your Excellence is above it.
Were we less perfect,
Yet being as we are an absolute Princess,
We of necessity must be chaste, wise, fair,
By our prerogative. Yet all these fail
To move where I would have them. How received
Count Sanazarro the rich Scarf I sent him
For his last Visit?
With much reverence,
I dare not say affection. He expressed
More ceremony in his humble thanks
Then feeling of the favour; and appeared
Wilfully ignorant in my opinion
Of what it did invite him to.
No matter,
He's blind with too much light. Have you not heard
Of any private Mistress he's engaged to?
Not any, and this does amaze me Madame,
That he, a Soldier, one that drinks rich wines,
Feeds high, and promises as much as Venus
Could wish to find from Mars, should in his manners
Be so averse to women.
Troth I know not,
He's man enough, and if he has a haunt,
He preys far off like a subtle Fox.
And that way
I doe suspect him. For I learnt last night
(When the great Duke went to rest) attended by
One private follower, he took horse, but whither
He's rid, or to what end I cannot guess at,
But I will find it out.
Doe faithful servant,
We would not be abused. Who have we here?
How the fool stares?
And looks as if he were
Conning his neck-verse.
If I now prove perfect
In my A. B. C. of Courtship, Calandrino
Is made for ever, I am sent; let me see,
On a how doe you, as they call it.
What would thou say?
Let me see thy notes. These are her lodgings. Well.
Art thou an Ass?
Peace, thou art a Court wagtail
To interrupt me.
He has given it you.
And then say to th'illustrious
I have it. Which is she?
Why this; Fopdoodle.
Leave chattering Bulfinch: you would put me out,
But 't will not doe. Then after you have made
Your three obeisance to her, kneel and kiss
The skirt of Gown. I am glad it is no worse.
And why so sir?
Because I was afraid
That after the Italian garb I should
Have kissed her backward.
This is sport unlooked for.
Are you the Princess?
Yes sir.
Then stand fair
(For I am choleric) and doe not nip
A hopeful blossom. Out again. Three low
Obeisance.
I am ready.
I come on then.
With much formality.
Umph. One. two. three.
Thus far I am right. Now for the last. O rare!
She is perfumed all over! Sure great women
Instead of little dogs are privileged
To carry Musk Cats.
Now the ceremony
Is passed, what is the substance?
I'll peruse
My instructions, and then tell you: Her skirt kissed,
Inform her Highness, that your Lord,
Who's that?
Prince Giovanni, who entreats your Grace,
That he with your good favour may have leave
To present his service to you. I think I have nicked it
For a Courtier of the first form.
To my wonder:
Return unto the Prince: but he prevents
My answer. Calaminta take him off,
And for the neat delivery of his message
Give him ten Duccats, such rare parts as yours
Are to be cherished.
We will share. I know
It is the custom of the Court, when ten
Are promised, five is fair. Fie, fie, the Princess
Shall never know it, so you dispatch me quickly,
And bid me not come to morrow.
Very good sir.
Pray you friend
Inform the Duke I am putting into act
What he commanded.
I am proud to be employed sir.
Madam, that without warrant I presume
To trench upon your Privacies, may argue
Rudeness of manners. But the free access
Your Princely curtsy vouchsafes to all
That come to pay their services, gives me hope
To find a gracious pardon.
If you please, not
To make that an offence in your construction,
Which I receive as a large favour from you,
There needs not this Apology.
You continue
As you were ever, the greatest Mistress of
Fair entertainment.
You are Sir the Master,
And in the Country have learnt to out-doe
All that in Court is practised. But why should we
Talk at such distance? You are welcome sir.
We have been more familiar, and since
You will impose the Province, you should govern,
Of boldness on me, give me leave to say
You are too punctual. Sit sir, and discourse
As we were used.
Your Excellence knows so well
How to command, that I can never err
When I obey you.
Nay, no more of this.
You shall overcome; no more I pray you sir.
And what delights, Pray you be liberal
In your relation, hath the Country life
Afforded you?
All pleasures gracious Madame,
But the happiness to converse with your sweet virtues.
I had a grave Instructor, and my hours
Designed to serious Studies yielded me
Pleasure with profit in the knowledge of
What before I was ignorant in. The Signior
Carolode Charomonte being skilful
To guide me through the labyrinth of wilde passions,
That laboured to imprison my free soul
A slave to vicious Sloth.
You speak him well.
But short of his deserts. Then for the time
Of recreation I was allowed
(Against the form followed by jealous Parents
In Italy) full liberty to partake
His daughters sweet society. She's a virgin
Happy in all endowments, which a Poet
Could fancy in his Mistress: being her self
A School of goodness, where chaste Maids may learn
(Without the aids of foreign Principles)
By the example of her life and pureness
To be as she is, excellent. I but give you
A brief Epitome of her virtues, which
Dilated on at large, and to their merit,
Would make an ample Story.
Your whole age
So spent with such a Father, and a Daughter,
Could not be tedious to you.
True great Princess:
And now since you have pleased to grant the hearing
Of my times expense in the Country, give me leave
To entreat the favour, to be made acquainted
What service, or what objects in the Court
Have in your Excellence acceptance, proved
Most gracious to you?
I'll meet your demand,
And make a plain discovery. The Dukes care
For my estate and person holds the first
And choicest place. Then the respect the Courtiers
Pay gladly to me, not to be contemned.
But that which raised in me the most delight
(For I am a friend to valour) was to hear
The noble actions truly reported
Of the brave Count Sanazarro. I profess
When it hath been, and fervently delivered.
How boldly in the horror of a fight
Covered with fire and smoke, and as if nature
Had lent him wings, like lightning he hath fallen
Upon the Turkish Galleys, I have heard it
With a kind of pleasure, which hath whispered to me
This Worthy must be cherished.
'T was a bounty
You never can repent.
I glory in it.
And when he did return (but still with conquest)
His Armour off not young Antinous
Appeared more Courtly; all the Graces that
Render a mans Society dear to Ladies,
Like Pages waiting on him, and it does
Work strangely on me.
To divert your thoughts
Though they are fixed upon a noble subject,
I am a suitor to you.
You will ask
I doe presume, what I may grant, and then
It must not be denied.
It is a favour
For which I hope your Excellence will thank me.
Nay, without circumstance.
That you would please
To take occasion to move the Duke,
That you with his allowance may command
This matchless virgin Lidia (of whom
I cannot speak too much) to waite upon you.
She's such a one, upon the forfeit of
Your good opinion of me, that will not
Be a blemish to your train.
It is rank! He loves her;
But I will fit him with a suit. I pause not
As if it bred or doubt or scruple in me
To doe what you desire, for I'll effect it,
And make use of a fair and fit occasion.
Yet in return I ask a boon of you,
And hope to find you, in your grant to me
As I have been to you.
Command me Madame.
It is near allied to yours. That you would be
A Suitor to the Duke, not to expose
(After so many trials of his faith)
The noble Sanazarro to all dangers,
As if he were a wall to stand the fury
Of a perpetual battery: but now
To grant him after his long labours, rest
And liberty to live in Court, his Arms
And his victorious sword and shield hung up
For monuments.
Umph. I'll embrace fair Prince
The soonest opportunity. The Duke!
Nay, blush not; we smile on your privacy,
And come not to disturb you. You are equals,
And without prejudice to eiders Honours.
May make a mutual change of love and Courtship,
Till you are made one, and with holy rites,
And we give suffrage to it.
You are gracious.
To our self in this. But now break off. Too much
Taken at once of the most curious viands
Dulls the sharp edge of appetite. We are now
For other sports, in which our pleasure is
That you shall keep us company.
We attend you.
IS my Lord stirring?
No; He's fast.
Let us take then
Our morning draught. Such as eat store of Beef,
Mutton, and Capons, may preserve their healths
With that thin composition called small Beer,
As it is said they doe in England. But Italians
That think when they have supped upon an Olive,
A Root, or bunch of Raisins, it is a Feast,
Must kill those cludities, rising from cold herbs,
With hot and lusty wines.
A happiness
Those Tramontaines ne'er casted.
Have they not
Store of wine there?
Yes, and drink more in two hours
Then the Dutchman, or the Dane in four and twenty.
But what is it? French trash, made of rotten grapes
And dregs, and lees of Spain, with Welch Metheglyn,
A drench to kill a horse, but this pure Nectar
Being proper to our climate, is too fine
To brook the roughness of the Sea. The spirit
Of this begets in us quick apprehensions
And active executions, whereas their
Gross feeding makes their understanding like it.
They can fight, and that's their all.
Security
Dwells about this house I think, the gate's wide open,
And not a servant stirring. See the horses
Set up, and clothed.
I shall Sir.
I'll make bold
To press a little further.
Who is this,
Count Sanazarro?
Yes, I know him. Quickly
Remove the Flagon.
A good day to you friends.
Nay, doe not conceal your Physic, I approve it,
And if you please will be a Patient with you.
My noble Lord.
A health to yours. Well done,
I see you love your selves. And I commend you
It is the best wisdom.
May it please your Honour
To walk a turn in the Gallery, I ll acquaint
My Lord with your being here.
Tell him I come
For a Visit only. It is a handsome pile this.
Why here is a brave fellow, and a right one,
Nor wealth, nor greatness makes him proud. 
There are too few of them, for most of our new Courtlers
(Whose Fathers were familiar with the prices
Of oil, and corn, with when and to where to vent 'em)
And left their heirs rich from their knowledge that way)
Like gourds shot up in a night, disclaine to speak
But to cloth of Tissue.
Stand you prating, knaves,
When such a guest is under my roof? See all
The rooms perfumed. This is the man that carries
The sway, and swinge of the Court; and I had rather
Preserve him mine with honest offices, then. ???
But I'll make no comparisons. Bid my daughter
Trim her self up to the height, I know this Courtier
Must have a smack at her, and perhaps by his place
Expects to wriggle further. If he does
I shall deceive his hopes, for I'll not taint
My Honour for the Dukedom. Which way went he?
To the round Gallery.
I will entertain him.
As fits his worth, and quality, but no farther.
I Cannot apprehend, yet I have argued
All ways I can imagine, for what reasons
The great Duke does employ me hither, and
What does increase the miracle, I must render
A strict and true account, at my return
Of Lidia this Lords daughter, and describe
In what she's excellent, and where defective.
It is a hard task; he that will undergo
To make a judgement of a women's beauty,
And see through all her plaistrings, and paintings,
Had need of Linceus eyes, and with more ease
May look like him through nine mud walls, then make
A true discovery of her. But th'intents
And secrets of my Princes heart must be
Served and not searched into.
Most noble Sir
Excuse my age subject to ease, and Sloth,
That with no greaver speed I have presented
My service with your welcome.
It is more fit
That I should ask your pardon for disturbing
Your restate this unseasonable hour.
But my occasions carrying me so near
Your hospitable house, my stay being short to;
Your goodness, and the name of friend, which you
Are pleased to grace me with, gave me assurance
A Visit would not offend.
Offend my Lord?
I feel my self much younger for the favour.
How is it with our gracious Master?
He Sir
Holds still his wonted Greatness, and confesses
Himself your debtor, for your love, and care
To the Prince Giovanni, and had sent
Particular thanks by me, had his Grace known,
The quick dispatch of what I was designed to
Would have licenced me to see you.
I am rich
In his acknowledgement.
Sir, I have heard
Your happiness in a daughter.
Sits the wind there?
Fame gives her out for a rare master-peece.
It is a plain Village Girl Sir, but obedient,
That's her best beauty Sir.
Let my desire
To see her, find a fair construction from you,
I bring no loose thought with me.
You are that way
My Lord free from suspicion. Her own manners
(Without an imposition from me)
I hope will prompt her to it. As she is
She's come to make a tender of that service
Which she stands bound to pay.
With your fair leave
I make bold to salute you.
Sir, I, you have it.
I am her Gentlewoman, will he not kiss me to?
This is course in faith.
How he falls off!
My Lord, though silence best becomes a Maid,
And to be curious to know but what concerns my self, and with becoming distance,
May argue me of boldness, I must borrow
So much of modesty as to enquire Prince Giovannies health?
Hee cannot want, what you are pleased to wish him.
Would it were so, 
And then there is no blessing that can make 
A hopeful and a noble Prince complete,
But should fall on him. O, he was our North star,
The light and pleasure of our eyes.
Where am I?
I feel my self another thing! Can charms
Be writ on such pure Rubies? Her lips melt
As soon as touched! not those smooth gales that glide
O'er happy Arabia, or rich Sabaea,
Creating in their passage gummes and spices,
Can serve for a weak simile to express
The sweetness of her breath. Such a brave stature
Homer bestowed on Pallas, every limb
Proportioned to it.
This is strange; my Lord.
I crave your pardon, and yours, matchless Maid,
For such I must report you.
There's no notice
Taken all this while of me.
And I must add
If your discourse and reason parallel
The rareness of your more then humane form,
You are a wonder.
Pray you my Lord make trial:
She can speak I can assure you, and that my presence
May not take from her freedom, I will leave you.
For know my Lord, my confidence dares trust her
Where, and with whom she pleases. If he be
Taken the right way with her, I cannot fancy
A better match; and for false play I know
The tricks, and can discern them. Petronella!
Yes my good Lord.
I have employment for you.
What's your will Sir?
Madame, you are so large a theme to treat of,
And every Grace about you offers to me
Such copiousnesse of language, that I stand
Doubtful which first to touch at. If I err,
As in my choice I may, let me entreat you
Before I doe offend, to sign my pardon,
Let this the Emblem of your innocence
Give me assurance.
My hand joined to yours
Without this superstition confirms it.
Nor need I fear you will dwell long upon me,
The barrenness of the subject yielding nothing
That Rhetoric with all her tropes and figures
Can amplify. Yet since you are resolved
To prove your self a Courtier in my praise,
As I am a woman (and you men affirm
Our sex loves to be flattered) I'll endure it.
Now when you please begin.
Such Leads paps were,
Down pillows styled by Jove. And their pure whiteness
Shames the Swans Down, or snow. No heat of lust
Swells up her Azure veins. And yet I feel
That this chaste Ice but touched fans fire in me.
You need not noble Sir be thus transported,
Or trouble your invention to express
Your thought of me: the plainest phrase and language
That you can use, will be too high a strain
For such an humble Theme.
If the great Duke
Made this his end to try my constant temper,
Though I am vanquished, it is his fault, not mine.
For I am flesh and blood, and have affections
Like other men. Who can behold the Temples,
Or holy Altars, but the Objects work
Devotion in him? And I may as well
Walk over burning iron with bare feet
And be unscorch'd, as look upon this beauty
Without desire, and that desire pursued to,
Till it be quenched with the enjoying those
Delights, which to achieve danger is nothing,
And loyalty but a word.
I ne'er was proud,
Nor can find I am guilty of a thought
Deserving this neglect, and strangeness from you,
Nor am I amorous.
Suppose his Greatness
Loves her himself, why makes he choice of me
To be his agent? it is tyranny
To call one pinched with hunger to a feast,
And at that instant cruelly deny him
To taste of what he sees. Allegiance
Tempted too far, is like the trial of
A good sword on an Anvil; as that often
Flies in pieces without service to the owner;
So trust enforced too far proves treachery,
And is too late repented.
Pray you Sir,
Or licence me to leave you, or deliver
The reasons which invite you to command
My tedious waiting on you.
As I live
I know not what to think on it. Is it his pride,
Or his simplicity?
Whither have my thoughts
Carried me from my self? in this my dullness,
I have lost an opportunity.
It is true,
I was not bred in Court, not live a star there,
Nor shine in rich embroderies, and pearl,
As they that are the Mistresses of great fortunes,
Are every day adorned with.
Will you vouchsafe
Your ear sweet Lady?
Yet I may be bold
For my integrity, and fame, to rank
With such as are more glorious. Though I never
Did injury, yet I am sensible
When I am contemned, and scorned.
Will you please to hear me?
O the difference of natures. Giovanni,
A Prince in expectation, when he lived here,
Stole curtsy from heaven, and would not to
The meanest servant in my Fathers house
Have kept such distance.
Pray you doe not think me
Unworthy of your ear, it was your beauty
That turned me statue, I can speak, fair Lady.
And I can hear. The harshness of your Courtship
Cannot corrupt my courtesy.
Will you hear me
If I speak of love?
Provided you be modest,
I were uncivil else.
They are come to parley,
I must observe this nearer.
You are a rare one,
And such (but that my hast commands me hence)
I could converse with ever. Will you grace me
With leave to visit you again.
So you
At your return to Court, doe me the favour
To make a tender of my humble service
To the Prince Giovanni.
Ever touching
Upon that string? And will you give me hope
Of future happiness?
That, as I shall find you.
The Fort that's yielded at the first assault,
Is hardly worth the taking.
O, they are at it.
She is a Magazine of all perfection,
And it is death to part from her, yet I must,
A parting kiss fair Maid.
That custom grants you.
A homely breakfast does attend your Lordship.
Such as the place affords.
No, I have feasted
Already here, my thanks, and so I leave you.
I will see you again. Till this unhappy hour
I was never lost, and what to doe or say
I have not yet determined,
Gone so abruptly?
It is very strange.
Under your favour Sir,
His coming hither was to little purpose
For any thing I heard from him.
Take heed Lidia!
I doe advise you with a Fathers love,
And tenderness of your honour: as I would not
Have you course and harsh in giving entertainment,
So by no means be credulous. For great men
Till they have gained their ends are Giants in
Their promises, but those obtained, weak Pigmies
In their performance. And it is a maxim
Allowed among them, so they may deceive
They may swear any thing; for the Queen of love
As they hold constantly, does never punish,
But smile at Lovers perjuries. Yet be wise too,
And when you are sued to in a noble way,
Be neither nice, nor scrupulous.
All you speak Sir
I hear as Oracles, nor will digress
From your directions.
So shall you keep
Your fame untainted.
As I would my life Sir.
LEave the horses with my Grooms; but be you careful
With your best diligence, and speed to find out
The Prince, and humbly in my name entreat him
I may exchange some private conference with him
Before the great Duke know of my arrival.
I hast my Lord.
Here I'll attend his coming,
And see you keep your self as much as may be
Concealed from all men else.
To serve your Lordship
I wish I were invisible.
I am driven
Into a desperate straight, and cannot steer
A middle course; and of the two extremes
Which I must make election of, I know not
Which is more full of horror. Never servant
Stood more engaged to a magnificent Master
Then I to Cozimo. And all those honours
And glories by his Grace conferred upon me,
Or by my prosperous services deserved,
If now I should deceive his trust, and make
A shipwreck of my loyalty, are ruined.
And on the other side, if I discover
Lidias divine perfections, all my hopes
In her are sunk, never to be boyed up:
For it is impossible, but as soon as seen
She must with adoration be sued to.
A Hermit at his beads, but looking on her,
Or the cold Cinique, whom Corinthian Lais,
Not moved with her lusts blandishments, called a stone,
At this object would take fire. Nor is the Duke
Such an Hippolitus, but that this Phaedra
But seen, must force him to forsake the Groves
And Deans Huntmanship, proud to serve under
Venus soft Ensigns. No, there is no way
For me to hope fruition of my ends,
But to conceal her beauties; and how that
May be effected, is as hard a task
As with a veil to cover the Suns beams,
Or comfortable light. Three years the Prince
Lived in her company, and Contarino
The Secretary, hath possessed the Duke
What a rare piece she is. But he's my creature,
And may with ease be frighted to deny
What he hath said. And if my long experience
With some strong reasons I have thought upon,
Cannot o're-reach a youth, my practise yields me
But little profit.
You are well returned Sir.
Leave us. When that your Grace shall know the motives
That forced me to invite you to this trouble, 
You will excuse my manners.
Sir, there needs not
This circumstance between us. You are ever
My noble friend.
You shall have further cause
To assure you of my faith and zeal to serve you.
And when I have committed to your trust
(Presuming still on your retentive silence)
A secret of no less importance, then
My honour, nay my head, it will confirm
What value you hold with me.
Pray you believe Sir
What you deliver to me, shall be locked up
In a strong Cabinet; of which you your self
Shall keep the key. For here I pawn my Honour
(Which is the best security I can give yet)
It shall not be discovered.
This assurance
Is more then I with modesty could demand
From such a paymaster, but I must be sudden,
And therefore to the purpose. Can your Excellence
In your imagination conceive
On what design, or whither the Dukes will
Commanded me hence last night?
No I assure you,
And it had been a rudeness to enquire
Of that I was not called to.
Grant me hearing,
And I will make you truly understand,
It only did concern you.
Me my Lord?
You in your present state, and future fortunes,
For both lye at the stake?
You much amaze me.
Pray you resolve this riddle.
You know the Duke,
If he die issue-lesse (as yet he is)
Determines you his Heir.
It hath pleased his Highness
Oft to profess so much.
But say, he should
Be won to prove a second wife, on whom
He may beget a son, how in a moment
Will all those glorious expectations, which
Render you reverenced and remarkable,
Be in a moment blasted, how ever you are
His much loved sisters son?
I must bear it
With patience, and in me it is a duty
That I was borne with: and it were much unfit
For the receiver of a benefit
To offer for his own ends, to prescribe
Laws to the givers pleasure.
Sweetly answered,
And like your noble self. This your rare temper
So wins upon me, that I would not live
(If that by honest Arts I can prevent it)
To see your hopes made frustrate. And but think
How you shall be transformed from what you are,
Should this (as heaven avert it) ever happen,
It must disturb your peace. For whereas now,
Being as you are received for the Heir apparent,
You are no sooner seen, but wondredat;
The Signiors making it a business to
Enquire how you have slep'd; and as you walk
The streets of Florence, the glad multitude
In throngs press but to see you, and with joy
The Father, pointing with his finger, tells
His son, This is the Prince, the hopeful Prince,
That must hereafter rule, and you obey him.
Great Ladies beg your picture, and make love
To that, despairing to enjoy the substance.
And but the last night, when't was only rumor'd
That you were come to Court (as if you had
By Sea past hither from another world)
What general shouts, and acclamations followed,
The bells rung loud, the boonfires blazed, and such
As loved not wine, carrow sing to your health,
Were drunk, and blushed not at it. And is this
A happiness to part with?
I allow these
As flourishes of Fortune, with which Princes
Are often soothed, but never yet esteemed 'em
For real blessings.
Yet all these were paid
To what you may be, not to what you are,
For if the great Duke but show to his servants
A son of his own, you shall like one obscure
Pass unregarded.
I confess, command
Is not to be contemned, and if my Fate
Appoint me to it, as I may I'll bear it
With willing shoulders. But my Lord as yet
You have told me of a danger coming towards me,
But have not named it.
That is soon delivered;
Great Cozimo your Uncle, as I more
Then guess, for it is no frivolous circumstance
That does persuade my judgement to believe it,
Purposes to be married.
Married, Sir?
With whom, and on what terms, pray you instruct me?
With the fair Lidia.
Lidia?
The daughter
Of Signior Charomonte.
Pardon me
Though I appear incredulons, for on
My knowledge he ne'er saw her.
That is granted;
But Contarino hath so sung her praises,
And given her out for such a master-peece,
That he's transported with it Sir. And love
Steals sometimes through the care into the heart
As well as by the eye. The Duke no sooner
Heard her described, but I was sent in post
To see her, and return my judgement of her.
And what's your censure?
It is a pretty creature.
She's very fair.
Yes, yes, I have seen worse faces.
Her limbs are neatly formed.
She hath a waste
Indeed sized to loves wish.
A delicate hand too.
Then for a leg and foot.
And there I leave you,
For I presumed no further.
As she is Sir
I know she wants no gracious part that may
Allure the Duke, and if he only see her
She is his own. He will not be denied,
And then you are lost. Yet if you'll second me
(As you have reason, for it most concerns you)
I can prevent all yet.
I would you could
A noble way.
I will cry down her beauties;
Especially the beauties of her mind,
As much as Contarino hath advanced 'em,
And this I hope, will breed forgetfulness,
And kill affection in him: but you must
Join with me in my report, if you be questioned.
I never told a lye yet, and I hold it
In some degree blasphemous to dispraise
What's worthy admiration. Yet for once
I will dispraise a little, and not vary
From your relation.
Be constant in it.
My Lord, the Duke hath seen your man, &amp; wonders
You come not to him. See if his desire
To have co??ference with you hath not brought
Him hither in his own person.
They are comely coursers,
And promise swiftness.
They are of my knowledge
Of the best race in Naples.
You are Nephew,
As I hear, an excellent horseman, and we like it.
It is a fair grace in a Prince. Pray you make trial
Of their strength and speed, and if you think them fit
For your employment, with a liberal hand
Reward the Gentleman, that did present 'em
From the Viceroy of Naples.
I will use
My best endeyour Sir.
Wait on my Nephew.
Nay stay you Contarino, be within call,
It may be we shall use you. You have rode hard Sir,
And we thank you for it. Every minute seems
Irksome, and tedious to us; till you have
Made your discovery. Say friend, have you seen
This Phoenix of our age?
I have seen a Maid Sir,
But if that I have judgement, no such wonder
As she was delivered to you.
This is strange.
But certain truth, it may be she was looked on
With admiration in the Country Sir,
But if compared with many in your Court,
She would appear but ordinary.
Contarino
Reports her otherwise.
Such as ne'er saw Swans,
May think Crows beautiful.
How is her behaviour?
It is like the place she lives in.
How her wit,
Discourse, and entertainment?
Very course,
I would not willingly say poor, and rude,
But had she all the beauties of fair women,
The dullness of her soul would fright me from her.
You are curious Sir, I know not what to think on it.
Contarino!
Sir.
Where was thy judgement man
To extol a virgin, Sanazarro tells me
Is nearer to deformity.
I saw her,
And curiously perused her, and I wonder
That she that did appear to me, that know
What beauty is, not worthy the observing,
Should so transport you.
Troth my Lord I thought then.
Thought? Did thou not affirm it?
I confess Sir
I did believe so then, but now I hear
My Lords opinion to the contrary,
I am of another faith: for it is not fit
That I should contradict him. I am dim Sir,
But he's sharpe sighted.
This is to my wish.
We know not what to think of this, yet would not
Determine rashly of it. How doe you like
My Nephews horsemanship?
In my judgement Sir
It is exact and rare.
And to my fancy
He did present great Alexander mounted
On his Bucephalus.
You are right Courtiers,
And know it is your duty to cry up
All actions of a Prince.
Doe not betray
Your self, you are safe, I have done my part.
I thank you,
Nor will I fail.
What's your opinion Nephew
Of the horses?
Two of them are in my judgement
The best I ever backed. I mean the roan Sir,
And the browne bay: but for the chestnut coloured,
Though he be full of mettle, hot, and fiery,
He treads weak in his pasterns.
So, come nearer;
This exercise hath put you into a sweat,
Take this and dry it: and now I command you
To tell me truly what's your censure of
Charomontes daughter Lidia.
I am Sir
A novice in my judgement of a Lady,
But such as it is, your Grace shall hear it freely.
I would not speak in of her, and am sorry
If I keep my self a friend to truth, I cannot
Report her as I would, so much I owe
Her reverend Father. But I'll give you Sir
As near as I can her character in little.
She's of a goodly stature, and her limbs
Not disproportioned; for her face it is
Far from deformity, yet they flatter her
That style it excellent: her manners are
Simple and innocent: but her discourse
And wit deserve my pity, more then praise.
At her best my Lord, she is a handsome picture,
And that said, all is spoken.
I believe you
I ne'er yet found you false.
Nor ever shall Sir.
Forgive me matchless Lidia I too much love
And jealous fear to lose thee, doe bompell me
Against my will, my reason, and my knowledge
To be a poor detractor of that beauty,
Which fluent Ovid, if he lived again,
Would want words to express.
Pray you make choice of
The richest of our furniture for those horses,
And take my Nephew with you, we in this
Will follow his directions.
Could I find now
The Princess Fiorinda, and persuade her
To be silent in the suit, that I moved to her
All were secure.
In that my Lord t'll aid you.
We will be private, leave us. All my studies
And serious meditations aim no further
Then this young mans good. He was my sisters son,
And she was such a sister when she lived
I could not prize too much, nor can I better
Make known how dear I hold her memory,
Then in my cherishing the only issue
Which she hath left behind her Who's that?
Sir.
My fair charge, you are welcome to us.
I have found it Sir.
All things go well in Urbin.
Your gracious care to me an Orphan, frees me
From all suspicion, that my jealous fears can drive into my fancy.
The next Summer
In our own person, we will bring you thither,
And seat you in your own.
When you think fit Sir.
But in the mean time, with your Highness pardon,
I am a suitor to you.
Name it Madame,
With confidence to obtain it.
That you would please
To lay a strict command on Charomonte,
To bring his daughter Lidia to the Court,
And pray you think Sir that it is not my purpose
To employ her as a servant, but to use her
As a most wished companion.
Ha. Your reason?
The hopeful Prince your Nephew Sir hath given her
To me for such an abstract of perfection,
In all that can be wished for in a virgin,
As beauty, musique, ravishing discourse,
Quickness of apprehension, with choice manners
And learning to, not usual with women;
That I am much ambitious (though I shall
Appear but as a foil to set her off)
To be from her instructed, and supplied
In what I am defective.
Did my Nephew
Seriously deliver this?
I assure your Grace
With zeal, and vehemence, and even when
With his best words he strived to set her forth
(Though the rare subject made him eloquent)
He would complain, all he could say came short
Of her deservings.
Pray you have patience.
This was strangely carried. Ha! are we tristed with?
Dare they doe this? is Cozimos fury, that
Of late was terrible, grown contemptible?
Well; we will clear our brows, and undermine
Their secret works, (though they have dug like Moles,)
And crush'em with the tempest of my wrath
When I appear most calm. He is unfit
To command others, that knows not to use it,
And with all rigour, yet my sterne looks shall not
Discover my intents, for I will strike
When I begin to frown. You are the Mistress
Of that you did demand.
I thank your Highness,
But speed in the performance of the grant
Doubles the favours Sir.
You shall possess it sooner then you expect,
Only be pleased to be ready when my Secretary
Waits upon you, to take the fresh ayre. My Nephew!
And my bosom friend so to cheat me, it is not fair!
Where should this Princess be? nor in her lodgings,
Nor in the private walks, Her own retreat
Which she so much frequented?
By my life
She's with the Duke. And I much more then fear
Her forwardness to prefer my suit, hath ruined
What with such care we built up.
Have you furnished
Those Coursers, as we willed you?
There's no sign
Of anger in his looks.
They are complete Sir. 
It is well. To your rest. Soft sleeps wait on you Madame.
Tomorrow with the rising of the Sun
Be ready to ride with us. They with more safety
Had trod on fork-tongu'd Adders, the?? provoked me.
I come not to be thanked Sir for the speedy
Performance of my promise touching Lidia,
It is effected.
We are undone.
The Duke
No sooner heard me with my best of language
Describe her excellencies, as you taught me,
But he confirmed it. You look sad, as if
You wished it were undone.
No gracious Madame,
I am your servant for it.
Be you as careful
For what I moved to you. Count Sanazarro,
Now I perceive you honour me, in vouchsafing
To wear so slight a favour.
It is a grace
I am unworthy of.
You merit more
In pricing so a trifle. Take this Diamond,
I'll second what I have begun. For know
Your valour hath so won upon me, that
It is not to be resisted. I have said Sir,
And leave you to interpret it.
This to me
Is Wormwood. It is apparent we are taken
In our own noose. What's to be done?
I know not.
And it is a punishment justly salne upon me
For leaving truth, a constant Mistress, that
Ever protects her servants, to become
A slave to lies, and falsehood. What excuse
Can we make to the Duke? what mercy hope for,
Our packing being laid open?
It is not to
Be questioned, but his purposed journey is
To see fair Lidia.
And to divert him
Impossible.
There's now no looking backward.
And which way to go on with safety not
To be imagined.
Give me leave. I have
An Embrion in my brain, which, I despair not,
May be brought to form and fashion, provided
You will be open breasted.
It is no time now
Our dangers being equal, to conceal
A thought from you.
What power hold you o'er Lidia?
Doe you think that with some hazard of her life
She would prevent your ruin?
I presume so.
If in the undertaking it, she stray not
From what becomes her innocence, and to that
It is far from me to press her, I my self
Will rather suffer.
It is enough, this night
Write to her by your servant Calandrino
As I shall give directions, my man
Shall bear him company. See Sir to my wish
He does appear, but much transformed from what
He was when he came hither.
I confess
I am not very wise, and yet I find
A fool, so he be parcel knave in Court,
May flourish and grow rich.
Calandrino.
Peace.
I am in contemplation.
Doe not you know me?
I tell thee? no, on forfeit of my place,
I must not know my self, much less my Father,
But by Petition. That Petition lined too
With golden birds, that sing to the tune of Profit,
Or I am deaf.
But you have your sense of feeling.
Nay pray you forbear.
I have all that's requisite
To the making up of a Signior. My spruce ruff,
My hooded cloak, long stocking, and pained hose,
My Case of tooth-picks, and my silver fork,
To convey an Olive neatly to my mouth,
And what is all in all, my pockets ring
A golden peal. O that the Peasants in the Country
(My quondam fellows) but saw me as I am,
How they would admire and worship me!
As they shall,
For instantly you must thither.
My grand Signior
Vouchsafe a bezolus manus, and a cringe
Of the last edition.
You must ride post with Letters
This night to Lidia.
And it please your Grace
Shall I use my Coach, or foot-cloath Mule?
You Whidgin,
You are to make all speed, think not of pomp.
Follow for your instructions Sir.
I have one suit to you
My good Lord.
What is it?
That you would give me
A subtle Court charm, to defend me from
Th infectious ayre of the Country.
What's the reason?
Why, as this Court ayre taught me knavish wit,
By which I am grown rich, if that again
Should turn me fool and honest; Vain hopes farewell,
For I must die a beggar.
Go too Sirrha,
You'll be whipped for this.
Leave fooling, and attend us.
DAughter I have observed since the Prince left us
(Whose absence I mourn with you, &amp; the visit
Count Sanazarro gave us, you have nourished
Sad and retired thoughts, and parted with
That freedom, and alacrity of spirit
With which you used to cheer me.
For the Count, Sir,
All thought of him does with his person die;
But I confess ingenuously I cannot
So soon forget the choice, and chaste delights
The courteous conversation of the Prince,
And without stain I hope, afforded me
When he made this house a Court.
It is in us
To keep it so without him. Want we know not,
And all we can complain of (heaven be praised for)
Is too much plenty, &amp; we will make use of
All lawful pleasures. How now fellows, when
Shall we have this lusty dance?
In the afternoon Sir,
It is a device Iwis of my own making,
And such a one, as shall make your Signiorship know
I have not been your Butler for nothing, but
I have crotchets in my head. We'll trip it titely,
And make my sad young Mistress merry again,
Or I'll forswore the Cellar.
If we had
Our fellow Calandrino here to dance
His part, we were perfect.
O, he was a rare fellow;
But I fear the Court hath spoiled him.
When I was young
I could have cut a caper on a pinnacle,
But now I am old &amp; wise, keep your figure fair,
And follow but the sample I shall set you,
The Duke himself will send for us, and laugh at us,
And that were credit.
Who have we here?
I find 
What was brawn in the Country, in the Court grows tender.
The bots on these jolting Jades, I am bruised to jelly.
A Coach for my money! and that the Courtesans know well,
Their riding so, makes them last three years longer
Then such as are hacknei'd.
Calandrino, it is he.
Now to my postures. Let my hand have the honour
To convey a kiss from my lips to the cover of
Your foot dear Signior.
Fie, you stoop too low Sir. 
The hem of your vestment Lady. Your Glove is for Princes,
Nay, I have coned my distances.
It is most Courtly.
Fellow Calandrino!
Signior de Caponi,
Grand Botelier of the Mansion.
How is it man?
Be not so rustique in your salutations,
Signior Bernardo, Master of the accounts.
Signior Petruchio, may you long continue
Your function in the chamber.
When shall we learn such gambols in our villa?
Sure he's mad.
It is not unlike, for most of such mushrooms are so.
What news at Court?
Basto! they are mysteries,
And not to be revealed. With your favour Signior,
I am in private to confer a while
With this Signiory. But I'll pawn my honour,
That neither my terse language, nor my habit
How ever it may convince, nor my new shrugs,
Shall render her enamoured.
Take your pleasure
A little of these apish tricks may pass,
Too much is tedious.
The Prince in this paper
Presents his service. Nay, it is not Courtly
To see the seal broke open. So I leave you.
Signiors of the Villa, I'll descend to be
Familiar with you.
Have you forgot to dance?
No, I am bettered.
Will you join with us?
As I like the project.
Let me warm my brains first with the richest Grape,
And then I am for you.
We will want no wine.
That this comes only from the best of Princes,
With a kind of adoration does command me
To entertain it, and the sweet contents
That are inscribed here by his hand, must be
Much more then musical to me. All the service
Of my life at no part can deserve this favour.
O what a virgin longing I feel on me.
To unripe the seal, and read it, yet to break
What he hath fastened, rashly, may appear
A saucy rudeness in me. I must doe it,
(Nor can I else learn his commands, or serve'em)
But with such reverence, as I would open
Some holy Writ, whose grave instructions beat down
Rebellious sins, and teach my better part
How to mount upward. So, it is done, &amp; I
With Eagles eyes will curiously peruse it.
Chaste Lidia: the favours are so great
On me by you conferred, that to entreat
The least addition to 'em, in true sense
May argue me of blushless impudence.
But such are my extremes, if you deny
A farther grace, I must unpitied die.
Hast cuts off circumstance; as you are admired
for beauty, the report of it hath fired
The Duke my Uncle, and I fear you'll prove,
Not with a sacred, but unlawful love.
If he see you, as you are, my hop'd-for light
Is changed into an everlasting night.
How to prevent it, if your goodness find
You save two lives, and me you ever bind,
The honourer of your virtues, Giovanni.
Were I more deaf then Adders, these sweet charms
Would through my ears find passage to my soul,
And soon enchant it: To save such a Prince
Who would not perish? Virtue in him must suffer,
And piety be forgotten. The Dukes lust
Though it raged more then Tarquins, shall not reach me.
All quaint inventions of chaste virgins aid me!
My prayers are heard, I have it. The Duke ne'er saw me,
Or if that fail, I am again provided.
But for the servants! They will take what form
I please to put upon them. Giovanni.
Be safe, thy servant Lidia assures it.
Let mountains of afflictions fall on me,
Their weight is easy, so I set thee free.
ARe you not tired with travail Sir?
No, no,
I am fresh and lusty.
This day shall be ever
A holy day to me, that brings my Prince
Under my humble roof.
See Sir, my good Tutor
Sheds tears for joy.
Dry them up Charomonte,
And all forbear the room, while we exchange
Some private words together.
O my Lord,
How grossly have we overshot our selves!
In what Sir?
In forgetting to acquaint
My Guardian with our purpose; all that Lidia
Can doe, avails us nothing; if the Duke
Find out the truth from him.
It is now passed help,
And we must stand the hazard, hope the best Sir?
My loyalty doubted Sir.
It is more. Thou hast
Abused our trust, and in a high degree
Committed treason.
Treason? it is a word
My innocence understands not. Were my breast
Transparent, and my thoughts to be discerned,
Not one spot shall be found to taint the candor
Of my allegiance. And I must be bold
To tell you Sir (for he that knows no guilt
Can know no fear) it is tyranny to o'er charge
An honest man, and such till now I have lived,
And such my Lord I'll die.
Sir, doe not flatter
Your self with hope, these great &amp; glorious words
Which every guilty wretch, as well as you
That's armed with impudence, can with ease deliver,
And with as full a mouth, can work on us?
Nor shall gay flourishes of language clear
What is in fact apparent.
Fact? What fact?
You that know only, what it is, instruct me,
For I am ignorant.
This then Sir: we gave up
(On our assurance of your faith and care,)
Our Nephew Giovanni, nay, our heir
In expectation, to be trained up by you
As did become a Prince.
And I discharged it.
Is this the treason?
Take us with you Sir.
And in respect we knew his Youth was prone
To women, and that living in our Court
He might make some unworthy choice, before
His weaker judgement was confirmed, we did
Remove him from it; constantly presuming
You with your best endeavours, rather would
Have quenched those heats in him, then light a Torch,
As you have done to his looseness.
I? my travail
Is ill requited Sir, for by my soul
I was so curious that way, that I granted
Access to none could tempt him, nor did ever
One syllable, or obscene accent touch
His care that might corrupt him.
No? Why then
With your allowance did you give free way
To all familiar privacy, between
My Nephew and your daughter? Or why did you
(Had you no other ends in it but our service)
Read to 'em, and together (as they had been
Scholars of one form) Grammar, Rhetoric,
Philosophy, Story, and interpret to 'em
The close temptations of lascivious Poets?
Or wherefore (for we still had spies upon you)
Was she still present, when by your advice
He was taught the use of his weapon, horsemanship,
Wrestling, nay swimming, but to fan in her
A hot desire of him? and then forsooth
His exercises ended, covered with
A fair pretence of recreation for him,
When Lidia was instructed in those graces
That add to beauty. He brought to admire her,
Must hear her sing, while to her voice, her hand
Made ravishing Music; and this applauded, dance
A light Levalto with her.
Have you ended
All you can charge me with?
Nor stopped you there,
But they must unattended walk into
The silent Groves, and hear the amorous birds
Warbling their wanton notes, here a sure shade
Of barren Sicamours: (which the all-seeing Sun
Could not pierce through) near that an arbor hung
With spreading Eglantine, there a bubbling spring
Watering a bank of Hyacinths, and Lilies,
With all allurements, that could move to lust.
And could this, Charomonte, (should I grant
They had been equals both in birth and fortune)
Become your gravity? Nay, it is clear as ayre
That your ambitious hopes to match your daughter
Into our family, gave connivance to it;
And this, though not in act, in the intent
I call high treason.
Hear my just defence Sir,
And though you are my Prince, it will not take from
Your Greatness to acknowledge with a blush,
In this my accusation you have been
More swayed by spleen, and jealous suppositions,
Then certain grounds of reason. You had a Father
(Blessed be his memory) that made frequent proofs
Of my loyalty, and faith, and (would I boast
The dangers I have broke through in his service)
I could say more. Nay, you your self, dread Sir,
When ever I was put unto the test,
Found me true gold, and not adulterate metal,
And am I doubted now?
This is from the purpose.
I will come to it Sir, your Grace well knew
Before the Princes happy presence made
My poor house rich, the chiefest blessings which
I gloried in, (though now it prove a curse)
Was an only daughter. Nor did you command me,
As a security to your future fears,
To cast her off: which had you done, how ever
She was the light of my eyes, and comfort of
My feeble age; so far I prized my duty
Above affection, she now had been
A stranger to my care. But she is fair.
Is that her fault, or mine? Did ever Father
Hold beauty in his issue for a blemish?
Her education and her manners tempt to.
If these offend, they are easily removed,
You may, if you think fit, before my face,
In recompense of all my watchings for you,
With burning corrafives transform her to
An ugly Leper; and this done to taint
Her sweetness, prostitute her to a loathsome brothel.
This I will rather suffer Sir, and more,
Then live suspected by you.
Let not passion
Carry you beyond your reason.
I am calm Sir,
Yet you must give me leave to grieve, I find
My actions misinterpreted. Alas Sir,
Was Lidias desire to serve the Prince
Called an offence? or did she practise to
Seduce his youth, because with her best zeal
And fervour she endeavoured to attend him?
It is a hard construction: though she be my daughter
I may thus far speak her. From her infancy
She was ever civil, her behaviour nearer
Simplicity then craft; and malice dares not
Affirm in one loose gesture, or light language,
She gave a sign she was in thought unchaste:
I'll fetch her to you Sir, and but look on her
With equal eyes, you must in justice grant
That your suspicion wrongs her.
It may be,
But I must have stronger assurance of it
Then passionate words. And not to trifle time,
As we came unexpected to your house,
We will prevent all means that may prepare her
How to answer that, with which we come to charge her.
And how soever it may be received
As a foul breach to hospitable rites,
On thy allegiance, and boasted faith,
Nay forfeit of thy head, we doe cousin thee
Close prisoner to thy Chamber, till all doubts
Are cleared that doe concern us.
I obey Sir,
And wish your Grace had followed my hearse
To my Sepulchre, my loyalty unsuspected,
Rather then now? but I am silent Sir,
And let that speak my duty.
If this man
Be false, disguised treachery ne'er put on
A shape so near to truth. Within there.
Sir.
Bring Lidia forth.
She comes Sir of her self
To present her service to you.
Ha. This personage
Cannot invite affection.
See you keep State.
I warrant you.
The manners of her mind
Must be transcendent, if they can defend
Her rougher out-side; may we with your liking
Salute you Lady?
Let me wipe my mouth Sir
With my Cambric handkercher, and then have at you.
Can this be possible?
Yes sir, you will find her
Such as I gave her to you.
Will your Dukeship
Sit down and eat some Sugar-plum? here's a Castle
Of March-Pane too, and this Quince Marmalade
Was of my own making. All summed up together
Did cost the setting on, and here is wine too
As good as ever was taped. I'll be your taster,
For I know the fashion, now you must doe me right Sir,
You shall nor will, nor choose.
She's very simple.
Simple, it is worse. Doe you drink this often Lady?
Still when I am thirsty, and eat when I am hungry.
Such Junkets come not every day. Once more to you,
With a heart and a half in faith.
Pray you pause a little,
If I hold your Cards, I shall pull down the side,
I am not good at the game.
Then I'll drink for you.
Nay, pray you stay. I'll find you out a pledge
That shall supply my place, what think you of
This complete Signior? You are a Juno, and in such state
Must feast this Iupiter, what think you of him?
I desire no better.
And you will undertake this service for me?
You are good at the sport.
Who I? A peddler Sir.
Nay, you shall sit inthroan'd, and eat, &amp; drink
As you were a Duke.
If your Grace will have me,
I'll eat and drink like an Emperor.
Take your place then,
We are amazed.
This is gross. Nor can the imposture
But be discovered.
The Duke is too sharpe sighted
To be deluded thus.
Nay, pray you eat fair,
Or divide, and I will choose. Cannot you use
Your fork as I doe? Gape and I will feed you.
Gape wider yet, this is Court-like.
To choke Daws with,
I like it not.
But you like this.
Let it come Boy.
What a sight is this? we could be angry with you,
How much you did belie her when you told us
She was only simple, this is barbarous rudeness,
Beyond belief.
I would not speak her Sir
Worse then she was.
And I my Lord chose rather
To deliver her better parted then she is,
Then to take from her.
Ever I'll loose my dance,
I'll speak to the purpose. I am Sir no Prologue,
But in plain terms must tell you, we are provided
Of a lusty Hornepipe.
Prithee let us have it,
For we grow dull.
But to make up the medley,
For it is of several colours, for we must borrow
Your Graces Ghost here.
Pray you Sir depose me,
It will not doe else. I am sir the engine
By which it moves.
I will dance with my Duke too,
I will not out.
Begin then. There's more in this
Then yet I have discovered. Some Oedipus
Resolve this riddle.
Did I not foot it roundly?
As I live stark drunk. Away with her. We'll reward you.
When you have cooled your selves in the Cellar.
Heaven preserve you.
We pity Charomonte's wretched fortune.
In a daughter, nay, a monster. Good old man!
The place grows tedious. Our remove shall be
With speed. We'll only in a word or two
Take leave and comfort him.
Twill rather Sir
Increase his sorrow, that you know his shame,
Your Grace may doe it by Letter.
Who signed you
A Patent to direct us? Waite our coming
In the Garden.
All will out.
I more then fear it.
These are strange Chimeras to us! what to judge of't
Is past our apprehension! One command
Charomonte to attend us. Can it be
That Contarino could be so besotted
As to admire this prodigy! or her Father
To dote upon it! or does she personate
For some ends unknown to us, this rude behaviour
Within the Scene presented, would appear
Ridiculous and impossible. O you are welcome.
We now acknowledge the much wrong we did you
In our unjust suspicion. We have seen
The wonder Sir, your daughter.
And have found her
Such as I did report her. What she wanted
In Courtship, was I hope supplied in civil
And modest entertainment.
Pray you tell us,
And truly we command you, Did you never
Observe she was given to drink?
To drink Sir?
Yes. Nay more, to be drunk.
I had rather see her buried.
Dare you trust your own eyes, if you find her now
More then distempered?
I will pull them out Sir,
If your Grace can make this good. And if you please
To grant me liberty, as she is I'll fetch her,
And in a moment.
Look you doe, and fail not,
On the peril of your head.
Drunk. She disdains it.
Such contrarieties were never read of.
Charomonte is no fool, nor can I think
His confidence built on sand. We are abused,
It is too apparent.
I am indisposed Sir,
And that life you tendered once, much endangered
In forcing me from my Chamber.
Here she is Sir,
Suddenly sick I grant, but sure not drunk,
Speak to my Lord the Duke.
All is discovered.
Is this your only daughter.
And my heir Sir,
Nor keep I any woman in my house
(Unless for sordid offices) but one,
I doe maintain trimmed up in her cast habits,
To make her sport. And she indeed loves wine,
And will take too much of it. And perhaps for mirth
She was presented to you.
It shall yield
No sport to the contrivers, it is too plain now
Her presence does confirm what Contorino
Delivered of her, nor can sickness dim
The splendour of her beauties, being her self then
She must exceed his praise.
Will your Grace hear me?
I am faint and can say little.
Here are accents,
Whose every syllable is musical!
Pray you let me raise you, and a while rest here!
False Sanazarro, treacherous Giovanni;
But stand we talking?
Here's a storm soon raised.
As thou art our Subject, Charomonte, swear
To act what we command.
That is an oath
I long since took.
Then by that oath we charge thee
Without excuse, denial, or delay
To apprehend, and suddenly, Sanazarro,
And our Ungrateful Nephew. We have said it.
Doe it without reply, or we pronounce thee,
Like them, a traitor to us. See them guarded
In several lodgings, and forbid access
To all, but when we warrant, Is our will
Heard, sooner then obeyed?
These are strange turns,
But I must not dispute 'em.
Be severe in it.
O my abused lenity I from what height
Is my power fallen?
O me most miserable!
That being innocent, make others guilty.
Most gracious Prince!
Pray you rise, and then speak to me.
My knees shall first be rooted in this earth,
And Myrrh like I'll grow up to a tree,
Dropping perpetual tears of sorrow, which
Hardened by the rough wind, and turned to amber,
Unfortunate virgins like my self shall wear,
Before I'll make Petition to your Greatness
But with such reverence, my hands held up thus,
As I would doe to heaven. You Princes are
As gods on earth to us, and to be sued too
With such humility, as his Deputies
May challenge from their vassalls.
Here's that form
Of language I expected; pray you speak,
What is your suit?
That you would look upon me
As an humble thing, that millions of degrees
Is placed beneath you. For what am I dread sir?
Or what can fall in the whole course of my life,
That may be worth your care, much less your trouble?
As the lowly shrub is to the lofty Cedar,
Or a molehill to Olympus, if compared,
I am to you Sir. Or suppose the Prince,
(Which cannot find belief in me,) forgetting
The greatness of his birth and hopes, hath thrown
An eye of favour on me, in me punish,
(That am the cause) the rashness of his youth.
Shall the Queen of the inhabitants of the ayre,
The Eagle that bears thunder on her wings,
In her angry mood destroy her hopeful young,
For suffering a Wren to perch too near 'em?
Such is our disproportion.
With what fervour
She pleads against her self!
For me poor Maid,
I know the Prince to be so far above me,
That my wishes cannot reach him. Yet I am
So much his creature, that to fix him in
Your wonted grace and favour, I'll abjure
His sight for ever, and betake my self
To a religious life (where in my prayers
I may remember him) and ne'er see man more
But my ghostly father. Will you trust me Sir?
In truth I'll keep my word? or if this fail,
A little more of fear what may befall him,
Will stop my breath for ever.
Had you thus argued
As you were your self, and brought as advocates
Your health and beauty, to make way for you.
No crime of his could put on such a shape,
But I should look with the eyes of mercy on it.
What would I give to see this diamond
In her perfect lustre, as she was before
The clouds of sickness dimmed it! yet take comfort,
And as you would obtain remission for
His treachery to me, cheer your drooping spirits,
And call the blood again into your cheeks,
And then plead for him. And in such a habit
As in your highest hopes you would put on,
If we were to receive you for our Bride.
I'll doe my best Sir.
And that best will be
A crown of all felicity to me.
Tic proved in me, the curse of humane frailty
(Adding to our afflictions) makes us know
What's good, and yet our violent passions force us
To follow what is ill. Reason assured me
It was not safe to shave a Lyons skin,
And that to trifle with a Sovereign, was
To play with lightning: yet imperious beauty
Treading upon the neck of understanding,
Compelled me to put off my natural shape
Of loyal duty, to disguise my self
In the adulterate, and cobweb masque
Of disobedient treachery. Where is now
My borrowed Greatness? or the promised lives
Of following Courtiers echoing my will?
In a moment vanished? Power that stands not on
Its proper base, which is peculiar only
To absolute Princes, falls, or rises, with
Their frown, or favour. The great Duke my Master
(Who almost changed me to his other self)
No sooner takes his beams of comfort from me,
But I as one unknown, or unregarded,
Unpitied suffer! who makes intercession
To his mercy for me now? who does remember
The service I have done him? not a man;
And such as spake no language, but my Lord,
The favourite of Tuskanies grand Duke
Deride my madness. Ha! What noise of horses?
A goodly troop! This back-part of my prison
Allows me liberty to see and know them.
Contarino! Yes, it is he, and Lodovico;
And the Duchess Fiorinda; Urbins heir,
A Princess I have slighted; yet I wear
Her favours. And to teach me what I am,
She whom I scorned can only meditate for me.
This way she makes, yet speak to her I dare not,
And how to make suit to her, is a task
Of as much difficulty; yes; thou blessed pledge
Of her affectionayde me. This supplies
The want of pen and ink, and this of paper.
It must be so, and I in my Petition
Concise and pithy.
It is a goodly pile this.
But better by the owner.
But most rich
In the great States it covers.
The Dukes pleasure
Commands us hither.
Which was laid on us
To attend you to it.
Signior Charomonte,
To see your Excellence his guest, will think
Himself most happy.
Tie my shoe. What's that?
A pane thrown from the window no wind stirring?
And at your feet too fallen, there's something writ on it.
Some Courtier belike would have it known 
He wore a Diamond.
Ha; it is directed:
To the Princess Fiorinda.
We will read it.
He whom you pleased to favour, is cast down,
Past hope of rising, by the great Dukes frown,
If by your gracious means, he cannot have
A pardon. And that got, be lives your slave.
Of men the most distressed, Sanazarro.
Of me the most beloved, and I will save thee,
Or perish with thee. Sure thy fault must be
Of some prodigious shape, if that my prayers
And humble intercession to the Duke
Prevail not with him. Here he comes, delay
Shall not make less my benefit.
What we purpose
Shall know no change, and therefore move me not,
We were made as properties, and what we shall
Determine of'em, cannot be called rigour,
But noble justice. When they proved disloyal,
They were cruel to themselves. The Prince that pardons
The first affront offered to majesty,
Invites a second, rend'ring that power
Subjects should tremble at, contemptible.
Ingratitude is a monster, Carolo,
To be strangled in the birth, not to be cherished.
Madame, you are happily met with.
Sir, I am
An humble Suitor to you; and the rather
Am confident of a grant, in that your Grace
When I made choice to be at your devotion,
Vowed to deny me nothing.
To this minute
We have confirmed it, what's your boon?
It is Sir,
That you in being gracious to your servant,
The ne'er sufficiently praised Sanazarro,
(That now under your heavy displeasure suffers)
Would be good unto yourself. His services
So many, and so great (your storm of fury
Calmed by your better judgment) must inform you,
Some little slip (for sure it is no more)
From his loyal duty, with your justice cannot
Make foul his fair deservings. Great Sir, therefore
Look backward on his former worth; and turning
Your eye from his offence (what'tis I know not)
And I am confident, you will receive him
Once more into your favour.
You say well,
You are ignorant in the nature of his fault,
Which when you understand (as we'll instruct you)
Your pity will appear a charity
(It being conferred on an unthankful man)
To be repented. He's a traitor Madame
To you, to us, to gratitude, and in that
All crimes are comprehended.
If his offence
Aimed at me only, what so ever it is
It is freely pardoned.
This compassion in you
Must make the colour of his guilt more ugly:
The honours we have hourly heaped upon him,
The titles, the rewards, to the envy of
The old Nobility, as the common people,
We now forbear to touch at, and will only
Insist on his gross wrongs to you. You were pleased
Forgetting both your self and proper Greatness,
To favour him, nay, to court him to embrace
A happiness, which on his knees with joy
He should have sued for. Who repined not at
The grace you did him? yet in recompense
Of your large bounties, the disloyal wretch
Makes you a stale; and what he might be by you
Scorned, and derided, gives himself up wholly
To the service of another. If you can
Bear this with patience, we must say you have not
The bitterness of spleen, or ireful passions
Familiar to women. Pause upon it,
And when you seriously have weighed his carriage,
Move us again, if your reason will allow it,
His treachery known: and then if you continue
His advocate for him, we perhaps, because
We would deny you nothing, may awake
Our sleeping mercy. Carolo!
My Lord.
To endure a rival, that were equal to me,
Cannot but speak my poverty of spirit,
But an inferior more; yet true love must not
Know, or degrees, or distances. Lidia may be
As far above me in her form, as she
Is in her birth beneath me, and what I
In Sanazarro liked, he loves in her.
But if I free him now, the benefit
Being done so timely, and confirming too
My strength &amp; power, my souls best faculties being
Bent wholly to preserve him, must supply me
With all I am defective, and bind him
My creature ever. It must needs be so,
Nor will I give it o'er thus.
Does our Nephew
Bear his restraint so constantly, as you
Deliver it to us?
In my judgement Sir
He suffers more for his offence to you,
Then in his fear of what can follow it.
For he is so collected and prepared
To welcome that, you shall determine of him,
As if his doubts and fears were equal to him.
And sure he's not acquainted with much guilt,
That more laments the telling one untruth
Under your pardon still (for it was a fault Sir)
Then others that pretend to conscience, doe
Their crying secret sins.
No more, this Gloss
Defends not the corruption of the text,
Urge it no more.
I once more must make bold Sir
To trench upon your patience. I have
Considered my wrongs duly. Yet that cannot
Divert my intercession for a man
Your Grace like me, once favoured. I am still
A suppliant to you, that you would vouchsafe
The hearing his defence, and that I may
With your allowance see, and comfort him.
Then having heard all that he can allege
In his excuse, for being false to you,
Censure him as you please.
You will overcome,
There's no contending with you. Pray you enjoy
What you desire. And tell him, he shall have
A speedy trial. In which we'll forbear
To sit a Judge, because our purpose is
To rise up his accuser.
All increase
Ofhappines wait on Cozimo.
Was it no more?
My Honor's pawned for it.
I'll second you.
Since it is for the service and the safety
Of the hopeful Prince, fall what can fall, I'll run
The desperate hazard.
He's no friend to virtue
That does decline it.
Ha; what sue you for?
Shall we be ever troubled? doe not tempt
That anger may consume you.
Let it Sir,
The loss is less, though Innocents, we perish,
Then that your sisters son should fall unheard
Under your fury. Shall we fear to entreat
That grace for him, that are your faithful servants,
Which you vouchsafe the Count, like us a subject?
Did not we vow, till sickness had forsook
Thy daughter Lidia, and she appeared
In her perfect health and beauty to plead for him,
We were deaf to all persuasion?
And that hope Sir
Hath wrought a miracle. She is recovered,
And if you please to warrant her, will bring
The penitent Prince before you.
To enjoy
Such happiness, what would we not dispense with?
We all kneel for the Prince.
Nor can it stand
With your mercy, that are gracious to Strangers,
To be cruel to your own.
But art thou certain
I shall behold her at the best?
If ever
She was handsome, as it fits not me to say so,
She is now much bettered.
Rise, thou art but dead
If this prove otherwise. Lidia appear,
And feast an appetite almost pined to death
With longing expectation to behold
Thy excellencies; thou as beauties Queen
Shalt censure the detractors. Let my Nephew
Be led in triumph under her command,
We'll have it so; and Sanazarro tremble
To think whom he hath slandered; we'll retire
Our selves a little, and prepare to meet
A blessing, which imagination tells us
We are not worthy of; and then come forth
But with such reverence, as if I were
(My self the Priest, the sacrifice my heart)
To offer at the Altar of that goodness
That must or kill or save me.
Are not these
Strange gambols in the Duke?
Great Princes have
Like meaner men their weakness.
And may use it
Without control or check.
It is fit they should,
Their privilege were less else, then their Subjects.
Let them have their humours, there's no crossing 'em.
ANd can it be your bounties should fall down
In showers on my ingratitude? or the wrongs
Your Greatness should revenge, teach you to pity?
What retribution can I make? what service
Pay to your goodness, that in some proportion
May to the world express, I would be thankful?
Since my engagements are so great, that all
My best endeavours to appear your creature
Can but proclaim my wants, and what I owe
To your magnificence.
All debts are discharged
In this acknowledgement: yet since you please
I shall impose some terms of satisfaction
For that which you profess your self obliged for,
They shall be gentle ones, and such as will not
I hope afflict you.
Make me understand
Great Princess, what they are, and my obedience
Shall with all cheerful willingness subscribe
To what you shall command.
I will bind you to
Make good your promise. First, I then enjoin you
To love a Lady, that a Noble way
Truly affects you, and that you would take
To your protection and care the Dukedom
Of Urbin, which no more is mine, but yours.
And that when you have full possession of
My person, as my fortunes, you would use me
Not as a Princess, but instruct me in
The duties of an humble wife, for such
(The privilege of my birth no more remembered)
I will be to you. This consented to
All injuries forgotten, on your lips
I thus sign your quietus.
I am wretched
In having but one life to be employed
As you please to dispose it. And believe it,
If it be not already forfeited
To the fury of my Prince, as it is your gift,
With all the faculties of my soul, I'll study
In what I may to serve you.
I am happy
In this assurance. What
Sweet Lady's this?
It is Lidia Madame, she. ???
I understand you:
Nay, blush not, by my life she is a rare one!
And if I were your Judge I would not blame you,
To like and love her. But Sir you are mine now,
And I presume so on your constancy,
That I dare not be jealous.
All thoughts of her
Are in your goodness buried.
Pray you Sir
Be comforted, your innocence should not know
What it is to fear, and if that you but look on
The guards that you have in your self, you cannot.
The Duke's your Uncle Sir, and though a little
Incensed against you, when he sees your sorrow
He must be reconciled. What rugged Tartar,
Or Cannibal, though bathed in humane gore,
But looking on your sweetness, would forget
His cruel nature, and let fall his weapon,
Though then aimed at your throat?
O Lidia,
Of Maids the honour, and your sexes glory.
It is not fear to die, but to loose you
That brings this Fever on me. I will now
Discover to you, that which till this minute
I durst not trust the ayre with. Ere you knew
What power the magique of your beauty had,
I was enchanted by it, liked, and loved it,
My fondness still increasing with my years:
And flattered by false hopes, I did attend
Some blessed opportunity to move
The Duke with his consent to make you mine.
But now, such is my starre-cross'd destiny,
When he beholds you as you are, he cannot
Deny himself the happiness to enjoy you.
And I as well in reason may entreat him
To give away his Crown, as to part from
A jewel of more value, such you are:
Yet howsoever, when you are his Duchess,
And I am turned into forgotten dust,
Pray you love my memory. I should say more
But I am eve off.
The Duke? that counvenance once,
When it was clothed in smiles, showed like an Angels,
But now it is folded up in clouds of fury,
It is terrible to look on.
Sir.
A while
Silence your musical tongue, and let me feast
My eyes with the most ravishing object that
They ever gazed on. There's no miniature
In her fair face, but is a copious theme
Which would (discoursed at large of) make a volume.
What clear arched brows? what sparkling eyes? the Lilies
Contending with the Roses in her cheeks,
Who shall most set them off? what ruby lips?
Or unto what can I compare her neck,
But to a rock of crystal? every limb
Proportioned to loves wish, and in their neatness
Add lustre to the riches of her habit,
Not borrow from it.
You are pleased to show Sir
The fluency of your language, in advancing
A Subject much unworthy.
How unworthy?
By all the vows which Lovers offer at
The Cyprian Goddess Altars, eloquence
It self presuming, as you are, to speak you,
Would be struck dumb. And what have you deserved then?
(Wretches you kneel too late) that have endeavoured
To spout the poison of your black detraction
On this immaculate whiteness? was it malice
To her perfections? or ???
Your Highness promised
A gracious hearing to the Count.
And Prince too;
Doe not make void so just a grant.
We will not,
Yet since their accusation must be urged,
And strongly, ere their weak defence have hearing,
We seat you here as Judges to determine
Of your gross wrongs and ours. And now remembering
Whose Deputies you are, be neither swayed,
Or with particular spleen, or foolish pity,
For neither can become you.
There's some hope yet
Since they have such gentle Judges.
Rise, and stand forth then,
And hear with horror to your guilty souls
What we will prove against you. Could this Princess
(Thou enemy to thy self) stoop her high flight
Of towering greatness to invite thy lowness
To look up to it, and with nimble wings
Of gratitude, could thou forbear to meet it?
Were her favours boundless in a noble way,
And warranted by our allowance, yet
In thy acceptance there appeared no sign
Of a modest thankfulness?
Pray you forbear
To press that farther, it is a fault we have
Already heard, and pardoned.
We will then pass over it, &amp; briefly touch at that
Which does concern our self. In which both being
Equal offenders, what we shall speak, points
Indifferently at either. How we raised thee
(Forgetful Sanazarro of our Grace)
To a full possession of power, and honours,
It being too well known, we'll not remember.
And what thou were (rash youth) in expectation
(And from which headlong thou hast thrown thy self)
Not Florence, but all Tuskany can witness
With admiration. To assure thy hopes,
We did keep constant to a widowed bed,
And did deny our self those lawful pleasures,
Our absolute power and height of blood allowed us.
Made both, the keys that opened our hearts secrets,
And what you spake believed as Oracles.
But you in recompense of this to him
That gave you all, to whom you owed your being
With treacherous lies endeavoured to conceal
This jewel from our knowledge, which our self
Could only lay just claim too.
It is most true Sir.
We both confess a guilty cause.
Look on her,
Is this a beauty fit to be embraced
By any Subjects arms? Can any tyre
Become that forehead, but a Diadem?
Or should we grant your being false to us
Could be excused, your treachery to her
In seeking to deprive her of that greatness
(Her matchless form considered) she was born too,
Must ne'er find pardon? we have spoken Ladies
Like a rough Orator, that brings more truth
Then rhetoric to make good his accusation,
And now expect your sentence.
In your birth Sir
You were marked out the Judge of life, and death,
And we that are your Subjects to attend
With trembling fear your doom.
We doe resign
This Chair as only proper to your self.
And since in justice we are lost, we fly
Unto your saving mercy.
Which sets off
A Prince much more then rigour.
And becomes him
When it is expressed to such as fell by weakness
(That being a twin-borne brother to affection)
Better then wreathes of conquest.
Hie. Lod. Con. Alph. We all-speake
Their language mighty Sir.
You know our temper,
And therefore with more boldness venture on it.
And would not our consent to your demands
Deprive us of a happiness hereafter
Ever to be despaired of, we perhaps
Might hearken nearer to you, and could wish
With some qualification or excuse
You might make less the mountains of your crimes,
And so invite our clemency to feast with you.
But you that knew with what impatience
Of grief we parted from the fair Clarinda
Our Duchess, (let her memory still be sacred)
And with what imprecations on our self
We vowed, not hoping ever to see her equal,
Ne'er to make trial of a second choice,
If Nature framed not one that did excel her,
(As this Maids beauty prompts us that she does)
And yet with oaths then mixed with tears, upon
Her monument we swore our eye should never
Again be tempted, it is true, and those vows
Are registered above, something here tells me.
Carolo thou heard us swear.
And swear so deeply,
That if all women's beauties were in this
(As she's not to be named with the dead Duchess.)
Nay, all their virtues bound up in one story
(Of which mine is scarce an Epitome)
If you should take her as a wife, the weight
Of your perjuries would sink you. If I durst
I had told you this before.
It is strong truth Carolo,
And yet what was necessity in us
Cannot free them from treason.
There's your error.
The Prince in care to have you keep your vows
Made unto heaven, vouchsafed to love my daughter.
He told me so indeed Sir.
And the Count
Averred as much to me.
You all conspire
To force our mercy from us.
Which given up
To after-times, preserves you unforsworne,
An Honour, which will live upon your Tomb
When your Greatness is forgotten.
Though we know
All this is practise, and that both are false,
Such reverence we will pay to dead Clarinda,
And to our serious oaths, that we are pleased
With our own hand to blind our eyes, and not
Know what we understand. Here Giovanni
We pardon thee, and take from us in this,
More then our Dukedom, love her. As I part
With her, all thoughts of women fly fast from vs.
Sanazarro, we forgive you. In your service
To this Princess merit it. Yet let not others
That are in trust and grace, as you have been,
By the example of our lenity,
Presume upon their Sovereigns clemency.
Long live great Cozimo.
Sure the Duke is
In the giving vain they are so loud. Come on Spouse,
We have heard all, and we will have our boon too.
What is it?
That your Grace, in remembrance of
My share in a dance, and that I played your part 
When you should have drunk hard, would get this Signiors grant
To give this Damsel to me in the Church,
For we are contracted; in it you shall doe
Your Dukedom pleasure.
How?
Why the whole race
Of such as can act naturally fools parts,
Are quite worn out, and they that doe survive,
Doe only zany us; and we will bring you,
If we die not without issue, of both sexes
Such chopping mirth-makers, as shall preserve
Perpetual cause of sport, both to your Grace,
And your posterity, that sad melancholy
Shall ne'er approach you.
We are pleased in it,
And will pay her portion. May the passage prove
Of what's presented, worthy of your love,
And favour, as was aimed, and we have all
That can in compass of our wishes fall.

LEt go this wicked hand; oh daughter leave me,
Leave me while thou art virtuous, before
The infection of my crimes do blast thy good∣ness
Or draw some plague upon thee; this dire head
Abhorred by heaven and earth, living in Thebes
Brought forth a pestilence, which help of art
Could never cure, until, by heavens decree,
Most hateful I was banished from the City.
Oh Daughter leave me.
Never, never Sir.
While you are here, Cythaeron's craggy mount
Is my abode, and far prefern'd before
Labdacus stately palace, or the towers
Of wealthy Thebes, for which my brothers strive,
What there I loved, I am possessed of here,
My Father's presence; doe not banish me
Thither again; that place is banishment,
While you are here; what but impiety,
And brothers hatred shall I there behold?
Thou art too good, Antigone, thy birth
Would make me Jove my crimes, but that all sense
Of virtue, as of light, is dead in me.
If thou wilt guide me, guide me to that high
And fatal cliff, from whence unhappy Ino
Pursued, leaped down into the seas, and met
The danger which she fled, there let me lie
Concealed for ever from the eye of heaven
Ah could I kill my memory as well,
That no succeeding ages might relate
The name and story of sad Oedipus!
Be not unjust unto your self to think
You have deserved death; the gods call that
Mis-hap and error, which your cruel self
Against your self call crime; love would not hold
His vengeful thunder, if he judged it so.
The age were good, were men as penitent
For true and real faults, as you for that,
Which ignorance hath wrought, and was the crime
Of fate it self, not yours: you could not think
That Theban Laius and Iocasta were
Your hapless parents; and too great a fear
Of being guilty, made you what you feared.
Remembering what the oracle foretold,
You left a Kingdoms glory, and forsook
Good Polybus and loving Merope,
Your then supposed parents, and betook
Your self unto a willing banishment.
What more then this could you have done? to keep
Your goodness, you forsook a crown, which others
Strive to attain by all impiety.
Yet cruel fate pursued you still, and made
Your virtuous mind the way to your offence;
As if the Gods themselves had punished you
For striving to be innocent, when they
Had-fore decreed your guilt, take comfort Sir,
No man offends, but where the will consents.
How well can thou, Antigone, that bea•'st,
A Magazine of virtuous thoughts within thee,
Speak words of comfort, but accursed I
Am most incapable, there's nought in me,
But horror, grief, despair and misery.
Show me some way of death, or let me go.
I cannot leave you Sir, nor show your death,
But where I mean to bear you company.
I never should have had a virtuous child
But to afflict me more; nature will work
A miracle to make my sufferings greater.
The Sun shall bring black night, the Evening star
Usher the day, and seas shall meet the sky
To make addition to my misery!
good Sir, go take some rest; doe not destroy
That life, on which another life depends.
There's none but thou, has a commanding power
Ore Oedipus, if thou command me leap
Into Sicilian Aetna's scalding throat,
I'll gladly do it; if thou wilt have it so
I will, like Titius, with my liver feed
A tiring vulture; more, I will take rest;
Nay, most of all, Isle live at thy request.
I see some signs of rest upon him now. Exeunt.
How well this sad and solitary place
Suites with my thoughts? these unfrequented woods,
Where nature void of artificial robes
Presents her naked and vngarnish'd face.
In such abodes as these dwelt piety,
White innocence, and spotless chastity
In that first golden age when Saturn reigned.
And still me thinks within these woods he reigns,
Though banished quite from all the world beside,
Here lives the soul of virtue; here abides
The fair Antigone, whose matchless goodness
Upbraids, and expiates this ages crimes,
And quite our-weighs th'impiety of Thebes,
This place the Gods, disdaining other sights,
Behold with wonder, when Antigone
With pious hands directs her blinded sire
The woeful Oedipus; hither the Graces,
The chaster Nymphs, and harmless Dryads
Leaving their bowers of pleasure, all resort
To wa•te on her, and bear her company.
My father is asleep; you powers aboue
Send sweet refreshment to his wearied soul.
Oh pity him, and punish not too far•e
That crime which fate and you your selves have made.
He has already been himself a judge
Too cruel to himself, to expiate
His fatal errors, left a crown and sceptre,
Fled men's society, and day it self,
Torn out his innocent unhappy eyes.
Now since he wants the comfort of your light
Grant him a quiet undisturbed night.
Young Aemon here?
Pardon me royal virgin,
Think it not rudeness in me thus to press
Upon your privacies; but call it service,
Or zeal to wait upon you, and behold
What I doo most admire.
Sir, tic no fault
That I can apprehend; or if it bee,
Tic such a fault as punishes it self.
This is the house of sorrow; nought is here
That can inuit or recompense your coming.
To visit you, so you be pleased to grace
That visit with a welcome, is a blessing
No place has power to lessen, it would make
Hells saddest cave a fair Elysium.
You come from Court, and speak as that has taught you.
This place knows no such language.
Aemon never
Was taxed of flattery, nor will your worth
Admit it; gentle Lady, be but pleased
To think my heart speaks in my tongue to you.
Oh give me leave but to confess my flame,
Which never can be hid; a better fire
More chaste, more true, and full of constancy,
(I dare maintain it) warmes no breast on earth.
No earthly power but sweet Antigone
Can sentence me to bliss or endless woe.
Oh save that creature that depends on you.
Make me immortal by a fair return
Of grace from you and favour.
(That title, though I hated you, your worth
Would challenge from my truth) I love you better
Then so to work your ruin; Love and wed-locke
Have still been fatal in our family.
The baleful owls and croaking ravens sing
Our Hymenaean songs, and furies light
Their brands for torches to our bridal beds.
No, wondrous maid, you bear a heaven about you,
A heaven of virtue, that is proof against
The furies rage, and fortunes utmost spite:
You are aboue them all. Oh take me to you,
And by conjunction of your goodness, make
Me higher then the power of fate can reach.
These are no times for Hymen, when the frown
Of all the gods lies heavy on our house.
Oh move that suite no more; but yet as far
As my chaste sorrow can admit of love,
Let this suffice you, I do love your soul.
And if this storm should clear, and I have power
To marry ever, Aemon is the man
Of all the world I choose.
Oh heavenly voice!
This promise from divine Antigone,
More then fruition of the proudest beauty
That ere mortality could boast, revives me,
And makes me ever happy; all the hours,
That from my countries cause, and from the war
I can be spared, Isle keep as holy ones
To pay devotion here, here Isle relate
What ever fortune throws on doubting Thebes.
But one chaste kiss and so farewell.
You have it.
Ye powers of love, bee all auspicious now.
Hymen redeem the wrongs that thou hast done
Our house already; had I never seen
Young Aemon's face, ne'er known his matchless worth,
No other man or mind had ere had power
To warm Antigones cold breast with love.
Prosper that flame that you your selves did move.
Tic so, Ianthus, Aemon is in love
With fair Antigone; no other passion
Could make so fresh a youth and spirit as his
To seek such sad retreats; from that dark grove,
Which clothes Cythaerens rough and craggy top,
Where far from sight and company of men
The woeful Oedipus laments alone
His hapless;e errors fault, unseen by any
But good Antigone his pious daughter,
How oft of late brave Aemon has been met!
What but her love had power to draw him thither?
She is an object worthy of Aemon's love.
The mirror of her sex, a lassting pattern
Of piety to all succeeding times.
As much true wortha nd manly virtue lives
In noble Aemons breast, hoe's the true brother
Of brave Menaeceus, whose devoted head
Saved Thebes from ruin.
True, if Thebes be safe,
As never fairer were her hopes then now;
Th'Argolian forces are disheartened quite,
And of their seven proud leaders, which of late
Beset the gates of Thebes, but two are left
Only Adrastus, and our banished prince.
If we, I say, be safe, we owe that safety
To Croons sons, to brave Menaeceus death,
And Aemon's living valour; one by death
Gave life to thousands; t'other noble life
Deserved an easier way to fame then death.
But I have heard news from the enemies camp,
Alls quiet there, and tic supposed they mean
To fight no more, but secretly dislodge,
And fly away by night.
Tic like enough,
And would the King be ruled by my advice
Hee should not follow them, there has been spilt
Already blood enough in that unjust,
Unnatural cause. Those brave Argolians,
Whose virtues wee, although their enemies,
Must needs acknowledge, and lament their deaths,
Besides those dearer funerals, which Thebes
Has mourned already for, to justify
The broken faith of King Eteocles.
But who's that makes to vs so speedily,
Thy looks speak news, what are they man? be brief.
The King was walking round the city walls,
When straight a parley sounded from the foe,
And Polynices our exiled Prince
Himself appeared, who from below complained
So many noble funerals had paid
The forfeit of his brothers perjury;
Defied him then, and challenged him alone
To end the difference in a single combat.
Oh horrid monstrous challenge?
Has the King
Accepted it?
Yes, with a seeming joy,
And did complain alone that he himself
Was not the challenger.
Unnatural!
Though many that were by, persuaded him
He need not answer it at all; his strength
Was great enough to keep the crown without it.
But piety how ever should forbid it.
It did not move his breast; thou shalt (quoth he)
Immediately at head of all our troops
Find vs prepared to answer, and to take
Mistake away, we'll wear our royal crown▪
It grieves vs only t'was thy motion first.
And one of vs, when this black fight is done,
Shall without rival keep the Theban crown.
Come Dircus, let's away, and or prevent,
Or see the issue of this dire intent.
Can Thebes yet find no peace, nor see
A period of her misery?
What booted brave Menaeteus death,
Who gave up his devoted breath
To save his Country? what the falls
Of all those worthyes, whom the walls
Of our sad Thebes late trembled at?
Bold Capaneus, whose strange fate
No human strength, but from aboue
The thunderbolts of armed Jove
Could work; the stout Hippomedon,
And Meleager's beauteous son;
Apollo's sacred Prophet too.
Quick to Auernus forced to go
Amphiaraus, to prevent
The fates, by his so strange descent
Frighting the Ghosts that dwell below.
Nor could the fatal sisters know,
Before they saw him amongst the dead;
That they should cut his vital thread.
These, and a thousand worthyes more
Are fled down to the shades below,
And yet the wicked part of war
Doth still remain; the Princes are
Both yet alive, and yet doe hate.
What end can be composed by fate?
Their hate is impious, but to try
The cause, were more impiety.
Our fears doe still increase, the skies
Are filled with nought but prodigies
Which woes and ruins doe display.
I long to hear what fate to day
The field affords; relate to vs
How black so ere and ominous.
Then hear a story that might make
Amazed natures self to shake
The Princes both are slain (alas).
What guilty hands could act such tragedies?
Nay there's the sorrow of it, and a grief
Worse then their death's are, in a single combat
They slew each other.
Oh black family?
But yet relate the manner of their death.
When this great war of one divided womb,
Two brothers met, both armies stood at gaze,
Amazed both; the grieved gods of war,
Withdrew their presence from so black a fight.
Bellona broke her lance, the blew-ey'd maid
Fled from the field ashamed, and Mars drove back
His Thracian chariot; in whose stead the furies
Marshalled the field, and all the Ogygian ghosts
In a black ring beset the combatants
Blasting the day with dampes of Acheron.
No Trumpets sounded, nor shrill cornets pierced
The wounded air; for these the nights sad King
Thrice thundered from Auernus; thrice the Earth
with mournful groans gave signal to the fight.
Old men complained that they had lived too long.
To see that horrid sight; the women shrieked,
And weeping mothers from the walls forbad
Their children to behold it, but the Princes
With such a furious hatred both encounter
As if the souls of all their slaughtered friends,
And both the armies, whom their cause engaged,
Had lived in them, till fate so cruelly
Balanced their strength, that both were slain, yet both
were guilty conquerors.
But did they die
Together then.
Eteocles fell first;
Ore whom, before death closed up his eyes,
Bloodless and feeble Polynices stood,
And from his head taking th'imperiall crown
Impaled himself therewith; at last (quoth hee)
Thou art mine own. oh doe not close his eyes
Pale death, till he have seen me wear the Crown.
But I must leave it too; Oh short short reign.
If there be justice in the other world,
Before great Minos urn, it Minos urn
Be not a fable, will I summon thee,
Nor shall this combat end our enmity.
Then on his brother falling down he died.
Oh horrid fight! bright Phoebus hide thy head,
Wrap up the day in foggy clouds, and make
An endless night, to hide this tragedy
From human eyes; a blacker deed then this
Thy light did ne'er discover, here let all
The prodigies that threatened vs, have end.
The Argiues all with winged speed are fled,
And Thebes once more has peace; but that, I fear
Long cannot last.
What storm can threaten now?
Croon no sooner was saluted King
(For so hee was since both those Princes fell)
But he commanded (Oh fond tyranny)
No man on pain of death should dare to bury
One body of the Argiues, they (alas)
Remain exposed in the open field
To feed the fowls, or perish in the air.
Nor must the Argiues only want the rites
Of funeral; but Theban Polynices
Because with them he fought against his country,
Remains exposed as the Argiues are
In the open air, who ere shall bury him,
His own dead carcass shall supply the place.
Thebes will, I fear, incur the enmity
Of nations by this act, and we shall wish
(If Croon so begin his froward reign)
The unhappy house of Oedipus again.
WHere shall we vent our griefs? what power on earth
Can lend our woes redress?
Accursed Thebes,
First not enough thy guilty soil hath drunk
So many princes bloods, but after death
Unto their Ghosts thou still should prove a foe,
And bar what nature, and all laws bestow?
Whither is goodness fled from humane breasts?
Tigers themselves, if tigers could perform
These rites of funerals, would now correct
The malice of mankind.
What shall we doe
T'appease the ghosts of our unburied Lords?
Go sue to Thebes, perchance the sighs, and tears
Of weeping queens may move the tyrants heart:
No, royal Ladies, banish from your breasts
That flattering hope; no tears, nor prayers can move,
The ruthless tyrants mind; an impious oath
Hath bound his cruelty; his watchmen tell
The carcasses, and guard the place, to keep
Sad friends from thence: no creatures have access
To that dire field, but beasts, and birds of prey.
His hate is constant, sooner hope t'appease
Busiris altars, or the fiends themselves,
Then savage Croon; venture not to Thebes.
What other course is left vs?
To perform
To their dear names such empty funerals
As fortune will allow; or if that that
Will not suffice, go speedily to Athens;
Thither all conquering Theseus is returned,
Triumphant now from the Amazonian war,
Whose mighty arm all savage tyrants dread,
Whose high Heroike thoughts were ne'er averse
From suppliants, and for encouragement
To all that come, in midst of Athens stands
A gracious altar, where white mercy dwells,
The poor mans goddess, shaded with a grove
Ofsuppliant Olives, and chaste Laurel trees.
None are denied to enter, but the rich,
And fortunate; poor wretches, night and day,
Find free access, and there have leave to pay
Their cheap devotion; no slain bullocks blood,
No Frankincense, nor rich Arabian fumes
Do feed that altar▪ sighs, and floods of tears
Are all that goddess craves; no gold adorns
Her humble roofs, as those proud temples raised
By happy Monarchs, and great conquerors,
Instead of trophies, and triumphal robes,
Torn hair, and widows mourning garments hang
About the temple, thither from all coasts
Unhappy souls repair, sad folk subdued
In war, or banished from their native soils,
Or those, whom hapless error has made guilty.
There they implore, and there obtain their peace.
Go you to Athens, sister, and entreat
Great Theseus aide, whilst I, whose fatal quarrel
Was cause of all this dire and mournful war,
Will try what mercy can be found in Thebes.
Do not expose your life to such an hazard.
What mischief can an humble suppliant fear?
Besides my suite to Croon will in Thebes
Be seconded by Polynices friends.
Go you with speed to Athens, if I fail,
That your petitions timely may prevail.
And all the gods prosper your pious suite.
May Thebes prove gentle when Orgies enters.
Now I am free to act what I design.
Shall I expect the doubtful grant of Croon,
Or Theseus lingering aide, whilst thou, dear Lord,
Art food for Vultures? whilst thy funeral
Decreases daily, and thy wandering Ghost
Perchance complaining to the infernal gods
Call me unkind, and cruel? I will lose
No longer time, no danger shall withstand
That act, which love, and my chaste fires command.
Move me no more in that, can Aemon find
No match'mongst all the noble Theban Maids,
Nor foreign Princes, but Antigone?
To mix the fortune of our house with that
Incestuous, dire, and fatal family?
Move me no more I say.
but good, my Lord,
Weigh not alone her haplesse parentage,
(Though that were royal, and allied to you
In near degrees) but her admired virtue,
In which the general voice of people speaks her
As much excelling, as the worst of all
Her wretched race were infamous for vice.
What real virtue ever could proceed
From such an impious stock? or being borne,
Could ever prosper?
Doe not tax so far
The justice of the gods, that they should punish
In good Antigone her kindreds crimes:
They have already with dire punishments
Paid for their proper guilt; and her rare virtues
By the same law may challenge, as a due,
The greatest blessings that the gods can grant.
No act of hers can recompense the guilt
Her birth alone has brought into the world,
And now we'll purge the city, Aephytus,
Go find out Oedipus, and in our name
Confine him to Cythaeron; speak it death,
If ere he show within the walls of Thebes
His ominous head.
That banishment, my liege,
Is come too late, hee is confined already
Unto his latest home, grief for his sons
Has broke at last his great and stubborn heart.
The queen Iocasta hearing that sad news
Beating her breast, tearing her hoary hair,
And uttering sad complaints against the gods,
And fates severe decrees, at last espied
That fatal sword by which old Laius died
On which she fell, and ended her sad life.
We have no tears for her, although our sister;
Let all the plagues, that Thebes so long has felt,
Take end with them. None but Antigone
Is now remaining of that family.
Go thou, Ianthus, in our name command her
To keep her house in Thebes, nor stir from thence,
Until our farther pleasure shall be known.
Be good to her, my Lord, for Aemons sake.
What ere mishap befall Antigone
He will deeply share in, for I fear his love
Is too too constant ere to be removed.
Rather then loose him, grant his lawful suite.
Isle rather grant him death then marriage there.
Remember hoe's our son, our only son,
And virtuous too, of whom the Kingdom boasts.
Blast not their hopes in him, the fate of love
Is irresistible.
Let Aemon know
We'll be his fate. No more Eurydice.
Antigone was lately met alone
Without the city. None of all her servants
Were privy to her going, nor yet know
Whither their Lady went.
Ha! I suspect
What she intends to doe. If I guess right
She goes upon her ruin. Aephytus,
Double the watch, and with a careful eye
Ore look the knaves; this night shall be thy charge.
Perform it well, and thou shalt find reward
Beyond thy wishes; let no negligence,
No gifts, no favour, nor respect to any,
How neereso ere to vs, make thee or them
Slack in your charges, as your lives shall answer
Our strictest justice.
Doe not fear me Sir.
Isle be at hand my self to make all sure.
Post to the West, bright Phoebus, and thou night,
That rob mortality of light, to lend them
A greater blessing, rest and sweet ropose,
Spread thy black mantle ore yon mourning fields,
Which those dead Gracious strew, where too too long
My wronged brother Polynices lies
Barred by unnatural, and injurious Thebes,
Dead from a tomb, as living from a Crown.
This wrong must I redress, assist me virtue,
And all ye gods, that favour piety.
I have at last escaped the curious eyes
Of all that watched my actions, and expect
Nought but the safe concealment of the night:
Were but these rites performed, not Croons spite,
Nor racks, nor tortures should my soul affright.
What could the Argolian ghosts, though once our foes,
Deserve so much from vs, as thus to lose
The rites of funeral, which all mankind
Justly expect from greatest foes to find?
Why should the land that gave them death, deny
Them sepulture? pursuing enmity
Farther then that? why with so black a stain
Dost thou pollute the entrance of thy reign
Unhappy Croon, thwarting natures law,
Upon thy self and fatal Thebes to draw
The hate and curse of nations, who will make
The quarrel theirs; Pluto himself will take
Revenge for this great loss, that must befall
His Monarchy, whilst these Argolians all
Unburied lie, wandering a hundred year
Exiled from him for want of sepulchre.
Thine anger boots not, Croon; it is all one
Whether the fire or putrefaction
Dissolve them; all to natures bosom go,
And to themselves their ends the bodies owe.
If now the Argiues bodies be not burned,
They shall when earth and seas to flames are turned.
Earth will, inspire of thee, receive again
What ever she brought forth; and they obtain
Heavens coverture, that have no graves at all.
Thou that deny these people funeral,
Why dost thou fly those slaughter-smelling fields?
Breathe, if thou can, the air this sad place yields.
Those vanquished carcasses alone possess
The ground, and bar the conquerors access.
When that annoyance shall be vanished quite,
The wandering ghosts will still remain, and fright
The bafefull place; ploughmen shall fear to toil
In furrows of this ill-manured soil.
This ghostly land of ours perchance shall be
Tan for Avernus by posterity,
And claimed by Pluto as his monarchy,
Where thousand wandering souls together fly.
Clear Dirce shall be made the Poets theme,
Instead of muddy Styx, whose fatal stream
The ghosts so strive to be transported ore
By churlish Charon to Elysiums shore:
And rather then so great an host should seem
Exiled from thence, it will be thought by them
Another Acheron shall here be made,
And they possess their own Elision shade.
What shall we doe to cure this fatal stain
Upon our nation?
Nothing but complain.
MY fears have brought me early to this place.
The night is young; No watches yet are set.
How sad and deep a silence does possess
These mourning fields! but why should that seem strange!
Why shake I thus? Why do my coward thoughts
Tell me tic ominous? is it not night?
And who dares tread on this forbidden ground?
The Ravens, Wolves, and Vultures here have filled
Their hungry mawes, and now are gone to rest.
What noise should I expect, unless the Ghosts
Of these dead Greeks with querulous cries should fill
The air of night? what horror thus invades me?
Is it because the Schreich owl cried about me
Passing the gates of Thebes? because to night
I have so often stumbled on dead men?
Tut; these are toys for children, let not fear,
That ever was a stranger to this breast,
Reign in it now. But tic Antigone,
Whom cruel virtue will command to night
Into a world of danger, is the cause
Of all my fear. Oh fair Antigone,
Why art thou good? so excellently good,
To make me more then wretched? you bright stars,
That doe alternallie with Phoebus rule
And measure time, if virtue be a kin
To heaven and you, if your fair influence
Govern this lower world, let not the night,
Which is your time of reign, give privilege
To murders, witchcrafts, and infernal arts,
Whilst virtue suffers, and white innocence
Is made a prey. Isle watch the fields to night;
But not be seen, till time require mine aide.
Secretly shrouded in yon Cypress grove
Isle watch what fortunes doe attend my love.
Madam, the place is near; the noisome air,
Which those unburied carcasses exhale,
Grows stronger still, and from that feeble shine,
Which to the night halfe-clouded Cynthia lends,
How large a shade the lofty Theban walls
Spread ore this field of death! those twinkling lights,
Which we from hence discern, burn in the tower
Of Creon's cruel watch.
Oh Thebes, a name
Once dear to me, but now a word of horror,
And endless sorrow! yet give leave to enter
My husbands hearse, and I will love thee still,
And leave my heart for evermore to dwell
On thy dear ground, behold with what attendance,
What state the great Adrastus daughter comes
To claim her right at Thebes; how poor a claim
The wronged wife of Polynices makes.
Tic not thy wealth, nor Cadmus stately throne,
Nor crown, nor septer that Orgies claims.
I crave but mourning free, but death and dust,
And such abhorred dust, as thou disdain
To harbour lovingly, bestow but what
Thou hat'st on me, and take the greatest thanks
A queen can give; and thou beloved ghost
Of my dead Lord, if through these fields thou wander,
And love the rites that I perform to night,
Direct me where thy wronged body lies.
Madam this way, nearer the city walls
My Lord was slain, &amp; there perchance he lies.
Prince Aemon is abroad, and woe is me
Gone with too great a confidence I fear
Upon my plot, which is defeated quite.
The watch is doubled, and more strictly kept
Then heretofore, no possiblity
To lay them all asleep, what he intended
To work upon it, is quite frustrate now.
Oh could I meet him but to let him know
What has befallen. Isle range these fields to find him.
Was this the sight was promised me at Thebes?
Are these the triumphs of my dearest Lord?
Thus to thy native country dost thou bid
Orgies welcome? thus dost thou requite.
The entertainment, that kind Argos gave
To thee a stranger? why prepar'st thou not
The Theban palace to receive thy queen?
But why complain I vainly? thou alas
Art held a stranger to thy native Thebes,
Nay more, a foe, to whom the cruel ground
Denies that common bounty, which in death
The meanest creatures challenge at her hand.
But woe is me, t'was I that cause thy fall,
T'was I that moved my father to this war,
And all those Grecian Princes; happy else
Might thou have lived at Argos still with me,
And ne'er set foot on this accursed ground.
Did I for this entreat those valiant Greeks
To war with Thebes, to see my dearest Lord
Thus all deformed with gore, trod down in dust,
And covered ore with filth?
See, Madam, see
The mortal wound yet gaping on his breast.
Was this a brothers hand? but in that name
I find thy guilt as much; Isle rather think
Thou ne'er hadd'st any kindred, never brother,
Nor other name of blood, which nature meant
A name of love. For where are all their tears?
Where is their sorrow now? if not in Thebes
Where hast thou kindred? none laments but I;
To me alone is Polynices dead.
Where is thy mother, and thy sisters now?
Where is that good Antigone, so famed
Forpiety, whom thou so oft would praise,
And tell such pleasing stories of her virtue?
About this place he lies, dear Ghost forgive
Thy Sisters slackness, and with favour now
Accept these loving, though late rites I doe.
A Grecian Lady? (so her habit speaks her)
Some pious sorrow brings her to this place:
Lady the gods assist your piety.
Are you a woeful widowed Lady too,
That come to break dire Croons savage law?
But yet you seem a Theban; all their bodies
Have rites of funeral performed already.
Or does your too too charitable grief?
Extend to some unhappy Grecian soul?
I know not how to answer you; the man
Whose hearse I seek, was once a Thebes, prince;
But since his native soil did prove to him
So cruel, and unnatural, I dare
Not call him Theban. Gentle Argos proved
A kinder home to him, and freely gave
What Thebes, though due, denied, a princely state
With royal nuptials; now among the souls
Of those unburied Graecians wanders he,
And still perhaps desires to bee esteemed
One of their company, hating for ever
(Ah woe is me) the memory of Thebes.
His name was Polynices, my unhappy,
Though dearest brother.
Oh my heart? are you
That good Antigone, whom I so long
Have wished to see?
I am that woeful maid.
Then see your brother my dear husbands hearse
Your grief is mine.
Pardon me royal sister,
Are you Orgies great Adrastus daughter?
Let me adore the best of woman kind.
Has your most faithful vnexampled love
Brought you so far, and on so cruel hazards
To my dead brother? was it not enough
That first so great a princess as your self
Advanced a banished man, and freely gave
That love to him, which happiest princes sought?
But that his dire misfortunes evermore
Should make your virtue wretched?
Dearest sister,
Whose knowledge I am proud, though thus, to meet,
By this true knot of everlasting love
Our sorrow ties to night, I here protest,
No grief, no loss that banishment could bring
Did move so much sad Polynices heart,
As parting from thy dearest company.
No name to him was half so dear in Thebes,
No name so often as Antigone
Would his sad tongue to me alone repeat.
And witness all ye sacred deities,
Though Polynices from his native Thebes
Were banished long, yet from a sisters heart
The love of thee could never be exiled,
Nor Thebes without thy presence pleasing to me.
How oft have I upon Cytherons mount
Appeased my fathers anger toward thee?
And dost thou thus visit thy sister here?
Oh my wronged brother?
Oh my dearest Lord!
When first at Argos I beheld thy face,
It was deformed with blood, and wounded then,
Yet then I loved it; fortune to my love
Showed thee at first a pitied spectacle
As now at last, dearest Antigone;
My brother Tydeus met him then at Argos,
Both strangers there, before affinity
Had made them brothers, in a mutual rage
They fought; but all the blood that then was drawn
Seemed but a sacrament, that did confirm
Their after rare and vnexampled love.
Ay me, how different was i• from the love
Which here a natural brother showed to him!
Argos, how far dost thou disgrace our Thebes
In nature and in honour!
Royal Ladies,
The night grows old, and danger threatens vs.
Be speedy now: these obsequies performed,
You may with more security enjoy
Each others mutual love, and then discourse
Of Thebes, and Argos; danger, and the time
Will not permit it now; not far from hence
Are many fragments left of funeral fire,
Where Thebans have been burned; those let vs use,
And then retire from this unhappy place.
Where did thou see those lights? 1. About the place
Where Polynices body lies.
If any
Have there performed forbidden obsequies,
They cannot far escape; pursue with speed;
Spare none; you know your oath, and penalty.
The watch is up, and with a winged speed
Pursues those lights, which my presaging soul
Tells me attend on fair Antigone.
Should what I fear prove true, they must not seize her,
If all persuasions, promise of reward,
Nor gold prevail not, the dear cause will lend
This arm a strength aboue mortality.
The watch is diligent; they doe not know
That I am in the field.
No sure, my Lord.
For your disguise is perfect, and no notice
Was given from me at all.
What things are these?
Witches, my Lord, that come to exercise
On these dead bodies that bestrew the field
Their damned arts; here in the depth of night
With incantations, and abused herbs
They turn the dead's pale faces to enquire
And hear the horrid oracles of death.
The infernal gods ore mastered by their power,
Or else persuaded by some piety
Which pleases them, deny these witches nothing
Which they request, the souls of those dead men
Are forced to obey their charmings, and return
Back to their ancient prisons, to reveal
To these dire hags the secrecies of fate
And things to come.
Isle follow them Ianthus,
And know what fortunes shall attend my reign.
Ah good my Lord use not so bad away,
You have at hand, a nobler means to know
The truth of all; the old Tiresias
Taught from the wisdom of the gods aboue,
Who by a magic more divine and pure
Surveys the course and influence of the stars,
And in that glorious book reads the event
Of future things, rather repair to him,
Let him prepare a sacrifice, and ask
The pleasure of the gods.
Tut tut Ianthus,
Astrolog'is uncertain, and the gods
In mystike riddles wrap their answers up.
But he that dares with confidence to go
Enquire of deaths black oracles below
In plainest terms the certain truth shall know.
We come too late, nor can this field
To vs a speaking prophet yield.
The carcasses, whose cold dead tongues
From whole, and yet vnperish'd lungs,
Twixt hell and vs should hold commerce,
And be the black interpreters
Of Stygian counsels to relate
The hid decrees of death and fate;
Those carcasses I say are grown
Corrupt, and rotten every one,
Their marrow's lost, their moistur's gone,
Their Organs parched by the sun,
That there the Ghost drawn up from hells
Dark entrance, nought, but broken yells,
And dismal hizzings can afford,
Not one intelligible word.
But from this field of slaughter I
Have gathered up a treasury,
As dead men's limms wet in the rain,
Cold gelled tongues and parched brain,
The slime that on black knuckles lies,
Shrunk sinews, and congealed eyes,
Bit from their fingers nails ore grown,
And from young chinns pulled springing down.
Flesh bit by Wolves I took away,
And robbed the vulture of her prey.
Where Thebans funeral piles had made,
I did the mourning fire invade,
And there black rags with ashes filled,
And coals on which their fat distilled,
I gathered up, and took from thence
Halfe-burnt bones, and Frankincense,
And snatched the fatal kindling brand
From out the weeping parents hand.
Once more let's trott the fields about
To find a fresher carcass out.
And speak a charm that may affright
All pious love from hence to night,
Lest we by funeral rites do loose
What Croons cruelty bestows.
By Croons trembling watch I bore
This new slain carcass, but before
I brought him thence, I grip'd him round.
The fillets of his lungs are sound.
His vitals all are strong and whole
To entertain the wretched soul,
Whom forced furies must affright
Back from hell to vs to night.
You wise interpreters of fate, that look
With just contempt down on that small allowance
Of knowledge, which weak human breasts possess.
Whose subtle eyes can penetrate the depth
Of dark Auernus secrets, and from thence
Enforce an answer from the obeying finds.
Let me from your deep skill be guided now
To know the assurance of my future state:
It is a King that craves your aide, a King
Whose power has given your art this furtherance,
By my command these carcasses have lain
Vnburled here for you to practise on.
If Croon then deserve it at your hands,
Resolve me of my fate.
You have your wish.
This carcass shall relate it; do not fear
To hear him speak: what herbs have you prepared?
I here have gathered, all in one,
The poisonous gelly of the moon,
Mixed with sulphur of the night,
Libbards bane, and Aconite,
Dew gathered, ere the morn arose,
From night-shade, henbane, Cypress boughs.
Amongst living creatures I have sought,
And from each baneful brood have brought
What ere could aide to our work give,
Skins stripped from horned snakes alive,
The Lynxes bowels, blood of frogs,
The Schreichowles eggs, the foam of Dogs,
The wings of Bats, with Dragons eyes,
The Crows black head, the stone that lies
In Eagles nests, and pebbles round,
That when the Ocean ebbs are found:
Enough; but I to add to these so known
And vulgar helps of our great art, have gone,
And found such simples, whose concealed aide
No witch ere used, or trembling god obeyed.
Thessaliaes valleys, Colchos famed shore,
Nor Lybian squalid sands with Gorgont gore
Bedw'd and sprinkled, ne'er produced juice
That could so much enthral the deities.
When first I plucked them in yon gloomy vale
The furies shrieked, and Hecate grew pale,
As loath to have (in that abhorred ground)
The power of simples, and their weakness found.
Then let vs now employ their powerful help.
What place doe we design for our black work?
There is within Cithaerons hollow side
A dark, and squalid cave, where day ne'er peeped,
Nor ever light, but light by magic made
Shot through that dismal air; pale mouldy filth
Bred there by dreary night orespredds the place.
The mouth of Taenarus, that baleful bound
Twixt heaven and hell, appears not half so black.
To this sad caueth' accustomed fiends ascend,
And think themselves still in their proper place.
But Ghosts, that newly past Auernus lake,
Shun the ascent, and though by vs invoked,
Tremble to enter to that place unknown,
And find a hell more horrid then their own.
Then thither let vs bear this carcass hence.
3. No, no, we scorn the helps of that dark place;
Nor is it honour to our art to find,
But make a darkness fit to serve our ends.
We that can forcea Magic light to glide
Through closest vaults, can force in spite of day
A mist of night to rise, which all the rays
Ofburning Phoebus shall want power to scatter.
Oh would it were not night, but that the sun
Rode in his height of strength; how proudly then
Might we perform our rites, and make it known,
We use not natures darkness but our own.
Let's go no further then; this place shall serve.
3. Apply your ointments to the body, whilst I
Prepare, and speak a charm shall quickly call
The affrighted soul back to his mansion.
My joints begin to tremble, and I fear
As much the means of knowledge, as the event
Of what I came to know.
How full of black
And baleful horror is this art of theirs?
Would I were well from hence; let me hereafter.
Rather remain in endless ignorance
Then purchase knowledge by such means as these.
3. Sad King of night, whose baleful Monarchy
The still repaired ruins of mankind
Through every age increase; that greiu'st alone
To see the heavenly gods for ever free
From death's assaults, and thy subjection.
Old formless Chaos, thou that would deface
Natures whole beauty, quite disioint her fabrike,
And swallow up in dark confusion
Ten thousand worlds; thou squalid ferriman
Of still Auernus; thou three-headed porter;
You snake-hair'd sisters, punishers of guilt,
As you would gain our aid, or fear our threats,
Whip back againeinto this upper world
That new-fled soul, which did of late inhabit
This pale and ghastly seat, but if in vain
On you I call, thou wretched wandering Ghost,
Not yet transported ore the burning stream,
But doomed to exile for an hundred years,
If true rewards can tempt thee, once again
Enter thy ancient prison, and in lieu
Of that shore penance, I will make thee free
(Releasing all thy tedious banishment)
Of fair Elisium; with such powerful rites
Isle give thee burial, as no Magic spells,
Nor incantations shall for ever call
Thee bakce, nor trouble thine eternal rest.
Relate to Croon King of Thebes the fate
That shall attend his reign.
The carcass stirs.
The face retains pale death; yet seems to live.
Thy death is near; yet ere thou die
A great and strange calamity
Shall seize thy house, and thou in woe
Shalt think the fatal sisters slow
In giving death, desiring then
Thy reigns short date had shorter been;
Yet thou at last in death shalt have
(Though thou denid'st it vs) a grave.
Shame on your damned arts; it does not lie
Within the power of fate to work this mischief.
Believe it not, my Lord; let's quit the place,
And from the wise Tiresias seek advise,
Dircus, shoe's gone, and I am worse then dead,
Oh would the villains arms had had the power
To have dispatched me quickly.
Good my Lord,
Take fairer hopes, and live; cast not away
The Kingdoms joy; what cruelty can touch
So sweet a virtue as Antigone?
Retire with me into yon little house;
Isle there bind up your wounds; you bleed too fast,
And needs must faint before you reach the walls.
The wounds I took are scratches.
Honest Dircus,
What care can ere my body have without
The presence of my soul?
Delay not Sir.
Their goodness will protect them: what other Lady
Was that with her?
It seems it was Orgies
Dead Polynices wife, Adrastus daughter,
Or else some grace or goddess in that shape
Came to consort with good Antigone.
Wandering about the fields to find out you,
I met with witches, impious hags, that came
As I suppose, for execrable ends
There to abuse the bodies of the dead.
Oh partial fates, oh too injurious night,
Can these escape, when piety must suffer?
A saintnesse seizes me, I prithee Dircus
Let me have speedy news.
You shall my Lord.
When I have dressed you, Isle to court, and thence
Bring you a true and swift intelligence.
By what new ways of grief shall we
Our widowed losses signify?
What strange expression can become
A woe so strangely burdensome?
No howls, no shrieks, no voice of woe,
Not such as widowed turtles show,
Nor such as Philomel, when she
High seated on a poplar tree,
Sends sweet sad notes through the air of night,
Wailing the husbandman's despite,
That reaved her of her dearest nest.
Our loss cannot be so expressed.
No, nor by actions, such as are
The rending of disheuel'd hair,
Or beating of our breasts; these all
No more then death and funeral
Can show; but in our husbands we
Receive a greater injury
Then death had done; the common rite
Of funeral barred in despite.
Cease widows longer in that strain
To wail, or against the fates complain
For funeral rites; but understand
Great Theseus, whose victorious hand
In conquests never yet has failed,
Is he, with whom we have prevailed
For aide; and think what action
He undertakes, already done.
He will revenge on Creon's head
The wrongs that we have suffered.
Our dear Lords Ghosts shall righted be.
Then join your voices all 〈◊〉 me,
And in triumphant songs let vs
Renown the noble Theseus.
Theseus is he, whose warrelike hand
Defends mankind in every land
No less by tyrants feared and known
Then was the fair Alcmenaes son.
It was he, whose just revenging steel
Subdued, and made dire Schinis feel
The selfe-fame torture in his death
By which he took from others breath,
When trees together bowed were,
And parted thence again, did tear
Poor wretches, but by Theseus he
Was forced to taste that Tragedy.
Procrustes that inhuman thief
(Monster of nature past belief)
That made all passengers, whom he
Surprised within the woods, to bee
By an unheard of cruel sport
Stretched longer out, or else cut short,
To fit their stature to his bed,
By Theseus hand was conquered,
And doomed then himself to die
By the same kind of cruelty.
It was he alone that did set free
Athens from that sad slavery
Which Minos fury, for the loss
Of his beloved Androgeos,
Had brought them to; when w ith clew
He escaped the Labyrin••, and slew
Fierce Minotaurus, that had been
The monstrous issue of the Queen
Pasiphae, Whom unnatural
Prodigious lust had made to fall
Before a Bull; the monster held
Both shapes, and her foul guilt reueal'd.
Against a far worse monster now
The noble Theseus arms to go,
Inhumane Croon, that denies
To worthiest souls due obsequies,
And, what those monsters would not doe,
Does after death his hate pursue.
Oh let that still victorious sword
Be now as prosperous, and afford
To wicked Croon the just mead
That is deserved for such a deed.
But it is against all holy laws
To doubt success in such a cause.
PRince Polynices body is enterr'd
By these two Ladies, whom I apprehend
Just as the deed was done; nor did themselves
Deny the fact.
One I suspected still,
And I am glad I have her, what's the other?
The woeful widow of that wronged Prince
Who stayed behind my countrymen, to doe
Those rites, which love, and piety required
To my dead Lord; if that be judged a crime
Tic such a crime as I profess, and boast.
Are you Adrastus daughter then?
The sam•▪
You are our prisoner now, take her, Ianthus,
Into your custody: this falls out fitly,
The ransom of this Princess will come well
To fill our now-exhausted treasury.
But thou a Theban borne, bound to obey
Our crown and laws, what fury moved thy brea••
(Disloyal maid) to scorn our edict so?
No other fury then the love of virtue,
And reverence of the gods, moved me to this.
Which were it to doe again, not all the power
Of hell, and tyrants should affright me from it.
Has guilt emboldened thee? is this the excuse
Thou make to me?
Croon, Let impious acts
Seek for excuses; I nor can, nor will
So wrong the cause of heaven and piety,
As once to plead a fond excuse for that▪
Which is my merit, for that act I say
Which by direction from the gods themselves
I have performed.
Is disobedience merit?
Or do the gods command subjects to break
The laws of Princes?
Yes, their wicked laws,
Which thwart the will of heaven, the rule of nature,
And those pure principles, which human breasts
Did at their first original derive
From that Celestial essence: Such a law
Was this which I have broke, in giving rites
Of funeral to Polynices hearse,
My dearest brother, this disobedience
Thy servants (durst they speak) would justify;
But foreign nations, and all future times
In spite of tyrants threatenings shall commend
What I have done, and though I die for this
Unjustly now, yet the infernal judges,
Whose sentence no mortality can scope,
But must to all eternity sustain,
Shall from their just unpartial vrnes bestow
Endless rewards beyond my sufferings far.
To those infernal judges shalt thou go,
And thank my charitable doom, that sends
Thy soul to such great happiness, if thou
Esteem it happiness, and doe not fear
What thou would seem to wish.
No, tyrant, no;
Death cannot prove a punishment to me,
Whose life was nought but sorrow; freed from this
Unhappy world, in t'other I shall come
Most wished, and welcome to my fathers sight,
And that dear brother, for whose sake I die.
Thou shalt be banished from the light of day,
Nor then shalt thou immediately have power
To see that other world thou so desire.
Ianthus, till our farther pleasur's known
Guard safe Argiaes person; Aephytus;
See present execution done upon
Antigone; without the city walls
There is a new dug tomb, where never yet
Lay any funeral; in that enclose
Antigone alive, and bar it fast
As thou intend to live, there let her pray
To those infernal gods she so adores,
To keep her there, or take her quickly thence.
Oh black accursed doom; oh my sad fate,
That must report this news to noble Aemon,
And with that breath destroy the best of men.
Furies have left their dark abodes, to dwell
In human shapes on earth; there could not else
Live such a monster, one so opposite
To heaven and goodness, as cursed Croon is.
Ah dearest, dearest sister, did the fates
Differ so long our wished acquaintance here
To make vs meet so wretchedly at last?
Weep not dear sister; your calamity
Adds to my sufferings more: why were not all
The miseries of Cadmus woeful house
Confined within our selves, and bounded here
In fatal Thebes? why spread they so, to make
The best of souls partaker? happy else,
And safe for ever had your virtue lived
Admired in wealthy Argos, had you ne'er
Ne'er known the sad affinity of Thebes.
Why did the tyrant thus divide our sufferings?
The tomb, where thou art closed, had been to me
More pleasing then a palace.
Heaven forefend;
May the just gods hereafter recompense
Argiaes virtue with a happier love
Then Polynices was, and happier friends
Then Thebes can give, doe not lament for me,
Not fear the torments of my lingering death.
I am provided of a remedy
That shall delude the cruelty of Croon.
Farewell my dearest Aemon, whose loved presence
More then the sight of day afflicts my soul
To loose so soon, farewell where ere thou art,
Till in the other world we meet again.
No news of comfort, or discomfort yet?
Forgive me faithful Dircus, if my soul
My loue-sicke soul unjustly doe accuse
Thy diligent care, and think thee slack; my heart
Till thy return is stretched upon the wrack,
A rack of torturing thoughts, more painful far
Then tyranny could wish, or foes invent
To punish foes, dost thou delay, because
The news thou bring is ill? if my fair love
Be dead, or doomed to death, why dost thou keep
My soul from her Celestial company?
If all be well—but oh presumptous soul
Check that too happy thought again; I know
My fathers nature is unmovable
In all resolves, and this bound by an oath
So deep, so solemn, and inviolable
As ere't be broke will break this heart of mine.
See here he comes, speak man, what news? Ay me,
Thy very looks have blasted me before
Thy tongue can be their sad interpreter.
No news but black could force a soldiers tears.
Antigone is dead.
Not dead, my Lord,
But lives among the dead.
How man? Expound
This Aenigmatike sorrow.
In a tomb,
Where never more she shall behold the day
Nor Phoebus splendour, by the Kings command,
Is fair Antigone enclosed alive—
To famish there and die.
Enough, enough.
Shut up alive to starve, oh horrid doom!
As if that death alone, though ne'er so gentle,
Had not been punishment enough for her
For such a cause as that; but yet this sentence
Gives respite to her death, and leaves a way
To our prevention; I must spend no time
In thinking now; all action is required.
Thus it must be; be speedy faithful friend,
Run to my mother, and with all the vows,
And vehement protestations that thou can
From me assure her, if Antigone
Be not releast in time, it shall not lie
In all the power of earth to save my life.
Her love I fear not, though my father now
Have cast his frown upon me, to this place
Return again with all thy speed, whilst I
Devise some other means if that should fail.
Fear not my care, my Lord, but let me crave
(By your own worth I beg it, and that favour
Which you were ever pleased to reflect
On my poor services) till I return,
Attempt no other course, I will be speedy,
And if persuasions of the queen doe fail;
We'll find a way to save the princess life,
But tic a desperate way, and must be used
The last of all.
Oh comfortable Dircus,
Do but assure me that, and I shall owe
More then my life, and all my fortunes to thee
Upon mine honour, Isle not stir from hence
Till thou return, nor stay thee now t'enquire
More of the plot.
I will out-fly the wind.
Closed up alive within a tomb to starve!
Oh horrid cruelty, I would I could
Forget whose crime it were, that my free hate
Might not be checked by duty to a father.
Should I approve his action, it were a sin
So great against virtue, as no time could pardon;
Should I condemn it, I must then abhor
The offender, and that piety forbidds.
Oh why should piety, and virtue strive?
That piety, which I so much admired
In fair Antigone, my self transgress
In loving her cross to my fathers will.
Yet in obeying him I must approve
Her piety, or else condemn mine own.
What thoughts will reign in this divided breast.
Till Dircus doe return? but courage heart,
More strong is he, that can his doubts defer
Then he that known calamities does bear.
Oh smooth thy frown at last, great queen of heaven,
Let not unhappy Thebes for ever feel
The dire effects of thy too mindful wrath:
What could the wretched Similes offence,
Or poor Alemenas error more deserve,
Then they themselves have suffered from thy hand?
Or if succeeding branches needs must bleed
For parents faults, before a goddess wrath
Can be appeased, could not Actaeons wounds
Athamas madness, Inoes woeful death,
Nor pitied Oedipus his fall suffice?
Could not the actions of great Hercules,
Nor Bacchus glorious deeds, which all mankind
For ever shall renown, weigh down the crimes
Of their unhappy mothers, and such crimes,
As only Ioues resistless power could force?
A fiercer war by far now threatens Thebes
Then that which old Adrastus with the aide
Of all his rash confederates could make.
The mighty Theseus, whose all-conquering hand
No Kingdom yet with safety could withstand,
Armed with a cause, in which the prayers and wish
Of nations join, is marching towards vs.
In vain, alas, did we expect an end
Of this dire war, when both the princes died,
When the Argines fled, must out own victory
Become our grief? and draw upon vs now
A greater ruin then our foil had done?
2. It must, it must, since Croons cruelty,
Most unexpected, barbarous cruelty
Will have it so, oh friend, I could believe,
Were not the noble Aemon Croons son,
And heir apparent to our Diadem,
We had been happier far to have been subdued
Then brought by victory to such obedience.
True friend; there's all out trust, the gods in nought
But that brave Princes life, have left vs hope
Of any future fau••r to redress
The miseries, which we so long have felt.
But for this imminent, nay present danger
What were we best to doe?
Advise the King
Rather to change his purpose, then expose
His weakened Kingdom to great Theseus fury.
Though he should prove never so obstinate:
Better that any one for good advice
Should suffer from his fury, then the land
In general should smart. 2. You counsel well,
But who should be the man? 3. There's none so fit
As old Tiresias, that most holy man,
Taught from the gods aboue, whose words by all
Our Theban Princes have been long esteemed
As oracles, him Croon will obey.
1. Then thither let vs, and with him advise
How to redress our present miseries.
THat was my fear before, I thought my son
Too far in love to bear, with patience,
His Ladies death, and therefore did entreat
The King with tears, and sighs, that would have moved
A rock of flint, but hee more hard then rocks,
Deafer then Northern winds, with rage repulsed
My oft repeated suite, and now, ay •e,
What most I feared is proved, my son will die;
For he has vowed never to pardon her.
Must I return the Prince this killing news?
No gentle Dircus, stay a little while,
Twill not be long before the King return,
Isle move him once again.
Your highness pardon,
Not for the world would I delay the time—
Upon uncertainties; I fear I have
Already stayed too long. My quick return
Is the only means to keep the prince alive.
Please it your highness then when I am gone
To move the King, and fear not, gracious madam,
The Princes life a while how ere.
Farewell,
True faithful Dircus, all the gods assist
Thy good intents, and bless thy loyalty.
What, weeping still?
Would I could weep my self
Like Niobe to marble, and become
A woeful tomb to Aemon, whom my womabe
With fates disastrous brought into the world,
My virtuous Aemon,
Why, is Aemon dead?
Why doe you ask, that mean to murder him?
How? murder him?
Yes in Antigone
His most inseparable love.
Must then
Th'audacious giglot, live unpunished,
To brave a King?
Were kings ordained to kill
Virtues true servants, and control her laws?
Where is the king?
Hoe's here. What mischief now
Come thou to utter, never from thy tongue
Flowed any good to me.
A guilty man
Was never pleased with truth, but hear me,
I come to thee sent from the wrathful gods
To let thee know thy guilt, and punishment.
Great plagues from heaven, if Tiresias
Truly divine, are threaten'd'gainst thy house.
When I for thee unthankful man prepared
A sacrifice within, the opened beast
No signs but sad and fatal did afford.
None but the infernal gods deigned to appear.
The blood was black, the burning entrails gave
No flame at all, but darkly did consume,
Mouldering away to ashes, and with black
Unsavoury smoke clouded the fearful ayre.
Unto our augury no birds at all
But sad, and baleful birds of night appeared.
Nor to our orisons would th'inuoked gods
Vouchsafe an answer, but in signs alone
Declared their wrath. The cause of these their threats
Against thy house is for thy cruelty
To good Antigone, and if she die
These plagues will surely fall.
Can we avoid them.
By sparing her?
The gods aboue relent
At humane penitence, and hear their prayers,
Nor like the fiends are they inexorable.
No longer,
shalt thou now deny me
Since heaven is joined with my petition.
You are not constant in persisting thus,
But obstinate.
Now I renew my suite.
In which we bend our knnes, release, O king,
For Thebes, for Aemons sake, that virtuous maid,
And to prevent a fierce and cruel war,
Vouchsafe to grant our suite, and give vs leave
To bury those dead Graecians in the field.
No more of them; that last must not be granted,
For our command is past too far already,
And must be justified, not changed now.
But for the life of that Antigone,
Although it cannot suite well with our justice
To pardon her rebellious stubbornness,
Yet she is thine Eurydice, to thee
Do we refer her wholly; take this ring,
And absolute power to dispose of her,
Either to pardon, or to punishment.
The gods reward thee for it; Isle go my self
And bring her out with speed from that sad place;
Heaven grant that grief have not already killed her.
To arms, my Lord, if any arms so soon
Can rescue Thebes from quick destruction.
The mighty Theseus threatens you at hand.
Why let him come: Should I esteem the name
Of Thesous such a buggebeare it should fright
Me from my constant resolution?
Have our late conquests, have the overthrows
Of Argor and Mycenae taught the world
Nothing of vs? look on you purple fields
With slaughter died, and learn what Thebes can doe,
Where Capanaeus, and stout Tydeus
Parthenopaeus and Hippomedon
Lie weltering in their gores, and should we then
So tremble at the threats of Theseus?
No power must daunt me; it is not Kingly now
Upon constraint to change my rough decree.
Though I relented now, though my soft breast
Were moved with piety, yet thought of honour
Would conquer that, as now it conquers fear,
The fear of Theseus hand; nor have I left
A place for wisdom now; it comes too late;
I must prevent or meet my instant fate.
Yonder's the tomb, my Lord, which though it seem
Too hard, and solid for our strength to force,
I know a place will open presently.
Then let vs break this wealthy Cabinet,
And take from thence a jewel, which the ransom
Of all the Kings on earth would be a price
To poor to purchase: Knew thou, happy cave,
Or knew the world what true vnualew'd wealth
Thy bare unpolished bosom did contain,
Thou would despise the richest temples reared
On Marble Columns, and high-roof'd with gold;
To thee would men with adoration come
As to a place more sacred then the cave
That nourished Cretin Jove, then Bacchus Nice,
Or the Oetaean Mount, from whence in flames
The great Al•ides mounted to the sky.
But I forget my self, I first must know
Whether I live or no; for in that cave,
Not hee•e does. Aemon breath. Antigone.
Who calls Antigone? is it my Aemon?
Dircus I live; heard thou that heavenly voice
Which has inspired a happier life into me
Then my creation did. Lets loose no time
In this sweet business.
Isle op the tomb
Immediately, my Lord.
Sad Thebes adieu,
Isle find some happier country to convey
My envied treasure to. Possessed of her
I shall be richer then the Theban crown
Can make me; speak how fares my fairest love;
Shall we be gone?
I would, my dearest Aemon,
Begone with thee rather then live; but fate
Too cruel, fate prevents it.
How? what fate
Can let our journey, if thy love consent?
I love thee, Aemon, better then my life,
And never truly wished to live till now,
But now I cannot live.
Oh doe not mock
My joys, Antigone, or if thou doest not,
Tell me what sad disaster can befall.
That sad disaster is befallen already;
Fearing the pains that such a lingering death
Might bring upon me, I have tan already
A gentle poison down, which long before
Against some such dire occasion I prepared,
I feel it work; my vital spirits fail.
My dearest love farewell. Live long and happy;
Let fate hereafter recompense to thee
What ere her cruelty against me has wrought.
No fate can make me happy, I am lost
Beyond her cure.
What end of tragedies
Can woeful Thebes for ever hope to see
After this sorrow. Oh I more then fear
The Princes fury;
Her white soul is fled.
What vnsubstantiall bubbles are the best
Of humane joys? how from the top of all
My hopes and comforts in one fatal minute
Has envious fortune thrown me down again
Into the depth of misery, and woe.
Oh fortune how extreme thou art in all
Thy favours and thy frowns!
Most noble prince,
Collect that strength of man, which all the world
Expects from you, and arm your self to bear
With fitting patience this calamity.
The passive fortitude is great and noble
As is the active.
Strike that string no more,
Doe not in vain torment a desperate man
With thy dull counsel: Tic as possible
Thou should persuade a dead man to arise
After his soul is fled, as me to live.
Now she is dead, I doe conjure thee Dircus
By all the love thou bear me, by that faith
Which I have ever found and prized in thee,
To leave me here.
My Lord, I will obey;
And thus I take my leave.
Too cruel Dircus.
Was I not miserable enough before,
But thou must load my sufferings with thy death?
What cause hadd'st thou to die? thou hast not lost
A love, why should my loss extend so far
As to the ruin of so brave a friend?
Thy death has injured fair Antigone,
And made a strange Division in my grief.
For all the sorrow which this breast could hold,
Was due to her before. I must encroach
Upon her right in spending tears for thee.
My breast's too narrow for so great a grief,
And must be quickly opened. Thou pure soul
Of my Antigone, which still suruiu'st,
Though this fair palace be demolished quite
By deaths ungentle hand, thou heavenly substance,
True object of a chaste, and spotless love,
Thy Aemon comes; and from these bonds of nature
Flies forth to meet thee in the other world,
To wed thee there; to finish there the rites
Of long-cross'd love, and taste eternal sweets.
Oh horrid spectacle! see Aephytus,
The Prince, Antigone, and Dircus dead.
All dead?
Ay me.
Look to the Queen, she sownes
Alas, tic more then so; cold death has seized her
I fear, beyond recovery, Let's in,
And certify the King, who now may see.
The dire effects of his rash cruelty.
Our warre's already ended, and the death
Of savage Croon, whose dire soul is fled
To pacify the Argiues wandering ghosts,
Hath satisfied our justice, here we sheath
Our sword again, and free your town from fears.
And now enter with fitting obsequies
The Carcasses of all your slauter'd foes.
Let cruel Croon too, though he at all
Deserve it not, have rites of funeral.
Those pious rites will we perform with joy,
And thanks to mighty Theseus, may the Gods.
Assist thee ever; and great Hercules
Beholding thy brave actions from the sky
Rejoice, and not disdain at all to be
Esteemed thy aequall by posterity.
Send back Orgies to her father's court
With fair attendance; and tic left to you
To place the Theban sceptre where tic due.
Thebes humbly bows to mighty Theseus,
And lays her crown and seepter at his feet.
No; still let Thebes be governed by her own;
T'was not our wars intention to enthral
Your land, but free it from a tyrants yoke;
And to preserve the conquered, not destroy them.
We drew the sword of justice, not of conquest,
Ambitiously to spread our Kingdoms bounds,
But to avenge the laws of nature broke;
This act being done, Theseus is peace again.
Soldiers march on to Athens. Thebes adieu.
Now let mankind enjoy a happy peace;
Oh let no monsters breed on earth, to glut
Themselves with human slaughter, let no thieves
Infest the woods; no tyrants stain the cities
With blood of innocents? but if such monsters
Must needs be bred to plague the wretched earth,
Against nature, and her holy laws to strive,
Let them appear while Theseus is alive.

THere were two brethren Citizens of Athens, the one called Chromes the o∣there Phania. Chromes being to travel into Asia left the charge of his then only daughter Basibula an infant with his brother Phania. Shortly after his departure out of Attica, Phania also to avoid the rage of war growing hot in Greece, shipped himself thence with his little niece, directing his course towards the place where he supposed Chromes abode: but suffering shipwreck was cast with the little one, upon the shore of the Isle of Intros, where getting entertainment of a poor Islander he shortly after died. His host after his decease, changes the child's name from Pasibula into Glycerium; and having bred her up for some years in e∣quall education with his own natural child called Chry∣sis, himself also dies. Chromes in the Interim had returned to Athens, and there had another daughter named Philu∣mena: And all this while supposed his brother and his o∣there daughter to have long since perished at sea. Chrisis being left fatherless and poor leaves Intros, and taking Glycerium with her sails to Athens; where they dwell to∣gether as reputed sisters. Chrisis turns harlot: her lovers draw along with them to her house one Pamphilus son of Simo an ancient Athenian Citizen. Pamphilus falling in love with Glycerium gets her with child, and affianceth
himself to her. Chromes upon a public fame of Pamphi∣lus his virtues treats with Simo for a match between their children Pamphilus and Philumena: and a marriage is agreed upon between the two old fathers, Pamphilus be∣ing not made acquainted. Chrysis soon after dies, at whose funerals Pamphilus occasionally discovered signs of very ardent affection to Glycerium; which Chromes hearing of, renounceth him for son in law as one apparently be∣sotted and entangled with extraordinary love to a strag∣ling strumpet (so ignorantly he stiled the issue of his pro∣per loins) Pamphilus (now first hearing of the determi∣ned match) is glad such marriage is disappointed. Simo frets at it. And now is the prefixed day of marriage come, be∣ing the day containing the argument of this Coinedie. Simo makes show to all the people of his family, as if the marriage were on this day to be solemnised, and this he did out of a foxlike subtlety to feel his sons inclinati∣on to marriage, and upon his refusal to have just occa∣zion of complaint against him, which hitherto he had not. And if his son should declare readiness to entertain the match, he then thought it would prove no such diffi∣cult matter to cuerrule Chromes; and so the business to go on as it was first determined. Simo having thus proie∣cted matters, meets his son; and wills him to pray to the gods for success upon his marriage instantly to bee a∣complished. The son at his fathers salutation stands thunderstrucken, ignorant what course to take for pre∣uention. Dauus comes to him in this distraction, at what time one Charinus was with him. This Charinus was a young man inflamed with the love of Philumena, the intended bride; and was now in a manner desperate, when he un∣derstood that Pamphilus was that day to marry her: Pam∣philus assuers him of his purposed resolution to the con∣trarie. This was the theme of their discourse when Dauus came upon them. Dauus (now) was Simoes servant, a fellow
of good reach: and he upon grounds reasonable had con∣ceiued his old masters fetch in this pretended marriage, which (having sent away Charinus) he opens to Pamphilus: resolving him that in all likelihood the old man did but cast out a hook to catch at his inclination to Glycerium: wishing him therefore without all scruple to promise his father all obedience and readiness in embracing this fa∣ced marriage; he further intimates, that no hazard was likely hereby to ensue: for that Chromes having once open∣lie refused him, would not (at least so suddenly) entertain him for a son in law. Pamphilus puts the advice in exe∣cution. Simo and Dauus venture either of them upon the ha∣zard, but Simo his luck carries it. For Chromes is won to a new consent, and now is Pamphilus in danger to bee cast upon a present marriage, where hee never intended. What may Dauus how do? author of a counsel not so un∣likely as unlucky? Chance presents him occasion, and he hath good brain to make use of the least offered occasi∣on: what is that? Glycerium is brought to bed: the new borne child is by her maid, but by Dauus direction) laid at Simo's door: and this is done just when Chromes must of necessity see it: Dauus further so carries the matter, that Chromes understands who is father, who is mother to the child. These things instly moan Chromes to a second re∣nunciation: Hence great stereo arises: Crito a man of Intros (arrived at Athens upon news of Crysis her death, being next heir to her estate) ends all; by discovering Glyceriums freedom &amp; parentage. Pamphilus marries Gly∣cerium now again known by her first name Pasibula; Charinus marries the other sister Philumena.
SImo An old man careful of his son, whom hee loved at first for his reported virtues: and after he once doubted his carriage, showed his greater love in his care of him. In the first Seen he carries himself mild in discourse and behaviour: and still after in∣creaseth in angry mood, till at length he grows to rage and passion.
Pamphilus. Son to Simo, a well qualified young man and faithful lover.
Dauus Servant of the family, subtle wife, consident.
Dromo. Another servant, only used for Dauus punish∣meant.
Sosia. Snno's freed-man, a protaticke person brought in only, to whom the ground of the argument might be opened.
Chromes. an old man of a quiet and tranquil spirit.
Glycerium. Daughter of Chromes not presented on the Stage; neither speaks but within doors in labour of child-birth:
Lesbia. Her midwife.
Misis. Hermaid-seruant.
Charinus. A young man, simple and ignorant.
Byrrhia. His man for wit aboue his master. Discreet.
Crito. A stranger of Intros, poor yet honest, wise and of a good spirit and stomach.
Our Poet first setting his mind to write,
Deemed this the sole maine charge upon him laid,
To please the people with the plays he made:
But now he finds that he misreckond quite.
For, that he cannot (Prologue wise) now lay
The argument of this his play aright,
Is caused by an old rank'rous Poets spite;
Who drutes him to clear faults, leave the meant way.
Now pray observe their cauellings: those plays
Andria and Perinthia, which Menander wrote,
(Know one, know both) not much unlike in plot,
Are different yet both in their stile and phrase.
He not denies that from Perinthia
Those things which seemed convenient in the same,
He (as his own) hath drawn into the frame,
And course of this presented Andria.
This is the thing they challenge: and they brawl
That in such sort a cleanly Comedy
Should not be hotch-potchd. These men verily
While much they seem, show they know nought at all:
Who him accusing draw his presidents
Nauius, Plautus, Ennius, in like crime,
To whose mistakings he would rather climb,
Then follow these men's obscure diligence.
I further wish'hem hence soorth keepe'hem still;
And cease with evil language him to sting;
Lest their ill doing in their ears do ring.
Spectators kind, of you we crave good will;
In silence shown and kind attention;
That without prejudice our play y'ould hear:
Thence you may fully know, if it rest clear,
That all our future purposd action
Of new made plays be to be banished quite;
Without aduentring your hereafter sight:
YOu sirs have those things in: away I say.
draw near; I am to speak with you.
I think th'errand given;
your meaning is
I look to those things careful cookery.
No: tic another matter.
Pray say on
What tic, my art may further doe for you.
Here's need of no such art, in what I purpose;
But of those parts which I have ever noted
To dwell in thee; trust, and true secrecy.
I waite your pleasure.
Since I bought thee first
Being then a yongling, in what gentle sort,
In what due course, thou ledst thy service with me,
Thy self well know: and for I found thee careful
In thy employments, the best good I had
To answer it, I gave thee; liberty.
I •••re it sir in mind.
And I repent nor.
〈◊〉 is my harts joy Master, if I did
Or 〈◊〉 can doe, ought to your satisfaction;
And further owe you thanks that you acknowledge
I well accepted: yet it troubles me,
For this remembrancing your benefit,
Seems to upbraid me, as forgetting it.
Pray in one word acquaint me with your pleasure.
I will; but first I tell thee of this thing,
This which thou think is no meant marriage.
Why make you as it were then?
Thou shalt hear
From the beginning all: and by that means
Shalt better know my Sons forepassed life,
My present purpose, and thy future charge.
My Son having past his childhood Sosia
Hath now more scope allowed him; before
How could one know or fist his disposition,
While tender age, sear, tutors awed him?
Sir, you say right.
What almost all youth doe,
To set their mind on one some chosen course;
That to breed Hearse, this Hounds, and both to hunt,
A third to study of Philosophy:
He none of these followed professedly,
Aboue the rest: but yet all moderately.
I joyed at it.
Sir, not without good cause:
"For to oredoe no one thing, in my sense
"To mans life is of chiefest consequence.
Such his behaviour; all those gently
To bear and forbear, that he kept withal;
Apply himself to please and humour all;
Cross none, nor proudly seek to overtop
His young companions: so that easily
He got him friends and praise; yet without envy.
He bare him wisely: for in this times state
Sweet yielding procures friends; blunt truth gets hate.
Mean while a certain woman three years since
Drawn by her wants and kindreds negligence,
From Anaros Isle came to our neighbourhood;
Of passing beauty, flouring womanhood.
I sear this Andrian woman bodes no good.
She at the first a sparing chaste life led;
At Rock and Loom, hard labord to get bread:
But when a first, a second, a third came;
Tendering their loves, gifts promised with the same,
(As all our natures are prone commonly
From labour unto wanton liberty)
She stooped to lure, began the gainful trade.
By those that then chief love unto her made,
My Son was drawn along occasionally
To banquet with 'hem; keep 'hem company.
I to my self — Sure the young fry is tan:
He has caught the poisoned bait; with it, his bane.
These lovers servants passing to and fro
I every morning watch; and calling to
One that I spied, thus question; Prithee lad,
Who yesterday yond Chrysis company had?
So was the Andrian called.
Sir. I conceive you.
The answer was, Phoedrus, or Nicerate,
Or Clinias (for at that time those three
Her jointly loved.) I reply presently,
And what did Pamphilus? what? (answers he.)
He staked his share, and supped: this gladded me.
At other times I cast more news to learn;
Still nothing found that did my Son concern.
I thought him now proofe-temper'd against excess,
Great pattern of a settled staidness.
For he that deals with natures of this kind,
Yet thereby grows not slagg'ring in his mind;
To such a mans own hands thou moist be bold
To leave the free reigns of his life in hold.
As this gave me most satisfying pleasure,
So all tongues talked my good, proclaimed my treasure,
In having such a qualified Son.
What should I make further relation?
Chromes our neighbour drawn by this same bruit,
Freely comes to me; and makes earnest suit
To place his daughter, yea his only one
With a large dowre as wife unto my Son:
I agreed the marriage, on his motion;
And this the day, it is appointed on.
What barie now stopped? why in very deed
According to the show, it not proceed?
Isle tell thee: few days after this befell,
Our neighbour Chrysis died.
That's chanced well.
You have reuin'd me; I much doubted her.
With Chrysis lovers still my Son comes there
Alike her funeral looks to; alike cheer
Sometimes of sadness shows, sometimes alike
Weeps with 'hem: I his carriage well did like
Thus argued I; Her death how tenderly
For very small acquaintance doth he take?
What, if himself had loved her? what for me,
What will he doe for me, his Fathers sake?
All this I thought in my simplcitie,
Merely the functions of humility,
And of kind heart. Why leng then I my tale?
My self for his sake tend the funeral.
Dreaming as yet no evil.
Ha! what means this?
Isle cause thee know. The dead corps is brought out;
Along we go; now there amidst the throng
Of wonten, I a maiden very young
Perchance espied; of person—
Perhaps handsome.
I, and of countenance Sosia so delightsome,
So modest, fair, that nothing might her stain:
Who for she seemed to me, in all the train
Most to lament; and was aboue the rest
Of sweet and comely personage and face.
I pressed near to the Maids, asked what she was:
They told me Chrysis sister. Instantly
It struck me cold at heart. Oh God! thought I,
Hence grew his tears: his tenderness she breeds.
How I doe fear whither your tale proceeds.
The Funeral goes on: we attend the same
To th'Sepulchre she's come: into the flame
She's put: all weep. The maid I named late
Approached the fire, as careless, desperate;
To her evident danger: here my frighted Son
Well showed his long concealed affection
So close dissembled: to her hies he fast,
And both his arms folding about her wast,
My dear Glycerium says he, how dost? say,
What cause hast thou to make thy self away?
Then she (that all their indeard love might spy)
Cast her self on him, weeping tenderly.
How? what doe you say?
Home I get me straight,
Enraged and fretting; yet no cause of weight
Appeared to me to chide him: he might plead,
What foul fact have I done? what merited?
Or wherein faulted, Father? one that sought
To burn her self, I hindered (as I ought)
And saved her life. It were a fair reply.
You weigh things well; for if deservedly
He may be chidden which helped life to save,
Who hurts or spoils one, what should that man have?
Next day comes Chromes to me, urging thus,
Oh case to be lamented! Pamphilus
(I find clear) holds yond stranger harlotry
In place of a just wife: this earnestly
I doe deny, he stiffly holds. In fine,
I so part with him, as one utterly
Denies to give his Daughter to my Son.
Chid you not Pamphilus yet?
Nor yet I saw
A grounded cause to build a chiding on.
Why I pray?
Thus my Son might urge his law:
Your self sir set a limitation
To this my course: the time is coming on,
I must my self to another will apply:
Let mead interim mine own satisfy.
For what cause then of blaming will you 〈◊〉
If for loose love he shall dome to marry
That is the first occasion that I seek
Against him; and the present way I make
By this self marriage, if he show mislike
Is hereby true pretence of blame to take.
Besides, if wicked Dauus have a foot
Any contriuement, that he now consume
His stock of knavery whilst it cannot hurt
Who (I imagine) tooth and nail will practise,
And that with purpose rather to cross me
Then please my Son.
Why should you so conceive?
Make thou a question? evil minds, ill manners.
Whom if in any thing I shall discover —
But what need talk? if happily it fall
(As I doe wish) my Son be nothing backward,
It only rests, that I persuade with Chromes:
Which I hope may be wrought. Now, be it your charge
Well to bear up this seeming marriage;
Fright Dauus; observe my Sons carriage;
And note their consultations.
Tic enough; Isle see to 't: shall we in.
Go before, I follow.
There is no question, my Son would decline
This marriage; that I marked in Dauus sear,
When he had heard that wedding did go forward.
But he himself comes forth.
I Marld if this would end so, and still doubted
Whereto my Masters caline remissness tended:
Who when he saw his Son could have no wife,
Never made word to vs on it; nor gave sign
Of being troubled at it.
Now he will
Talk to you on it; and as I doe suppose
To your no little cost.
This was his cunning,
To lead vs on in saire fools paradise;
And in our secure dreaming take vs napping,
Having no time to cast prevention.
A fox in faith.
What first the knave talks on?
My Master, and vnheeded!
Dauus—
Ha, what is the affair?
Come you hither to me.
What now trow is in working?
What foist thou?
What sir the business?
Dost thou demand that?
Folk talk my Sonne's in love.
That byr'lady
Concerns the world to think on.
Dost mark me
In what I say or not?
Oh, yes sir well.
But now of this for me to make inquiry
Were no kind Fathers part. What hitherto
He has done, I pass not: while the time permitted
I gave him way to take his course and pleasures:
His years now call for a new life, new manners.
Henceforward Dauus I require, or rather
(If the word may befit me) I request thee,
Retriue my Son from this loose liberty.
What may this mean?
All these loose libertines
That wantonly doe love, cannot endure
To hear of wiving.
So indeed they say
Beside, if such one chance to light upon
Some patron of his inclination,
His raw greene sickly mind he commonly
Wonts to the worser part still to apply.
Troth sir I understand you not.
How, not?
No verily: I am your plain man Dauus;
No riddle-teller, cunning Oedipus.
Thould'st then in plain terms have me speak my mind?
Yes, pray at any hand sir.
If I find
That thou to day use any cunning crotchet,
Whereby to hinder this intended wedding;
Or fine would show thy wits sine nimbleness:
When I have first well whipped thee, in the Mill
Isle thrust thee, to thy very dying day:
With this proviso and condition,
If ever I thence free thee, Isle grind for thee.
What, understand me yet, or not yet neither?
Yes clearly now; you've used no round-abouts,
But come to the matter roundly.
In ought else
Save this, I better could endure a slighting.
Pray sir good words yet.
Make thou a jest on it?
I know thee to a hair: but I doe tell thee,
Least thou should rashly venture. Doe not say
But th'hast had fair warning given thee: look to it.
Upon my faith now Dauus here's no leisure
Left thee, to rest or dream upon the matter;
For ought I gather of the old mans purpose
Touching this wedding. which not wisely helped
Me or young Master undoes utterly.
Not can I judge my best course, him to succour,
Or lean to the old mans counsel: forsake him?
I doubt his life; assist him? th'others threats;
Whom to o'er reach it's hard. First he has discovered
All of their love: then keeps hard watch o'er me,
Least I should lead some trumping card in th'way:
Which if he find, I'm lost: or else at pleasure
Heel take occasion, be it right, be it wrong;
And to the Mill I shall be tumbled headlong.
To all these hazards comes another mischief:
This Andrian woman, be she his wise, or leman,
Is great with child by him. Now, tic worth nothing
To hear their bold adventure: none can judge it
Fond lovers fancy, but mere frenzy rather:
For whether boy or girl she shall bring forth,
They have resolved to keep and nourish it.
Besides they coin a pretty cunning fable,
Among themselves, that shoe's free Attic borne.
There was long since (say they) an ancient Merchant
Shipwrecked on Intros Island; who there died;
And that with him then saved, Chrysis Father
Took up a little girl. Conceited fiction!
To me it seems unlikely: yet they sooth
Themselves in the tale. But see Mysis coming 
From out Glyceriums house. Isle to the Market
To seek out Pamphilus: for fear his Father
Vnwates doe press him with this business. 
GOod God Archillis, I doe hear you woman:
You would have Lesbia fetched; upon my word
She is a drunken gossip, and vnheedie:
And one scarce fit to whom you may commit
A woman in first childbirth: Yet He fetch her.
Note you the old ones importunity!
None but her pot companion will serve turn.
But I pray God grant this a good delivery:
And that the Midwife rather may elsewhere
Neglect, then here. But what may be the cause
I Pamph' us see so much disquieted?
I fear what it may be. Isle stay a while
To know the reason of his troubled gesture.
IS this kind dealing? courteous attempt?
Is this a Fathers carriage?
What is that?
Oh gods and men your faith! what can be said,
Neglect, disgrace, or scorn, if this be none?
Say he had meant to marry me to day;
Ought I not have foreknowne it? ought I not
Have bin made privy to it?
Out alas,
Wretch that I am, what doe I hear him talk of?
What should I think of Chromes? who denied
To trust me as a husband with his daughter?
Changes he mind, because I rest unchanged?
That he should still thus obstinately endeavour
Me most accursed to divorce and sever
From my Glycertam? which, if it fall out,
I am undone for ever. Amongst men
Was ever yet found out one more disgraceful?
More every way unhappy then my self?
Men, gods assist me! is there left no way
For me to shun Chromes affinity?
How many ways have I bin scorned? refused?
(All done, all ended) the other day cast of
Own now again required: and why so?
Unless (I guess) h'has some deformed piece,
Which when he cannot fasten upon any,
He seeks to 〈◊〉 on me?
This talk of his
Kills me poor wretch with sear.
For what should I
Now of my Father speak? Oh God! that he
So weighty a thing should doe so carelessly.
Passing now by me in the Market-place,
Go, get you home, says he; and fit your self:
This day you must be married Pamphilus.
To m• his words seemed of such sound and sense,
As he had said, get home and hang thy self.
I stood confounded at it. Doe you think
I had a word to utter? any excuse?
Though foolish, false, vnsitting? I stood dumb.
Yet had I known't before, what could I doe?
If any now should ask me, I would surely
Use other course, then (as I did) keep silence.
But now what first thing shall I enter on?
So many cares, several distraction,
Puzzles my mind: love, pity of her, fear
About this marriage so loathed, so near:
Then the respect I owe my Father, who
So mildly hath me suffied hitherto
Without restraint to run my own free race,
In every course I listed: with what face
May I now cross his pleasure? wretched me!
I know not what to rest on.
I poor woman
Doubt th'end of this irresolution.
But now tic very needful that I draw him
To speak with her; or else of her
Find some discourse to him. Whilst yet his mind
Hangs wavering, every little moment turns it.
Who first talks hereabout? Mysis well met.
Pamphilus and you.
How does my dearest?
How does she? marie sir in pangs of travail:
And many troublous thoughts come in her mind
About this day, once purposed for your wedding.
She further doubts, least you may mind to leave her.
May I be thought to mind a thing so foul?
And through my fault suffer mine own dear soul
To be abused? trusting her heart, her life
To me? whom I have made my dearest wife?
May I permit her chaste well trained mind
Enforced by foul want to change it kind?
No, I will never doe it.
If it lay
In you, I need not fear: but how you may
Be forced by your Father, is the doubt.
What Mysis dost thou think me such a love?
So ungrateful further? so inhumane, bestial?
That nor acquaintance, love, or shame, at all
May move or prompt me to keep plighted faith?
One thing I know, that she deserved hath
That you should mind her.
Should mind her Mysis?
Even now the very latest words of Chrysis
Touching Glycerium, rest imprinted here;
Here at my heart. Her last hour drawing near,
She called for me: I came to her: all you
Voided the room: being alone we two
She thus began. Kind Pamphilus you see
Glyceriums youth and beauty; verily
Two weak unsafe guards (as your self perceive)
To keep her ch•ste, guard the small stock I leave.
Wherefore by this right hand I crave of thee,
By thy good nature, thy fidelity:
I adiure thee by her here vnfriendednesse
Thou would not leave her: doe not part from her.
If as a brother I thee still respected,
If she of all men hath thee best affected,
As she in all things sought thy full contentment
In true observance, due obedience.
I leave thee as a friend, a guardian, Father,
A husband to her. All the little wealth
I leave behind, I trust to thy disposing.
Then her hand taking, in my hand she clasped it;
And forthwith died. I then there recein'd her;
Received will keep.
Indeed sir I hope so.
But why dost now come from her?
I am sent
To fetch the Midwife.
Oh, I prithee hasten.
And hear you? see you mention not a word
About the marriage: least it may perhaps
Add to her weakness.
I doe mind it sir.
what say thou Byrrhia? must she then to day
Be married unto Pamphilus?
Yes sir.
How dost thou know it?
But en very now
Dauus so told me in the Market-place.
Accursed, wretched me! how hitherto
My thoughts have waited upon hope and fear?
But hope now being fled, my fainting spirits
Wasted with care, yield to confusion.
Pray, for Gods love Charinus, since that things
Cannot be as you would, seek to desire
What you may compass.
There is nothing else
In all the world I wish, but Philumen.
But how much better were it, to endeavour
To vnlodge this idle love out of your heart,
Then thus to talk of that which adds more fuel
To this your bootless vain affection?
All men in health can easily prescribe
To the sick patient good directions.
If thou were in my case thy mind would alter.
Well sir then doe your pleasure.
But lo yonder
Where Pamphilus is. I doe mean to venture
All trials yet, ere I doe fully perish.
What means he now to doe?
I will request,
Beseech him, open to him all my love.
I hope I may obtain of him at least,
For some few days to put the wedding of.
I trust in th'Interim somewhat may be done.
That somewhat is just nothing.
Byrrhia,
What think thou of it? shall I go to him?
What else? if he will yield to nothing, yet
Let him suspect, you have good mind to horn him
If he shall marry her.
Away liens varlet,
With this thy lewd suspicion.
Charinus,
God save you.
And you also Pamphilus.
I was a coming to you, with desire
To crave hope, help, health, counsel at your hands.
Troth I have neither place for counsel left,
Nor means to help. but what's the matter man?
Are you to day to marry?
So they say.
If you doe Pamphilus, I can assure you,
This is the last day you shall ever see me.
How so?
I shame to tell it, Birrhia prithee
Declare the matter to him.
Yes, I will.
What is it?
Sir, he loves your wise that shall be.
Troth he and I are of two several minds:
I can assure thee. Prithee hearken hither
Charinus; hast not had to doe with her
More, then thy man here talks of.
Pamphilus,
No o'my troth. I am. Oh, how I wish thou hottest.
Now I entreat thee by our friendship, love;
First that you would not marry her at all.
Isle (what I can) avoid it.
If it full so,
You cannot shun it, or doe else affect it—
Affect it?
Yet defer it of awhile,
That I may void hence somewhere, and not see it.
Charinus, now hear me. I doe not think it
At any time a part of honesty,
When one deserves nought, to expect for thanks.
Id rather shun this match then thou obtain't.
You put new life into me.
If thou can now,
Or this this thy man here; work, invent, fashion,
Take all the course you can to make her thine:
I will find means, that mine she shall not be.
I have enough.
And in good time I see
Danus, whose counsel I rely upon.
But thou dull head can nothing cast about
Worth knowing. Can you leave vs?
Yes, and gladly.
GOod God! what good news bring I?
But where•row may I find Pamphilus out?
To ••d his fears, and sill his heart with comfort.
He is jocund, at what I know not.
Tut, man, tic, nothing.
The mischief now afoot, he yet not hears of.
Who if he have heard of this prepared wedding —
Doe you not hear him?
I guess verily
Hunts all the town ore for me, like a madman.
But where shall I look for him? to what place
First bend my course?
Why speak you not unto him?
Isle get me hence, and seek him.
Dauus, stay:
Come hither.
Who first calls? Oh Pamphilus,
I sought you: you here too Charinus? brave.
Both in the nick. You're the men, I looked for.
Oh Dauus I me undone.
Tut, list to me.
I am for ever lost.
Your fear I know.
My life now lies at stake.
Yours I know too.
I must be married.
That I also know.
I, but this very day.
You weary me
With news, that I am perfect in already.
You fear to have her; you to miss her.
Th'hast it.
I that's the point.
Well, and I say the point
Has then no danger in it. Observe me.
For Gods sake rid me quickly of this fear.
Lo, I fice thee. Chromes now's not minded
To trouble you with a wife.
How doest know it?
Your Father took me by the sleeve even now,
And told me this day he would marry you:
Adding much more, which now's no time to talk on.
Presently hastening to acquaint you with it,
I ran to the Market-place: there missing you
I got to a high raised ground, and round about
Looked to espy you; could not. Then by ch••ce
I saw Charinus servant, Birrhia:
Of him I asked, he said he had not seen you:
It vexed me: still I cast what I should doe.
Returning thence, a certain realousie
By circumstances bred came in my mind.
V•ph! here is small roast; the old man sad, a wedding?
It scarce hangs well together.
Whereto this?
I by me straight to hremes; thither come,
I note a silent stillness at the door.
Now, this gave me good heart.
Well said, go on.
Somewhile I there continue: all that while
I saw no creature passing out or in;
No matron there; no decking of the house;
No stir; I nearer came, and peeped in.
I know they are good conjectures.
Doe such things
Think you agree unto a nuptial day?
In troth I think not Dauus.
Doe you say, think?
You construe things not well: the case is plain.
Besides, thence going I met Chromes servant
With herbs and small sprots for the old mans supper.
Dauus, through thee I am now rid of care.
Nay of my faith not so.
Why man prithee?
For thou conclude, he will not give her him.
Conceited pate! as if it therefore followed,
If he not have her, you must marry her.
Unless you looked toot, make your suit, and means
T'her fathers friends, you may hap hop wiuelesse.
Thou promptst me well; Isle go about it straight.
Though ought this hope have failed me: fare ye well.
what means my father then?
Why doubles he?
Isle tell you. If he now should chafe at you,
Cause Chromes will not let you have his daughter,
Himself may see he plainly injured you:
If he should press you on, before he knew
How your mind stood inclined to the match.
But if you shall stiffly deny to wed her;
Then he will justly lay the blame on you:
Then shall we have a coil on it.
What would have me
To undergo this marriage?
Pamphilus,
He is your Father: and it will be hard
T'oppose him: this your sweet heart too (you know)
Is friendless here. Heel find cause easily
To thrust her out o'th'towne.
Out of the town man?
And speedily too.
Counsel me then Dauus.
What I should doe.
Tell him you'll marry her.
How?
What's the matter?
Should I tell him so?
Why not?
I ne'er will do it.
Deny me not.
Persuade me not.
Note, what hence will follow.
To be shut out from her, mewed up to this.
No, no such thing. I guess your father thus
Will say to you: my purpose Pamphilus
Is that this day you wed: then answer you,
Sir, I am ready: pray you tell me now
For what cause can he chide you? by this means
His settled plots you shall disorder clean:
Your self yet run no hazard; for the thought
Is groundless, vain, that Chromes may be wrought
To give his daughter: nor doe you let fall
Your course, least he his purpose should recall.
Tell you your Father that you like the Bride:
That, when he would, he have no cause to chide.
And for the dangerous passage that you fear;
Isle steer your course, and waft you over clear.
No man will give his daughter as a wife
To one discovered of your wanton life.
Heel with some poor man rather seek to place her,
Then suffer you to injure or disgrace her.
But if your father see you quiet take
This his command, you shall him retchlesse make.
At leisure heel seek out some other wife,
Mean time your fathers death may end the strife
Or some like good chance happen.
Think thou so?
There is no doubt in the world on it.
Take you heed to what you lead me.
Will you sir be quiet?
Isle tell my father as thou bid me: but
There must be care had, he by no means know
she's with child by me; for I have promised
To give it breeding.
Oh bold enterprise!
She begged this promise of me, as assurance
That I would not forsake her.
Isle look toot.
Your Father's here: let him not note you sad.
I Come to observe their carriage, note their plots.
He thinks now surely, you'll refuse to marry:
And comes from some lone place premeditate,
Thinking to puzzle you with a set speech:
Therefore collect your self.
Well, as I can.
In this thing Pamphilus you shall take my word,
You shall not now change two cross syllables,
If you but say, you ready are to marry.
MY Master willed me (all things else set of)
Pamphilus watch: &amp; learn what course he takes
About the Bride. This cause me dog him hither:
And lo, where he is with Dauus. To my task.
I see 'hem both together.
Now sir look toot.
Pamphilus.
Look you back as on the sudden.
Oh, you my father?
I, that's well carried.
As I late told thee, tic my purpose Son
That thou this day be married.
Now I fear
His answer on our side.
Sir, or in this
Or in what else I wait upon your pleasure.
Ha!
Mute.
What said he?
Thou dost now my Son
As well becomes thee, when so graciously
Thou yeeldst to what I crave.
Was I not right?
My Master (as I hear) hath lost his wife.
Get you now in that when the time requires,
We be not driven to stay for you.
Yes sir.
That in nothing one man may trust another!
It is an old said saying, and as common,
All to themselves wish best. My self have seen
The maiden, and remember her a fair one.
Which makes me better bear with Pamphilus,
If he himself had rather nightly bed her,
Then let my Master. Isle bear back this news:
That he may pay me well, for my ill tidings.
MY Master thinks now I have some device
A foot: and that, for that end I stay here.
What first, thou talk Dauus?
Even just sir.
What, nothing? ha?
Indeed sir nothing, I.
I sure did look to hear some news from thee.
I know tic chanced quite besides his aim:
That's it which nettles him.
First possible
I get thee tell me a truth?
Most readily.
Doos this same wedding grieve him any thing,
By reason of the acquaintance that he holds
With yonder stranger?
Truly I think not.
Or if it doe, the matter of his trouble
Will be at most two or three days disquiet:
(Conceive you sir?) then it will clearly vanish.
For with himself he has tan a due account,
And set all clear that way.
I doe commend him.
Whilst he had leave, &amp; his green youth did suffer'r
He winched a little; but yet privately:
He ever had a care to keep his name
Untouched; as did become a wise young man.
Now marriage fits, he frames his mind that way.
And yet me thought he appeared somewhat sad.
Nothing about this business; but there's cause
That makes him somewhat angry with you.
What?
A trifle.
What first?
Nothing.
Tell me what?
He says you're ouerniggardish in Cost.
Who, I?
That you have scarce disbusd ten groats
In your provision for his wedding supper:
What (says he) is this like a Sons nuptials
Whom chiefly of my fellow bachelors
May I inuit (quoth he) to such a banquet?
And to speak that which may be said herein;
Intrude you are too too sparing, I liked not.
Hold your tongue.
I have gald him.
I will see
That all shall be well carried. What means this?
What first this old fox-hunt doth hammer on?
If there be any knavery, his pare forged it.
I, Indeed Lesbia you have said aright:
A woman hardly finds a faithful lover.
Belongs this maid to the Andrian here?
Yes sir.
But this kind Pamphilus
What first she says?
Hath given her full assurance—
Out alas!
Would either he were dease now or she dumb.
That son or daughter, he will foster it.
Oh Iupiter! what news is this I hear?
All is lost utterly; if she speak truth.
You doe describe a young man honest natured.
Oh, the best natured gentleman — but pray,
Follow me in, for fear she stay for you.
Yes I follow.
What help for this now, trow?
What, is he mad? a loose land loping strumpet?
Oh! I have it: old dulhead (as I was)
I fearce at length could hit on it.
What has he hit on, says he?
This first knavish practise
Of my man here is now thus put upon me:
She is to be in child birth, to flight Chromes.
Glycerium with∣in doors. Iuno, Lucina help; save me, I pray thee.
Horde such speed? ha, ha, ridiculous
As soon as are she heard me at the door,
The throws come on: scarce fitly a'my word,
You rank and place your times scarce sitly Dauus.
I sir?
Or have your Actors mist their Cues?
I know not what you mean, sir.
If this fellow
Had set upon me, being unprovided
In a true marriage oh, what pageants
Would he have plaid me? Let him now make sure
His own adventure; •m•ith port secure.
AS yet Archillis I doe note in her
All usual matters, and good signs of health
First see her cleansd, and then deliver her
That drink, in measure as I gave in charge:
Isle be here straight again: as God shall help me.
She hath brought Pamphilus a goodly boy.
If it please God, may it live to be a man:
Seeing the father is of disposition
So honest; and makes conscience to wrong
This good young woman.
Who did ever know thee
That would not swear, this thy contriving now?
Pray, what?
She cannot in the house give order,
For what is needful to the childebed woman:
But coming forth a doors, proclaims ith'strect
Her mind to them within: what? what sir Dauus
Slight you me so? or deem me now at length
Such a fine easy property, thou moist
So plainly pass thy juggling tricks upon me?
At least yet, it was circumspectly carried;
And showed your awe, if'twere discovered.
Troth his own cunning cheats him now; not I.
Did I not forewarn thee? threaten further
If thou should dare attempt this? hast thou yet
Stood in fear of't? hath it in ought prevailed?
Think thou I doe believe this woman here
Hath had a child now by my Pamphilus?
I now find his mistaking, know my course.
Why speak thou not?
What talk you of your thinking?
As if you'd had no notice of the matter?
I notice?
Why good sir, tell me I pray
Found you of your self that this was counter faited?
I'm flouted.
Come, come, it has bin told you:
How else a Gods name could you dream of it?
How? cause I well did know thy qualities.
You think it then a thing of my direction.
I, and I know tic.
Truly sir I see
You thoroughly doe not know me.
Not I, thee?
But when I seek to tell you any thing,
You straight suppose, I put some trick upon you.
Tic false.
So that I dare scarce speak to you.
This one thing I am sure on; heir's no child born.
Are you so sure? yet sir notwithstanding
They straight will lay a child before your door.
I tell you on it aforehand, for your knowledge:
Least you should say hereafter, Dauus plots
And cunning managed all. I very fine
Would work my self out of your jealousy.
How know it?
I have heard so and believe it.
They are many &amp; those grounded circumstances,
Which my conjectures build on. Ne'er before
Named she her self with child by Pamphilus;
And that is false, unless my judgment err:
But seeing now a wedding is preparing,
A midwife straight is sent for, by the maid,
Who was to bring a young borne child with her.
Unless you see a child, the wedding still
Stands fairly.
I but, sir tell me this,
When thou had found they plotted this among them, her?
Why told you not it straight to Pamphilus?
Pray, but my self then who hath drawn him from
We know how fondly he did dote upon her:
Now he desires a wife to live withal.
In fine, trust me with this whole business:
Yet pursue you, to make the marriage up;
And I doe hope the Gods will further it.
Nay, get you in; there see you stay my coming:
And have such things as need in readiness.
He hath not drawn me yet to give full credit
To this he says; nor to conclude all true.
But I regard it little: the maine thing
I rest on, is the promise of my Son.
Isle now go speak with Chromes, and desire
He would bestow his daughter: that obtained,
Why should I linger? and not now this day
Finish the match a foot? doubtless my Son
Will stand t'his word: if not, what hinders me
But I may force him? and in good time see
Where Chromes is, Chromes good time of day.
OH! you are the man I sought for.
And I you.
You're come as I would wish: a many men
Have pressed unto me; who report as heard
From you, that on this very day your Son
Should wed my daughter. Now I come to see
Whether or you or they be from their wits?
Pray list a while, and I will satisfy
This doubt: and withal acquaint you further
What suit I have unto you.
I attend.
Say what you please.
Chromes I request you
For love of God; and for the unfeigned friendship
Which in our youth begun along together
Hath grown up with our years; by the respect
You bear your only child; for my Sons cause
Chief power of whose preserving lies in you,
Lend me your furtherance in this business,
That the match this day meant may so go on.
Oh! I pray crave it not, as if 't were fit
I should in this thing listen to your suit?
Think you me altered from the man I was,
When late I made you promise? if 't may be
For both our welsares, take my daughter to you
But if hereby more harm then good will follow
To either of vs by it, then I pray
Cast for the common good: as if my daughter
Were yours, I father to your Pamphilus.
Nay, that's my meaning Chromes: and I doe
Crave nothing of you but upon such terms:
Nor would I ask it of you, if the case
It felse did not require it.
Why, how is it?
There's jar between Glycerium and my son.
I hear.
So great, I hope't will sunder them.
A tale.
In very deed tic so
Indeed
It will just so (as I shall tell thee) prove;
The jars of lovers give fresh life to love.
I, but I pray you let vs prevent that,
Whilst his loves flame is smothered by abuse:
Before this harlots leaud designs, false tears
Reduce his sickly mind to passion,
Lets marry 'hem.
I have good hope,
Fair wedlock and a wives experienced love
Will eas'ly pluck him out of these feared else.
You think so: but I deeme't impossible
That either they will always live together,
Or I may endure their earring.
How doe you know,
Unless you make a trial?
But it were hard
For me to make such trial in my child.
Why, all the inconvenience which can happen
Should the worst fall (which I pray God forbid)
Were at the most a separation.
In counterpoise now weigh the benefits
That will ensue, if my son prove reclaimed:
First you restore to your friend his son: your self
Gain a fast son in law: your child a husband.
Why, if you think it so commodious,
For my part I will be no hindrance too't.
I justly always held you my best friend.
But as to that you said.
What?
Marry how know you
There's now debate between 'hem.
Dauus self
(who is their Counsels inward secretary)
So told me; and withal advised me further
To haste the marriage with all speed I could.
Think you he would doe thus, but that he knows.
My son desires it likewise? you your self
Shall heate him. Ho there, one call Dauus forth.
But lo, I see him coming out a doors.
I Was a coming to you.
What's the matter?
Why is the bride not sent for? it grows late.
Doe you now hear him? I will tell thee Dauus,
I lately had thee in some jealousy;
That thou did take the course most servants hold,
By seeking to delude me in the matter.
Of Pamphilus wanton loving.
Who, I sit?
I thought so: and for that I kept from you
A secret, Isle now utter.
What was that?
Isle tell thee; for I almost now doe trust thee.
At length you find what servant you have of me.
This was not to have bin a marriage
What, no.
But I therefore counterfeited,
That I might feel your minds.
What first you say?
Just as thou hear.
La ye; I could never,
Think such a matter: oh fine cunning plot?
List this; when hence I bad thee get thee in,
Chromes came fitly to me.
Are we trow
Not lost for ever?
I told all to him
Thou late toldst me.
What hear I?
Begged of him,
And scarce at length won him to give his daughter.
I am undone.
What say?
Excellently done.
Now he's not backward.
Isle straight get me home,
And leave word all be had in readiness!
Thence give you notice.
Now I preach Dauus,
Since thou alone hast wrought this marriage for vs—
Yes sure, I was th'onely worker.
Doe now
Endeavour further to reclaim my son.
Yes truly, I will look toot carefully.
Thou moist now do it, whilst his mind is vexed.
Pray take no Care.
Look toot then:
But where now is he himself?
Tic marle but he's at home.
Isle too him then, and to himself deliver
All I told thee.
I am now just nothing. 
What hinders, but I fairly take my way
Directly to the mill, and fall a grinding?
Entreaty may doe nothing; I have drawn
All things to such confusion: first deceived
My Master: then have headlong thrust his son
Upon a marriage, that he looked not for:
And clean against his will: and this to day
To be made up, by my alone procurement.
Pray mark th'end of cunning: had I sat still,
No evil in the world had happened.
And see where he is. I am a mere dead man.
Would I had any means to break my neck now.
where is the villain has undone me?
I Am a plain castaway.
But I confess
Tic justly fallen upon me; since I am
So idle, vain, and inconsiderate:
Ought I to trust my whole state to a slave;
A prating slave? I have my follies hire:
But unrevenged he ne'er shall scope with it.
Isle ne'er doubt tempest, if I scope this storm.
But now what answer shall I make my father?
Shall I deny to marry, who but now
Consented to it? with what impudence
May I dare doe it? neither with my self
Know I what course to take.
Troth nor I, neither
But I am canuassing my brains about it.
Isle tell him Isle forthwith find out some means
A little to put off his threatened vengeance.
Oh—
I'm spied.
Oh, you sir, honest fellow
Come nearer: what say to me? doe you see now
How I am puzzled through your goodly counsel?
Isle presently make all clear.
Thou make clear?
Pamphilus indeed I will.
I, as erewhile.
Nay, I hope better
Trust thee pillory?
Or thou make good a case perplexed, lost?
See what a suresby I have trusted too;
Who from a quiet state I late stood in,
This day hast thrust me on a marriage:
Did I not tell thee it would thus fall out?
You did.
What hast then deserved
Hanging.
A little yet let me collect my self.
Isle straight find out some help.
Oh me accursed:
Why want I time to plague thee as I would?
This scarce will serve my danger to prevent,
Permits me not pursue thy punishment.
May it be believed? or may it once be talked on?
That any should be so selfe-wild perverse,
As to take pleasure in another harms?
Or think his own gain sweeter, if procured
By others disadvantage? oh good God!
Is this a brood of men? Men let them be;
Worst are they of the generation.
They show a little tricksey modesty,
Not to deny a craved courtesy:
But when performance comes, they then declare
(Nature will show it self) what men they are.
They are ashamed a little, but in trial
Their temper bursts forth to flat denial.
Then shall you hear their shameless Oratory—
Pray who are you? are what at least to me.
Why yield my love to you? good sir attend,
I am unto my self the nearest friend.
Touch them with faith and troth, they blush no whit:
So that when no constraint enforces it,
They make some scruple; when it comes to the pinch,
Then at the proof your hollow friend doth flinch.
But what's my best course? shall I to him straight,
And with him this his wrong expostulate?
And ply him with harsh terms? but some may say,
What good shall I procure my self that way?
Yes much: I shall both chafe him, and give ease
To my grieved heart.
Charinus, less God please
To succour vs, I have both thee and me
Against my will undone vnwarily.
Vnwarily: is that word now thought on?
You've broke your promised faith.
As how, I pray?
Seek you again with fair words to abuse me?
What means this?
After I said I loved her,
You must needs like her too. Oh me accursed,
That scantled out your dealing by mine own!
You are mistaken.
Seemed your content not full,
Unless you fooled, and with false hope trained on
A wretched lover? much good doe ye; take her.
I take her? oh I perceive thou know not
In what a gulf of misery I am plunged:
What peck of troubles this my torturer
Hath brought me to, by harkening to his counsel.
No marle: he takes his president from you.
You would not say this, if you fully knew
Or me, or her I'ue set my fancy on.
Yes, I doe know; you were at hot high words
Late with your father; and have angered him,
Because he cannot make you marry her.
Nay, which discovers thou less know my grief,
This marriage never was prepared for me:
Nor did now any force me to a wife.
I know it your own will forced you.
Tarry, yet thou know not all.
I know thou'st marry her.
Why doe you thus torment me? hear but this
He never ceased to be urgent on me,
That I should tell my father I would marry:
To entreat, persuade, till he had drawn me to it.
What man did this.
This Dauus.
Dauus?
Dauus brings all things out of square.
What the inducement?
I nothing know, except this one thing only,
That I well see the Gods are much displeased
With me, for listening to him.
Did you thus Dauus?
I did.
Ha, what foist thou caitiff?
The gods give thee a death futing thy doings.
Sir tha, but tell me; say that all his foes
Had laid their heads together for a plot
To yoke him to a wife, what stratagem
Could they have framed more speeding then this was?
I am deceived, but faint not.
I, I know it.
It thrived not this way, weal attempt some other.
Unless you judge because at first we sped not,
There's no means jest vs to salve up the mischief.
Nay more, I well believe if thou watch for it,
Of one thoult make me out a double marriage.
I (Pamphilus) by reason of my bondage
Owe you thus much: to doe, go, night and day
To endeavour all I may, with my lives hazard,
For your advantage: it is yet your part
To bear with me, if things come cross my hopes:
My plots fail; yet I use all carefulness:
Your self else frame things wiseher, discharge me.
I crave thou leave me in that state thou foūdst me;
I will.
But't must be straight.
How now! hist, stay.
Glyceriums door did creak.
That's nought to thee.
I am a forging.
How, is it now to forge.
But I will gived you fashioned presently.
where ere he be, Isle find your Pamphilus
And bring him with me straight;
Mean while good heart vex not your self.
Mysis?
What's the matter?
Oh, was it you Pamphilus? you are well met.
What news?
My Mistress prays you of all love
To come to her: she longs to speak with you.
I am a sorlorne wretch: the mischief spreads.
That she and I should both be thus perplexed
By means of thee? for I am therefore sent for
Because she hears my wedding is prepared.
From which how easily had you now bin quiet,
Had he bin quiet?
Yes, so, go on:
If of himself he be not vexed enough,
Urge him on further.
I indeed tic that
Does now afflict her.
Mysis, I doe swear
By all the Gods unto thee, I will never
Forsake her: no, though I were sure thereby
To undergo the whole worlds enmity.
I did desire her; have obtained her; see
That we both jump in minds, and quality.
Farewell to all that seek vs two to sever:
But death none takes her from me.
I recover
I doe desire (if it may be so borne up)
My father should not think I am the cause
The marriage holds not: if that cannot be,
Isle take the next course: that he may perceive
I cross it. What kind of man dost think me.
Faith every way as wretched as my self.
I cast for help.
I, thou hast a good heart.
And will effect it for you.
'T must be now.
Why, I have it now.
What is it?
You mistake;
It is for him, not you.
I am content.
Say, what wilt doe?
I have scarce day enough
To finish it I fear: and think me not
At leisure therefore now, to tell you it.
But get y'hence both; you, now but hinder me.
Isle visit her here.
And you, whither you? 
Wilt thou I tell thee truth?
Nay see, he makes a prologue to a tale.
What dost for me?
Oh impudent! is it not enough I give thee
Some hours; by putting off his marriage?
Yet Dauus —
Well, what?
That I may have her. —
Ridiculous!
Yet if thou can do ought —
Come home to me.
To what end should I come?
I nothing have to help thee.
I but if—
Well, I will come.
If thou can think of ought
Isle be at home.
Mysis, while I go hence
Stay here a little for me.
To what end?
Tic needful now, thou do so.
Make hast then.
I will be here straightway again with thee.
THat no one holds any thing in certain?
Your help good Gods! I thought this Pamphilus
Had bin my Mistresses firm, chiefest good;
Took him to be her friend, her lover, husband;
Ready at all essaies to stand to her:
And yet what grief sustains she now through him?
Hence sure more ill she reapes then good from him.
But here comes Dauus.
What's that prithee friend? the child?
Whither dost bear it?
MYsis, now I
need thy redressed memory and wit
In this I go about.
What art to doe?
Take the child from me straight, &amp; lay it down
Before our door.
What on the bare ground pray?
Take a few strewings from the altar there—
And lay 'hem under.
Why dost not thou thy self?
That if perchance my Master urge my oath
It was not my doing, I may safely swear it.
I understand you: but pray tell me whence
This now new tender conscience comes upon thee?
Stir you more quick; that you may further know
What tic I have in hand. Oh Iupiter!
What?
The father of the bride is come on vs. leave the course which I at first intended.
I know not what you talk on?
My self too
Will make as if I came from the right hand.
Have you a care now as occasion serves
You mark my talk, and suit your words to mine.
I understand nothing you go about:
But if in any thing you need my help
Or see more then my self, I here will stay,
That I may be no hindrance in your way.
Having prepared all in readiness
Was needful to my Daughters marriage,
I now return to will 'hem send for her.
But what is here? so help me God, a child!
Weman, laid you this child here?
Where is hee?
Dost not answer me?
Woes me, out of sight.
Alas, Dauus has left me: and is gone. 
Faith of the Gods!
What coile's yond'at the Market?
What throng of wranglers brawl there? and beside
Corn bears excessive price. I know not now
What other words to use.
For Gods sake man
Why left you me alone here?
Hoida what
Denice is this? you Mysis, whence this child?
Or who here laid it?
Are you in your wits,
To ask me that?
Of whom else should I ask,
That see none else here?
I marle whence it is.
Wo•• tell me.
Au!
Come here, o'my right side.
You are mad did not your self?
Look thou beware
Thou utter not a word, but what I ask thee.
Do ye threaten me?
From whence is it? speak out.
From you.
Ha, ha, he, first news, if women
Of your condition doe grow impudent?
This maid belongs to the Andrian, as I think.
Seem we such fitting persons to you, trow
That you should play on vs?
I came in time.
Therefore with speed take you the child away
Ilence from our door: yet stay, see thou stir not
One inch out of this place.
The Gods confound thee
That me poor woman frightst thus.
Do I speak to thee, or not?
What would you?
Asked thou still?
Say, tell me whose child tic thou hast laid here?
Doe not you know?
Talk not of what I know,
But tell me that I ask.
Tic of your house
Whose, of vs?
Pamphilus.
Ha, what, Pamphilus?
First not?
I always rightly shunned this match.
Oh notable vile practise!
Why exclaimst thou?
Which child did not my self see yesternight
Brought late to you?
Oh most audacious fellow
Tic truth, I saw Canthara thick stuffed out.
I thank the Gods yet, that some City wives
Were present at the labour.
She not knows
Him (I assure thee) for whose cause she plots this.
She thinks if Chromes see a child laid here,
Heel'e not bestow his daughter: yes of truth,
For this the rather.
Faith but he will not though.
Now therefore, for thy knowledge, take it hence
Or I will tumble it in the high way;
And further lay thee by it in the kennel.
Thou certainly art drunk.
One cunning prank
Treads on another heel. I hear it whispered
She's a free-borne Athenian.
Ha!
And that
He shall be fore'd by law to marry her.
Why sir I pray you, i• she not free-borne?
I had almost unawares jested my self
Into a dangerous mischief.
Who talks here?
Oh Chromes you are come in happy time.
Pray listen sir—
I have heard all already.
How all say you?
I, from the beginning all.
Have you pray heard it? see their villainies!
Tic fit she were hence hurried to the rack.
This is the man I talked of: doe not think
You play your tricks on Dauus.
Oh wretched me!
Indeed (good old Sir) I have spoke no falsehood.
I know all to the full: but is your Master
Simo within?
Yes Sir.
Rogue hand me not.
Troth if Glycerium know not of all this—
Attend you fool, thou know not what is done:
This the brides father: by no other means
Could he be made to know what we would have him.
Why then you should have told me on it.
Doest think
There no great difference, when a thing is carried
The natural way, and when premeditate.
Tic told me Chrysis dwelt in this same street:
Who rather chose here lewdly to grow rich,
Then in her Country honestly live poor:
She dead, the Law hath cast her state on me.
But now I see some I may question:
God save you.
Oh good God whom doe I see?
Is not this Crito, Chrisis Cozen German?
Tic he.
Oh Mysis! you are well met.
The Gods
Prosper you Crito.
Chrysis then is—well?
Yes truly she has left vs, to th'wide world.
And you, what shift do ye make? any thing well?
We? faith even according to the proverb;
Live as we can, since cannot as we would.
Glycerium—what, hath she yet sound her parents?
I would she had.
What not yet? I came hither
In an unlucky hour: for had I known it
I sure would ne'er have stirred a soot this way.
She always was both said and deemed her sister
And holds all that was hers: now for me their
To follow law suits being here a stranger,
How easy and commodious 'tmay be
Rife precedents of other men do warn me.
Besides, I judge by this she has got her self
Some friend and patron: for when she came thence
She had well near attained to ripe years
Men will cry out I am a sycophant,
A beggar laying claim to others right:
Withal, my self list not impoverish her:
Good Crito, you still hood your ancient course.
Bring me unto her, since I am come hither,
I may at least yet see her.
Yes I will.
Isle follow yet the old man shall not see me.
Mysis and Crito enter Glyceriums house and Dauus follows them.
SImo enough, I have enough tried your friend ship:
Ventured sufficient hazard, pray now leave
Entreating. Whilst I seek to pleasure you
I almost trisled my childes lise away.
Nay, but I earnestly beg and crave Chromes,
This your good turn now late begun in words
You would in deeds make up.
Note how unjust
You grow, through earnestness to work your aims:
You nor consider bounds in courtesies,
Nor yet what tic you crame: for if you did,
Yould cease to load me with these injuries.
What iniuties?
Oh, doe you question them?
You wrought me to bestow my only child
To one entangled in a strangers love:
A wilde young youth abhorring marriage:
To most sure discord, marriage as insure;
That by her grief and sorrow I might physic
Your riotous son: this y'obtain'd: I went on,
Whilst things permitted: now that the case not brooks it,
You must brooke my denial. Tic affirmed
This stranger is fice borne; hath a child by him:
Leave troubling vs.
By all the Gods I beg
You would not bend your mind to trust these people,
Whose best advantage tic, to make him worst.
These things are only seign'd and fashioned
To dash the wedding: take away the cause
Moves them to this, they'll straight way leave contrining.
You're wide: My self saw a maid scolding here
With Dauus.
I know it.
I but this was done
In good sad earnest; neither of them both
Knowing that I was near.
I doe believe it
And Dauus late told me it would be so.
I know not how I did forget to tell you,
As I had meant.
I Will you now rest quiet —
See, here's Dauus.
Whence comes he?
Through my furthrance and this guests.
What new mischief?
Man, time, coming fitter, I never saw.
Who first, the rogue so praises?
Ell's now secure.
Cease I to speak to him?
My Master! what's my course?
Oh Simo, oh our Chromes,
All things are now in readiness within.
Th'hast looked too 't well.
When you please, send for her.
Tic very well; but that course now here fails vs.
But may I know, what thou had there to doe?
I Sir.
I, Sir.
Me mean you?
Yes, mean thee.
I went in but now —
As if I ask 't thee, when?
Together with your son.
Is my son there?
I wretch am set of the rack. Diddst not hangman
Tell me, they were at deadly odds together?
They are.
What does he there then?
Hee? what think?
I warrant railing at her.
Nay but Chromes
Isle tell you now of a strange accident.
I know not what old man is newly come,
Note him, a man both confident and wise,
When you shall see him, you'll much value him.
A grave austerity rests on his face;
And in his words dwell faith.
What news bring thou?
No other, then I heard that man report.
And what doo's he report?
That he doo's know
Glycerium here, a free Athenian borne.
Hoe Dromo, Dromo.
What's the matter?
Hear me.
If thou speak one word more—Dromo.
I doe beseech you hear me.
What would you've?
Hoist in this fellow here, hence speedily.
Whom?
Dauus.
Why?
For it is my pleasure.
Away with him I say.
What have I done?
In with him.
If you shall find I have lied
In any thing, then kill me.
Isle hear nothing.
Isle straightway put thee into motion.
Though that I said the truth?
Though — see you
Isle be kept bound; and hear you, bound all four.
Isle show thee, what tic to abuse a Master,
If I but live this day: and teach the other
What tic to cross a father.
Oh, I pray you rage not so much.
Chromes dost not, seeing
How unkindly he deals with me, pity me?
That I should toil and care for such a son?
But Pamphitus you, come you out Pamphilus:
Doth any shame possess thee?
who called me?
I am lost, it is my father.
What say now?
Thou of all—
Oh, rather go to th'point man:
And spare ill speaking.
As if any thing
Can be spoke ill enough of such a one?
But Sirrha say, is your Glycerium now
Free borne of Athens?
So they say of her.
Doe they say so? Monstrous audaciousness!
Considers he his words? grieves at his deeds?
Or shows his colour any note of shame?
That he should be of such debauched manners,
That clear beyond all precedent of freemen,
Against the form of law, in opposition
Of me his father, he should bend to have her
Though 't reach to th'highest pitch of infamy?
Oh me most wretched!
Dost thou now at length
Perceive that Pamphilus? that word of old
Of old that word then truly sitted thee,
When first thou set thy heart to please thy self;
Though at what rate soever compassed.
But wherefore doe I thus? why yex my soul?
Why waste my self away? why doe I grieve
My old and fainting age with his youths follies?
Shall I endure the penance of his faultings?
No, let him have her; I, God speed him well;
Yes, let him keep with her.
Oh my father—
Why call me father? as if thou had need
Of me to be thy father? a house, wise,
Children are had maugre thy fathers will:
Fellows are hired shall bear her up freeborne.
You've got the mast'tie.
I beseech you father,
May I have leave to utter a few words.
What wilt say to me?
Vet hear him Simo.
I hear him: what first Chromes I should hear him.
Permit him tell you.
Well, tell he: I permit
I doe confess I love this woman here
If it be faulty, I confess that too.
Further I yield me up to your full pleasure,
Lay any task, any command upon me.
Will you I marry that, leave this? I will
Endure it as I may. But this one thing
I beg of you, that you would not imagine
That this old man is by my means brought in
Suffer me clear my self, and fetch him hither
Into your presence
Fetch him.
Let me pray.
He craves but reason, grant it.
I pray sir.
Well, I doe: I wish Chromes ought be proved,
So that I find he doos not juggle with me.
Slight accusation in a sons offence
Suffices for a father.
CEase to entreat.
Each of the reasons you have used, persuade me
To your request? either your own self cause,
Or for it is a truth, or cause I wish
All furtherance unto Gl ceriuns.
Doe I not see Crito of Intros there?
Tic he. Crito you are here well met:
You have bin long a stranger here: what chance
Hath brought you now to Athens.
An occasion.
But is this Simo?
Yes.
Ask you for me?
Do ye hear sir, is it you that doe affirm
Clycerium to be free borne of Athens?
Are you one, doe deny it?
Is 't even so?
Come you so well prepared too?
Wherefore?
Dost thou use question? think thou to escape
Fairly thus of with 't? seek thou to work on
The easy natures of unguided youth,
Peruerting our well nurtured children?
Winning their hearts with fawning promises.
And this, in Athens.
Are you in your wits?
And harlot-loues knit'st up in marriage?
If you knew this man Simo thoroughly,
You would not judge so: he is an honest man.
An honest man; to come jump in th'instant
Of dosing hands, and ne'er seen here before?
Chromes, may such a man be credited?
If I not doubted to displease my father
I easily could prompt him to that point.
Cavilling sycophant —
How?
Forbear Crito;
It is his temper.
Let him regard his temper:
If he will vent his pleasure upon me
He shall be forced to hear what will displease him.
Trouble I his matters? or yet care for'hem?
Cannot you bear your own else patiently?
For my part, it may instantly be known
Whether 't be false or true, you heard me say
A certain man of Athens, now long since
Shiprackt at sea, was cast on Intros Isle;
And with him this Glycerium, then a child:
He being poor had harbour at the house
Of Chr si, father.
He begins a tale.
Pray give him leave.
Does he disturb me thus?
He that entertained him was my kinsman:
Of him I then heard, that this shipwrecked man
Was an Ithenian.
Pray, what was his name?
His name so suddenly? Pha—Pha-nia.
Oh, my heart!
Yes sure, I think it was Phania.
This I well know, he named himself of Ramnes.
O Iupiter!
A many more in Intros
Then heard it.
I beseech the Gods, it prove
According to my hopes: but pray you Crito,
What said he of the child, that it was his own?
No.
Whose then?
The daughter of his brother.
Tic certainly mine own.
What doe you say?
What say you?
Pamphilus give heed to this.
Why think you so?
That Phania was my brother.
I knew him well, and know that he was so.
He flying hence to avoid the rage of war,
Trauaild toward Asia in pursuit of me;
And feared withal to leave the child behind:
Since whence, now I hear the first news of him.
I scarcely feel my self: my mind's so tossed
Twixt fear, and hope, and joy, and wondering,
At this so great, so sudden happiness.
In truth I much rejoice, she is found yours.
I doe believe you father.
But there rests
One scruple yet, which somewhat troubles me.
You are worthy now of hate, with these your scruples
What is 't?
The name agrees not.
She had sure
Another being young.
What was it Crito?
Can thou remember?
I am thinking on 't.
Shall I permit his tardy memory
To slacken my joys current, being able
Herein to give my self a remedy?
No, I will not: hark you hither Chromes;
The name you doubt of is Pasibula.
That's it.
Tic right.
I heard it of her self
At least a thousand times.
I believe Chromes,
You think we all joy at it.
As may the Gods
Assist me, I doe think so.
What rests father?
The case it self now reconcileth vs.
Oh my most loving father and you Chromes
Change nothing in the wife I now possess?
The cause is just, your father so agreeing.
Thus much—
Yea marry—
Her dowre Pamphilus I make ten talents.
I accept of it.
Isle forthwith see my daughter: Crito, pray
Go with me; for I think she knows me not.
Why cause you not your wife be brought to vs?
You warn me well, Isle even give Dauus charge out.
He cannot now effect it.
Pray why so?
Has more and greater charge upon himself.
What?
Hoe's bound.
Hoe's not bound rightly father.
No; I did will him be bound otherwise.
Pray order he be loosd.
Well, be it so.
But good sir, haste.
Isle in and see it done.
Oh happy, oh this prosperous blessed day.
I Come to see how Pampirlus speeds, and lo.
Some man perhaps may think I feed on dreams:
But now I please to think all real truth.
I on this ground judge the Gods lives eternal,
Because heir pleasure's certainly their own
For I my self have gained immortal state,
If with this joy no grief ere intermeddle
But who might I now wish especially
Here at this time, to tell the tidings to?
What joy is that he talks of?
I now see
Dauus our man: there is no living one,
I rather would have had. I know he will?
Full truly joy in the true joy I feel.
Where is this Pamphilus trow?
Dauus Dau. Who's that?
Tic I.
Oh Pamphilus!
Thou know not what has befallen me?
True: yet know, what has chanced me.
And so do I.
Why this hippos just oth'fashion,
That you my ill luck learn, ere I your good.
Glycerium hath found out her parents.
Good.
How's that?
Her father our chief friend.
Who first?
Chromes.
Oh brave!
Nor now is any stay,
But that I take her home forthwith to wife.
Dreams he trow, of things he desires waking?
Now Dauus, for the child?
Leave of I pray:
The gods sure purpose him their minion.
I am a made man, if these things be true
Isle speak to'hem.
O Charinus,
Thou come in a fit time.
Oh happy news.
Hast heard ont then?
Yes all: pray think on me,
Now in the height of your felicity.
Chromes is now your own, and I do know
Heal yield to any thing you motion.
I mind it. But 't would now be ouer-long
Here to attend, till he come forth to vs.
Follow me in; he's with Glycerium.
Get you home Dauus, hasten; and procure
Some that may bear her hence: why stand thou so?
Why staiest thou still?
Sir Isle go presently.
I Note you sit with kind attention bent,
As pleased with what hath passed; and expect
The further issue of our argument;
And on the mirage now your minds reflect.
We pray you cease such expectation;
For we have done: the bride you do conceive
But newly brought to bed; night coming on
Women shall bear her hence, at Sionoes leave.
Chromes hs younger daughter Philumen
Charinus gets, at sure of Pamphilus.
Crito of Intros, who has been the mean
The long lost child should be discovered thus,
What course he now shall take to obtain his right
In Chrysis goods, I here not mention will;
Nor in leede can I: I have no insight
In law points, triable at Mars his hill.
Yet knowing Chromes nature tractable,
Seeing withal he hath dealt liberally
In portion, so that amph lus is able
To bear the loss, though-common honestic
Did not exact it I not doubt they will
Use the poor stranger well. Me you have scene heis
Venture to binding, grinding in the Mill:
That fell on me, this was approaching near.
I purpose further in their joy to sue
My present freedom: Pamphilus love I have,
Glyceriums also; both I think of due:
My Masters chase is off I only crave
Your furtherance in the matter; which if gained,
I have good hope: for I have heard it sed
By men in the Periclaean laws well read,
If I make you my friends, my sute's obtained:
For they have told me my discharge now stands
not upon whispering voices; but clapped hands.

A Citizen of Athens dwelling at Su∣nium a port-towne of Attica having two children, Chromes a Son, and Pamphila a daughter, had his daughter stolen away by Pirates when she was of such tender age that she could only tell her own and parents names. After this the Athe∣neon died. The Pirates sold the child to a Mer∣chant of Rhodes, who gave her to a Strumpet which he loved. This Harlot had a daughter called Thais, somewhat elder then Pamphila: Which children she so brought up together, that all men of Rhodes did repute them for Sisters. Thais in process of time took to her mothers trade of life; and yeel∣ding up her self to a strangers devotion, was by him carried to Athens; where he dying left her good means. He thus dead, she was taken up by one Thraso asouldier: he also having a while accompanied her, had occasion of travail into Carry. Mean while
the mother of Thais died at Rhodes: Her goods fell to a brother, who (with them) exposed to sale the abouenamed Pamphila, just upon the time where∣in the soldier passed that way. Her youth and beau∣tie induced the soldier (ignorant of all passages) to buy her, as a fit gift to bestow on Thais at his re∣turn to Athens. But she before that time (whores do not live in expectation, nor upon the means of one man only) had entertained the love of one Phaedria a young gentleman, son of an ancient Athenian Citizen. She also had by this time gained some inkling of the parentage of Pamphila, and that one Chromes a genteleman of Athens was in good likelihood uaturall brother to the maiden: for better discovery whereof, she had had conference with him (a aloof off) touching the matter. The soldier returns to Athens bringing Pamphila along with him, (her maiden-head is questioned by Terence, Act. 1. Sen. 2. in these words etiamne amplius? To avoid matter unfitting for the grace of the Comedy, but she was (beyond any contrary supposable conjecture) a maiden: for a child might sillip this soldier out of his courage; and foolery was all the allurement he could use to her) and be∣ing thus returned, he finds Phaedria entered into Thais her books: out of which if he be not clean wiped, Pamphila is not for her, as the soldier offer∣meth. Terence hath set out this Thais as none of the
worst of that course of life; and withal of good discretion in her carriage. A Dilemma is now put upon her; love and consideration are the two horns: she must venture the goring by one of them. Love pleads first, and this is natural to her blood; and Phaedria besides deserves it. I but hee may be ten∣dered a wife; his appetite cloyed his father workeher displeasure. Resolute love in spite of these premises hath down the cō•lusion On the other side a reputed sister, that sister hath good friends, those friends able to strengthen her unsettled fortunes; if by her means the one be restored to the other: Thus pleads Consideration. Wisely therefore she keeps the middle way for barring Phaedria her company for abrace of days (telling him why) she aims to gull the soldier of the wench by this curtsy; and then to recall Phaedria to his former contentment. Phaedria assents, leaves the City. gives withal charge to Parmeno his fathers man, for bringing an Eunuch to Thais in his absence: Phaedria gone, Thraso also sends Pamphila to her by Gnato a Pa∣rasite. In the passing of the maiden thither, Chaerea a younger brother of Phaedria spies her, falls in love with her, dogs her, by accident loses her, chafes with himself at it: then to Parmeno coming upon him, discovers his mind and whereto carried. Parmeno informs him of an Eunuch by his brother Phaedria sent, and by him forthwith to be conveyed
to the very house where the maid abides. So that by shifting clothes with the Eunuch he may un∣discovered be brought to her; the Eunuch nor hee having ever before been seen by Thais or any of her family Chaerea follows the advise, is brought thither, ravishes the maiden. Much coil hence arises, Pamphila at length being found to bee free∣borne, Chaerea marries her; Thais is taken into pro∣tection by the father of the two brothers. The Soldier for mirth and cost sparing is admit∣ted among them, by Gnatoes pursue∣zion, with the consent of Phaedria.
SEnex, an old man not named by Terence; father of two sons: himself being retired to his Country Grange, at his return to the City finds that either of his sons have played Rex in his absence: his nature sudden and fiery.
Phaedria one of his sons, a young man entangled with the love of a harlot: well qualified and straggling with his faulty inclination.
Chaerea. Another of the old mans sons, an early Cock of the game: the heate of his youthful blood vio∣lently caries him on to a rape: either he was passed an Ephebus, or Grammarians mistaken in the word, or else Terence hath been very bold in the part of Chaerea lustful, heady, head-strong.
Parmeno, Scruant of the family, wise and discreat while he gives advise; when he undertakes employment diligent and faithful.
Thais, A strumpet of a sweet and pleasing disposition: graceful in language, in manners free and indiffe∣rently modest. Terence (in a word) hath strived in her person to set out a tolerable harlot.
Pythias maid to Thais. A busy prattling house-wife.
Dorias another of her maids, of clean contrary tem∣per: an idle meacock.
Chromes, A young country gentleman. Clownish of manners, very timorous and fearful.
Sophrona an old nurse, she hardly huddles over the stage: And all the news I hear frō her, is this one word, Moueo.
Amipho a young gentleman of good demeanour, familiar.
Thraso. Gnato. These I couple: for what good Mus•que makes a trumpet without its ecco. The first a Parat, the other a fellow clawing his poll. The soldier a bragging sot, of necessity therefore a Cow∣heard; the other a Clawbacke rubbing his proud itch. The Parasite thus far wise, that he can make use of his foolish Master: for he pickes matter of mirth and means out of him.
Sanga a Cooke, by consequence inclining to sauciness. Malapert.
IF there be any who their studies frame
To give good men contentment, displease none;
In their fair rank our Poet files his name:
If any further hold opinion,
That harsh uncivil terms to procure shame
To any man, be here ungently sown;
Let him think so a Gods name: but with all
He lets them know, what ever words do pass,
Do not on such as free invectives fall;
But forced replies of him first wronged was:
To utter the mans name not need I shall:
One, shrewdly tossed, lewdly glossed has
Many Greek comedies: and by that mean
In that tongue good, in Latin marred clean.
It was he who but ere-while presented you
Menanders Phase••. to name it is enough:
But in the Treasure, there you saw him show
rare work emanship, exceeding his rich stuff.
One man another for found gold did sue:
(Our Orators are but a glimmering snuff
To this bright Poets shining Oratory.)
Now in that case judiciously he wrought
The per••e at the bar, then defensorie,
To plead first, for the gold inquestion brought;
Before the plaintiff urged his injury;
or reason showed why he by action sought
Recovery of that gold: or how the same
into the comb of his dead father came.
I wish him henceforth, he himself not flatter;
Or think (his plays being passed) he stands secure
This will be unsafe refuge for the matter
I have against him: which (I him assure)
Is kept in store: and (cease he not to scatter
His tales abroad our scandal to procure;
As he begins; and leave to urge vs on)
Yet hull t shall be produced to public view.
This Eunuch now a foot for action
Being by the Aediles bought, he hard did sue.
To be at sight of the relation.
The Overseers come, the Actors drew
To the rehearsal. I beseech you now,
But hear, what he hath challenged and how,
My man baules out in roar, a pilferer
No Poet hath now tendered you a play:
And yet in all the same, no one word neither
Of's own, for's money tendered. Why, I pray?
Why out of Nauius, Plautus, (choose you whether)
All is purloind that you shall hear to day.
And going on, the envious point he plies;
That this is stale stuff in each author named:
That either of them in their Comedies
The soldier and flatterers part have framed:
And that both thence are hither brought he cries.
Which, if 't be such a fault as must be blamed;
Our Author says disknowing led him on:
No purposed filching practise thought upon.
That this is so, may by you straight be tried:
Menanders Flatterer hath a Parasite,
Which Colax called is; there is beside
A braggart Soldier: that he did indite
Those personages thence is not denied,
To fill his Eunuch: but that he did wit
That this had ever been the argument
Of Latin plays before he utterly
Denies. If this now be so insolent,
To assume the persons used formerly
By other Poets; why is suffrance lent
To frame a servant running hastily?
To fashion harlots wonton? matrons chaste?
Soldiers to vant? parasites cramming fast?
Why of false children are drabs brought to bed?
Why the old Master cheated by his slave?
Why are not love, hate, jealousy yet dead?
There is no sentence (to conclude) we have,
Which hath not formerly been uttered.
It is but reason therefore, if we crave
Notice be tan; and our course pardoned:
If what in precedent the ancients gave,
New Poets modestly have followed.
Pray lend your favour, and attentive ear;
That you our Eunuchs news may fully hear.
what should I then resolve on rot to go?
Not now at least, being so kindly sent to?
Or rather this way bend, my settled course,
Not to endure these scornful tricks of Whores?
She shut me out of doors; now sends for me.
Go? never I, should she sue earnestly.
Sir, surely if you can do as you say,
It were your most worthy, your most manly way.
But if beginning, you so go not one,
And faintly bearing loves assliction,
When you're not sought to, when you are at square
Shall then come creeping to her; and declare
Your ardent love, whose flames you cannot bear;
You are gone: shall be her pipe to play upon,
When you are sound at her devotion.
And therefore master timely yet consider,
That such a thing as holds in it neither
Reason, nor measure; such vniuly thing
Cannot be brought to reasons governing.
In love these vicious humours settled are;
Suspicious, wrongs, enmities, truces, war,
New league again: Now this uncertainty
To draw to certain, were like mystery,
As if one should a project venture on
To make a man mad with discretion.
And what you now here to your self in passion
Do utter, shall I brooke this base queens fashion?
Who hugges you'd soldier? bars her door on me?
Not caring? Isle die first: she it shall see
What manner man she has to do withal.
These your high words, these hot terms tragical
With one false tear shall allay easily;
Which (rubbing of her eyes most pitifully)
She hardly shall force from'hem: and anon
You'll tender your own accusation,
And stoop to her set penance.
Oh my hard fate!
I clearly find my self unfortunate;
And her a wicked strumpet. I do fry
In flames of love to one I loathing fly:
Knowing and seeing fall; alive, awake:
Nor see my course.
To what course should you take,
But seek to gain your liberty now lost,
At what low rate you may? if little cost
Will not procure it, then at th'utmost price;
And do not vex your self.
That thy advise?
If you be wise, and to loves misery
Ad not: what'thas, strive to bear moderately.
But she comes forth; our households known decay.
For what we ought to have, she sweeps away.
Woes me, I fear Phaedria hath tan it hard
And worse then I did mean it, he was bard
His entrance here last day.
Oh Parmeno,
How I do shake and shudder every part
At sight of her.
I pray Sir take good heart.
Approach that fire, you'll be warmd thoroughly.
Who's that? oh, were you my Phaedria so nigh?
Why staid you here? why entered not straight way?
But ne'er a word of's shutting out last day.
Why art silent?
Yes indeed I confess
Your house is still op to my free access:
And I the fan'rite.
Pray no more of this.
Why no more of it? ô, ô, Thais, Thais,
I would our loves were like; that this might thee
equally trouble, as it troubles me;
Or that I could not weigh thy injury.
I prithee sweet heart Phaedria do not grieve
Troth it was not that I love any alive
More then thy self, I did it: but the case
(As things fell out) so to be carried was.
Why, I believe her; as things came about,
The poor kind soul for mere love shut him out.
Say you so Parmeno? Leave that: and hear
Wherefore I now sent for you.
Well. I hear.
But pray say first, can this your man keep counsel?
Who, I? exceeding well. But hear you Thais?
I pass my word to you, with this proviso,
All truth I hear I hold in exlently:
If lie, or toy, or fable, out it goes:
I'm full of chinckes then, I leake every where:
If therefore you'll have counsel kept, speak truth.
My mother borne at Samos, dwelt at Rhodes.
This may be well concealed.
There a merchant
Bestowed a little girl upon my mother,
Stolen hence from Athens.
Was the child freeborne?
I think so; do not know the certainty.
Her self did tell father and mothers name;
Country or other signs to be known by.
She knew not; nor indeed was it possible
By reason of her tender age she should.
The Merchant thus much added, that he heard
The Pirats say of whom he bought the child,
That it was brought from Sunium. My mother
Having received it, bred it, taught it so
In every thing, as if it had been her own:
And indeed most reputed her my Sister.
Long after I left Rhodes, in company
Of a then stranger, whom alone I kept to,
And hither came. That stranger dying, gave
All the now goods unto me, which I have.
Either of these is false, twill out.
Why so?
Because that neither were you satisfied
With him alone, nor yet had all from him:
Good and great part of it, my Master brought you.
I grant thee but permit me to go on
Whither I aim. Since that, a soldier
Who had begun to love me, travailed
To Carry: after which I grew into
Acquaintance with your self. And you well know.
That I since then have held you inwardly:
Made you my bosoms only Secretary.
Neither will this be hushed by Parmeno.
ô do you make a doubt ont?
Pray attend.
My mother there at Rhodes deceased late;
Her covetous brother, heir to her estate,
Nothing the wench was fair, and skilled well
In Musique; hoped her at good rate to sell:
So forth he brought her, sold her to my friend
Who then there was; and fully did intend
To give the maid to me: Yet nothing knew
Of all the passage I have told to you.
He coming home, and understanding too,
That in my love you likewise have to do,
He frames excuses to keep back the maid.
For (says he to me) could he get belief
That he in my account should be held chief,
And you put by? or stood he not afraid
I having got her from him, presently
Would then forsake him; he would give her me?
But this he doubts. Yet I do rather guess
He fancies her.
Has he yet done no more?
No surely: for my self have (Phaedria)
Upon that point sisted her narrowly.
For many reasons I desire to get her;
First for she's deemed my sister: then beside
That to her friends I may the maid deliver.
My self do here a lovely woman bide,
Having nor kinsemen here nor yet fast friend;
Wherefore I seek to win some Phaedria,
By this good turn, I to the wench intend.
For my more ready working, I do pray
Thy help dear heart. The manner of my plot
Is, by your free consent for some few days
He may enjoy my love. Answer you not?
Oh woman wickedst of all thy race!
Should I reply ought to thy filthy doings?
ô our brave young Master! I commend him.
He's vexed at length: now sir you are a man.
The issue of the tale I could not find:
Small girl stolen hence; my mommy as her own
Bred it; deemed sister; have a childing mind
To hea't; and to put it where tic known.
Whereto doth this your tale now wheel about?
But that thou loust me less then yonder lout,
And jealous art thy sweet pigsme doos tout
On her, thee of his greazie grace cast out?
I jealous of it?
What else troubles thee?
Is he alone a giver? did ere see
My bounty slight or slack? when late you said
You had a great mind to an Aethiop maid;
Did not I, laying all else care aside,
Cast out for one? and Eunuch too beside
Thou wished; cause great Ladies have
Such creatures; I found one; yesterday gave
Twenty pounds for'hem. Now despised by thee,
I yet retain this in my memory:
For these my kindenesses thou slights me.
Why speak you Phaedria in this angry manner?
Though I desire her, and think may obtain her
Best this way: rather yet then have a foe
Of you, Isle do as you will have me do.
Would that word truly frō thy heart were brought;
Rather then me thy foe if I but thought
That this was spoke without dissembling,
I could my self frame to bear any thing.
How quickly one poor word hath tamed him?
do I poor soul speak it dissemblingly?
What thing did you ere crave though reastingly
At my hand, but you had it? I of you
Cannot obtain leave for a day or two.
If only two, and that if they prove not twenty.
Indeed but two, or —
Or I wait nothing.
Tshall be no more: pray yield this liberty.
Well: Thais I must do as you will have me.
Deservedly I love you.
Tic well done
Isle to the country, and there pine a lone
For these two tedious days: I am resolved so.
Thais must be obeyed. You Parmeno
See those brought hither straight.
Yes sir.
Thais
Farewell for two days.
And you Phaedria.
Command you all else?
What else should I say
With this same soldier present absent be:
Days nights thy love, fix thy desire on me:
Thy longings, dreams, thy hopes, delights, and mi•….
Fix upon me: be all with me: in fine
Be thy soul mine, as mine is truly thine.
Woes me; perhaps he hardly credits me,
But judges me by other wantons trade:
But I that best know my own privity,
Know I have now no kind of leasing made:
And that I love, no man more heartily
Then Phaedria here: and that what I have said
Or done, is only for to help the maid:
I hope I have well nigh discovered
Who is her brother: a young man well bred.
He promised to visit me this day.
Isle get me in, and for his coming stay:
AS I late bad, see those be hither brought.
I will.
But carefully.
It shall be done.
And speedily.
I Warrant you.
Is this Sufficient?
Good God▪ What need you ask so?
Would you could find some good commodity,
As easily as all this will bee lost.
My self, to my self dearer, am lost too.
Do not so thwartly entertain the charge.
No: but will see it done. Would you ought else?
Grace this my present with what words thou can
And what thou can, disgrace my rival from her.
I had thought o'that, though you had not
Mentiond it.
Isle to the country, and there keep.
I Judge so.
But hear?
What say y'?
Dost judge I may fettle
There to abide without returning back,
For all the time of my enjoined penance?
You? troth I think not: either I imagine
You'll pace again back to her presently;
Or want of sleepeith' night will force you hither,
Isle work to weariness, that I may force sleep.
Put this into your task you'll watch weary.
A way fool, thou talk idly Parmeno:
I sure must weed this my effeminate mind;
My self Louercoker. Can I not
(If need should be) for bear her company,
Yea, for three days together.
Wonderful!
For three whole days? advise sir what you do.
The word shall stand.
Oh you good gracious gods!
What disease call you this? is it not strange
That none should know him the same thing to be,
That erst he was? who late more stayed then he?
More temperate? less vain? but who comes here?
How! troth us the soldiers Parasite
Gnato; who with him brings the maid along.
As present unto Thais. Oh rare sight!
Sweet countenance! tic marle but I shall have
Course entertainment of her here to day
With my decrepit Eunuch. Why her face
Puts down the Mistress; Thais self doth pass.
OH you immortal gods! how far one man
Outstrips another? and what difference is
Twixt men of brain, and fools? this argument
Comes to my mind on this occasion.
To day I met one, of my rank and place;
No niggard pinch-gut: but one, took delight
To havoc out his state in dainty morsels.
I note him rugged, nasty, drooping grown;
Beset with rags and age. Why how now fellow,
Say I to him, what does this dressing mean?
Marry, says he, poor creature having lost
All I enjoyed, see to what state I am driven?
Acquaintance, friends, all do abandon me.
Here I began (measuring my own estate)
To hold him in contempt; and school him thus:
What, idle drone, hast thou so framed thy course
That no hope's left thee? hast thou sent thy wits
After thy wealth? dost not observe me
One of thine own rank and condition?
What clothing, coulor, neatness,, plight of body
Have I? have every thing though nothing have:
And nought possessing, yet do nothing want.
I but (sighs out my fellow) I poor caitise
Cannot endure to be a jesting stock,
Nor suffer stripes for money. What, I prithe
(Reply I) should be gotten that way, think?
Thou art clean wide: in former times, of old,
Such kind of fellows, shifted out a living:
This a new way of birding found by me.
There are a sort of men that fine would show
To have rare parts; and yet are nothing so.
I follow these; to these my self apply;
Not to make them sport by my foolery,
But my own sport of them I smile on these,
Withal admire their wits: what ere they please
To say I do commend it: if straight way
They do the very selfsame thing unsay,
I praise that too: ought say they, ought deny?
The same I say, deny for company.
In fine, I on my self impose this law:
Their humours at all hands to sooth and claw:
And this is now found the most thriving way.
Troth a fine fellow: he of fools mintes madmen.
While thus we talk, we reach to the market place:
The joyful Victlers haste to meet me there;
Fish-mungers, Butchers, Saulsagemakers, Cooks,
And Fishermen: people to whom I had been
both beneficial, while my state stood good;
And since it was sunk: and still advantage them.
These me salute, inuit me home to dine:
Do welcome me. The Hungerstarued fellow
I named, seeing the account men made of me,
And that I fared so well, so easily;
Humbly besought me he might learn the trade.
I bade him follow that if 't may be wrought,
Lake as professed Philosophers have sought
To keep their names up in their sectaries,
According to their doctrines qualities:
Epicures, Cynickes, Stoickes, Platonic:
So these my followers be styled Gnatonickes.
Do you not note what ease and trusting to
Other men's roast, may work a man to do?
Yet why thus loiter I, and not convey
This maid to Thais; and her further pray
To come to supper? but see Parmeno
The soldiers Rivals servant, at her door.
Hes melancholy: ell's well. Sure the folk here
Are frosty wetted: I am now determind.
To play upon the fool.
By this their gift
They think that Thais now 's their own cocke-sure.
Gnato does greet his chief friend Parmeno.
With wishes of much health. What dost man?
Stand.
I see it, but feast ought here does trouble thee?
Yes, thee.
I do believe it; but ought else?
Why ask?
Because y' are sad.
Not I truly.
No, be not. But what thinks thou of this maid?
Thus you now mean, that we are cashiered hence,
Las, all things fusser intercourse of change.
Parm'no: for these six whole months together.
Isle set thee at rest from trudging up and down
Or watching to day break: make I thee happy?
Me? wounder sully!
So I use my friends.
I do commend you for it.
I detain you:
Perhaps you were to go some whither else.
No whither, I.
Then I pray a little
Lend me your furtherance: work my entrance here.
Well sir go on. Your passage now lies saire
By reason of this maid you bring with you.
Would ye have any called to you out of the house?
Let but two days be passed over once;
And you that have the happy readiness
With your least singer now to op the doors,
Isle make you many a time hereafter knock
And kick your heals against'hem to no purpose
What do you still attend here Parmeno?
Pray, are you placed there sentinel, to watch
Least any private messenger should run
Between the soldier and Thais hither.
Conceitedly! but indeed they must be
Things extraordinary, that may please 
The soldier. But my Masters younger son
I spy a coming hither: I do marvel
What tic hath drawn him out of the Pyreum:
For there at this time he is public Custos.
Tic not for nothing. And he com's in haste:
And (why God knows) his eyes about doos cast.
I Am undone she's no where to be seen:
And I that lost sight of her am lost too.
Where may I search? where hunt? whom ask? what way
Take? I have no direction; but I have this hope left
Where ere she be, she cannot be long hid.
Beautiful face! hence forward I do blot
Out of the table of my fantasy
All other women: and do fall to loath
These common beauties.
Mark this yonker too?
I know not what he talks to himself of love.
Oh my most unfortunate old master!
Why this is such a hotspurre, if he take
To winching once, you'll think his brothers course
mere tricks and gambits in comparison
Of what his furious rage will venture on.
Oh all you gods and goddesses confound
That same old dotaid stayed me on my way.
Lee them plague me too, that did deign to stay:
And further would not slight him. But behold
Here's Parmeno: well met.
Why are you sad?
Or about what so earnest? whither going?
Troth I not know, nor whither, nor bout what;
I am so utterly beside my self.
Why how comes this?
I am in love man.
How?
Now Parmeno make proof, what dwells in thee.
Thou know thou oftentimes hast promised me,
Bidding me think of something I desired;
And thou would show how thou could pleasure me.
And this thou offerdst, when I secretly
Brought to the seller all our victuals to thee.
Peace idlesbee
Now on my part tic found
What I desire: let me thy promise find.
Besides it is an action of that value,
Whereon thou may spend thy best sweat and labour.
This wench is nothing like our City Mammats,
Whom their mothers strive to make low shoulderd;
And lace hard in, to make 'hem appear slender;
If any grow a little fleshlier
Sh's termed a champion; straightway dieted:
That be they of natural temper ere so good,
They tanner 'hem to form of reeds or rushes:
And therefore they are made much on.
What on yours?
Face af a rare proportion.
Excellent!
Colour her own plump body; full of mettle.
Her years?
About sixteen.
The very prime.
Procure her me by force stelth, or entreaty;
I weigh not which way, so I may into, her.
Of what condition is she?
Troth I know not.
Of whence.
Nor that.
Where dwells she?
As little, that.
Where saw you her?
Passing a long the street.
How lost?
That was chafing with my self
Tust now as I came hither: neither think
Ther's any living on, to whom good hippos
Offering well at first, do end more thwartly.
What mischief hath falue out?
Oh me accursed!
Why, what's the matter?
Ask thou? know thou not.
My fathers kinsman, Archidemides?
A man much of his years?
What else?
Whilst I
Follow the maiden, he comes just upon me.
Unseasonably of my word.
Nay verily
Unluckily. The word unseasonable
Fits other chances better Parmeno.
I may swear safe, this six or seven months
last past, I ne'er happened to see the man;
But now when least I would, or had less need.
Seems it not strange, how think thou?
Yes, y' faith.
As distant as he was he huddled to me,
Bow-bent, palsey-handed, blabber-lipt, cough-strangled:
Ho, ho, stay, Chaerea (says he) Chaerea stay;
Chaerea to thee I speak: knows thou my errand?
What is it, say I to him? marry — marry —
And half an hour after grunties to me
I have a trial to be heard to morrow —
And what of that, say I? he answers me
see that thou tell thy father carefully,
That he remember to be early ready
To plead my cause. This our dialogisme
Took up an hour of time, I asked what else?
No more sares he. I left him; looking backward
To spy the maid, she ith mean time had turned
down this way to our street.
Tic ten to one
But he means her, that was now brought to Thais.
When I come hither, she's not to be seen.
Did any company attend the wench?
Yes, a Parasite and a maid servant.
Tic she Cast of your care: all now is quiet.
Thou talk from the purpose.
Nay, but mind the business now in hand:
Say dost know her? or saw her?
Saw, know her, know where she is?
Oh my sweet Parmeno know her?
I do know her.
And where she is?
Here, brought to the harlot Thais,
And given her for a gift.
Who is so potent
To give such gifts?
Thraso the soldier,
Your brother Phaedria's rival.
Thou declar'st
But a hard case my brother stands in then.
Yould say so indeed, if you had seen the present Which he provides to send in counterpoise.
Prithe, what first?
An Eunuch.
What, that driule,
That filthy fellow he brought yesterday?
The old man-woman?
I, the very same.
Heal be coited out of doors wed's present.
But I ne'er knew, this Thais was our neighbour
She has not long been.
I'm a fellow of nothing.
Strange, I should ne'er have seen her? but dost hear?
Is she so fair, as she's reported for?
Yes sine.
But not to be compared to mine?
Tic otherwise.
I prithe Parmeno
Work that I may obtain her.
Isle see toot:
Isle study for your furtherance and help. Command you me ought else?
Whether now go thou?
Home; to convey those servants unto Thais.
As late your brother charged me.
Oh blessed Eunuch!
Who is to be there placed in that house.
Wherein so blessed
Wherein, demandest thou?
That ever has so fair a fellow servant
To look on; talk to: under the same roof
Be still with her; sometimes take meals with her?
Sometimes sleep nigh her?
What if now your self
May be made happy?
Wherein Parmeno?
Say. Tak's clothes
His clothes? what thence Will follow?
Isle lead y' in 's stead.
I note.
Isle say y' are hee.
I apprehend thee
You may then enjoy
The benefits, which now you said he should;
be present, eat, touch, play, and lie close by her:
Seeing 〈…〉 'hem do know you, what you are.
Beside your face and years are such, you may
Pass easily for an Eunuch.
Excellent.
I never in my lise heard better counsel.
Let's in; and help to dress me presently.
Lead me, carry me, with all speed thou can.
What mean? troth I but reasted.
Thou west's time in prating.
I have cast my self away.
What have I done wretch? whither thrust you me?
Will you now force me? Sir I warn you stay.
Let's go.
Persist you?
I am fully bent toot.
Foresee, if th'course be not to hot for vs.
Tic not I warrant thee, let's on.
I, but
This bean will sure be threshed on my shoulders.
Oh tic a heinous practise we attempt.
A hamous sigge: is that a heinous practise,
If I be brought in a bawdy house,
And there return their own upon these gibets
And plagues of men? which always hold om youth
In such contempt, and always work our torment?
If I do now put a like trick upon 'hem,
As we by them are still gulled? or else rather
First fit, we still take their wrongs patiently?
I say tic fit I put the jest upon her.
Who'l blame me that shall hear on it? every man
Will say, I fitted 'hem a peniworth
What means all this? If you be so resolved
You may go on. But pray you sir hereafter
Lay not the fault on me.
I will not.
You Command me then?
Command, charge and compel.
Isle ne'er (decline then) your authority.
Follow.
The powers divine prosper our course.
DId Thais (says thou) give me such great thanks?
Huge thanks sir.
And glad say? ha?
Not so much for the gifts worth, as that it came From you: that's her hearts pride sir.
I come forth to see
How time serves for conveyance of my present.
But lo the soldier.
My kind destiny
Sure of a child bestowed this gift upon me,
That all I do becomes most acceptable.
Truly I note so much.
The King himself
Still used to give me singular great thanks
For all I did; to other men not so.
The man that hath brain in him doth derive
Oft times the glory earned by others sweat
Upon himself: a thing that's rife in you.
Thou hast it.
Therefore the King still wore you—
I,
In his eye.
True: gave the oversight
Of all his forces, all his plots to me.
Rare!
Then, if weariness at any time
Of men, or tediousness of business
Possessed him; when he minded to be private,
Would—as it were—thou feelst me?
Yes when he would
Unload his mind—as it were—of care.
Yes, then
He would retire with me alone to banquet.
ô strange! you do describe a rare choice King.
I, he's a man of very few men's stamp.
Rather of none's if he converse with you.
All men envied me; closely snapped at me;
I thus regard'hem; all (I say) bare me ill:
But one most deadly, whom the King had made
Orescer of his Indian Elephants.
He at a time being over saucy with me,
What said I to him, take you boldness Strato,
Because you have command over the beasts?
So help me God, an exlent witty jest:
Oh singular! this was a wipe unto him.
Ah! and what he?
Struck dumb.
How could he choose?
Your faith good gods! desperate fellow, caitiff,
Churchrobber.
I but what think thou Gnato.
Of that same jest, wherewith I girded once
A youth of Rhodes being at dinner with me?
Did I ne'er tell't thee?
Never: I pray tell it.
I have heard it told aboue a thousand times.
This Rhodian I speak of, a raw young stripling
Sat once at banquet with me: when by chance
I had my harlot with me: This greene novice
Began to speak broad: how now impudence,
Say I to him, art thou thy self hare-haunched
And hunt'st for ven'son.
ha, ha, he.
How first?
Conceited, clearly, smooth, not to be mended
For Gods love was it your jest? I thought it old.
Hast heard it?
Oft, abroad it bears the bell
For a prime witty one.
It was mine.
Alas,
Rash headless youth.
Now the gods confound thee.
For Gods sake what did he?
Blasted. All there
Were ready every man to burst with laughter:
And in conclusion all began now fear me.
I could not blame'hem.
But dost hear were
Best I cleared my self to Thais, of this maid:
For that she stands in jealousy I love her?
At no hand: rather strive to increase her doubt.
Why?
Ask you? find you not, if any time
She do commend or mention Phaedria,
How it does vex you?
Yes.
To prevent that
This is your only remedy. When she
Names Phaedria to you, do you presently
Name Pamphila: if she at any time
Say, let vs have home Phaedria to banquet,
Reply you, call in Pamphila to sing:
In fine, give like for like, to nettle her
I, if she loved me, this might further Gnato.
Seeing she expects and loves what you do give her,
She long since loves you; you have long since
Easily got the start how you may grieve her.
Sheel always stand in awe, least any time
Upon offence tan you'll bestow elsewhere
That benefit, she now doos reap from you
Tic right thou say. Strange, 't came not to my Mind?
That is a jest indeed; because you bent not
Your mind out or else Thraso what rare strain
Had it produced, if minted in your brain.
ME thought, I en now heard the soldiers tongue
See where he is: Thraso my friend, well met.
Oh my dear Thais, my delight, how dost thou?
Do you a little love me for your Ministrell?
What a sweet proper handsel has he given her
At the first onset.
Much for your deserving:
Then let's to supper. Why here stay you?
Mark tother Wiseacre too. A man may judge
He was of a mans getting.
When you please,
I am in readiness.
Isle go toward 'hem,
And make as if I now but new came forth.
Are you to go forth any whither Thais?
ô Parmeno, well done: yes indeed to day.
I am to go abroad.
Pray whither?
See thou not
The man There?
Yes, withal his presence irkes me.
Those presents from my Master Phaedria
Are ready when you please.
What stay we for?
Why •et not hence?
Pray sir grant truce a while,
I may surrender up some trifling presents, I also may
Imparle and treat with her.
Some goodly present
Sure: nothing like mine.
The matter self will
Show that. Ho there, bid those two I gave in charge,
Come quickly forth. 
Come you here forward. This same wench was brought
From Aethiopia.
Some three half penny purchase,
Scarce that.
Where are you Dorus.
Come you hither. Here is an Eunuch for you: mark
How sweet faced, of what a blooming age.
Now
As God help me a handsome youth.
What say
You to him Gnato? What fault find thou? or what
Objects thou Thraso? hushed both: sufficient
Commendation. Prove him in learning, song or
Wrestling: such knowledge fitteth free-horne youth to
Have, Isle make it clear appear he's perfect in.
For need, vnwarm'd with wine I could that Eunuch
And he that sends you these, doos not require
That you should only live to pleasure him;
For his sake, bar all else your company;
Nor brags his battles, nor shows forth his scars;
Nor stands betwixt you and your benefit
As one doos, I could name: but at such times
When he may be injurious to none,
Your self disposed, and time convenient;
If then admitted, he rest's satisfied.
This shows he serves some poor &amp; forlorn Master.
For no man sure that could procure another
Would endure this.
Sir., hold thou thy peace,
Whom I do judge under all names of baseness:
For thou that fram'st thy self to claw that thing,
I think may feed on fire.
Do we yet go?
Isle have but in these first; and leave some charge
Among my servants, what I would have done;
And come out to you straight.
Isle depart hence.
Gnato do you stay for her.
I, for it fits not
A general walk wed's mistress in the streets.
What should I use a many words to thee?
Thou art much like thy Master.
Ha, Ha, he.
What first thou laughst at?
That which now you said,
And the other jest broke on the Rhodian
Came to my mind: But Thais is come forth.
Run you before and get at home all ready.
Content.
You Pythias have a special care,
If Chromes chance to call here, you entreat him
To stay; if that he cannot fitly do,
That he would come again some other time:
If neither that he can, bring him to me.
I will forsooth.
But what, what was it else
I was about to say? Oh, have a care
Unto the maiden, see you? and keep home.
Let's go.
Wenches attend and follow me.
The more I do revolve things in •y mind
Still the more likely arguments, find
That Thais here aims some shrewd trick against me;
I see she works on me so cunningly.
When first she sent for me (if any one
should then have asked me the occasion
Of business twixt vs twain, I knew not••ng
To Answer) being come, with hammerit
She fashiond out pretences of my stay•
She had performed religious rites that day
Unto the gods, and would communicate
A Weighty secret to me: (I then straight
Grew jealous, all this was some cunning strain•,
She fits down by me; cause of talk doth frame
I seeming cold, her speech to this point came,
How long it was since my Parents had been dead
Long since I told her: then she questioned
If I had land at Sunium? and how far
It lay from sea? this (I think) likes her:
She hopes to work it from me. at the last
She drew to this, if I had no young sister
From that place stolen a many years now past?
Who then was with her at the time we mist her?
What things she had about her? or if any
Could know her? why should she these questions move
unless (as is the impudence of many)
She fine her self would that my sister prove,
Of old so young hence lost? should she survive,
Her years at most reach not aboue sixteen;
Thais is elder then my self, I wean.
She craved me again come to her: let her drive
The matter, and her business to some head;
Or leave this sending: isle not be troubled,
To listen her third errand. Ho, within —
Who's that?
One Chromes.
Oh fine little pleasant pa•e.
I still affirm, I am laid for to be caught.
Thais did earnestly request you would
Return to morrow.
I go into the Country.
Pray y'
I say I cannot.
Then remain here
A while till she come back.
No by no means.
Why my kind Chromes?
Hence you harlotry
If such be your determination,
I pray step over to her where she is.
I care not if I do.
Darias go straight
And leads is gentleman to his soldiers.
SOme youths of vs agreed on yesterday
A feast in Common amongst vs 〈◊〉 Chaerea
We made our Steward, rings were given, time, place
Set down; time's past, where it appointed was
Nothing is ready, he not to be seen,
I know not what to say out, what to wean.
Now all the rest have laid the task on me
To seek him; therefore now Isle first go see
If he be gotten home. But who is that
Comes out of Thais house? is it he or not?
Tic he. What creature's he become? what means
This his attire? what evil bodes his staring?
I cannot enough wonder, or conjecture.
But what so ere it be, Isle aloof stand;
And angle for the secret now in hand.
IS none about the doors? Not one. Doos none
come yet behind me neither? No not one.
May I not now at pleasure vent my joy?
Oh Iupiter! now truly is the time
I easily could brooke to part with life:
Least some ensuing wretchedness thereof
Should hap to sour my present happiness.
No curious inquisitor now meet me?
That up and down would hant me, weary me,
Kill me with tedious questions, why I skip thus?
Why am so jocund? Whither I am going?
Or whence do come? in what place got these clothes?
What is my aim? whither Ime mad or sober?
Isle to him, and obtain the thanks of him
He so desires to part with. Chaerea,
Why in such rapture man! whence this attire?
Why art so pleasant? or what aymst thou at?
Art in thy wits? Why starest thou so upon me?
Why speak not?
Oh happy day? ô friend well met.
There's no man living, I would rather see
At this time then thy self.
I prithee, say
What is the matter!
Nay truly I pray thee
Give me the hearing. Know thou not her here
My brother is in love withal?
Yes Thais:
As I do guess.
The same.
So I remember.
A certain maid was given her to day.
What need I blazon or set out to thee
This maidens matchelesse beauty, Anripho?
Thou know me choice in such disciphering.
She did inflame my heart.
What say?
thou'lt say
She from the whole sex bears the Bell away,
If ever thou shalt see her. What need words?
I began to love her: by good chance there was
At home an Eunuch which my brother had
bought for this Thais, not then sent to her.
Here our man Parmeno an odd inkling gave me
Of a device, which quickly I laid hold on.
What
If you would silent keep, you would
Know sooner.
First to change clothes with him, then cause my self
To be conueyed for him.
What for the Eunuch?
Yes.
What advantage should you win thereby?
Make then a question? I should see, should hear,
Should be with her I loved, Antipho.
Was it a slight cause, or a trifling reason?
I was brought to her; when she had received me
She gladly led me home: commits the maid —
To whom? To thee?
To me.
a fine safe∣guard.
She charge me that no man come to her;
Commands me further, I not start from her;
But that alone I keep with her alone,
In a close chamber: I say, yes forsooth;
Upon the ground looking demurely.
Gaits.
I am to go now forth (says she) to banquet,
And with her leads along her maiden servants;
(A few young novice wenches left behind
To attend upon the maid) these presently
Prepare for her to Bathe. I wish them haste
While they make things in readiness, the maid
Sits in a closet, looking on a table:
Wherein was painted, how that Iupiter
Once ray'nd in Danes lap a golden showie.
I looked upon the piece too: and because
He had in former times plaid the like prankt,
My spirits were the more encouraged:
In that a God had taken human shape,
And in gold dew dropping himself through tiles
Had closely, finely, wantond with his leman
And which of th'Gods had done it? matie the same
Who shakes with thunder heavens high arched frame
Should I wormeling (then) make scruple of it?
I did not, but embraced it willingly.
When this I cast in mind, the maid mean while
Is called for in, to wash: goes, bathes, returns;
And afterword they lay her in her bed:
I waiting stand if they'ld bid me do ought.
One comes to me, and says, you sir Dorus
Take you this fan; and thus fan wind upon her•
When we have washed, you (if you will) wash too.
I take it with sad countenance.
At that time
I would have seen that bashful face of thine
How thou great Ass did stand holding a fan
She had scarce spoken it, when all together
I surring out of the room, depart to Bathe;
And make such noise, as servants commonly
Are went to do, when Masters are from home
Mean while a flumber seases on the maid.
I privily (thus) on the fans side do leer,
And look about too, if all else be clear:
I saw all safe, and hoited fast the door.
What then?
What then fool?
I con∣fesse it.
Should I let slip such opportunity,
So proffered, short, wished and not hoped for?
I had been then indeed such as I showed for.
Tic true thou say. But in the mean while what's done
Cconcerning our repast?
why all is ready.
Thou art careful: where? at your house?
No at Discus
Our free-mans.
Tic far hence, let's make more haste
Go shift your clothes.
Where should I go to shift?
Ime lost; from whom I stand as banished;
I doubt my brother may be now within:
Fear also, least my father be returned
Out of the country.
Go we to our house,
That's the next place, where you may shift your self.
The advise is good, lets go: withal I mind
To take thy counsel, how I may my love
Further enjoy.
Content, our wits will prove.
SO help me God, I somewhat doubt poor creature
By things I saw, least the enraged soldier
Should raise some broil; and do my Mistress wrong.
For presently as soon as Chromes came
The late given young maids brother; she requests
The soldier, he would cause him be called in:
He grew in sum, but yet durst not deny her.
She further moves his invitation
Unto their banquet: (this my Mistress did
To keep him there; because as yet the time
Served not to tell him things concerned his sister.
The soldier willed him sit; yet grumblingly.
He placed, my mistress frames discourse to him:
The soldier thought a rival had been brought
Under his nose, and minding to cry quittance
Called out, ho, one of you fetch Pamphila
To sing to vs; Thais cries out, at no hand:
What her to a banquet? He would have it so.
Hence grew the matter to a down right brawl:
My mistress privily took of her jewels,
And gave 'hem me in secret to bring thence.
This is a certain sign, whereby I know
Shee'• slip thence, when she spies fit time thereto
AS I upon my journey passing was,
A thronging troupe of busy thoughts do press
Into my mind; as ought it comes to pass
To men whose souls some trouble seized has:
And every thing in the worse sense I guess.
What need much talk? while these dumps me possess
Vnheeded I was passed the town I meant to,
And was gone far beyond it; when at last
Perceiving it I back returned fast:
And being scarce come unto the torn which went to
The town, there staid; and in my mind thus cast,
Two whole days must I this place be pent to
Alone without her? Why is that such a matter?
Tic nothing: Nothing? What, if not come at her
To touch her? must I yet be barred her sight?
If that be crossed, is this to be lost quite?
To climb the lowest, first step of loves lather
Were somewhat yet. But why in such affright
Comes Pythias forth? and why so hastily?
VVRetch that I am, where shall I find this fellow?
Where this ungodly wicked fellow find?
That he should dare attempt a piece of work
So monstrous, so audacious!
I am lost,
And doubt what this may mean.
Besides, yet further
The vilaine not alone defiled the maid;
But rent the poor souls linen, tore her hair.
How's this?
Whom if I now could light upon,
How I would fly upon th'eyes of the witch?
I cannot guess what coil hath here besalne
Since my departure. Isle go to her. How now?
What is the matter? why such haste? Who is it
Pythias, thou look for thus.
Oh Phaedria,
Whom seek I? Sir I pray you get you hence
Where you deserve, with your conceited presents.
What may this mean?
Ask you? what fine Eunuch
Was that you sent? what stir hath he here made vs?
H'has ravished the young maid, the soldier
Bestowed upon my Mistress.
Ha! what this?
I am undone.
Thou art drunk.
I would
To God that all that hate me, were as drunk as I am.
Dorias. For Gods love Pythias what strange hap was this?
You are mad. How could an Eunuch do such things?
I know not what he was, but what h'has done
The case it self doth show. The wench she weeps.
And when one asks her, dare not utter why.
The honest fellow too's not to be found.
Beside I fear, hoe's run away with somewhat.
You make me wonder, where the lazy bones
Should have conveyed himself: unless penhaps
He be retired back to our house again.
Pray, see if he be there.
You shall know straight.
I am to seek, good God sweet Pythias
I have not heard so strange and accident.
Yes, I had heard that they loved woman
Dearly, but could do nothing. And forgetful beast
I never thought ont: else I had mewed him up,
And ne'er h'trusted her unto his keeping.
COme out outdoors mischieuos rogue; come out.
what draw you backward? come forth runaway
Ill purchased commodity come forth.
For Gods sake sir.
Mark how the Hangman
Wries his choppes a'toneside? sir, what's the scope
Of this your coming back? the mystery
Of this your changing clothes? your answer sirrha?
If I had stayed ne'er so little Pithias,
I had not found him there: he had prepared
Ready for packing.
Have you got him then?
Got him? what else?
Upon my faith that's well.
I troth that's passing well.
Where is he?
Phae ask?
See him not?
See pray? whom?
Why this.
Wha'ts he?
He that this day was brought you.
None of vs
Ere saw this fellow, till now Phadria.
Ne'er saw?
for Gods love. (Phaedria) did you
Think,
That this was brought.
Yes for I had no other.
Fie, there's between 'hem no comparison.
That was a fair and comely vizadgd youth.
You thought so then cause he had other clothes on:
Those off, you think him now ill favoured.
Au! pray sir cease: as if the difference.
Were small between 'hem? here to day was brought
(Phaedria) a youth you would ha'longd to look on:
This an old, creping, dreaming, dropsy, dotard;
Complexiond like a Weasel.
How, how this?
Chrochets? you make me searse know what I do.
Sirrha come near me did not I buy you?
Yes forsooth.
Now command him answer me.
Put forth your question.
came thou here to day?
You see he does deny it: but the other
Came to vs, hither brought by Parmeno,
Some sixteen years of age.
Resolve me this;
First, by what means got you the clothes you wear?
Silent? monster of men, speak not? Dorus. Chaerea
Came home.
My brother?
Yes.
When?
But this day.
How long since?
Even now.
And
Who was with him?
Parmeno
Had thou ever before seen him?
No, nor yet ere before had heard him named.
How then did know him to have bin my brother
Dorus. Parmeno said so. He gave me these clothes.
Ime lost.
himself withal straight put on
Mine.
You think me now not drunk; nor that I have li'd.
Tic now most clear the poor Wench is deflowered.
Fie beast, believe him?
What need I
Believe him?
The matter self proclaims it.
sirrha you,
Come hither (here you) yet a little nearer:
So, Tic well. Tell me again, did Chaerea
Take your clothes.
Yes.
And put 'hem on him∣self?
Yes
And was brought for you to Thais?
Yes sir.
Great Iupiter! oh wicked shameless fellow
Woes me; you scarce believe yet we a•• abu'sd.
Tic marle now, but thou credit's what he says?
Ime at my wits end — Sirrha dost thou hear?
(Done it being asked again) can I no way
Work a truth from thee? ha? did see my brother?
Not I intrude.
No truth, I see, unforced
Can be got from him. Come, come in with me.
Now say things straight deny 'hem? (beg of me.)
For Gods sake sit
Will you get in? Dorus
Hoy hey.
I know no means else how to shift away.
I stand in a fair case, if such a knave
As thou, may thus befoole me at his pleasure.
I know sure as I lieve, 't was Parmeno.
Complotted this.
Yes doubtless.
Ere I sleep
Isle find a mean how to cry quittance with him.
But what think best we should do, Dorias?
Touching the wenchd'ye mean.
Yes, it't be best
To utter or conceal't. Dorias If you be wise,
Know ought, know nought, touching the Eunuch self,
Or her abuse: so shall you keep from blame;
And do her a good turn. You may say only,
Dorus is run away.
Isle even do so.
But see I not Chromes vonder? Thais straight
Will be here with vs.
Wherefore think you so?
Because when I came thence, they grew to brawl.
Bear in the jewels: Isle of him learn all.
I, I, assure as heaven, I was but plaid on.
The wine ore wrought me: yet while I was sitting
Me thought I was exceedingly well tempered,
but rising found both feet and brains to sail
Who's that? Oh Pythias how much
Fairer
Now seem thou then crewhile.
You in good sooth
Are pleasanter by saire.
Tic true and old,
Spare wine and dainties, sportful lusts grows cold.
First long, since Thais came?
Hath she already
Then left the soldier?
oh yes long age.
And there has been great falling out between 'hem.
Did she say nothing, you should follow her?
Nothing, but at her parting winkd on me.
What, was not that sufficient Item man.
I knew not that the meant so much, but that
The soldier helped my dull conceiving her;
For out outdoors he thrust me: see where she is
I marvel where it was, I over went her.
I guess he will be here straight, with intent
To take her from me; let him come on then:
But if he lay on little singer on her,
Isle claw his eyes out. I can so far bear
His fopperies, and swollen bombasted words
Whilst that they be but words: come they to deeds once,
Isle ferrit him.
I was here long since Thais.
Oh Chromes, I looked for you. Know you not
That all this brabble hath been about you?
Me? how? as if I broached it?
Yes because
While I do seek to render to your hands
Your long lost sister, this ensued thereon.
Whore's that my sister?
Here at home with •e.
Ha!
Why whats the matter? Shee'has been
Brought up
As fits her self and you.
What first you say?
That which is truth: freely give her you.
Demanding nothing at your hands for her.
I give and owe you Thais many thanks
As you have well deserved.
But beware
Chromes, you lose her not, ere you receive her:
For this is she the soldier comes to get
By maine force from me. Pythias get you in,
And fetch the little cofer with the tokens•
Do you see him coming Thais?
Mistress
Where is it?
Ith'leatherne hamper: Makst thou no more haste queen?
What forces dooes he bring with him? oh me.
Are you afraid friend?
A way, I afraid?
No man a live less.
I tic fit you be not.
T'sh, I do doubt what man you take me for.
No, but consider, he you are to deal with
Is a mere stranger, of less means, less known,
Less friended here then you.
All this I know:
But yet tic folly to admit an evil
Which may be well prevented. I had rather,
We seek aforehand to prevent a wrong,
Then to return a suffered injury.
Do you get in; and then make fast your doors;
Whilst I haste over to the market place.
I will have some assistants by, in the tumult.
Stay.
Tic the safest course.
Pray stay.
Pray leave.
Isle be here straight again.
Chromes this needs not,
Acquaint him only that she is your sister,
Which you a small girl lost; and now do know her:
Show him the proving tokens.
Here they are.
Here take 'hem, if he offer violence,
Summon him to the law: conceive you me?
Yes very well.
See you utter it with courage.
I warrant you.
Pull up your cloak there, to you.
Ime in a fair case: why, this man I make
My Champion, needs another him to back.
BRooke such a base assront? Isle die first, Gnato.
Simatio, Donax, and Syriscus follow:
The house Isle first dismantle —
Aright course.
Take thence the maid my hostage —
Very Good.
Make Thais feel my vengeance —
Excellent.
Donax come you here hither with your leaver,
Into the heart of my battalion:
Simatio fall you there on the left wing.
Wheel you about Syriscus to the right.
Draw out some more: whore's Sanga the Centurion
Wed's band of the black guard.
Here ready Captain.
Where are thy arms drone? wilt thou enter fight
With thy moppe there? that thou hast brought it hither?
sir I but know the courage of my Chiestaine,
Or soldiers fury, that the day would cost
Much blood shed, brought it here to cleanse the gore.
Where are the rest there?
what (a murrain) rest?
Samnio alone keeps home, to look to th'house.
Do you rank these; Isle march behind the Van.
Note sirs his wisdom! having ranked the rest,
Himself retires to safe place for shelter.
It was Pyrthus usual practise.
Thais, see you
What he intends? that sure's the safest way,
To locke up doors.
This fellow (lassure thee)
Thou deem a man of spirit is a gull;
A pure great goosecappe: ne'er make doubt of him.
What thinks thou Gnato.
I could wish you had
A sling stone here, to gall 'hem a loose off:
They'ld straight forsake their Castle.
But I see
Thais her self.
Let's straight rush in upon them.
Forbear: A discreet general should cast
To win his aims by treaty, ere he put
The hazard unto battle. How dost know
But she may do my biddings, uncompelled?
Oh you good Gods! what tic to be distreeter
I ne'er come to you, but I do depart
Much bettered in my judgment.
Thais, first
Answer me this, when I bestowed on you,
The maid, assure you not your company
To me for certain days.
Well, what o'that?
Ask thou what? that broughst before mine eyes
Thy lover? (what hast thou to do with him?)
And with him sneak'st from me?
It was my pleasure.
Restore now therefore Pamphila, unless
You'll have me force her from you.
How, to thee
Restore her? or dare thou lay hands on her?
Thou? of all —
Have care good sir, you know not
What kind of man you speak so grossly to.
Will you get hence? know you how stands your case?
If you disturb vs here, Isle give you cause
To think upon this time, this place, and me:
Whilst you have day to live;
I pity you,
That seek to make so great a man your so.
Isle crack your crown sir if you get not hence.
How whelp, what say?
Why what art thou?
What mean?
What business hast thou with her?
Thou shalt know
First I affirm the maiden is free borne.
How?
Free of Athens.
Hoida!
And my sister.
I therefore now forewarn thee soldier,
Thou use no force against her. Thais, He go
And fetch her Nurse Sophrona hither straight;
And show her these remembrances.
Dost thou
Forewarn me that I should not touch my own?
I say I do forewarn thee.
Here you sir,
You have good action of deceit against him.
Said I enough?
Say you so Thais too?
Seek one to answer.
What's our course
Now Gnato?
Why let's retreat: sheel straight come after you,
Crouching and kneeling.
Think so?
Nay
That's sure.
I am acquainted with these women's humours:
Sue, they are squeamish; if you keep off, they sue.
Thou deem aright.
Shall I dismiss the
Army?
I, when thou please.
Sanga, as fits good soul∣diers,
Cast now your eyes back on the household chimnels
My mind was long ago among the platters
You are careful,
All follow me this way in.
Continue drab to talk in riddles to me?
I know, I know not, heard so, he is gone,
I was not by —. Wilt thou not in plain terms
Tell me the matter? the maids clothes are torn,
She weeps and silent keeps, the Eunuch gon.
Why this? what's chanced? speak not?
Woes me
Poor soul!
What should I say? they say he was no Eunuch.
who then?
This Chaerea here.
which Chaerea?
This younger brother unto Phaedria.
What say witch?
I have found it certain so.
Why what a gods name had he here to do?
Or why was hither brought?
I cannot tell,
But that I guess he loved Pamphila.
I find my self accursed wretch undone,
If this be true thou vtterst. First for that,
The wench so weeps?
I think so.
Think so hedge?
Was this the charge I left you at my parting?
What should I do? I left 'him both alone
As you did bid.
Unlucky queen, thou left's
A lamb to the woolfe: oh I am ashamed,
So to be plaid on. What man have we here?
Mistress, for Gods love peace; we are well
W'haue caught
The man.
Where is he?
Look to your left hand.
Do you not see him?
Yes.
Call out for help;
To lay hold on him with all speed you can.
What shall's do with him fool?
What do, •'you ask?
Pray mark if when you wistly eye the fellow,
Has not a ashamelesse leer?
No, has he not.
Note with what confidence my man struts too.
AS I but now to Antiphoes did come,
His father and his mother were at home;
As if it had been so plotted so that in
I could not enter butt I must be seen.
Whilst here about the door a while I stay,
One that I knew came but into my way:
I him espying hastily betook
Me to my heals; and fled into a nook
Was unfrequented: so from place to place
Posted, till I to death nigh wearied was:
And this I did, least any should me know.
But is not this Thais, I see? tic she:
I stick ith'mire; nor know I what to do.
But what care I? what dare she do to me?
Let's to him. O, you are well met honest Dorus.
Tell me, did run away?
Mistress I did.
And was it well done, think thou?
no forsooth.
Think to go with it scot free so away?
Forgive me but this one fault, if I ever
Commit the like again, then kill me for it.
Did fear my curstness?
No.
What Feardst thou then?
I feared your maid here would tell tales of me.
What had thou done?
A 〈◊〉.
Impudence
A trifle? is it a trifle in thine eye
To take a freeborne maid, and ravish her?
I took her for my fellow servant.
Fellow?
I searse can hold my singers from his ears.
Monster art come again, to flout vs too?
Get you hence Bedlam.
Pray forsooth, why so?
I think I ow't the gallows, if I do
As I do threaten; and the rather too,
Because he does confess he's slave to you.
No more of this. Chaerea, you have committed
An act fair unbeseeming that fair port
Your self and friends here bear; say the scorn fitted
And to my course of life did rustly sort:
Yet for your own worth you should have forborne.
Nor truly know I now what course to frame
Touching the maid; you have disordered so
All my proceedings, I cannot return
Her to her friends, as I desired the same;
And as was fitting for the maid to go:
So that both maid and friends I might have made
Beholding to me, by the course I laid.
Thais, but now I hope henceforth will grow
Fast love between vs: oftentimes you know
From bad beginnings, slight occasion,
Great love hath had its derivation.
What, if some higher powers did thus decree?
In such sense I do take it verily;
And so do wished.
Pray one thing reckon right
No purposd scorn, but loves imperial mihght
Then swayed my passions.
I believe it was so;
And truly therefore pardon you the rather:
I am not (Chaerea) of such stubborn nature,
Nor so vnskild as loves power not to know.
So help me God as I now grow in love
With you to Thais.
Then mistress I perceive
You ought to watch him.
O, I dare not prove.
In truth le trust thee for just nothing.
Leave.
Thais, I do commend, commit my self
To your protection; beg your help herein;
Desire, beseech you'll stand my Patronise.
I cannot live if I not marry her.
But if your father—
Tsh, what? I know he will—
So she be known freeborne.
If you please stay
A little, the maids brother will be here;
He went to call the nurse that nur'st her young:
You may be by at her acknowledging.
Yes, I will stay.
And in the mean time will You.
(Till he do come) we go into my house?
Tic better then at door here waiting stand.
With all my heart.
Pray what do ye mean to do?
In what?
Do you ask? mean you for all this yet
To let him come again into the house?
Why not?
Take my word for it, h'le adventure
Some second battery.
Prithee hold'thy chat.
Ha'you not had sufficient trial of him?
I will not, Pythias.
Isle not trust you, Chaerea.
Unless you be kept out.
But (Pythias)
Thy self shalt be my keeper
Troth not I:
Isle neither trust thee with the custody
Of any thing, not keep thee yet my self.
So get you hence.
Her brother's fitly come.
I'm lost, pray let vs in, I would not (Thais)
He see me in this habit in the street.
Why, art ashamed?
Yes truth.
Yes truth? alack!
A maiden bachelor I warrant you.
Go in before, I follow. Pythias
Tarrte you here, to bring in Chromes with you.
WHat, can I think of no plot, no device,
No trick to erie quittance with this rascal?
That foisted in this counterfeit among vs?
Pray move your joints a little nimbler rues.
I moan sir.
I, I see it; but nothing forward.
Have you yet shown the tokens to her sir?
Yes, all.
What says she, pray? remembers them?
Yes perfectly.
In troth you bring good news,
For Ido wish the maid well. Pray go in;
My mistress long since did expect your coming.
But see the honest fellow Parmeno,
I think I have found a trick to nettle him,
As I would wish. Isle first go in and hear
The maids acknowledgement; and again come forth
To fright the rogue with a fine penny worth.
I Now scout out, to see what Chaerea has done:
Who if he have the business cleanly handled,
Good gods! What glorious palm have I then won?
For to omit, that I a cafeintangled
Have wound out fairly to his hand; have wrought,
Have compassed his love, his wench, a maid
He so did dote on: and yet cost him nought,
(No purse expense, no trouble, hazard made;)
And from a greedy harlot. Then again
(Which I indeed account my Masters prise)
That I have found him out a ready mean,
To learn these strumpets manners and full guise:
Which ripely understood, he may for ever
Detest their courses: when abroad they git,
None are more neat and sweet in their behaviour,
They mince and pick upon each dainty bit;
(With their friend eating such is their demeanour.)
And then to note their greedy ravening,
Their sluttishnesse, their penury at home;
What nasty Cormorants they are alone;
Out of stale porrage musty bread devouring:
These things are youths true cordials being known.
Rogue for thy deeds &amp; words Isle plague thee so.
Thou shalt not for our wrongs hence scot-free go.
Your mercy oh good gods oh cruel practise!
Alas poor youth! but ô that cursed vilaine!
That vilaine Parmeno, that brought him hither!
What may the matter be?
It pities me;
Therefore I hasted out of doors, poor woman:
Because I would not see it. Oh, what example
(Say the) they do intend to make of him?
ô God! What strange stirre's this? am not I lost, trow?
Isle to her. What means this flight, Pythias?
Dost ask audacious fellow? whilst thou soughtst
To put a trick upon vs, th'hast undone,
Hast utterly undone that pretty youth,
Thou brought vs for an Eunuch.
why, what's chāc'd?
Dost know the maid was sent vs is free borne?
And has a brother here of great account?
I know it not.
But she's proved so: this poor youth
Has ravished her; which when her brother heard of.
Coming in furious heate—
What did he do?
First piteously has bound him.
Ha, has Bound him?
I, although Thais begged the contrary.
What say
And now he further threatened
To use him in such sort, as is the wont
To be performed upon adulterers.
Upon what confidence dare he venture
So heinous an attempt?
Why, is 't so heinous?
Is it not the heynousest that can be thought on?
Who ever saw any one apprehended
For an adulterer in a bawdy house?
I know not that.
But that thou moist know it
I tell thee (Pythias) tic my Masters son.
What, first I pray?
Therefore let Thais look then,
She suffer him sustain no injury.
But why do I my self not receive him?
Parmeno consider what you go about.
Lest you not help him, and yet cast away
Your self forever. For they do imagine
That all is done is of your practising.
What shall I do then wretch? or what contrive.
But lo, I see my old Master newly come
Out of the country: were I best acquaint him
What is befallen or not? Isle tell him, sure;
Though I do know, I shall pay soundly for it.
But I must doot, that he may help his son.
I, thou dost wisely. Isle go in. Deline.
Every thing to him, as it chanced in order.
MY Country grange yields this commodity,
I find no irk somnesse in field, or city:
I can shift place, being of either weary.
But is not yond our Parmeno? tic he.
Who waite you here for before Thais door?
Who's thats oh Master' you are welcome home.
Who wait'st thou here for?
I'm undone, my Tongue
Falters for scare.
How's this? why shakst thou so?
Tell me, 's all well here?
Master first I crave
You would conceive the matter as it stands:
That what so ere hath happened, hath not come
Through any fault of mine.
Say, what it is?
Indeed you urge the question orderly:
I should have first opend the cause to you.
Phaedria bought an Eunuch to bestow
upon her here
Upon whom here?
Thais.
Bought say thou? I am certainly undone.
What cost he?
Twenty pound.
Ell's lost.
Chaerea doos love a minstrel wench here.
Ha! Besides
What, loves say thou? doos he already know
What a whore means? is he got to town too?
One mischief broods another.
Pray you sir
Do not so eye me. This he dooes not do
upon my setting on.
Sirtha, leave talk
Touching thy self. If I live (pillory)
Ile-but unfold first the whole business to me.
Chaerea was brought to Thais for that Eunuch.
How! for an Eunuch?
Yes sir, afterword
They have taken him for an adulterer;
And bound him.
Oh, I'm undone for ever.
Pray note (good sir) these strumpets insolence.
Is there yet any further mischief left,
Or ill vnutterd.
This is all.
Why stay I
From breaking in upon 'hem?
There's no doubt
But I incur some famous punishment:
But since I must do it of necessity,
I joy yet I shall work these queens some mischief.
For th'old man long hath sought occasion
To plague'hem soundly: now at last has found one.
TRroth for this many aday there has not chanced
An accident more pleasant then this now;
To see the old man come in so mistaken:
'T was sport to me alone of all the rest,
Who knew the ground of the error. ha, ha, he.
What first she laughs at?
I'm come forth to
With Parmeno, but where a Gods name is he?
Doos she seek me?
See where he is, Isle to him meet
What news with thee now Giglet?
Ha, ha, he.
What meanst thou? why this laughter? goosed thou on?
Ha, ha, ha, he. Oh-oh-I burst, I faint
With laughing at thee.
Wherefore?
dost thou ask?
Upon my troth I never in my life
Knew a more errand fool, nor ever shall.
Ha, ha, ha, he—it cannot be expressed
What pastime thou hast made vs yond' within:
And yet (good truth) at first I took thee for
A very wise and cunning pated fellow.
Why what's the matter?
What at the first dash
Oughtst thou to credit every thing I said?
What did thou think the bran exploit too little,
The rash youth ventured through thy setting on;
unless thou further diddst discover him
unto his father? prithe, tell me one thing;
What think thou Cherea thought, when now his father
Found him so fine dressed in an Eunuchs habit?
How first? see thou yet, thou art ripe for hanging?
How? what say thou pestilent queen, diddst lye then?
Ha, ha, ha, he.
And keep a laughing still too?
Think thou tic such fine pastime (harlotry)
To make a scorn of me?
ô yes; sport a life.
I, if perchance thou carryit away, scotfree.
Indeed la?
Isle cry quittance of my credit.
Yes sure. We shall have, time yet, Parmeno:
For thee, thou art to be trussed up presently;
Who flashest heedless youth in villainy
And then betraist him to discovery.
Father and son will both make thee an example.
I am a dead man.
Look you' this you've got
For the Eunuch you late ushered home to vs.
Farewell.
Unlucky I am caught just like a rat,
Traced by my noise, mine own vnheedie chart
what do we now? on what hopes? or with what Purpose
Do we come hither? what intend you Traso?
Who, I to yield my self to Thais mercy,
Do all she shall enjoin.
What first you say?
Why Hesse, then the valiant Hercuies,
Who condescended to serve 〈◊〉?
I like the precedent Wo•lt I yet might see
Her crack your crown once with her pantefle.
What news? her door ops.
what new mischief's this?
I ne'er saw this man yet: what may it mean,
That he comes forth so hastily and iocond?
OH loving countrymen, lives any man
More happy then my self? troth, I think none
The Gods have shown all their full might on me,
On whom so suddenly so many chances,
So many prosperous chances meet in one.
Why is he grown so merry?
Oh my dearest,
My kindest Parmeno' first fashioner,
Contriver, finisher, of all my fortunes;
All my contentments. Know thou Parmeno
What joy I am in? hear thou my Pamphila
Is found to be free borne?
Yes; I have heard so.
Made sure to me?
As God shall help me, I'm Glad ont.
do y' hear him what he says?
I joy beside
My brother Chedria's love is now fair settled:
W'are made one house; Thais hath given up her self
Unto my fathers kindness and protection:
Shoe's now our own.
Then she is all your brothers.
That's most certain.
Then (that's other cause
The sculdier is cashiered hence.
now I prithee (of joy)
Give thou my brother notice of this news,
Where ere he may be found; and speedily.
Isle seek for him at home.
Dost thou now Gnato
Make any doubt, but I am lost for ever?
Sure I judge so
What should I first count on?
Whom chiefly praise? or him that counseld me
Or yet my self that ventured the performance?
Or shall I not yield fortune share of praise,
Which guided these things thus? Which in one day
Hath closed up so many, so great things,
And all so timely ordered? or the easy
And pleasant disposition of my father?
Oh I beseech thee, gracious In••la.
Continue to vs this our happiness
Your faith good Gods! What things aboue belief
Hath our man told me? but where is my brother?
Here.
I am lad—
I well believe you, brother
There is none living more deserving love
Then this your Thais: she's a furtherer
To all our family
Why, how now brother,
Commendst thou her to me?
I am undone:
The lesser hope I have, the more I love.
Help Gnato at a pinch; my trust's in thee.
What wold you have me do?
Win by entreaty,
By money. I may hold some place near Thais.
Tic a hard task.
Come, I know thee Gnato.
If once thou vndertak'st a thing—work this,
And name but what reward or gift thoult have
And thou shalt have it.
Say you so?
I, and will Perform it.
If I perform it, I require your house
Do ever open rest at my command,
Be you within or not: that though unbidden
I still have room and welcome given me
Here is my hand thou shalt.
Then I will settle
To the attempt.
Whom hear I here? ô Thraso!
God save you.
Thou perhaps hear not the News?
Yes, I know all.
Why do I see you then
Here in these quarters?
Sir as resting only
Upon your love.
Know thou not, what to rest on?
I tell thee soldier, if I here hence forward
Do take thee in this street; you are a dead man:
It will avail you little then to say
You sought some man, or were to pass this way.
Nay good sir this not fitteth.
I have said it.
I know you are not of such boisterous temper.
It shall so stand.
Pray yet first give me hearing
Of a few words; which when I shall have said
As you do like it, grant it.
Well, let's hear.
Thraso remove your self a little of.
First I most earnestly request you both
Thus far to credit me; that what herein
I do, is chiefly for my own sake meant:
But if the same may likewise further you,
It were simpleness in you not to admit it.
What first?
I think fit, you take unto you
This rival soldier.
How say? take him to vs?
Pray but consider this; you Phaedria
Do surely love your Thais company,
And to fare well: little you have to give her,
And she of force must be supplied largely.
Now then to serve her turn, and spare your cost,
There's none can be more fitting, or more useful
Then is this soldier: first has where withal,
And then there's none more lavish the's a fool
A prating babbling fool, a dolt, a block,
will snore you out whole days, and nights together.
And for the fear that she may hap to love him,
That's needless: you may pelt him out at pleasure:
What were we best to do?
Then add this too;
(Which I account a thing of greatest moment.)
None fares more richly, none more daintily.
Its mar'le but we have need at any hand
Of this same fellow.
That's my judgment too.
You take the right course. One thing more I beg,
I may be made one of your company:
I have been long now rolling of this stone.
We admit thee.
Yes, and freely.
Phaedria,
And hairy in requital, twixt you both
I tender him to slout, and feed upon.
We like it.
He deserves it•
Thraso, now
You may draw near at pleasure.
Gnato, say
How stands my case?
How? these men knew you not
After I told, hem your conditions,
Praised you according to your deeds and virtues;
I won my suit.
It was well done, I thank thee
I never yet could come in any place
But all men doted on me.
Said I not:
How graceful was his tongue for eloquence?
Thou left'st out nothing. Pass we this way hence.
AThens and Rome full many ages hence
Have through Menanders, Plautus, Lerence Art
(In several names but sounding to one sense)
Seen this our Eunuch, graced the slatterers part.
Those Greek and Latin plays had their desert,
Earning loud plaudits from their audience.
Our English Author (h'has no Poets name,
Nor (says he) may he dare such stile to take)
Puts me upon the brunt to stand the blame:
Himself not venturing his approach to make,
Nor to your censure his raw skill to stake.
He thinks me now wrought, past all fear and shame.
But I the name and nature here cast off:
I see amongst you no proud soldier,
No self blown bladder, I may prick or scoff.
Our Nation is not guilty of the former,
Nor could I well play the flatterer:
No maile if I the name now seek to dosse
Yet though I dosse the fawn; still bend I low,
Craving your gentle pardon for vs all,
And thank you for your patience hitherto
So kindly shown to vs in general.
Oh, would you deign some further grace withal
Upon our swouning writer to bestow;
He dyes in fear least you mislike his pain,
Your well clapped hands call him to life again.

