TO tell ye (Gentlemen) in what true sense
The Writer, Actors, or the audience
Should mold their Iudgemēts for a Play, might draw
Truth into Rules, but we have no such law.
Our Writer, for himself would have ye know,
That in his following Scenes, he doth not owe
To others Fancies, nor hath lain in wait
For any stolen Invention, from whose height
He might commend his own, more then the right
A Scholar claims, may warrant for delight.
It is Arts scorn, that some of late have made
The Noble use of Poetry a Trade.
For your parts (Gentlemen) to quite his pains,
Yet you will please, that as you meet with strains
Of lighter mixtures, but to cast your eye
Rather upon the maine, then on the bye.
His hopes stand firm, and we shall find it true,
The Lovers Melancholy cured by you.
DAngers? How mean you dangers? that so courtly
You gratulate my safe return from dan∣gers?
From Travails (noble Sir.)
These are delights,
If my experience hath not Trewant-like
Mis-spent the time, which I have strove to use,
For bettering my mind with observation.
As I am modest, I protest it is strange:
But is it possible?
What?
To bestride
The frothy fomes of Neptunes surging waives,
When blustering Bores tosses up the deep,
And thumps a thunder bounce?
Sweet Sir, it is nothing,
Straight comes a Dolphin playing near your ship,
Heaving his crooked back up, and presents
A Feather-bed, to waft'ee to the shore,
As easily as if you slepti'th' Court.
Indeed, is it true, I pray?
I will not stretch
Your Faith upon the Teinters, prithee Polios,
Where did thou learn this language?
I this language?
Alas, Sir, we that study words and forms
Of complement, must fashion all discourse,
According to the nature of the subject.
But I am silent, now appears a Sun,
Whose shadow I adore.
My honoured Father.
From mine eyes, son, son of my care, my love,
The joys that bid thee welcome, doe too much speak me a child.
O Princely Sir, your hand.
Perform your duties where you owe them first,
I dare not be so sudden in the pleasures,
Thy presence hath brought home.
Here thou still find
A Friend as noble (Menaphon) as when
Thou left'st at thy departure.
Yes, I know it,
To him I owe more service.—
Pray give leave,
He shall attend your entertainments soon,
Next day, and next day, for an hour or two,
I would engross him only.
Noble Lord.
You're both dismissed.
Your creature, and your Servant.
Give me thy hand, I will not say, You are well∣come,
That is the common road of cōmon friends,
I am glad I have thee here—O, I want words
To let thee know my heart.
It is pieced to mine.
Yes, it is, as firmly, as that holy thing
Called Friendship can unite it. Menaphon,
My Menaphon: now all the goodly blessings,
That can create a Heaven on earth, dwell with thee.
Twelve months we have been sundried, but henceforth
We never more will part, till that sad hour,
In which death leaves the one of vs behind,
To see the others funerals performed.
Let's now a while be free. How have thy travails
Disburth'ned thee abroad of discontents?
Such cure as sick men find in changing beds,
I found in change of Airs; the fancy flattered
My hopes with ease, as theirs doe, but the grief
Is still the same.
Such is my case at home.
Cleophyla, thy Kinswoman, that Maid
Of sweetness and humility, more pities
Her Fathers poor afflictions, then the tide
Of my complaints.
Thamasta, my great Mistress,
Your Princely Sister, hath, I hope ere this,
Confirmed affection on some worthy choice.
Not any, Menaphon. Her bosom yet
Is intermur'd with Ice, though by the truth
Of love, no day hath ever past, wherein
I have not mentioned thy deserts, thy constancy
Thy—Come, in troth I dare not tell thee what,
Lest thou might think I fawnd upon a sin
Friendship was never guilty of; for flattery
Is monstrous in a true friend.
Does the Court
Wear the old looks too?
If thou mean the Prince,
It does, hoe's the same melancholy man,
He was it's Fathers death, sometimes speaks sense,
But seldom mirth; will smile, but seldom laugh;
Will lend an ear to business, deal in none;
Gaze upon Revels, Antique Fopperies,
But is not moved; will sparingly discourse,
Hear music; but what most he takes delight in,
Are handsome pictures; one so young, and goodly,
So sweet in his own nature, any Story
Hath seldom mentioned.
Why should such as I am,
Groan under the light burdens of small sorrows,
When as a Prince, so potent, cannot shun
Motions of passion? To be man (my Lord)
Is to be but the exercise of cares
In several shapes; as miseries doe grow,
They alter as men's forms; but how, none know.
This little Isle of Cyprus sure abounds
In greater wonders, both for change and fortune,
Then any you have seen abroad.
Then any
I have observed abroad: all Countries else
To a free eye and mind yield something rare;
And I for my part, have brought home one Jewel.
Of admirable value.
Jewel, Menaphon?
A Jewel, my Amethus, a fair Youth;
A Youth, whom if I were but superstitious,
I should repute an Excellence more high,
Then mere creations are, to add delight.
I'll tell ye how I found him.
Prithee doe.
Passing from Italy to Greece, the Tales
Which Poets of an elder time have feigned
To glorify their Tempe, bred in me
Desire of visiting that Paradise.
To Thessaly I came, and living private,
Without acquaintance of more sweet companions▪
Then the old In-mates to my love, my thoughts;
I day by day frequented silent Groves,
And solitary Walks. One morning early
This accident encountered me: I heard
The sweetest and most ravishing contention,
That Art or Nature ever were at strife in.
I cannot yet conceive, what you infer
By Art and Nature.
I shall soon resolve ye.
A sound of music touched mine ears, or rather
Indeed entranced my soul: as I stole nearer,
Invited by the melody, I saw
This Youth, this faire-fac'd Youth, upon his Lute
With strains of strange variety and harmony,
Proclaiming (as it seemed) so bold a challenge
To the clear Choristers of the Woods, the Birds,
That as they flocked about him, all stood silent,
Wondering at what they heard. I wondered too.
And so doe I, good,—on.
A Nightingale.
Natures best skilled Musicion undertakes
The challenge, and for every several strain
The wel-shapt Youth could touch, she sung her down;
He cooed not run D•vision with more Art
Upon his quaking Instrument, then she,
The Nightingale did with her various notes
Reply too, for a voice, and for a sound,
Amethus, tic much easier to believe
That such they were, then hope to hear again.
How did the Rivals part?
You term them rightly,
For they were Rivals, and their Mistress harmony.
Some time thus spent, the young man grew at last
Into a pretty anger, that a bird
Whom Art had never taught Cliffs, Moods, or Notes,
Should vie with him for mastery, whose study
Had busied many hours to perfect practise:
To end the controversy, in a rapture,
Upon his Instrument he plays so swiftly,
So many voluntaries, and so quick,
That there was curiosity and cunning,
Concord in discord, lines of differing method
Meeting in one full Center of delight.
Now for the bird.
The bird ordained to be
Musics first Martyr, strove to imitate
These several sounds: which, when her warbling throat
Failed in, for grief, down dropped she on his Lute,
And brake her heart; it was the quaintest sadness,
To see the Conqueror upon her Hearse,
To weep a funeral Elegy of tears,
That trust me (my Amethus) I cooed chide
Mine own unmanly weakness, that made me
A fellow-mourner with him. Amet. I believe thee.
He looks upon the trophies of his Art,
Then sighed, then wiped his eyes, then sighed, and cried,
Alas poor creature: I will soon revenge
This cruelty upon the Author of it;
Henceforth this Lute guilty of innocent blood,
Shall never more betray a harmless peace
To an untimely end: and in that sorrow,
As he was poshing it against a tree,
I suddenly stepped in.
Thou hast discoursed
A truth of mirth and pity.
I reprieved
Th'intended execution with entreaties,
And interruption: but (my Princely friend)
It was not strange, the music of his hand
Did ouer-match birds, when his voice and beauty,
Youth, carriage and discretion, must, from men
Endued with reason, ravish admiration:
From me they did.
But is this miracle
Not to be seen?
I won him by degrees
To choose me his Companion whence he is,
Or who, as I durst modestly inquire,
So gently hee would woo not to make known:
Only for reasons to himself reserved,
He told me, that some remnant of his life
Was to be spent in Travail; for his fortunes,
They were nor mean, nor riotous, his friends
Not published to the world, though not obscure:
His Country, Athens; and his name, Parthenophill.
Came he with you to Cyprus?
Willingly.
The same of our young melancholy Prince,
Meleanders rare distractions, the obedience
Of young Cle•phila, Thamasta's glory,
Your matchless friendship, and my desperate love
Prevailed with him, and I have lodged him privately
In Famagosta.
Now you are doubly welcome:
I will not lose the sight of such a rarity
For one part of my hopes. When do ye intend
To visit my great-spirited Sister.
May I
Without offence?
Without offence? Parthenophill
Shall find a worthy entertainment too.
Thou art not still a coward.
Shoe's too excellent,
And I too low in merit.
Isle prepare
A noble welcome. And (friend) ere we part,
Unload to thee an overcharged heart.
I will not court the madness of the times,
Nor fawn upon the Riots that embalm
Our wanton Gentry, to preserve the dust
Of their affected vanities in coffins
Of memorable •home▪ when Commonwealths
Totter and reel from that nobility
And ancient virtue, which renowns the great,
Who steer the Helm of government, while Mush∣rooms
Grow up, &amp; make new laws to licence folly:
Why should not I, a May-game, scorn the weight
Of my sunk fortunes? snarl at the vices
Which rot the Land, and without fear or wit
Be mine own Antique? Tic a sport to live
When life is irksome, if we will not hug
Prosperity in others, and contemn
Affliction in our selves. This Rule is certain,
" He that pursues his safety from the School
" Of State, must learn to be mad man, or fool.
Ambition, wealth, ease, I renounce the devil
That damns ye here on earth, or I will be—
Mine own mirth, or mine own tormentor,—So,
Here comes intelligence, a Buzz of the Court.
Rhetias, I sought thee out to tell thee news,
New, excellent new news. Cucolus, Sir,
That Gull, that young old Gull, is coming this way.
And thou art his forerunner?
Prithee hear me:
In stead of a fine guarded Page,
We have got him
A Boy, tricked up in neat and handsome
Fashion;
Persuaded him, that tic indeed a Wench;
And he has entertained him, he does follow him,
Carries his sword and buckler, waits on his trencher,
Filles him his Wine, Tobacco, whets his knife,
Lackeys his letters, does what service else
He would employ his man in: being asked,
Why he is so irregular in Courtship?
His answer is, that since great Ladies use
Gentlemen Ushers to go bare before them,
He knows no reason, but he may reduce
The Courtiers to have women waite on them,
And he begins the fashion; he is laughed at
Most complementally. Thou't burst to see him.
Agelastus, so surnamed for his gravity,
Was a very wise fellow, kept his countenance
All days of his life as demurely, as a Judge that
Pronounces sentence of death, on a poor Rogue,
For stealing as much bacon, as would serve at a meal
With a Calves head. Yet he smiled once,
And never but once: Thou art no Scholar?
I have read Pamphlets dedicated to me:
Dost call him Agelastus? why did he laugh?
To see an Ass eat Thistles.
Puppy, go study to be a singular Coxcomb. Cuculus is an
Ordinary Ape, but thou art an Ape of an Ape.
Thou hast a Patent to abuse thy friends:
Look, look, he comes, observe him seriously.
Reach me my sword and buckler.
They are here, forsooth.
How now (Minkes) how now? Where is your duty, your distance?
Let me have service methodically tendered; you are now One of vs. Your curtsy; good: remember that you are To practise Courtship▪ was thy father a Piper, say thou?
A sounder of some such wind instrumēt forsooth.
Was he so? hold up thy head; be thou musical
To me, and I will marry thee to a dancer: one
That shall ride on his Foot-cloth, and maintain thee
In thy Muff and Hood.
That will be fine indeed.
That art yet but simple.
Dee think so?
I have a brain; I have a head-piece;
O my conscience, if I take pains with thee, I shoot
Raise thy understanding (Girl) to the height of a nurse,
Or a Court-midwife at least, I will make thee big
In time, wench.
Even doe your pleasure with me, Sir.
Noble accomplished Cuculus.
Give me thy fist, Innocent.
Would it were in thy belly, there tic.
That's well, hoe's an honest blade, though he be blunt.
Who cares? we can be as blunt as he for's life.
Cuculus, there is within a mile or two, a Sow-pig
Hath sucked a Brach, and now hunts the Dear, the Hare,
Nay, most unnaturally the wilde Bore,
As well as any Hound in Cyprus.
Monstrous Sow-pig! first true?
Isle be at charge of a banquet on thee for a sight of her.
Every thing takes after the dam that gave it suck:
Where had thou thy milk?
I? Why, my nurses husband was a most ex∣cellent maker
Of Shittle-cocks.
My nurse was a woman-surgeon.
And who gave thee pap, Mouse?
I never sucked that I remember.
La now, a Shittle-cock-maker, all thy brains are stuck with cork and feather. Cuculus, this lear∣ned Courtier takes after the nurse too, a she-surgeon, which is in effect a mere matter of colours. Go, learn to paint and daub complements, tic the next step to run into a new suit; my Lady Periwinckle here never sucked; suck thy Master, and bring forth Moon∣calves, Fop, doe; This is good Philosophy, Sirs, make use on it.
Bless vs, what a strange Creature this is?
A Gull, an arrant Gull by Proclamation.
Corax, the Princes chief Physician;
What business speeds his haste—
Are all things well, Sir?
Yes, yes, yes.
Phew, you may wheel about, man, wee know you're proud of your slovenry and practice, tic your ver∣tu; the Princes melancholy fit I presume holds still.
So doe thy knavery and desperate beggary.
Aha: here's one will tickle the ban-dog.
You must not go yet.
Isle stay in spite of thy teeth. There lies my gravity:
Doe what thou dare, I stand thee▪
Mountebank, Empricks, Quacksaluers, Mi∣neralists, Wizards, Alchemists, cast-Apothecaries, old Wives and Barbers, are all suppositors to the right Worshipful Doctor, as I take it.
Some of ye are the head of your Art, &amp; the horns too, but they come by nature; thou lives single for no other end, but that thou fairest to be a Cuckold.
Have at thee; thou affect'st railing only for thy health, thy miseries are so thick and so lasting; that thou hast not one poor denier to bestow on opening a vein. Wherefore to avoid a Pleurisy, thou't be sure to prate thy self once a month into a whipping, and bleed in the breech in stead of the arm.
Have at thee again.
Come.
There, there, there; O brave Doctor.
Let'em alone.
Thou art in thy Religion an Atheist, in thy condition a Cur, in thy diet an Epicure, in thy lust a Goat, in thy sleep a Hog; thou take upon thee the habit of a grave Physician, but art indeed an impostrous Empiric. Physicians are the bodies Cobblers, rather the Botchers of men's bodies; as the one patches our tattered clothes, so the other solders our diseased flesh. Come on.
Tot, tot, hold him tot, hold him toot, tot, tot, tot.
The best worth in thee, is the corruption of thy mind, for that only entitles thee to the dignity of a louse: a thing bred out of the filth and superfluity of ill humours: Thou byt'st any where; and any man who defends not himself with the clean linen of se∣cure honesty; him thou dare not come near. Thou art Fortunes Idiot, Virtues Bankrupt, Times Dunghill, Manhoods Scandal, and thine own scourge. Thou would hang thy self, so wretchedly miserable thou art; but that no man will trust thee with as much mo∣ney as will buy a halter: and all thy stock to be sold, is not worth half as much as may procure it.
Ha, ha, ha; this is flattery, gross flattery.
I have employment for thee, and for ye all, Tut, these are but good morrows between vs.
Are thy bottles full?
Of rich wine, lets all suck together.
Like so many Swine in a trough.
Isle shape ye all for a devise before the Prince, We'll try how that can move him.
He shall fret or laugh.
Must I make one?
Yes, and your feminine Page too.
Thanks most egregiously.
I will not slack my part.
Wench, take my buckler.
Come all unto my chamber, the project is cast,
The time only we must attend.
The melody must agree well, and yield sport,
When such as these are, Knaves and Fools consort.
Does this show well?
What would you have me doe?
Not like a Lady of the trim, new crept
Out of the shell of sluttish sweat and labour,
Into the glittering pomp of ease and wantonness,
Embroideries, and all these antike fashions,
That shape a woman monstrous; to transform
Your education, and a Noble birth
Into contempt and laughter. Sister, Sister,
She who derives her blood from Princes, ought
To glorify her greatness by humility.
Then you conclude me proud.
Young Menaphon,
My worthy friend, has loved you long, and truly,
To witness his obedience to your scorn,
Twelve months (wronged Gentleman) he undertook
A voluntary exile. Wherefore (Sister)
In this time of his absence, have you not
Disposed of your affections on some Monarch?
Or sent Ambassadors to some neighbouring King
With fawning protestations of your graces?
Your rare perfections, admirable beauty?
This had been a new piece of modesty,
Would have deserved a Chronicle!
You are bitter;
And brother, by your leave, not kindly wise.
My freedom is my births, I am not bound
To fancy your approuements, but my own.
Indeed you are an humble youth, I hear of
Your visits, and your loving commendation
To your hearts Saint, Cleophila, a Virgin
Of a rare excellence: what though she want
A portion to maintain a portly greatness?
Yet tic your gracious sweetness to descend
So low, the meekness of your pity leads ye.
She is your dear friends Sister, a good soul,
An Innocent.
Thamasta.
I have given
Your Menaphon a welcome home as fits me;
For his sake entertained Parthenophill,
The handsome Stranger, more familiarly
Then (I may fear) becomes me; yet for his part,
I not repent my courtesies, but you—
No more, no more; be affable to both:
Time may reclaim your cruelty.
I pity
The youth, and trust me (brother) love his sadness:
He talks the prettiest stories, he delivers
His tales so gracefully, that I cooed sit
And listen, nay forget my meals and sleep,
To hear his neat discourses. Menaphon
Was well advised in choosing such a friend,
For pleading his true love.
Now I commend thee,
Thou't change at last, I hope.
I fear I shall.
Have ye surveyed the Garden?
Tic a curious,
A pleasantly contrived delight.
Your eye (Sir)
Hath in your travails, often met contents
Of more variety.
Not any (Lady.)
It were impossible, since your fair presence
Makes every place where it vouchsafes to shine,
More lovely then all other helps of Art
Can equal.
What you mean by helps of Art,
You know your self best, be they as they are:
You need none I am sure to set me forth.
It would argue want of manners, more then skill,
Not to praise praise it self.
For your reward,
Henceforth Isle call you Servant.
Excellent Sister.
It is my first step to honour: May I fall
Lower then shame, when I neglect all service
That may confirm this favour.
Are you well, Sir?
Great Princess, I am well, to see a League
Between an humble love, such as my Friends is,
And a commanding virtue, such as yours is,
Are sure restoratives.
You speak ingeniously.
Brother, he pleased to show the Gallery
To this young stranger, use the time a while,
And we will altogether to the Court.
I will present ye (Sir) unto the Prince.
You're all composed of fairness, and true bounty.
Come, come, we'll wait thee, Sister: this begin∣ning
Doth relish happy process.
You have blessed me.
Kale, O Kale,
Lady.
We are private, thou art my Closet.
Locke your secrets close then:
I am not to be forced.
Never till now,
Cooed I be sensible of being traitor
To honour and to shame.
You are in love.
I am grown base—Parthenophill—
Hoe's handsome,
Richly endowed; he hath a lovely face,
A winning tongue.
If ever I must fall,
In him my greatness sinks. Love is a Tyrant
Resisted; whisper in his ear, how gladly
I would steal time, to talk with him one hour;
But doe it honourably; preth'ee Kale
Doe not betray me.
Madame, I will make it
Mine own case; he shall think I am in love with him.
I hope thou art not Kale.
Tic for your sake:
Isle tell him so; but Faith I am not, Lady.
Pray use me kindly; let me not too soon
Be lost in my new follies. Tic a Fate
That ouer-rules our wisdoms, whilst we strive
To live most free, wee'r caught in our own toils.
Diamonds cut Diamonds: they who will prove
To thrive in cunning, must cure love with love.
Our Common-wealth is sick: tic more then time
That wee should wake the Head thereof, who sleeps
In the dull Lethargy of lost security.
The Commons murmur, and the Nobles grieve,
The Court is now turned Antique, and grows wilde,
Whiles all the neighbouring Nations stand at gaze,
And watch fit opportunity, to wreak
Their just conceived fury, on such injuries,
As the late Prince, our living Masters Father,
Committed against Laws of truth or honour.
Intelligence comes flying in on all sides,
Whilst the unsteady multitude presume,
How that you, Aretus, and I, engross
(Out of particular Ambition)
Th'affaires of government, which I for my part,
Groan under, and am weary of.
I am as zealous too of shaking of
My gay State fetters, that I have bethought
Of speedy remedy; and to that end
As I have told ye, have concluded with
Corax, the Princes chief Physician.
You should have done this sooner, Aretus;
You were his Tutor, and could best discern
His dispositions to inform them rightly.
Passions of violent nature, by degrees
Are easili'st reclaimed. There's something hid
Of his distemper, which we'll now find out.
You come on just appointment: welcome, Gentlemen,
Have you won Rhetias (Corax?)
Most sincerely.
Save ye, Nobilities: doe your Lordships take notice of my Page? Tic a fashion of the newest edition, spick and span new, without example. Doe your honour, Housewife.
There's a curtsy for you, and a curtsy for you.
Tic excellent: we must all follow fashion, and entertain Shee-waiters.
Twill be Courtly.
I think so; I hope the Chronicles will rear me one day for a head-piece—
Of Woodcock without brains in it; Barbers shall wear thee on their Citternes, and Hucksters set thee out in Ginger-bread.
Devil take thee: I say nothing to thee now; can let me be quiet?
You're too perstreperous, Sauce-box.
Good Girl, if we begin to puff once.
Prithee hold thy tongue, the Lords are in the presence.
Mum, Butterfly.
O the Prince: stand and keep silence.
O the Prince: Wench, thou shalt see the Prince now.
Sir; Gracious Sir.
Why all this Company?
A Book! is this the early exercise
I did prescribe? in stead of following health,
Which all mē covet, you pursue your disease.
Whore's your great Horse, your Hounds, your set at Tennis,
Your Balloon ball, the practice of your dancing,
Your casting of the sledge, or learning how
To toss a Pike; all changed into a Sonnet?
Pray Sir grant me free liberty to leave
The Court, it do's infect me with the sloth
Of sleep and surfeit: In the University
I have employments, which to my profession
Add profit and report: Here I am lost,
And in your wilful dullness held a man
Of neither Art nor honesty: you may
Command my head; pray take it, doe; it were better
For me to lose it, then to lose my wits,
And live in Bedlam: you will force me too't,
I am almost mad already.
I believe it.
Letters are come from Create, which do require
A speedy restitution of such ships,
As by your Father were long since detained;
If not; defiance threatened.
These near parts
Of Syria that adjoin, muster their friends:
And by intelligence we learn for certain,
The Syrian will pretend an ancient interest
Of tribute intermitted.
Through your Land
Your subjects mutter strangely, and imagine
More then they dare speak publicly.
And yet
They talk but oddly of you.
Hang 'em Mungrels.
Of me? my subjects talk of me?
Yes, scurvily,
And think worse (Prince.)
Isle borrow patience
A little time to listen to these wrongs,
And from the few of you which are here present,
Conceive the general voice.
So, now he is nettled.
By all your loves I charge ye, without fear
Or flattery, to let me know your thoughts,
And how I am interpreted: Speak boldly.
For my part (Sir) I will be plain, and brief:
I think you are of Nature mild and easy,
Not willingly provoked, but withal head-strong
In any passion that misleads your Judgment.
I think you too indulgent to such motions,
As spring out of your own affections,
To old to be reformed, and yet too young
To take fit council from your self, of what
Is most amiss.
So—Tutor, your conceit?
I think you dote (with pardon let me speak it)
Too much upon your pleasures, and these pleasures
Are so wrapped up in selfe-loue, that you covet
No other change of fortune: would be still
What your birth makes you, but are loath to toil
In such affairs of State as break your sleeps.
I think you would be by the world, reputed
A man in every point complete, but are
In manners and effect indeed a child,
A boy, a very boy.
May it please your Grace,
I think you doe contain within your self
The great Elixir, soul and quintessence
Of all divine perfections: are the glory
Of mankind, and the only strict example
For earthly Monarchies to square out their lives by:
Times miracle, Fems pride, in Knowledge, Wit,
Sweetness, Discourse, Arms, Arts—
You are a Courtier.
But not of the ancient fashion, an't like your Highness. Tic I; I, that am the credit of the Court, Noble Prince: and if thou would by Proclamation or Patent, create me Overseer of all the Tailors in thy Do∣minions; then, then the golden days should appear again; bread should be cheaper; fools should have more wit; knaves more honesty; and beggars more money.
I think now—
Peace you Squall.
You have not spoken yet.
Hang him, he will nothing but rail.
Most abominable: out upon him.
Away Cuculus; follow the Lords.
Close Page, close.
You are somewhat long a thinking.
I doe not think at all.
Am I not worthy of your thought?
My pity you are—
But not my reprehension.
Pity?
Yes, for I pity such to whom I owe service, who exchange their happiness for a misery.
Is it a misery to be a Prince?
Princes who forget their sovereignty, and yield to affected passion, are weary of command. You had a Father, Sir.
Your Sovereign whiles he lived. But what of him?
Nothing. I only dared to name him; that's all.
I charge thee by the duty that thou ow'st vs, be plain in what thou meanest to speak: there's some∣thing that we must know: be free, our ears are open.
O Sir, I had rather hold a Wolf by the ears, then stroke a Lyon, the greatest danger is the last.
This is mere trifling—Ha? are all stolen hence?
We are alone: Thou hast an honest look,
Thou hast a tongue, I hope, that is not oyld
With flattery. Be open, though tic true,
That in my younger days I oft have heard
Agenors name, my Father, more traduced,
Then I could then observe; yet I protest,
I never had a friend, a certain friend,
That would inform me thoroughly of such errors,
As oftentimes are incident to Princes.
All this may be. I have seen a man so curious in feeling of the edge of a keen knife, that he has cut his fingers. My flesh is not of proof against the metal I
am to handle; the one is tenderer then the other.
I see then I must court thee. Take the word
Of a just Prince for any thing thou speak.
I have more then a Pardon, thanks and love.
I will remember you of an old Tale that something concerns you. Meleander, the great (but unfortunate Statesman, was by your Father treated with for a Match between you and his eldest daughter, the Lady Eroclea. You were both near of an age. I presume you remem∣ber a Contract, and cannot forget Her.
She was a lovely beauty: Prithee forward.
To Court was Eroclea brought, was courted by your Father, not for Prince Palador, as it followed, but to be made a prey to some less noble design.—With your favour I have forgot the rest.
Good call it back again into thy memory,
Else losing the remainder, I am lost too.
You charm me. In brief, a Rape, by some bad Agents, was attempted; by the Lord Meleander her father rescued, she conveyed away Meleander accused of treason, his Land seized, he himself distracted and confined to the Castle where he yet lives. What had ensude was doubtful. But your Father shortly after dyed.
But what became of fair Eroclea?
She never since was heard of.
No hope lives then
Of ever, ever seeing her again.
Sir, I fear I should anger ye. There was, as I said, an old Tale: I have now a new one, which may per∣haps season the first with a more delightful relish.
I am prepared to hear, say what you please.
My Lord Meleander falling, on whose favour my fortunes relied, I furnished my self for travail, and
bent my course to Athens, where a pretty accident after a while came to my knowledge.
My ear is open to thee.
A young Lady contracted to a noble Gentle∣man, as the Lady we last mentioned, and your Highness were, being hindered by their earring Parents, stole from her home, and was conueyed like a Ship-boy in a Mer∣chant, from the Country where she lived, into Corinth first, and afterwards to Athens; where in much solitari∣ness she lived like a Youth almost two years, courted by all for acquaintance, but friend to none by familiar∣tie.
In habit of a man?
A handsome young man, till within these three months, or less, her sweet hearty Father dying some year before, or more, she had notice of it, and with much joy returned home, and as report voiced it, at A∣thens enjoyed her happiness: she was long an exile: For now Noble Sir, if you did love the Lady Eroclea, why may not such safety and fate direct her, as directed the other? tic not impossible.
If I did love her, Rhetias: yes I did.
Give me thy hand: As thou did serve Meleander,
And art still true to these, henceforth serve me.
My duty and my obedience are my surety,
But I have been too bold.
Forget the sadder story of my Father,
And only Rhetias, learn to read me well,
For I must ever thank thee; you have unlocked
A tongue was vowed to silence, for requital
Open my bosom, Rhetias.
What s your meaning?
To tie thee to an oath of secrecy—
Unloose the buttons, man, thou dost it faintly,
What findst thou there?
A picture in a Tablet.
Look well upon it.
I doe—yes—let me observe it—
Tic hers, the Ladies.
Whose!
Erocleas.
Hers that was once Eroclea: for her sake
Have I advanced Sophronos to the Helm
Of government; for her sake will restore
Meleanders Honours to him; will for her sake
Beg friendship from thee, Rhetias. O be faithful,
And let no politic Lord work from thy bosom
My griefs: I know thou were put on to sift me:
But be not too secure.
I am your Creature.
Continue still thy discontented fashion:
Humour the Lords, as they would humour me;
Isle not live in thy debt.—We are discovered.
Honour and health still wait upon the Prince.
Sir, I am bold with favour to present
Unto your Highness, Menaphon my friend,
Returned from travail.
Humbly on my knees
I kiss your gracious hand.
It is our duty
To love the virtuous.
If my prayers or service
Hold—any value, they are vowed yours ever.
I have a fist for thee too (Stripling) you are started up prettily since I saw thee. Hast learned any wit abroad? Can tell news, and swear lies with a grace like a true Traveller? What new Owzle's this?
Your Highness shall doe right to your own judgment,
In taking more then common notice of
This stranger, an Athenian, named Parthenophill.
One, (whom if mine opinion doe not sooth me
Too grossly) for the fashion of his mind,
Deserves a dear respect.
Your commendations,
Sweet Cousin, speaks him Nobly.
All the powers
That sentinel just Thrones, double these guards
About your sacred Excellence.
What fortune led him to Cyprus!
My persuasions won him.
And if your Highness please to hear the en∣trance
Into their first acquaintance, you will say—
It was the newest, sweetest, prettiest accident,
That ere delighted your attention.
I can discourse it, Sir.
Some other time.
How is a called?
Parthenophill.
Parthenophill?
Wee shall sort time to take more notice of him.
His wonted melancholy still pursues him.
I told you so.
You must not wonder at it.
I doe not, Lady.
Shall we to the Castle?
Wee will attend ye both.
All three—Isle go too. Hark in thine ear, Gallant: Isle keep the old mad man in chat, whilst thou gabblest to the girl: my thumb's upon my lips, not a word.
I need not fear thee, Rhetias.—Sister, soon
Expect vs: this day wee will range the City.
Well, soon I shall expect ye.—Kale?
Trust me.
Troop on—Love, Love, what a wonder thou art?
May I not be offensive, Sir?
Your pleasure; yet pray be brief.
Then briefly, good, resolve me:
Have you a Mistress, or a Wife?
I have neither.
Nor did you ever love in earnest any
Fair Lady, whom you wished to make your own?
Not any truly.
What your friends or means are
I will not be inquisitive to know,
Nor doe I care to hope for. But admit
A dowre were thrown down before your choice,
Of Beauty, Noble birth, and sincere affection,
How gladly would you entertain it? (Young man)
I doe not tempt you idly.
I shall thank you,
When my unsettled thoughts can make me sensible
Of what tic to be happy: for the present
I am your debtor: and fair Gentlewoman,
Pray give me leave as yet to study ignorance,
For my weak brains conceive not what concern me.
—Another time.—
Doe I break off your Parley
That you are parting? Sure my woman loves you.
Can she speak well, Parthenophill?
Yes, Madame:
Discreetly chaste she can: she hath much won
On my belief, and in few words, but pithy,
Much moved my thankfulness. You are her Lady,
Your goodness aims (I know) at her preferment:
Therefore I may be bold to make confession
Of truth, if ever I desire to thrive
In women's favour. Kale is the first
Whom my ambition shall bend to.
Indeed.
But say a Nobler Love should interpose?
Where real worth, and constancy first settle
A hearty truth, there greatness cannot shake it,
Nor shall it mine: yet I am but an Infant
In that construction, which must give clear light
To Kale's merit: riper hours hereafter
Must learn me how to grow rich in deserts.
Madame, my duty waits on you.
Come hither.
If ever henceforth I desire to thrive
In women's favours, Kale is the first
Whom my ambition shall bend to—it was so.
These very words he spake.
These very words
Curse thee, unfaithful creature, to thy grave:
Thou wood'st him for thy self?
You said I should.
My name was never mentioned!
Madame, no:
We were not come to that.
Not come to that?
Art thou a Rival fit to cross my Fate?
Now poverty and a dishonest fame,
The waiting-womans wages, be thy payment.
False, faithless, wanton beast, Isle spoil your carriage;
There's not a Page, a Groom, nay, not a Citizen
That shall be cast upon ye. Kale,
Isle keep thee in my serve•• all thy life time,
Without hope of a husband or a suitor.
I have not verily deserved this cruelty.
Parthenophill shall know, if he respect
My birth, the danger of a fond neglect.
Are you so quick? Well, I may chance to cross
Your peevishness. Now though I never meant
The young man for my self; yet if he love me,
Isle have him, or Isle run away with him,
And let her doe her worst then: what, we are all
But flesh and blood; the same thing that will doe
My Lady good, will please her woman too.
Tread softly (Trollio) my Father sleeps still.
I forsooth: but he sleeps like a Hare with his eyes open and that's no good sign.
Sure thou art weary of this sullen living,
But I am not; for I take more content
In my obedience here, then all delights
The time presents elsewhere.
Menander within. Oh!
Dost hear that groan?
Hear it? I shudder, it was a strong blast, young Mistress, able to root up heart, liver, lungs and all.
My much-wrong'd Father: let me view his face.
Lady Mistress, shall I fetch a Harbour to steal away his rough beard, whiles he sleeps in's naps? He never looks in a glass, and tic high time on conscience for him to bee trimd, has not been under the Shavers hand almost these four years.
Peace, fool.
I could clip the old Ruffian, there's hair enough to stuff all the great Codpieces in Switzerland. A be∣gins to stir, a stirs. Bless vs how his eyes roll. A good year keep your Lordship in your right wits, I beseech ye.
Cleophila?
Sir, I am here, how do ye Sir?
Sir, is your stomach up yet? get some warm porridge in your belly, it is a very good settle-braine.
The Raven croakt, and hollow shrieks of Owls
Sung Dirges at her funeral; I laughed
The whiles: for it was no boot to weep. The Girl
Was fresh and full of youth: but, O the cunning
Of Tyrants that look big, their very frowns
Doom poor souls guilty, ere their cause be heard.
Good. What art thou, and thou?
I am Cleophila,
Your woeful daughter.
I am Trollia your honest implement.
I know ye both. alas, why do ye use me thus!
Thy Sister, my Eroclea, was so gentle,
That Turtles in their Down doe feed more gall,
Then her spleen mixed with: yet when winds and storm
Drive dirt and dust on banks of spotless snow,
The purest whiteness is no such defence
Against the sullying foulness of that fury.
So raved Agenor, that great man, mischief
Against the Girl—it was a politic trick,
We were too old in Honour.—I am lean
And fallen away extremely; most assuredly
I have not dyn'd these three days.
Will you now, Sir?
I beseech ye heartily Sir. I feel a horrible puking my self.
Am I stark mad?
No, no, you are but a little staring—there's difference between staring and stark mad. You are but whymsed, yet crotchetted, conundroun'd, or so.
Here's all my care: and I doe often sigh
For thee, Cleophyla: we are secluded
From all good people. But take heed, Amethus
Was son to Doryla, Agenors Sister.
There's some ill blood about him, if the Surgeon
Have not been very skilful to let all out.
I am (alas) too grieved to think of love,
That must concern me least.
Sir, be wise, be wise.
Who I? I will be monstrous and wise immedi∣italy. Welcome, Gentlemen, the more the merrier, Isle lay the cloth, and set the stools in a readiness, for I see here is some hope of dinner now.
My Lord Meleander, Menaphon your Kinsman
Newly returned from travail, comes to tender
His duty t'ee: to you his love, fair Mistress.
I would I could as easily remove
Sadness from your remembrance, Sir, as study
To doe you faithful service—my dear Cousin,
All best of comforts bless your sweet obedience.
One chief of 'em (worthy Cousin) lives
In you, and your well-doing.
This young stranger
Will well deserve your knowledge.
For my friends sake,
Lady pray give him welcome.
He has met it, if sorrows can look kindly.
You much honour me.
How a eyes the company: sure my passion will betray my weakness—O my Master, my Noble Master, doe not forget me, I am still the humblest, and the most faithful in heart of those that serve you.
Ha, ha, ha.
There's wormwood in that laughter, tic the usher to a violent extremity.
I am a weak old man. All these are come To ieere my ripe calamities.
Good Uncle!
But Isle out-stare 'ee all, fools, desperate fools,
You are cheated, grossly cheated, range, range on,
And roll about the world to gather moss,
The moss of honour, gay reports, gay clothes,
Gay wives, huge empty buildings, whose proud roofs,
Shall with their pinnacles, even reach the stars.
Ye work and work like Moles, blind in the paths,
That are bored through the crannies of the earth,
To charge your hungry souls with such full surfeits,
As being gorged once, make 'ee lean with plenty.
And when ye have skimd the vomit of your riots,
You're fat in no felicity but folly,
Then your last sleeps seize on 'ee. Then the troops
Of worms crawl round, &amp;, feast, good cheer, rich fare,
Dainty delicious—here's Cleophyl•:
All the poor stock of my remaining thrift;
You, you, the Princes Cousin: how do ye like her?
(Amethus) how do ye like her?
My intents are just and honourable.
Sir, believe him.
Take her.—we two must part, go to him, doe.
This sight is full of horror.
This is sense yet in this distraction.
In this Jewel I have given away,
All what I can call mine. When I am dead,
Save charge; let me be buried in a nook.
No guns, no pompous whining: these are fooleries.
If whiles we live, we stalk about the streets,
Iustled by Carmen, Foot-poasts, and fine Apes,
In silken coats, vnminded, and scarce thought on;
It is not comely to be hauled to the earth,
Like high fed lades upon a Tilting-day,
In antique trappings: scorn to vse-lesse tears.
Eroclea was not coffind so: she perished,
And no eye dropped save mine, and I am childish.
I talk like one that dotes; laugh at me, Rhetias,
Or rail at me: they will not give me meat:
They have starved me: but Isle henceforth be mine own Cook.
Good morrow: tic too early for my cares
To revel. I will break my heart a little,
And tell ye more hereafter. Pray be merry.
Isle follow him. My Lord Amethus, use your time
Respectively. Few words to purpose soon'st prevail:
Study no long Orations; be plain and short,
Isle follow him.
Cleophyla, although these blacker clouds
Of sadness, thicken and make dark the sky
Of thy fair eyes, yet give me leave to follow
The stream of my affections: they are pure,
Without all mixture of unnoble thoughts.
Can you be ever mine?
I am so low
In mine own fortunes, and my Father woes,
That I want words to tell ye, you deserve
A worthier choice.
But give me leave to hope.
My friend is serious.
Sir, this for answer: If I ever thrive
In an earthly happiness, the next
To my good Fathers wished recovery,
Must be my thankfulness to your great merit;
Which I dare promise for the present time:
You cannot urge more from me.
Ho, Cleophyla?
This Gentleman is moved.
Your eyes, Parthenophill,
Are guilty of some passion.
Friend, what ails thee?
All is not well within me, Sir.
Meleander within. Cleophyla?
Sweet Maid, forget me not; we now must part.
Still you shall have my prayer.
Still you my truth.
DOe not I look freshly, and like a Youth of the Trim?
As rare an old Youth as ever walked crosse-gartered.
Here are my Mistresses mustered in white and black. Kale the Waiting-woman. I will first begin at the soot: stand thou for Kale.
I stand for Kale, doe your best and your worst.
I must look big, and care little or nothing for her, because she is a creature that stands at livery. Thus I talk wisely, and to no purpose. Wench, as it is not fit that thou should be either fair or honest; so considering thy service, thou art as thou art, and so are thy betters, let them bee what they can bee. Thus in despite and defiance of all thy good parts, if I cannot in∣dure
thy baseness, tic more out of thy curtsy, then my deserving, and so I expect thy answer.
I must confess—
Well said.
You are—
That's true too.
To speak you right, a very scurvy fellow.—
Away, away, dost think so?
A very foule-mouth'd, and misshapen Cocks∣comb
Isle never believe it by this hand.
A Magot, most unworthy to creep in—
—To the least wrinkle of a Gentlewoman's
(What do ye call) good conceit, or so, or what
You will else.—Were you not refined by Courtship
And education, which in my blear eyes
Makes you appear as sweet as any nosegay,
Or savoury cod of Musk new fallen from th'Cat.
This shall serve well enough for the Waiting-woman. My next Mistress is Cleophyla, the old mad-mans daughter: I must come to her in whining tune, sigh, wipe mine eyes, fold my Arms, and blubber out my speech as thus: Even as a Kennel of Hounds (sweet Lady) cannot catch a Hare, when they are full paunched on the Carrion of a dead Horse: so, even so the gorge of my affections being full crammed with the garboils of your condolements, doth tickle me with the prick (as it were) about me, and fellow-feeling of howling out∣right.
This will do it, if we will hear.
Thou see I am crying ripe, I am such another tender-hearted fool.
Even as the snuff of a candle that is burnt in the socket, goes out, and leaves a strong perfume behind it; or as a piece of toasted cheese next the heart in a morning is a restorative for a sweet breath: so, even so the odoriferous savour of your love doth perfume my heart, (Hay ho) with the pure sent of an intolerable content, and not to be endured.
By this hand tic excellent. Have at thee last of all: for the Princess Thamasta, she that is my Mistress
indeed, she is abominably proud. A Lady of a damn∣ble, high, turbulent, and generous spirit. But I have a loudmouthed Cannon of mine own to batter her, and a penned speech of purpose observe it.
Thus I walk by, hear and mind you not.
Though haughty as the Devil or his Dam,
Thou dost appear, great Mistress: yet I am
Like to an ugly fire-worke, and can mount
Aboue the Region of thy sweet Ac—count.
Were thou the Moon her self, yet having seen thee,
Behold the man ordained to move within thee.
—Look to your self, Housewife; answer me
In strong Lines you're best.
Keep off, poor fool, my beams will strike thee blind:
Else if thou touch me, touch me but behind.
In Palaces, such as pass in before,
Must be great Princes; for at the back door
Tatter-demallians waite, who know not how
To get admittance: such a one—art Thou.
S'foot, this is downright roaring.
I know how to present a big Lady in her own cue. But pray in earnest, are you in love with all these?
Pish, I have not a rag of love about me. Tic only a foolish humour I am possessed with, to be surnam'd the Conqueror. I will court any thing; be in love with nothing, nor no—thing.
A rare man you are, I protest.
Yes, I know I am a rare man, and I ever held my self so.
In amorous contemplation on my life;
Courting his Page by Hell. con.
Tic false.
A gross untruth; Isle justify it, Sir, At any time, place, weapon.
Marry shall she.
No quarrels, good'ee Whisk. Lay by your Trumperies, and fall to your practice. Instructions are ready for you all. Polios is your Leader, follow him. Get credit now or never. Vanish, Doodles, vanish.
For the Device.
The same, get'ee gone, and make no bawling.
To waste my time thus Droane-like in the Court,
And lose so many hours, as my studies
Have horded up, is to be like a man
That creeps both on his hands and knees, to climb
A mountains top, where when he is ascended,
One careless slip down, tumbles him again
Into the bottom whence a first began.
I need no Princes favour: Princes need
My art. Then Corax, be no more a Gull,
The best of'em cannot fool thee, nay, they shall not.
We find him timely now let's learn the cause.
Tic fit we should—Sir, we approve you learned,
And since your skill can best discern the humours
That are predominant, in bodies subject
To alteration: tell vs (pray) what devil
This Melancholy is, which can transform
Men into Monsters.
You're your self a Scholar,
And quick of apprehension: Melancholy
Is not as you conceive. Indisposition
Of body, but the minds disease. So Ecstasy,
Fantastic Dotage, Madness, Frenzy, Rupture,
Of mere imagination differ partly
From Melancholy, which is briefly this,
A mere commotion of the mind, o're-charg'd
With fear and sorrow; first begot in the brain,
The Seat of Reason, and from thence derived
As suddenly into the Heart, the Seat
Of our Affection.
There are sundry kinds
Of this disturbance.
Infinite, it were
More easy to conjecture every hour
We have to live, then reckon up the kinds,
Or causes of this anguish of the mind.
Thus you conclude, that as the cause is doubt∣full,
The cure must be impossible; and then
Our Prince (poor Gentleman) is lost for ever,
As well unto himself, as to his subjects.
My Lord, you are too quick; thus much I dare
Promise, and doe, ere many minutes pass,
I will discover whence his sadness is,
Or undergo the censure of my ignorance.
You are a Noble Scholar.
For reward,
You shall make your own demand.
May I be sure?
We both will pledge our truth.
Tic soon performed,
That I may be discharged from my attendance
At Court, and never more be sent for after:
Or if I be, may Rats gnaw all my books,
If I get home once, and come here again,
Though my neck stretch a halter for it, I care not.
Come, come, you shall not fear it.
Isle acquaint ye
With what is to be done, and you shall fashion it.
My Lady do's expect'ee, thinks all time
Too slow till you come to her: wherefore young man,
If you intend to love me, and me only,
Before we part, without more circumstance
Let vs betroth our selves.
I dare not wrong 'ee;
You are too violent.
Wrong me no more
Then I wrong you: be mine, and I am yours:
I cannot stand on points.
Then to resolve
All further hopes, you never can be mine,
Must not, (and pardon though I say) you shall not.
The thing is sure a Gelding—Shall not? well,
You're best to prate unto my Lady now,
What proffer I have made.
Never, I vow.
Doe, doe, tic but a kind heart of mine own,
And ill luck can undo me.—Be refused?
O sciruy.—Pray walk on, Isle overtake 'ee.
What a greene-sickness-liuer'd Boy is this!
My Maiden-head will shortly grow so stale,
That'twill be mouldy: but Isle mar her market.
Parthenophill past the way; prithee Kale
Direct me to him.
Yes, I can direct'ee:
But you (Sir) must forbear.
Forbear!
I said so.
Your bounty he has engaged my truth; receive
A secret, that will, as you are a man,
Startle your Reason: tic but mere respect
Of what I owe to thankfulness. (Dear Sir)
The Stranger whom your curtsy received
For Friend, is made your Rival.
Rival, Kale.
Take heed, thou art too credulous.
My Lady
Dotes on him: I will place you in a room,
Where, though you cannot hear, yet you shall see
Such passages as will confirm the truth
Of my intelligence.
Twill make me mad.
Yes, yes: it makes me mad too, that a Gentle∣man
So excellently sweet, so liberal,
So kind, so proper, should be so betrayed
By a young smooth-chind straggler: but for loves sake
Bear all with manly courage.—Not a word,
I am undone then.
That were too much pity:
Honest most honest Kale; tic thy care,
Thy serviceable care.
You have even spoken all can be said or thought.
I will reward thee:
But as for him, ungentle Boy, Isle whip
His falsehood with a vengeance.—
O speak little.
Walk up these stairs, and take this key, it opens
A Chamber door, where at that window yonder,
You may see all their courtship.
I am silent.
As little noise as may be, I beseech ye;
There is a backe-staire to convey ye forth
Unseen or unsuspected.—He that cheats
A Waiting-woman of a free good turn
She longs for, must expect a shrewd revenge.
Sheepe-spirited Boy, although he had not married me,
He might have proffered kindness in a corner,
And ne'er have been the worse sor't. They are come;
On goes my set of Faces most demurely.
Forbear the room.
Yes, Madame.
Whosoever requires access to me, deny him entrance till I call thee, and wait without.
I shall. Sweet Venus, turn his courage to a Snow-ball, I heartily beseech it.
I expose
The Honour of my Birth, my Fame, my Youth,
To hazard of much hard construction,
In seeking an adventure of a parley
So private with a Stranger; if your thoughts
Censure me not with mercy, you may soon
Conceive, I have laid by that modesty,
Which should preserve a virtuous name unstained.
Lady, to shorten long excuses; time
And safe experience have so thoroughly armed
My apprehension, with a real taste
Of your most Noble nature, that to question
The least part of your bounties, or that freedom
Which Heaven hath with a plenty made you rich in,
Would argue me uncivil, which is more,
Base-bred, and which is most of all, unthankful.
The constant Loadstone, and the Steel are found
In several Mines: yet is there such a league
Between these Minerals, as if one Vein
Of earth had nourished both. The gentle Myrtle
Is not engraft upon an Olives stock:
Yet nature hath between them locked a secret
Of Sympathy, that being planted near,
They will both in their branches, and their roots
Embrace each other; twines of Ivy round
The well grown Oak; the Vine doth court the Elm;
Yet these are different Plants. Parthenophill,
Consider this aright, then these slight creatures,
Will fortify the reasons I should frame
For that ungrounded (as thou think) affection,
Which is submitted to a strangers pity.
True love may blush, when shame repents too late,
But in all actions Nature yields to Fate.
Great Lady, it were a dullness must exceed
The grossest and most sottish kind of ignorance,
Not to be sensible of your intents:
I clearly understand them. Yet so much
The difference between that height and lowness,
Which doth distinguish our unequal fortunes,
Dissuades me from ambition; that I am
Humbler in my desires, then Loves own power
Can any way raise up.
I am a Princess,
And know no law of slavery, to sue,
Yet be denied?
I am so much a subject
To every law of Noble honesty,
That to transgress the vows of perfect friendship,
I hold a sacrilege as foul, and cursed,
As if some holy Temple had bin robbed,
And I the thief.
Thou art unwise, young man,
To enrage a Lioness.
It were unjust
To falsify a faith, and ever after
Disroab'd of that fair ornament, live naked,
A scorn to time and truth.
Remember well who I am, and what thou art.
That remembrance
Prompts me to worthy duty, O great Lady.
If some few days have tempted your free heart,
To cast away affection on a stranger:
If that affection have so overswayed
Your Judgment, that it in a manner hath
Declined your sovereignty of birth and spirit:
How can ye turn your eyes off from that glass,
Wherein you may new Trim, and settle right
A memorable name?
The Youth is idle.
Days, months and years are past, since Mena∣phone
Hath loved and served you truly: Menaphon;
A man of no large distance in his blood,
From yours; in qualities desertfull, graced
With Youth, Experience; every happy gift
That can by nature, or by Education
Improve a Gentleman: for him (great Lady)
Let me prevail, that you will yet at last,
Unlock the bounty, which your love and care
Have wisely treasured up, t'inrich his life.
Thou hast a mooing eloquence; Parthenophill,
Parthenophill, in vain we strive to cross
The destiny that guides vs. My great heart
Is stooped so much beneath that wonted pride
That first disguised it, that I now prefer
A miserable life with thee, before
All other earthly comforts.
Menaphon, by me, repeats the selfsame words to you:
You are too cruel, if you can distrust
His truth, or my report.
Go where thou wilt,
Isle be an exile with thee, I will learn
To bear all change of fortunes.
For my friend, I plead with grounds of reason.
For thy love,
Hard-hearted youth, I here renounce all thoughts
Of other hopes, of other entertainments,—
Stay, as you honour Virtue.
When the proffers of other greatness—
Lady.
When entreats of friends;—
Isle ease your grief.
Respect of kindred;
Pray give me hearing.
Loss of Fame;
I crave but some few minutes.
Shall infringe my vows, let Heaven—
My love speak t'ee; hear then, go on.
Thy love, why tic a Charm to stop a vow
In its most violent course.
Cupped has broke
His Arrows here; and like a child unarmed,
Comes to make sport between vs with no weapon,
But feathers stolen from his mothers Doves.
This is mere trifling.
Lady, take a secret.
I am as you are, in a lower rank
Else of the self samesexe, a maid, a virgin.
And now to use your own words, if your thoughts
Censure me not with mercy, you may soon
Conceive, I have laid by that modesty,
Which should preserve a virtuous name unstained.
Are you not mankind then?
When you shall read
The story of my sorrows, with the change
Of my misfortunes, in a letter printed
From my vnforg'd relation; I believe
You will not think the shedding of one tear,
A prodigality that misbecomes
Your pity and my fortune.
Pray conceal the errors of my passions.
Would I had
Much more of honour (as for life I value't not)
To venture on your secrecy.
It will be
A hard task for my Reason, to relinquish
The affection which was once devoted thine,
I shall a while repute thee still the youth
I loved so dearly.
You shall find me ever, your ready faithful servant.
O the powers
Who doe direct our hearts, laugh at our follies!
We must not part yet.
Let not my unworthiness alter your good opinion.
I shall henceforth
Be jealous of thy company with any;
My fears are strong and many.
Did your Ladyship call me?
For what?
Your servant Menaphon desires admittance.
With your leave, great Mistress! I come—
So private: is this well, Parthenophill?
Sir, Noble Sir.
You are unkind and treacherous.
This tic to trust a straggler.
Prithee servant.
I dare not question you, you are my Mistress;
My Princes nearest Kinswoman, but he—
Come, you are angry.
Henceforth I will bury
Unmanly passion in perpetual silence.
Isle court mine own distraction, dote on folly,
Creep to the mirth and madness of the age,
Rather then be so slau'd again to woman,
Which in her best of constancy is steddist
In change and scorn.
How dare ye talk to me thus?
Dare? Were you not own Sister to my friend,
Sister to my Amethus; I would hurl ye
As far off from mine eyes, as from my heart;
For I would never more look on ye. Take
Your Jewel t'ee. And Youth, keep under wing,
Or—Boy—Boy.
If commands be of no force,
Let me entreat thee, Menaphon.
Tic nought, fie, fie, Parthenophill, have I deserved
To be thus used?
I doe protest—
You shall not,
Henceforth I will be free, and hate my bondage.
Away, away to Court, the Prince is pleased
To see a Mask to night, we must attend him:
Tic near upon the time.—How thrives your suit?
The Judge, your Sister, will decide it shor•lie.
Parthenophill, I will not trust you from me.
Lights and attendance, I will show your highness,
A trifle of mine own brain If you can,
Imagine you were now in the University,
You'll take it well enough, a Scholars fancy,
A quab. Tic nothing else a very quab.
We will observe it.
Yes, and grace it too Sir.
For Corax else is •umorous and testy.
By any means, men singular in Art,
Have always some odd whimsy more then usual.
The name of this conceit.
Sir, it is called the Mask of Melancholy.
We must look for nothing but sadness, here then.
Madness rather
In several changes: Melancholy is
The Root as well of every Apish Frenzy,
Laughter and mirth, as dullness. Pray my Lord
Hold and observe the plot, tic there expressed
In kind, what shall be now expressed in action.
No interpretation, take your places quickly.
Nay, nay, leave ceremony: sound to the entrance.
Bow, Bow, wow, wow; the Moone's eclipsed, Isle to the Church-yard and sup: Since I turned Wolf, I bark and howl, and dig up graves, I will never have the Sun shine again, tic midnight, deep dark mid∣night, get a prey, and fall too, I have caught thee now. Are.
This kind is called, Lycanthropia, Sir,
When men conceive themselves Wolves.
Here I find it.
I will hang 'em all, and burn my wife: was I not an Emperor; my hand was kissed, and Ladies lay down be∣fore me. In triumph did I ride with my Nobles about me, till the mad-dog bit me, I fell, and I fell, and I fell. It shall be treason by Statute for any man to name wa∣la, or wash his hands throughout all my Dominions; break all the looking-glasses, I will not see my horns; my wife Cuckolds me, she is a whore, a whore, a whore, a whore.
Hydrophobia term you this?
And men possessed so, shun all sight of water:
Sometimes, if mixed with jealousy, it renders them.
Incurable, and oftentimes brings death.
Philosophers dwell in the Moon Speculation and Theory girdle the world about like a wall. Ignorance like an Atheist, must bee damned in the pit. I am very, very poor, and poverty is the physic for the soul: my opinions are pure and perfect. Envy is a monster, and I defy the beast.
Delirium this is called, which is mere dotage,
Sprung from Ambition first, and singularity,
Self love, and blind opinion of true merit.
I not dislike the course.
Yes forsooth, and no forsooth, is not this fine, I pray, your blessing Gaffer, here, here, here did hee give me a shough, and cut offs tail: bus, bus Nuncle, and ther's a pum for Daddee.
You find this noted there, Phrenitis.
True.
Pride is the ground on it;
It reigns most in women.
They that will learn to drink a health in Hell,
Must learn on earth to take Tobacco well,
To take Tobacco well, to take Tobacco well:
For in Hell they drink nor Wine, nor Ale, nor Beer,
But fire, and smoke, and stench, as we do here.
Isle soope thee up.
Thou'st straight to execution.
Fool, Fool, Fool, catch me and thou can.
Expel him the house, tic a Dunce.
Hark, did ye not hear a rumbling,
The Gobblings are now a tumbling:
Il• tear 'em, Isle seare'em,
Isle roar 'em, Isle gore 'em:
Now, now, now, my brains are a Iumbling,—
Bounce, the gun's off.
You name this here, Hypocondriacall.
Which is a windy flattuous humour stuffing
The head, and thence derived to th'animall parts
To be too ouer-curious, loss of goods,
Or friends, excess of fear, or sorrows cause it.
Good your Honours,
Pray your Worships,
Dear your Beauties,
Hang thee.
To lash your sides,
To taeme your hides,
To scourge your prides,
And bang thee.
Were pretty and dainty, and I will begin,
See how they doe Ieere me, deride me, and grin:
Come sport me, come court me, your Topsaile advance,
And let vs conclude our delights in a Dance.
A Dance, a Dance, a Dance.
This is the Wanton Melancholy; women
With child possessed with this strange sury often,
Have danced three days together without ceasing.
Tic very strange: but Heaven is full of miracles.
We are thy debtor (Corax) for the gift
Of this invention: but the plot deceives vs;
What means this empty space.
One kind of Melancholy
Is only left untouched; it was not in Art
To personate the shadow of that Fancy.
Tic named Loue-Melancholy. As for instance,
Admit this stranger here (Young man, stand forth)
Entangled by the beauty of this Lady,
The great Thamasta, cherished in his heart
The weight of hopes and fears: it were impossible,
To limn his passions in such lively colours,
As his own proper sufferance cooed express.
You are not modest Sir.
Am I your mirth?
Love is the Tyrant of the heart, it darkens
Reason, confounds discretion, deaf to counsel:
It runs a headlong course to desperate madness.
O were your Highness but touched home, and thoroughly,
With this (what shall I call it) Devil—
Hold, let no man henceforth name the word again
Wait you my pleasure, Youth; tic late, to rest.
My Lords—
Enough, thou art a perfect Arts-man.
Panthers may hide their heads, not change the skin:
And love pent ne'er so close yet will be seen.
Dote on a stranger?
Court him, plead, and sue to him,
Affectionately?
Servilely; and pardon me, if I say basely.
Women in their passions,
Like false fierce flash, to fright our trembling senses;
Yet in themselves contain nor light nor heate.
My Sister doe this? She, whose pride did scorn
All thoughts that were not busied on a Crown?
To fall so far beneath her fortunes now?
You are my friend.
What I confirm, is truth.
Truth, Menaphon?
If I conceived you were
Jealous of my sincerity and plainness,
Then Sir—
What then, Sir?
I would then resolve,
You were as changeable in vows of friendship,
As is Thamasta in her choice of love.
That sin is double, running in a blood,
Which justifies another being worse.
My Menaphon, excuse me, I grow wilde,
And would not willingly believe the truth
Of my dishonour: She shall know how much
I am a debtor to thy noble goodness,
By checking the contempt, her poor desires
Have sunk her fame in. Prithee tell me (friend)
How did the Youth receive her?
With a coldness,
As modest and as hopeless, as the trust
I did repose in him, cooed wish, or merit.
I will esteem him dearly.
Sir, your Sister.
Servant, I have employment for ye.
Hark ye:
The mask of your ambition is fallen off,
Your pride hath stooped to such an abject lowness,
That you have now discovered to report
Your nakedness in virtue, honours, shame—
You are turned Satire.
All the flatteries
Of greatness have exposed ye to contempt.
This is mere railing.
You have sold your birth, for lust.
Lust?
Yes, and at a dear expense
Purchased the only glories of a Wanton.
A Wanton?
Let repentance stop your mouth.
Learn to redeem your fault.
I hope your tongue he's not betrayed my honesty.
Fear nothing.
If (Menaphon,) I hitherto have strove;
To keep a wary guard about my fame;
If I have used a women's skill to sift
The constancy of your protested love;
You cannot in the Justice of your judgment,
Impute that to a Coyness, or neglect,
Which my discretion and your service aimed
For noble purposes.
Great Mistress, no:
I rather quarrel with mine own ambition,
That durst to soar so high, as to feed hope
Of any least desert, that might entitle
My duty, to a pension from your favours.
And therefore Lady (pray observe him well)
He henceforth covets plain equality;
Endeavouring to rank his fortunes low,
With some fit partner, whom without presumption,
Without offence, or danger, he may cherish;
Yes and command too, as a Wife; a Wife;
A Wife, my most great Lady
all will out.
Now I perceive the league of Amity,
Which you have long between ye, vowed and kept,
I• s•cred and inviolable, secrets
Of e•ery nature are in common t'ee:
I have trespassed, and I have been faulty:
Let not too rude a Censure doom me guilty,
Or judge my error wilful without pardon.
Gracious and virtuous Mistress.
Tic a trick,
There is no trust in female cunning (friend)
Let her first purge her follies past, and clear
The wrongs done to her honour, by some sure
Apparent testimony of her constancy:
Or wee will not believe these childish plots;
As you respect my friendship, lend no ear
To a reply. Think on it.
Pray love your fame.
Gon! I am sure awaked. Kale I find,
You have not been so trusty as the duty
You owed, required.
Not I? I doe protest, I have been, Madam.
Bee no matter what.
I'm paid in mine own Coin; something I must,
And speedily—so,—seek out Cuculus
Bid him attend me instantly.
That Antique!
The trim old Youth shall wait ye.
Wounds may be mortal, which are wounds indeed:
" But no wounds deadly, till our Honours bleed. 
Thar't an excellent fellow. Diabolo. O this lousy close-stoole Empricks, that will undertake all Cures, yet know not the causes of any disease. Dog-leaches. By the four Elements I honour thee, cooed find in my heart to turn knave, and bee thy flatterer.
Sir, tic pity you have not been a Scholar;
You are honest, blunt, and rude enough. O Conscience!
But for thy Lord now, I have put him too't.
He chafes hugely, fumes like a stew-pot; Is he not monstrously overgone in frenzy?
Rhetias, tic not a madness, but his sorrow's
Close griping grief, and anguish of the soul
That torture him: he carries Hell on earth
Within his bosom, it was a Princes tyranny
Cause his distraction, and a Princes sweetness
Must qualify that tempest of his mind.
Corax, to praise thy Art, were to assure
The misbelieving world, that the Sun shines,
When tic in th'full Meridian of his beauty.
No cloud of black detraction can eclipse
The light of thy rare knowledge; henceforth casting
All poor disguises off, that play in rudeness,
Call me your servant: only for the present,
I wish a happy blessing to your Labours;
Heaven crown your undertakings; and believe me,
Ere many hours can pass, at our next meeting,
The bonds my duty owes, shall be full cancelled.
Farewell—a shrewd-braine Whoreson, there's pith
In his untoward plainness.—
Now, the news!
Worshipful Master Doctor, I have a great deal of I cannot tell what, to say t'ee; My Lord thun∣ders: every word that comes out of his mouth, roars like a Cannon: the house shook once, my young Lady dares not be seen.
We will roar with him, Trollio, if he roar.
He has got a great Poll-axe in his hand, and fences it up and down the house, as if he were to make room for the Pageants. I have provided me a Murrion forfeare of a clap on the Coxcomb.
No matter for the Murrion, here's my Cap:
Thus I will pull it down; and thus out-stare him.
The Physician is got as mad as my Lord.—
O brave, a man of Worship.
Let him come, Trollio, I will firk his Trangdido,
And bounce, and bounce in metal, honest Trollio.
Hee vapours like a Tinker, and struts like a Juggler.
There, there, there; look to your Right Worcester∣shipfull, look to your self.
Show me the Dog, whose triple throated noise,
Hath rowzd a Lyon from his uncouth den,
To tear the Cur in pieces.
Stay thy paws,
Courageous beast, else lo, the gorgeous skull,
That shall transform thee, to that restless stone,
Which Sysiphus roules up against the hill;
Whence tumbling down again, it, with his weight
Shall crush thy bones, and puff thee into Ayre.
Hold, hold thy conquering breath, tic stronger far
Then Gun-powder and Garlic. If the Fates
Have spun my thread, and my spent-clue of life
Be now untwisted, let vs part like friends.
Lay up my weapon, Trollio, and be gone.
Yes Sir, with all my heart.—
This friend and I will walk, and gabble wisely.
I allow the motion: On.
So Politicians thrive,
That with their crabbed faces, and sly tricks
Legerdemain, ducks, cringes, formal beards,
Crisped hairs, and punctual cheats, do wriggle in
Their heads first, like a Fox, to rooms of State,
Then the whole body follows.
Then they fill Lordships, steal women's hearts: with them and their's the world runs round, yet these are square men still.
There are none poor, but such as engross offices.
None wise; but unthrifts, bankrupts, beggars, Rascals.
The hangman is a rare Physician.
Thats not so good, it shall be granted.
All the buzz of Drugs, and Minerals and Simples,
Bloud-lettings, Vomits, Purges, or what else
Is conjured up by men of Art, to gull
Liege-people, and rear golden piles, are trash
To a well-strong-wrought halter; there the Coute,
The stone, yes and the Melancholy devil,
Are cured in less time then a pair of minutes.
Build me a Gallows in this very plot,
And Isle dispatch your business.
Fix the knot right under the left ear.
Sir, make ready.
Yet doe not be too sudden, grant me leave,
To give a farewell to a creature long
Absented from me, tic a daughter (Sir)
Snatched from me in her youth, a handsome girl,
She comes to ask a blessing.
Pray where is she? I cannot see her yet.
She makes more haste
In her quick prayers then her trembling steppes,
Which many griefs have weakened.
Cruel man!
How can thou rip a heart, that's cleft already
With injuries of time? whilst I am frantic,
Whilst throngs of rude divisions huddle on,
And doe difranke my brains from peace, and sleep;
So long I am insensible of cares.
As balls of wild-fire may be safely touched,
Not violently sundried, and thrown up;
So my distempered thoughts rest in their rage,
Not hurried in the Ayre of repetition,
Or memory of my misfortunes past.
Then are my griefs struck home,
When they are reclaimed,
To their own pity of themselves—Proceed;
What of your daughter now?
I cannot tell ye,
Tic now out of my head again; my brains
Are crazie; I have scarce slept one sound sleep
These twelve months.
alas poor man; can thou imagine
To prosper in the task thou take in hand,
By practising a cure upon my weakness,
And yet be no Physician for thy self?
Go, go, turn over all thy books once more,
And learn to thrive in modesty; for impudence
Does least become a Scholar. Thou art a fool,
A kind of learned fool.
I doe confess it.
If thou can wake with me, forget to eat,
Renounce the thought of Greatness; tread on Fate;
Sigh out a lamentable tale of things
Done long ago, and ill done; and when sighs
Are wearied, piece up what remains behind,
With weeping eyes, and hearts that bleed to death:
Thou shalt be a companion fit for me,
And we will sit together like true friends,
And never be divided. With what greediness
Doe I hug my afflictions? there's no mirth
Which is not truly seasoned with some madness.
As for example.—
What new Crochet next?
There is so much sense in this wilde distraction,
That I am almost out of my wits too,
To see and hear him: some few hours more
Spent here, would turn me Apish, if not frantic.
In all the volumes thou hast turned, thou Man
Of knowledge, hast thou met with any rarity,
Worthy thy contemplation like to this?
The model of the Heavens, the Earth, the Waters,
The harmony, and sweet consent of times,
Are not of such an excellence, in form
Of their Creation, as the infinite wonder
That dwells within the compass of this face:
And yet I tell thee, Scholar, under this
Well-ord'red sign, is lodged such an obedience,
As will hereafter in another age,
Strike all comparison into a silence.
She had a Sister too: but as for her,
If I were given to talk, I cooed describe
A pretty piece of goodness: let that pass—
We must be wise sometimes: What would you with her?
I with her! nothing by your leave, Sir, I:
It is not my profession.
You are saucy,
And as I take it, scurvy in your sauciness,
To use no more respect—good soul, be patient:
We are a pair of things the world doth laugh at:
Yet be content, Cleophila; those clouds
Which bar the Sun from shining on our miseries,
Will never be chased off till I am dead;
And then some charitable soul will take thee
Into protection. I am hasting on,
The time cannot be long.
I doe beseech ye,
Sir, as you love your health, as you respect
My safety, let not passion overrule you.
It shall not, I am friends with all the world.
Get me some wine, to witness that I will be
An absolute good fellow, I will drink with thee.
Have you prepared his Cup?
Tic in readiness.
By your leave, Gallants, I come to speak with a young Lady, as they say, the old Troianes daughter of the house.
Your business with my Lady daughter, Tosse-pot?
Tosse-pot? O base! Tosse-pot?
Peace; dost not see in what case he is? I would doe my own commendations to her; that's all.
Doe, come my Genius, we will quaff in wine
Till we grow wise.
True Nectar is divine.
So, I am glad he is gone. Page, walk aside. Sweet Beauty, I am sent Ambassador from the Mistress of my thoughts, to you, the Mistress of my desires.
So Sir, I pray be brief.
That you may know, I am not as they say, an Animal; which is as they say, a kind of Cokes, which is as the learned term, an Ass, a Puppy, a Widgin, a Dolt, a Noddy, a—
As you please.
Pardon me for that, it shall be as you please indeed. Forsooth I love to be courtly, and in fashion.
Well, to your Embassy; what, or from whom?
Marry what is more then I know? for to know what's what, is to know what's what, and for what's what: but these are foolish figures, and to little purpose.
From whom then are you sent?
There you come to me again: O, to bee in the favour of great Ladies, is as much to say, as to be great in Ladies favours.
Good time a day t'ee; I can stay no longer.
By this light but you must, for now I come toot. The most excellent, most wise, most dainty, precious, lo∣uing, kind, sweet, intolerably fair Lady Thamasta commends to your little hands, this letter of impor∣tance. By your leave, let me first kiss and then deliver it in fashion, to your own proper beauty.
To me from her? Tic strange; I dare peruse it.
Good, O that I had not resolved to live a sin∣glee life! Heir's temptation able to conjure up a spirit with a witness. So so: she has read it.
Is it possible? Heaven, thou art great and bountiful.
Sir, I much thank your pains: and to the Princess,
Let my love, duty, service, be remembered.
They shall Mad-dame.
When we of hopes, or helps, are quite bereauen,
Our humble prayers have entrance into heaven.
Thats my opinion clearly and without doubt.
The Prince is thoroughly moved.
I never saw him so much distemp'red.
What should this young man bee,
Or whither can he be conveyed?
Tic to me a mystery, I understand it not.
Nor I.
Ye have consented all to work upon
The softness of my nature; but take heed:
Though I can sleep in silence, and look on
The mockery ye make of my dull patience;
Yet'ee shall know, the best of ye, that in me
There is a masculine, a stirring spirit;
Which provoked, shall like a bearded Comet
Set ye at gaze, and threaten horror.
Good Sir.
Good Sir. Tic not your active wit or language,
Nor your grave politic wisdoms (Lords) shall dare
To check-mate and control my just commands.
Where is the Youth your friend? is be found yet?
Not to be heard of.
Fly then to the desert,
Where thou did first encounter this Fantastic,
This airy apparition; come no more
In sight: Get ye all from me; he that stays,
Is not my friend.
Tic strange.
We must obey.
Some angry power, cheats with rare delusions,
My credulous sense: the very soul of Reason
Is troubled in me—the Physician
Presented a strange Mask, the view of it
Puzzled my understanding: but the Boy—
Rhetias, thou art acquainted with my griefs,
Parthenophill is lost, and I would see him;
For he is like to some thing I remember
A great while since, a long, long time ago.
I have been diligent (Sir) to pry into every cor∣ner for discovery, but cannot meet with him: There is some trick I am confident.
There is, there is some practice, slight or plot.
I have apprehended a fair Wench, in an odd
Private lodging in the City, as like the Youth
In face, as can by possibility be discerned.
How Rhetias!
If it be not Parthenophill in long coats,
Tic a spirit in his likeness; answer
I can get none from her; you shall see her.
The young man in disguise upon my life,
To steal out of the Land.
Isle send him t'ee.
Doe, doe my Rhetias. As there is by nature
In every thing created contrariety:
So likewise is there unity and league
Between them in their kind; but Man, the abstract
Of all perfection, which the workmanship
Of Heaven hath model'd, in himself contains
Passions of several quality, the music
Of mans fair composition best accords,
When tic in consort, not in single strains.
My heart has been untuned these many months,
Wanting her presence, in whose equal love
True harmony consisted; living here
We are Heavens bounty all, but Fortunes exercise.
Minutes are numbered by the fall of Sands;
As by an houre-glasse, the span of time
Doth waste vs to our graves, and we look on it.
An age of pleasures reuel'd out, comes home
At last, and ends in sorrow, but the life
Weary of riot, numbers every Sand,
Wailing in sighs, until the last drop down,
So to conclude calamity in rest.
What Echo yields a voice to my complaints?
Can I be no where private?
Let the substance
As suddenly be hurried from your eyes,
As the vain sound can pass your ear,
If no impression of a troth vowed yours, 
Retain a constant memory.
Stand up; tic not the figure stamped upon thy cheeks,
The cozenage of thy beauty, grace, or tongue,
Can draw from me a secret, that hath been
The only level of my speechless thoughts.
I am so worn away with fears and sorrows,
So wintred with the tempests of affliction,
That the bright Sun of your life-quickning presence
Hath scarce one beam of force, to warm again
That spring of cheerful comfort, which youth once
Apparelled in fresh looks.
Cunning Impostor,
Untruth hath made thee subtle in thy trade:
If any neighbouring Greatness hath seduced
A free-borne resolution, to attempt
Some bolder act of treachery, by cutting
My weary days off. Wherefore (Cruell-mercy)
Hast thou assumed a shape, that would make treason
A piety, guilt pardonable, blood-shed
As holy as the sacrifice of peace?
The Incense of my loue-desires, are slam'd
Upon an Altar of more constant proof.
Sir, O Sir, turn me back into the world,
Command me to forget my name, my birth,
My Fathers sadness, and my death alive,
If all remembrance of my Faith hath found
A burial, without pity in your scorn.
My scorn (disdainful Boy) shall soon un∣weave
The web thy Art hath twisted: cast thy shape off,
Disroabe the mantle of a fained Sex,
And so I may be gentle; as thou art,
There's witch-craft in thy language, in thy face,
In thy demeanours; turn, turn from me (prithee)
For my belief is armed else. Yet (fair subtlety)
Before we part (for part we must) be true,
Tell me thy Country.
Cyprus.
Ha: thy Father.
Meleander.
Hast a name?
A name of misery, the unfortunate Eroclea.
There is danger
In this seducing counterfeit, great goodness!
Hath honesty and virtue left the time?
Are we become so impious, that to tread
The path of impudence, is Law and Justice?
Thou vizard of a beauty ever sacred,
Give me thy name.
Whilst I was lost to memory,
Parthenophill did shroud my shame in change
Of sundry rare misfortunes: but since now
I am, before I dye, returned to claim
A Convoy to my grave, I must not blush
To let Prince Pallador (if I offend,)
Know when he dooms me, that he dooms Eroclea.
I am that woeful Maid.
Join not too fast
Thy penance, with the story of my sufferings.
So dwelt simplicity with virgin truth;
So Martyrdom and holiness are twins,
As innocence and sweetness on thy tongue.
But let me by degrees collect my senses,
I may abuse my trust. Tell me, what ayre
Hast thou perfumed, since Tyranny first ravished
The contract of our hearts?
Dear Sir, in Athens have I been buried.
Buried! Right, as I
In Cyprus.—Come to trial, if thou be
Eroclea, in my bosom I can find thee.
As I, Prince Palador, in mine: This gift
His bounty blessed me with, the only physic
My solitary cares have hourly took,
To keep me from despair.
We are but Fools
To trifle in disputes, or vainly struggle
With that eternal mercy which protects vs.
Come home, home to my heart, thou banisht-peace,
My ecstasy of joys would speak in passion,
But that I would not lose that part of man,
Which is reserved to entertain content.
Eroclea, I am thine; O let me seize thee
As my inheritance. Hymen shall now
Set all his Torches burning, to give light
Throughout this Land, new settled in thy welcome.
You are still gracious. Sir, how I have lived,
By what means been conveyed, by what preserved,
By what returned; Rhetias, my trusty servant,
Directed by the wisdom of my Uncle,
The good Sophronos, can inform at large.
Enough, in stead of Music, every night
To make our sleeps delightful, thou shalt close
Our weary eyes with some part of thy story.
O but my Father!
Fear not: to behold
Eroclea safe, will make him young again;
It shall be our first task. Blush sensual follies,
A Cast-away, a poor despised Maid,
Only for me to hope was almost sin,
Yet troth I never tempted him.
Chide not the grossenes of my trespass (lovely Sweetness)
In such an humble language, I have smarted
Already in the wounds, my pride hath made
Upon thy sufferings. Henceforth tic in you
To work my happiness.
Call any service
Of mine a debt, for such it is; the Letter
You lately sent me, in the blessed contents
It made me privy to, hath largely quited
Every suspicion of your Grace or goodness.
Let me embrace thee with a Sisters love,
A Sisters love, Cleophila: for should
My Brother henceforth study to forget
The vows that he hath made thee, I would ever
Solicit thy deserts.
We must have entrance.
Must? Who are they say, must? you are un∣mannerly.
Brother is it you, and you too, Sir?
Your Ladyship has had a time of
Scolding to your humour:
Does the storm hold still?
Never fell a shower
More seasonably gentle on the barren
Parcht thirsty earth, then showers of curtsy
Have from this Princess been distilled on me,
To make my growth in quiet of my mind
Secure and lasting.
You may both believe that I was not uncivil.
Pish, I know her spirit, and her envy.
Now in troth, Sir,
Pray credit me, I doe not use to swear▪
The virtuous Princess hath in words and carriage
Been kind, so ouer-kind, that I doe blush:
I am not rich enough in thanks sufficient
For her unequalled bounty.—My good Cousin,
I have a suite to you.
It shall be granted.
That no time, no persuasion, no respects
Of Jealousies past, present, or hereafter
By possibility to be conceived,
Draw you from that sincerity and pureness
Of love, which you have oftentimes protested
To this great worthy Lady she deserves
A duty more, then what the ties of Marriage
Can claim, or warrant: be for ever hers,
As she is yours, and Heaven increase your comforts.
Clophila hath played the Church-mans part,
Isle not forbid the Banes.
Are you consented?
I have one task in charge first, which concerns me.
Brother, be not more cruel then this Lady,
She hath forgiven my follies, so may you:
Her youth, her beauty, innocence, discretion,
Without additions of estate or birth,
Are dower for a Prince indeed. You loved her;
For sure you swore you did: else if you did not
Here fix your heart, and thus resolve, if now
You miss this Heaven on earth, you cannot find
In any other choice ought but a hell.
The Ladies are turned Lawyers, and plead hand∣somely
Their Clients cases. I am an easy Judge,
And so shalt thou be Menaphon. I give thee
My Sister for a wise; a good one, friend.
Lady, will you confirm the gift?
The errors of my mistaken judgment being lost,
To your remembrance, I shall ever strive
In my obedience to deserve your pity.
My love, my care, my all.
What rests for me?
I'm still a Bachelor: Sweet Maid, resolve me,
May I yet call you mine?
My Lord Amethus,
Blame not my plainness, I am young and simple,
And have not any power to dispose
Mine own will without warrant from my father:
That purchased, I am yours.
It shall suffice me.
Revenge, I must have revenge; I will have re∣avenge bitter and abominable revenge; I will have re∣avenge. This vnfashionable Mongrel, this Linsey-wool∣sey of mortality by this hand, Mistress, this shee-Roague is drunk, and clapper-clawd me without any reverence to my person, or good garments, why do ye not speak, Gentlemen.
Some certain blows have past, and't like your Highness.
Some few knocks of Friendship, some loue-toyes, some Cuffs in kindness, or so.
Isle turn him away, he shall bee my Master no longer.
Is this your she-Page, Cuculus? tic a Boy, sure.
A Boy, an arrant Boy in long coats.
He has mumbled his nose, that tic as big as a
great Cod piece.
Oh thou Cock vermin of iniquity.
Polios, take hence the wag and school him for it.
For your part, servant, Isle entreat the Prince
To grant you some fit place about his Wardrobe.
Ever after a bloody nose do I dream of good luck.
I horribly thank your Ladyship.
Whilst I'm in office, the old garb shall again
Grow in request, and Taylors shall be men.
Come Trollio, help to wash my face, prithee.
Yes, and to scour it too.—
The Prince and Princess are at hand, give over your amorous Dialogues. Most honoured Lady, hence∣forth forbear your sadness: are you ready to practise your instructions?
I have studied
My part with care, and will perform it (Rhetias)
With all the skill I can.
Isle pass my word for her.
Thus Princes should be circled with a guard
Of truly noble friends, and watchful subjects.
O Rhetias, thou art just; the Youth thou told me.
That lived at Athens, is returned at last
To her own fortunes, and contracted I ove.
My knowledge made me sure of my report, Sir.
Eroclea, clear thy fears, when the Sun shines,
Clouds must not dare to muster in the sky,
Nor shall they here—Why do they kneel? Stand up,
The day and place is privileged.
Your presence, Great Sir, makes every room a Sanctuary.
Wherefore does this young virgin use such cir∣cumstance,
In duty to vs? Rise.
Tic I must raise her.
Forgive me, Sister, I have been too private,
In hiding from your knowledge any secret
That should have been in common twixt our souls:
But I was ruled by council.
That I show my self a Girl (Sister) and bewray
Joy in too soft a passion'fore all these,
I hope you cannot blame me.
We must part:
The sudden meeting of these two fair Rivulets
With the Island of our arms, Cleophila,
The custom of thy piety hath built
Even to thy younger years a Monument
Of memorable Fame; some great reward
Must wait on thy desert.
The Prince speaks t'ee, Niece.
Chat low, I pray; let's about our business.
The good old man awakes: my Lord, with-draw;
Rhetias, let's settle here the Coach.
Away then.
Fly hence, shadows, that doe keep
Watchful sorrows, charmed in sleep;
Though the Eyes be overtaken,
Yet the Heart doth ever waken
Thoughts, chained up in busy snares
Of continual woes and cares:
Love and griefs are so expressed,
As they rather sigh then rest.
Fly hence, shadows, that doe keep
Watchful sorrows, charmed in sleep.
Where am I? Ha? What sounds are these? Tic day, sure.
Oh, I have slept belike: tic but the foolery
Of some beguiling dream. So, so, I will not
Trouble the play of my delighted Fancy
But dream my dream out.
Morrow to your Lordship:
You took a jolly nap, and slept it soundly.
Away, beast, let me alone.
O, by your leave, Sir.
I must be bold to raise ye, else your Physic
Will turn to further sickness.
Physic, Beare-leech?
Yes physic, you are mad.
Trollio, Cleophila.
Sir, I am here.
I know thee, Rhetias, prithee rid the room
Of this tormenting noise. He tells me, sir.
I have took physic, Rhetias, physic, physic.
Sir true, you have; and this most learned Scho∣ler
Applied t'ee. O you were in dangerous plight
Before he took ye hand.
These things are drunk,
Directly drunk. Where did you get your liquor?
I never saw a body in the wane
Of age, so over spread with several sorts
Of such diseases as the strength of Youth
Would groan under and sink.
The more your glory in the miraculous cure.
Bring me the Cordial
Prepared for him to take after his sleep,
Twill doe him good at heart.
I hope it will, Sir.
What dost think I am, that thou should fiddle
So much upon my patience? Fool, the weight
Of my disease sits on my heart so heavy,
That all the hands of Art cannot remove
One grain to ease my grief. If thou cood'st poison
My memory, or wrap my senses up
Into a dullness, hard and cold as Flints?
If thou cood'st make me walk, speak, eat and laugh
Without a sense or knowledge of my faculties,
Why then perhaps at Marts thou might make benefit
Of such an Antique motion, and get credit
From credulous gazers, but not profit me.
Study to gull the wise; I am too simple
To be wrought on.
Isle burn my books (old man)
But I will doe thee good, and quickly too.
Most honoured Lord Meleander, our great Master,
Prince Palador of Cyprus, hath by me
Sent you this Patent, in which is contained
Not only confirmation of the Honours
You formerly enjoyed, but the addition
Of the Marshalship of Cyprus, and ere long
He means to visit you. Excuse my haste,
I must attend the Prince.—
There's one Pill works.
Dost know that spirit? tic a grave familiar,
And talked I know not what.
Hoe's like, me thinks, the Prince his Tutor, Aretus.
Yes, yes; it may be I have seen such a formality;
No matter where, or when.
The Prince hath sent ye
(My Lord) this Staff of Office, and withal
Salutes you Grand Commander of the Ports
Throughout his Principalities. He shortly
Will visit you himself: I must attend him.—
Do ye feel your physic stirring yet?
A Devil is a rare Juggler, and can cheat the eye,
But not corrupt the reason in the Throne
Of a pure soul.—Another? I will stand thee,
Be what thou can, I care not.
From the Prince, dear Brother, I present you this rich Relic,
A Jewel he hath long worn in his bosom:
Henceforth he bade me say, he does beseech you
To call him son, for he will call you Father.
It is an honour (brother) that a subject
Cannot but entertain with thankful prayers.
Be moderate in your loyes, he will in person
Confirm my errand, but commands my service.
What hope now of your Cure?
Stay, stay—What Earthquakes
Roll in my flesh? here's Prince, and Prince and Prince;
Prince upon Prince: the dotage of my sorrows
Revels in magic of ambitious scorn,
Be they Enchantments deadly (as the grave)
Isle look vpon'em: Patent, staff, and Relic
To the last first. Round me, ye guarding ministers
And ever keep me waking till the Cliffs
That over hang my sight fall off, and leave
These hollow spaces to be crammed with dust.
Tic time I see to fetch the Cordial. Prithee
Sit down: Isle instantly be here again—
Good, give me leave, I will sit down indeed:
Here's Company enough for me to prate to,
Tic the same, the cunning Artsman
Faultred not in a line. Cooed he have fashioned
A little hollow space here, and blown breath
To have made it move, and whispher, 't had bin excellent.
But faith, tic well, tic very well as tic.
Passing, most passing well.
The sovereign Greatness,
Who, by Commission from the powers of heaven,
Sways both this Land and vs, our gracious Prince,
By me presents you (Sir) with this large bounty,
A gift more precious to him then his birth-right.
Here let your cares take end; now set at liberty
Your long imprisoned heart, and welcome home
The solace of your soul, too long kept from you.
Dear Sir, you know me.
Yes, thou art my Daughter:
My eldest blessing. Know thee? Why Eroclea,
I never did forget thee in thy absence.
Poor soul, how dost?
The best of my well-being consists in yours.
Stand up: the gods who hitherto
Have kept vs both alive, preserve thee ever.
I thank thee and the Prince,
I thank thee too, Eroclea, that thou would
In pity of my age, take so much pains
To live, till I might once more look upon thee,
Before I broke my heart: O it was a piece
Of piety and duty vnexampled.
The good-man rellisheth his comforts strangely,
The sight doth turn me child.
I have not words that can express my joys.
Nor I.
Nor I: yet let vs gaze on one another freely,
And surfeit with our eyes; let me be plain,
If I should speak as much as I should speak,
I should talk of a thousand things at once,
And all of thee, of thee (my child) of thee:
My tears like ruffling winds locked up in Caves,
Doe bustle for a vent—on t'other side,
To fly out into mirth were not so comely.
Come hither, let me kiss thee—with a pride,
Strength, courage, and fresh blood, which now thy pre∣sense
Hath stored me with, I kneel before their Altars,
Whose sovereignty kept guard about thy safety.
Ask, ask thy Sister (prithee) she'll tell thee
How I have been much mad.
Much discontented,
Shunning all means that might procure him comfort.
Heaven he's at last been gracious.
So say I but wherefore crop thy words in such a sloth,
As if thou were afraid to mingle truth.
With thy misfortunes? Understand me thoroughly,
I would not have thee to report at large
From point to point, a Journal of thy absence:
T'will take up too much time, I would securely
Engross the little remnant of my life,
That thou might every day be telling somewhat,
Which might convey me to my rest with comfort.
Let me be think me, how we parted first:
Puzzles my faint remembrance—But soft,
thou toldst me, that the Prince
Sent me this present.
From this own fair hands I did receive my Sister.
To requite him, we will not dig his Fathers grave anew,
Although the mention of him much concerns
The business we inquire of—as I said,
We parted in a hurry at the Court,
I to this Castle, after made my lilac.
But whither thou, dear heart?
Now they fall too't, I looked for this.
I by my Uncles care (Sophronos▪ my good Uncle) suddenly was like a Sailors Boy conveyed a shipboord that every night.
A policy quick and strange.
The ship was bound for Corinth, whither first
Attended only with your servant Rhetias,
And all fit necessaries, we arrived:
From thence in habit of a youth we journeyed
To Athens, where till our return of late,
Have we lived safe.
Oh what a thing is man,
To bandy factions of distemp'red passions,
Against the sacred providence aboue him?
Here in the Legend of thy two years exile,
Rare pity and delight are sweetly mixed,
And still thou were a Boy.
So I obeyed my Uncles wise command.
It was safely carried, I humbly thank thy Fate.
If earthly treasures
Are powered in plenty down from Heaven on mortals;
They reign amongst those Oracles, that flow
In Schools of sacred knowledge; such is Athens:
Yet Athens was to me but a fair prison:
The thoughts of you, my Sister, Country, Fortunes,
And something of the Prince, barred all contents,
Which else might ravish sense: for had not, Rhetias,
Been always comfortable to me, certainly
Things had gone worse.
Speak low Eroclea;
That something of the Prince bears danger in it:
Yet thou hast travailed (Wench) for such Endowments,
As might create a Prince a wife fit for him,
Had he the World to guide: but touch not there;
How came thou home?
Sir, with your Noble savour,
Kissing your hand first, that point I can answer.
Honest, right honest Rhetias.
Your grave Brother
Perceived with what a hopeless love his son,
Lord Menaphon, too eagerly pursued
Thamasta, Cousin to our present Prince;
And to remove the violence of affection,
Sent him to Athens, where for twelve months space
Your daughter, my young Lady and her Cousin
Enjoyed each others griefs, till by his Father
The Lord Sophronos we were all called home.
Enough, enough, the world shall henceforth witness
My thankfulness to Heaven, and those people
Who have been pitiful to me and mine.
Lend me a Looking-glasse—How now? How came I
So courtly in fresh rayments?
Here's the Glass, Sir.
I'm in the trim too.—O Cleophila,
This was the goodness of thy care and cunning.—
Whence comes this noise?
The Prince my Lord in person.
Ye shall not kneel to vs; rise all, I charge ye:
Father, you wrong your age, henceforth my arms
And heart shall be your guard; we have o're-heard
All passages of your united loves.
Be young again, Meleander, live to number
An happy generation, and dye old
In comforts as in years. The Offices
And Honours which I late on thee conferred,
Are not fantastic bounties, but thy merit;
Enjoy them liberally.
My tears must thank ye, for my tongue cannot.
I have kept my promise, &amp; given you a sure cordial.
O, a rare one.
Good man, wee both have shared enough of sadness:
Though thine he's tasted deeper of th'extreme;
Let vs forget it henceforth. Whore's the picture
I sent ye? Keep it, tic a counterfeit,
And in exchange of that, I cease on this,
The real substance: with this other hand
I give away before her Fathers face
His younger joy, Cleophila, to thee
Cousin Amethus: take her, and be to her
More then a Father, a deserving husband.
Thus robed of both thy children in a minute,
Thy cares are taken off.
My brains are dulled;
I am entranced, and know not what you mean:
Great, gracious Sir, alas, why do you mock me?
I am a weak old man, so poor and seeble,
That my untoward joints can scarcely creep
Unto the grave, where I must seek my rest.
Eroclea was you know, contracted mine;
Cleophila, my Cousins by consent
Of both their hearts: We both now claim our own;
It only rests in you to give a blessing
For confirmation.
Sir, tic truth and justice.
The gods that lent ye to me, bless your vows:
O Children, children, pay your prayers to Heaven,
For they have showed much mercy. But Sophronos,
Thou art my Brother: I can say no more:
A good, good Brother.
Leave the rest to time.
Cousin Thamasta, I must give you too:
She's thy wife, Menaphon. Rhetias, for thee
And Corax, I have more then common thanks.
On, to the Temple; there all solemn Rites
Performed, a general Feast shall be proclaimed.
The Lovers Melancholy hath found cure;
Sorrows are changed to Bride-songs. So they thrive,
Whom Fate in spite of storms hath kept alive.
TO be too confident, is as unjust
In any Work, as too much to distrust;
Who from the laws of study have not sweru'd,
Know, begged applauses never were deserved.
We must submit to Censure: so doth He,
Whose hours begot this issue; yet being free
For his part, if He have not pleased you, then
In this kind, he will not trouble you again.

CAn horror have an auditory? can
Man love the spectacle of ruined man?
We feared we should have been alone, that hence,
The Actors should have been the Audience.
Are you not frighted yet? do• you not rise?
Can that inuit, which should dismay your eyes?
We show near murders, and in that degree
Where Marriage is unlawful, then, the free
Progress of crimes, by nimble Justice met,
Aequally horrid, this we show, but yet
Unless your Curtsy, your Judgment sway,
We suffer a worse torture, then we play.
WHy weeps my Dear?
Ask why I do not weep:
(Poor Isabella are thy tears denied thee?)
Ask why thus long such a succession
Of sorrow clogs my bosom, and does rob
So much of Woman from me, as complaints.
Ask why I doe not rave, tear my hair, thus,
Create a grief, which Fate would spare me, then
Cloud the sad Ayre with sighs, and at the last,
With a bold stab take from insulting Fortune
The miserable object of her sport:
Ask why I doe not this, not, why I weep.
Or stint thy tears, or mingle them with mine
By a relation of their cause: these eyes,
Trust me, my Isabella, are not dry,
Nor has strong sorrow ere exhausted them,
To make them bankrupt of a friendly tear,
Doe thou but prove it once a friendly tear
And not a fond one. Why, my Isabella,
Why dost thou hasten those that come too fast,
Sorrow, and Age? If it be true, I heard
Of Sforza, my dear Sforza, ther's no joy
But either past, or fleeting, and poor man
Grows up but to the experience of Grief,
And then is truly past minority
When he is past all happiness:
My Lord,
My sorrow dares not argue with your love,
This smile expels it.
Be it banished far,
Aeternally, or to the years of Age.
I, those vnclouded looks become my dear,
And give me joy too. I must hunt to day
With my dear uncle: O he is a man
That alters all those fond relations,
Which Nature gives, who in an uncles name
Ou• loves a Father: I could praise him still,
But that I stay too long from him: farewell.
O Galeazzol O not Galeazzo!
How has Man fled thee! how thy soul has fled thee!
Only thy lineaments belly a Man.
Thou hunt; 〈◊〉 as poor Prince, thou art the Game:
Thy uncle hunts: and yet he does not neither,
But stands a glad, and idle looker on,
Whilst thou ensnare•st thy self, sinfully fooled,
Flattering thy Executioner, and so
Dost no• prevent thy misery, nor yet know.
I am returned once more; before I'm gone,
To see if thy fond grief be not returned;
What joy is there in a forbidden grief?
What comfort in the eyes sad flux? once 〈…〉
Is it my fault gives you these tears?
My 〈…〉▪
For which so strange a sad ness seizes me,
That it increases when I strive with it,
And makes my face rebellious to my Lord,
When my heart yields.
Then once again, adieu,
Forsake your grief, or grief will forsake you.
Forsake my grief—O bid me forsake heaven,
My reason, and mine honour: only sighs
Doc keep me in opinion of Being,
And without them I were a stupid coarse.
Shall I obey impossibilities?
Forsake the sorrow, and retain the cause?
How can I think that yet the vntyr'd Sun
Has journeyed but a twelue-month, since I was
In Ferdinando's Court, the Paragon
Of happy Naples, when his Palace seemed
Guarded with Princely suitors, and mine eye,
Caught with so many rarities of men,
Taught me that too much choice did hinder choice,
That Galeazzo then must cary me?
This Galeazzo, neither Prince, nor Man,
Fooled out of both by Sforza, his dear uncle.
Can I think this, and think of joy again?
Can I think this, and dare to think again?
Why should some toys of after-torment fright
A resolution of easing me
From present ones? O tic the curse of man
To be unhappy at arbitrament,
Till heaven please to relent▪ My Iulia,
Breath's Naples any comfort? quickly speak.
None, Madam, and your courteous Grandfather
In stead of Armies sends you Patience.
What patience? he should have sent me rage,
Aided my anger, if not my revenge:
Patience? O God! can grief be patient?
Can Thunder whisper? or chafed se•• not to•re?
In me is Sea and thunder, I will be
A pattern of Revenge not misery.
SForza as yet thou but beginst to act,
And yet beginst to stagger: were thou not
A Princes son? why art thou not a Prince?
Protectors are but subjects, and this staff
But shows me under whose command I am.
Is this our hindrance that our mother first
Swelled with another? what her womb denied
Our head shall give, or we will loose our head,
What was her labour to a Crown? Perhaps
A monster might have filled her first, a thing
Of royal prodigy, and should this thing
Grow to be hooted to a crown before vs?
Or if that Crowns be due to the most years,
Why should the Nephew be the Uncles Lord?
And Laws of Nations conquer those of Nature?
Nature intended Sov'raignty to them
Of sovereign understanding; to the rest,
How ever aged, but subjection,
Which Isabella would detain vs in:
And whilst she trusts to Naples, our sad brow
May sooner wear willow, then Diadems.
Returned so soon, my Belgiosa? thanks,
Before I hear thy message, for thy hast.
My Lord, our sudden coming into France,
Left fame behind vs, where arrived, we craved
A private audience?
But had you it?
Did not our enemies sharpe espies desery
The depth of our hid counsels?
They might first
Desery the subtle path of a swift ship,
The voyage of a bullet, or of thought,
Before your more mysterious purposes?
Then since we are alone, and in a place
Free from the bold intrusion of an eye,
Feign Vs the Prince to whom we sent you forth,
And speak our Embassy unto our self.
Great Prince, to have the offer of a Crown
Is rare, and your felicity: my Lord,
Millans Protector, but your servant, knowing
The ancient right your predecessors had
In usurped Naples, by vs woos your Grace
(Consider unto what he woos your Grace)
Not to maintain his power, but make your own,
To take a Kingdom that even sighs for you.
So shall the infamy of a lost crown
Rot in the earth with your dead Ancestors,
And the recovery revive their names
To waite upon your triumph with your foes:
For so much justice needs no other power,
And yet such is your power, that it is able
To make what ever you should fancy, just:
But that your virtue is aboue that power.
I will not call you usurer of Fame,
By this large act, when the astonished world
Now fifty Ages off from vs, shall read
Not in the boastings of a painted tomb
(The flatteries of great rottenness) but your 〈…〉
Writ in 〈…〉s true Characters,
For making conquered Crowns the •udiments
Of your victorious infancy i• arms,
When France shall know no other Charlemaign•.
But should we fail in the attempt? what then?
Can Heaven fail Justice? or those powers commit
Sins which they punish? O my gracious Lord
Sin not with that weak thought: but if they should
Sforza will never:
He is always noble,
But he will undo vs with a benefit,
To give a kingdom is aboue requital.
His hopes are but the praise of honest deeds,
If in the rereward of your spreading Fame,
That fills all mouths, some happy tongue may glance
At him, as a poor engine of your glory,
That could impart, but no• possess a Fame.
Excellent man, if to this welcome speech
Thou giu'st as fair an answer.
This in brief
After some scruple, and a little pause
He whispered he would come.
Exactly done.
But leave vs now, my noble Belgiosa,
Till we may study a reward for thee.
The twilight hastens, when Vitellio
And Malatesta one of an high trust
With our fond Nephew, promised conference.
And here they are. Is it decreed brave friends▪
Shall it be swiftly done• nay, tic no matter,
Your colour says you dare not.
It lies then:
If that my colour show me disobedient
To my good Lord, be I for ever pale:
But when shall Galeazzoes wish'd-for death
Show we dare somewhat?
We would gladly have
A poison teach him linger to his death,
And a month hence we shall expect his knell.
Now are we entered, and now to retire
Were the worse treason: like an enraged fire
The more we are opposed, the more we'll spread
And make our foes our fuel: to be head
We'll cut off any member, and condemn
Virtue of folly for a Diadem,
Banish Religion, and make blood as cheap
As when two Armies turned into one heap
Of carcasses, lye grove ling, what care we
For the slight tainture of disloyalty?
None will commend the race till it be run,
And these are deeds not praised till they are done.
My Picinino, holds this sad news true?
My Iuliano, yes; tic in each voice
That some persuasion flattering Ferdinand,
That the French journey was but a report,
Made him revoke Alphonso, his brave son,
Who with an Army had endangered vs:
For the wise old man fearing, a deep fear
Might arm an enemy, else too weak for him,
And make vs hasten the French war, gave o'er
His war with vs: but when he understands
That all this queen•t does not purchase peace,
The coozen'd Prince seeks the sure peace of death,
And leaves his ruin to destroy his son.
Will the French come? then prithee, Death, come too.
Why should our eyes dulled to all other sights
By Age and sorrow, be reserved for sight
Of war and sorrow? ô discourteous heavens!
Why have you dallied with vs to white hairs?
Why kept till this time, must we perish now?
O wherefore are we come so near the grave
And are not in it yet? yet pardon me
Good heaven, your acts are aboue question:
Yet I may shed these tears for Italy;
Slave of that world, which once, her valour slau'd,
Restoring back her triumph's with her spoil,
Distracted in herself, and only fit
To make a bankrupt Poet heal his credit
With matter for fresh Tragedies.
Good heaven!
Is this to ease misfortune, or increase it?
If Passion could whine out felicity,
Or plenteous tears could drown unhappiness,
I have eyes too, and they contain their showers,
Nor would I ere be niggard of a Grief.
But tears being only tears, an easy de•
Of childish eyes, and all the rest of Grief
Commanding smiles, more then Compassion,
I thank my Genius I am resolute
To laugh at Fortune when she is most angry▪
Such laughter may have little mirth in it,
And I shall have more comfort in a tear.
You may, good Fountain, y••, drop on, to so,
If so much moisture will revive thy cheeks
Whilst Isle be young with laughter. I am he
That fears a sorrow, more then misery.
THis is the place, and this the time: good heaven!
What an odd place, and what an uncouth time?
Had I been hired to murder Sforza here,
Hell could not prompt more fit occasion.
I like nor it, nor him: but here he comes.
Welcome Vitellio, thy hast is welcome:
Nay complement with him, whom thou would kill,
Be free to vs as we doe know thee true.
Speak, yet I need not bid thee, for thine eye
Sparkles a joyful answer. It is done.
Tic done my Lord, and now my Lord, it is told
(That Galeazzo is no more a man)
And with an even scruple, for to me
The act's as easy as relation.
Thou speak true manhood: it is thy art alone
That gives vs certain honour: there are some
Strive for Aeternity with loss of life,
At least with hazard of the loss of it,
And think they are revenged when they are killed?
These are our valiant duellists, and these
Doe bleed whilst we doe conquer▪ heal their wounds,
Whilst we receive none: then, at last, unfold
(Man of deep Art, that can prevent the Fates,
And cut a thread, which they had thought to spun
Forty years younger) thy wise mysteries.
Thy constant, 〈…〉 failing 〈…〉,
Which cause a death, without a fear of death,
Here are some drugs, but of these some, not one
But can command a life where ere it is,
And ruinate the strongest workmanship
That Heaven ere bragged to have composed of Earth.
Powders of speedy Fate, but aboue all
The instruments, which make me near to death
Of such endeared familiarity,
This glass has nimblest operation:
Whose liquor cast upon the face of man
Straight du•ls him to an everlasting sleep.
Is this the liquor of Aeternity?
Then take thy •ethe, and go sleep for ever.
I am deceived, or esse this is the place
Which Sforza chooses when he is alone.
Yes, this is it.
What Malatesta come?
What Devil brought him hither? O cross stars▪
Be sudden, Sforza, now, or thou art lost:
He must believe out guilt was accident.
Speak, my Vitellio▪ O tune thy lips
But to one syllable, but to one groan
And I am satisfied.
What fight is here?
Vitellio dead, and •force tur'nd a Mourner?
Should thou dye thus, how would my name be •oil•▪
For though I am at guiltless of thy death,
As Innocence, or if there be a name
That hath less being: yet the envious world
Will quit curft Fortune of so great a crime,
And give it me: yet speak.
In〈…〉 my Lord,
To ask your 〈…〉 when 〈…〉 chance•
First frighted Heaven?
Now, Malatesta, now▪
When could unhappiness ra••no so, but now?
As if he meant to be before his Lord,
He had no sooner told the Prince must dye,
But he straight died.
Then courage, my good Lord.
Since it is thus, make the best use of it:
For now you need not fear to be reueal'd,
When one mouth's stopped, and the other is your own:
But since your last retirement, we have been
Instructed by the speed of frequent Posts,
Of the a rival of the King of France.
With thanks, a while, my Malatesta, leave vs.
Why should we longer think of other powers,
And not bring offerings now to our own brain?
Which gives vs Agents of all kinds of men,
And Kings alwell as poys'ners: this w••e King
Must trouble Naples, who would trouble vs,
Divert invasions which are yet not made,
And thus ou• ends are cheaply brought about,
We only at the charge of plot: they fight,
And Galiazzo dyes, whom either King
Were they not thus entangled, would preserve:
We shall be conquerors without fighting thus,
And their poor swords shall cut a way for vs.
I'm for you France.
And I am for you, Sforza,
Not poisoned yet, unless it were by thy tear•.
The other liquor had an Anted••e.
Happy suspect! had I been credulous
And thought his love as free as it would seem
I had not been, distrust has ransomed me.
But Malatesta is intr•pp'd, I know
Sforza for nothing did not ask the skill▪
My equal villain p•••shes, and I
Thus being accessory to his death
May sin to Innocence, by posting off
The Princes fate to him: whilst a disguise
Shall keep alive the fame that I am dead.
And thus half truth shall come to light, and I,
Be wisely cleared by double villainy.
AS I am noble, it was a glorious sight,
To see two Princes, in their State at once:
As if two Suns had harmlessly conspired
To beautify, and not to fright the Heavens.
Why should the formal nicety of State
Debar these often enter•jaws? I think
They would be medicine against Tyranny:
For, when a Prince sees all things under him,
Heads of eternal nakedness, and men
That make their glory of their servitude▪
He thinks hoe's uncontrollable, that none
Without a saucy imputation
Dares warn him to his duty: but suppose
An equal Majesty should once become
His usual object, one, whose vncheck't blood
Runs full as high as 〈◊〉, then he does learn,
That ther's a Common-wealth of Princes too,
Not one sole Monarch▪
Yet, Sanseuerin,
If you observed some clouds obscured both Suns,
For, when they smiled most freely, and expressed
Their nearest friendship by a strict embrace,
They looked so jealously, as if they feared
A closer stab: and then the King took leave
With that excess of hast, that one would think
(After this eager preparation,)
He did intend his journey to leave vs,
Not to win Naples.
It is a dangerous time,
(And yet I seem to cross the truth I speak
When I not fear to call it a dangerous time)
Sforza is ouer-wise, and so attempts
Upon the confidence of his own brain
(A brain, though wise, yet I may safely say,
Within the possibility of error)
Things, that can only hap by miracle
To any good.
Why, what can happen ill?
Fear you a war? and what's to be feared there?
Least that a mortal die, least that the life
Due to a knotty gout, or grating stone,
Have a more easy period by the sword.
Let them fear war, who fear to see their gold▪
Lest that the Sun should have a sight with them▪
Holding so much of Earth, they are turned to it,
Who have no more life then their duty akers,
Men, I may say, in the worst part of men.
And why like these run we an idle race
Of threescore years, and then sneak to a Death?
Whilst soldiers master their mortality
And dye by men, if that at all they dye.
Malvezzo know, when all things sifted are,
Peace only pleases them that ne'er knew war.
HEard you the general whispering▪
No, what i〈…〉
The Duke is ill.—
And doe they whisper that▪
Yes: and, they say, he has strange fits.
How strange
Is poison strange in Italy▪ why, know,
As Princes live aboue the vulgar, so
Their death has a Prerogative: mean men
May dream away their time to fourscore years,
And when their rotten joints drop to their dust▪
Only some trivial infirmity,
A Pal•ie, or an Aguebeares the blame:
But'tis not State for Princes to be old,
And yet they must not be supposed to dye
By the respectless treason of disease,
But by some strange unheard▪ of accident
That Fate did never dream of: but no more,
You know Vitellio, and the height of grace
Sforza has showed him▪ it is suspicious
When wisdom flatters villainy: then come,
Let vs be private, and discourse some treason.
But stay, my Picinino, who are here?
O the grand favourite, Sanseuerin,
A most full bubble, valiant vanity:
That in high terms can swear down fortresses,
Blow away Armies with a powerful breath,
And spoil the enemy before he sees him:
But when he comes to action, lye as still,
As in the tale, that lumpish King of Frogs,
Which Jove did give them in his merriment.
Were tilting valour, I ne'er knew a man
Of larger worth: could he but break the ranks
Of enemies as well as he does spears,
Millan ne'er saw a braver General.
But there's his brother too.
I, thats the man.
(Tic wonder we can know so much of him)
He that can sound the depth of that sly brain
Has a large plummet, trust me Iulian,
An hundred Lawyers make up that one head,
And scarcely too: quick Proteus to him,
To this Caiazzo was an Idiot,
A plain flat Idiot, I tell thee man,
Meander never knew so many windings▪
If, as they say, an Aemulation
Is bred by likeness, • doe wonder much
How Sforza is induced to employ him.
Who has more Devil in him, then himself.
But why is this employment? why these Arms?
When all but Naples are our friends, and they
Not able now to show themselves our foes,
Engaged, and almost lost in the French war.
Tricks, Iuliano, Statists call them Arts,
Not to be fado•'d by a vulgar reach:
But though I want the villainy to know,
Yet I have so much spleen to laugh at them;
And take a comfort in this plainer sense:
No subtlety can cousin Providence.
HOw rests the Prince?
O my good Lord, he rests▪
But it is a quiet, such as the Seas have,
When that the winds have spent their violence,
And out of impotence bestow a calm:
It is more a death, then slumber, you may see
His senses rather weary, then at rest.
Are then his •its so raging?
Nothing else,
Should he but wake, your think two Armies met▪
And strove together for the loudest shout.
Disease has spread herself ore all his parts,
And only spared his tongue, as if some star
Not knowing otherwise to clear it self
From imputation of tyranny,
For such exact plaguing of Innocence
Had left him that to curse withal, that so
To all that heard his fury, he might seem
To be thus tortured for his Blasphemy.
Water, some water.
Now the fit begins:
Some of my slaves run, and exhaust the •o,
Charge him no more to vent his idle streams
Into the glutted maine, but rather pour
All his moist mouths on me: do ye stare, begone,
Use not your eyes at all, unless to weep:
And that, not tears of sorrow; but of help,
Such as may cool me.
Patience, sweet Prince,
Add not unto the fire of your disease,
The heat of passion.
What red thing is this?
Ha, Isabella, tell me.
It is your uncle.
The noble Prince Ascanio.
It is false;
He is nor Prince, nor noble: hark you friends,
He talks of Passion, and of Patience,
Let him discourse of Aetna, or Vesuuius,
Or of a greater heat then I doe feel,
And I will answer him: Patience to me?
Go bid rough seas be patient.
He grows worse,
And opposition does inflame him more:
Me thinks I see his eye-lids faintly strive,
Against Deaths closing.
O! my joints are fire,
Why does not heaven shed Cataracts, and lowr•
Once to my comfort? are they hot as I,
Have they no moisture, for a Suppliant?
Then, though hot heaven oppose, when once my br〈…〉
Hath left this corps, Isle have a cold by death.
Heard you that groan my Lord—ô he is dead:
Crack then ye tardy heart strings, quickly crack,
And give me leave to ouer-take the fligh▪
Of my dead husband.
What is past our help,
Let it be past our grief: tic fortitude
To suffer chances counterbuffes as one
That by his expectation had deceived
All her faint threatenings: till this •adder time
Your life has had one constant scene of joy,
Which here is interrupted: you should thank
The heavens because they were not tedious
In their delights: for this variety.
As hunger praises feasts, so it may be
You'll love joy better for this misery.
HOW covetous thou art to learn mishap?
Beatrice the answer kills thee.
Kill me then,
But not deny me.
Dearest, I am lost,
And in my ruin, thou.
I would be so,
Safety were ruin were it otherwise.
Yet tell me Sforza, how are you so lost?
O what a busy torture woman is!
I must say somewhat, but the maine is silence,
Vitellioes loss, yes, that hathlost me too:
No sooner killed then lost, so strangely gone,
As if the dead had learnt a motion
So to convey themselves unto the grave.
Will you be still unkind?
Thou shalt hear all▪
The French have conquered Naples, and which draws
Blood from our soul, without a drop of blood:
When thus we plotted it, that when both Kings
Had wearied out themselves with equal slaughter,
And here Alphonso tottered, and there Charles;
When loss had ceiz'd the conqueror, then we
Would have amazed the conqueror afresh
With new alarms: when by the flattery
Of chance, France gets a kingdom without blood,
And by dry victory has undone a plot
Worth many Kingdoms: I presumed on this,
Naples had soldiers enough to last
Killing a year, in which space, we resolved
To arm all Italy against the French,
And cunningly drive out, whom we called in:
Which, ere we could accomplish, is disclosed,
And conquering France intends to hinder it,
By our invasion: ô my policy!
Must I be wounded with the sword I gave?
And find those enemies, whom only I
Enabled to my injury? well; heaven,
Your kindness is a miracle sometime,
Beyond all reason, but your curse is wit,
My fault is my faults punisher.
Long life,
And happy to our Duke.
How my Ascanio?
Recall thy self, good Cardinal, what Duke?
Whilst Galeazzo lives?
Most truly Duke,
For Galeazzo's dead.
Alas, poor child,
I could have wished thee longer life, but since
Heavens willis otherwise, it were blasphemy
To storm at that which is the will of heaven.
I hate that impotent rebellion.
My Lord, so cross was Fortune, that you were
Made almost bankrupt by a too much thrift:
For when you had discharged those numerous troop•,
Whose charges lay as hard upon the State
As an invasion could, then Orleans moved
And stole N•uarra, which disastrous news
So heated the remainder of your troops
(As if you had added to their valour more,
When you abated from their multitudes)
That by a nimble victory, they made
His conquest be his prison.
Noble friend
Stand thou, and our State stands: ô why doe men
Cry out on Age, on eating Age? as though
Our many griefs were from our many years,
And the last times were worst: we rather find
That nothing is so dangerous to Kings
As a young Principality: for tic
With them almost as with young plants, which yield
Unto the least entreaty of the wind,
And need no stronger blast, but gaining Age
Scarce stoop to thunder: may we once arise
Unto this happy firmness of estate,
This blessed maturity of Prince, we stand
Fearless of fall, but if heaven envy vs
And have decreed our fuine with our rising,
Yet such weal have it void of all base fears
Our foes shall grieve our ruin was not theirs.
MY Lords, since we are met so happily,
(If you esteem me not too by•d, to ask
The story of your high famed actions)•
Bless me with the Relation.
I much fear
Mine are not worthy your attention:
Yet if it please you, noble Belgiosa,
(Because my story will depend on that)
To show the reason why the giddy French,
So strangely left their conquest: such your power,
Such a full conquest have you of your friend,
I'll shame my self for your content.
Then, thus:
From vs France hurried thorough Lumbardy
And fled to conquer, who had seen that hast
Would easily supposed it to have been
Rather a flight then an invasion.
The Pope quakes at the progress, and admits
Young Ferd'nand into Rome, that if the French
Should dare a fight, they might find Naples there.
France slights that fainter opposition,
And speaks his scorn in thunder, Naples flies,
And all his army hath no other use
Then to become unwilling harbingers
To show their lodgings to the conquering French▪
Who like fierce winds that sweep away their lets,
Or like encroaching tides, take •wiftly in
The offered Countries, not defended, now
Saint German yields, and saucy Capua
That dared a competition once with Rome,
Averse takes the president, and now
The Kng of Naples finds home foes, and such
As durst be valiant against their Prince,
And use their fond arms in a mutiny,
Which were not safe enough for a defence.
He taking the advantage of thou crime
Unconquered by the French, to these he yields,
And chooses rather to become no Prince
Then keep the Crown, which they would take away.
What was the issue?
Strangely pitiful:
He that had Navies yesterday, has now
Scarce a bark left him, scarce a plan•e or two,
To trust him to the mercy of the Seas,
The Seas more courteous then the multitude:
In which he makes for Ischia, and leaves
His enemy his successor.
And he
(As I have seen some wav'ring amorist)
Neglects his conquest for the •a••ness,
For when it was certain F•r •••a•d was fled,
Whilst they might justly yet fear his return,
The French return, as if they meant to try
Which would be soonest weary of the hast,
Who had the swifter pace to 〈…〉 away:
That is 〈…〉 act of new governors,
Such stories are as an〈…〉 as the world.
Till they doe try what they can doe, they think
They may doe all things, their first act is •••••
(As if they meant 〈…〉 to kill then •a•g••)
It matters not upon what ground▪ there is
Pretence enough to quit a conqu••o•
From the least show of 〈…〉y: but then
When they have felt the least of wars extremes
They rave, they faint, they cross what they first did,
And are even weary of a victory.
France made this certain truth, who in his brags
Had sworn the fall of Mahomet: but now
When he might hear the groans of Graecia
Delivered by the echoes of their sea,
To make them more, he thinks on a retreat,
And chooses home before a victory▪
It was a valley, where our Taro laues
The root of Appe•nine, and a large plain
Spheard with a row of swelling Earth makes war
A spacious Amphitheater: where we
Stayed for their coming; when mature advice
That crowns most actions, strangely injured vs,
For rashness would have stole a victory
Which tedious consultation gave away.
Success had smiled on our temerity
Had we assaulted them upon the hills
And added to the mountains with the French.
But I am tedious: only our vanne fought,
And it was the Frenchmens victory to resist:
Both were overcome, both conquerors, for they
Still kept the field, and wee still kept the prey.
O what is valour joined with Modesty!
This conquers both your Fortune and your skill.
Should you but write a story; and profess
That pureness from all passion which you've shown.
You would be credited, though it were your own.
But what reward is it to be but believed?
You shall be ever praised: what you have done
Fears neither envy, nor oblivion:
And for this act succession shall see
Caiazzo as long-liu'd as Italy▪
I Wonder Malatesta still survives:
Sure Sforza has forgot himself; my death
Does but half clear him, and if the other live,
He cannot look for a full innocence.
It is not mercy, certainly: ô, no,
Mercy with him is folly: but t'may bee
He fears that had he kilt vs both at once
Rumour would be too busy, and all mouths
Would cry, that Chance had too much project in it.
This is the place of Destiny, it is here
Sforza does actuate his bloody arts,
Mistaking privacy for innocence,
And thinks hoe's good, because he is not seen▪
Here must I wait for a discovery.
I must once more be cruel, yet not I,
This is the murder of Necessity:
But what has he deserved, who has done nought
But what we charged, and so performed our thought?
Is Death due to Obedience 〈…〉can this hand
Yield to his Fate, that fe••'d to his command?
Yet he, or I must perish: shall I see
My life, my honour, my Aeternity▪
Lye at his mercy, and be safe, so long
As he is pleased to temper his rude tongue?
Till he be drunk, or treacherous? Isle first
Study amongst all actions, which is worst
And ouer-act it▪ though our former deed
Was from ambition, this is yet from need:
Death is too good reward for such a slave,
And sure there is no blabbing in the grave.
But here he comes: why are thy looks so grim?
Why, Malatesta, in thy •urrow'd face
See I the signs of Anger, or of Grief?
Command thy face to a more smiling form,
That I may think thee pleased when thou dost tell
What does displease thee.
It was a foolish dream,
That stole my colour from my paler cheeks.
Last night I saw Ʋitellio.
And what?
Can thou fear shadows?
Yes if shadows speak,
If that their threatenings be substantial.
From such a paper as your Highness holds,
He forced me breath in Death.
This Paper holds
A strange perfume, of such a cunning virtue,
That at a distance it scarce smells at all.
And at the nose it gives the best of scents.
Make the experiment:
O! I am ••aine.
Heavens what a stillness here is? what a death
Of the whole man at once? the wandering eye
Now finds a station, and the busy pulse
Is now for ever idle: whore's the tongue
That but even now could say as much as this,
When that the soul could prompt it? but even now
Here was a thing could speak, and poison too,
That knew more ways to kill, then ever Heaven
Did to make man: and could his subtlety,
That could give death, not know to keep out death?
Fie, what a bulk it is, what a great lump
Of Nothing, that shall lose that nothing too?
What a dead toy is Man, when his thin breath
Flies to its kindred Ayre? ô why at all
Did Heaven bestow, or why at all bereave
Man of this Vapour of Eternity?
And must we one day be a stock like this,
Fit only to enrich the greedy Earth,
And fill an house of Death, perhaps before
We see the issue of another Plot?
Must we lye subject to be trampled on,
By some, perhaps not Politicians?
Whore's then our Wisdom? our deep Providence
Are they dirt too? ô heavens! but if they are
Or dirt▪ or nothing, Isle enjoy my fame.
And rottenness shall ceize me, not my name.
Are those the Instrumens? well my black friends,
I eased you of a labour: all succeeds
According to the flatt'ry of my wish,
And my suspicion turns to prophecy.
But my so bloody, and so wary Sforza,
Your Agent's dead, but not your crime: twill out,
And by this carcass: I will fly to France,
Divulge loud papers,—they are writ already,—
And here they are, these I will swear were found
In the dead pois'ners pockets: by this means
Sforza's proclaimed a murderer, I'm freed,
And make it be his guilt, which was my deed.
MAdame I have some news of that import, That (if you please to command privacy) Will both desire, and fright your patience.
Be brief.
First know I am Vitellio.
Thou art a villain, and a pois'ner then,
Hast thou a drug for vs?
Yes such an one
Shall make you love a poison: read, and wonder.
I doe: and more, how thou could purchase this Without a guilt.
I did peruse the spoils
Of Malatesta's carcass, whom I found
Most strangely guilty, and as strangely dead,
Whose pockets furnished me with these instructions.
Thus we learn Murder from thy Felony:
But what should make me trust a confessed rogue?
My villainy: my credit is my crime:
Had not I stole, you had not understood.
I must believe: but dare thou poison well?
Commit a crime, which thou moist glory of?
On whom dear Lady?
Nay I care not whom.
But I can give reward to a wise crime.
My quick dispatch shall make you gladly know
I understand, what you desire, and hide.
Now should he poison Sforza. O fond hope!
That make vs think all true that we desire.
Should he betray vs now? for what? that we
Entreated him to kill, we knew not whom.
By this expression thus much I have won:
I may be made, but cannot be undone.
FOrtune is merry, and the heaven disposed
To play with me, I am turned Favourite.
Me thinks my hairs ashamed of their white hue
Should blush to youth: O how I could look big,
Take Giant strides, dote on my lovely self,
And talk as silly as any Lord.
To see the prettiness of action,
Of State-imployment: Sforza's to be crowned,
And I must win the popular suffrages.
Good Heavens! was ever such a merry load
Imposed on Man: some cry the times are ill,
Others could wish them better, and a third
Knows how to make all well, but tells not how,
And, cause that he is silent, would be wise.
But in conclusion I doe find them ready
(On supposition of no more expense,
And that their voice is sued for, not their purse)
To give a lusty acclamation.
IO, Io, gladly sing,
Till the Heaven with wonder ring.
He is fled, let Millan say
Once more, he is fled, the day
Clears again, and makes vs see
A braver light of victory.
Io, Io, &amp;c.
Yet he had before he fought
(By the speedy war of thought)
Conquered Italy, and so
Has hastened his own overthrow.
Io, Io, &amp;c.
Henceforth let them learn to live
In the peace, that home doth give,
Nor again so fondly rave,
To travel for a foreign grave.
Io, Io, &amp;c.
First we thank Heaven, by whose most gracious aid
We have the means, and reason to thank you.
Now we begin to lift up our faint heads,
And entertain, though scarce believe a peace:
Now Italy at length has lost her yoke,
Which she was wont to give, but never bear,
And therefore wondered at the strangeness more
Then at the weight of't: in this noble act
Sforza claims nothing but the happiness,
Which he acknowledges received from you.
Sforza's deserts exceed the height of praise.
He has slau'd Italy by freeing it.
Millan must know him for her Romulus.
We know our self so underneath this praise,
That could we but suspect untruth in you,
Weed call all this but mockery.
Do ye doubt?
Make you a question of the name of it?
Why call it as it is, plain flattery.
We wondered lately at the prouder French,
And gave too high a value to their acts:
When in a serious estimation,
Their chiefest victory was of the miles,
And more a journey then a war: if they
Could gain a fame by nimble travelling,
How shall we rear a trophy to his name,
That made them go far faster then they came?
For my part (though I know his Modesty,
Which will refuse the honours he deserves)
I'd have him forced unto the government,
To rule that happy land which he hath saved.
Sforza will ne'er gain say the general voice,
Your love I like beyond your gift: kind Heavens!
Show by my governments integrity
You were the peoples prompter, and I'll show
(If you but actuate my just desires)
I only am their Duke in goodness: since
Millan hath chose, it shall applaud her Prince.
NO rest in death? why then I see they err
That give a quiet to a sepulchre.
It is our hard fate, nor can Man choose but dye,
But where Grief is, is Immortality.
This draws our iuicelesse bones to a new day,
From Lethes banks, where we have learnt the way,
(An easy learning) to return our woes,
And laugh at our misfortunes in our foes.
We'll draw felicity out of our fall,
And make our ghost revenge our Funeral.
That our dim Eyes, and with pale death benighted,
May by revenge be cleared, and we be righted
(If other punishment should come too •low)
By the exacter justice of our foe.
When being betrayed by them he trusted most,
He shall be prisoner in a foreign coast,
When wanting sustenance, his teeth shall chaw
His arms for food, and their one fe•ders gnaw.
When Hell shall have but part of him, when he
That now triumphs shall be less ghost then we.
SForza, you are undone.
Why my Ascanio?
Fortune is fearful of so foul a crime.
You durst be bad, and yet improvident,
And so it is not Fortunes, but your crime.
Which shall I first begin to blame? your fault
Or (pardon if I call it) Foolishness:
I faint to think that you are past excuse,
Both with the honest and the Politic.
Come nearer, my dear Cardinal, and tell
In easier terms what tic that troubles you:
Is Galeazzo's death divulged?
It is:
The time, the manner, and the murderer,
Nor am I free from th'imputation:
You speak what you suspect, not what is true,
Does speech come from the dead? can their dried nerues
Borrow a tongue for accusation?
This is no other then the voice of Guilt,
The speech of our home-executioner:
And yet I fear—and yet what should I fear?
Blood hath strange organs to discourse withal,
It is a clamorous Orator, and then
Even Nature will exceed her self to tell
A crime so thwarting Nature.
My good Lord,
Pardon the zeal of my intrusion,
I bring hid danger with me: it was my chance
As I was passing to the bedchamber,
Just at the door to find this muffled man,
VVaiting some treacherous opportunity.
Each circumstance swelled with suspicion,
The place, the time, the person, all did seem
To bear a danger worthy of your fear,
At least your wiser disquisition.
Thou art all goodness, and deserve of vs
Beyond the niggardly reward of thanks:
But what are you that thus be cloud your face,
Who, not unlike that ouer-bashfull foul,
Delight in darkness? Ha! Vitellio!
The wonder is resolved by a new wonder.
Sforza I live: do ye stare? I live: these words
Are not the fond delusions of the Ayre,
As you officiously would gull your self;
But from a solid substance, had not we
Bin by your diligent spy too soon surprised,
Before our proiects full maturity,
Thy death more fully should have proved my life.
Fool that I was, who thought to take thy life
By that which nourished it: there's none so mad
Would poison Serpents, Isle work surely now,
Once more Isle try your immortality.
Strangle the Monster.
It was a doubtful chance
Within this hour who first should own those words.
But, Tyrant, weary thy invention
To find variety of punishment,
Yet all that thou can doe, exceeds not this,
A pin could doe as much: weak, silly Sforza,
All thou can doe to me exceeds not that
Which I did on the person of thy Prince:
Disease would prove a better murderer.
Stop that malignant throat.—O my Ascanio,
Thus must they toil which work an hight by blood,
How I could wish an innocent descent
To new subjection? how I hate that wish
How scorn all thoughts that have not danger in them▪
Get vs more Remora's, sweet Cardinal,
Or rather then to droop to Idleness▪
We'll work to be no Prince, our self re-calling:
In rising, most, some wit there is in falling.
ASsist me, Hell, for I intend an Act,
Which should your puny fiends but think upon,
Would make their blacker cheeks receive a blush,
Would give a redness which your weaker Fire
Had ne'er that heating power to work in them:
An act, the Heavens did only then declare
They would permit to be performed by man
When they created Night: for were all Day,
Could such a Crime be as well seen as done,
Their Immortality might justly fear,
Lest all the guilt should be removed on them,
As Idle, or as Cruel lookers on,
Whilst Heaven, on Earth did suffer: this black night
Must Isabella dye, dye, by this hand:
This Chapel is her ordinary walk,
Discovered to me by her Iulia,
Where when she comes to see her husbands tomb,
This hand shall make her •it for such a room.
PRince of shades, (for unto me
Still thou keep thy Majesty)
If thou art not wholly lost,
And there's something in a Ghost:
Hear thy Isabella's vow:
If hereafter I allow
Of a second match, or know
Any man, but for a foe,
Saving him that shall engage
His revenge unto my rage:
(Hear just Heavens) may I then be
Made another Ghost like thee,
May I dye, and never have
What I visit now, a Grave.
O doe not hear her Heaven, and kill me straight
If I dare touch her: he that sees those eyes
And dares attempt to make those eyes not see,
Has a blind soul: burn clearer, you kind lights▪
O doe not envy me the sight of her:
But what's there in a sight? I must be brief,
If not for love, yet for ambition:
Her Marriage makes me greater then her Death,
And she has taught me the condition.
Pardon, bright Angel, and return the sword,
Which Sforza made me swear to sheath in you,
Into my bosom▪
No, obey your Prince,
If you have goodness in you keep your oath,
Murder is nothing unto perjury.
By this fair hand you injure me, and more
Then ever Sforza did: can you suppose
(Though you had heard the vows he forced me to)
I meant what I protested? that this hand
Which ever yet has used a sword for you,
Would use it now for your destruction.
Revoke that thought, dear Lady, that harsh thought,
And let not so much sweeter innocence
Make it self guilty by suspicion,
Suspicion of impossibilities.
Rather command, and you shall quickly see
That he, who would have armed me against you,
Shall find in his own entrails the just steel.
What traps are these to catch the Innocent?
Sforza I smell your project, it is too rank.
My Lord, no more: your speech is dangerous,
I must not hear it.
You shall see it then:
Doe not believe me Madam till I'ue done,
Till I doe bring my credit in my arms,
The Traitors head, and when you see that time▪
Confess you owe your life unto my crime.
what will become of this declining state?
Can we believe that the yet patient heaven
Will any longer suffer? and not give
Destruction as notorious as our crimes.
Awake, sterne Justice, and unsheathe thy sword,
The Scabbard will not heal vs, but the edge,
Nor is it enough to brandish, but to strike:
Let then thy terror give vs innocence,
That mildness may no longer injure man.
Why, thou perpetual Murmurer, thou sea
Tossed with eternal tempest, thou dark sky
With everlasting clouds, thou—any thing,
Whom, being angry I can call no more:
Think better of those acts thou can not mend.
Will Sforza be less bad, because thou whin'st?
Or dost thou think thy pitiful complaints
Can beg a goodness of Ascanio?
I never knew that mighty use of tears,
That they could wash away another fault:
When thou shalt want a tear for a fit grief,
Sanseuerin will be a Coward still:
And when thy groans are turned to thy last gasp,
Caiazzo will not be less treacherous.
Now for thy thunder, Heaven, now for a piece
Of thy most eminent Artillery.
Are you still silent? see, he tears their papers,
Papers, perhaps, wherein they worship him,
Give him more titles, then they give their God▪
And yet he tears them. O vast Favourite!
Swelled by the airy favour of thy Prince,
Till thou hast dimmed the light that made thee shine,
Till Sforza's less then his Sanseuerin.
Tell me, good Picinino, does the Sun
Spend all his rays upon one Continent?
Or have you ever seen the partial Heavens
Upon one A•e• lavish all her showers,
While the rest molder with dry barrenness?
I have not, Iuliano, but what then?
Are you to seek for the collection?
Why, has not Sforza made himself our Sun?
Are not his favours our refreshing showers?
Why should one suck up what is due to all,
Why is the Prince made a Monopoly?
Thou make me laugh at thy fond question:
What? are not Princes men▪ of the same mould,
Of the same passions with inferiors?
Doe not they fear, desire, and hate (as we)
And shall we only hinder them from love?
Cobblers may have their friends, and why not Kings?
Because they are higher then the rest of men,
Shall they be therefore worse? and therefore want
The Benefits, because they have the Rule?
O hard condition of Majesty!
The former accusation of Kings
Has been their cruelty, that they did hate
The people they should govern: O hard plight!
O strange perverseness! shall their love at length,
Their friendship be imputed as their fault?
Would Heaven our Sforza had no worse a crime.
You are a worthy Advocate, and here
Comes your great Patron: go and ask your •ee:
This is a saucy importunity:
You have your answer.
O my gracious Lord,
Look on these scars I gained in the French ••••e,
Where I have lost my Fortunes.
So have I,
Scarce left alive to tell my misery.
You have bin drunk, and quarrelled—must the State
Find plasters for your broken heads?—no more—
Nay, if you'll take no answer, I must call
Them that will drive you hence. O my tired ears!
Henceforth I vow to stop them at your suites,
And be as Deaf, as you are Impudent.
Yes, doe good Aeolu•—how he blows them hence!
How clears his passage with a lusty frown!
And yet it may be that despised wretch
Worn out of clothes, and flesh, whom his high scorn
Would not vouchsafe once more to look upon,
Durst in the field doe more, then he durst see,
Then he would there vouchsafe to look upon.
As if that Valour were the only praise,
And none were to be loved, but they that fight:
Where were we then? what would become of vs?
Thou think it Paradox, but tic most true,
A Soldier is the greatest enemy,
Of whom the Common-wealth can be afraid:
Prefer you which you please; yet unto them
Which are the sole Physicians of State,
Who with the teeming of a pregnant brain,
Search the diseases and the remedies,
Valour is nothing but a desperate vice,
And there's no safety, but in cowardice.
WE are not man, for such an empty thing
Could not have this solidity of joy:
Say the French King is dead, and say withal
We are immortal, and ones happy truth,
Shall expiate for the others flattery.
But speak the manner too as well, as death▪
When now his gadding thoughts had won the world▪
And Italy was to be taken in
But only as an easy seat, from whence
He might derive his further victories;
Ottoman quaked, and it was in chance, if now
New Rome, should be new-French, &amp; the proud T〈…〉
Be brought to know what their beginnings were▪
When Fortune had advanced him to that height▪
That grown forgetful of a lowly tomb,
He reared huge Pyramids, and troubled Art
To match his fancy with magnificence
Fit for a conquering builder, who had learnt
To ruin first, and then to build a City.
When Marbles were to be in rich with wounds▪
And cut for their advancement▪ then, Heavens spo•t▪
He raised competitors to dare the Heavens:
Nor dreams his own descent into low Earth.
Ascanio, you make him live too long,
Tell how he died, without more circumstance.
He went (such was his use) to see the play
At Tennis▪ court, when by his trembling Queen
He sank into halfe-death: thence he's conuey'〈…〉
To the next room, where on a couch of straw,
As if a downe-bed were too soft for him,
Whom rottenness attended, and the grave,
That harder lodging of Mortality,
A King, a conquering, youthful King expires.
Thrice from deaths slumbers he awaked to speak,
Thrice did he cry to heaven, unto deaf heaven▪
And after nine hours death he died.
I find
A certain grumbling against Fortune here:
Which that I may whet to a lively rage,
Repeat Maluezzo her last treachery
Against the French, and Neopolitan.
Naples now won, and the unstable French
(As if they were afraid of their own luck)
Ridiculously leaving what th'ad won▪
The Deputy was Mompen•eer, a man
Of an high birth, but of unequal deeds.
For when young Ferdinand with some few boats
(Which only fear might make a Navy of,
And nothing but the strength of cowardice
Could possibly judge strong) approached the shore,
As if the poor Prince once more had desired
Only to see his ancient government,
And therefore had adventured to the Sea,
The Sea was in the City, for ne'er was
Such a confusion in the vulgar waives:
All cry a Ferdinand, a Ferdinand,
Even those who lately banished Ferdinand:
Part op the gates to him, and part shut up
The French into the Citadels, where •e
Besieges his once Conquerors.
Tic true
Not the world only▪ but a man's a ball,
Will Fortune never leave her tossing him▪
Whether their own neglect forced them to want,
Or want to yield, it is doubted: but they yield:
Thus as in trivial sports we oft have seen
After a tedious inconstancy,
The Cork return to him that struck it first,
So in this fatal revolution,
Fortune gives Naples unto him again▪
Whom she first injured in the taking it.
Who hearing this would not erect his soul
To a contempt▪ of Fortune! that blind wretch
Whom only sottishness hath Deified?
Man hath a nobler Godhood in himself,
His virtue and his wisdom, unto these▪
Bend all our knees▪ let vs still honour these:
And count it comfort in our lowest state,
He that is vvi•e, would not be fortunate.
WE leave it to your care, Sanseuerin;
But see the night grows old, good rest my Lords▪
Why stayst thou▪ my Aurelio? good boy
Isle see no bed to night; then go, yet stay,
If they have not escaped thy memory
Sing me those verses which you made of sleep.
HOw I laugh at their fond wish
whose desire
aims no higher
Then the baits of Midas dish?
What is Gold but yellow dirt?
which th'vnkind
heavens refined
When they made vs love our hurt.
Would to heaven that I might steep
my faint eyes
in the wise,
In the gentle dew of sleep?
Whose effects doe pose vs so,
that we deem
it does seem
Both Deaths brother and his foe.
This does always with vs keep,
and being dead
that's not fled:
Death is but a longer sleep.
Pretty Philosophy! go boy, go sleep,
Enjoy the good thou sing—this boy can sleep,
Sleep quietly, and sing himself asleep:
Making that gentle Rest unto his Song.
But lle go read: what have we here? a Map?
Welcome thou lively picture of the world:
Now Isle peruse my large Dominions,
What a vast compass they doe fill in thee?
How Poe is wearied with his tedious course,
But running only through our Continent?
Ha! where is Poe? which is our Continent?
If that my eyes deceive me not, I see
My Empire is comprised within my nail:
What a poor point I me Master of? a blot▪
Made by the swiftest tincture of the Ink?
But what did this point cost me? this small blot?
My innocence, my conscience, my soul;
I killed a Nephew, to obtain this blot.
O horrid purchase! all this toil, this guilt
For so despised a Nothing? let me see,
Here is no room to sit, to walk, to stand,
In all my land I cannot place my self,
Nor be at all, where I would be the Duke.
But the sad tapers doe deny their light,
And stranger fire supplies an horrid day
Of Lightning: help vs, heaven, make vs confess,
There is a Power in your Mercy too.
Is then a time, when all our time is spent
That thou of vs should fear a punishment?
O happy purchased privacy! to have
The free possession of an humble grave.
Wu't poison vs from that? why starest thou so?
We doe not shun a kinsman, but a foe:
Believe it Sforza, I am a near ghost,
Nor is our kindred by thy murder lost:
Raise thy cheered look, see Galeazzo here:
Traitor, and coward, does thy faint breast fear
The shadow, which is made? or is a soul
Vncloath'd of Earth, more abled to control
Him that unclothed it! Then I see to dye
Is more to right, then suffer injury.
Know I am still thy Prince, and if that man
In such a Miracle of villain can
At last be sound, in this thy manhood show
That thou dare hear thy doom of overthrow.
Villain be dumb: we are too tamely mild
That deadmen dare affront vs, assume flesh,
And we will make a second ghost of thee.
Thy threats are Ayre, like vs: but to go on
In curse; now that thy wisdom hopes upon
A joy in unmolested royalty,
Now shalt thou have only a certainty
Of high unhappiness, and be undone,
Losing thy rule no better then it was w••no.
Fetters shall bind thy legs, not Crowns thy head,
And as a cursed beast is prohibited
From common show; so thou, of beasts the worst,
Must die imprisoned, and, what's most accursed,
Obey, to death, all comforts tan away,
Robed o• the light, and the sweet heaven of day:
Then flatter not thy miseries, to know
Is not to hinder Fate, fall shalt thou low,
Sink to despair, despair to nought, and die,
Then lower fall, and then as low as I.
Sink into earth, and doe not reach thy hell,
Prophetic bubble: might thy threats prove true,
For we could wish the death that thou foretell'st,
That our f•irce shadow might pursue thee still,
To fright thy Ghost to nothing: O weak Heavens!
Was this a terror for a man? to send
A Bug-beare, framed out of the empty Ayre.
This does confirm, not fright vs: this might be
A terror to my picture, not to me.
IT must succeed: Fortune may show her spite,
Her power she cannot, in the hour I'm made
A Princes Lord, or murderer: I'ue placed
Close at the outward door, Sanseuerin,
That if success doe crown my hopes, his cares
May give me safety, with my happiness,
That I be not surprised: but if I fail
I have in joined him on the noise he hears,
Straight to go call the Duke, &amp; enter hither.
Madame, tic done: and now the guilty head
(Which whilst it stood, made all to fear their head,
Who durst affirm it did usurp a crown,)
Most humbly bends, and offers it to you.
Which I accept: but for no other end
Then to revenge his death, base wretch, on thee:
If that head be not planted there, 't shall off:
You shall enjoy your Masters death.
How's this?
Is this a loue-tricke, Lady? I had thought
After your thanks parted twixt heaven and me,
You would with greediness have given your self
To him that gave you your desires:
Fond thought!
Dost think Id love a man that kills a man?
Make him my Prince, who hath dispatcht his own
Was Treason ever Preface unto Love?
Had thou monopolised perfection,
And shared a thousand Cupids in each eye:
I would contemn the proudest of their shafts,
And give thee only what is due, Disdain.
You'll urge me to just vengeance? doe you hear
Madam ingratitude, quickly profess
That this harsh language was but a wise bait
To make him faster, who was sure before,
Or I profess Isle join your death with his
With thy loathed Sforza.
I believe thee now,
And trust me, so believe, that I could thank thee,
I love thy cruelty, though not thy person.
Hath death so little horror? well Isle doe
What shall enforce you to desire a death.
This poniards point shall nail thee to the •••t•
Struck through thy arms: where doe not hope up
A noble rauishet, my sue•tie slaves,
Slaves hated of their fellow Black a mores,
Shall on thy Honours ruin tyre then Lust,
And kill thee in thy loathfull suffering.
What dare you struggle?
A rape, a rape.
O my good Lord you come in such a time
As I could wish for, for this hour or more
This wicked woman hath been wooing me,
To murder your most sacred Majesty,
And for reward hath promised me herself,
Together with the Duchy: my good Lord,
In detestation of such treachery,
I gave her some harsh answers, with which moved,
She used a women's craft, and cried a Rape.
Is this truth, Isabella; see, shoe's dumb:
Have I then lived to have you seek my death?
A Cosin-Traitor? yet you shall not die,
Nor know another prison then my Court,
I love to see my Murderer: O heavens!
Why, should I fear to kill her? yet tic reason:
Who is no true Prince, can ne'er punish treason.
And I shall take you at your word, dear Sforza.
IT cannot be, good Iulian, no more:
I doe not love these ouer-earnest dreams.
The French invade vs? when their jolly King
With limber slaves does only mock a war,
Which like so many reeds against a stone
Punish their own attempt with their own r〈…〉▪
Breaking themselves, no• a•morse: when we 〈…〉
The Court is lost in Ma•kes, reality
Is so far fled since the last victory,
That we may think the Court it self a ma•ke▪
Aeternall Music, revels without end
Tire the too-much delighted soldier,
Whose arms have now forgot their ancient use,
His spirits only active in his heals,
And can thou think theyle dance to Italy?
I'ue heard so•e tell that a great City once
Was built by Music: would we might not •••d
Our Country to be ruined by a dance:
O fear the toying of an enemy.
What cannot be believed, cannot be feared.
You'll not believe, not you, till the French swords
Dive to the bottom of your doubting heart,
Till that th'vokinder news is brought so ne'er,
You cannot have the power to believe it:
Can you believe this is a drum that beats?
That this is the courageous General?
Can you believe, that he believes it is true?
But who assists vs in this dreadful time?
As many as we have deserved: not one:
Sforza has too much wisdom to have friends.
And we have too much—I said nothing, did I?
I did not speak against the State▪ I hope?
Nor said that we had too much patience?
Is Picinino then overcome at last,
Now I could change my sorrow for a smile.
I must confess an anger though not grief:
O how I love to fit me to mischance
And when that has no reason, then I'm •ad.
Why should our Millan blood stain the french swords
Unto a glory? Sforza does offend,
Deny's the heavenly powers, or names them then,
When he does dare them with bold perjury,
Loads his black soul with murder of a man
That could have made his execution, justice.
This Sforza does, but what is this to me?
Why shall this throat be cut for his? why thine?
Why shall our Countries ruin fill his penance?
The heavens doe know no mean but either wast
Their benefits on dull ingratitude
Or throw away their thunder, so it hit
So it not fail, they care not whom it strike,
Whether the guilty, or the innocent.
This is a grief of higher fault then mine,
You make a war with them you should appease,
And urge the heavens to our calamities.
First we were punished with, and now for Sforza,
Could any justice have more method in it.
Well Iulian, I me sorry for my grief,
And so persuade thee to that holy truth.
I now could rave against my self, not heaven,
But tic as fruitless, as to wish good luck:
Then let the French press upon victory,
Let them amaze the Ayre with stranger fire,
Raised by our Cities flaming Funerals.
Swell they the Poe with blood, act o'er, what ere
Has been the brag of royal murderers,
Yet our defence is here: Fortune may fail
But our true souls shall never, we may lose
An aged life, but not Aeternity:
And with this strength the field must needs be ours:
Who doe not fear, doe beat the Conquerors.
what noise is this that from a foreign foe
Recalls our anger? yet our purer hands
Know not the die of blood: we should be loath
To learn a valour on our subjects first.
The people now have raved to quietness:
But till that Landrian•, whom you used
About the last taxation, was become
Their rages sacrifice, I durst have sworn
The French were in the City.
This sad hour
(I'm sorry that you hear this truth from me)
Your Duchess is departed.
Whither villain?
To that free Crown, where she shall fear no
To Heaven.
O envious heaven! why doe you give
Men such hard precepts of mortality,
And take them hence before that they can learn?
Must not she live, because she lived too well?
Alas my wife!
Alas my sister, •!
Who dared that groan? good Cardinal, no more,
I know not what I could deny to thee:
Take to thee all for what the French so toil,
But kindly leave my grief unto my self.
Pardon, my Lord, ill Fortunes eloquence,
Unless you h••re you cannot cure your harms;
The French, now entered Lombardy, sat down
Before Valenza: where the mouth of Death,
The thundering Canon being scarcely brought,
But just presented to the yet sound wall,
Discovered there was somewhat more unsound:
For Rattagnino, the false Governor
Entreats a Parley, gives away the strength,
Swears the town French, and •eves the key to them,
With which they open Lombardy.
My fact;
None can be guilty of this crime, but I:
That after Treason durst again trust treason.
This very man, whose easy heart relents
At a French death, and wisely is afraid
His manners might be called in question,
If he should put them off to sue again,
To ask the second time, for what he held:
Out of his zeal to virtue, and good luck,
Did the like act for vs, and gave a strength
Which all our Duchy never could have forced.
What more revolting yet?
O my good Lord!
I fear this is beyond Addition.
O my blood fails me, but my tongue does more,
Fearing the story that it must relate.
Your Army being parted, and this half
Caiazzo leading, that Sanseuerin,
My troops did fall among the French men's scouts.
From whom we learned their numbers, and intent,
To march with speed for Millan: this sad news
We sent to Count Caiazzo, with advice,
That he would instantly reioyne with vs,
To stop their further entrance: hee pretends
That the Venetians hemming in his camp
Have made his danger greater: yet he moves,
Makes to the river, and when now our thoughts
Had left their wau'ring, and did seem assured
His actions would be better then his words,
I saw, O misery that ere I saw!
That crossing o'er the Po he did embrace
Those men which he in duty should have killed:
(O tic this kills me, not my want of blood)
I in just anger set upon the Rear,
And after many vain attempts, have brought
My carcass, to entreat for my revenge.
This is conspiracy: Caiazzo false?
Tell me that contradictions then are true,
Tell me the heavens no more doe travel now
Being grown inconstant to their motion:
Or that the Earth purse with too long ease
Would with a walk at length refresh her self:
Tell me that Princes may be fortunate,
Those that like me are credulous: or if
You'd speak of things more hard to be believed,
Tell me, there are, that birth of fear, called Gods,
And if they be, that they doe think of Man:
Tell me, O prithee tell me somewhat else,
Or I shall think thee false, and not Caiazzo,
But I doe know thee true, know thy wounds true,
And must conclude Caiazzo is most false.
To be overcome, my Lord, is wretched chance,
But not to fight at all will be thought crime,
I ne'er durst think so to survive ill luck
As to become the fatal messenger?
But I must say, I durst not fight, and more,
I must entreat your cowardice, your foes
Are strengthened with your Army (ô pardon me
Let me not tell you, how) and all our troops,
Have no power left vs but for a safe flight.
I did expect this: was not man at first
Placed on this curious Theater, to see
How he could act all parts: doe we not know
What we can fear is nothing? providence
Long since hath spent our fear; for a wise man,
When he does found his happiness, forecasts
Mischiefs, that Fate had never practised yet,
Which if they happen, if they prove too true,
They meet, not overtake him, and so find
A scorn, because a preparation.
I knew it might be thus, though I not feared,
And know it may be better, though not hope:
Yet let vs ne'er despair, nor by low thoughts
Excuse Fate for her present injury.
And when once more her favours we shall feel,
Then say, that Fortune has no standing wheel.
WE here present you with our keys great Lords,
Yet doe not think vs cowards, who doe part
So easily with that, which if we pleased
We might, in spite of force, as easily keep:
We know your right, justice does op these gates,
And not your swords, nor our disloyalty;
We leave a Traitor that hath first left vs,
And now are glad to entertain our Prince.
Is he fled then? O our unhappy sloth!
Why ran we not as well as we did fight?
Are Cowards swifter then their Conquerors.
Doe not dissuade me, Iulia, it is true
I may escape, but whither? all is lost,
In Naples we find France, as well as here.
O who'od endure the tyranny of hope,
That could so quickly gain a liberty?
If I but fall I'm free; ô Iulia,
The greatest distance twixt my bliss, and me,
Reaches no farther then to the next earth.
Can I behold in a perplexed flight
(Of which I know no comfort, and no end)
This my sweet infant crying for the food,
Which I'm uncertain where to beg for him?
No, Isle descend, and if the greedy French
Will have our blood with our Dominions,
Yet I shall joy to have a speedy end
And call a nimble enemy, a friend.
What answer from the Citadel? once more
Give them a summons, if they yield not then
Give an assault.
You shall not need my Lords,
What you could wish you have, most cheaply have,
The conquest of a woman, and a child.
I'm Isabella, (let not that sad name
Be ominous to conquerors,) and this
This pretty infant, is my luckless child,
Borne Prince of that, which you have made your prey.
Why doe you one consult another face,
As you would see, who could be cruel first?
Be not at all, or if at all, to me.
O doe not war with infants! can these hands
Deserve your fear or anger? these weak hands
That cannot reach themselves unto their teat?
Who have so much of young infirmity,
They cannot lift themselves to ask your mercy?
O let them have, because they cannot ask.
How many dismal accidents may chance
To take him hence, before he grow to man,
And so excuse, and yet fulfil your purpose?
O let disease be cruel, and not you.
Madame, you shall be honourably used,
You, and your fair son: take your liberty
To choose your own free course: for this young Lord,
He must to France with vs, where he shall learn
The good of royal education:
Where he shall know the happy difference
Between a petty, and a kingly Court.
Some waite upon the Princess.
O my stars!
What have I done? ay me? I have betrayed,
What Tyranny had left me, my sweet boy:
For whom I never knew a grief; till now
I brought him forth with pleasure, when I think
Upon this pain of parting: my dear child,
O too too like thy mother; if thou chance
To draw thy life unto that hated length,
That thou arrive to the discretion
To know, what by my folly, thou hast lost,
Call it no more, ô doe not call it crime,
No mother willingly would lose a son:
Whilst in some darker cell I will in tomb
Thy ruins cause, where whatsoever tear
Sorrow did once force, no devotion shall:
That my new name unto the heavens may reach
Whom misery the way to bliss did teach.
Never till now had we the victory,
And now no single one, this happy hour
Has gained a a conquest for Posterity.
They may be idle now, now the French youth
May grow up without wounds, and at their homes,
Steal to a private grave, no more being forced
To death, though by a glory; nay this Land
May thank vs, for our thrift of victory,
For lighting on this blessed occasion,
Which makes vs need no more to conquer them:
If heaven continue vs this kindness still,
We'll measure out our conquests by our will.
O What is man? and all that happiness
That puffs him to security? to day
One acts a Prince, and swelled with Majesty
Fills a proud throne, from whence the Multitude
Thinks he rules Fortune too, as well as them,
Whilst she in just esteem of her own name,
Makes him forgot, or odious, that none
Can be so miserably fooled, to wish
His well-apparell'd misery: thus we
That did enjoy beyond a Crown, a brain
Able to meet, or challenge the worst chance:
Yet in the space of a few days, a space
Of too short lasting to expel a man
(By the most subtle fetches of the Law)
Out of a false inheritance: we lost,
We were expelled out of a Monarchy;
But does Fate make a stand at this? O no,
She is not constant, no not in her curse,
But giving most again, which once was mine
She gives me too the capability
Of a new curse.
Of a new joy: for shame
Give thanks at least for your felicity:
Can you rapine being crammed, and so deserve
A bountiful unhappiness? I'ue known
Some that have long endured a tedious siege,
Or a more tedious sickness, who have been
Forced to a lasting Lent, when they have come
Or to their health, or to their liberty,
Not dare to take the nourishment they might,
Making themselves their sickness, and their foe:
Is not my Sforza one of these? you grieve
Because you have no longer cause to grieve.
O I doe fear your grief, that it does glance
With a most undeserved disgrace at me;
As if I were a-kinne unto the fault
Of my false brother: O repeat that thought,
It is no great thing I request you to,
But trust unto the faith that you have found.
Would I betray, and follow you? do ye think,
I'd be so mad to buy my banishment?
No man would be unprofitably false,
Nor I for any profit: speak your self
If I have left you, when your Fortune did?
Nay, then my love was greatest, when you least,
I was your subject, when you were no Prince.
Sanseuerin, thy fear is too too fond,
And like the people, the Authority,
Who make an impious confusion
Of an high birth, and of an higher crime:
Who in a saucy thwarting to their Prince,
Count him still worst, whom he has made the best,
As if we gave him, with his honours, crimes,
And made him vicious, when fortunate.
No, let them spend their breath in idle talk,
Count thee or treacherous, or cowardly?
Whilst to thy Sforza thou art still the same,
Most valiant, and with thy valour, wise,
That by thy abstinence a while from war,
Hast saved vs forces for a victory.
The Subjects life lies in the Princes voice:
Now you have cleared me I dare hasten war,
And wish more enemies, then cowards fear:
That you may see, by my neglect of blood,
(Which I shall only love when shed for you)
How slander was my most feared enemy.
No more, my dearest friend: we lose all time
Which we doe save from fight, still there does flock•
New forces to our Army, and the French
Are now as much amazed, as proud before:
We lately took the Swizzers into pay,
Those that dare sell their lives to any cause,
Whom Gold hath armed for me: if they proceed
In their first heat, we win: but if they fail
We cannot be more wretched then we were:
The vilest chance of luck can make vs know
But an Addition to an Overthrow.
NOw w' are alone I dare reueal• my self,
I am not what I seem, a Fugitive,
But one that from Triulcio doe bring
Letters that much concern you.
What? to me?
Letters unto his enemy? let's see:
Expect an answer in my Tent.—VVhat's here?
THou Man of Action, whom the Italians
Feel their Achilles, both to wound, and heal:
Triulcio salutes thee: what is past,
As past recall he will not mention,
But for the future this; you aid a man,
From whom you cannot any way expect
Reward, or Honour, such his poverty
Both in desert, and means? but against whom?
I will not urge they are your Countrymen,
Partakers of the same sweet soil with you,
Who only differ in their better choice:
Yet so far doe I prize your worth, to think,
You have not put off Nature, nor have changed
With your home ayre, your home-affections.
That you are still a Swizzer: think of this,
And that at other times it were shame to fly,
Now only flight shows Magnanimity.
What shall I doe? O I am lost in doubt,
Nor know, what to refuse, or what to grant.
Shall then the Swizzers to their valour add
A tainture of disloyalty? to whom?
Who can accuse vs for our treachery?
One that has patronised it by his act:
That hath betrayed his Nephew: shall a man
Be counted treacherous, that betrays vice?
It was a crime to aide him, can it •e
A crime to leave him too? O paradox!
Resolve me Goodness what tic best to doe:
And that does whisper a dislike: for what,
What goodness can there be in civil war?
When we shall kill them that were borne with vs,
When we shall make the Father dye his sword
In the sons blood, and strangely give a death
To him, to whom he kindly gave a life,
When the mixed blood of the same Family
Shall make a cruel incest: this we doe
If we are honest: Isle learn treason first,
And the most accurate sin. Triulcio,
Our Country calls vs, and not thou, to be
Dishonest then is the best honesty.
THis is the sum, I can but be like this.
After the prouder threatening of the French,
After the sure impression of Diseases
I can but be like this: then let me think
What loss I have when I am made like this:
This fears no French: a peace of ordinance
Can break, but not astonish this, no force
Can draw a tear, no not a sigh from hence:
And can it be a loss to be like this?
O Death! why art thou feared? why doe we think
Tic such a horrid terror▪ Not to Be?
Why, not to be, is, not to be a wretch,
Why, not to be, is, to be like the heavens,
Not to be subject to the power of Fate:
O there's no happiness but not to be.
But thou discloser of the stealth of Time,
Let me inquire how much is worn away
Of this sad hour: the half? O speedy time!
That make vs feel, ere we can think of Age,
Ere we can take an order for the Grave.
What? deep in meditation, noble friend?
So studious of your Watch? alas good man,
Thou need not this faint help to guess at Fate,
These silver hairs are watch enough for thee.
I only look how many minutes hence
M••an expires.
O swift Arithmetic,
To sum by minutes our sad Duchies age.
This Watch doth teach real Philosophy,
There is no tutor to this active brass:
What is a Kingdom, but a larger watch?
Wound up by Fate unto some scores of years,
And then it falls: good Iuliano list,
Hark how it beats, how strongly, and how fast,
Beyond the motion of a nimble pulse:
Who would not think this were a lasting noise?
And yet it ends: after some date of hours
The watch will be as silent as the head.
O tic our folly, folly, my dear friend,
Because we see th'actiuity of States,
To flatter them with false Eternity:
Why longer then the dweller lasts the house?
Why should the world be always, and not man?
Sure kingdoms are as mortal as their Kings,
And stay but longer for their period.
I fear our Climactericall is now:
When all professions turn to soldier,
To that eurst Art that thrives by Destiny.
The sides are straighted into swords, and th'Earth
Being not wounded is undone, where once
Stood buildings, which an humble Poetry
Without too bold a swelling might give Kings:
Whole Mines undone to beautify one roof,
Now only Desolation dwells: weak grief,
To say Corn grows, where once a City stood,
That sustenance is there where no men are,
This is a trifling, and halfe-misery:
Our Lands now only furnish vs with Graves,
Can hide vs, but not feed vs; we would think
Our Cities standing, though the buildings fell,
If we had no grief, but Fertility.
But on what strength does Sforza still subsist
Against so powerful foes?
The Emperor
Has sold him some few Almaines, but his hopes
Chiefly depend upon the valiant Swizze,
Who were the chief in his depression.
Has his gross brain not learnt the danger yet
Of bringing strangers into Italy?
He called the French to Naples, who have now
Found Millan too: O what's the difference
Betwixt a mercenary and a foe?
But that we kill one for his outrages,
And hire the other? Juliano, I
May feel misfortune, but will never buy.
THe French are mighty, and portentously
Rise by their fall: strong shame begets a rage,
And a disdain, that you whom they expelled
Should hazard their expulsion, makes them hazard,
What ere being ventured, adds a fame to Man,
And gives a glory to his misery.
They are so far from the base fear of death,
That they embraced, and like those fiercer cures,
That spend their anger on the senseless stone
Not daring to attempt on him that threw,
They with a senseless anger break the darts
That nail them to the Earth, as if they scorned
Their killer should survive them: other lets,
As heat, or hunger, are their exercise:
That one would think they'd lost all part of man
When they did mean to show the best: my Lord,
I wish a swift, but love a certain conquest:
I think it were wisdom to protract the fight.
I know thou speak what thou think best: but know,
Tic wisdom to delay on equal fame:
But when a foe has won opinion,
Which draws all eyes, and hearts to him, O then
A valiant desperation fits a man:
For victory is not impossible,
And honour necessary: my best friend,
Call forth our Swizzers, and if happy swords
Though few, may cut a way to glory, come:
The purchase is aboue the pains: but here
Come they that shall fill histories: brave friends
Now is the time we shall employ your swords,
And teach the world your valour.
You may fail:
It is better to be wise: Sforza, I'm come
To take my leave of you, nor shall much breath
Be spent in ceremonial complement,
I am the French Kings soldier.
Speak low,
Let not the ayre feel such a treason, know
There is a power aboue vs, and that power
Thunders sometimes, I know, thou dare not stand
In contestation with the power of heaven:
Revoke thy words.
Isle doe no miracles:
My voice and faith are past.
Yes they are past:
Thou art made up all of disloyalty,
Reason hath nothing of thee: yet relate
(If thou hast any relics left of sense,
Isle not conjure thee by strange Honesty)
Why dost thou leave the heavens, and vs, and so
For nothing dost commit a double Treason?
Isle satisfy you thus, you see I do it:
Strike up a march.
Yet stay: what is the price
That makes thee treacherous, Isle turn prodigal
To buy thee to a virtue: stay: be rich,
Without a curse, without a fault.
Tic vain,
I'm deaf to The•toricke: yet say you have met
With a good periurer, my word is past,
And to be twice a traitor, is a fault
No sorrow can atone for: yet thus far
Isle strain my self to please thee, tic well known,
Unless you get unto Ascanio,
Your hopes are at the last, but between you
And him, the French have interposed themselves,
Nothing remains but that you trust to me,
And in a Swizzers coat disguise your self,
That you may pass their Army.
O hard strait,
Must Sforza impotently hide himself?
Or can a Prince be hid? I have oft heard
Sparks of Divinity adorn his face,
To clear him from the multitude: why then,
The being a Prince will make vs be no Prince,
We being betrayed by our own Majesty.
Yet off ye envied robes, fall to the Earth,
O fall so low, that henceforth Man may scorn
The labour of descent to take you up:
On, on, ye happy robes, that like good clouds
Doe not obscure, but for a time defend
The threatened Sun, that he may after shine
With higher vigour: I have heard of some,
That wear their flesh with hairecloth for their crimes,
As thinking to be good if they were rough,
By such a wilde repentance: be it so
These robes offended, then there is an hope
These rags may expiate heaven
Brave soldiers,
How we rejoice we may embrace at last,
Not with armed hands, without the guilt and shame
Of civil murder▪ but are these the troupes
That now must learn to use their valour well?
To give a death without a prodigy?
A conquering cheerfulness adorns their face▪
These are not common soldiers: look you pale,
Then I must know the mystery.
I'm betrayed.
Yea I know all, but yet from thy forced tongue
Will I extract confession; fetch a rack,
To make him howl the truth, he will not speak.
I can dare torments for wise honesty,
But when you know as much as I can tell,
Should I conceale't, all policy would judge,
I did deserve the worst that I endured:
Who told you this was Sforza?
O my brain!
Must subtlety perish by subtlery?
And our high wisdom find a Conqueror?
Make an end Nature, the great work is done,
Sforza is ouer-reacht—weak, childish rage:
Is this to lessen, or make misery?
Can passion loose vs, or a courteous tear
Wash off our fetters? if it can, pour eyes,
Pour out wet comfort; if it can, refuse
The curse of slumber, but it cannot, then
Covet a slumber everlastingly,
And be like 〈…〉, imprisoned in your lid•.
Convey vs quickly hence, kind friends, you know
Sforza can never be a prisoner here.
Convey vs thither where we are no Prince.
And must we woo our Ruin? never man
Is a true wretch, but when he loses all,
And wants the sad Election of his fall▪
i'm lost in this confusion: one reports▪
We have lost all; another instantly
Kill• all the French at once: thus every street▪
Is filled with w••d•ing people; some cry▪ Arm,
Others run crying, to persuade a slight:
All have an earnest bus••esse in the stir,
But in the help not any.
These are they▪
That if a• happy messenger should come
With Sforza's victory, would pretend at least
To be overcome with joy: the gorgeous walls
Should shine with painted triumphs, and the French
Should be again vanquished in pageant.
But if his fortune yield to the French force,
What obloquy's will be enough for him?
Disgrace will then be wit, and any brain
Will venture on a Libel.
It is the use,
The popular folly to admire events,
And those low souls think that the sword is just,
Proportioning the reason by the end
Of the chief acts, of the best enterprise,
And so by folly run into a crime.
No matter for their wisdom, were they good:
O why are such termed Innocents? but friend,
What is our aim? a flight our age denies,
And whither should we fly, but to the grave?
O I have so much people in me too,
That I could wish thy company.
Good Heavens!
Am I escaped? may I stay safely here?
My fear has left such near impressions,
I scarce dare think that this is Liberty.
Noble Maluezzo, is there any hope?
As much as in despair: we are betrayed,
Sforza is made a prisoner, ell's lost,
And Millan, without blows, is once more French.
Now I remember what I dream't last night,
(If it be safe to call a vision, Dream,)
I saw our Sforza in so pale a shape,
That Envy never was described more wan,
Who frighted me with this relation.
STart not astonished mortal: let no fear
Chill thee to my pale image, but fix here:
Let thy once Prince be thy now spectacle,
Whilst I the direst Tragedy shall tell
That ever challenged wonder: briefly then,
I was betrayed, betrayed, and by those men
By whom I conquered:] tic an happy end
To perish for, but never by a friend.
This our first death: but then—O could cursed Time
Dare ever such a Minute, such a Crime?
Then was I pinioned, then these royal hands
Were forced obedient to the base commands
Of an insulting conqueror, and knit
Unto a hated union; •were fit
If ever Heaven shed tears, then to distill
Mornings El•xar, though th'expence should kill
The hopes of after Ages: but Heaven smiled
Nor any courteous cloud▪ were wisely piled
Over the Suns sharpe beam•, but they gazed on
With the same visage of compassion
As did my torturers, [by whom I'm brought
Unto a place the which some shallower thought
Has faintly termed a prison, but to tell
The truth of horror, t'was on Earth, an Hell:
Darkness so dwell there, that I might be won
To wish the cruel comfort of the Sun,
Which erst I raved at: it was a narrow cave,
Formed to the model of a lesser grave,
Or straitened Coffin, all was length, for they
Left not the height that I might kneel to pray.
Was ever such a bed? could ever yet
Cruelty boast of such a subtle wit
To bury so! some that have entered Earth
Alive, like me, yet by the usual mirth
Of justice had their burial with meat,
As if it should be their punishment to eat,
From which I me barred, I had no food, but me,
And yet a guest of famine; curtsy
At last ceiz'd heaven, I died, and so though late,
I both appeased and triumphed over Fate.
But where am I? what ecstasy was this?
How quickly we learn misery? no ghost
Would have so courteously relinquished Hell
To teach vs happiness: if a kind star
Had cast a Fortune on vs beyond wish,
We might expect the story from the star
As soon as the dear benefit: but when grief
That against which we would seal up our ears,
When that is meant vs, we shall surely hear,
Though heaven doe strain for a new Miracle,
So to amaze vs to a certainty:
Though rotten carcasses regain a voice,
And hell is bounteous of intelligence,
To give vs tears.
Why, then an end to tears,
Let's scorn the sorrow, which we owe to hell:
Now learn we the prodigious effects
Of wise Ambition: for it were easy justice
To ruin foolish usurpation,
Heaven needs not stickle in it: but when those men
Who are as accurate, as bad, who can
So shape their vice into a virtuous mould,
That we rapine at the accusers more,
Then at the guilty: when that these men fall,
Who then will call that wise, which he sees bad?
Such wisdom made, and ruined him: then ye
That dazzle with your Majesty, and sit
Too near to thunder, and not fear it, know
Sforza, and learn a wise contempt of wisdom,
Frailty attends your best, and strongest trick,
And there's no fool unto the Politic.
SOmewhat beyond an end? and can there b•
Tediousness counted an Apology?
It was prolixity of speech offended,
And can that error by more speech be mended?
Your patience stints the wonder: that is it
Hath dared vs to be public, and to fit
These times of tempest, with a blustering scene.
If ought doe please, if we have hit the mean,
That neither cloys the Auditor, nor starve•,
Felicity hath crowned vs, if ought swarues
From plausible invention, know it was it
Which we intend, which is in stead of wit.
Tears grace a Tragedy, and we are glad
To have the happy power to make you sad.
Continue it, and our applause is high,
Not from your Hand so much, as from your eye.

A Strange Play you are like to have, for know,
We use no Drum, nor Trumpet, nor Dumb show;
No Combat, Marriage, not so much to day,
As Song, Dance, Masque, to bombast out a Play;
Yet thèse all good, and still in frequent use
With our best Poets; nor is this excuse
Made by our Author, as if want of skill
Cause this defect; it's rather his self will:
Will you the reason know? There have so many
Been in that kind, that Hee desires not any
At this time in His Scene, no help, no strain,
Or flash that's borrowed from an others brain;
Nor speaks Hee this that Hee would have you fear it,
He only tries if once bare Lines will bear it;
Yet may it afford, so please you silent sit,
Some Mirth, some Matter, and perhaps some Wit.
OH friend, that I to mine own Notion
Had joined but your experience; I have the
Theoricke, But you the Practicke.
I perhaps, have seen what you
have only read of.
There's your happiness.
A Scholar in his study knows the stars,
Their motion and their influence, which are fixed,
And which are wandering, can decipher Seas,
And give each several Land his proper bounds;
But set him to the Compass, hoe's to secke,
When a plain Pilot can, direct his course
From hence unto both th'Indies; can bring back
His ship and charge, with profits quintuple.
I have read Jerusalem, and studied Rome,
Can tell in what degree each City stands,
Describe the distance of this place from that,
All this the Scale in every Map can teach,
Nay, for a need could punctually recite
The Monuments in either; but what I
Have by relation only, knowledge by travel
Which still makes up a complete Gentleman,
Proves eminent in you.
I must confess,
I have seen Jerusalem and Rome, have brought
Mark from th'one, from the other Testimony,
Know Spain, and France, and from their airs have snckt
A breath of every language: but no more
Of this discourse since wee draw near the place
Of them we go to visit.
Noble master Geraldine, worshipful master Dalauill.
I see thou still remember vs.
Remember you, I have had so many memorandomes from
the multiplicities of your bounties, that not to remember you were to
forget my self, you are both most ingeniously and nobly welcome.
And why ingeniously and nobly?
Because had I given your welcomes other attributes then I
have done, the one being a Soldier, and the other seeming a Scholar,
I should have lied in the first, and showed my self a kind of block∣head
in the last.
I see your wit is nimble as your tongue,
But how doth all at home?
Small doings at home sir, in regard that the age of my Master
corresponds not with the youth of my Mistress, and you know cold
January and lusty May seldom meet in conjunction.
I doe not think but this fellow in time may for his wit and
understanding make Almanacs?
Not so sir, you being more judicious then I, isle give you the
preeminence in that, because I see by proof you have such judgment
in times and seasons.
And why in times and seasons?
Because you have so seasonably made choice, to come so just at
dinner time; you are welcome Gentlemen, isle go tell my Master of
your coming.
A pleasant knave.
This fellow I perceive
Is well acquainted with his Masters mind,
Oh tic a good old man.
And she a Lady.
For Beauty and for Virtue unparalleled,
Nor can you name that thing to grace a woman
She has not in a full perfection,
Though in their years might seem disparity.
And therefore at the first, a match vnsit;
Imagine but his age and government,
Withal, her modesty, and chaste respect;
Betwixt them, there's so sweet a sympathy,
As crowns a noble marriage.
Tic acknowledged,
But to the worthy gentleman himself,
I am so bound in many courtesies,
That not the least, by all the expression
My Labour, or my Industry can show,
I will know how to cancel.
Oh you are modest.
Hee studies to engross me to himself,
And is so wedded to my company,
Hee makes me stranger to my Fathers house,
Although so near a neighbour.
This approves you,
To be most nobly propertied, that from one
So exquisite in Judgment, can Attract
So affectionate an eye.
Your Character,
I must bestow on his unmerited Jove,
As one that know I have it, and yet ignorant
Which way I should deserve it: Here both come.
Gentlemen, welcome, but what need I use
A word so common, unto such to whom
My house was never private; I expect
You should not look for such a needles phrase,
Especially you Master Geraldine,
Your Father is my neighbour, and I know you,
Even from the Cradle, then I loved your Infancy,
And since your riper growth bettered by travel;
My wife and you, in youth were play-fellowes,
And nor now be strangers; as I take it,
Not aboue two years different in your Age.
So much hee hath out stripped me.
I would have you
Think this your home, free as your Fathers house,
And to command it, as the Master on 't;
Call boldly here, and entertain your friends,
As in your own possessions, when I see it,
Isle say you love me truly, not till then;
Oh what a happiness your Father hath,
Far aboue me, one to inherit after him,
Where I (Heaven knows) am childless.
That defect
Heaven hath supplied in this your virtuous Wife,
Both fair, and full of all accomplishments.
My Father is a Widower, and herein
Your happiness transcends him.
Oh Master Geraldine,
Flattery in Men's an adjunct of their sex,
This Country breeds it, and for that, so far
You needed not to have travelled.
Trueth's a word,
That should in every language relish well,
Nor have I that exceeded.
Sir, my Husband
Hath took much pleasure in your strange discourse
About Jerusalem and the Holy Land;
How the new City differs from the old,
What ruins of the Temple yet remain,
And whether Zion, and those hills about,
With these Adjacent Towns and Villages,
Keep that proportioned distance as wee read;
And then in Rome, of that great Piramis
Reared in the Front, on four Lyons Mounted,
How many of those Idol Temples stand,
First dedicated to their Heathen gods,
Which ruined, which to better use repaired,
Of their Panthaeon, and their Capitol,
What Structures are demolish't, what remain.
And what more pleasure to an old mans ear,
That never drew, save his own Countries air,
Then hear such things related. I doe exceed him
In years, I must confess, Yet he much older
Then I in his experience.
Master Geraldine,
May I bee bold to ask you but one question.
The which I'd be resolved in.
Any thing, that lies within my knowledge.
Put him too't,
Doe Sister, you shall find him (make no doubt)
Most pregnant in his answer.
In your travels
Through France, through Sauoye, and through Italy,
Spain, and the Empire, Greece and Palestine,
Which breeds the choicest beauties.
Introath Lady•
I never cast on any in those parts
A curious eye of censure, since my Travel
Was only aimed at Language, and to know;
These past me but as common objects did,
Seen, but not much regarded.
Oh you strive
To express a most unheard of modesty,
And seldom found in any Traveller,
Especially of our Courtrey, thereby seeking
To make your self peculiar.
I should be loath
Profess in outward show to be one Man,
And prove my self another.
One thing more,
Were you to marry, You that know these climes,
Their states and their conditions, out of which
Of all these countries would you choose your wife.
Isle answer you in brief, (as I observe)
Each several clime for object, fare, or use,
Affords within it self, for all of these
What is most pleasing to the man there borne;
Spain, that yields scant of food, affords the Nation
A parsimonious stomach, where our appetites
Are not content but with the large excess
Of a full table; where the pleasingest fruits
Are found most frequent, there they best content;
Where plenty flows, it asks abundant Feasts;
For so hath prou•dent Nature dealt with all;
So in the choice of Women, the Greek wantons
Complied beneath the Turkish slavery,
Vassal themselves to all men, and such best
Please the voluptious, that delight in change;
The French is of one humour, Spain another,
The hot Italian hoe's a strain from both,
All pleased with their own nations even the Moore,
Hee thinks the blackest the most beautiful;
And Lady, since you so far tax my choice,
Isle thus resolve you; Being an English man,
Mong'st all these Nations I have seen or tried,
To please me best, here would I choose my bride.
And happy were that Lady, in my thoughts,
Whom you •••id deign that grace too.
How now Sister,
This is a fashion that's but late come up,
For maids to court their husbands.
I would wife
It were no worse, upon condition,
They had my helping hand and purse to boot,
With both in ample measure; oh this Gentleman,
I love, nay almost dote on.
Ya'ue my leave,
To give it full expression.
In these arms then,
Oh had my youth bin blessed with such a son,
To have made my estate to my name hereditary,
I should have gone contented to my grave,
As to my bed; to death, as to my sleep;
But Heaven hath will in all things, once more welcome,
And you sir, for your friends sake.
Would I had in me,
That which he hath, to have clam•d it for mine own,
How ever, I much thank you.
Now sir, the news with you.
Dancing news sir,
For the meat stands piping hot upon the dresser,
The kitchen's in a heat and the Cooke hath so bestirred himself,
That hoe's in a sweat. The Jack plays Music, and the Spits
Turn round too't.
This fellows my best clock,
Hee still strikes true to dinner.
And to supper too sir, I know not how the day goes with you,
but my stomach hath struck twelve, I can assure you that.
You take vs unprovided Gentlemen,
Yet something you shall find and wee would rather
Give you the entertain of household guests,
Then complement of strangers, I pray enter.
Isle stand too't, that in good hospitality, there can be nothing
found that's ill, he that's a good house-keeper, keeps a good table,
a good table, is never without good stools, good stools, seldom
without good guests, good guests, never without good cheer, good
cheer, cannot bee without good stomachs, good sfomackes, without
good digestion, good digestion, keeps men in good health, and there∣fore
all good people, that bear good minds, as you love goodness, be
sure to keep good meat and drink in your houses, and so you shall
be called good men, and nothing can come on it but good, I warrant
you.
Away you Corridon.
Shall I bee beat out of my Masters thou•e thus?
Thy Master, wee are Lords amongst our selves,
And here we Live and Reign, Two years already
Are past of our great Empire, and wee now
Write, Anno Tertio.
But the old man lives,
That shortly will depose you.
In the mean time,
I, as the mighty Lord and Seneshcall
Of this great house and castle, banish thee,
The very smell ath' kitchen, bee it death,
To appear before the dresser,
And why so?
Because thou stink'st of garlic, is that breath
Agreeing with our Palace, where each Room,
Smells with Musk, Ciuit, and rich Amber-greece,
Aloes, Cassia, Aromaticke-gummes,
Perfumes, and Pothers, one whose very garments
Scent of the fowlds and stables, oh fie, fie,
What a base nasty rogue tic.
Yet your fellow.
Then let vs put a Cart-Horse in rich trappings.
And bring him to the Tilt-yard.
Prank it, doe,
Waste, Riot, and Consume, Mispend your Hours
In drunken Surfeits, lose your days in sleep,
And burn the nights in Revels, Drink and Drab,
Keep Christmas all year long, and blot lean Lent
Out of the Calender; all that mass of wealth
Got by my Masters sweat and thristy care,
Havoc in prodigal uses; Make all fly,
Powr't down your oily throats, or send it smoking
Out at the tops of chimneys: At his departure,
Was it the old mans charge to have his windows
Glister all night with Stars? his modest House
Turned to a common Stews? his Beds to palates
Of Lusts and Prostitutions? his Buttrey hatch
Now made more common then a Taverns bar,
His Stools that welcomed none but civil guests,
Now only free for Panders, Whores and Bawds,
Strumpets, and such.
I suffer thee too long,
What is to me thy country, or to thee
The pleasure of our City? thou hast Cowes,
Cattle, and Beef to feed, Os and Boues,
These that I keep, and in this pasture graze,
Are dainty Demoiselles, bonny Girls;
If thou be borne to Hedge, Ditch, Thrash and Plough
And I to Revel, Banquet and Carrow•e;
Thou Peasant, to the Spade and Pickax, I
The Baton and Stiletto think it only
Thy ill, my good, our several lots are cast,
And both must be contented.
But when both our services are questioned.
Look thou to one,
My answer is provided.
Farewell Musk-Cat.
Adieu good Cheese and Oynons, stuff thy guts
With Speck and Barley-pudding for digestion,
Drink Whig and sour Milk, whilst I rince my Throat,
With Bordeaux and Ca•arie.
What was hee?
A Spy Sir,
One of their Hinds of the country, that came prying
To see what dainty fare our kitchen yields,
What Guests we harbour, and what rule we keep,
And threats to tell the old man when he comes;
I think I sent him packing.
It was well done.
A whoreson-Iack-an-apes, a base Baboon,
To insinuate in our secrets.
Let such keep, the Country where their charge is.
So I said Sir.
And visit vs when we command them thence,
Not search into our counsels.
It were not fit.
Who in my fathers absence should command,
Save I his only son?
It is but justice.
For am not I now Lord?
Dominus face totum.
And am not I your Steward?
Well remembered,
This night I have a purpose to bee Merry,
Jovial and Frolic, how doth our cash hold out?
The bag's still heavy.
Then my heart's still light.
I can assure you, yet tic pretty deep,
Tho scarce a mile to the bottom.
Let me have
to Supper, Let me see, a Duck—
Sweet Rogue.
A Capon—
Geld the Rascal.
Then a Turkey—
Now spit him for an Infidel.
Greene Plouer, Snit,
Partridge, Lark, Cock, and Pheasant.
Ne'er a Widgin?
Yes, wait thy self at Table.
Where I hope your self will not be absent.
Nor my friends.
Weal have them then in plenty.
Cauiare, Sturgeon, Anchoues, pickle Oysters: Yes,
And a Potato Pie; besides all these,
What thou think rare and costly.
Sir, I know
What's to be done; the stock that must be spent,
Is in my hands, and what I have to doe,
I will doe suddenly.
No Butchers meat,
Of that, beware in any case.
I still remember,
Your father was no Grassier, if he were,
This were a way to eat up all his Fields,
Hedges and all.
You will be gone sir.
Yes, and you are in the way going.
To what may young men best compare themselves?
Better to what, then to a house new built?
The Fabric strong, the Chambers well contrived,
Polished within, without, well beautified;
When all that gaze upon the Edifice,
Doe not alone commend the workman's craft,
But either make it their fair president
By which to build another, or at least,
Wish there to inhabit: Being set to sale,
In comes a slothful Tenant, with a Family
As lasy and debauched; Rough tempests rise,
Until the roof, which by their idleness,
Left vnrepaired, the stormy showers beat in,
Rot the maine Posts and Rafters, spoil the Rooms,
Deface the Feelings, and in little space,
Bring it to utter Ruin, yet the fault,
Not in the Architector that first reared it,
But him that should repair it: So it fares
With vs young men; Wee are those houses made,
Our Parents raise these Structures, the foundation
Laid in our Infancy; and as wee grow
In years, they strive to build vs by degrees,
Story on story higher; up at height,
They cover vs with Council, to defend vs
From storms without: they polish vs within,
With Learnings, Knowledge, Arts and Diseiplines;
All that is nought and vicious, they sweep from vs,
Like Dust and Cobwebs, and our Rooms concealed,
Hang with the costliest hangings; Bout the Walls,
Emblems and beauteous Symbols pictured round;
But when that lasy Tenant, Love, steps in,
And in his Train, brings Sloth and Negligence,
Lust, Disobedience, and profuse Excess;
The Thrist with which our fathers tiled our Roofs,
Submits to every storm and Winters blast,
And yielding place to every riotous sin,
Gives way without, to ruin what's within:
Such is the state I stand in.
And how doth this Tire become me?
Rather ask, how your sweet carriage,
And Court behaviour, doth best grace you, for Loucrs regard,
Not so much the outward habit, as that which the garment covers.
Oh heir's that Hail, Shower, Tempest, Storm, and Gust,
That shattered hath this building; Let in Lust,
Intemperance appetite to Vice; withal,
Neglect of every Goodness; Thus I see,
How I am sinking in mine own disease,
Yet can I not abide it.
And how this Gown? I prithee view me well,
And speak with thy best Judgment.
What doe you talk of Gowns, and Ornaments;
That have a Beauty, precious in it self,
And becomes any thing.
Let me not live, but she speaks nought but truth,
And isle for that reward her.
Ell's one to me, become they me, or not,
Or bee I fair, or foul, in others eyes,
So I appear so to my Lionel,
Hee is the glass, in whom I judge my face,
By whom in order, I will dress these curls,
And place these Jewels, only to please him,
Why dost smile.
To here a Woman, that thinks her self so wise, speak so
foolishly, that knows well, and does ill.
Teach me wherein I err.
Isle tell thee Daughter; In that thou know thy self to bee
beloved of so many, and settle thy affection, only upon one; Doth the
Mill grind only, when the Wind sits in one corner? Or Shippsonely
Sail, when it's in this, or that quarter? Is hee a cunning Fencer, that
lies but at one Guard? Or he a Skilful Musician, that plays but on
one String? Is there but one way to the Wood? And but one Bucket
that belongs to the Well? To affect one, and despise all other, becomes
the precise Matron, not the Prostitute; the loyal Wife, not the loose
Wanton: Such have I been, as you are now, and should learn, to
Sail with all Winds, defend all Blows, make Music with all
Strings, know all the ways, to the Wood, and like a good travelling
Hackney, learn to drink of all Waters.
May I miscarry in my Blandaes love;
If I that old damnation, doe not send
To Hell, before her time.
I would not have you Mother, teach me ought,
That tends to injure him.
Well look too't when it is late, and then repent at leisure,
as I have done; Thou see, hears nothing but Prodigality and Pride,
Wantoning, and Wasting, Rioting, and Revelling, Spoiling, and
Spending, Gluttony, and Gormondising, all goes to Havoc, and
can this hold out? When he hath nothing left, to help himself, how
can he Harbour thee? Look at length, to Drink from a dry Bottle,
and feed from an empty Knapsack, look too 't, twill come to that.
My parsimony shall begin in thee,
And instantly, for from this hour, I vow,
That thou no more shalt Drink upon my cost,
Nor taste the smallest Fragment from my Board;
Isle see thee starve in the street first.
Live to one man? a jest, thou may as well, tie thy self to one
Gown; and what Fool, but will change with the Fashion, Yes, doe,
Confine thy self to one Garment, and use no Variety, and see how
foone it will Rot, and turn to Rags.
Those Rags, be thy Reward; Oh my sweet Blanda,
Only for Thee, I wish my Father dead,
And near to Rouse vs from our Sweet delight;
But for this Hag, this Beldam, she whose back,
Hath made her Items, in my Mercers Books,
Whose raucnous Guts, I have Stuffed with Delicates,
Nay even to Surfeit; And whose frozen Blood,
I have Warmed with Aquauitae; Be this day
My last of Bounty, to a Wretch Ingrate,
But unto Thee, a new Indenture Scaled,
Of an affection fixed, and Permanent,
Isle love thee still, bee 't but to give the lye,
To this old Cancker'd Worm.
Nay, be not angry.
With thee, my Soul shall ever be at peace,
But with this love seducer, still at War.
Here me but speak.
Op but thy lips again, it makes a way,
To have thy Tongue plucked out.
What all in Tempest?
Yes, and the Storm, raised by that Witches Spells.
Oh it is a Damned Enchantress.
What's the business?
Only some few words, slipped her unawares,
For my Sake, make her peace.
You charge me deeply,
Come Friend, will you be Moved at women's Words,
A man of your known judgment?
Had you but heard,
The damned Erroneous Doctrine that she taught,
You would have judged her to the Stake.
But Sweet heart,
She now Recants those Errors, once more Number her
Amongst your Household servants.
Shall she beg, and be denied ought from you?
Come this Kiss, Shall end all former quarrels.
It is not possible,
Those Lips should move in vain, that two ways plead;
Both in their Speech, and Silence.
You have prevailed,
But upon this Condition, no way else,
Isle Sensure her, as she hath Sentenced thee;
But with some small Inuersion,
Speak, how's that?
Not too severe, I prithee see poor wretch,
She at the bar, stands quaking.
Now, hold up?
How man, how?
Her hand, I mean; And now ••'e 〈◊〉 thee,
According to thy Council given to her:
Sail by one Wind; Thou shalt, to one tune Sing,
Lie at one Guard, and Play but on one String,
Henceforth, I will Confine thee to one Garment,
And that shall be a cast one, Like thy self
Just, past all Wearing, as thou past all Use,
And not to be renewed, til't be as Ragged,
As thou art Rotten.
Nay sweet.
That for her Habbit.
A cold Suit, I have on 't,
To prevent Sursit,
They Diet, sha I bee to one Dish confined,
And that too Rifled, with as unclean hands,
As ere were laid on thee.
What hee scants me in Victuals, would he but allow once in Drink.
That shall be the refuse of the Flagons, Iaoks,
And Snuffs, such as the naftieft Breathes shall leave;
Of Wine, and Strong-water, never hope,
Henceforth to Smell.
Oh me, I 〈◊〉 already.
If I sinc•e in my State, of all the rest,
Be thou excused, what thou proposed to her,
Beldam, is now against thy self decreed,
Drink from dry springs, from empty, Knapsacks fe•de.
No burnt Wine, nor Hot-waters.
Take her hence.
Indeed you are too cruel.
Yes to her,
Only of purpose, to be kind to thee;
Are any of my Guests come?
Fear not Sir,
You will have a fill Table.
What, and Music?
Best Consort in the City, for fix parts.
Wee shall have Songs then?
Bith' ear.
And Wenches?
Yes bith' eyes.
Ha, what was that you said?
We shall have such to bear you company,
As will no doubt content you.
Enter then:
In Youth there is a Fate, that sways vs still.
To know what's Good, and yet pursue what's Ill.
And what's this Dalauill?
My apprehension,
Can give him no more true expression,
Then that he first appears, a Gentleman,
And well conditioned.
That for outward show;
But what in him have you observed else,
To make him better known?
I have nor Eyes,
To search into the inward Thoughrs of Men,
Nor ever was studied in that 'Art,
To judge of Mouse affection by the face;
But that which makes me best opinioned of him,
Is, That he's Companion, and the Friend
Beloved of him, whom you so much commend,
The Noble Master Geraldine,
Thou hast spoke,
That which not only crowns his true desert,
But now instates him, in my better thoughts,
Making his Worth, unquestioned.
Hee pretends
Love to my sister Pru. I have observed him,
Single her out, to private conference.
But I could rather, for her own sake, wish
Young Geraldine would fix his thoughts that way,
And she towards him; In such Affinity,
Trust me, I would not use a sparing hand.
But Love in these kinds, should not be compelled,
Forced, nor Persuaded; When it freely Springs,
And of it self, takes voluntary Root,
It Grows, it Spreads, it Ripens, and brings soorth,
Such an Vsurious Crop of timely Fruit,
As crowns a plenteous Autume.
Such a Harvest,
I should not be the vngladdest man to see,
Of all thy sisters friends: Now, whence come you?
Who, I Sir, From a Lodging of Lardgesse, a House of Hospita∣lity,
and a Palace of Plenty; Where there's Feeding like Horses, and
Drinking like Fishes; Where for Pints, w'are served in Pottles; and in
stead of Pottle-pots, in Pails; in stead of Siluer-tanckards, we drink
out of Water-tanckards; Claret runs as freely, as the Cocks; and
Canary, like the Conduits of a Coronation day; Where there's no∣thing
but Feeding and Frolicking; Carving in Kissing; Drinking, and
Dancing; Music and Matting; Fidsing and Feasting.
And where, I pray thee, are all these Revels kept?
They may be rather called Reakes then Revels; As I came a∣long
by the door, I was called up amongst them; Hee-Gallants, and
Shee-Gallants, I no sooner looked out; but saw them out with their
Knives, Slashing of Shoulders, Mangling of Legs, and Launching of
Loins, till there was scarce a whole Limb lest amongst them.
A fearful Massacre.
One was Hacking to cut off a Neck, this was Mangling a Breast,
his Knife slip from the Shoulder, and only cut of a Wing, one was
picking the Brains out of a Head, another was Knuckle deep in a
Belly, one was Groping for a Liver, another Searching for the Kid∣nays;
I saw one pluck the Sole from the Body (Goose that she was
to suffer't) another pricked into the Breast with his one Bill, Wood∣cock
to endure it.
How fell they out at first?
I know not that, but it seems, one had a Stomach, and ano∣there
had a Stomach; But there was such biting and tearing with
their teeth, that I am sure, I saw some of their poor Carcasses
pay for it.
Did they not send for Surgeons?
Alas no, Surgeons help was too late; There was no stitching
up of those Wounds, where Limb was plucked from Limb; Nor any
Salve for those Scars, which all the Plaster of Paris cannot Cure.
Where grew the quarrel first?
It seems it was first Broached in the Kitchen; Certain cry∣tures
being brought in thither, by some of the House; The Cooke be∣ing
a Colloricke fellow, did so Towse them and Toss them, so Pluck
them and Pull them, till hee left them as naked as my Nail, Pinioned
some of them like Felons; Cut the Spurs from others of their
Heals; Then down went his Spits, Some of them he ran in at the
Throat, and out at the Back-side; About went his Basting-Ladle,
where he did so besawce them, that many a shrode turn they had
amongst them.
But in all this, How did the Women scope?
They fared best, and did the least hurt that I saw; But for
quietness sake, were forced to swallow what is not yet digested, yet
every one had their share, and she that had least, I am sure by this
time, hath her belly full.
And where was all this havoc kept?
Marry Sir, at your next neighbours, Young Master Lionel,
Where there is nothing but Drinking out of Dry-Fats, and Healthing
in Halfe-Tubs, his Guests are fed by the Belly, and Beggars served at
his Gate in Baskets; Hoe's the Adamant of this Age, the Daffodil
of these days, the Prince of Prodigality, and the very Caesar of all
young Citizens.
Belike then, it was a Massacre of meat, not as I apprehended?
Your gravity hath gest aright; The chiefest that fell in this
Battle, were wild Foul and tame Foul; Pheasants were wounded in
stead of Alfaresse, and Capons for Captains, Anchoues stood for An∣tiants,
and Cauiare for Corporals, Dishes were assaulted in stead of
Ditches, and Rabbits were cut to pieces upon the rebellings, some lost
their Legs, whilst other of their wings were forced to fly; The Pioner
vndermind nothing but Pie-crust; And—
Enough, enough, your wit hath played too long upon our pa∣tience;
Wife, it grieves me much both for the young and old man, the one,
Graces his head with care, endures the parching heat and biting cold,
The terrors of the Lands, and fears at Sea in travel, only to gain
Some competent estate to leave his son;
Whiles all that Merchandise, through Gulfs, Crosse-Tides,
Pitats and Storms, he brings so far; The other
Here Shipwrecks in the Harbour.
Tic the care of Fathers; and the weakness
Incident to youth, that wants experience.
I was at the beginning of the Battle,
But here comes some, that it seems
Were at the rifling of the dead Carcasses;
For by their mirth, they have had part of the Spoil.
Youare pleasant, Oendemen, what 〈◊〉
Might be the Subject of your pleasant sport,
It promises some pleasure?
If their recreation
Bee, as I make no question, on truth grounded,
twill beger sudden laughter.
What's the Project?
Who shall relate it.
Master Geraldine, if there be any thing can please my Ear,
With pleasant sounds, your Tongue must be the Instrument,
On which the Sring must strike.
Be it his then.
Nay hear it, it is a good one.
Wee entreat you, Possess vs of the Novel,
Speak, good Sir.
I shall then, with a kind of Barbarism,
Shadow a Jest, that asks a smoother Tongue,
For in my poor discourse, I doeprotest,
twill but loose his luster.
You are Modest.
However speak, I pray; For my sake do it?
This is like a hasty Pudding, longer in eating then it was
in making.
Then thus it was, this Gentleman and I,
Past but just now, by your next Neighbours house,
Where as they say, dwells one Young Lionel.
Where I was to night at Supper.
An undressed Youth, his Father now at Sea.
Why that's they very Subject, upon which
It seems, this Jest is grounded, there this Night,
Was a great feast.
Why so I told you, Sir.
Bee thou still dumb, 'tis-hee that I would hear.
In the height of their Carousing, all their brains,
Warmed with the heat of Wine; Discourse was offered,
Of Ships, and Storms at Sea; when suddenly,
Out of his giddy wildness, one conceives
The Room wherein they quaffed, to be a Pinnace,
Mooning and Floating; and the confused Noise,
To be the murmuring Winds, Gusts, Mariners;
That their vnstedfast Footing, did proceed
From rocking of the Vessel: This conceived,
Each one begins to apprehend the danger,
And to look out for safety, fly saith one
Up to the Manne-top, and discourer; Hee
Climbs by the bed post, to the Tester, there
Reports a Turbulent Sea and Tempest towards;
And wills them if they'll save their Ship and lines,
To cast their Lading ouer-board; At this
All fall to Work, and Hoist into the Street,
As to the Sea, What next come to their hand,
Stools, Tables, Trestles, Trenchers, Bed-steds, Cups,
Pots, Plate, and Glasses; Here a fellow Whistles,
They take him for the Boatswain, one lies struggling
Upon the floor, as if he swam for life,
A third, takes the Base-violl for the Cock-boate,
Sits in the belly on it, labours and Rows;
His Oar, the Stick with which the Fiddler plaid;
A fourth, bestrides his Fellows, thinking to scope
As did Orion, on the Dolphins back,
Still fumbling on a gitterne.
Excellent Sport.
But what was the conclusion?
The rude multiude,
Watching without, and gaping for the spoil
Cast from the windows, went bith' ears about it;
The Constable is called to Atone the broil,
Which done, and hearing such a noise within,
Of eminent Ship-racke; enters the house, and finds them
In this confusion, They Adore his staff,
And think it Neptunes Trident, and that hee
Comes with his Tritons, (so they called his watch)
To calm the Tempest, and appease the Waives;
And at this point, wee left them.
Come what will, isle steal out of Doors,
And see the end of it, that 'scertaine.
Thanks Master Geraldine, for this discourse,
Introath it hath much pleased me, but the night
Begins to grow fast on vs, for your parts,
You are all young, and you may sit up late,
My eyes begin to summon m•e to sleep,
And nothing's more offensive unto Age,
Then to watch long and late.
Now good Rest with you.
What says fair Prudentilla? Maids and Widows,
And wee young Bachelors, such as indeed
Are fore'd to lie in Solitary beds,
And sleep without disturbance; wee methinks,
Should desire later hours; when Married Wines,
That in their amorous arms, hug their delights;
To often wakings subject; their more hast,
May better be excused.
How can you,
That are as you confess, a single man,
Enter so far into these Mystical secrets
Of Marriage, which as yet you never proved.
There's Lady, an instinct innate in man,
Which prompts vs to the apprehensions
Of th uses wee were borne to; Such we are
Aptest to learn; Ambitious most to know,
Of which our chief is Marriage.
What you Men
Most meditate, wee Women seldom dream of.
When dream Maids most?
When think you?
When you lie upon your Backs, come come, your Ear.
Wee now are left alone.
Why say wee be who should be jealous of vs?
This is not first of many hundred Nights,
That wee two have been private, from the first
Of our acquaintance, when our Tongues but clipped
Our Mothers-tongue, and could not speak it plain,
Wee knew each other; As in slatnre, so
Increased our sweet Society; Since your travel,
And my late Marriage, Through my Husbands lone,
Mid-night hath been as Mid-day, and my Bed-chamber,
As free to you, as your own Fathers house,
And you as welcome too 't.
I must confess,
It is in you, your Noble Curtsy,
In him, a more then common considence,
And in this Age, canscarce find president.
Most true, it is withal an Argument,
That both our virtues are so deep impressed
In his good thoughts, hee knows we cannot err.
A villain were hee, to deceive such trust,
Or (were there one) a much worse Character.
And she no less, whom either Beauty, Youth,
Time, Place, or opportunity could tempt,
To injure such a Husband.
You deserve, even for his sake, to be for ever young;
And hee for yours, to have his Youth revowed;
So mutual is your true coniugall Love; Yet had the Fates so pleased
I know your meaning,
It was once voiced, that wee two should have Matched,
The World so thought, and many Tongues so spake,
But Heaven hath now disposed vs otherwise;
And being as it is, (a thing in me,
Which I protest, was never wished, nor sought)
Now done, I not repent it.
In those times,
Of all the Treasures of my Hopes and Love,
You were the Exchequer, they were Stored in you;
And had not my unfortunate Travel crossed them,
They had bin here reserved still.
Troth they had,
I should have been your trusty Treasurer.
However let vs Love still, I entreat:
That, Neighbour-hood and breeding will allow;
So much the Laws Divine and Human both,
Twixt Brother and a Sister will approve;
Heaven then forbid, that they should limit vs
Wish well to one another.
If they should not,
Wee might proclaim, they were not Charitable,
Which were a deadly fin but to conceive.
Will you resolve me one thing?
As to one, that in my Bosom hath a second place,
next my dear Husband.
That's the thing I crave,
And only that, to have a place next him.
Presume on that already, but perhaps,
You mean to stretch it further.
Only thus far,
Your Husbands old, to whom my Soul doth wish,
A Nesters age, So much he merits from me;
Yet if (as proof and Nature daily teach)
Men cannot always live, especially
Such as are old and Crazed; Hee be called hence,
Fairly, in full maturity of time,
And we two be reserved to after life,
Will you confer your Widow-hood on me?
You ask the thing, I was about to beg;
Your tongue hath spake mine own thoughts.
Vow to that.
As I hope Mercy.
It is enough, that word
Alone, instates me happy; Now so please you,
Wee will divide, you to your private Chamber,
I to find out my friend.
Nay Master Geraldine, one Ceremony rests yet unperformed,
My Vow is past, your oath must next proceed,
And as you covet to be sure of me,
Of you I would be certain.
Make ye doubt?
No doubt; but Lone's still Jealous, and in that
To be excused; You then shall swear by Heaven,
And as in all your future Acts, you hope
To thrive and prosper; As the Day may yield
Comfort, or the Night rest, as you would keep
Entire, the Honour of your Fathers house,
And free your Name from Scandal and Reproach,
By all the Goodness that you hope to enjoy,
Or ill to shun—
You charge me deeply Lady.
Till that day come, you shall reserve your self
A single man; Converse nor company
With any Woman, Contract nor Combine,
With Maid, or Widow; which expected hour,
As I doe wish not haste, so when it happens,
It shall not come unwelcome; You here all, Vow this.
By all that you have said, I swear,
and by this Kiss Confirm.
You're now my Brother,
But then, my second Husband.
Wee had a stormy night on it.
The Wine still works,
And with the little rest they have took to night,
They are scarce come to themselves.
Now it is a Calm,
Thanks to those gentle Sea-gods, that have brought vs
To this safe Harbour; Can you tell their names?
He with the Painted-staffe, I heard you call Neptune.
The dreadful god of Seas,
Upon whose back near stuck March flees.
One with the Bill, keeps Neptunes Purposes,
So Ouid says in's Metamorphosis.
A third the learned Poets write on,
And as they say, His name is Triton.
These are the Marine gods, to whom my father
In his long voyage prays too; Cannot they
That brought vs to our Haven, bury him
In their Abisse? For if he safe arrive,
I with these Sailors, Sirens, and what not,
Am sure here to be shipwrecked.
Stand up stiff.
But that the ship so totters: I shall fall.
If thou fall, Isle fall with thee.
Now I sink,
And as I dive and drown, Thus by degrees,
Isle pluck thee to the bottom.
A maine for England, See, see,
The Spaniard now strikes Sail.
So must you all.
Whence is your ship, from the Bermoothes?
Worse, I think from Hell:
We are all Lost, Split, Shipwrecked, and undone,
This place is a mere quick-sands.
So we feared.
Wher's my young Master?
Here man, speak, the News?
The News is, I, and you—
What?
She, and all these—
I?
We, and all ours, are in one turbulent Sea
Of Fear, Despair, Disaster and mischance swallowed:
Your father, Sir—
Why, what of him?
He is, Oh I want breath.
Where?
Landed, and at hand.
Upon what coast? Who saw him?
I, these eyes.
Oh Heaven, what shall I doe then?
Ask ye me what shall become of you, that have not yet
Had time of study to dispose my self;
I say again, I was upon the Key,
I saw him land, and this way bend his course;
What drunkard's this, that can out sleep a storm
Which threatens all our ruins? Wake him.
Ho, Rioter, awake.
Yes, I am wake;
How dry hath this Salt-water made me; Boy,
Give me the other Glass.
Arise, I say,
My Fathers come from Sea.
If he be come, Bid him be gone again.
Can you trifle at such a time, when your Inventions.
Brains, Wits, Plots, Devices, Stratagems, and all
Should be at one in action? each of you
That love your safeties, lend your helping hands,
Women and all, to take this drunkard hence,
And to bestow him else where.
Lift for Heavens sake.
But what am I the nearer, were all these
Conveyed to sundry places and unseen;
The stain of our disorders still remain,
Of which, the house will wirnesse, and the old man
Must find when he enters; And for these
I am here left to answer: What is he gone?
But whither? But into the self same house
That harbours him; my Fathers, where we all
Attend from him surpriseall.
I will make
That Prison of your fears, your Sanctuary;
Go get you in together.
To this house?
Your Fathers, with your Sweet-heart, these and all;
Nay, no more words but do it,
That were to betray vs to his fury.
I have it here,
To Bail you hence at pleasure; and in the interim,
Isle make this supposed Goal, to you, as safe
From the injured old mans just incensed spleen,
As were you now together in the Low-Countreyes,
Viriginia, or in the Indies.
Present fear,
Bids vs to yield unto the faint belief
Of the least hoped safety.
Will you in?
By thee we will be counselled.
Shut them fast.
And thou and I to leave them?
No such thing, for you shall bear your Sweet-heart com∣pany,
And help to cheer the rest.
And so thou
Meanest to escape alone?
Rather without,
Isle stand a Champion for you all within;
Will you be swayed? One thing in any case
I must advise; The gates bolted and locked,
See that amongst you no living voice be heard;
No not so much as a Dog to howl,
Or Cat to mew, all silence, that I charge;
As if this were a mere forsaken house,
And none did there inhabit.
Nothing else?
And though the old man thunder at the gates
As if he meant to ruin what he had reared,
None on their lives to answer.
It is my charge;
Remains there nothing else?
Only the Key; for I must play the jailer for your durance,
To bee the Mercury in your release.
Me and my hope, I in this Key deliver
To thy safe trust.
When you are fast you are safe,
And with this turn it is done: What fools are these,
To trust their ruined fortunes to his hands
That hath betrayed his own; And make themselves
Prisoner to one deserves to lie for all,
As being cause of all; And yet something prompts me,
Isle stand it at all dangers; And to recompense
The many wrongs unto the young man done:
Now, if I can doubly delude the old,
My brain, about it then; Ell's hushed within,
The noise that shall be, I must make without;
And he that part for gain, and part for wit,
So far hath travelled, strive to fool at home:
Which to effect, Art must with Knavery join,
And smooth Dissembling meet with Impudence;
He doe my best, and howsoever it prove,
My praise or shame, it is but a servants love.
Discharge these honest Sailors that have brought
Our Chests a shore, and pray them have a care,
Those merchandise be safe we left aboard:
As Heaven hath blessed vs with a fortunate Voyage,
In which we bring home riches with our healths,
So let not vs prove niggards in our store;
See them paid well, and to their full content.
I shall Sir.
Then return: These special things,
And of most value, weal not trust aboard;
Me thinks they are not safe till they see home,
And there repose, where we will rest our selves,
And bid farewell to Travel; for I vow,
After this hour, no more to trust the Seas,
Nor throw me to such danger.
I could wish
You had took your leave of the Land too.
And now it much rejoices me, to think
What a most sudden welcome I shall bring,
both to my Friends and private Family.
Oh, but how much more welcome had he been,
That had brought certain tidings of thy death.
But soft, what's this? my own gates shut upon me,
And bar their Master entrance? Whose within there?
How, no man speak, are all asleep or dead,
That no soul stirs to open?
What mad man's that, who weary of his life,
Dares once lay hand on these accursed gates?
Whose that? my servant Reignald.
My old Master,
Most glad I am to see you; Are you well Sir?
Thou see I am.
But are you sure you are?
Feel you no change about you? Pray you stand off.
What strange and unexpected greetings this,
That thus a man may knock at his own gates,
Beat with his hands and feet, and call thus loud,
And no man give him entrance?
Said you Sir;
Did your hand touch that hammer?
Why, whose else?
But are you sure you touched it?
How else, I prithee, could I have made this noise?
You touched it then?
I tell thee yet I did.
Oh for the love I bear you,
Oh me most miserable, you, for you own sake,
Of all alive most wretched; Did you touch it?
Why, say I did?
You have then a sin committed,
No sacrifice can expiate to the Dead;
But yet I hope you did not.
It is past hope,
The deed is done, and I repent it not.
You and all yours will do it. In this one rashness,
You have undone vs all; Pray be not desperate,
But first thank Heaven that you have escaped thus well;
Come from the gate, yet further, further yet,
And tempt your fate no more; Command your servants
Give off and come no nearer, they are ignorant,
And doe not know the danger, therefore pity
That they should perish in 't; It is full seven months,
Since any of your house durst o•ce set foot
Over that threshold.
Prithee speak the cause?
First look about, beware that no man hear,
Command these to remove.
Be gone.  Now speak.
Oh Sir, This house is grown Prodigious,
Fatal, Disastrous unto you and yours.
What Fatal? what Disastrous?
Some Host that hath been owner of this house,
In it his Guest hath slain; And we suspect
It was he of whom you bought it.
How came this
Discovered to you first?
Isle tell you Sir,
But further from the gate: Your son one night
Suppt late abroad, I within; Oh that night,
I never shall forget; Being safe got home,
I saw him in his chamber laid to rest;
And after went to mine, and being drowsy,
Forgot by chance, to put the Candle out;
Being dead asleep; Your son affrighted, calls
So loud, that I soon wakened; Brought in light,
And found him almost drowned in fearful sweat;
Amazed to see it, I did demand the cause:
Who told me, that this murdered Ghost appeared,
His body gashed, and all ore-stucke with wounds;
And spake to him as follows.
Oh proceed, it is that I long to hear.
I am, quoth he,
A Transmarine by birth, who came well stored
With Gold and Jewels, to this fatal house;
Where seeking safety, I encountered death:
The covetous Merchant, Land-lord of this rent,
To whom I gave my life and wealth in charge;
Freely to enjoy the one, robed me of both:
Here was my body buried, here my Ghost
Must ever walk, till that have Christian right;
Till when, my habitation must be here:
Then fly young man, Remove thy family,
And secke some safer dwelling: For my death,
This mansion is accursed; It is my possession,
Bought at the dear rate of my life and blood,
None enter here, that aims at his own good.
And with this charge he vanished.
Oh my fear,
Whither wilt thou transport me?
I Entreat keep further from the gate, and fly.
Fly whither? Why doest not thou fly too?
What need I fear, the Ghost and I am friends.
But Reignald.
Tush, I nothing have deserved,
Nor ought transgressed: I came not near the gate.
To whom was that thou spoke?
Was it you Sir named me?
Now as I live, I thought the dead man called,
To enquire for him that thundered at the gate
Which he so dearly paid for: Are you mad,
To stand a fore-seene danger?
What shall I doe?
Cover you head and fly; Lest looking back,
You spy your own confusion.
Why doest not thou fly too?
I tell you Sir,
The Ghost and I am friends.
Why did thou quake then?
In fear lest some mischance may fall on you,
That have the dead offended, For my part,
The Ghost and I am friends: Why fly you not,
Since here you are not safe?
Some blessed powers guard me.
Nay Sir, isle not forsake you: I have got the start;
But ete the goal, twill ask both Brain and Art.
We are bound to you, kind Master Geraldine,
For this great entertainment; Troth your cost
Hath much exceeded common neighbour-hood:
You have feasted vs like Princes.
This, and more
Many degrees, can never countervail
The oft and frequent welcomes given my son:
You have took him from me quite, and have I think,
Adopted him into your family,
He stays with me so seldom.
And in this,
By trusting him to me, of whom your self
May have both use and pleasure, you're as kind
As moneyed men, that might make benefit
Of what they are possessed, yet to their friends
In need, will lend it gratis.
And like such,
As are indebted more then they can pay;
Wee more and more confess our selves engaged
To you, for your forbearance.
Yet you see,
Like Debtors, such as would not break their day;
The Treasure late received, wee tender back,
The which, the longer you can spare, you still
The more shall bind vs to you.
Most kind Ladies,
Worthy you are to borrow, that return
The Principal, with such large use of thanks.
What strange felicity these Rich men take,
To talk of borrowing, lending, and of use;
The usurers language right.
You've Master Geraldine,
Fair walks and gardens, I have praised them,
Both to my Wife and Sister.
You would see them,
There's no pleasure that the House can yield,
That can be debarred from you; prithee Son,
Be thou the Usher to those Mounts and Prospects
May one day call thee Master.
Sir I shall; Please you to walk.
What Master Dalauill,
Will you not bear vs company.
It is not fit
That wee should leave our Noble host alone,
Be you my Friends charge, and this old man mine.
Well, be it then at your pleasure.
You to your Prospects, b•t there's project here
That's of another Nature; Worthy Sir,
I cannot but approve your happiness,
To be the Father of so brave a Son,
So every way accomplished and made up,
In which my voice is least; For I alas,
Bear but a mean part in the common queer,
When with much louder accents of his praise,
So all the world reports him.
Thank my Stars,
They have lent me one, who as he always was,
And is my present joy; If their aspect
Be no ways to our goods Malevolent,
May be my Future comfort.
Yet must I hold him happy aboue others,
As one that Sole to himself enjoys
What many others aim at; But in vain.
How mean you that?
So Beautiful a Mistress.
A Mistress, said you?
Yes Sir, or a Friend,
Whether you please to stile her.
Mistress? Friend?
Pray be more open languag'd.
And indeed,
Who can blame him to absent himself from home,
And make his Fathers house but as a grange,
For a Beauty so Attractive? Or blame her,
Hugging so weak an old Man in her arms,
To make a new choice, of an equal youth,
Being in him so Perfect? yet introath,
I think they both are honest.
You have Sir,
Possessed me with such strange sancies.
For my part,
How can I love the person of your Son,
And not his reputation? His repair
So often to the House, is voiced by all,
And frequent in the mouths of the whole Country,
Some equally addicted, praise his happiness;
But others, more Censorious and Austere,
Blame and reprove a course so dissolute;
Each one in general, pity the good man,
As one unfriendly dealt with, yet in my conscience,
I think them truly Honest.
It is suspicious.
True Sir, at best; But what when scandalons tongues
Will make the worst? and what good in it self,
Sully and stain by fabulous mis-report;
For let men live as chary as they can,
Their lives are often questioned, Then no wonder,
If such as give occasion of suspicion,
Be subject to this scandal: What I speak,
Is as a Noble Friend unto your Son;
And therefore, as I glory in his Fame,
I suffer in his wrong; for as I live,
I think, they both are honest.
Howsoever, I wish them so.
Some course might be deuis'd,
To stop this clamour ere it grow too wrancke;
Lest that which yet but inconvenience seems,
May turn to greater mischief; This I speak
In Zeal to both, in sovereign care of him
As of a Friend; And tender of her Honour,
As one to whom I hope to be allied,
By Marriage with her Sister.
I much thank you,
For you have clearly given me light of that,
Till now I never dreamt on.
It is my Love,
And therefore I entreat you, make not me
To be the first reporter.
You have done
The office of a Noble Gentleman,
And shall not be so injured.
See Master Geraldine,
How bold wee are, especially these Ladies
Play little better then the thieves with you,
For they have robbed your Garden.
You might Sir,
Better have termed it sauciness, then theft;
You see we blush not, what we took in private,
To wear in public view.
Besides, these cannot
Be mist out of so many; In full fields,
The gleanings are allowed.
These and the rest,
Are Ladies, at your service.
Now to horse,
But one thing ere wee part, I must entreat;
In which my Wife will be joint suitor with me,
My Sister too.
In what I pray.
That hee
Which brought vs hither, may but bring vs home;
Your much respected Son.
How men are borne,
To woe their own disasters?
But to see vs
From whence he brought vs Sir, that's all.
This second motion makes it Palpable:
To note a Women's cunning; Make her husband
Bawd to her own lascivious appetite,
And to Solicit his own shame.
Nay Sir,
When all of vs join in so small a suit,
It were some injury to be denied.
And work her Sister too; What will not woman
To accomplish her own ends: But this disease,
Isle seek to Physic ere it grow too far:
I am most sorry to be urged sweet Friends,
In what at this time I can no ways grant;
Most, that these Ladies should be ought denied,
To whom I owe all Service, but occasions
Of weighty and important conscequence,
Such as concern the best of my Estate,
Call him aside; excuse vs both this once,
Presume this business is no sooner over,
But hoe's at his own freedom.
It were no manners
In vs to urge it further, wee will leave you,
With promise Sir, that he shall in my will,
Not be the last remembered.
Wee are bound to you;
See them to Horse, and instantly return,
Wee have Employments for you.
Sir I shall,
Remember your last promise,
Not to do it, I should forget my self:
If I find him false
To such a friend, be sure he forfeits me;
In which to be more punctually resolved,
I have a project how to fifth his foul,
How it is inclined; whether to yonder place,
The clear bright Palace, or black Dungeon: See,
They are onward on the way, and hee returned.
I now attend your pleasure.
You are grown perfect man, and now you float
Like to a well built Vessel; 'Tweene two Currents,
Virtue and Vice; Take this, you steer to harbour;
Take that, to eminent shipwreck.
Pray your meaning.
What fathers cares are, you shall never know,
Till you your self have children; Now my study,
Is how to make you such, that you in them
May have a feeling of my love to you.
Pray Sir expound your self, for I protest
Of all the Languages I yet have learth'd,
This is to me most foreign.
Then I shall;
I have lived to see you in your prime of youth
And height of Fortune, so you will but take
Occasion by the forehead; to be brief,
And cut off all superfluous circumstance,
All the ambition that I aim at now,
Is but to see you married.
Married Sir.
And to that purpose, I have found out one,
Whose Youth and Beauty may not only please
A curious eye; But her immediate means,
Able to strengthen a state competent,
Or raise a ruined Fortune.
Of all which,
I have believe me, neither need nor use;
My competence best pleasing as it is;
And this my singularity of life,
Most to my mind contenting.
I suspect, but yet must prove him further;
Say to my care I add a Fathers charge,
And couple with my counsel my command:
To that how can you answer?
That I hope:
My duty and obedience still vnblam'd,
Did never merit such austerity;
And from a father never yet displeased.
Nay, then to come more near unto the point,
Either you must resolve for present marriage,
Or forfeit all your interest in my love.
Vn-say that language, I entreat you Sir,
And doe not so oppress me; Or if needs
Your heavy imposition stand in force,
Resolve me by your counsel; With more safety
May I infringe a sacred vow to heaven,
Or to oppose me to your strict command?
Since one of these I must.
Now Dalauill,
I find thy words too true.
For marry, Sir, I neither may, nor can.
Yet whore you may;
And that's no brech of any vow to Heaven:
Pollute the Nuptial bed with Michall sin;
Asperse the honour of a noble friend;
Forfeit thy reputation, here below.
And the interest that thy Soul might claim aboue,
In you blessed City: These you may, and can,
With untouched conscience: Oh, that I should live
to see the hopes that I have stored so long;
Thus in a moment ruined: And the staff,
On which my old decrepit age should lean;
Before my face thus broken: On which trusting,
I thus abortiuely, before my time,
Fall headlong to my Grave.
It yet stands strong;
Both to support you unto future life,
And fairer comfort.
Never, never son:
For till thou can acquit thy self of scandal,
And me of my suspicion; Here, even here,
Where I have measured out my length of earth;
I shall expire my last.
Both these I can:
Then rise Sir, I entreat you; And that innocence,
Which poisoned by the breath of Calumny, cast you thus low,
Shall, these few staines wiped off, with better thoughts erect you.
Well, Say on.
There's but one fire from which this smoke may grow;
Namely, the unmatched yoke of youth; And
In which, If ever I occasion was,
Of the sma•lest breach; The greatest implacable mischief
Adultery can threaten, fall on me;
Of you may I be disavowed a son;
And unto Heaven a servant: For that Lady,
As she is Beauties mirror, so I hold her
For Chastities examples: From her tongue,
Never came language, that arrived my ear,
That even censurious Cato, lived he now,
Could mis-interpret; Never from her lips,
Came unchaste kiss; Or from her constant eye,
Look savouring of the least immodesty: Further—
Enough; One only thing remains, which on thy part per∣formed,
Assures firm credit to these thy protestations.
Name it then.
Take hence the occasion of this common fame;
Which hath already spread it self so far,
To her dishonour and thy prejudice, From this day forward,
To forbear the house: This doe upon my blessing.
As I hope it, I will not fail your charge.
I am satisfied.
To which hand shall I turn me; Here's my Master
Hath bin to enquire of him that sold the house,
Touching the murder; Here's an Vsuring-Rascall,
Of whom we have borrowed money to supply
Our prodigal expenses; Broke our day,
And owe him still the Principal and Use:
Were I to meet them single, I have brain
To oppose both, and to come off vnscarr'd;
But if they doe assault me, and at once.
Not Hercules himself could stand that odds:
Therefore I must encounter them by turns;
And to my Master first: Oh Sir, well met.
What Reignald; I but now met with the man,
Of whom I bought you house.
What, did you Sir?
But did you speak of ought concerning that
Which I last told you?
Yes, I told him all.
Then am I cast: But I pray tell me Sir,
Did he confess the murder?
No such thing; Most stiffly he denies it.
Impudent wretch; Then serve him with a warrant, let the Of∣ficer
Bring him before a Justice, you shall hear
What I can say against him; Sfoot done it:
But I pray Sir excuse me, yonder's one
With whom I have some business; Stay you here,
And but determine what's best course to take,
And note how I will follow't.
Be brief then.
Now, If I can as well put off my Vse-man,
This day, I shall be master of the field.
That should be Lionells man.
The •am, I know him.
After so many fri•olous delays,
There's now some hope. He that was wont to shun vs,
And to absent himself, accoasts vs freely;
And with a pleasant countenance: Well met Reignald,
What's this money ready?
Never could you
Have come in better time.
Whore's your master, young Lionel, it something troubles me,
That hee should break his day.
A word in private,
Tush, Private me no priuates, in a word,
Speak, are my moneys ready?
Not so loud.
I will be louder yet; Give me my moneys,
Come, tender me my moneys.
We know you have a throat, wide as your cons•ience;
You need not use it now—Come, get you home.
Home?
Yes, home I say, return by three a Clock,
And I will see all cancelled.
It is no• past two, and I can stay till three,
Isle make that now my business, otherwise,
With these loud clamours, I will haunt thee still;
Give me my Use, give me my Principal.
This bur will still cleave to me; what, no means
To shake him off; I near was caught till now.
Come come, you're trouble 〈◊〉.
Prevent that trouble,
And without trifling, pay me down my cash;
I will be fooled no longer.
So so so.
I have been still put off, from time to time,
And day to day; these are but cheating tricks,
And this is the last minute isle forbear
Thee, or thy Master: Once again, I say,
Give me my Use, give me my Principal.
Pox a this use, that hath and one so many:
And now will confound me.
Hast thou heard this?
Yes Sir, and to my grief.
Come hither Reignald.
Here Sir; Nay, now I am gone.
What use is this?
What Principal hee talks of? in which language
Hee names my Son; And thus vpbraideth thee,
What is it you owe this man?
A trifle Sir,
Pray stop his mouth; And pay't him.
I pay, what?
If I say pay't him; Pay't him.
What's the Sum?
A toy, the maine about five hundred pounds;
And the use fifty.
Call you that a toy?
To what use was it borrowed? At my departure,
I left my Son sufficient in his charge,
With surplus, to de•••y a la•ge expense,
Without this need of borrowing.
It is confessed,
Yet stop his clamorous mouth; And only say,
That you will pay't to morrow.
I pass my word.
Sir, if I bid you do it; Nay, no more words,
But say you'll pay't tomorrow.
Jest indeed, but tell me how these moneys were bestowed?
Safe Sir, I warrant you.
The Sum still safe,
Why doe you not then tender it your selves?
Your ear sir; This sum joined to the rest,
Your Son hath purchased Land and Houses.
Land, dost thou say?
A goodly House, and Gardens.
Now joy on him,
That whilst his Father Merchandised abroad,
Had care to add to his estate at home:
But Reignald, wherefore Houses?
Now Lord Sir,
How dull you are; This house possessed with spirits,
And there no longer stay; Would you have had
Him, vs, and all your other family,
To live, and lie in the streets; It had not Sir,
Been for your reputation.
Blessing on him,
That he is grown so thiftie.
It is struck three,
My money's not yet tendered.
Pox upon him,
See him discharged, I pray Sir.
Call upon me
To morrow Friend, as early as thou wilt;
Isle see thy debt defraid.
It is enough, I have a true mans word.
Now tell me Reignald,
For thou hast made me proud of my Sons thrift;
Where, in what Country, doth this fair House stand.
Never in all my time, so much to seek;
I know not what to answer.
Wherefore studdiest thou?
Use men to purchase Lands at a dear rate,
And know not where they lie?
It is not for that,
I only had forgot his name that sold them,
It was let me see, see.
Call thy self to mind.
Non-plust or never now; Where art thou brain?
O Sir, where was my memory; It is this house
That next adioynes to yours,
My Neighbour Ricots.
The same, the same Sir; Wee had pennyworths in it;
And I can tell you, have been offered well
Since, to forsake our bargain.
As I live,
I much commend your choice.
Nay, it is well seated,
Rough-cast without, but bravely lined within;
You have met with few such bargains.
Prithee knock,
And call the Master, or the servant on it;
To let me take free view on it.
Puzzle again on Puzzle; One word Sir,
The House is full of Women, no man knows,
How on the instant, they may be employed;
The Rooms may lie unhandsome; and Maids stand
Much on their cleanliness and housewifery;
To take them unprovided, were disgrace,
It were fit they had some warning; Now, doe you
Fetch but a warrant, from the Justice Sir;
You understand me.
Yes, I doe.
To attach him of suspected murder; Isle see it screwed;
Did he deny it? And in the interim, I
Will give them notice, you are now arrived,
And long to see your purchase.
Councilled well; And meet some half hour hence.
This plunge well past,
All things fall even, to Crown my Brain at last.
Where shall we dine to day?
At the Ordinary.
I see Sir, you are but a stranger here;
This Barnet, is a place of great resort;
And commonly upon the Market days,
Here all the Country Gentlemen Appoint,
A friendly meeting; Some about affairs
Of Consequence and Profit; Bargain, Sale,
And to confer with Chap-men, some for pleasure,
To match their Horses; Wager in their Dogs,
Or try their Hawks; Some to no other end,
But only meet good Company, discourse,
Dine, drink, and spend their Money.
That's the Market, Wee have to make this day.
It is a Commodity, that will be easily vented:
What my worthy Friend,
You are happily encountered; Oh, you're grown strange,
To one that much respects you; Troth the House
Hath all this time seemed naked without you;
The good Old Man doth never sit to meat,
But next his giving Thanks, hee speaks of you;
There's scarce a bit, that he at Table tastes,
That can digest without a Geraldine,
You are in his mouth so frequent: Hee and She
Both wondering, what distaste from one, or either,
So suddenly, should alienate a Guest,
To them, so dearly welcome.
Master Dalauill,
Thus much let me for him Apoligie;
Divers designs have thronged upon vs late,
My weakness was not able to support
Without his help; He hath bin much abroad,
At London, or else where; Besides it is Term;
And Lawyers must be followed, seldom at home,
And scarcely then at leisure.
I am satisfied,
And I would they were so too, but I hope Sir,
In this restraint, you have not used my name•
Not, as I live.
You're Noble—Who had thought
To have met with such good Company; You're it seem
But new alighted; Father and Son, ere part,
I vow weal drink a cup of Sack together:
Physicians say, It doth prepare the appetite
And stomach against dinner.
Wee old men,
Are apt to take these courtesies.
What say you Friend?
lie but enquire for one, at the next Inn,
And instantly return.
It is enough.
Bess: How dost thou Gentle?
Faith we may doe how we list for you, you are grown so
Great a stranger: We are more beholding
To Master Dalauill, Hoe's a constant Guest:
And howsoe•e to some, that shall bee nameless,
His presence may be graceful; Yet to others—
I could say somewhat.
Hoe's a noble fellow,
And my choice friend.
Come come, he is, what he is; and that the end will prove.
And how's all at home?
Nay, weal not part without a glass of wine,
And meet so seldom: Boy,
Drawer Anon, anon Sir.
A Pint of Claret, quickly.
Nay, sit down: The news, the news, I pray thee;
I am sure, I have been much enquired of
Thy old Master, and thy young Mistress too.
Ever your name is in my Masters mouth, and sometimes too
In hers, when she hath nothing else to think of:
Well well, I could say somewhat.
Heerc's your wine Sir.
Fill Boy: Here Bess, this glass to both their healths;
Why dost weep my wench?
Nay, nothing Sir.
Come, I must know.
Introath I love you Sir,
And ever wished you well; You are a Gentleman,
Whom always I respected; Know the passages
And private whisperings, of the secret love
Betwixt you and my Mistress; I dare swear,
On your part well intended: But—
But what?
You bear the name of Land-lord, but another
Enjoys the rent; You dote upon the shadow,
But another he bears away the substance.
Bee more plain.
You hope to enjoy a virtuous widowhood;
But Dalauill, whom you esteem you friend,
Hee keeps the wife in common.
Y' are too blame,
And Bess, you make me angry; Hoe's my friend,
And she my second self; In all their meetings,
I never saw so much as cast of eye
Once entertained betwixt them.
That's their cunning.
For her; I have been with her at all hours,
Both late and early; In her bed-chamber.
And often singly ushered her abroad:
Now, would she have bin any mans alive,
She had bin mine; You wrong a worthy Friend,
And a chaste Mistress, you're not a good Girl;
Drink that speak better of her, I could chide you,
But I'll forbear; What you have rashly spoke,
Shall ever here be buried.
I am sorry my freeness should offend you,
But yet know, I am her Chamber-maid.
Play now the Market-maid.
And prithee bout thy business.
Well, I shall—that man should be so fooled.
She a Prostitute?
Nay, and to him my troth plight, and my Friend;
As possible it is, that Heaven and Earth
Should be in love together, meet and kiss,
And so cut off all distance: What strange frenzy
Came in this wenches brain, so to surmise?
Were she so base? his nobleness is such,
He would not entertain it for my sake:
Or he so bent? His hot and lust burnt appetite
Would be soon quenched, at the mere contemplation
Of her most Pious and Religious life.
The Girl was much too blame; Perhaps her Mistress
Hath stirred her anger, by some word or blow,
Which she would thus revenge; Not apprehending
At what a high price Honour's to be rated;
Or else some one that envies her rare virtue,
Might hire her thus to brand it; Or, who knows
But the young wench may fix a thought on me;
And to divert me from her Mistress love,
May raise this false aspersion? howsoever,
My thoughts on these two columns fixed are,
She's good as fresh, and purely chaste as fair.
Oh Sir, you are the Needle, and if the whole County of Mid∣dlesex
had bin turned to a mere Bottle of Hay, I had bin enjoined to
have found you out, or never more returned back to my old Master:
There's a Letter Sir.
I know the hand that superscribed it well;
Stay but till I peruse it, and from me
Thou shalt return an answer.
I shall Sir: This is Market-day, and here acquaintance com∣monly
meet; and whom have I encountered my gossip Pint-pot,
and brim full; nay, I mean to drink with you before I part, and how
doth all your worshipful kindred? your sister Quart, your pater-Pottle,
(who was ever a Gentleman's fellow) and your old grandsier
Gallon; they cannot choose but be all in health, since so many healths
have been drunk out of them: I could wish them all here, and in
no worse state then I see you are in at this present; howsoever gossip,
since I have met you hand to hand, I'll make bold to drink to
you—Nay, either you must pledge me, or get one to do it for you;
Doe you open your mouth towards me? well, I know what you would
say; Here Roger, to your Master and Mistress, and all our good
friends at home; gramercy gossip, if I should not pledge thee, I were
worthy to be turned out to Grass, and stand no more at Livery: And
now in requital of this curtsy I'll begin one health to you and all
your society in the Oeller, to Peter Pipe, Harry Hogshead, Bartholo∣mew
Butt, and little master Randall Runlet, to Timothy Taster, and
all your other great and small friends.
Hee writes me heete,
That at my discontinuance hoe's much grieved,
Desiring me, as I have cuer rendered
Or him or his, to give him satisfaction
Touching my discontent; and that in person,
By any private meeting.
I Sir, it is very true, The Letter Speaks no more
Then he wished me to tell you by word of mouth.
Thou art then of his council?
His Privy and please you.
Though near so strict hath bin my fathers charge,
A little I'll dispense with it, for his love;
Commend me to thy Master, tell him from me,
On Monday night (then will my leisure serve)
I will by Heavens assistance visit him.
On Monday Sir:
That's as I remember, just the day before Tuesday.
But 't will be midnight first, at which late hour,
Please him to let the Garden door stand op,
At that I'll enter; But conditionally,
That neither Wife, Friend, Servant, no third soul
Save him, and thee to whom he trusts this message,
Know of my coming in, or passing out:
When, tell him, I will fully satisfy him
Concerning my forced absence.
I am something oblivious; Your message would bee the true∣lier
delivered if it were set down in black and white.
I'll call for Pen and Ink,
And instantly dispatch it.
Now impudence, but steel my face this once,
Although I near blush after; Heere's the house,
Ho, whose within? What, no man to desend
These innocent gates from knocking?
Whose without there?
One Sir that ever wished your worships health;
And those few hours I can find time to pray in,
I still remember it.
Gramercy Reignald,
I love all those that wish it: You are the men
Lead merry lives, Feast, Revel, and Carouse;
You seele no tedious hours; Time plays with you,
This is your golden age.
It was, but now Sir,
That Gold is turned to worse then Alcamy,
It will not stand the test; Those days are past,
And now our nights come on.
Tell me Reignald, is he returned from Sea?
Yes, to our grief already, but we fear
Hereafter, it may prove to all our cost's.
Suspects thy Master any thing?
Not yet Sir;
Now my request is, that your worship being
So near a Neighbour, therefore most disturbed,
Would not be first to peach vs.
Take my word;
With other Neighbours make what peace you can,
I'll not be your accuser.
Worshipful Sir;
I shall be still your Beads-man; Now the business
That I was sent about, the Old Man my Master
Claiming some interest in acquaintance past,
Desires (might it be no way trouble some)
To take free view of all your House within.
View of my House? Why it is not set to Sale,
Nor bill upon the door; Look well upon it:
View of my House?
Nay, be not angry Sir,
Hee no way doth disable your estate;
As far to buy, as you are loath to sell;
Some alterations in his own• he would make.
And hearing yours by worke-men much commended,
Hee would make that his President.
What fancies
Should at this age possess him; Knowing the cost,
That hee should dr•••• of Building.
It is supposed,
He hath late found a Wife out for his Son;
Now Sir, to have him near him, and that necrenesse
Too, without trouble, though beneath one roof,
Yet parted in two Families; Hee would build
And make what's picked, a persit quadrangle,
Proportioned just with yours, were you so pleased,
To make it his example.
Willingly; I will but order some few things within,
And then attend his coming.
Most kind cox-combe,
Great Alexander, and Agathocles,
Caesar, and others, have bin Famed, they say.
And magnified for high Facinerous deeds;
Why claim not I, an equal place with them?
Or rather a presedent: These commanded
Their Subjects, and their servants; I my Master,
And every way his equals, where I please,
Lead by the nose along; They placed their burdens
On Horses, Mules, and Camels; I, old Men
Of strength and wit, load with my knavery,
Till both their backs and brains ache; Yet poor animals,
They near complain of weight; Oh are you come Sir?
I made what haste I could.
And brought the warrant?
See here, I have it.
It is well done, but speak, runs it
Both without Bail and Maineprize?
Nay, it carries both form and power.
Then I shall warrant him;
I have bin yonder Sir,
And what says hee?
Like one that offers you
Free ingress, view and regress, at your pleasure;
As to his worthy Land-lord.
Was that all?
Hee spake to me, that I would speak to you,
To speak unto your Son; And then again,
To speak to him, that he would speak to you;
You would release his Bargain.
By no means,
Men must advise before they part with Land,
Not after to repent it; It is most just,
That such as hazard, and disburse their Stocks,
Should take all gains and profits that accrue,
As well in Sale of Houses, as in Barter,
And Traffic of all other Merchandise.
See in acknowledgement of a Tenants duty,
Hee attends you at the gate; Salute him Sir.
My worthy Friend.
Now as I live, all my best thoughts and wishes
Impart with yours, in your so safe return;
Your servant tells me, you have great desire
To take suruiew of this my house within.
Be it Sir, no trouble to you.
None, enter boldly;
With as much freedom, as it were your own.
As it were mine; Why Reignald, is it not?
Lord Sir, that in extremity of grief,
You'll add unto vexation; See you not
How sad hoe's on the sudden,
I observe it.
To part with that which he hath kept so long;
Especially his Inheritance: Now as you love
Goodness, and Honesty, torment him not
With the least word of Purchase.
Councilled well;
Thou teach me Humanity.
Will you enter?
Or shall I call a servant, to conduct you
Through every Room and Chamber?
By no means;
I fear wee are too much troublesome of our selves.
See what a goodly Gate?
It likes me well.
What brave carved posts; Who knows but here,
In time Sir, you may keep your Shreualtie;
And I be one of the Seriants.
They are well Carved.
And cost me a good price Sir, Take your pleasure,
I have business in the Town.
Poor man, I pity him;
H'ath not the heart to stay and see you come,
As it were, to take Possession; Look that way Sir,
What goodly fair Bay windows?
Wondrous stately.
And what a Galleric, How costly Seeled;
What painting round about?
Every fresh object to good, adds bitterness.
Tarrast aboue, and how below supported; doe they please you?
All things beyond opinion; Trust me Reignald,
I'll not forgo the Bargain, for more gain
Then half the price it cost me.
If you would? I should not suffer you; Was not the
Money due to the Usurer, took upon good ground,
That proved well built upon? Wee were no fools
That knew not what wee did.
It shall be satisfied.
Please you to trust me with it, I'll see it discharged.
Hee hath my promise, and I'll do it my self:
Never could Son have better pleased a Father,
Then in this Purchase: Hie thee instantly
Unto my house in the Country, give him notice
Of my arrive, and bid him with all speed
Post hither.
Ere I see the warrant served?
It shall be thy first business; For my Soul
Is not at peace, till face to face, I approve
His Husbandry, and much commend his Thrift;
Nay, without pause, be gone.
But a short journey;
For hoe's not far, that I am sent to seek:
I have got the start, the best part of the Race
is run already, what remains, is small,
And tyre now, I should but forfeit all.
Make haste, I doe entreat thee.
This is the Garden gate; And here am I set to stand Sentinel,
and to attend the coming of Young Master Geraldine: Master Da∣lauill's
gone to his Chamber; My Mistress to hers; It is now about
Mid-night; A Banquet prepared, bottles of Wine in readiness, all the
whole Household at their rest; And no creature by this, honestly stir∣ring,
saving I and my Old Master; Hee in a bye Chamber, prepared of
purpose for their private Meeting; And I here to play the Watch|
man, against my will; Chauelah, Stand; Who goes there?
A Friend.
The Word?
Honest Roger.
That's the Word indeed; You have lea•e to pass freely
Without calling my Corporal.
How go the affairs within?
According to promise, the business is composed, and the ser∣•ants
disposed, my young Mistress reposed, my old Master according as
you proposed, attends you if you bee exposed to give him meeting;
Nothing in the way being interposed, to transpose you to the least
danger: And this I dare be deposed, if you will not take my word, as
I am honest Roger.
Thy word shall be my warrant, but secured
Most in thy Masters promise, on which building;
By this known way I enter.
Nay, by your leave, I that was late but a plain Sentinel,
Will now be your Captain conductor: Follow me.
I wonder whence this strangeness should proceed,
Or wherein I, or any of my house,
Should be the occasion of the least distaste;
Now, as I wish him well, it troubles me;
But now the time grows on, from his own mouth
To be resolved; And I hope satisfied:
Sir, as I live, of all my friends to me
Most wishedly, you are welcome: Take that Chair,
I this: Nay, I int•eat no complement;
Attend—Fill wine.
Till the mouths of the bottles yawn• directly upon the
floor, and the bottoms turn their rayl•s up to the seeling; Whilst
there's any blood in their bellies, I'll not leave them.
I first salute you thus.
It could not come
From one whom I more honour; Sir, I thank you.
Nay, since my Master begun it, I'll see it go round
To all three.
Now give vs leave.
Talk you by your selves, whilst I find something to say to
this: I have a tale no tell him shall make his stony heart relent.
Now, first Sir your attention I entreat;
Next, your belief that what I speak is just,
Maugre all contradiction.
Both are granted.
Then I 〈◊〉; With due acknowledgement
Of all your more then many courtesies:
You've bin my second father, and your wife,
My noble and chaste Mistress; All your seruanes
At my command; And this your bounteous Table,
As free and common as my Fathers house;
Neither against any, or the least of these,
Can I commence just quarrel.
What might then be
The cause of this constraint, in thus absenting
Your self from such as love you?
Out of many,
I will propose some few: The care I have
Of your (as yet unblemished) renown;
The untouched honour of your virtuous wife;
And (which I value least, yet dearly too)
My own fair reputation.
How can these, in any way be questioned?
Oh dear Sir,
Bad tongues have bin too busy with vs all;
Of which I never yet had time to think,
But with sad thoughts and griefs unspeakable:
It hath bin whispered by some wicked ones,
But loudly thundered in my fathers ears,
By some that have maligned our happiness;
(Heaunen, if it can brooke slander, pardon them)
That this my customary coming hither,
Hath bin to base and sorded purposes:
To wrong your bed; Injure her chastity;
And be mine own undoer: Which, how false?
As Heaven is true, I know it.
Now this Calumny
Arriving first unto my fathers ears,
His easy nature was induced to think,
That these things might perhaps be possible:
I answered him, as I would doe to Heaven:
And cleared my self in his suspicious thoughts,
As truly, as the high all-knowing Judge
Shall of these staines acquit me; which are merely
Aspersions and untruths: The good old man
Possessed with my sincerity, and yet careful
Of your renown, her honour, and my fame;
To stop the-worst that scandal could inflict;
And to prevent false rumours charges me,
The cause removed, to take away the effect;
Which only could be, to forbear your house;
And this upon his blessing: You hear all.
And I of all acquit you: This your absence,
With which my love most caucll'd; Orators
In your behalf. Had such things past betwixt you,
Not threats nor chidings could have driven you hence:
It pleads in your behalf, and speaks in hers;
And arms me with a double confidence,
Both of your friendship, and her loyalty:
I am happy in you both, and only doubtful
Which of you two doth most impart my love:
You shall not hence to night.
Pray pardon Sir.
You are in your lodging.
But my fathers charge.
My conjuration shall dispense with that;
You may be up as early as you please;
But hence to night you shall not.
You are powerful.
This night, of purpose, I have parted beds,
Faining my self not well, to give you meeting;
Nor can be ought suspected by my Wife,
I have kept all so private: Now it is late,
I'll steal up to my rest, But howsoever,
Let's not be strange in our writing, that way daily
We may confer without the least suspect,
In spite of all such base calumnious tongues;
So, Now good-night sweet friend
May he that made you
So just and good, still guard you. Not to bed,
So I perhaps might ouer-sleepe my self,
And then my tardy waking might be••ay me
To the more early household; Thus as I am,
I'll rest me on this Pallar; But in vain,
I find no sleep can fasten on mine eyes,
There are in this disturbed brain of mine
So many mutinous fancies: This, to me,
Will be a tedious night; How shall I spend it?
No Book that I can spy? no company?
A little let me recollect my self;
Oh, what more wished company can I find,
Suiting the apt occasion, time and place;
Then the sweet contemplation of her Beauty;
And the fruition too, time may produce,
Of what is yet lent out? It is a sweet Lady,
And every way accomplished: Hath mere accident
Brought me thus near, and I not visit her?
Should it arrive here are, perhaps might breed
Our lasting separation; For twixt Lovers,
No quarrel's to unkindness; Sweet opportunity
Offers prevention, and invites me too't:
The house is known to me, the stairs and rooms;
The way unto her chamber frequently
Trodden by me at mid-night, and all hours:
How joyful to her would a meeting be,
So strange and unexpected; Shadowed too
Beneath the veil of night; I am resolved
To give her visitation, in that place
Where we have past deep vows, her bed-chamber:
My fiery love this darkness makes seem bright,
And and this the path that leads to my delight.
And this the gate vntoo't; I'll listen first,
Before too rudely I disturb her rest:
And gentle breathing; Ha? shoe's sure awake,
For in the bed two whisper, and their voices
Appear to me unequal;—One a women's—
And hers;—The other should be no maids tongue,
It bears too big a tone; And hark, they laugh;
(Damnation) But list further; Tother sounds—
Like—It is the same false perjured traitor, Dalauill,
To friend and goodness: Unchaste impious woman,
False to all faith, and true coniugall love;
There's met, a Serpent and a Crockadell;
A Synon and a Circa: Oh, to what
May I Compare you?—But my Sword,
I'll act a nobel execution,
On two unmatched for sorded vilianie:—
I left it in my Chamber, And thanks 〈◊〉
That I did to; It hath prevented me
From playing a base Hang-man: Since securely•
Whilst I, although for many, yet less faults,
Strive hourly to repent me; I once loved her,
And was to him intir'd; Although I pardon,
Heaven will find time to punish, I'll not stretch
My just revenge so far, as once by 〈◊〉
To make your brazen Impudence to 〈◊〉;
Damn on, revenge too great; And to suppress
Your Souls yet lower, without hope to 〈◊〉
Heap Ossa upon Pelion: You have made me
To hate my very Country, because here bred:
Near two such monsters; First I'll leave this House,
And then my Fathers; Next I'll take my leave,
Both of this Clime and Nation, Travel till
Age snow upon this Head: My passions now,
Are unexpressible, I'll end the• thus:
Ill man, bad Woman, your unheard of 〈◊〉,
This unjust censure, on a Just man give,
To seek out place, where no two 〈◊〉 live.
A happy Morning now 〈◊〉 your Lady,
To equal the content of a sweet Night.
It hath bin to my wish, 〈◊〉 your desire:
And this your coming by 〈◊〉
Unto my Sister Pru. cuts of suspicion
Of any such converse 'twi•• you and 〈◊〉.
It hath bin wisely carried.
One thing troubles me.
What's that my Dearest?
Why your Friend Geraldine,
Should on the sudden 〈◊〉 absent himself?
Has he had think you no intelligence.
Of these our private meetings.
No, on my Soul,
For therein hath my brain 〈◊〉 yours;
I studying to engross you to my self,
Of his continued absence have bin 〈◊〉
Yet hee of your affection no way jealous,
Or of my Friendship—How the plot was cast,
You at our better leisure shall partake;
The air grows cold, have care unto your health,
Suspicious eyes are ore us, that yet sleep,
But with the dawn, will open; Sweet 〈◊〉 you
To your warm Sheets; I now to fill my own,
That have this Night bin empty.
You advise well;
Oh might this Kiss dwell ever on thy Lips,
In my remembrance.
Doubt it not I pray,
Whilst Day frights Night, and Night pursues the day:
Good morrow.
Now is the Goal delivery; Through this back gate
Shift for your selves, I here vnprison all.
But tell me, how shall we dispose our selves?
Wee are as far to seek now, as the first;
What is it to repreeue vs for few hours,
And now to suffer, better had it bin
At first, to have stood the trial, so by this,
Wee might have past our 〈◊〉.
Sweet Reignald.
Honest rog•e.
If now thou fail vs, then we are lost for ever,
This same sweet Reignald, and this honest rogue,
Hath bin the Burgess, under whose protection
You all this while have lived, free from Arrests,
But now, the Sessions of my power's broke up,
And you exposed to Actions, Warrants, Writs;
For all the hellish rabble are broke loose,
Of Seriants, Sheriffs, and Baliffes,
Guard vs Heaven,
I tell you as it is; Nay, I my self
That have bin your Protector, now as subject
To every varlets Pestle, for you know
How I am engaged with you—At whose suit sir.
Why did thou Start.
I was afraid some Catchpole stood behind 〈◊〉,
To clap me on the Shoulder.
No such thing; Yet I protest
Thy fear did fright vs all.
I knew your guilty conciences.
No Brain left?
No crotchet for my sake?
One kiss then Sweet,
Thus shall my crotchets, and your kisses meet.
Nay, tell vs what to trust too.
Lodge your selves
In the next Tavern, ther's the Cash that's left,
Go, health it freely for my good success;
Nay, Drown it all, let not a Tester scope
To be consumed in rot-gut; I have begun,
And I will stand the period.
Bravely spoke.
Or perisn in the conflict.
Worthy Reignald.
Well, if he now come off well, Fox you all;
Go, call for Wine; For sing•e of my self
I will oppose all danger; But I charge you,
When I shall faint or find my self distaste;
If I like brave Orlands, wind my Horn,
Make haste unto my rescew.
And die in it.
Well hast thou spoke my noble Charlemain,
With these thy Peers about thee.
May good Speed
Attend thee still.
The end still crowns the deed.
Sir sir, your threats nor warrants, can fright me;
My honesty and innocence's known
Always to have bin unblemished; Would you could
As well approve your own Integrity,
As I shall doubtless acquit my self
Of this surmised murder.
Rather Surrender
The price I paid, and take into thy hands
This haunted mansion, or I'll prosecute
My wrongs, even to the utmost of the Law,
Which is no less then death.
I'll answer all
Old Lionel, both to thy shame and scorn;
This for thy Menaces.
This is the House, but whore's the noise that was wont to be
in it? I am sent hither, to deliver a Noate, to two young Gentlemen
that here keep Reuell-rout; I remember it, since the last Massacre of
Meat that was made in it; But it seems, That the great Storm that
was raised then, is chaste now; I have other Notes to deliver, one to
Master Rycott—and—I shall think on them all in order; My
Old Master makes a great Feast, for the parting of young Master Ge∣raldine,
who is presently upon his departure for Travel, and the better
to grace it, hath invited many of his Neighbours and Friends; Where
will be Old Master Geraldine—his Son, and I cannot tell how
many; But this is strange, the Gates shut up at this time a day, belike
they are all Drunk and laid to sleep, if they be, I'll wake them, with
a Murrain.
What desperate fellowe's this, that ignorant
Of his own danger, thunders at these Gates?
Ho, Reignald, Riotous Reignald, Revelling Reignald.
What madness doth possess thee, honest Friend,
To touch that Hammers handle?
What madness doth possess thee, honest Friend,
To ask me such a question?
Nay, stir not yo•?
Not I; The game begins.
How doest thou, art thou well?
Yes very well, I thank you, how doe you Sir?
No alteration; What change about thee?
Not so much change about me at this time,
As to change you a Shilling into two Teasters.
Yet I advise thee Fellow, for thy good,
Stand further from the Gate.
And I advise thee Friend, for thine own good, stand not be∣twixt
me and the Gate, but give me leave to deliver my er•ant; Hoe,
Reignald, you mad Rascal.
In vain thou thunder at these silent Doors,
Where no man dwells to answer, saving Ghosts,
Furies, and Sprights.
Ghosts; Indeed there has bin much walking, in and about the
House after Mid-night.
Strange noise oft heard.
Yes, terrible noise, that none of the neighbours could take any
rest for it, I have heard it my self.
You hear this; Heere's more witness.
Very well Sir.
Which you shall dearly answer—whooping.
And hollowing.
And shouting.
And crying out, till the whole house rung again.
Which thou hast heard?
Oftner then I have toes and singers.
Thou wilt be deposed of this?
I'll be sworn too't, and that's as good.
Very good still; Yet you are innocent:
Shall I entreat thee friend, to avouch as much
Here by, to the next Justice.
I'll take my soldiers oath on it.
A soldiers oath, What's that?
My corporal oath; And you know Sir, a Corporal is an office
belonging to a soldier.
Yet you are clear?
Murder will come to light.
So will your gullery too.
They say my old Master's come home; I'll see if hee will
turn me out of doors, as the young man has done: I have laid rods
in peace for some-body, scope Reignald as hee can, and with more free∣dome
then I dust late, I boldly now dare knock.
More mad-men yet; I think since my last voyage,
Half of the world's turned frantic: What dost mean,
Or long thou to be blasted?
Oh Sir, you are welcome home; It was time to come
Ere all was gone to havoc.
My old servant? before I shall demand of further busin••.
Resolve me why thou thunder at these doors,
Where thou know none inhabits?
Are they gone Sir?
It was well yet they have left the house behind;
For all the furniture, to a bare bench,
I am sure is spent and wasted.
Whore's my son,
That Reignald p•acting for him with such speed,
Brings him not from the Country?
Country Sir?
It is a thing they know not; Here they Feast,
Dice, Drink, and Drab; The company they keep,
Cheaters and Roaring-Ladds, and these attended
By Bawds and Queens: Your son hath got a Strumpet,
On whom he spends all that your sparing left,
And here they keep court; To whose damned abuses,
Reignald gives all encouragement.
But stay stay;
No living soul hath for these six months space
Here entered, but the house stood desolate.
Last week I am sure, so late, and the other day,
Such Revels were here kept.
And by my son?
Yes, and his servant Reignald.
And this house at all not haunted?
Save Sir with such Sprights.
This Murder will come out.
But see, in happy time here comes my
Neighbour of whom he bought this mansion; He I am sure
More amply can resolve me: I pray Sir,
What sums of moneys have you late received
Of my young son?
Of him? None I assure you.
What of my servant Reignald?
But devise
What to call less then nothing, and that sum
I will confess received.
Pray Sir, be serious;
I doe confess my self indebted to you,
A hundred pound.
You may doe well to pay't then, for heere's witness
Sufficient of your words.
I speak no more then what I purpose; lust so much I owe you,
And ere I sleep will tender.
I shall be as ready to receive it, and as willing,
As you can bee to pay't.
But provided,
You will confess seven hundred pounds received
Before hand of 〈◊〉 •o••?
But by your favour;
Why should I yield seven hundred received
Of them I never dealt with? Why? For what?
What reason? What condition? Where or when
Should such a sum be paid me?
Why? For this bargain: And for what? This house,
Reason? Because you sold it: The conditions? Such
As were agreed between you: Where and When?
That only hath escaped me.
Madness all.
Was I not brought to take free view thereof,
As of mine own possession?
I confess;
Your servant told me you had found out a wife
Fit for your son, and that you meant to build;
Desired to take a friendly view of mine,
To make it your example: But for selling,
I tell you Sir, my wants be not so great,
To change my house to Coin.
Spare Sir your anger,
And turn it into pity; Neighbours and friends,
I am quite lost, was never man so so••'d,
And by a wicked servant; Shame and blushing
Will not permit to tell the manner how,
Lest I be made ridiculous to all:
My fears are to inherit what's yet left;
He hath made my son away.
That's my fear too.
Friends, as you would 〈◊〉 a m•n
Deprived at once, both of his wealth and son;
And in his age, by one I ever tendered
More like a son then servant: By imagining
My case were yours, have feeling of my griefs
And help to apprehend him;
Furnish me with Cords and Fetters,
I will lay him safe in Prison within Prison.
Weal assist you.
And I.
And all;
But not to doe the least hurt to my old friend Reig••d.
His Legs will be as nimble as his Brain,
And twill be difficult to seize the slave,
Yet your endeavours, pray peace, here hoe comes.
My heart mis-giues, for it is not possible
But that in all these windings and indents
I shall be found at last: I'll take that course
That men both troubled and affrighted doe,
Heap doubt on doubt, and as combustions rise,
Try if from many I can make my peace,
And work mine own atonement.
Stand you close,
Be not yet seen, but at your best advantage
Hand him, and bind him fast: Whilst I dissemble
As if I yet knew nothing.
I suspect
And find there's trouble in my Masters looks;
Therefore I must not trust my self too far
Within his fingers.
Reignald?
Worshipful Sir.
What says my son in the Country?
That tomorrow,
Early in the morning, heel attend your pleasure,
And doe as all such duteous children ought;
Demand your blessing Sir.
Well, it is well.
I doe not like his countenance.
But Reignald? I suspect the honesty
And the good meaning of my neighbour here,
Old master Ricott; Meeting him but now,
And having some discourse about the house,
He makes all strange, and tells me in plain terms,
Hee knows of no such matter.
Tell me that Sir?
I tell thee as it is:
Nor that such moneys, took up at use, were ever tendered him
On any such conditions.
I cannot blame your worship to bee pleasant,
Knowing at what an vnder-rate we bought it, but you ever
Were a most merry Gentleman.
(Impudent 〈◊〉)
But Reignald, hee not only doth demi it,
But offers to depose Himself and Servants,
No such thing ever was.
Now Heaven, to see to what this world's gro••e too.
I will make him—
Nay more, this m•n will not confess the Murder.
Which both shall dearly answer; You have warrant
For him already; But for the other Sir,
If hee deny it, he had better—
Appear Gentlemen,
It is a fit time to take him.
I discover the Ambush that's laid for me.
Come nearer Reignald.
First sir resolve me one thing, amongst other Merchandise
Bought in your absence by your Son and me,
Wee engrossed a great commodity of Combs,
And how many sorts think you?
You might buy
Some of the bones of Fishes, some of Beasts,
Box-combes, and Iuery 〈◊〉.
But besides these, we have for Horses Si•,
Mayne-combes, and Curry-combes; Now Sir for men,
Wee have Head-oombes, 〈◊〉-combes, I and Cox-combes too;
Take view of them at your pleasure, whil'it for my part,
I thus bestow my self.
Well said Reignald, nobly put off Reignald,
Look to thy self Reignald.
Why dost thou cli••by thus?
Only to practice
The nimbleness of my Arms and Legs,
Ere they prove your Cords and Fetters.
Why to that place?
〈…〉 Har∣bore
long, and now it must bee my Sanctuary; Dispute now, and
I'll answer.
〈…〉
To challenge me of Murder?
Oh sir, the man you killed is alive at this present to iustisie it:
I am, quoth he, a Transmarine by birth—
Why, challenge me receipt of Moneys, and to give abroad,
That I had sold my House?
Why? because sir,
Could I have purchased Houses at that rate,
I had meant to have bought all London.
Yes, and Middlesex too, and I would have bin thy half Reig∣nald.
Yours are great,
My wrongs insufferable; As first, to fright me
From mine own dwelling, till they had consumed
The whole remainder of the little left;
Besides, out of my late stock got at Sea,
Discharge the clamorous Usurer; Make me accuse
This man of Murder; Be at charge of warrants;
And challenging this my worthy Neighbour of
Forswearing Sums hee never yet received;
Fool me, to think my Son that had spent all,
Had by his thrift bought Land; I and him too,
To open all the secrets of his House
To me, a Stranger, On thou insolent villain,
What to all these can answer?
Guilty, guilty.
But to my Sons death, what thou slave?
Not Guilty.
Produce him then; In the mean time, and—
Honest Friends, get Ladders.
Yes, and come down in your own Ropes.
I'll fetch a Piece and shoot him.
So the warrant in my Masters pocket, will serve for my Mur∣der;
And ever after shall my Ghost haunt this House.
And I will say like Reignald,
This Ghost and I am Friends.
Bring faggots, I'll set fire upon the House,
Rather then this endure.
To burn Houses is Felony, and I'll not out
Till be fired out; But since I am Besieged thus,
I'll summon supplies unto my Rescue.
Before you chide, first here me, next your Blessing,
That on my knees I beg; I have but done,
Like mis-spent youth, which after wit dear bought,
Turns his Eyes inward, sorry and ashamed;
These things in which I have offended most,
Had I not proved, I should have thought them still
Essential things, delights perdureable;
Which now I find mere Shadows, Toys and Dreams,
Now hated more then erst I doted on;
Best Natures, are soonest wrought on; Such was mine;
As I the offences, So the offenders throw
Here at your feet, to punish as you please;
You have but paid so much as I have wasted,
To purchase to your self a thrifty Son;
Which I from henceforth, Vow.
See what Fathers are,
That can three years offences, foul ones too,
Thus in a Minute pardon; And thy faults
Upon my self chastise, in these my Tears;
Ere this Submission, I had cast thee off;
Rise in my new Adoption: But for these—
The one you have nothing to doe withal, here's his Ticket for
his discharge; Another for you Sir, to Summon you to my Masters
Feast, For you, and you, where I charge you all to appear, upon his
displeasure, and your own apparels.
This is my Friends 〈…〉 one I loved,
Only because they have bin dear to him
That now will strive to be more dear to you;
Vouchsafe their pardon.
All dear, to me indeed, for I have paid for it soundly,
Yet for the sake, I am atoned with all; Only that wanton.
Her, and her Company, abandon quite;
So doing, wee are friends.
A just Condition, and willingly subscribed to.
But for that Villain; I am now devising
What shame, what punishment remarkable,
To inflict on him.
Why Master? Have I laboured;
Plotted, Contrived, and all this while for you,
And will you leave me to the Whip and Stocks;
Not mediate my peace.
〈◊〉 come down.
Not till my Pardon's sealed, I'll rather stand here
Like a Statue, in the Fore-front of your house
For ever; Like the picture of Dame Fortune
Before the Fortune Play-house.
If I have here
But any Friend amongst you, join with me
In this petition.
Good Sir, for my sake, I resolved you truly
Concerning Whooping, the Noise, the Walking; and the Sprights,
And for a need, can show you a Ticket for him too.
I impute my wrongs rather to knavish Cunning,
Then least pretended Malice.
What he did,
Was but for his Young Master, I allow it
Rather as sports of Wit, then injuries;
No other pray esteem them.
Even as freely,
As you forget my quarrels made with you;
Raised from the Errors first begot by him;
I here remit all free; I now am Calm,
But had I seized upon him in my Spleen—
I knew that, therefore this was my Invention,
For Pollicie's the art still of Prevention.
Come down then Reignald, first on your hands and feet, and
then on your knees to your Master; Now gentlemen, what doe you
say to your inviting to my Masters Feast.
Wee will attend him.
Nor doe I love to break good company;
For Master Wincott is my worthy Friend,
And old acquaintance; Oh thou crafty Wag-string,
And coldest thou thus delude me? But we are Friends;
Nor Gentlemen, let not what's here to past,
In your least thoughts disable my Estate;
This my last Voyage hath made all things good,
With surplus too; Be that your comfort Son:
Well Reignald—But no more.
I was the Fox,
But I from henceforth, will no more the Cox—
Comb, put upon your pate.
Let's walk Gentlemen
Son, let me tell you, you are ill advised;
And doubly to be blamed, by undertaking
Unnecessary travel; Grounding no reason
For such a rash and giddy enterprise:
What profit aim you at, you have not reaped;
What Novelty affords the Christian world,
Of which your view hath not participated
In a full measure; Can you either better
Your language or experience? Your selfe-will
Hath only purpose to deprive a father
Of a loved son, and many noble friends,
Of your much wished a•quaintance.
Oh, dear Sir,
Doe not, I doe entreat you, repent you
Of your free grant; Which with such care and study.
I have so long, so often laboured for.
Say that may be dispensed with, show me reason
Why you desire to 〈◊〉 out of your Country,
Like some Malefactor that had forfeited
His life and freedom; Heere's a worthy Gentleman
Hath for your sake invited many guests,
To his great charge, only to take of you
A parting leave; You send him word you cannot,
After, you may not come: Had not my vrgence,
Almost compulsion, driven you to his house,
The unkindness might have forfeited your love,
And raced you from his will; In which he hath given you,
A fair and large estate; Yet you of all this stangenesse,
Show no sufficient ground.
Then understand;
The ground thereof took his first birth from you;
It was you first charged me to forbear the house,
And that upon your blessing: Let it not then
Offend you Sir, if I so great a charge
Have strived to keep so strictly.
Me perhaps,
You may appease, and with small difficulty.
Because a Father; But how satisfy
Their dear, and on your part, unmerited love?
But this your last obedience may salve all:
Wee now grow near the house.
Whose doors, to me,
Appear as horried as the gates of Hell:
Where shall I borrow patience, or from whence?
To give a meeting to this viperous brood,
Of Friend and Mistress.
You've entertained me with a strange discourse
Of your mans knavish wit, but I rejoice,
That in your safe return, all ends so well:
Most welcome you, and you, and indeed all;
To whom I am bound, that at so short a warning,
Thus friendly, you will deign to visit me.
It seems my absence hath begot some sport,
Thank my kind servant here.
Not so much worth Sir.
But though their riots tripped at my estate,
They have not quite ore-throwne it.
But see Gentlemen, these whom we most expected,
come at length; This I proclaim the master of the Feast,
In which to express the bounty of my love,
I'll show my self no niggard.
Your choice favours,
I still taste in abundance.
Methinks it would not mis-become me Sir,
To chide your absence; That have made your self,
To vs, so long a stranger.
Pardon me Sir,
That have not yet, since your return from Sea,
Voted the least fit opportunity,
To entertain you with a kind salute.
Most kindly Sir I thank you.
Methinks friend,
You should expect greene rushes to be strewn,
After such discontinuance.
Mistress Pru,
I have not seen you long, but greet you thus,
May you be Lady of a better husband
Then I expect a wife.
I like that greeting:
Nay, enter Gentlemen; Dinner perhaps
Is not yet ready, but the time we stay,
Weal find some fresh discourse to spend away.
Not speak to me? nor once vouchsafe an answer,
But slight me with a poor and base neglect?
No, nor so much as cast an eye on her,
Or least regard, though in a seeming show
She courted a reply? twixt him and her,
Nay him and me, this was not wont to be;
If she have brain to apprehend as much
As I have done, sheele quickly find it out:
Now as I live, as our affections meet,
So our conceits, and she hath singled him
To some such purpose: I'll retire my self.
Not interrupt their conference.
You are sad Sir.
I know no cause.
Then can I show you some;
Who could be otherwise, to leave a Father
So careful, and each way so provident?
To leave so many, and such worthy Friends?
To abandon your own country? These are some,
Nor doe I think you can be much the merrier
For my sake?
Now your tongue speaks Oracles;
For all the rest are nothing, it is for you,
Only for you I cannot.
So I thought;
Why then have you bin all this while so strange?
Why will you travel? suing a divorce
Betwixt vs, of a love inseparable;
For here shall I be left as desolate
Unto a frozen, almost widowed bed;
Warmed only in that future, stored in you;
For who can in your absence comfort me?
Shall my oppressed sufferance yet break forth
Into impatience, or endure her more?
But since by no persuasion, no entreats,
Your settled obstinacy can be swal'd,
Though you seem desperate of your own dear life•
Have care of mine, for it exists in you.
Oh Sir, should you miscarry I were lost,
Lost and forsaken; Then by our past vows,
And by this hand once given me, by these reares,
Which are but springs begetting greater floods,
I doe beseech thee, my dear Geraldine,
Look to thy safety, and preserve thy health;
Have care into what company you fall;
Travel not late, and cross no dangerous Seas;
For till Heavens bless me in thy safe return,
How will this poor heart suffer?
I had thought
Long since the Sirens had bin all destroyed;
But one of them I find survives in her;
She almost makes me question what I know,
An Heretic unto my own belief:
Oh thou mankinds seducer.
What? no answer?
Yes, thou hast spoke to me in Showers,
I will reply in Thunder; Thou Adulteress,
That hast more poison in thee then the Serpent,
Who was the first that did corrupt thy sex,
The Devil.
To whom speaks the man?
To thee, falsest of all that ever man termed fair;
Hath Impudence so stool'd thy smooth soft skin,
It cannot blush? Or sin so obdur'd thy heart,
It doth not quake and tremble? Search thy conscience,
There thou shalt find a thousand clamorous tongues
To speak as loud as mine doth.
Save from yours,
I hear no noise at all.
I'll play the Doctor
To open thy deaf ears; Monday the Ninth
Of the last Month; Can thou remember that?
That Night more black in thy abhorred sin,
Then in the gloomy darkness; That the time.
Monday?
Would thou the place know? Thy polluted Chamber,
So often, witness of my sin-lesse vows;
Would thou the Person? One not worthy Name,
Yet to torment thy guilty Soul the more,
I'll tell him thee, That Monster Dalauill;
Would thou your Bawd know? Mid-night, that the hour;
The very words thou spa•e? Now what would Geraldine
Say, if he saw vs here? To which was answered,
Tush hoe's a Cox-combe, fit to be so fooled:
No blush? What, no faint Fever on thee yet?
How hath thy black sins changed thee? Thou Medusa,
Those Hairs that late appeared li•• golden Wires,
Now crawl with Snakes and Adders; Thou art ugly.
And yet my glass, till now, near told me so;
Who gave you this intelligence?
Only hee,
That pitying such an Innocenti••s mine,
Should by two such delinquents bee be•rayed,
Hee brought me to that place by miracle;
And made mean ear witness of all this.
I am undone.
But think wharthou hast lost
To forfeit me; I not withstanding these,
(So fixed was my love and v•••arable)
I kept this from thy Husband, nay all ears,
With thy transgressions smothering mine own wrongs,
In hope of thy 〈◊〉
Which begin• thus low upon my knees.
Tush, bow in 〈◊〉,
Which thou hast most offended; alas,
Save in such (Sca•ce unheard of) Treachery,
Most sinful like thy self;
Wherein, Oh wherein, hath my unspotted and unbounded Love
deserved the least of these? Sworn to be made a ••ale
For term of life; And all this for my goodness;
Die, and die soon, acquit me of my Oath,
But prithee die repentant; Farewell ever,
It is thou, and only thou hast Banished me,
Both from my Friends and Country.
Oh, I am lost.
Why how now, what's the business?
Go take her Up, whom thou hast oft thrown Down,
Villain.
That was no language from a Friend,
It had too harsh an accent; But how's this?
My Mistress thus low cast upon the earth
Grauelling and breathless, Mistress, Lady, Sweet—
Oh tell me if thy name be Geraldine,
Thy very looks will kill me?
View me well,
I am no such man; See, I am Dalauill.
You are then a Devil, that presents before me
My horrid sins; persuades me to despair;
When hee like a good Angel sent from Heaven,
Besought me of repentance; Swell sick Heart,
Even till thou burst the ribs that bound thee in;
So, there's one string cracked, flow, and flow high,
Even till thy blood distill out of mine eyes,
To witness my great sorrow.
Faint again,
Some help within there, no attendant near?
Thus to expire, in this I am more wretched,
Then all the sweet fruition of her love
Before could make me happy.
What was hee clamoured so loud,
To mingle with our mirth this terror
And affright?
See Sir, your Wife in these my arms expiring.
How?
My sister?
Support her, and by all means possible
Provide for her dear safety.
See, she recovers.
Woman, look up.
Oh Sir, your pardon;
Convey me to my Chamber, I am sick,
Sick even to death, away thou Sycophant,
Out of my sight, I have besides thy self,
Too many sins about me.
My sweet Mistress.
The storme's coming, I must provide for harbour.
What strange and sudden alteration's this,
How quickly is this clear day overcast,
But such and so uncertain are all things,
That dwell beneath the Moon.
A Women's qualm,
Frailties that are inherent to her sex,
Soon sick, and soon recovered.
If she misfire,
I am a man more wretched in her loss,
Then had I forfeited life and estate;
She was so good a creature.
I the like
Suffered, when I my Wife brought unto her gre•e;
So you, when you were first a widower,
Come arm your self with patience.
These are casualties
That are not new, but common.
Burying of Wives,
As stale as shifting shifts, or for some servants,
To flout and gull their Masters.
Best to send
And see how her fit holds her.
Sir, my 〈◊〉
In these few Lines commends her last to you,
For she is now no more; What's therein writ,
Save Heaven and you, none knows, This she desired
You would take view of; and with these words expired.
Dead?
She hath made one then a free release,
Of all the debts I owed her.
My fear is beyond pardon, Dalauill
Hath plaid the villain, but for Geraldine,
Hee hath bin each way Noble—Love him still,
My peace already I have made with Heaven;
Oh be not you at war with me; My Honour
Is in your hands to punish, or preserve;
I am now Confessed, and only Geraldine
Hath wrought on me this unexpected good;
The Ink I write with, I wish had bin my blood,
To witness me Repentance—Dalauill?
Whore's hee? Go seek him out.
I shall, I shall Sir.
The Wills of Dead folk should be still obeyed;
How ever false to me, I'll not reueale't;
Where Heaven forgives, I pardon Gentlemen,
I know you all commiserate my loss;
I little thought this Feast should have bin turned
Into a Funeral; What's the news of him?
Hee went presently to the Stable, put the Saddle upon his Horse,
put his Foot into the Stirrup, clapped his Spurs into his sides, and a∣way
hoe's Galloped, as if hee were to ride a Race for a Wager.
All our ill lucks go with him, farewell hee;
But all my best of wishes wait on you,
As my chief Friend; This meeting that was made
Only to take of you a parting leave,
Shall now be made a Marriage of our Love,
Which none save only Death shall separate.
It calls me from all Travel, and from henceforth,
With my Country I am Friends.
The Lands that I have left,
You lend me for the short space of my life;
As soon as Heaven calls me, they call you Lord;
First feast, and after Morn; We'll like some Gallants
That Bury thrifty Fathers, think it no sin,
To wear Blacks without, but other Thoughts within.

THus to the Roman Palace, as our home
And proper mansion, is Megaera come
No stranger to these walls: not more in Hell
Then here, doe mischiefs, and we Furies dwell
Let the unenvied Gods henceforth possess
Poor Peasants hearts, and rule in Cottages;
Let Virtue lurk among the rural Swains,
Whilst Vice in Romes Imperial Palace reigns,
And rules those breasts, whom all the world obeys.
What though the Gods and Virtue first did raise
Rome to that height it holds? they did but make
An Empire large enough for us to take,
And build a strength for us to manage now,
Though Virtue made the Roman greatness grow:
She now forsakes it at the height: the Powers,
And fruits of all her diligence are ours.
But to preserve that interest, and keep high
Our hold in this commanding family,
A blacker Fury then my self must rise,
To fill these roofs with fresh Impieties.
Rise cruel Ghost, ascend Caligula,
That lately did the worlds proud sceptre sway
Beyond our wish; who though an Emperor,
In wickedness were it greater then in power;
And clothed with flesh among mankind did dwell
A Fiend more black then any was in Hell.
From those dark vaults ascend; to blast this fair
And gorgeous Palace, like that poisonous air,
Which Earth-quakes from the grounds torn entrails breath
To fill the world with pestilence and death.
Hee comes; Hee comes: the very house begins
To shake with horror of approaching sins.
The night grows blacker then before, and I
My self am filled with new Impiety.
Why am I raised from the vaults below?
What mischiefs can an aëry shadow doe?
What can a naked Ghost perform? In vain
Are all intents, unless I reigned again
Obeyed by all the Roman power, and wore
That wicked body which I had before.
What then I did you know, and if your power
Could have maintained me longer Emperor,
I had outdone your wishes, and given birth
To such new mischiefs, as the suffering earth
Had groaned to feel: what my intentions were
Did to the world in those black books appear,
When all Romes Senate were to death designed,
And chests of poison that I left behind,
Which since my death into the Ocean thrown,
Poisoned the waves for many leagues, and on
Poor fishes wrought that execution,
Which on mankind I meant they should have done.
What can I now perform alas?
With thy contagious presence blast this roof;
Infect the Imperial House with all the ill
That Hell and thou can bring. Let mischief still
Reign here, and keep out banished Piety,
Justice, and Conscience; let no sacred tie
Of Nature, or Religious laws restrain
Their Parricidall hands: all names bee vain
Of brother, child, or parent. let the wife
With impious rage destroy her husbands life,
The brother kill the brother, and the Son
Rip up his parents bowels.
Twill be done.
The actors are my kindred, and like mine
Must play their parts: ambitious Agrippine,
Pursue thy cruel projects, and upon
A husband's murder raise thy Impious Son,
That he may play the Parricide again,
And murder thee, that give him life and reign.
That all the world astonished at so high
Ingratitude and foul Impiety,
May fear the Monsters reign, yet suffer more
Then they could fear, or ere was felt before.
Let what no foes, no furies durst conspire
To act against Rome, nor I my self desire
When I was Prince; bee cursed Nero's crimes.
Let his dire story in succeeding times
From all earths Tyrants elf the wonder draw,
And men almost forget Caligula.
The Fates consent; that thunder, which wee hear
From Acheron, confirms the Omen there.
Down wicked Ghost into thy •ell below,
Wee must no longer bide; the Cocks doe crow,
The twinkling stars begin to hide their heads
The day would dawn, and from Auroraes bed
Would Titan rise, but that he fears to see
Such instruments of Hells impiety.
The Gods themselves forbid our longer stay,
For fear our presence should retard the day.
NOw is the time noble Vitellius,
For you, and you most honoured Polio,
To make that service you have done com∣pleat
To royal Agrippina; briefly thus:
The two commanders of the Praetorian camp
Crispinus Rufus, and that Lucius Geta
Must be displaced, and some of nearer trust
To her designs advanced in their room,
Or else our power will ne'er be full, they love
Britannicus too well, this is the thing
The Empress wishes; let your eloquence
And wisdom further it in Caesar's ear.
Fear us not Pallas; but what successors
Have wee to take their charge?
One must take all.
You may pretend the inconvenience
Of two commanders, and so take from Caesar
All jealousy of the plot.
Who shall it be?
Burrhus Afranius a wise valiant man,
Beloved and honoured by the soldiers.
None can except against him, and the change
Will not displease the camp: nor can his merit
Make him less thankful to her; knowing well,
It was in her power to make it otherwise.
But the advancing of such able men
As Seneca and Burrhus will take off
All envy from the Empress and our selves.
Then wee with praise have wrought our purposes,
And made our party strong, while Seneca
Shall sway the Senate, Burrhus rule the camp
To her designs: but I'll presume no farther
T'instruct your wisdoms, or much less to doubt
Your true affections to the state and honour
Of Agrippina, who will then have power
To make more large requital to her friends,
In which most high and happy rank, you two
Are chiefly seated: she acknowledges
Her self indebted to your eloquence
Noble Vitellius, who in Senate lately
You proved her marriage lawful▪ and being Censor,
Deposed Silanus from his Praetorship,
Who should have married young Octavia.
To you, brave Polio, whose persuasions
Have been the cause young Narrow now enjoys
That happy marriage, which Silanus lost.
But most of all she owed to both your pains
In causing Caesar to adopt her Narrow.
It was hard to work at first. Caesar stuck at it,
Alleging that the Claudian family
Never adopted any, and besides
When Lucius Geta and Crispinus Rufus
In love they bore to young Britannicus
Told him that that adoption to the world
Would bee ridiculous: by president
Wee did refute it, showing how Tiberius
Having a Son and Nephew both alive,
Adopted the issue of Germanicus.
My Lords, it was nobly carried; this design
That now wee have in hand, though not so hard
To work, will prove as advantageous.
Bee you with Caesar; I'll go satisfy
The Empress of your loves.
Farewell brave Pallas.
Farewell my Lords. Go flattering Senators,
Go use your best persuasive eloquence,
Whilst I alone upon your envy rise,
Whilst I enjoy in Agrippinaes love
The fruit of your obsequious diligence.
What though my birth be humble, and my stile
But one of Caesars freed-men, though I boast not
Patrician blood, nor in my galleries
Display old ranks of nose-lesse ancestors,
Or eare-cropt images, if I enjoy
What ever high Nobility can give
Respect and power: the state can witness it.
The Senate fear me, and in flattery
Have sued to Caesar to confer on me
Praetorian and Quaestorian ornaments.
Which I at last vouchsafed to accept.
When my command alone has doomed to death
The noblest of that order; men whose names
Old Rome has boasted of, whose virtues raised
Her to that envied height that now she holds.
Their murders stupid Caesar rather chose
To take upon himself, then question me.
Let dull Patricians boast their aerie titles,
And count me base, whilst I commend their lives,
And for the furtherance of my high intents,
Make noblest men my hated instruments.
But ha! Narcissus? yes; there comes a man
That was my rival once, whom I feared more
Then all the Lords of Rome, my fellow freed man,
That knew our ways of power; that not the Senate,
But Caesars chamber did command the world,
And rule the fate of men: but Fortune 's turned,
And he not worth my regard or fear.
In mastering him I feel my greatest strength
Not look upon me! am I fallen so low?
Did I in equal place with this proud man,
Nay far above him, sway the state, and rule
Great Caesar's heart, while Messallina lived,
And was not there content (Oh punishment
Of my ambitious aims) but cause the death
Of that loose Empress to bring in the expulst
Aelia Petina, and instead of her
Have let this Tigress Agrippina in
This dragon spirit to devour us all
Except proud Pallas her adulterer?
What unavoided dangers every way
Threaten this life? For if young Narrow reign,
I dye, that sought to cross his mothers match:
If ere Britannicus do reign, I dye
That cause his mothers death. What shall I doo?
Where shall I lean for safety? better trust
The innocent goodness of Britannicus
Then Agrippinaes fierce and cruel nature;
Nor can I hope more goodness from her son.
That may give longer respite to my fear.
Besides it bears the greater show of justice,
And honest service to my Royal Master.
Since wee must fall, it is some happiness
To fall the honest way, if wee may call
That honesty at all, or real virtue
To which necessity enforces us,
And wee by fortune not election practise.
Here comes two friends of young Britannicus▪
Hail Lucius Geta, hail Crispinus Rufus.
Narcissus hail.
Brave Romans your are come
Fitly to ease my overburdened breast
Of weighty thoughts, which I dare freely trust
Unto your noble ears.
You may Narcissus
Trust truth with us.
Or any honest secret.
What is it you would with us?
You know my Lords,
(And I must needs confess) I was a means
Of Messalinaes death; but all the Gods
Can witness with me how unwillingly
I lent a hand to that sad action;
And but for Caesar's safety, which I prize
Above my life and fortunes, and which then
I thought endangered much by her hold act,
Nought in the world could ere have moved me to it.
What hence would you infer?
Then Know my Lords,
How little I respect my private ends
To doe the public service, and can loose
My self for Caesars good: it may be thought
When the most hopeful Prince Britannicus
Shall wear that wreath which all the world adores,
To me it may be fatal, as a foe
Unto his mother: but I rather wish
My self for ever lost, then that brave Prince
Should not succeed his father.
How! succeed?
What fear is there of that?
What power on earth,
Can bar his right, whilst wee command the camp?
I'd rather see (which all the Gods avert)
Rome rent again with civil broils, then hee
Should loose unjustly the Imperial throne.
Y' are true and Noble friends; and here I vow
To join with you, and use my uttermost power
To advance the honour of Britannicus.
What danger threatens it?
Doe you not know
To whom the Son of Agrippina's married;
Yes.
And that honour were enough for him.
Without adoption too, were his aims private,
And that his crafty Mother did not cast
A way for him to the succession.
It was strangely done of Caesar I confess.
They make the faction strong, and cunningly
Increase the train of Narrow, and displace
The faithful servants af Britannicus.
Wise Seneca's recalled from banishment
By Agrippinaes means, not for the love
She bears his virtue; but to make him hers,
That Seneca's authority may gain
The peoples love to her ambitious son,
Of whose young years hee takes tuition.
I think no less.
Besides to make the match
For her young Narrow with Octavia.
Noble Silanus died, who might have proved
A faithful prop to Claudius family.
In blood that fatal marriage• was begun,
I fear the Omen; Agrippina's fierce
And cruel nature has too much been seen
In this short time. Lolly Pauline, Niece
To Cotta Messalinus, and late wife
To Caius Caesar, for no other cause
Then aiming once at Claudius marriage
Is banished Italy; her goods are seized,
And but five millions of Sesterces left her
Of all her great estate; but there the malice
Of this fell woman stays not: now wee hear
A Tribune is dispach'd away, to kill
The banished Lady, and bring back her head.
Oh barbarous cruelty!
Yet more I fear,
Since her Domitius is adopted now.
I fear she'll shortly aim at higher blood.
We'll guard the life of young Britannicus.
And I'll be vigilant for Caesar's safety.
When all her ends are wrought his death is next.
Here comes the youthful hope of Rome and us.
Tell me, my friends, am not I Caesar's son?
My Lord, who dares to question it?
I'm sure,
I was his eldest son, and whilst I lived
I thought that Caesar had not lacked an heir
But I at last have found an elder brother,
Domitius is adopted Caesar's son
His name is Narrow now. I cannot tell
What is my fault.
Excellent youth, how much
Beyond his years hee apprehends his wrongs?
Fear not sweet Prince, though Agrippinas son
Bee two year elder then your self, the Senate
Will never judge that an adopted Son
Shall in succession bee preferred before
The true and natural heir.
You ever loved me,
Pray doe so still.
While wee have breath, my Lord,
you shall command our lives.
How unawares
Has feeble Caesar wrought a snare to catch
His own unhappy life in! grow sweet prince,
Grow up to strengthen the Imperial house,
And Curb the furious malice of thy foes.
Brother Britannicus hail.
Hail to you
Domitius Anobarbus.
Doe you scorn
My salutation, or not know my name?
That was your fathers name; and why not yours?
How's that? Proud boy.
Well, let them go, my Lord.
It was not the brain of young Britannicus
That could give birth to this minurious scorn,
Though for his years, the boy be capable.
But riper heads then his: there went his counsel
Crispinus Rufus, and that Lucius Geta,
Who swell the youth with boasting hopes, and think
Their power can give protection to his pride.
I'll make them see their error, and perceive,
One breath of mine can blow them from their strength
This news I'll bear to Agrippina straight.
Come Prince; Britannicus shall find anon
What feeble props his pride has leaned upon.
You are my Judges.
Your poor servants, Madam.
Nay that must be your office; you have read
My Commentaries over, and I look for
A faithful censure: I am sure, my Lords,
You have both learning able to discern,
And such integrity as will not flatter.
Speak Seneca; I see they look on you:
How doe you like them?
Royal Agrippina,
Such, and so good they bee, that ablest men
May boldly speak, and not offend the truth,
Nor you at all; the stile is full and Princely.
Stately and absolute, beyond what ere
These eyes have seen; and Rome, whose majesty
Is there described, in after times shall owe
For her memorial to your learned pen,
More then to all those fading monuments
Built with the riches of the spoiled world.
When rust shall eat her brass, when times strong hand
Shall bruise to dust her marble Palaces,
Triumphal Arches, Pillars, Obeliskes,
When Julius Temple, Claudius Aquaeducts,
Agrippa's Baths, and Pompey's Theater,
Nay Rome it self shall not be found at all,
Historians books shall live; those strong records,
Those deathless monuments alone shall show
What, and how great the Roman Empire was.
The act is Noble; not the present world
Alone shall owe to Agrippinas worth
(As for her gracious government it does)
But future ages shall acknowledge more
To the rich labours of her Royal pen.
The wisest Princes never sought to raise
Their present state alone, but to preserve
Themselves immortal by an endless fame.
For memory of me, besides these books,
If that our Augurs fail not in their skill,
Or flatter not, that German Colony,
Which I of late deducted o'er the Rhine
To Ubium, for evermore the name
Of Agrippinaes Colony shall bear.
That act, though great, declares your power alone,
Your wealth and greatness: but these learned books
Express your wisdom, and for these you owe
Nothing at all to Fortune.
Thus I mean
To spend all time which from affairs of state,
And business of our Empire can be spared.
Is she already turned our Emperor?
Those wretches have too narrow souls, who think
That persons great and eminent in state
Can spare no time to purchase same by writing,
But what they steal from action and employment,
As if no mind were large enough for both.
Who was more full of action, and more fit
To rule, nay rule the world, then Julius Caesar?
Yet he was of my mind.
Oh strange male spirit!
Can there be found no other parallel
But Julius Caesar to a women's mind?
Yet Julius was too blame, hee toild too much
To get his honour, and too much debarred
His nature the free use of Princely pleasures.
Sure Lucius Sylla had an ample mind;
Tic Sillies Character, that Salust gives him,
A free and great enjoyer of his pleasures,
Yet how industrious his actions speak,
Hee found fit time to rule the Roman world,
And write both Greek and Latin Commentaries.
The souls of Sylla and of Caesar both
I think have entered her.
Well worthy friends,
You doe approve my way of writing then.
Yes gracious Madam; and because you named
Great Julius to us, I was thinking now
That as in blood, so in your stiles of writing
There was some nearness.
Seneca, I thank you;
But I confess your positive approbation
Pleased me as well as that comparison.
Does not your Majesty esteem his book?
Indifferent well; a good loose careless way.
I think directly with Asinius Polio,
Had Caesar lived, hee would have mended it;
The man had far more in him then that shows.
Yet under favour, Madam, some have thought
Those Commentaries hardly could be mended,
A stile so strong, naked, and beautiful,
Free from affected words, and from all gloss
Or dress of Oratory, as in stead
Of leading others in a way to write,
It quite discourages the ablest men.
So Hirtius thought, and that famed Cicero,
The greatest master of Romes eloquence.
Are those your authors then? that Hirtius
Was Caesars servant partial in his heart,
Or else hee flattered him; for Cicero,
They were so far out of his tedious strain,
Hee could not censure them.
Yet able men
Can truly censure of another stile
Then what themselves have used.
Hee was not able,
No, not in Oratory; had I ruled
Rome and her Senate then, as now I doe,
Not all the Orations that ever Cicero
Made in the Senate, should have saved one hair
Of an offender, or condemned a Mouse.
How confident she is in censuring!
I am amazed: but let her have her way.
Forgive my silence noble Cicero;
Here thy defence is vain; but what I spare,
The tongues of all posterity shall speak.
Lhe Tribune, Madam, is returned and brings
Lolly Paulinaes head.
Let him come in.
Your pleasure, great Augusta, is performed.
Let me peruse this face: ha! it is much changed.
Her teeth shall make me sure, they did not grow
The common way; I am confirmed; it is she.
Reward him Pallas.
The Gods preserve
Augusta Agrippina.
O pale death,
Thou mock of beauty, and of greatness too:
Was this the face, that once in Caesar's love
Was Agrippinaes rival, and durst hope
As much against me, as my unquestioned power
Has wrought on her? Was this that beauty, once
That wore the riches of the world about it?
For whose attire, all lands, all seas were searched,
All creatures robed? This! This was that Pauline,
Whom Cajus Caesar served, whom Rome adored
And the world feared.
Such a sight me 'thinks
Should make her sadly think of humane frailty.
Take hence the head, least in her death she gain
A greater conquest o'er me, then her life
Could ever doe, to make me shed a tear.
I would not wrong the justice I have done
So much as to lament it now: You know
My friends, she had a spirit dangerous.
And though my nature could have pardoned her,
Reason of state forbade it, which then told me
Great ruins have been wrought by foolish pity.
Would she had such a nature! but it is now
Too late to give her counsel.
So let all
That dare contest with Agrippina, fall.
Caesar is come to visit you.
Now friends,
Vitellius, Polio, Pallas second me.
How fares my Agrippina?
Wondrous well,
When I am blessed with Caesars company.
That shall be oft, my love, when Romes affairs,
And public business will give me leave.
I would partake my self of those affairs,
Rather then want your presence
I believe it.
Thou shalt; it is only for thy dearest sake
I love my fortunes, thy sweet fellowship
Makes light the burden of my government.
To ease great Caesars care, shall ever bee
The height of my desires: before you came
My heart was sad. I sent for these my friends
To impart the reason to them.
Sad; for what?
Weighing the troubles of a Princely state,
And all the dangers that still threaten it.
Dangers!
She strikes upon the fittest string;
No passion reigns in him so much as fear.
Wee were devising of the fittest means
To give your state security: you know
Your strongest guard is the Praetorian camp.
Most true.
That camp commanded now by two,
May be by Captains too ambitious strife
Divided into factions, and so made
Less serviceable, should your safety need them.
Caesar remembers when that bold attempt
Of Silius was, how the Praetorian camp
Was by their general strife in mutiny,
And had not one been chosen for that day
To rule them all, Caesar had not been safe.
Wise men in calms provide for storms to come.
None knows how dangerous the times may prove,
Though now the state be safe, and may the Gods
To Caesar's honour long preserve it so.
What new design is this, that all of them
•econd so readily, and I was not
Acquainted with it? If it prove mischievous,
I thank the Empress for my ignorance.
Burrhus Afranius is a worthy man,
Fit for the place, and faithful, well-belov'd
By all the soldiers: such a change, my Lord,
None can except against: Let him take all.
What ere her ends may bee, this proposition
For noble Burrhus sake, I must approve.
It is true, my love, I make no question
Of Burrhus worth, and fitness for the place:
But what offence have Geta and Crispinus
Been ever accused of? Or what just suspicions
Are there of them?
I will not be unjust,
To accuse guiltless men, although I price
Thy safety, Caesar, equal to my life.
I know no crimes of note they have commit.
Caesar, it is no loss to them at all;
They both have plenteous fortunes to retire to.
And in so near a cause, who dares examine
Great Caesar's counsels, or enquire the reason?
Shall Burrhus have it Caesar? speak thy pleasure.
Or if my care offend, I shall hereafter
Forbear to meddle.
No, sweet Agrippina;
Since thou wilt have it so; go Pallas, draw
The warrant straight, and seal it in our name:
Let Geta and Crispinus be removed,
And Burrhus take possession presently.
This day, my love, the Briton prisoners
Sent from Ostorius Scapula, and late
Arrived at Rome, shall be in public showed.
There thou shalt see that brave Barbarian Prince,
That bold Caractacus, whose stubborn spirit
So many years contemned the Roman power.
Hee now is taken.
It was a victory
Sent from the Gods to honour Claudius reign.
Had he been basely taken, or at first
Yielded himself, as hee had got no honour,
But been forgotten in his fall, and nought
Had ever been mentioned of him but his death:
So had thy glory Caesar been far less.
Not warre-like Syphax the Numidian King,
Stubborn Jugurtha, nor great Perseus
Ere brought to Rome by their captivity
More real honour then this Briton Prince.
Nor doe wee price our name Brittannicus
Fetched from that Island, less then Scipio
His honoured name of Africanus prized.
Thy stile, O Caesar, is the greater far
Drawn from the conquest of another world,
Which nature meant by interposing cold
And stormy seas, to guard from Lotion arms.
Great Julius Caesar did but only show
That land to us, whose conquest was reserved
By heavens decree to honour Claudius name.
Caesar, let's sit together; one Tribunal
Will hold us both.
It shall bee so, my love,
Thou, as my self, shalt pardon or condemn.
MY love, dear Otho, fine would bid thee stay:
But danger now forbids it, for my Lord
Returns by this time homewards from the Palace.
Wee must obey the times necessity
Sweetest Poppoea, though I part from thee
With such a sad'nesse as will loose by all
Comparisons and cannot bee expressed
But by it self, to say that Otho parts
From fair Poppy, is more tragical
Then soul from body, honour from a man.
I could, me thinks, flatter my fears, to keep
Thee ever here.
And I can scorn all fears,
And dangers too, if thou command me stay.
No, go, my Love, and warily let's meet
That wee may often meet: but why should still
Our highest bliss want freedom?
It is my fair one,
The envy of the Gods, who think the state
Of men would aequall theirs, if greatest joys
Were easiest to obtain, and therefore still
In horrid dangers wrap their dearest gifts,
As all the Poëts ancient fables taught.
Fire-breathing Bulls did guard the Colchian fleece;
A waking dragon kept the golden fruit.
But thou, Poppy, in my thoughts a prize
Of greater value, and more lustre far
Then that which drew the bold Thessalian forth
So far from Greece, or made Alcmenaes son
Invade the Hesperides, art kept from me
By stronger guards, the awful Roman laws,
Those laws resist our love.
Oh where was Otho
Then, when my virgin blossom was the hope
Of thousand noble youths? had thou been seen
Poppaeaes bed and beauties had been thine,
And with a lawful uncontrolled flame
Had met thy wish in those delights, which now
Wee are enforced to steal.
Must it bee so
For ever then?
It must while Rufus lives.
Nor can I blame blessed Rufus, if hee strive
To keep that wealth, which if it lay beyond
The Indian Ganges, Scythian Tanais,
Or horned Ammons scorched and thirsty sands,
Would draw the Roman Monarch to forsake
His worlds Imperial seat there to enjoy,
And think those banished that remained at Rome.
If I were Caesar, and condemned by fate
To want Poppaeaes love, I should bee poor.
No other dear prerogative could that
High wreath bestow, but only power to make
Thee mine without a rival: I might then
With boldness take thee from Crispinus arms.
But could that act bee lawful?
Can thou doubt it?
Where two loves meet can marriage bee unlawful?
Of which love is the soul, the very form
That gives it being no dead outward tie,
But natures strong and inward sympathy.
Can make a marriage, which the Gods alone
Have power to breed in us, and therefore they
Have only power to tie so sweet a knot.
I am thy mate; nor did thy father, when
Hee gave that snowy hand unto another,
Ought but rebel against the Gods decree.
Thou art to good an advocate, and I
Too partial for a judge.
Bee constant to me
Till fortune give a bolder privilege.
And warrant to our love, of which I have
Received such fair presages, as I cannot
Despair; mean while by stealth I must behold
Those starry eyes, and think my self most happy
In that, though no man know my happiness.
Can men count those delights a happiness
Which they conceal?
Yes, those that truly love.
Madam, my Lord is come.
Farewell dear Otho.
Farewell: love guard thee till wee meet again.
Come Lucius study to forget it now,
And let's bee truly merry; my Poppy
Bid' Lucius Geta welcome, my colleague
That was, but still my friend.
You are most welcome.
Thanks fairest Lady.
•ut my Lord, what means
That speech of yours, that Lucius Geta once
Was your colleague and is not.
I tell thee,
•reat Agrippina has commanded Caesar
•o command Pallas to command us two.
〈◊〉 quit our charge and suddenly resign
•he government of the Praetorian camp
〈◊〉 Burrhus hand; at which hee storms; but I
〈◊〉 merrier far, and lighter then before.
•ee may live freely now; Caesar has tan
〈◊〉 weighty burden from my weary neck.
•hank his goodness.
Thank his sottishness,
Tic that has pleasured you. ah friend it needs
Must grieve all noble hearts, that can love justice,
And pity suffering innocence, to see
The harmless years of young Britannicus
Exposed to all the malice of his foes,
And stupid Caesar made the instrument
To ruin his own son: whilst his great power
By others is abused against himself
And his posterity.
I do believe it.
His servants all, that to himself were true,
Or faithful to his son, are murdered now,
Or else displaced by her: our truth's the cause
That wee have lost our places.
Tic no matter;
Wee loose no honour by our truth; and since
While wee had power, wee faithfully discharged
Our trust to Caesar, let's no longer starve
To guard him against his will; but take his gift.
Hee gives us ease, and freedom, to retire,
And taste the sweets of privaty, and there
Enjoy our lives free from the glorious noise,
And troubles of a Court; instead of waiting
On Caesar now, on thee I will bestow
That time, my fair Poppy, and attend
On thy delights; thou wilt not cast me off
As Caesar does.
She cannot promise you
I know her heart better then you in that.
None can describe the sweets of country life
But those blessed men that do enjoy, and taste them.
Plain husband men, though far below our pitch
Of fortune plac,d, enjoy a wealth above us.
To whom the earth with true and bounteous justice
Free fhom wars cares returns an easy food.
They breath the fresh and uncorrupted air,
And by clear brookes enjoy untroubled sleeps.
Their state is fearless, and secure, enriched
With several blessings, such as greatest Kings
Might in true justice envy, and themselves
Would count too happy, if they truly knew them.
Tic true, Crispinus, greatest Monarchs oft
Have in the midst of all their careful glories
Desired such lives as those plain people lead.
Let us enjoy that huppinesse then Lucius
The country sports and recreations
And friends as innocent as wee, with whom
Wee need not fear the strength of richest wine
In drawing out our secrets: but well filled
At suppertime may hold a free discourse
Of Caesar's weakness, of the wealth and pride
Of his freed'men, how lordly Pallas rules;
How fierce and cruel Arippina is,
What slaves the Roman Senate are become,
And yet next morn awake with confidence.
All this, my Lord, you may discourse at Rome
•f you can wisely choose your company.
Well said Poppy, thou art a woman right
Thou love the city well.
I cannot blame her,
Such beauty seeks no corners, but may well
Become the Imperial city of the world.
Come Lucius Geta, let's go in and laugh
At our proud enemies, enjoy their malice,
And drown our cares in rich Falernian wine
As ancient as Opimius Consulship.
Here comes a man, Crispinus, I believe
Is sorry for this change.
I think so Lucius.
Hail noble Romans.
Hail to you Narcissus.
How dare you venture a salute on us,
Or make a visit to such guilty men?
Guilty my Lord, in what?
In being wronged.
Those that are wronged in Court, are made offenders▪
I must confess, my Lord, it was a wrong
To you and your Colleague to bee displaced,
But you have spirits great enough to scorn
That injury, and pity him that did it,
I mean that suffered his proud foes to doo it
Rather against himself then you; the wrong
Must fall on Caesar, and his haplesse house.
Blinded by fate, and near his fall, hee throws
Away the best supporters of his state.
The thought of that as I am true, Narcissus,
Afflicts me more then mine own loss can doe.
For me, I think my self well freed from trouble
Were it not for fear of poor Britannicus.
I doo believe it, noble Lords; but you
Are now dischar'gd, and may retire with safety.
My part is yet to play, a part of danger,
And I will act it bravely: here I vow
By all the Gods, no fear shall make me shrink
Till I have once more righted Claudius
Against the lusts and treasons of a wife.
Nor do I boast of Messalinaes death.
It was the times necessity, that made
Me then to show my power: that power perchance
Is yet as much; nor shall the Lordly Pallas,
Though swelled with Agrippinaes lustful favours,
And backed by her authority, hee think
Himself sole ruler in the Imperial house,
Find that Narcissus is so fallen in spirit
But that I dare attempt as much as then.
Great Caesar's safety is as much in danger
As then it was, his nuptial bed as stained,
And I will die, or take the same revenge,
That then was taken; all their plots and treasons
Will I reveal to Caesar, and pursue it
With such a dauntless constancy, that if
The Gods forget not to bee just, this day
Proud Agrippina, and her minion fall.
The young Britannicus shall stand secure
In his high birthright; Messalinaes ghost
Shall then perchance, although she hate me now,
•orgive the hand that cause her overthrow,
Bravely resolved, Narcissus.
You shall doe
An act that all good men shall thank you for.
Will you go in, and taste my wine'.
Not now.
I came but only to reveal my purpose
To you, whose noble wishes may befriend it,
And when occasion serves, may truly witness
My just intents; this hour I am expected
By▪ Caesar in his gardens; there I'll put
My life upon the hazard; every minute
May breed a change, and all delays have danger.
For Caesar upon those discoveries
That I already have made to him, uttered
Some words last night at supper in his wine.
Of which I fear that Agrippina took
Too great a notice; therefore speed must help us.
Farewell my Lords.
Farewell: the Gods assist thee.
So rich a bondage is Poppies love,
That I were base if I should with for freedom,
Nay more, ingrate, should I desire to change
So sweet a care for quietness it self;
Should I suppose that state, which some dull souls
Call calm content, were half so rich, so free
As are these pinings, this captivity.
Were there in love no cares, no sighs, no fears,
There were in love no happiness at all.
What bliss, what wealth did ever the world bestow
On man, but cares and fears attended it?
Yet who so base, as, to bee freed from those,
Would throw away the highest bliss on earth?
Let silly shepherds, whose poor narrow souls
Not much exceed the beasts they tend and feed,
That know, like them, no farther regions
Then some few fields, no larger bounds of pleasure
Then satisfaction of bare natures needs,
Bee still secure since they have nought to loose,
And rest content because they never knew
What cities were, and gorgeous Palaces.
Should Monarchs, who are taught to know the extent
Of natures wealth, and what the world affords,
Forgo their glorious fortunes, cause they want
That wretched thing, which only ignorance,
And low contempt can give, Security?
Should I forgo my fair Poppaeaes love
Because some cares, some fears▪ and sighs attend it:
When every smile of hers can recompense
A thousand such? were too much poorness in me
Had I ne'er seen those starry eyes of hers
More haplesse far my ignorance had been.
I had, like wretched men, that are borne blind,
Ne'er known there was a Sun to guild the world.
But to enjoy her love without all fears,
Without all rivals, were a bliss beyond
Mortality: the Gods would envy me.
Shoe's now another mans: that may bee thought
The greatest bar to Otho's happiness.
But I have framed in my jealous thoughts
A greater barrethen that: young Narrow Caesar,
In whose acquaintance I of late have found
So near a room, as fair presages tell us,
Is like to weareth' Imperial wreath: his power
May take her for me from Crispinus arms.
But then perchance I loose her more then ever.
Or should hee see her now to rival me
I were undone: hoe's amorous, and oft
Solicits me to let him see my Mistress.
I for that friendship, which I dare not loose,
Dare not deny his importunity.
And therefore to prevent what may ensue
(For yet hee never heard Poppies name)
I have made love to the fair freed woman
Young Act of mean rank, but such a face,
As whosoever had not seen Poppy
Would think this Act natures Masterpiece.
On her will I divert young Nero's love.
And to that purpose I have got her picture.
But here hee comes.
What Otho, still retired?
Where lives the face that breeds this melancholy?
There is no other cause can do it: I know
Thou art not busied with affairs of state.
I prithee let me see her: a friends counsel
May ease thy passion.
Tic not fit a Prince
Should stoop so low as to the passions
Of privatemen.
The name of friend admits
Of no such distance.
Sr. no man, whom you
Are pleased to call a friend, deserves that name,
Unless hee know himself to bee your servant.
Come prithee leave thy fooling, and bee plain.
Where there is no familiarity
Society is lost: why art thou fearful
To let me see her whosoere she bee?
Sr. I could give you a plain common reason,
If she bee foul, she is not worth your sight.
If fair, you are too great a rival for me.
But yet, know Sr. I am so free from those
Unworthy fears, that I dare trust my life,
My love, and all I have into your hands.
Spoke like a friend, and thou moist safely do it.
Then first behold her picture, and by that
Find whether she bee worth the sight or no.
Can any mortal beauty bee so sweet?
I would there were not.
Sure the painter flatters.
Oh no, hee had not art enough to reach
The glory of it; were the substance here
How dull would this now lovely table show!
See how his greedy eyes devour the picture.
Hoe's caught, hoe's caught; Cupid' I thank thee now.
I never saw true beauty till this hour.
But wherefore did thou wish there were no substance
So sweet as this? why would thou bee deprived
Of such a happiness? but I perceive
It is thy fear: come, let it not bee so.
I but desire to see whether the painter
Have erred or no: and do not think, my Otho,
That I will wrong thy love so much, or make
My wife Octavia jealous.
Sr. how ere,
My life, my love, and fortunes all are yours.
Your Majesty may yet prevent it all,
And justly throw upon the Traitors heads
That ruin which so boldly threatens you,
And your too much abused family.
Yet Caesar may bee safe, if hee will use
That power the Gods have put into his hands.
What course, Narcissus, can wee run, to make
The people sensible of our estate,
What danger threatens us, and how our Justice
Is forced to meet the treasons of a wife?
Let not too vain a care of popular breath,
Or what the Vulgar may surmise, outweigh
The safety of your person' and your house.
But I am most assured that all the world
Except your self, have long observed their plots,
And if they see your wakened Justice now
Arise to censure Agrippinaes death,
They will not think the execution done
Too soon on her: these humble knees, Oh Caesar.
Which for your safety I so oft have bowed
Before the Gods, now to your sacred self
I bow, entreating that you would bee safe,
And not believe the Gods by miracle
Will work for you whilst you neglect your self.
Arise Narcissus, tic the unhappy fate
Of Princes ever (as Augustus Caesar
Was wont to say) the people ne'er believe
That treasons were complotted against their persons
Until those treasons take effect, and then
Too late perchance they pity and believe.
But was the wise Augustus therefore slow
Or timorous to cut offenders off?
Feared hee the peoples whispers? Caesar, no.
Hee well knew to use the sword hee had.
Hee had not else lived till times gentle hand
Dissolved in peace his long felicity,
And made the world by such continuance
Of power, believe hee was a God on earth.
But some offenders are too great to suffer
The common course of Justice: against such
Wise Princes have forborne to draw the sword,
And rather sought some ways of policy
How to ensnare them.
Caesar, those are ways
As much unfit for Princes as unsafe.
As many Monarchs have in dangerous times
Been ruined quite by going ways too low
(Though they have seemed subtle) as proud subjects
Have been undone by playing Princes parts.
And as this high, and open way befits
The power and person of earths greatest Monarch:
So it befits the times necessity.
You have already, Caesar, showed your sword,
And if you strike not now, you do not right
Your self at all, but only arm your foes
With plots of mischief to prevent their own,
And hasten on your quick destruction.
You have already threatened, and those speeches
By Agrippina, and her minion Pallas
Were overheard; who, like seen snakes will now
Bestir themselves in a more desperate fury.
I have already cast mine own poor life
Into the utmost hazard: but alas!
That is a thing not now considerable.
The Gods above can tell how willingly
For Caesar's safety I would sacrifice
This life; make me the chiefest instrument
Impose what part of this exploit you please
Upon Narcissus hand, and if I fail
To execute, I'll not refuse to die.
Oh my Narcissus; I have found thy faith
In other services: it is resolved,
Their pride shall feel my justice; thou shalt see
How soon I will secure my self and thee.
Wee are discovered Pallas: all our drifts
Are sounded by Narcissus, and by him
Laid op to Caesar, who dissembling yet
The knowledge of it, seeks a sudden way
To ruin both of us: nor had wee feared
So soon as felt his fury, had not wine
Betrayed his thoughts to us; you know last night
What speeches Caesar in his drunkenness
Let fall before us; and it was lately told me
That meeting young Britannicus hee wept,
Confessed that hee had wronged him, and there vowed
A quick redress: what counsel shall wee take?
Wee have no time for counsel: but must act
As soon as think: wee go not now to work
But to prevent a mischief, and our cure
Must bee as strong, and quick of operation
As our disease is dangerous and sudden.
That bird, that sees the snare, and will bee caught
Deserves his death: and since that Caesar knows
His purpose is discovered (as Narcissus
He's before this informed him that wee heard it)
He will quickly act what else hee had deferred.
No way is left us but to meet the danger,
And for prevention first attempt to doe
That which wee fear to suffer.
By what means
Shall wee procure his death? for poison slow
Perchance may fail to lend a timely help
Unto our safety; and too quick a venom
May make the fact supected.
Should the fact
Bee ne'er so much suspected, your estate
Would bee more safe then now it is; but who
Would dare to utter it when Caesar's dead,
And your own Son the Emperor: for so
My confidence assures me it will bee.
Therefore bee speedy, Madam; for your danger
Where fame, where life, and Empire all are threatened,
Gives you no nice election. So't bee done
No matter how.
Thou hast confirmed me, Pallas.
The way's resolved already; there were lately
The fairest mushromes sent from Lybia
That ere these eyes beheld, a meat which hee
Affects with greediness; in one of those
Caesar shall meet his death; if that should fail
His chief Physician Xenophon is mine.
But are things story, and ready to confirm
The Empire upon Narrow.
Tic the best
And happiest time, before Britannicus
Bee grown to riper years, while yet hee wears
His childish robe, and Narrow has been shown
To all the people in triumphal weeds.
But when the deed is done, place warily
Your guards about the Palace gates, and keep
Britannicus within; whilst Narrow backed
By Seneca and Burrhus, by the camp
And Senate bee saluted Emperor,
And all be settled sure.
How fit a time
To work his own destruction Caesar chose
To tempt with threatening Agrippinas fury!
Is Narrow fired?
Extremely. I at first
Seemed melancholy to loose Act so,
And hee seemed loath to wrong me; but at last
When his desires were high, I cunningly
Withdrew my interest, and gave way to his.
Which hee has taken for the greatest favour
That ever man could doe him and I hope
It has endeared him strongly.
Thou wilt grow
A happy man.
Tic the best way to rise.
The wench is fair, and of behaviour
Wanton enough to make the arrantst novice
A perfect scholar in the school of Venus.
Seneca himself rather will give way
That hee should satisfy his lust on her
Then seek th'adulteries of noble women.
But gentlemen, have you not heard the news?
There is a great combustion in the Palace
As I have been informed, thieves are fallen out.
The two proud freemen Pallas and Narcissus
Are clashing against each other.
I am glad ont.
I hope some curious rogeries will come on it.
Those are the fellows that have ruled the state
These many years, and trampled on the lives
Of noble men Caesar's credulous weakness.
But yet me thinks Narcissus should not dare
Now to contest with Pallas he has got
Too great a start of him, and is too near
Acquainted with the empress.
So they say.
Has a fine time on it who would think the rogue
Sold bee so ambitious as to court an Empress?
It was her ambitions to bee made the wife
Of Claudius, that first made her prostitute
Her self so low, and court this fellows love,
Whom she perceived to have a ruling power
Over his doting master, to ambition
She sacrificed her honour tic well known.
And hee by doing of the Empress, takes
The surest way of keeping Caesars love
Yes, there's no doubt of that. You know the proverb.
Well met my Lords; I come to find you out.
What's the news Anicetus?
Great my Lord.
Caesar, is wondrous sick; it is thought to death.
The Pallas is by soldiers guarded round.
A great and frequent Senate is assembling.
The Consuls and the Priests are making vows
For Caesar's safety.
Claudius is old
There have been other ways to end a Prince
Besides old age. But what is that to us?
Come let's away and show our forwardness
To joy or mourning as occasion serves.
I am prepared for both.
And so am I.
Both must be done, if Caesar dye, our grief
Must last but till the successor bee known;
And then wee must rejoice.
Tic true.
But I
Shall have true cause of joy if Narrow reign,
Shall I not see my father ere hee die?
Good Xenophon.
Good Madam pardon me,
Nothing is now so great an enemy
To his disease as noise and company.
Hoe's lately fallen into a gentle slumber.
Deep sleeps his fever will not let him take.
I'll certify your highness when hee wakes.
And wait upon you.
Thanks good Xenophon.
I long to hear what favour Narrow finds
In the Pretorian camp, how Caesar's death
Is by the soldiers and the Senate taken.
Welcome my dearest Pallas What's the news?
Madam, as good as Jove himself could send,
No sooner in the camp was Caesar's death
Divulgd, but Burrhus enters to his charge,
And Narrow with him, who by all the cohorts
Was presently saluted Emperor.
Only some few were silent, and a while
Stood still expecting young Britannicus;
But when they saw their expectation
Was all in vain, and none but Narrow came,
Fearing at last to loose the Donative
Which Burrhus promised them in Neros name,
They joined themselves unto the greater part.
Britannicus within the Palace here
Is safe enough for coming forth to day.
The Senate have scarce heard of Caesar's death
For wee concealed it till all things were ready.
Now in a Princely chariot mounted high
Guarded by Burrhus and the soldiers
Narrow sets forward to the Senate house.
But having past the camp, you need not fear
The Senate, Madam.
Pallas thou were ever
A messenger of lucky news to me.
A safe contriver of the highest plots,
A happy instrument thou hast deserved
What ere thou hast enjoyed, though thou have tasted
That which a Caesar sued to taste, and bought
The world in recompense.
Pallas. If ever Pallas
Had any fire that could advance his thoughts
To high and great exploits, hee kindled it
At your celestial beauty, as from heaven
Prometheus stole that active fire, by which
Hee durst himself adventure to create
The noblest creature man. What act on earth,
What undertaking should he tremble at
Whom Agrippinas favours animate?
And what had I been but a piece of earth
Cold, dull, and useless, had I not been quickened
By your ethereal touch. Agrippina.
The happiness.
Of this high day has made thee eloquent
The love of royal Agrippina can
Inspire the dullest Soul with life and language.
When the Italian Queen was pleased to grace
A shepherds boy more then his humble thoughts
Could hope or wish, the ravished tongue forgot
That rural language which before it used.
Ah Pallas what a glorious change is here!
How is the lowness of our late despair
Turned to the height of joy and happiness?
Quick resolution well pursued will cure
The saddest state.
Go thou and hear more news,
Whilst I dispose of things about the Palace
May all the Gods accept our sacrifice,
And bee propitious to the vows, that wee
Have vowed for Caesar's safety.
Let the great
Divine and sacred Narrow Claudius
The care of heaven, sole ruler of the earth,
And Romes high Father not forsake his world
So soon to increase the number of the Gods,
••isle to the Consul, and this sacred Senate.
••eat Claudius Caesar's dead, in whose high throne
With one consent the soldiers have agreed
To seat young Narrow his adopted son;
And do by me entreat your suffrages
Fathers conscript; to ratify their choice.
Let not young Nero's years disparage him,
Nor trouble you, since happy presidents
May well be shown, grave Fathers. Great Augustus
Of glorious memory, no more in debt
To years then hee began to rule the state,
With what success not one in all this noble
And great assembly can bee ignorant.
But weigh with me the difference of the times.
The state is settled, and has flourished long
In peaceful government; no civil rents.
No factions now, nor armies are a foot
To stain with Lotion blood Philippe plains,
To dye the Actiak and Sicilian Seas,
And through all regions bear the unnatural wounds
Of bleeding Rome. No such affrighting names
As Marcus Brutus, Cassius, Lepidus
Great Pompey's son, or fierce Antonius
Armed with the power of half the Roman world
Stand to oppose him. Oh ye Gods how great!
How many dangers had beset the state
When young Augustus managed it! yet hee
Withstood and vanquished all those difficulties.
And why should Narrow our elected Prince
Aged like Augustus, not bee able now
To sway a peaceful sceptre? for the right
To this high, wreath although Britannicus
Were borne the natural son of Claudius,
A Prince of hope enough, and may by some
Bee thought much wronged in this election,
Yet weigh it rightly, and no wrong is done.
For Narrow was adopted. But besides
The claim of his adoption, hee is borne
A truer heir to our Imperial house
Sprung up from the loins of great Augustus Caesar.
Britannicus from Liviaes sons alone.
Nor are the years of young Britannicus
So ripe as his to govern.
Seneca,
Has wisely showed his undoubted right,
And I with joy approve the soldiers choice.
The Gods preserve Narrow our Emperor.
Now is the height of all my wishes reached.
Room for Caesar.
Hee goes on, and takes his state.
Hail Narrow Caesar.
Hail great Emperor.
Ever Augustus.
Most invincible
Most sacred Tribune
Holiest highest Priest.
Father of Rome
That honourable title
Is yet too weighty for my tender years.
Then let me wear it, fathers, when my pains
My toil and travel for the public weal
By aid and favour of the Gods have made
Me worthy of it. But your free consent
Fathers conscript, your powerful suffrages
Powerful and honoured as the voice of heaven
In confirmation of the soldiers choice
Fills me with joy immortal, and shall bind
My best endeavours to requite that love.
My heart is clear, my education
Was not in factious, in tumultuous times,
Or civil broils, my former life has been
As free from doing as receiving wrong;
And therefore bring I to the Imperial Throne
No fears, no grudges, hatred or reveneg.
This sacred Senate, which the world adores,
Shall still retain her old prerogative
While Narrow lives. My private house affairs
Shall from the free Republic bee divided,
And never turn the course of common Justice
No public Office shall bee bought for gold.
The sacred Consulary power shall judge
As heretofore, the affairs of Italy
And foreign provinces. My care alone
Sall bee to rule and lead the Soldiers.
And such to all the people will I bee
As I would wish the immortal Gods to me.
Oh speech most worthy Jupiter himself!
Worthy for ever to be registed
In brazen Pillars for the world to read.
Let public thanks by Senate bee decreed
To Caesar's grace and goodness.
No Asinius,
Let me deserve them first, first give me leave
What I have promised to perform in deeds,
That then if thanks or praises bee bestowed
They my bee judged as due, and better Crown
Your own true justice, and the Princes merits.
Oh happy Rome in such an Emperor!
Long may hee reign on earth, and late, oh late
Become a glorious star in Heaven
What word.
Will Caesar give the watching soldiers?
The excellent mother, Tribune, is their word.
Your company, noble Consul, we'll entreat
Home to the Palace.
I'll attend on Caesar.
The Prince has promised fair.
Life Seneca.,
That made the speech for him had been too blame.
Well, let him speak as Seneca instructs
•n public still say I, I know his heart
And secret thoughts better then Seneca
•hall ever doe; and there are Jovial days
• coming, gallants, say I prophecy.
Will it bee lawful to eat Lybian mushroms,
And British oysters without being cited
Before the censor?
Yes Curtius, and to whore
•or vacuation after them; those gifts
Will bee Court virtues. Come, the Prince is hopeful.
Would I might have the bringing of him up.
If I can help it, thou shalt have a share
In his tuition. Welcome Anicetus, Anicetus
Is it to me you come?
To you, my Lord.
Caesar desires your company at the palace.
Caesars desire, is a command, which I
With joy obey▪ return my humble duty
Good Anicetus, I'll attend him strait.
Now my mad shavers, do you know me yet?
Yes, very well; the question is if thou
Wilt know us now.
Tut man, Narrow shall know you.
I'll bring you both into his near acquaintance.
Now fair Poppaea's mine and mine alone.
Caesar must grant my first petition,
Or else deny the love hee swore to me
If ere hee wore the worlds Imperial wreath.
His power must fetch Poppy from her husband.
Nor is the deed so envious. Other Princes
Have done the like, and yet not taxed in story.
Besides, hee knows Crispinus never loved him,
And was an enemy to his adoption.
Against him perchance hee will the sooner grant it.
Agrip. This is the day that sets a glorious Crown
On all my great designs this day declares
My power, and makes the trembling world to know
That Agrippina. only can bestow
The Roman Empire, and command the wheel
Of suffering Fortune, holding in her hand
The fate of nation. Is there not a name
Above Augusta to inform the world
How great I am? What Roman Deity
Shall I assume? the petty Goddesses
Would all resign; but that they blushing think
Their stiles and altars are too mean for me.
•acinion Juno shall bee proud to share
Her glories all with me, and think her power
Graced with my fellowship would brighter shine;
Or leave her name, and bee adored by mine.
My Narrow is returned, hail Narrow Caesar.
Hail great and dear Augusta, best of Mothers.
To whose sole care and goodness Caesar owes
All those rich honours that he wears to day,
And will acknowledge ever
Brighter still
For many years let this blessed day return,
That does bestow for my dear Lord and husband
The ne'er enough lamented Claudius
•o true a solace on my grieved Soul.
This is that Caesar now, on whom my hopes
And comforts all rely.
This is that Caesar.
Who in obedience and true filial love
•o Agrippina will for ever strive
With virtuous aemulation to excel
Her most admired and exemplary goodness.
How well this piety becomes them both.
Long live great Narrow Caesar.
Thanks good Pallas.
Wee are indebted to thy faithful service;
And therefore till wee find some greater means
To make requital, still retain that office
Which in our father Claudius time thou hold.
Bee still our steward of the Imperial house.
Hee has deserved it.
For the funerals
Of our dead father, in what state and order
They shall bee celebrated, wee refer
To you dear Mother.
Let the order of them
Bee like Augustus Caesar's. Let him have
A Censors funerals with divine honours,
And put among the number of the Gods.
Nor shall our grandmother great Livia
With her Tiberius to Augustus show
More piety, or more magnificence
Then wee to our divinest Claudius.
If wee bee bound to think the Gods consider
This humane world, why are wee not as well
Bound to believe the greatest members of it
On whom the fates of all the rest depend,
Should be their greatest care? why should the Gods
Extend their narrow providence, and show
Their power in woods and rural villages,
Yet think the Imperial family of Rome
Not worth their care at all? for if they had
Where slept their justice, when great Claudius
Was murdered by his servants and his wife,
And they adored, and honoured by the state
For acting that accursed deed! what right
Can all the subject world receive from thence!
What good can dwell upon the earth with safety?
Proud Pallas, thou hast got the victory
O'er poor Narcissus, and may safely triumph
With thy false Empress; for no law can reach
The height you soar at now but yet take heed
That very crime, the same Impiety
That aided you in your foul enterprise
To vanquish me and justice on my side,
May one day pull you down.
Alas Narcissus!
Too truly Rufus, thou, and I foresaw
This fatal storm against Claudius woeful house.
Britannicus is now the object grown
Of all men's pity.
In the wrong hee did
Into his hopeful son hee needs must see
His own destruction woven. But if Claudius,
When I detected all their plots to him,
Had been of nature quick and resolute
Hee had prevented all, and escaped his murder.
Tic certain hee was poisoned
Rome it self
I fear will rue that sad adoption,
And in the wrongs of young Britannicus
Will bear too deep a share. while the fierce rule
Of Agrippina lasts.
What better hope
Does Narrow promise us?
Those that are near,
And inward with his nature, doe suspect
In him all seeds of vice and tyranny,
Though smoother'd for a time, at least, not hurtful
While he refrains from meddling with the state
That his night rambling revels, drinking feasts,
And cruel sports that he's delighted in,
Are vices of his nature, not his youth.
Tic true, Narcissus, I of late have heard
Many begin to fear the prophecy
of Aenobarbus his detested sire
That nothing good could be begot twixt him
And Agrippina. Too too true alas!
Such prophecies of some of our late Princes
Have proved to Rome, as that Augustus made
Of the slow-jaw'd Tiberius, and Tiberius.
Of his successor Caius, whom hee named
A Phaëton to the unhappy world.
All that I hope for is a wretched life,
If that bee not too much for me to hope.
Into Companion will I go, but there
If death pursue me, Caesars arms are long,
And I am armed for any accident.
Let none, but with a spirit prepared to dye,
Dare to adventure on prosperity.
Rufus and I are both resolved to leave
The city too, wee are not safe within it.
But far perchance, removed from her sight
Wee may escape fell Agrippinas spite.
Ah Lucius Geta, I am now enforced
To that retirement, which wee lately talked of.
Because my danger moved me not before,
Fresh cause is given me. Now I would not breath
The air of Rome for all the wealth within it.
What cause is that Crispinus? speak
Poppy,
That was my wife is carried from my house,
And divoc'd from me by command from Caesar,
The Prince begins his reign most hopefully.
Do you not wonder how I bear it thus?
I must confess the loss is wondrous great.
True, had she been my chaste and faithful wife,
The loss had been beyond all aestimation.
Nor could a manly spirit have borne the wrong.
But she was none of mine, her heart, my Lucius.
As I have since discovered, long ago
Was given to wanton Otho, and with him
Tic thought she stole her close adulterous hours.
For on that Otho, Narrow has bestowed her.
Wanting her heart, that gaudy peace of Earth
That men call beauty, I should soon have scorned,
Though Caesar's warrant had not come at all.
Shall wee be gone, my friend?
With all my heart.
It was my fear Poppy would have cause
Your stay too long.
I'll put her from my thoughts.
Farewell my Lords, all happiness attend
Your Country life, though I can hope for none.
Farewell Narcissus may the Gods protect thee.
Thus greatest Monarchs oft have given away
What they themselves ne'er saw, nor ever knew how
To value truly. Narrow has bestowed
A gift unknown on me, which I, that taste
How sweet it is, would not again forgo
For all his Empires wealth.
Nor would I change
My Otho's love for great Augustus state.
There to enjoy where both extremely love
Is such a happiness (as I have heard
Some do observe) it seldom does befall
A married pair, or if it doe, that bliss
Endures not long, so envious are the fates.
But that's a dream, my love, I doe not fear.
Thou need not fear Poppies constancy
Though Caesar were thy rival,
Sweet I do not;
I dare not wrong thy truth, or take so much
From mine own happiness, as to suspect
Thy constant mind at all: but Caesar's power
Is of extent as large as mans desire.
It was that, that made thee mine; and nought but that
That gave, can take my happiness away.
Thou hast a face, Poppy, that would clear
A ravisher from guilt, that would excuse
The treason of a friend, and make my wrong
No stain to Caesar's honour, though the Gods,
Or Cato were his judges.
Caesar would not;
Hee loves thee well besides a noble mind
Would scorn to taste the fruits of forced love,
A long beseidging is as forcible
As an assault, and wins the fort as sure
Though not so soon.
Nay spare your arguments.
I can look through them; thou art fearful, Otho,
That I should long to see the Court: alas
I have no such ambition to bee known
To Agrippina or Octavia.
Mistake me not, sweet love, I am so far
From jealousy of thee, that it was my purpose
To make it my request that thou would go
And see great Caesar's Court: nor do I think
Octavia would bee jealous, or that danger
That once befell the fair Calphurnia,
Whom Agrippina banished Italy
Because that Claudius Caesar praised her beauty,
Should fall on thee.
It shall not fall on me,
I will no see the Court: fie Otho fie
How wretchedly in striving to conceal
Thy jelousy, thou dost betray it to me!
Why dost thou tell me so of Caesar's power,
Octaviaes wrath, Calphuniaes banishment
Through Agrippinaes envy? tic thy love
Better then all these subtle tricks will keep
My thoughts at home.
It shall appear to thee
I do not fear at all; or if I did,
Tic not the failing of thy constancy.
Enjoy what freedom thou desire, Poppy.
Now for a little while excuse my absence,
I must for sake thee, though unwillingly.
Caesar, I fear, expected my return
Long before this love has beguiled the time,
And made my stay seem shorter then it is.
But I shall think till I return again
The hours are long, till then farewell Poppy.
I find his fears already, my estate
Was better far before Rufus Crispinus
Was grave. and knew not wantonness enough
To make him jealous as this Otho does
That too unlawful love, which then I showed
To Otho, is the mother of these fears.
Is old Seleucus the Magician come;
Madam hee waits without,
Go call him hither.
Seleucus is the master of his Art.
All his praedictions hitherto have proved
Most true and certain. why should I desire
To know my future fate; and hasten woe
(Should it prove ill) before the time of woe?
But tic a longing that I cannot check
Welcome Seleucus, have you found it out?
Madam, your scheme is drawn, and there I find
The stars a lot another husband to you
Another after Otho?
Yes, a third.
What shall hee bee?
The greatest Prince on earth.
Ha, Caesar?
Yes; it must be Caesar, Madam.
And tic as true as if the oracles
Of Jove and Phoebus had foretold it both.
This Caesar that now lives?
I can no further
Instruct you Madam; what you hear is true.
Drink this Seleucus for my sake. Farewell.
To bee Augusta is the greatest gift
The fates can give; nor does it seems to me
A thing so much unlikely. Otho's fear
Perchance was fatal. If it were, in vain
His care will bee, nor can hee then accuse
Me, but the fates that overruled my love.
It is decreed, Silanus must not live.
The Imperial blood, that runs within his veins
Were there no other cause, is crime enough.
Hee is descended in the same degree.
That Narrow is from great Augustus loins.
And some have lately whispered that his age
Is more mature for sovereignty then Nero's.
Besides thou know his brother Lucius,
That should have married young Octavia,
By us was hunted to his death; and hee
May meditate revenge.
You need not fear
A spirit so sluggish as Silanus is.
Your brother Caius Caesar, in the midst
Of all his fears and jealousies to which
Hee sacrificed so many noble branches
Of your Imperial house, contemned Silanus
As one in whom there was no spirit, or danger,
And called him nothing but the golden beast.
Wee cannot tell, if times of trouble come,
How much that beast by courage of attendants
And confluence of soldiers may bee changed.
Hee is Proconsul now of Asia,
And may here after, if the people should
Malign our government, bring power against us.
If you will have it so Publius Celerius
And Aelius now going for Asia
Have undertaken there to poison him.
Let it bee done. But Pallas, first of all
Let a centurion bee dispach'd into
Companion, to kill Narcissus. there
Hee must not live, that did contrive our ruin
And knows, I fear, the means by which wee escaped it.
By our command it shall bee warranted.
But tell me Pallas, ere thou goosed, are all
The German soldiers come?
Madam they are.
You have a royal guard.
Go dearest Pallas,
Dispatch Celerius into Asia,
And the Centurion to Companion.
Now Agrippina is her self, and all
The power and dignity she holds, her own.
I do not owe it to a marriage bed,
Or poor dependence on a husbands love,
Where every minion might have rivaled me.
There is no power, no state at all, but what
Is undependent, absolute and free.
Besides my proper and peculiar guards
Two lictors by the Senate are assigned
Distinct from Caesar and the Consuls state
To wate on me, that all the world at last
The Imperial power may in a woman know.
I was an Empress but ne'er reigned till now.
Come sit my friends, they here are freely welcome
That bring free Jovial hearts far hence bee all
Sad looks, sower gestures, and Censorious thoughts.
They fit not Nero's table. kiss me Act,
And smile upon the feast.
Caesar's command
Is warrant strong enough.
And thou shalt find
No rigid Catoes here.
True, great Caesar,
Let such sour Scauri sit at home, and write
Against the pleasure of this happy age
Dull satyrs, such as water, or the lees
Of Tuscan wine beget, let them admire
Those old penurious times. when Curius fed
On leekes and onions, when Fabritius
Feasted the frugal Senate with hung beef
And rusty bacon, and in earthen pots
Drunk small Etrurian wine, let them bee still
Such as themselves would make themselves, unworthy
To taste the plenty that Rome now enjoys.
Why did our famed ancestors so far
Extend their conquering arms, and strive to get
The riches of the world, but that their Nephews
Might now enjoy them? it were ingratitude
To their rich labours, should wee scorn to use
What they have got: or if the use of it
In us bee riot, sure it was avarice
In them, that toiled so much to purchase it.
Which of those rigid Censors, that declaim
Against the vices of the times, and tax
Rome as luxurious now would call it virtue
In a rich Citizen, whose store-houses
Were fraught with the best provisions, his chests crow∣ded
His cellars full of rich Companion wine
Yet hee himself to drink the coursest lees,
To feed on ackornes, pulse, and crabs, to wrong
His nature, and defraud his Genius?
Tic said the Furies keep pined Tantalus
From tasting those delicious fruits hee sees.
Such would the Roman virtue bee, should she
Affright her sons the masters of the world
From tasting that which they themselves possess.
Tic true; those former ages were most frugal;
Wee thank them for it, the better is our fare.
Let those that list, now when they have no need,
Still imitate, and boast their hungry virtue,
Whilst wee poor sinners are content with pleasants,
Numidian hens, and Lybian purple wings
Wilde goats, bores, hares, thrushes, and musheroms,
Oysters, and mullets, and such vicious meates.
Fill me some wine. Montanus melancholy,
And silent now?
Caesar, I was but listening
To hear Petronius good morality,
Otho I know cannot bee melancholy,
Hee is a bridegroom, and but new possessed
Of that fair treasure he has courted
So long, well Otho, I must have a sight
Of fair Poppy,; such I know she is.
She is unworthy of great Caesar's sight.
A round, go Anicetus bring the lots;
Because that no respect of power shall let
The freedom of our mirth, who ever draws
The longest cut shall bee our King to night,
And bee obeyed what ere hee shall command.
I will resign my chair to him. Com draw.
Tic I that am your King.
I shall believe
That Fortune has her eyes.
In getting Crowns
Narrow, thy fortune is too good for mine.
I know none envy me.
No envy can
Redress my wrongs.
I will begin with Otho.
I do command thee send by Anicetus
Some trusty token that immediately
May fetch Poppy hither to the banquet.
It shall bee done, this ring will fetch her hither,
I ever though it would come to this.
Thy plot
Of bringing Act in, I see has failed.
I care not much; he would at last have seen her.
Thou wilt not frown my Act, though thou see
Another beauty here.
No royal Caesar,
Nor shall you hear me envious, or detracting,
Although I know Poppy is a Lady
Whose beauty does as far excel poor Act
As Cynthia does the lesser stars, or Venus
The other Sea-nimphs.
Freely spoke, fair Act.
Here you shall find the saying does not hold
That women are detractors from each other.
Mean time begin a health.
So please it Caesar·
To great Augusta, Agrippina's health.
Let it go round. And now Petronius
I come to thee, I doo command thee write
A Satire presently against those pleasures
Thou did so lately praise, against the attire,
And costly diet of this notorious age.
This is thy Task.
I must obey the King:
And now's the fittest time for such a satire.
I never find my virtue of that strength
As to contemn good Victuals, but upon
A well filled stomach.
Give him wine to heighten't.
I've writ already a Satirick Poëm
In a grave angry way, where I complain
•hat Romes excess, corruption, luxury,
•uin'd the present government, and twixt
Caesar, and Pompey cause a civil war.
Listen, and hear my castigations.
Now all the world victorious Rome had won
All lands, all Seas, the morn and evening Sun,
Nor was content; the Ocean's furrowed ore
With armed ships; if any farre-hid shore,
〈◊〉 land there were, whence burnished gold was brought
It was their foe: by impious war they sought
(Fates fitted so) for wealth, old known delight
They scorn, and Vulgar bare-worne pleasure slight.
Pearls in the Assyrian lakes the soldiers love.
Bright polished earth in hew with purple strove.
Numidia marble brings the Scythian yields
His early fleece, the Arabs spoil their fields,
But see more ruin yet, and greater wounds
Of injured peace, the Mauritanian grounds
"And Lybian Ammon's farthest woods, to get
"Wilde beasts are searched whose teeth a price must set
"Upon their death, fierce Tigers fetched from far,
"And stalking stately on the Theater
"Are fed with humane slaughter to delight
"The peoples eyes: after the persian rite
"(Alas I shame to speak it, and display
"The ruine-threatning fates) they cut away
"Manhood from growth spoiled youths, for Venery
"Softening their nature, to keep back thereby
"In spite of time, their age her self in kind
"Abused nature seeks, but cannot find.
"They dote on Catamites, weak bending hams,
"Uunerved bodies, and a thousand names
"Of new attires, loose hair of men, in whom
"All man is lost! lo slaves from Africa come,
"Rich Citron boards, bright purple, which to view
"Cozening the senses bear a gold like hew.
"A wanton train, in wine and surffets drowned
"The far fetched table do encompass round.
"The wealth that all the spacious world contains
"By lawless arms the roaming soldier gains,
"Their gluttony grows witty; guilt-heads caught
"At Sea, alive are to their tables brought.
No more, my furious Satyrist, thou hast chid
The times sufficiently.
If you bee pleased
I have obeyed.
Well, I perceive Petronius
A man may write a Satire, and yet bee
No Scaurus, Curius, or Fabritius.
A Satyrist should bee the contrary,
And know those vices, which hee means to tax.
Brother Britannicus thy task is next,
Stand up and sing a song.
Give me some time:
I cannot do it extempore, what subject?
Choose that your self.
Then give me leave to sing
Mine own misfortunes, how I came to loose
The Roman sceptre.
How! that will not fit
A feast of mirth.
No, let them laugh that win.
A good smart youth.
This must not bee endured.
I must bee freed from this continual fear:
Then bee excused, be merry Gentlemen,
I wonder Anicetus stays so long.
But see they come, is this Poppy, Otho.
It is she great Caesar.
Wonder of her sex!
Bright paragon of Rome! all beauties yet
That I have seen, have been but foils to set
A greater lustre on this star of light.
His eyes are fixed; his changing looks do speak
A depth of passion, or my jealous fears.
Dazzle mine eyes too much.
Tic so; shoe's lost.
If ever Lady were a tennis ball
Tic this, shoe's bandied so from one to tother.
Must then another reap the envied fruit
Of my injustice? must Poppy bee
My crime, that took her from her other Lord,
To be his pleasure?
Is great Caesar sad!
No Otho, still she shows more fair and fair.
I cannot check my love; sit fairest Lady.
And with your lustre grace our feast. I see
Thou art a most incomparable judge
In beauty, Otho, and were I to choose
A wife again, I'd trust no eye but thine.
Would I might serve you Sr. in any thing.
But tell me thy opinion in one question.
Which dost thou think the noblest in a Prince,
If hee would use his power, and do an act
That may bee thought unjust, to do it for friendship▪
Or satisfaction of his own delight.
Sr. had you made the case a private man's
(For the delights of Princes, as themselves,
Wee must count sacred) I could soon resolve it.
Let it bee so for tic the same in justice.
I think it noblest then to do it for friendship.
For friendship ever was held honourable,
But satisfaction of our own delights
A thing of weakness rather then of honour▪
I see his drift.
Augustus Caesar then
And I by power have done the self same act.
But in the cause I have excelled Augustus,
For hee to satisfy his own hot love
From Claudius Narrow took fair Livia.
I from Crispinus took a brighter beauty
To show my self no lover. but a friend.
Doo not mistake me Otho, and suppose
I do repent the favour I have done
I know tic well bestowed.
It was such a favour
That I confess, great Caesar, as no tongue
Can bee enough expressive; so tic hard
To find a heart that's large enough to pay
Sufficient thanks in thought, but pious men
Have still acknowledged that no thanks of ours
Can aequalize the bounty of the Gods.
And Princes are like them, should I think less
I should both wrong the giver, and the gift.
In valuing her aright thou show thy self
As wise as just. I wish thee joy of her.
But fairest Lady, since it was so late
Before you graced our feast, I cannot think
That I have entertained you yet at all.
The scene shall therefore change, another room
Shall bid Poppy welcome to the Court.
Yet Caesar and his mother well agree.
The Gods continue it, but Vitellius,
I fear the sequel. Agrippinaes fierce
And haughty disposition will too much
Provoke her son it is thought; and hee too forward
To throw all nature off.
I think so too.
And therefore I could wish that Agrippina
Would go a gentler way, she must not build
Too much upon her merits, though wee know
It was she that put the sceptre in his hand.
For vicious natures, where they once begin
To take distaste, and purpose no requital,
The greater debt they owe, the more they hate
Besides she'll find it harder far to work
Her ends upon a son then it was to rule
A doting husband.
Time will show it all,
And we ere long shall know which way to lean.
Will Agrippina sit to day with Caesar
On his Tribunal, to give audience
To those Armenian Ambassadors?
There is no doubt she would; but I have spoiled
That state I hope; for I have councilled Narrow.
That if she come, hee shall arise and meet her,
As if he did it in respect, and duty
Deferring th'audience of th'Embassador,
I hope she will not understand our drift.
Pray heaven she do not, for you know her fircenesse.
It would bee Romes disgrace, the Senates shame
And my great crime if the Ambassadors
That come to plead their countries cause at Rome,
Should see a woman perching up with Caesar
Into the chare to give them audience.
And sit commanding ore the Roman ensigns:
It was not the custom of our Ancestors
To see such sights.
True Lucius Seneca,
Our Ancestors had no such kind of women,
She in her heart's a man, and you mistake
If you esteem her only Caesars mother;
Not his Colleague, and partner in the Empire
Or more then so.
I am not so ungrateful
To hate the woman, since I know it was
Her favour, that repealed my banishment.
But I dislike these things, that foreign states
In her unseemly carriage should behold
The shame of Rome, and would she keep a temper
Fitting the quality of her sex and place,
I should admire the bravery of her mind.
Long live great Narrow Caesar, the chief care
Of heaven, and highest Sovereign of the Earth,
The Princes of Armenia, Vologeses
And Tiridates greet your Majesty
By us, and do congratulate the honour,
Which since divinest Claudius left the earth
To make a God in'heaven, is fallen on you.
And to your high Tribunal doo refer
The controversy that is now betwixt them.
My mother's come, defer th'Embassadors
As it was appointed Seneca.
I will.
Hail dearest mother.
Wherefore rises Caesar
From his Tribunal when affaiers of state
Are brought before him?
No respect can bee
Too much for me to give great Argippina.
Excuse me, Caesar, if it bee respect,
Tic now unseasonable, take your seat,
I'll fit with you my self, and here th'affaires
Of these Armenian Ambassadors.
Wee have deferred the business a while,
And thought upon a fitter time to hear it.
If you arise because the audience
Is ended or deferred upon just reasons,
Tic not respect to me that made you rise,
As you alldg'd at first, but I have found it,
The reason that deferred this audience
Was Agrippinaes coming.
This I feared.
It was carried ill of Caesar at the first.
I see thou blush, Narrow, and may justly,
To call that reverence, which was affront,
Was a dissembling not befitting Caesar.
And to affront a mother so deserving
Was not the duty that befitted Narrow.
Can nearest Agrippina. think her Narrow.
Will ever doo an act that may bee judged
Affront to her
This was thou know it Narrow.
And so does thy adviser Seneca
From him it came, no other Senator
Durst to have councilled my disgrace but hee
Never will Seneca, so much obleidg'd
To Agrippinaes royal favour, wish
Or council her disgrace.
Oh Seneca.
Philosophy ne'er taught ingratitude.
If you had thought the place unfit for me,
You might have told me privately before,
Not used this trick which how so ere it hold
In Stoticisme, I'm sure is nought in state.
She pays him home.
Her spirit cannot brooke
The least appearance of an injury.
Caesar, I'll leave thee now, nor shall my presence
Bee any hinderance to thy state affairs.
I'll go a long with you.
For Seneca
I'll shortly teach him new Philosophy.
Shoe's full of anger; but it moves not me,
Since what I did was just, and for the honour
Of Rome and Caesar; honest actions
Will bee enough protection to them selves.
Take the best courses to prevent her fury.
Ah noble Burrhus, it must bee hereafter
Our greatest care to curb that women's pride,
And what wee can remove her from all rule
And government of state, for Agrippina
Is of too hot and fierce a disposition.
What should wee doo? it were pity to incense
Her son against her.
The Gods forbid that wee
Should starve to make the Prince unnatural.
But to prevent this inconvenience
I will persuade young Caesar not with purpose
To wrong his mother, somewhat to abate
Her dangerous greatenesse, to remove from her
Part of her guard of German soldiers,
And to displace her wicked counsellour
That insolent and Lordly free'dman Pallas.
You need not use persuasions to your Pupil
(The Gods forgive it if I judge amiss)
To stand against his mother, I much fear
Hee will too quickly hate her, for no reason
To state belonging; but because she grows
Imperious over him, and strives to curb
His lust and riots, those, those Seneca
I fear are seeds of future tyranny
And for his love (as if the fates decreed
To make his passions all preposterous)
His virtuous wife noble Octavia
The only instance in this wicked age
Of women great and good, is loathed by him.
That most afflicts me: could wee find a cure
For that disease, all other maladies
A riper age will in some part redress,
And I will strive to change them by degrees,
And get him to forsake his loose associates.
But let us first endeavour to remove
Fierce Agrippina from all rule of state.
I'll join with you, and use my best endeavours.
Shall I that am an Emperor, bee checked,
Controlled and baffled in my Palace thus?
I will remove this mother far from me,
And give command to Burrhus to provide
That house that was Antoniaes for her.
The Palace shall bee free to my delights,
I make no doubt but that the people know,
And hate her pride, and will the less rapine
At what I do against her, I have told her
(For she provoked me past all patience)
Part of my mind already, she shall rue
Perchance too late the fierceness she has showed
Ungrateful Narrow, is thy mothers power
So soon offensive grown? can thou so soon
Cast off all filial duties, and forget
What I deserve from thee? would thou deprive
Me of all power that gave all power to thee?
Did I so wickedly for thee procure
The height of human state, that thou should take
All state from me with greater wickedness?
Oh wronged Claudius, this sad punishment
My bloody treason, and ingratitude
To thy offended Manes justly pays.
By the most loving, and most injured Lord,
The worst of wives was more beloved then now
The best of mothers by a wicked Son.
I'll make him know what hand it was that raised
His fortunes to this height: but wherefore weeps
My dear Octavia?
What accursed fate
Pursues the woeful Claudian family?
Dear daughter speak thy grief.
Was I bestowed,
Or rather lost in marriage, to advance
Upon my brother's ruin, Nero's state
To bee by him despys'd, hated and made
A base freed-womans slave?
What freed woman?
Act thy Nero's concubine my mistress
That dares within the palace to contest
Nay to revile Octavia.
She dares not,
Nor shall she do it, I'll slit the strumpets nose,
If she dare speak against thee.
You cannot mother.
Narrow delights in none but her, his soul
In Act lives; on her he does bestow
That love, that's due to me: But me hee loathes;
Oh dismal love, Oh fatal marriage!
Take comfort sweet Octavia, I'll redress
Thy wrongs, or venture mine own fall with thee.
You have complained I see, Octavia.
Is there a chiding toward?
Has thy guilt,
And the unkind wrongs thou hast already done
Unthankful Narrow, to thy virtuous wife.
Armed thee with such an impudence, that now
Thou can prevent her just accusing thus?
How's this?
Me thinks although thou hadd'st no spark
Of goodness left thee, yet in Policy
Thou should not dare maintain a base borne strumpet
Against thy lawful wife great Claudius daughter.
Me thinks in policy you might remember
You speak to Caesar, not a child.
Tic true,
Thou hast forgot the duty of a child.
I will bee better known; if I bee Crossed
In my delights, I will bee bold to cross
You in your pleasures too
Oh heavens, what pleasures
What joys or studies have I ever had
But to prefer thee Narrow? are my cares
And all my labours thus requited now?
Let not too vain and foolish confidence
Of what thou art, make thee presume to wrong
Thy mother and thy wife; or thou shalt know
The Empires lawful heir is yet alive.
The wronged Britannicus is growing up
To take his right, and to revenge the wrongs
Which hee and all his family sustain
I'll go my self to the Praetorian Camp,
And plead his cause before the Soldiers.
There let one-handed Burrhus, and that base
Unthankful exile Seneca, appear
Against the daughter of Germanicus.
Yes plead the cause of young Britannicus;
And when y' have done, provide an advocate
To plead your own.
Gone so abruptly from us!
Slights hee mine anger so?
Madam I fear
You took too harsh a way; his looks were wilde
And full of rage; my sad misgiving soul
Tells me some mischeife's working in his thoughts.
Fear not, Octavia, weell take the best
And surest courses to prevent the ill
That may ensue: and if mature advice
And council cannot bridle him, we'll use
Another means to curb his insolence:
I have already by my bounty made
Most of the Tribunes and Centurions.
My guards are strong, and shall bee vigilant
Over the safety of Britannicus,
As mine own person, there's no open act
Of mischief can bee on the sudden wrought.
The Gods I hope will guard our innocence.
My fears have been too slow, and it was high time
That Agrippinaes thundering threats had waked
My sleeping mischiefs; which shall now no more
Study disguises, but appear in bold
And open acts with Caesars stamp upon um,
Feirelesse of vulgar whispering jealousies.
Upon thy death, Britannicus, a price
No less then Romes imperial wreath is set.
The deed, when done, will privilege it self,
And make the power of Narrow strong enough
To warrant his misdeed, who dare revenge
Or blame the offence that frees me from a rival?
But I shall leave a worse, and nearer far
Behind, my mother Agrippina lives;
She lives my rival, nay my partner still,
Nay more then that my Queen and Governess.
I am no Prince, no man, nothing at all
While Agrippina lives, must 〈◊〉 then live
To make me nothing? must the name of mother
Outweigh a sceptre? could the name of husband
Protect her Claudius? no; her own example
Shall teach me state: but first Britannicus
Must bee removed; his death assures my state,
And makes me able to contest with her.
That gentle poison, which Locusta gave him,
If poison it were, whilst wee did vainly fear
The peoples talk, has kept my fears alive.
Where is this hag?
Caesar.
Witch.
Fiend, fury, devil.
Mercy, mercy, Caesar.
I'll hew thy cursed carcass into atoms,
Thou give Britannicus an antidote
In stead of poison.
It was a gentle poison,
And such as you commanded me to make;
Hold Caesar hold; I will redeem all yet.
Do it or die, make me a poison strong,
A quick and speeding one.
It shall bee done.
No sooner tasted, but it shall destroy.
I'll see the trial of it, and reward
Thy service well; but if Britannicus
Out live this day, this day shall bee thy last.
It is the will of, Caesar, soldiers
You must bee all discharged from guarding her.
But you shall have allowance, and thus much
I'll promise for your comforts, you shall bee
The next that are ascribed into the list
Of the Praetorian camp.
Thanks noble Burrhus.
Go Anicetus, give command that straight
That house, which was Antoniaes bee prepared
For Agrippina, and her family.
Caesar will have the Palace to himself.
Does Agrippina know it
Not yet I think.
Is there displeasure then twixt her and Caesar?
I know not. you'll excuse my hast, my Lord
I must take leave.
I like not these new turns.
I came to visit her: but now I'll spare
My hail this morn. whither so fast my Lord?
To visit Agripina.
Stay, I'll tell you.
There is some difference twixt her and Caesar.
Her guards are tan away. I parted now
From Burhus, who discharged them. she her self
Shall be removed from the Imperial palace.
I like not that; I'll spare my visit then.
Otho will loose his wife then.
Yes, no doubt;
And I believe must leave the City too.
Nero's extremely fired, and hee will have her
Alone; poor Otho must not rival Caesar
Nor indeed is it fitting that the husband
Should make th'adulterer a cuckold.
Dost thou believe, Petronius, that this change
Pleases Poppy?
Yes, I warrant her.
She thinks her beauty never could have done her
A greater service.
But she seemed to love
Otho extremely.
I confess Montanus
I think her appetite stood well to Otho;
For it is a rascal of a winning carriage
And curious feature; but she has enjoyed him
Sometime already, and that passion
Which you call love, does move in a degree
So low, and feeble, it is soon swallowed up
In the deep torrent of ambition.
Poppaea's proud; nor can that breast of hers
Harbour a love so strong, but it must yield
To pride her quality praedominant.
What can she bee but Nero's concubine?
I see not what high honour lies in that.
You cannot tell what she may bee in time.
She cannot bee Augusta; that high name
Octavia, while she lives, will keep, hee dares not
Forsake that wife (how ever hee do affect her)
To whom hee may bee said to owe the Empire.
For mine own part, I know not how twill go.
But I dare swear Poppy ever this time
Has asked and heard what the Chaldaeans say
About her fortunes: our fine dames of Rome
Must still bee tampering with that kind of cattle.
Their dogs, their monkeys, and themselves do nothing
Without the advise of such a cunning man,
Hast thou seen Otho lately?
Yes to day:
How does hee look upon the business?
Faith somewhat sad; but Caesar seems to use him
So wonderful kindly that he cannot think
Hoe's wronged at all.
Prithee let's find him out.
No longer steward of the Imperial house!
Are greatest benefits so soon forgot
By wicked Princes? tic and ever was
The fate of Courts, Monarchs unjustly hate
Acknowledgment: what power, what honour now
Does Narrow, hold but what hee owes to me?
My merit, nay my wickedness, which did
To him increase the merit, for this heart
Has bled the more for my ingratitude
To my best master Claudius, his sad wrongs
Another now revenges! oh Narcissus,
Perchance the conquest that I got ore thee,
When wee two strove about the successor
To Claudius Caesar, will hereafter prove
More fatal to the conqueror, then him
That lost the day, thou in Companion
Di'dst happily, though hunted to thy death
By us; and carry'dst to thy grave the honour
Of aiding the just side, oh Royal Empress,
I fear our care to raise unthankful Narrow
Will prove at last our own destruction
My places loss I weigh not, but for fear
It prove a step to your dishonour, Madam.
Tic for my sake that thou hast lost it, Pallas,
With me my friends are hated. Oh sad fate
That follows impious actions! well perchance
And happily might I have lived if wronged
Britannicus had reigned! Oh would the loss
Of this unworthy life could yet procure
That injured Prince his due.
Can fortune turn
The course of things so strangely, that you Madam,
The Prince his mother and his raiser too
Should wish the others reign
It can, it can.
This is the power and justice of the Gods,
That when wee think our selves most safe in ill,
Can frustrate all our confidence, and make
That power, which seemed to bee our prop, to bee
Our only cause of ruin, wee are children,
Vice makes us children, like to them, wee cry
For Knives to hurt our selves with, and the Gods
To punish us oft grant what wee desire.
What doleful noise is this?
Ay me, I fear.
Oh dismal day! Oh wretched family!
Fly back bright Phoehus to the Eastern shore,
Or hide thy head; thou hast at Rome beheld
A feast more black then ere Mycenae saw.
〈◊〉 dearest brother, sweet Britannicus.
Britannicus.
Murdered Britannicus,
Poisoned at Nero's table.
Break my heart
The greatest woe, that could befall, is come.
Forgive me, gentle Soul, it was I that gave
That viper life, and rule to ruin thee.
Thou need not curse me; the impiety
Of him that killed thee, will revenge thy death.
Fair hope of Rome, sweet flower untimely cropped,
What parentasion shall sad Pallas make
T'appease thy wronged ghost, and expiate
My foul offences? to the King and Queen
Of fable night I'll build two grassy altars;
And yearly there, if any years at all
I have to live. with sad libations
Invoke the manes of Britannicus,
Thou from the groves of fair Elysium
For ever wailed for ever honoured Prince,
Deign to accept my humble sacrifice.
Or if those rights bee too too mean for thee,
Perchance the Genius of afflicted Rome
Shall weep hereafter ore thy grave, and wail
The untimely death of her Britannicus.
Gentle to thee let earth and water prove.
This woeful murder of Britannicus.
Bodes ill to me, and my presaging soul
Is filled with ghastly fears. Ah Pallas, Pallas,
This is the entrance into Parricide,
And but the Prologue to a mothers death.
Would I could speak to your distress and fears
A true and real comfort, such a one
As might not flatter your estate, and make
You weaker then before, by taking from you
All study of prevention.
Caesar. Madam,
Is come to visit you.
Pallas farewell.
What weeping Madam? what unworthy cause
Dares force a tear from great Augustaes eye
While Narrow lives: if 't bee my brother's death,
That cause this sorrow, I could join in tears
Had not that tragedy already robed
Mine eyes of moisture,
This hypocrisy
Makes me less trust his nature then before.
The Gods have robed me of one comfort now
The fellowship of sweet Britannicus,
That all my piety may bee confined
To you, dear mother, you contain alone
Within a Parents sacred name, all stiles
Of kindred now, all bonds of pious love.
Fear not a change in me.
I do not Caesar.
Minarvus feast is celebrated now
Minervaes feast is celebrated now
Five days at Bay thither you shall go
And feast with me dear mother, there forget
All jealous fears, and you shall never more
Complain of Narrow. If the stratagem
Of Anicetus prosper, her complaint
Shall be to Pluto, and the Ghosts below.
The Government of Lusitania.
By Nero's grace and favour is bestowed
On me! Oh glorious name of banishment!
Yet welcome now, since fair Poppaea's lost.
I thank thee, Narrow, thou provid'st a brave
And honourable cure for that sad wound
Thou hast inflicted on my love-sicke Soul.
How great a torture had it been to me
To live in Rome divorced from her, and see
That beauty folded in another arms!
Hence wanton thoughts; fond love for ever vanish,
Collect my soul what ere thou hast within thee
Of Roman left, and answer to the call
Bright honour makes, some favourable God
Pitying the lusts and riots of a youth
So much misled, has sent this seeming loss
To wake me from so base a lethargy.
Employed in foreign action, I shall live
Free from rh' infectious vices of this Court,
And far from seeing the abhorred effects
Of future tyranny, which needs must break
From Nero's vicious nature. At my birth
The Augurs promised high and glorious hopes.
This is the way to bring them. Spain shall find
Another Otho then was sent from Rome.
Poppy promised here to meet, and take
Her last leave of me. why should I again
Renew my passion by the sight of her?
But't is but one poor look. and so farewell.
Hail Marcus Otho Emperor of Rome,
Caesar that shall bee.
Ha!
It is thy fate,
Which shall not bee prevented.
Tell me father
(For your predictions ever have been true)
Shall I behold Poppaeaes face again,
When I have left the City?
Never more.
Never! a heavy doom yet I in lieu
Of her shall gain the Empire of the world.
Juno will heal the wounds that Venus gives.
See, there she comes; her beauty waxes still,
Or else the sad concit of never more
Seeing that face, makes it appear more fair.
How dull the edge of Honour grows already!
Here could I stay, and like the Trojan Prince
Locked in fair Diodes arms forget forever
The Italian land, and all my future fame.
Him Jove admonished to depart from thence.
Me the command of Caesar forces hence,
And leaves no power in my election.
Farewell Poppy.
Oh hard fate in love
Is mine, whose joys were never lasting yet.
Speak not so soon that killing word farewell.
What gain, alas, can one small minute bee?
Or if it were gain to me, to the Poppy
It were loss to keep thee from thy Caesars sight.
Hee is thy servant, whom the world obeys.
Ah Otho, love can witness that this fortune
Was never sought by me.
Thou were too great
A treasure for a private man to keep.
No; live still happy with thy Caesar here
And grant me one request; if of that love
Which once wee vowed so dear, there yet remains
So small a part as may deserve the name
Of common friendship, use thy power with Caesar
My government may be continued long.
Rather let me entreat the contrary,
And keep thee hereat Rome.
It must not bee.
Never while Narrow lives, and lives with thee.
It must bee love no more, but friendship now
Twixt us Poppy, which may still bee kept
In absence by good wishes, and without
Those nearer comforts which fond love requires.
But who shall teach me to forget that sweet
Delicious lesson which loves school did teach,
When thy admired beauty was the book,
And I a Scholar too too forward then?
Oh would great Caesars power to cure my wound,
Could but bestow so privative a good
As loss of memory. but that, alas,
Were too unjust a cure, and I could wish
Rather to suffer still then quite forget
That I was once Poppaeaes envied love.
I'll rather strive to solace my sick soul
With contemplation of past happiness,
And by recounting ore our former joys
Deceive those hours of sorrow I must pass.
And I for comfort of our absent love
Will cherish hopes that wee shall meet again.
No, think me dead, bright love, and I'll enforce
My imagination to believe that thou
Translated by some amorous Deity
Hast left the earth to beautify the sky,
And turn Astronomer in love, to find
Thy figure out among those radiant lights
Which Joves transformed Paramours have made.
Amongst those I'll seek for fair Poppaeaes star,
And swear I see it, rather then believe
Thou liv'st on earth debarred from Otho's sight.
I must begin to part, I see; for thou
In modesty art loath to chide me hence,
And bid me quit the place. Farewell Poppy.
Such height of happiness may thou enjoy
As Caesars constant love can bring to thee.
As much good fortune follow Otho still
Tic power that parts us. all the Gods can tell
How well I love thee Otho. but those Gods,
That have ordained another fate for me
Must bee obeyed yet Narrow must bee wrought
With cunning to my ends, or else my fortune
Is low and poor, my title nought at all.
Tic not the love of Caesar, but the honour,
And that high title which attends his love
That is Poppaeaes aim, Octavia
Debars me yet from that, and Agrippina
Is fierce, and keeps her son in Pupillage.
Now fair Poppy, thou art mine alone;
Otho's remove•d, embrace the happy change
That fortune brings thee, thou hast found instead
Of him, a Caesar, who besides his state
Has brought a heart as true to thee, and love
As strong and fervent as poor Otho's was
Thou were before a diamond coursly set,
A clouded star. the Fates did pity thee,
And would no longer let that beauty lie
Ecclippsed in a private family
No seat but Romes Imperial throne, no sphere
But Caesars arms were fit for these bright eyes
To shine in, and the subject world to adore
Their lustre, like some constellation
New risen to amaze mortality.
Not Rome alone, but all the farthest shores
That Peleus silver-footed wife ere knew
Shall call Poppy mistrrsse.
Those are honours
Caesar, too high, too great for me to hope.
To hope, my love, they are thine own already.
Caesar, thou know it cannot bee; and I
That might have lived content with Otho's love;
And there enjoyed the honoured name of wife,
Must in the Palace find a baser stile.
Thou wrong'st my power, Poppy, if thou think
I cannot give the highest stile to thee:
And if thou think I mean it not, thou wrong'st
My truest love
Octavia is alive
No love of thine can bear Augustus state
But only she
She shall bee soon removed
To make a room for fair Poppaeaes honour.
Nor will the Senate dare to grumble at it.
Though all were silent else, fierce Agrippina
Would in that act control thee, and think me
To mean for Caesars wife, though I am sprung
(For I may speak a truth that Rome can witness)
From noble and triumphant Ancestors.
There, love, thou strik'st upon the truest string.
That Agrippina was my greatest fear,
Though now she is not; for I'll tell it thee,
If Anicetus stratagem have taken,
Ere this she wanders on the Stygian shore.
Weary I was of her imperious pride,
And feared her cruel plots. How that succeeds
Is now my greatest expectation.
Nor do I live till Anicetus come
And bring my safety in that women's death
See, Anicetus is returned
Speak man
What is my fate? thou carry in thy voice
The life and death of Caesar
Your command
Was done, great Caesar, but your mother escaped.
Escaped? how could it bee, but you were false,
And all conspired together to betray
My life in saving hers? how could she scope?
Wee chose the night to act it in; but night,
Proved not so black as night; the stars gave light,
No wind at all blew as wee launched forth
Down in the Galley Agrippina lay,
And at her feet lay Aceronia
With joy discoursing of your courtesy,
And favour lately showed her, but when I
The watch-word gave, the covering of the place
Laden with lead fell down, and pressed to death
Her servant Gallus. But when the other part
By fortune stronger, broke not, nor the vessel
Was loosed asunder, all being in amaze
The rowers straitway thought it best to weigh,
The galley at one side, and sink her so
There Aceronia floating in the waves
Faining her self to bee the Empress, cried
Help, help the Prince his mother. But the rowers
With poles, and oars straight killed her as she swam,
But Agrippina in a silence cause
By policy or fear, swam to the bank,
Having received but one wound, and there
Succoured by little barks, through Lucrine lake
To her own house was carried at the last.
Oh, I am lost and dead; I shall bee straight
Surprised and killed; she'll arm her slaves, and stir
The soldiers up, or to the Senate house
Complain, and show the wound she has received
And tell the story there. What shall I doo?
Advise me, my Poppy, Anicetus,
But yet advise me nothing but her death,
No other course is safe Narrow. must die
If Arippina. live, call Burrhus to me;
Send forth the soldiers to dispatch her straight.
It is no action for a soldiers hand
Nor will the camp for brave Germanicus,
Her father's sake bee drawn to butcher her
Let Anicetus. finish the exploit
Hee has begun.
It must be so; go on
With thy religious act, good Anicetus.
Thou art obliged to finish it; or else
What thou hast done already, will procure
My ruin rather then security
Choose thee what aide thou wilt.
I have them ready.
Fear it not Caesar, Agrippinaes dead.
Oh comfortable voice' thou art the man
Thou only Anicetus, that bestow'st
The Empire upon Narrow. to thy gift
I will acknowlegd it, and celebrate
This as my day of coronation.
What plot shall wee invent to hide the deed,
And put the intent of murder upon her?
To bring you news of her escape, I'll find
A way to do it, tic strange none yet come from her.
See Agerinus comes
All health to Caesar
Augusta by the favour of the Gods
Has lately escaped a strange and wonderful
Danger at Sea.
Caesar when any of her servants come
What means this poniard
In Caesars presence, Agerinus?
Treason.
She sends to murder me; drag hence the slave,
And torture him to death.
I am as free
From guilt in this as innocence it self.
Hence with the villain to his death, and thou
Dear Anicetus, forward with thy plot.
Leave me alone; but bee not far from me.
Who would rely upon the gratitude
Of men? or trust the fruit of benefits,
That now behold, or shall hereafter read
My woeful fortune? I, that have bestowed
What ere the world contains, to bee possessed
By impious Narrow, in reward, expect
Nothing but bloody death it was too too true
That strange deceitful galley was a plot
An impious engine made to murder me,
As by the fierceness of the slaves, my wound,
And Aceroniaes death it did appear.
Can I expect that Narrow should relent?
Or that the tyrant in a brothers blood
Imbrewed already, should not rather think
No mischief can bee safe till fully done?
Oh had his thoughts been good, had my escape
Been grateful to him, all the house ere this
With visitants, and clients had been filled
To ask and see how Caesars mother did
Where now are all the hails the bended knees,
Low prostrate faces, and officious tongues,
That strove in honouring Agrippinaes name?
Vanished alas, and nought but solitude,
Ill-boding silence, and neglect remain
In this forsaken Palace. But too soon
Ay me, I fear the approach of villainy.
What noise is that at door! where are my servants?
Mnester, Seleucus, Galla, Xenophon.
No answer made! are they departed too!
Then vanish all my hopes false world farewell
With all thy fading glories. But alas,
Whither from hence shall Agrippina fly?
What regions are there in the other world
But my injustice has already filled
With wronged Ghoasts? there young Silanus wanders,
Lolly Pauline and great Claudius
My murdered Lord, yet those sad spirits perchance
Abhorring Nero's base ingratitude,
And glutted with revenge, will cease to hate
At last, and pity Agrippinas state.
Ay me, is Anicetus. come again?
Then I am dead past hope, murder, help. help Xiphilin.
You guess our business right but tic in vain
To call for help, your guards are far enough.
Oh hold your hands a while; hear me but speak
Consider with your selves before you act
A deed so execrable as will stick
A lasting brand on your abhorred names.
This murder will bee famous through the world.
All men will fly your hated company.
Like birds of night shall you for ever hide
Your guilty heads; or, which is worse then that,
Narrow himself, who did command the deed,
(As you pretend) shall guerdon you with death,
And quit himself by punishing of you.
O rather venture Neros frown, and keep
Your innocence.
Can they bee innocent,
That disobey their Prince his will?
But sure
You did mistake the Prince. I am his mother.
It was I that gave him birth; nay more, that put
Into his hand the sceptre of the world.
Could hee command my death?
Wee did not stand
Examining the cause.
Then strike this womb
This tragical, and ever cursed womb,
That to the ruin of mankind brought forth
That monster Narrow, here, here take revenge.
Here Justice bids you strike. let these sad wounds
Serve to appease the hatred of the earth
Against Agrippina for dire Nero's birth.

WHat Honour can bee greater to a King∣dome,
than to have a City for beauty,
able to match with the Fairest in the
World? A City, renowned Abroad,
admired at Home. London, and her
Royal Daughter (Westminster) are
the Representative body of the general
State; for, here our Kings and Queens
keep their Courts; here are our
Princes, the Peers, Nobility, Gentry, Lords
Spiritual and
Temporal, with the Numerous Communalty.
London in Foreign Countries is called the Queen of Ci∣ties,
and the Queene-mother over her own. She is her Kings
Chamber-royall, his Golden-Key: His Store-house: The Mega∣zine
of Merchandise; the Mistress of Sciences; a Nurse to all
the Sheers in England.
So famous she is for her Buildings, that Troy has leaped
out of her own Cinders, to build Her Walls. So remarkable for
Priority and Power, that hers is the Master-wheele of the
whole Kingdom: As that moves, so the maine Engine works.
London is Admiral over the Navy royal of Cities: And as
she sails, the whole Fleet of them keep their course.
Fully to write down all the Titles, Stiles, and Honours of this
our Metropolis, would weary a 1000. pens: Apollo shall
have a New Garland of Baize, to undertake it.
As thus in State, she her self is Glorious; so have all our
Kings held it fit to make her chief Ruler eminent, and an∣swerable
to her greatness. The Praetorian Dignity is there∣fore
come from the ancient Romans, to invest with Robes of
Honour, our Lord Mayor of London: Their Consuls are our
Sheriefes; their Senators our Aldermen.
The extention of a Lord Majors power, is every year
to bee seen both by Land and Water: Down as low as Lee
in Essex: Up, as high as Stones in Middlesex: In both which
places, he keeps personal Courts. His House is a Chancery:
He the Chancellor to mitigate the fury of Law: Hee the Mo∣derator
between the griping Rich and the wrangling Poor.
All the City▪ Orphans call him Father: All the Widows
call him their Champion. His Table lies spread to Courtiers,
and Free to all Gentlemen of fashion.
More to Proclaim his Greatness, what Vice-roy is installed
with louder popular acclamations? What Deputy to his So∣reign
goes along with such Triumphs? To behold them,
Kings, Queens, Princes, and Ambassadors (from all parts of
the World) have with Admiration, rejoiced.
These Triumphal passages are full of Magnificence for
State, Munificence for Cost, and Beneficence for doing good.
For▪ besides all the twelve Companies, (every one of which is
a gainer by this employment:) it would puzzle a good me∣mori
to reckon up all those Trades-men (with other extra∣ordinary
Professions which live not in the City) who get
money by this Action.
Then by this means, are every Year added to those that
were before, three Fair, Spacious, and Pallacious Houses,
Beautified, Painted, and Adorned.
The Lord Mayor of London (like a Prince) hath likewise
his Variety of Noble Recreations: As Hunting, Shooting,
Wrestling, before him, and such like.
Thus having (as it were in Lantschip) a far off shown
you the Tops only of our City-Buildings; and in a little
Picture drawn the Face of her Authority, giving but a
glimpse of her Praetor as hee passes by; let me now open a
Book to you, of all those Ceremonies, which this great
Festival day hath provided to Attend upon him, and doe
him Honour.
The first Salutation being on the Water, is furnished with
Persons and Properties fitting the quality of that Element.
An Artificial Rock therefore is quaintly contrived: On whose
highest Ascent fits Amphitrite Queen of the Seas, habitat
to her State; a Mantle frindg'd with silver crossing her Body:
Her hair long, and dishevelled, on her head, a fantastic
dressing made out of a Fishes writhen shell, interwouen with
Pearl, the shell is silver, on the top of it stands an Artifice∣all
mooing Torroyse: On each side of her, swim two
Mermaids. These two enticed by the variety of several in∣struments
(echoing to one another) have followed the Sea∣Sovereign,
and waite upon her, as Maids of Honour.
Round about the Rock are Sea-Nimphes, and in places
convenient for them are bestowed our three famous Rivers,
Humber, Trent, and Seuerne, aptly attired according to the
quality of such Marine Persons, who play upon Cornets.
Amphitryte is the Speaker. From whom are
delivered these lines.
Hail worthy Praetor, (Hail Grave Senators)
The Queen of Waives (leaving Gray Neptunes Bowers)
waits here (Fair Lord) to serve you. Fems Report,
(so far as old Oceanus Crystal Court)
what Triumphs Ceremony forthwould Call
To Swell the Joys of This Grand Festival,
Iutic'de me with my Mermaids and a Train
Of Sea-Nymphes hither. Here (this day) shall Reign
Pleasures in State Majestic: And to lend
A brighter Splendour to them, do Attend
Three of my Noblest Children, Humber, Trent,
And Seuerne (Glorious made by Punishment.)
The Siluer-footed Thames (my eldest son)
To Grace your Triumphs, by your Barge shall run.
Your Fortunes (led by a white-handed Fate
Up to this High Fame) I Congratulate:
Glad am I to behold you Thus Set Round
With Glories, Thus with Acclamations Crowned,
So Circled, and Hemmed in, on Every side
With Echoing Music, Fishes even take pride
To Swim along, and listen, Go, and Take
The Dignity stays for you, whilst I make
Smooth way Before you, on This Glassy Floor,
Ushering your glad Arrival to the Shore.
To Honours Temple now you have not far,
Hye, and Come back more Great than yet you Are, On,
And so the Cornets playing one to Another, they go for∣ward.
If her Majesty be pleased on the Water, or Land, to
Honour These Triumphs with her Presence; This following Speech
in French is then delivered to her, with a Book of
the Presentations, All the Cover, being set thick with Flower
de Lucas in Gold.
Voice, maintenant les Quatre Elements queen vos Attendant
pour vous fair Honour. L'eau est Covert de Triomphes
flottans, pour Dancer en L'Air: E'L'Air est Remply de
Mill Echos, &amp; Retentit de la doulce Musique, que lour voix
reason, pour Attirer vos oreilles fauorables à les Accoutre. Puis
vous auez sir la, Terre dix mill Mains queen vous Applaudissent
pour Joy &amp; Allegresse quelles ressentent de voir vostre Majesty
dans la Ville. L'Element du Five, Bruit &amp; Tonne vostre Bien
Venue. Vos Subjects accourent à grand Foùlle, rauis de voir les
Graces queen ont choice lour Throsne sir vostre Front. Toutes les
Deliees d' Amour se Iouënt sir vos paupieres, La Rose d' Angle∣terre,
&amp; les Flours de lis de France S'entrebaisent sir le Ver∣meil
de vos Iouës. Soyez Sane comme le printemps, Glorious
comme l'Este, Autant Fructeuse que la vigne. Que seurte
guard, &amp; Environ vostre Chariot le Jour: Et le Sommeil
door Dress &amp; orne vostre Chambre de Nuict. Viuez longuement:
Viuez Heureuze: Viuez aim, &amp; Cherie. Bonte vous guard;
Virtue vous Couronne; Et les Anges vous guident.
BEhold, the four Elements waite upon you to do you Ho∣nor:
Water hath provided Floating Triumphs to Dance
in the Air: In the Air are a Thousand Echoes
with Music in their Mouths, to Entice you to hear them:
On the Shore shall ten thousand pair of hands give you
Plaudits in the City: The Element of Fire, Thunders aloud
your welcomes. Thronges of Subjects here, are glad to see
the Graces Inthroand on your Forehead: All the Delicacies of
Love, playing on your Eye-lids, The Roses of England, and the
Lilies of France, Kissing one Another on your cheeks. Be
you healthful as the Spring; Glorious as Summer: Fruitfu•l
as the Vine: Safety run along your Chariot by Day; Gol∣den
Slumbers dress up your Chamber at Night.
Live long,
Live happy,
Live beloude;
Goodness Guard you,
Virtues Crown you,
Angels Guide you.
A Person in a rich Roman Antique Habit, with an orna∣meant
of Steeples, Towers, and Turrets on her head, Sits in a
quaint Arbor, Interwouen with several Branches of Flower•.
In her Left han•, she holds a golden Truncheon (leaning
on the ground) to show that shees a Leader &amp; Conductresse of
a Mighty People: Her Right Hand (thrusting through the
Arbor) takes hold of a Tree, out of which spread Twelve
Maine and Goodly Branches.
This Lady (thus si•ting) Represents London: The Tree
(guarded, and supported by her) The 12. Superior Companies.
Upon every particular Branch, is bestowed the Arms of
some One of the Twelve, expressed in the True Colours within a
fair shield. The highest Branch of all (as ouer-topping the
Rest at This Time) bearing the Arms of the Skinners in a more
large and glorious Escutcheon.
Among the Leaves in the Top, is a Tablet, in which is writ∣ten,
in letters of gold, Viuite Concordes, Live in Love: Or
Agree in one.
Over the Person, Representing London, is likewise Inscri∣bed
in golden Capitals, This,
Me ••nctus Lauro perducit ad astra Triumphus.
Each Triumph Crowned with Baize,
Me to the Stars does raise.
In places convenient, and in a Triangular form, under
the twelve branches of the Tree, are seated Minerua, (Inuen∣tress
and Patronise of Arts, Handy-crafts, and Trades)
in Ornaments proper to her quality: And not far from her,
is Bellona goddess of War, in a Martial habit, on her
head a Helm and Plume, in her hands a golden Spear and
Shield, with Medusaes ••ad. Hereby intimating, that both
Arts and Arms, are (in a high degree and fullness of honour,)
nursed up and maintained by and in the City: And, that either
of them flourish bravely under the shadow and protection
of the twelve Branches, shooting forth from that. New Troy's
Tree of Honour.
Upon a border of Flowers, enclosing this Tree, are fitly
bestowed the Arms of as many of the inferior Companies
in less Escucheons, as for the quantity of room, can there be
handsomely placed.
Within the same Border, (where less Trees also grow)
are presented Peace, Religion, Civil Government, Justice, Lear∣ning,
Industry, and close to Industry, Honour. For as all these
are golden Columns, to bear up the Glories of the City, so
is the City an indulgent and careful Mother, to bring up
them to their Glories. And as these twelve Noble Branches
cover these Persons, (as it were with the wings of Angels,) so
the Persons watch day and night to defend the twelve
Branches.
These Persons are adorned fitting their state and condition,
and hold such properties in their hands, as of right belong
unto them.
1. Peace hath a Dove on her fist, and a Palme-tree Branch
in her hand.
2. Religion is in a white glittering robe, with a Coronet
of Stars on her head, holding in one hand, a Book open,
in the other, a golden ladder, (emblem of prayer, by whose
steppes wee climb to Heaven.)
3. Civil Government is in a robe full of eyes, and a Dial
in her hand to express her Vigilance: For she must watch
every hour, and keep all eyes open, yet all little enough.
4. Justice holds a Sword.
5. Learning a Book, and a Iacobs Staff.
6. Industry, a golden Hammer, and a Sea-mans Com∣pass,
as taking pains to get wealth, both by Sea and Land.
7. Honour sits in Scarlet.
The Person, in whom is figured London, is the
Speaker, who thus salutes his Lordship.
TEn thousand welcomes Greet you on the shore,
(My long expected Praetor,) O before
You look on Others, fix your eyes on Me,
On Me, your second Mother, (London.) She
Whom all Great Britains Cities, stile their Queen,
For still I am, and have her Darling been.
The Christian World, in Me, reads Times best stories,
And Reading, false blind at my dazzling Glories,
But now the Snow of age, covers my head:
As therefore you, by Me have up binbred▪
You (Sir) must Nurse me now: with a quick eye
View then my Tree of Honour, branching high
For hundreds of past years, with 12. large Stems,
Twelve Noble Companies, which like 12. Iems
So shine, they add new Sun beams to the Day:
Guard all these 12. maine-Boughes; but you must lay:
A soft hand, on the Topping-branch, for there
(Thrive the Root well) your Self grows al this year:
The lesser twigs which lowly run along
My tall Tree, Border, you must shield from wrong,
There the poor Bee, (the sweating Trades man) flies
From Flower to Flower, and home with Honey byes.
With me Minerua; and Bellona come,
For Arts and Arms, must at your Board have room,
Your Gates will spread, the Rich to entertain,
But whilst the Mightyones within remain,
And feast: Remember at the same Gate stands
The Poor, with crying Papers in their hands,
To watch when Justice up the Glass shall turn,
Let those sands run, the Poor can never morn.
Place in your eyes two Beacons, to descry
Dangers far off, which strike ere home they fly;
Kiss Peace; let Order ever steer the Helm,
Left-handed Rule, a State does overwhelm.
You are your Sovereigns Gardner for one year,
The Plot of Ground, you're trusted with, lies here,
(A City,) and your care must all bee spent,
To prune and and dress the Tree of Government.
Lop off Disorders, Factions, Mutiny,
And Murmurations against those sit high,
May your years last day, end as this begins,
Sphar'd in the loves of Noble Citizens.
THis is a Chariot Triumphant, garnished with Trophies
of Armours. It is drawn by two Luzernes, The Sup∣porters
of the Skinners Arms. On the two Luzernes
ride two Antiques, who dance to a Drum beating be∣fore
them, there aptly placed. At the upper end of this Cha∣riot,
in the most eminent Seat, carrying the proportion of
a Throne, are advanced a Russian Prince and Princess;
richly habitat in Furs, to the custom of the Country.
1. Under them, sits an old Lord, Furred up to his chin
in a short cloak.
2. By him, a Lady with Martin skins about her neck,
and her hands in a Muff.
3. Then, a Judge in Robes Furred.
4. Then, an University Doctor, in his Robes furred.
5. Then, a Fro• in a short furred Cassock, girt to her.
6. Then a Skipper in a furred Cap.
I• all these Persons, is an implication of the necessary, an∣ci•ned
and general use of Furs, from the highest to the lowest.
On the Top of this Throne, (at the four corners) are ere∣ct•d
the Arms of the City, in four Pendants: On the point
of the •ore front, a large square Banner plays with the wind,
which Fame (who is in this Chariot,) holds in her hand, as she
stands upright, Being the Speaker.
FAme's turn is now to Speak; for who but Fame
Can with her thousand Tongues abroad Proclaim,
Your this days Progress (rising like the Sun,)
Which through the yearly Zodiac on must run.
Fame hath brought hither from great Mosco's Court,
(The seauen-mouth'd Volga, spreading the report,)
Two Russian Princes, who to feast their eyes,
With the rich Wonders of these rarities,
Ride in this glorious Chariot; How amazed
They look, to see streets thronged, and windows glazed
With beauties, from whose eyes such beams are sent,
Here moves a second starry Firmament.
Much, on them, startling admiration wins,
To see these Brave, Grave, Noble Citizens,
So streamed in mu•titudes, yet flowing in State,
For all their Orders are Proportionate.
Russia, now envies London, seeing (here) spent
Her richest Furs, in graceful ornament,
More Brave and more Abounding, than her own:
A golden Pen he earns, that can make known
The use of Furs, so Great, so General,
All men, may these, their Winter Armours call.
Th'inuention of warm Furs the Sun did fret,
For Russians lapped in these, slighted his heate,
Which seen, his fiery Steeds he drove from thence,
And so the Muff has dwelt in cold ere since.
What royalties, add Furs to Emperors, Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Earls, in the distinguishings,
Of all their several Robes? The Furs worn here,
Aboue th'old Roman State make Ours appear:
The reverend Judge, and all that climb the trees
Of sacred Arts, ascend to their Degrees,
And by the colours changed of Furs are known:
What Dignity, each Corporation
Puts on by Furs, witness these infinite eyes,
Thank then the bringers of these Rarities.
I wish (Grave Praetor) that as Hand in Hand,
Plenty and Bounty bring you safe to Land,
So, Health may be chief Carver at that Board,
To which you hasten. Bee as Good a Lord
I'th'eyes of Heaven, as this day you are Great
In Fems applause: Hye to your Honoured Seat.
THis is a Magnificent Structure, Advancing it self from
the Platform, or Ground-worke upward, with the
Bew•y of eight Antique Terms, By whose strength is
supported a Four square Building; The Top of which is a
Watch-Tower, or Lantern, with eight Columns of silver:
And, on the Highest point of this Watch-Tower, is Aduan∣ced
a Banner, bearing the Cullo•s of the Kingdom.
At four Corners of the upper Square, stand four Pen∣dants;
In which are the Arms of the four Companies of
which his Lordship is Free.
At rach end of this Platform, stands a great Corinthian
Brazen Pillar, on a Pedestal of Marble.
On the Capitals of those Pillars, stand two Angels, in Po∣stirs
ready to fly: holding Garlands of Victory in one
hand, stuck with White and Red Roses, and Branches of
Palm in the other.
The Capitals and Bases of the Pillars are Gold, and are
Emblems of the two Houses of York and Lancaster; once
divided, but now Joined into One Glorious Building, to
Support This Royal Kingdom, &amp; Consequently This City.
At Night, in place of the Angels, are set two Great Lights:
and so is the Watch-Tower at that Time, Filled with lighted
Tapers.
Upon the same Square, in four several Places, are Aduan∣ced
four stately Pyramids, being Figures, of the four King∣domes
Embellished with Escutcheons.
In the upper seat of all (fashioned into a Throne) is placed
Britannia, Majestically attired, fitting to her Greatness.
Beneath Her, and round about Her, are these Petsons: viz.
Magnanimity with a drawn Sword.
A Shipwright with a Mallet, holding a Scutcheon, in
which is drawn a Ship under sail. Then,
A person representing Victory, with a Palm Tree.
Providence with a Trumpet, ready to Foresee Dangers,
and awaken Men to meet them.
All These have been, and still are, Watch-Towers, and
Lanterns, in the Nighrs of Fear and Trouble, to Guard
the Kingdom, and in the Kingdom, This City.
In other Eminent places are seated some of those Kiuges of
England(in Robes Ermynd) whose loves and Royal favours,
in former times were Watch-Towers to Grace London,
stuck full with the Beams and Lights of Honours, Titles,
Offices, Magistracies and Royalties, which they Bestowed up∣pone
Her.
Edward Confessor, called Londons Chief Ruler, a Port-reue.
Richard 1. appointed two Bailiffs over London.
King Iohn gave the City a Lord Mayor and two Sheriffs.
Henry 3. added Aldermen.
These were Tender over the Renown of the City, and
still heaped on her head, Royalties upon Royalties.
And albeit most of our Kings, have in most of all of the
twelve Companies, Entered their Names, as Free of the So∣cieties,
thereby to Royallize their Brotherhoods: And that
many of our Kings likewise, besides Princes and Great Person∣nages,
have bin Free of This Company, whose Names I for∣bear
to set down, because they have in former years been
fully expressed: yet no Company, did ever, or can hereafter, re∣ceiue
such Graces from Kings, as This Ancient, and Honoured
Corporation of Skinners, hath had, and still have, In regard
that All our Kings and Princes, sit in their high Courts of
Parliament in Robes Ermynd, (being the richest Fur) the
workmanship of which goes through the Skinners fingers,
wearing likewise under their Crowns, Royal Caps of Honour
Ermynd.
Three of such Crowns, being the rich Arms of This
Company, thereby expressing as well their Honour, as Antiquity.
Britannia delivers thus much.
SHall the proud wife of Neptune, or shrill Fame,
Or Troynouant her self, Ring out your Name:
And I be Dumb, or sparing, to Sound high,
The Glories of This Day? No, They shall Fly
Like Soaring Eagles, to That Curled Maine
whose Head my Rocky Bridle, In does Reyne:
The Great Britannia, Bred you in her Womb,
Hear then a Mothers Counsel; You are Come
Aboard a Goodly Ship, where all your State,
Fame, Honour and Renown (Embarked) must waite
The voyage of twelve Moons. High A•mirall
You are to All That Fleet, which Thus you Call
To s•yle in This vast Ocean. Nor must you
Walk Heartless on the Hatches, I here is a New
State-Nauigation, to be studied Now,
With an High reared, Undaunted, Fixed Brow.
Be su•e to have Brave Ordnance, and charged well;
In this your S•ip, Trust None, For Officers Sell
Their Captains Trust; let None but your own Eyes,
Rule Chart and Compass, There your Safety lies.
Your Own Hands steer the Helm, But strongly Steer,
And spite of storms, be stout when you stand There.
Emblem of Mercy! Your Keen sword does sleep,
But why a Sword, if not to Kul, and Keep
Vices (like Slaves) in Awe? Fullness of Wine
Is a Foul Dropsy, That and Lust Entwine:
Pride a swollen Timpani, Sloth, the Beggars Gout,
(In Tradesmen's Hands and Feet, It runs about,)
No Cure for this! Oaths thick as Small-shot fly
From Children, No Defence to Put this by!
You May, you Must. I Counsel not, but Read
A Lesson of my love; By which Love led
Isle on, and Bring you to your Honoured Chair,
Whi•st Aves (Round about you) Dance in the Air.
The upper part of this, is adorned with several Flowers,
which in•erwou•n together, dress up a comely Greene Arbor,
in which the Sun si•s, with golden Beams about his Face;
an Attire glittering like gold; and a mantle bright as his
garment, fringed with gold, his hair curled and yellow. A∣bout
him are placed, Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter,
in proper Habiliments. Beneath these, is a Wilderness, in
which are many sorts of such Beasts, whose rich Skins serve
for Furs: As the Rear, Wolf, Leopard, Luzerne, Cat- A-Mountaine,
Foxes, Sables, Connies, Ferrets, Squirrels, &amp;c.
Of these Beasts, some are climbing, some standing, some
grinning, with lively, natural postures. In a Scroll, hanging
on a Bough, This is written in Cap•tall letters.
Deus ass Furentibus obstat.
See, for all some Beasts are fell,
There's one, that can their curstness quell.
Sol is the Speaker.
Heavens bright Oriental Gates I op'd this Morn,
And Hither wheeld my Chariot to adorn
These splendors with my Beams: ne'er did the Sun
In his Celestial Circle faster run
Than Now, to see these Sight•s: O how I joy
To view a Kingdom, and a New-built Troy
So flourishing so full, so fair, so dear
To the Gods. they leave Ioue's Court to revel here.
All o'er the World, I travel in one Day,
Yet oft am forced to leave my beaten way,
Frighted with Uproars, Battles, Massacres,
Famines, and all that Hellish brood of wars:
I meet no Peace but here. O blessed Land!
That see fires kindling round, and yet can stand
Vnburnt for all their flames; O Nation blessed!
When all thy Neighbours shrike, none wound thy breast.
To Crown these joys, with me are come along,
The four Lords of the year, who by a strong
Knit Charm, bring in this goodly Russian prize,
As earnest of a more rich Merchandise:
Half of our Race, Time, and my Hours have run,
Nor shall they give o'er till the Goal be won.
The Sun at Night being covered with a veil
of Darkness: The Person, representing
London, thus takes leave.
THe Sun is mantled in thick Clouds of Black,
And by his hidden Beams, threatens the wrack
Of all these Glories: Every pleasure dyes
When Rauen-winged Night, from her Cave flies;
None but these Artificial Stars keep fire
To Light you Home, these burn with a desire
To lengthen your brave Triumphs; but their heate
Must cool, and dye at length, tho ne'er so Great.
Peace therefore guide you on: Rest, charm your eyes,
And Honours waite to cheer you when you Rise.
Let it be no Ostentation in Me the Inuentor, to speak thus
much in praise of the works, that for many years, none
have been able to Match them for curiosity: They are not
Vast, but Neat, and Comprehend as much Art for Archi∣tecture,
as can be bestowed upon such little Bodies. The com∣mendations
of which must live upon Mr. Gerard Chrismas
the Father, and Mr. Iohn Chrismas the Son.

ALL free, and all forgi∣ven.
Bless her Ma∣jesty.
Henceforth (my friends) take heed how you so hazard
Your lives and fortunes on the peevish motion
Of every discontent, you will not find
Mercy so rise at all times.
Gracious Sir!
Your counsel is more like an Oracle,
Then mans advice, for my part I dare speak
For one, I rather will be racked asunder
Then ever again offend so wise a Ma∣jesty.
It is well your lives are once more made your own;
I must attend the execution
Of your hot General each shift now for your selves.
Is he gone, ha, ha, ha
We have the common Capony of the clear heavens
Once more o'er our heads, Sirs.
We are at liberty out of the Hangmans clutches,
Now, mark, what good language and fair words
Will do, Gentlemen.
Good language! O, let me go back and he hanged, rather then live within the rotten infection of thy Can∣kred breath; the poison of a flatterers tongue is a thousand times more dead∣lie, then the twinges of a rope; Thou birth of an unlucky Planet:
I abhor thee.
Fie, fie! Can you rail on your friends thus.
Friends, my friend Captain, come from that slippery Eel, Captain.
His very cradle was in dirt and mud.
His milk the oil of serpents; his mother a mangy Mermaid, and a male Croco∣dile begat him.
This needs not sweet, s•…gnior Pinto.
Sweet Signior? Sweet Cog a foist, go hang thy self, you would jeer the very rags I wear off my back with thy fustians of sweet, precious, unmatchable, rare, wise, judicious, hey do! Pox on thee; Sirrah, Sirrah, Hast not thou ma∣ny a time and often devoured a whole table of mine, garnished with plenty, nay; variety of good wholesome fare, under the colour of relling news with a rou∣ghy complement?
Good fare of thine!
Nay, dear Gentlemen.
Mine! I mine, Sycophant, I (•…oct mark me) to supply 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 a whole study of 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉 ri•…h that they might have set up a Cor•…a∣tion of Almanac makers; and what had I in return? But protestations, (hear∣est thou this maunderer) that I was, for learning, the soundest; for bounty, the royalist; for discourse, the sententi∣oust; for behavour, the absolutest 〈◊〉 for all endowments of m•…de and body, the most accomplished that nature ever called her workmanship: but thou dog, thou scoundres, my beggary was the fruits of thy flattery. Stand off, Rascal, off.
This is excellent faith;
How, how! I flatter ye? What thee, thee? A poor lousy uncloakt impostor, a deceitful, cozening, chea∣ting, dull decoying fortune teller; Thou pawn books; thou, patched out of an old shepherds Calender, that discoursest in time of the change of the weather.
And whose were thy Ephemerids? Why, Impudence, were thou ever worth Erra Potter's Prognostication? Thou learned! In what? By fill∣ching, stealing, borrowing, eating, col∣lecting, and counting with as weather∣wise Idiots as thy self; once in twelve months thou were indeed delivered, (like a big •…ellied wife) of a two penny Almanac, at Easter. A Hospital boy in a blew coat shall transcribe as much in six hours to serve all the year.
Thou a table of meat, yes, Astrono∣mers fare, air; or at a feast upon high holy days, three red Sprats in a dish; that was held gultony •…oo.
I s•…la thee? Thou learned?
Rascal, Cannibal that feed up∣on mans flesh.
Nay, pray, pray heartily Gen∣tlemen; in good earnest, and as I live, and by this hand now—
Right thou put me in mind what I should call thee; Who was it the cause of all the late insurrection for which we were all like to be hanged, and our brave General Alphonso is this day to suffer for; who but thou, for∣sooth; the influences of the Stars, the •…onjunction of the Planets, the predi∣•…tion of t•…e cel•…teal bodies were pe∣rempto•…, that if a' would but attempt a civil commotion, a' should (I marry should a') be strait crowned present King of Arragon. Now your Gipsonly may in the moon, your divination hath fairly mounted him; poor Gentleman, he's sure to leave his head in pawn for giving credit to thy prognosticating eg∣norance.
I scorn thee, Parasite.
You are a stinking starved〈◊〉go•… star•…gazer. I•… that •…attery or no.
•…oot, What do you mean, Sig∣nior Pinto, Signior Muretto?
I will be revenge•… and wa•…ch my time, Sirrah.
Do.
This is strange my Master, to be so heer the place of ex•…tion and pratt•…e so 〈◊〉; Come Signior Pinto; in∣deed •…a you shall shake hands.
Let me alone, you're a foolish Captain. Muretto, I will display thee for a—
Hang thy self, I care not for thee this.
Foolish Captain, foolish Captain, hark ye, Pinto, there's no such good meaning in that word.
A Parrot can ecoho, talk to Scholars so.
A proper Scholar, ftitcht up of waste paper.
Sneaks, if I be a fool, I'll bang out the wits of some of your nodles, or dry bastinado your sides.
Ye Dogret, mangy sc•…bbed owl∣glasses,
I•…ll mawle ye, so I will.
Captain, sweet Captain, nay, look, now will you put your discretion to coxcombs?
Yes, the proudest coxcombs of 'em all, if I be provoked; foolish, f•…esh and blood cannot eudur't.
So, goodman sky walker, you have made a trim hand on it, to chase your self into a threat cutting.
I will shred you both so small, that a very botcher shall shred Spanish needles, with every fillet of your itchy flesh; call me foolish, ye whelps-moyles; my father was a Corn cutter, and my mother a muscle woman, it is known what I am, and I'll make you know what I am, If my chol•…r be raised but one inch higher.
Well, I see Mars and Saturn, were thy Planets.
Thou art a valiant soldier, and there's no dealing with ye. For the Captains sake, I will abate my indignation, Mu∣retto. But—
But i'thy face, I'll have no buts, S' bores, the black guard is more ho∣norably sured then any of us three. Foolish, foolish, will never out of my head while•… I live.
Long life, eternal prosperity, the blessing of the heavens, and honours of the Earth, crown the glorious merits of the incomparable, Captain Don Ve∣lasso.
The Chime goes again, Captain.
Who are these poor Creatures, Lodovico.
My Lord, I know them now, they are some of the late mutineers, whom you (when you, took Alphonso prisoner) presented to the rigour of the Law, but since they are by the Queen's pardon set at liberty.
I should know yonder fell∣low.
Your name is Bufo, if I mistake not.
My name is my own name, Sir, and Bufo is my name, Sir, if any man shall deny it, I dare challenge him in de∣fence of my Godfathers that gave me that name, Sir; and what say you to that, Sir?
A shallow, unbrain'd, weak, foolish fellow, and so forth: Your lordship understands me;
But for our parts my good Lord—
Well, Gentlemen, I cannot tell you now,
That any poor endeavours of mine own
Can work Alphonso's peace, yet I have spoke
And kneeled and sued for his reprieve. The Queen
Hath heard, but will not grant; This is the day,
And this the time, and place, where he must render
The forfeit of his life unto the Law.
I only can be sorry.
Alphonso, here's the place, and this the hour;
Your doom is past, and now the sword of Law
Must cut the vein that swelled with such a frenzy
Of dangerous blood against your Queen and Country.
Prepare yourself, it is now too late to hope.
Petruchi, what is done I did, my ground
Was pity of my country, not malice to it.
I sought to free wracked Arragon from ruin,
Which a fond women's government must bring.
O had you and the nobles of this land,
A touch but of the miseries, her weak∣nos
Must force ye of neceessity to feel,
You would with me have bent your na∣ked swords
Against this female Mist•…iss of the Crown,
And not have been such children to have fawned
Upon a girls nod.
You are distracted;
She is our lawful Sovereign, we her Subjects.
Subjects, Petruchi, abjects, and so live;
I come to die, on to the execution.
Here's a high Saturnal spirit, Captain.
Pox o'spirits when they mount a man to the Hangmans mercy, I do not like such spirits, Let me rather be a moon calf.
I come to bid farewell, and in farewell,
To excuse my much ill fortune, for be∣leeve, Sir,
I hold my victory an overthrow.
To tell you how incessantly I plied
Her Grace, for your remission, were as useless
As was my suit, I sorry for your youth.
Let's part yet reconciled.
With all my heart;
It is my glory, that I was reduced
By the best man at arms, that ever knighthood
Hath styled a Soldier—Alas! What souls are those?
Now, now, in seeing them I die too late.
O brave General, O noble Gene∣ral, we are still the rags of the old Re∣giment. The truth on it is, we were loath to leave thee, till thy head and should∣ders parted companies. But sweet good dear General take courage, what, we are all mortal men, and must every one pass this way, as simple as we stand here.
Give me thy hand, farewell; the Queen is merciful in sparing you; I have not ought to give thee but my last thanks.
B•…rto' giving, our clothes are paid for, and A day will come shall quit us all.
Art thou, and thou there too; well, leave thy art,
And do not trust the fi•…ions of the stars,
They spoke no truth by me: My Lord Velasco,
That creature, there, Muretto, is a man
Of honest heart, for my sake take him to you:
And now soft, peace to all.
I will burn my books, forswore the liberal sciences, and that is my reason∣lution.
Go thy way for the arrantest General, that ever led crew of brave Sketdreus.
Will you make ready, Sir.
Petruchi, yes, I have a debt to pay, it is natures due.
Fellow before thou ask my pardon, take it;
Be sure and speedy in thy fa•…al blow.
Never fear clean shaving, Sir.
May I have leave to meditate?
You may.
A gallant resolution, even in death.
Stay execution it is her Highness pleasure;
Aphonso rise ye, and behold the Queen.
Beshrew the voice of Majesty, my thoughts
Were fixed upon an upper Region now,
And traffic not with Earth; alas great woman,
What newer tyranny, what doom, what torments
Are borrowed from the conclave of that hell.
Where legions of worse Devils, then are in hell
Keep revels, a proud women's heart. What plagues
Are broached from thence to kill me?
The moon is now Lady of the ascendant, and the man will dye raving.
Fie, Alphonso,
Will you commit another strange com∣motion
With your unruly tongue. And what you cannot
Perform in act, attempt to do in words?
A dying man be so uncharitable.
Cry mercy, she is Queen of Are∣ragon,
And would with her own eyes (instead of masks
And courtly sports) behold an act of death.
Queen, welcome, Queen, here quaff my blood like wine;
And live a brave she tyrant.
Alas, poor man.
Poor man, that looks on me, de∣lighted to destroy me.
Good boy i faith, by this hand a' speaks just as I would do, for all that he is so near being made puddings meat.
You are sorry For your late desperate rudeness, Are you not?
By all my miseries these taunts are cruelty.
Worse then the Hangmans ax, I am not sorry,
Nay more, will not be sorry, know from me
I hate your sex in general, not you
As you're a Queen, but as you're a woman:
Had I a term of life could last for ever,
And you could grant it, yes, and would, yet all
Or more should never reconcile my heart
To any she alive—are ye resolved?
His spirit flies out in his daring language.
Alphonso though the law require thy head,
Yet I have mercy where I see just cause:
You'll be a new man?
Oh! A women's tongue
Is sharper then a pointed steel; Tender, Madam,
I kiss your Royal hand, and call you fair,
Assure this noble, this uncovered, pre∣sense,
That richest virtue is your bosoms te∣nant,
That you are absolutely great and good;
I'll flatter all the vices of your sex,
Protesting men are monsters, women Angels,
No light ones, but full weighty, natures best,
I'll proclaim lust a pity, pride a hand∣somness.
Deceit ripness of wit, bold scandalous scolding,
A bravery of spirit; bloody cruelty,
Masculine justice; more I will maintain
That Queens are chief for rule, you chief of Queens,
If you'll but give me leave to die in peace.
Pray give me leave to die. Pray good now do,
What think ye, it is a Royal grant; hence∣forth
Heaven be the rest you chose, but never come at.
A kind farewell to all.
Can you endure
To let a Rebel prate? off with his head,
And let him then dispute.
I should have used
The privilege of time, had I known this.
You must not talk so loud.
My Lords, a word: What if we pardoned him, I think the nearness of his arrival to the stroke of death, Will ever be a warning to his Loyalty.
How pardon him! What means your Majesty?
What can you hope from one so wholly drowned
In melancholy and sour discontent;
That should he share the Crown, a' would employ•…
On none but Apes and Flatterers.
Spare, my Lord
Such liberal censure, rather reyn the fury
Of Justice, then so spur it on. Great Mistress,
I will not plead my services, but urge
The glories you may challenge by your mercy.
It will be a most sweet becoming act
To set you in the Chronicles of memory.
Velasco, thou art not more brave in arms
To conquer with thy valour, then thy curtsy.
Alphonso, take thy life, who took thee prisoner,
Is now become thy spokesman.
Phew, mock not
Calamity so grossly.
You are too desperate: The Queen hath freely pardoned you.
And more to purchase kind open∣neon of thy Sex, our self will lend our help. Lords, all your hands.
But is the Queen in earnest?
It becomes her, Mercy is God like.
Officers be gone.
Such objects for a Royal presence are
Unfit, here kiss our hand, we dare con∣ceive
That it was thy hight of youth, not hate of us
Drew thee to those attempts, and both we pardon.
Do not the stars run a wrong bias now, Signior Pinto?
Venus is Lady of the Ascendant, man. I knew if once he pass the fatal hour, the influence would work ano∣there way.
Very likely, your reasons are infallible.
What can our favours challenge.
More true service,
True faith, true Love, then I have words to utter.
Which we accept, lead on, here ends this stress,
When Law c•…aves justice, mercy should grant life.
Go thy ways for a sure sound brained piece whilst thou livest; Pinto, say I, now, now, am I an ass, now my Masters, hang your selves, 'S foot, I'll stand to it; that man whoever he be, (better or worse, ell's one) who is not star wise, is natures fool; your Astono∣mer hath the heavens, the whole globe of the earth, and the vast gulf of the Sea itself, for his proper kingdom, his see-simple, his own inheritance, who looks any higher then the top of a sty∣ple, or a may pool, is worthy to die in a ditch. But to know the conjuncti∣once of the Planets, the influences of the celestial body, the harmony of the spheres, srost and snow, hail and tem∣pests, rain and sun-shine, nay, life and death; here's cunning, to be deep in speculation, to be groping the secrets of nature.
O, Sir, there, there, there.
Let me aloe, I say it my self, I know I am a rare fellow; why, look, look ye, we are all made, or let me be stewed in Star-shut; pish, I am con∣fident, and we shall all mount, be∣leeve it.
Shall we, nay, then I am re∣soly'd.
Friar Bacon was but a brazen head, in comparison of him.
But why should you not have said so much before, goodman Jolthead?
Nay, look ye, Captain, there's a time for all things.
For all this, what will become of us; is the sign lucky to venture the begging of a cast suit? Let me be resolved of that once.
It was wisely urged, Captain.
Mans richest ornament is his na∣kedness, Gentlemen, variety of clo∣thing is the surquedry of fools; wise men have their proper solace in the linings of their minds; as for fashions, it is a disease for a horse.
Never richer stuff came from man.
'Zookes, it is a scurvy, a pocky, and a naked answer; a plague of all your sentences; whilst I am like to starve with hunger and cold,
By your leave, Gentlemen, the Lord Alphonso hath sent you this purse of gold, commands ye to put your selves into costly suits, and repair to Court;
How! To Court!
Where you may happily see him Crowned King, for that's the common report; I was charged to urge you to be very speedy: farewell, Gen lemon.
What think ye now, my hearts of gold?
Hearts of gold indeed now, Signior.
Pish, I am a coxcomb, I; Oh, the divinity of—
Bawll no more the weather's cold, I must have utensicles, follow your leader, ho.
Prethoe persuade me not.
You'll loose your honour.
Id rather loose my honour then my saith: O, Lodovico, thou art witness with me, that I have sworn, and pledged my heart, my truth to her deserving memory, whose beauty, is through the world un∣followed.
Here the wisdom of sword men, They deal all by strength not policy. What exercise shall be sain'd, let me know that?
Excuse, why, Lodovico, I am sick, And I am sick indeed, sick to the soul.
For a decayed tilter, or a known Goward, this were tolerable now: But to, the business; I have so∣licited your widow.
Will she nor speak with me?
Young widows, and grave old Ones two, by your leave care not so much for talking; if you come once to them you must do, and do, and do again, Again, and again, ell's two little, you'll find it.
Come, friend, you mock my mi∣series
It's a fine laughing matter when the best and most approved soul∣dier of the world, should be so heart∣sick for love of a plac•…et: Well I have sent your wise servant (for fools are best to be trusted in women's things) to my cousin Shaparoons, and by him your se∣cond letter, you shall shortly hear what news: My cousin is excellently traded in these mo•…tal businesses of flesh and blood, and will hardly come of with two denials.
If she prevail, Lodovico.
What then? Ply your occu∣potion when you come to it, it is a fit sea∣son of the year, women are honey moon if a man could jump with them at the instant, and prick 'em in the right vain; else this Queen would never have saved a Traitor from the block, and sudden∣lie made him her King and Husband. But no more of that, there's danger in it; You're sick you say?
Pierced through with •…ery darts, much worse then death.
Why your only present re∣medy is, then as soon as you can, to quench those fires in the watery Champion∣nils of qualification: soft, no more words, behold a prodigy.
Long live Alphonso King of Are∣ragon.
Then we are Sovereign.
As free, as I by birth:
I yield to you (my Lord) my Crown, my Heart,
My People, my Obedience; In exchange
What I demand is Love.
You cannot miss it;
There is but one thing that all humane power
Or malice of the Devil could set a broach,
To work on for a breach twixt you and me.
One thing! Why, is there one thing then, my Lord?
Yes, and it is only this; you're still a woman.
A woman! Said you so, sir.
I confess
You have deserved more service, more regard
From me, in my particular, then life
Can thank you for; and that you may conceive
My fair acknowledgment; although it is true,
I might command; yet I will make a suit,
An earnest suit t'ee.
It must then be granted.
That to redeem a while some se∣rios thoughts
Which have misdeem'd your sex. You'll be content
I be a married Bachelor one seven-night.
You cannot but conceive.
How's this?
Fine work.
Alas my Lord, this needs no pub∣lick mention.
Nay, Madam, hear me, that our our Courts be kept
Under a several roof; that you and I
May not for such a short time, come to∣gether.
I understand you not.
Your patience, Madam,
You interrupt me, That no message pass
Of commendation, questioning our healths,
Our sleeps, our actions, or what else be∣longs
To common courtesy, twixt friend, and friend.
You must be pleased to grant it, I'll have it so.
No message of commends!
Phew, you demur,
It argues your distrust.
I am content
The King should be obeyed. Pray hey∣ven all be well.
Velasco, thou were it he did con∣quer me,
Did take me prisoner? were it in that the means
To raise me up thus high. I thank thee for it;
I thought to honour thee in a defence
Of the Queens beauty; but we'll now deferr't.
Yet hand your mistress, lead her to the Court,
We and our Lords will follow, there we'll part;
A seven days absence cannot seem but short.
And as I said (nay pray my friend be covered) the business hath been soundly followed on my part. Yet again, in good sooth, I cannot abide you should stand bare before me to so little purpose.
Manners is a Jewel (Madam) and as for standing bare, I know there is some difference, the putting down of a mans cap, and the putting down of his bree∣ches before a reverend gentlewoman.
You speak very properly, there is a great deal of difference indeed. But to come to the point; Fie, what a stir I had to make her to receive the letter, and when she had received it, to open it, and then to read it; nay, to read it again and again; that as I am a very woman, a man might have wrong my smock dropping wet, with the pure sweat that came from my body. Friend, I took such pains with her. Oh my conscience, to bea•… a child at those years would not trouble me half so much as the delivery of that letter did.
A man-child of my age perhaps, Madam, would not.
Yet that were a sore burden for one that is not used to it, I may tell you. O these coy girls are such wild cattle to have dealing with.
What ancient Madams cannot do one way, let them do another; she's a rank Jade that being past the breeder, cannot kick up her heels, wince, and cry wee-hee: good examples cannot choose from ones elders, but work much to the purpose, being well plied, and in season.
In season? True, that's a chief thing; yes, I'll assure you my friend, I am but entering into eight and twen∣tie.
Wants somewhat of that too, I take it; I warrant ye your mark ap∣pears
yet to be seen for proof of your age, as plain as when you were but fife∣teen.
Truly, if it were well searched, I think it does.
Your name is Mopes, you told me?
Mopes my name is, and yours Madam Shaparoon I was told.
A right Madam born I can as∣sure ye.
Your Ancestors will speak that, for the Shaparoons have ever took place of the best French-hoods in the parish; ever since the first addition.
All this with a great deal of mo∣desty I must confess. Ud's Pittikins, stand by, aside a little: see where the lady coms; do not appear before you are called, in any case: but mark how I will work her like wax.
Your servant in all commands Velasco. So, and I am resolved to put ye to the test, servant, for your free fools heart, ever I give you the slip, I warrant ye.
Your ladyship hath considered the premises ever this time, at full, I hope.
O, Shaparoon, you keep true sen∣tinel, what? I must give certain answer; must I not?
Nay, Madam, you may choose, it is all in your Ladyships discreet consi∣deration. The sum of all is, that if you show him not some favour, he is no long lives man.
Very well; how long have you been a factress for such Merchants, Sha∣paroon.
O my Religion! I a factress? I am even well enough served for my good will; and this is my requital. Factress, quoth you?
Come, your intercession shall prevail, which is his letter carrier?
At your ladyships service.
Your Lord Velasco sent you?
Most true, sweet madam.
What place hold you about him?
I am his Drugstore, Madam.
What Sir?
Being hard bound with melan∣choly, I give him a purge, with two or three soluble stools of laughter.
Belike you are his fool, or his jester.
Jester if you please, but not fool, Madam; for bibles belong to fools, and they are then only fit for ladies secre∣sies, not for Lords.
But is he indeed sick of late?
Alas good heart, I suffer •…or him.
By your leave lady, without ceremony, you know me, and may guess my errand.
Yet more trouble, nay, then I shall be hail-shot.
To be brief. By the honours of a good name, you are a dry-skinn'd wi∣dow, and did not my hast concern the life of the noblest Gentleman in Eu∣rope, I would as much scorn employ∣mints of this nature to you, as I do a proud woman of your condition.
I marry here's one will thunder her widow-head into flitters: stand to it, Signior, I am your second.
Sir you're uncivil to exclaim a∣against a lady in her own house.
A lady, yet a paraquitto, po∣pingjay, your whole worth lies in your gay out side, and your squalling tongue.
A Wagtail is a glorious fowl in respect of many of ye.
Though most of ye are in nature as very fowl as wagtayles.
Are such as you the Lord Ve∣lasso's agents in his hot affection?
Sweet cousin, Lodovico, pray now, the lady is most virtuously re∣solved.
Hark ye middle-ag'd countess, do not take another tale into your mouth, I have occasion to use you in private, and can find you work enough my self, a word in your ear.
I protest, I meant more noble
answer for his satisfaction, then ever your railing language shall force from me.
Were I the man that doted on you, I would take a shorter course with you, then to come humbly whi∣ning to your sweet—pox of all such ri∣diculous foppery—I would—
Weep your self to death, and be chronicled among the regiment of kind tender hearted souls.
Indeed, forsooth, I would not; what, for a widow one that hath jumped the old moyles trot, so oft, that the sci∣atica founders her yet in both her thighs.
You abuse me grossly.
One that hath been so often drunk with satiety of pleasure, that four∣teen husbands are but as half a draught to quench her thrust in an afternoon.
I will no longer endure ye.
For you, you? That are nei∣there noble, wife, rich, fair, nor well∣favoured. For you?
You are all these, if you can keep your own counsel and let no body know, Mistress Madam.
Nay I am so persuaded, and as∣sure your self no body shall know.
Yet forsooth, must you be the only precious piece the Lord Velasco must adore, must dye for. But I vow, if he do miscarry, (as I fear he cannot recover.)
Goodness forbid, Alas! Is he sick, sir?
Excellent dissimulation! Yes sure, he is sick, and an everlasting silence strike you dumb that are the cause on it. But, as I said, if he do go the wrong way, as I love virtue, your ladyship shall be ballated through all Christen∣doom, and sung to sciroy tunes, and your picture drawn over every ballad, sucking of rotten eggs among wheasels.
Pray give me leave; Is Lord Velasco sick? And lies there ought in me to comfort, or recover him?
Marry does there, the more In∣fidel he: And what of all this now?
What would you have me do?
Wonders, either go and visi him, or admit him to visit you; these are mighty favours are they not?
Why, good Sir, I will grant the later willingly; he shall be kindly well∣com.
And laughed at while he is here: shall a not?
What would you have me say? My best entertainment shall be open to him; I will discourse to him freely, if he requires it privately: I will be all what in honour I should.
Certify him so much by letter.
That cannot stand with my mo∣desty, my word and truth shall be my gage.
Enough, do this, and by this hand I'll ask you pardon for my rude∣nos, and ever heartily honour you.
I shall hear from you when my leasures serves.
Most assuredly. Good destines speed your journey.
All happiness ride ever before you, your disgraces behind you, and and full pleasure in the midst of ye.
My over kind, Captain, what would you say?
Why, Mistress, I would say, as a man might say forsooth, indeed I would say.
What, Captain?
Even whatsoever you would have me to say, forsooth.
If that be all, pray say nothing.
Why look ye, Mistress, all what I say if you mark it well, is just nothing; As for example, To tell you that you are fair, is nothing, for you know it your self; to say you were honest, were an indignity to your beauty, and upon the matter nothing, for honesty in a fair woman is as good as nothing.
That is somewhat strange to be proved.
To a good wit, dear Mistress, no∣thing's impossible.
Sure the Court and your new clothes have infected you: Would I were a purse of gold, for your sake, Cap∣tain, to reward your wit.
I would you were, mistress, so you were not counterfeit metal, I should soon try you on the too true touch∣stone of my affections, indeed for∣sooth.
Well, witty Captain, for your love I must pass away in debt, but will not fail to think on it. But now I am in hast.
If you would but grant me but one poor request, before you go, I should soon dispatch and part.
Name it, Captain.
Truly, and as I live, it is a very small trifle for your part, all things con∣sidered.
But cannot you tell what it is?
That were a fine jest indeed, why, I would desire, entreat, and be∣seech you.
What to do?
There you have it, and thank you too.
I understand you not.
Why, To do with you, forsooth, to do with you.
To do what?
In plain words, I would commit with you, or as the more learned phrase it, if you be pleased to consent, I would ravish you.
Fie, fie, Captain, so un•…ivil, you made me blush.
Do I say; why, I am glad I have it for you: Soldiers are hot upon ser∣vice, mistress, and a wise mans bolt is soon shot; as the proverb says:
Good Captain, keep up your bolt till I am at leisure to stand fair for your mark. If the Court Stalions prove all so rank, I will vow all to ride hence∣forth upon an ass; so, Captain, I must leave you.
Fare-wel heartily to you for∣sooth.
Go thy ways for as true a Mistress as ever fowled clean Napary. This same whore∣son Court diet, cost, lodging, change of clothes, and ease, have addicted me villainously to the itch of concupi∣sconce.
They all shall not entreat me.
Your Majesty were no King, if your own will were not your own law.
Always, my Lord, observing the domination of the Planets: As if Mars and Venus being in conjunction, and their influence working upon your frail∣tie; then in any case you must not resist the motion of the celestial bodies.
All which (most gracious So∣verain) this most famous Scholar will at a minute foretell.
All hail to the King himself, my very good Liege, Lord, and most grati∣os benefactor.
What need I other counsellors then these.
Shall I be forced to be a women's slave? That may live free, and hate their fiokle sex.
O it is a glorious virtue in so magnificent a Prince to abstain from the sensual surfeits of fleshly and wanton ap∣petites.
I find the inclination of such follies.
Why, what are women?
Very pleasant pretty necessary toys, an't please your Majesty; I my self could pass the time with them, as occasi∣on migh serve, eight and forty hours out right, one to one always provided.
Yet of all the seven planets, there are but two women among them, and one of them two is chaste, which is, as good as if she were a boy.
That is not to be questioned; the best of women are but troubles and vexations, it is man that retains all true perfection, and of all men your Ma∣jesty.
Ye are to rude to enter on our privacies,
without our license, speak, your busi∣nos Lords.
We came from your most virtue∣os Queen.
No more.
A month is well nigh past, and yet you slack
Your love to her: What mean you, sir, so strangely
To slight a wife whose griefs grow now too high,
For womanhood to suffer.
Is it your pleasure
To admit her to your bosom?
You're too saucy.
Return, and quickly too, and tell her thus;
If she intend to keep her in our favour,
Let us not see her.
Say you so, Great Sir;
You speak it but for trial
Ha, ha, ha.
O, Sir, remember what you are, and let not
The insinuations of these servile cry∣tures,
Made only men by you, sooth and tra∣duce
Your safety to a known and wilful danger.
Fix in your thoughts the ruin you have s•…ap't;
Who freed you; who hath raised you to this height,
And you will then awake your judge∣mints eye:
The Commons murmur, and the streets are filled
With busy whispers: Yet in time recall
Your violence.
As I am King, the tongue Forfeits his head that speaks another word.
Talk we not now like a King?
Like one that hath the whole World for his proper Monarchy, and it becomes you Royally.
The Queen, and my Mistress; O brave, we shall have some doings hard to hand now, I hope.
What means the woman? Ha! Is this the duty
Of a good wife, we sent not for you, did we?
The more my duty that I came unsent for;
Wherein my gracious Lord have I of∣fended?
Wherein have I transgressed against thy laws
O sacred Marriage? To be sequestered
In the first spring and April of my joys
From you, much dearer to me, then my life?
By all the honour of a spotless bed,
Show me my fault, and I will turn away,
And be my own swift executioner.
I take that word. Know then you married me
Against my will, and that's your fault
Alas! Against your will? I dare not contradict
What you are pleased to urge. But by the love
I bare the King of Arragon, (an oath
As great as I can swear by) I conceived
Your words to be true speakers of your heart,
And I am sure they were; you swore they were.
How should I but believe, that loved so dearly?
Come then you are a trifler, for by this
I know you love me not.
Is that your fear?
Why la now, Lords, I told you that the King
Made our division but a proof of faith.
Kind husband, now I'm bold to call you so;
Was this your cunning to be jealous of me
So soon? We women are fine fools
To search men's pretty subtilties.
You'll scarce find it so
She would persuade me strangely.
Prithee, Sweet heart,
Force not thy self to look so sadly; troth
It suits not with thy love, it is well. Was this
Your sennights respite? Yet, as I am a Queen,
I feared you had been in earnest.
Earnest: Hence
Monstrous enchantress, by the death I owe
To Nature, thou appear'st to me in this
More impudent then impudence, the tide
Of thy luxurious blood is at the full;
And cause thy raging pleurisy of lust
Cannot be sated by our royal warmth,
Thou tri'st all cunning petulant charms to raise
A wanton devil up in our chaste breast.
But we are Canon-proof against the shot
Of all thy arts.
Was it you spoke that, my Lord?
Phaeton is just over the orb of the moon, his horses are got loose, and the heavens begin to grow into a com∣bustion.
I'll sooner dig a dungeon in a mole-hill,
And hide my crown there, that both fools and children
May trample o'er my Royalty, then ever
Lay it beneath an antic women's feet.
Could thou transship thy self into a man,
And with it be more excellent then man
Can be; yet since thou were it a woman once,
I would renounce thee.
Let the King remember
It is the Queen he speaks too.
Pish, I know
She woúld be well contented but to live
Within my presence; not for love to me,
But that she might with safety of her honour,
Mix with some hot veined lecher, whose prone lust
Should feed the rank impostume of de∣sires,
And get a race of bastards, to whose birth
I should be thought the Dad. But thou, thou woman,
Ever I will be the cloak to thy false play,
I'll couple with a witch, a hag; for if
Thou can live chaste, live by thy sell like me.
Or if thou would persuade me that thou love me,
See me no more, never. From this time forth
I hate thy sex; of all thy sex, thee w•…rst.
Madam, dear Madam, yet
Take comfort, time will work all for the best
Where must I go?
You're in your own Kingdom, it is your birth-right,
We all your Subjects; not a man of us,
But to the utmost of his life, will right
Your wrongs against this most unthank∣full King.
Away, ye are all Traitors to pro∣fane
His sacred merits with your bitter terms.
Why, am I not his Wife? A wife must bear
Withal what likes her Lord t'upbraid her with,
And yet it is no injustice. What was it he said?
That I no more should see him, never, never.
There I am quite divorced from all my joys,
From all my paradise of life. Not see him?
It was too unkind a task. But he com∣manded
I cannot but obey. Whore's Herophil?
Here Madam.
Go hang my Chamber all with mourning black;
Seal up my windows, let no light survey,
The subtle tapers that must eye my griefs.
Get from me Lords, I will defy ye all,
You're men, and men (O me) are all un∣kind.
Come hither Herophil, spread all my robes,
My jewels and apparel on the floor,
And for a Crown get me a Willow wreath:
No, no, that's not my colour, buy me a veil
Ingrained in •…awny. Alas, I am forsaken,
And none can pity me.
By all the faith
I ow to you my sovereign, if you please
To enjoy me any service, I will prove
Most ready and most true,
Why should the King
Despise me? I did never errors his will,
Never gainsaid his, yea; yet sure I fear
He hath some ground for his displeasure.
None,
Unless because you saved him from the block.
Art thou a prattler too? Peace, Herophil,
Tempt not a desperate woman. No man here
Dares do my last commends to him.
If your excellent Majesty please to repose confidence in me; I will not only deliver him your commenda∣tions, but think my self highly dishono∣red, if he return not his back to you by letter.
Off beast, made all of baseness, do not grieve
Calamity, or as I am a knigh,
I'll cut thy tongue out.
Sweet Signior, I protest—
Madam, believe him not, he is a Parasite;
Yet one the King doth dote on.
Then beshrew ye,
You had not used him gently, had I known't,
I would have kneeled before him, and have sent
A handful of my tears unto the King.
Away, my Lords, here is no place to revel
In our discomfits. Herophil, let's hast,
That thou and I may heartily like wi∣dows
Bewail my bridal mocked Virginity.
Let's follow her my lords; I fear to late
The King will yet repent these rude di∣visions.
Complement? It is for Bar∣bors shops; know your own worth, you speak to a frail commodity; and barter't away roundly, my Lord.
She promised free discourse?
She did: Are ye answered?
Madam, my Lord Velasco is come, use him nobly and kindly, or—I say no more.
To a poor widow's house my Lord is welcome.
Your lordship honours me in this fa∣for; in what thankful entertainment I can, I shall strive to deserve it.
Your sweet lordship is most heartily welcome, as I may say.
Instead of a letter, Madam good∣face, on my Lord's behalf, I am bold to salute you.
Madam Salassa, not distrusting the liberty you granted, now you and my Lord are in you own house, we will attend ye in the next room; Away, Cousin; follow, sirrah.
It is a woman part to come be∣hind.
But for two men to pass in be∣fore one woman, it is too much a con∣science; on reverend antiquity.
What is your lorships plea∣sure?
To rip up
A story of my sate. When by the Queen
I was employed against the late Common∣tioners,
(Of whom the now King was chief Lea∣der) then
In my return you pleased to entertain me
Here in your house.
Much good may it do your lordship.
But then, what conquest gained I by that conquest,
When here mine eyes, and your com∣manding beauty
Made me a prisoner to the truest love,
That ever warmed a heart.
Who might that be?
You, Lady, are the deity I adore,
Have kneeled too in my heart, have vowed my soul to,
In such a debt of service, that my life
Is tenant to your pleasure.
Phew, my Lord;
It is not nobly done to mock me thus.
Mock you? Most fair Salassa, if ever truth
Dwelt in a tongue, my words and thoughts are twins.
You wrong your honour in so mean a choice.
Can it be though, that that brave man, Va•…asco,
Sole Champion of the world, should look on me?
On me, a poor lone Widow? It is im∣possible.
I am poorer
In my performance now, then ever; so poor,
That vows and protestations want fit credit
With me to vow the least part of a service
That might deserve your favour.
You are serious?
Lady, I wish that for a present trial,
Against the custom of so sweet a na∣ture,
You would be somewhat cruel i•… com∣mands.
You dare not sist the honour of my faith
By any strange injunction, which the speed
Of my glad undertaking should not cheerfully
Attempt, or perish in the sufferance of it.
You promise Lordly.
You too much distrust
The constancy of truth.
It were unnoble,
On your part to demand a gift of bounty,
More then the freedom of a fair allow∣ance,
Confirmed by modesty and reason's war∣rant
Might without blushing yield unto.
Oh, fear not,
For my affections aim at chaste contents;
Not at unruly passions of desire.
I only claim the title of your servant,
The flight of my ambitions soars no higher,
Then living in your grace, and for in∣couragement
To quicken my attendance now and then
A kind unravisht kiss.
That's but a fee,
Due to a fair deserver: but admit
I grant it, and you have it; may I then
Lay a light burden on you.
What is possible
For me to venture on, by how much more
It carries danger in it; by so much more
My glorie's in the achievement.
I must trust ye.
By all the virtues of a Souldi∣ers nane,
I vow and swear.
Enough, I take that oath: And thus my self first do confirm your warrant.
I feel new life within me.
Now be Steward,
For your own store, my lord, and take possession
Of what you have purchased freely.
With a joy.
As willing as my wishes can arrive at.
So, I may claim your oath now.
I attend it.
Velasco, I do love thee, and am jealous
Of thy spirit, which is hourly apt
To catch at actions; if I must be Mistress
Of thee and my own will, thou must be subject
To my improvements.
It is my souls delight.
You're famed the only fighting Sir alive;
But what's thy•…; if you be not safe to me.
By all—
you shall not swear, take heed of perjury.
So much I fear your safety, that I com∣mand,
For two years space, you shall not wear a sword,
A dagger, or stiletto; shall not fight
On any quarrel be it near so just.
Lady!
Hear more yet; if you be baffled, Railed at, scorned, mocked struck, baff•…'d, kicked,
(O Lady!)
Spit on, reviled, challenged, pro∣vok'd by fools,
Boys, antics, cowards.
(It is intolerable.)
I charge you (by your oath) not to reply
In word, deed, look: and lastly, I con∣jure ye
Never to show the cause to any living
By circumstance or by equivocation;
Nor till two years expire to motion love.
Why do you play the Tyrant thus?
It is common
T'observe how love hath made a Co∣ward valiant;
But that a man as daring as Velasco,
Should to express his duty to a Mistress,
Kneel to his own disgraces, and turn Coward,
Belongs to me and to my glories only;
I'm Empress of this miracle. Your oath
Is past, if you will lose your self you may.
How do ye, Sir?
Woman thou art vain and cruel.
Wilt please your lordship taste a cup of wine,
Or stay and sup, and take a hard bed here?
Your friends think we have done strange things this while.
Come let us walk like Lovers: I am pit∣tiful,
I love no quarrels.
Triumph in my ruins.
There is no act of folly but is common
In use and practise to a scornsul woman.
You have prevailed, yet ever you came (my Lord)
Muretto, here this right, right, honest man
Confirmed me thoroughly, now to witness further
With what a gratitude I love the Queen.
Reach me a bowl of wine.
Your Majesty more honours me, in making me the Messenger of this most happy concord, then addition of great∣nos can express.
I ever told you,
How you would his Grace, inclined at last
The very Jove of benignity, by whose gentle aspect the whole sphere of this Court and Kingdom are (like the lesser orbs) moved round in the har∣money of affability.
My Lord Almado, health unto your Mistress,
A hearty health, a deep one.
upon my knee
My duty gladly answers
Give him wine.
There's not a man whoever in our Court
(Greater or meaner) but shall pledge this health,
In honour of our Queen, our virtuous Queen.
Commend us, and report us as you find.
Great Sir, I shall with joy.
Bufo and Pinto,
All in, and drink, drink deep, let none be spared,
Comers or goers, none.
Away my hearts.
We'll tickle it till the welkin
blussle again, and all the fixed Stars dance the old measures.
I shall attend to wait upon your lordship to the Caraoch.
So, so, far reaching policy, I adore thee,
Will hug thee as my dearling
Shallow fools
Dive not into the pitch of regular Sty∣tests.
Henceforth my Stratagem's of scorn and hatred
Shall kill in smiles. I will not strike and frown,
But laugh and murder.
Welcome, are we safe?
Most free from interruption: The Lord Velasco is newly entered the Court; I have given the watch word that they ply him mainly; the conclusion (I know cannot but break off in hurl∣burly.
Good, good, I hate him mortal∣lie. It was he
Slaved me to the hangmans ax: But now go on;
Petruchi is the man, you say, must stand
The Champion of her lust.
There may be yet virtuous in∣tention even in bad actions, in lewd words, I urge no further then likely∣hoods may inform.
Phew, that's thy nobleness: But now Muretto,
The eye of luxury speaks loud in si∣lence.
Why look ye, Sir, I must con∣fess I observed some odd amorous glen∣ces, some sweet familiar courteous toy∣ing smiles; a kind of officious bold∣nos in him, Princelike and Queenlike allowance of that boldness in him again; sometimes I might warily overhear her whispers. But what of all this? There might be no harm meant.
Fie, no, the grafting of my fore∣head, nothing else.
Grafting, grafting, Muretto, A most Gen∣tleman-like exercise; a very mystery be∣longs to it.
And now and then they walk thus, arm in arm, twist fingers: ha. Would they not Muretto?
It is wondrous fit a great Queen should be supported, Sir; and for the best lady of 'em all, to discourse familiarly with her supporter, is court∣lie and passing innocent.
She and Petruchi did so?
And at her passing to her pri∣vate lodgings, attended only with her lady in ordinary. Petruchi alone went in before her.
Is it true! Went in before her! Can prove that?
Your Majesty is too quick, too apprehensive of the worst: I meant he performed the office of an Usher.
Guilty apparently: Monstrous woman! Beast!
Were these the fruits of her dissembling tears!
Her puling, and her heart sighs. But, Muretto.
I will be swift Muretto, swift and la∣rible.
I am such another Coxcomb; O my side too.
Yet faith, let me persuade ye; I hope your wife is virtuous.
Virtuous? The Devil she is, it is most impossible.
What kiss and toy, wink, prate, yet be virtuous?
Why not Sir? I think now a woman may lie four or five nights toge∣there with a man, and yet be chaste; though that be very hard, yet so long as it is possible, such a thing may be.
I have it, we'll confer; let's stand aside.
Not drink more? By this hand you shall drink eleven whole healths, if your cap be wool or beaver; and that's my resolution.
'Sfoot, eleven score, without dishonour be it spoken to any mans per∣son out of this place.
Prithee, I can no more, it is a profession
I dare not practice, nay, I will not.
How will not? Not her Queen∣ships health?
Hark ye, thy sty•…king and unwholesome words—
Will not—You will not—You say you will not?
I say so, pray be answered.
Pox of all flinchers; if a'say a will not,
Let him choose, like an arrant dry lord as he is.
Give me the bowl, I must be va∣liant.
You, Sirrah, man at arms; Here's a ca∣rouse
To the King, the Queen, and my self.
Let it come, I ll have that i'faith,
Sweet, sweet, sweet, Captain.
Hold, give the lord first, drink it up lord, do, ump.
Away I say, I am not in the tune.
Tune, tune? 'Sblood, do ye take us for fiddlers, scrappers, rime canters by tune? By this light, I'll •…courge ye like a town top: Look ye, I am urged—Ump—And there's a side blow for ye, like a sober thing as ye are.
well done i'faith, precious Cap∣tain.
Dare thou do this to me know∣ing who I am?
Yes, in the way of daring, I dare kick you thus, thus, Sir up and down. There's a jolt on the bum too: How do ye like it?
It is well! You use the privy∣ledge of the place.
There was a time the best of all this Court
Durst not have lift a hand against me then.
But I must bear it now.
Is not this strange Muretto?
I can scantly credit mine own eyes: The Captain follows his instru∣ctions perfectly.
Not drink? Mahound, In•…del.
I will fillip thy nose, spit in thy face,
Mongrel; brave, a Commander, •…a?
O woman-woman-woman.
That's a lie, a slark one, it is known I ne'er was a woman in my life. I am weary beating of him, and can stand no longer. Groom, kick him thou up and down in my behalf; or by this flesh I'll sue•…ge you, sirrah.
Come aloft, Jackanapes: come aloft; sirrah.
Why sure Velasco dares not fight.
It must be some or other hath bewitched him.
Avaunt, I saw twelve dozen of Cuckolds in the middle region of the air, galloping on a black Jack, Eastward ho. It is certain that every dozen went for a company, and they are now be∣come a corporation. Aries and Taurus, the Bull and the Ram, two head signs, shall be henceforth their recognizances, set up in the grand hall of their politic convocations—whirr, whirr, there, there, just under the rainbow ambles Mercury, the thin bearded thief that stole away the Drappers wife, while the good man was made drunk at the Still∣yard, at a beaver of Dutch bread and Rhenish wine, and lay all night in pure holland in's stockings and shoes. P•…sh, Talk not to me, I will maintain against the Universities of both the Indies, that one Aldermans horse is more right worcester∣shipful, then any six Constables, brown bills and all. Now, now, now, my brains burn in Sulphur, and thus will I stalk about; and swim through a whole Element of dainty, neat, brisk, rich claret, canary, or maligo. Am not I Pinto, have not I heron here? What art thou, a full moon, or a moon calf?
No, no, it is a dry Stock-fish, that must be beaten tender.
Was ever man so much a slave as I?
Does Saturn wince? Down with him, let Charles his wain run over his North pole; it shall be justified too.
Now, Sir, having taken a little breath, have at ye once more, and I have done.
Clubs, clubs, I have been the death of two Brewers horses, and two catch-poles, my self, and now be tried by two fools and ten knaves: O monstrous base, horrible; is my lord past recovery?
Hold, prithee, fellow hold, I have no sword,
Or if I had, I dare not strike again.
U'ds bones, were ye an invinci∣ble Armado,
Id pound ye all like brown paper rags.
Let me be stricken blind! The shame of fate;
Velasco, baffled, and not dare to strike!
Dogs, drunken dogs, I'll whip ye to your kennels.
Nay good, forbear.
Bilbo come forth and show thy foxes tail.
Nay, nay, give me liquor, and I'll fight like a rorer.
Keep standing ho; the Almanac says plainly it is no season to be let blood, the sign is mortal. Hold!
Yes I command. Uncivil ill bred beasts.
How dares ye turn our palace to a booth?
How dare the proudest of ye all lift up
A hand against the meanest of those creatures
Whom we do own for ours? Now, now you spit
The ancient rancor of you bitter galls
Wherewith you strove to wound us heretofore.
We are abused, My Lord.
Fellow, Thou lie.
Our Royal eyes beheld the pride and malice
Of thee Velasco; who in hate to us
Deny to honour our remembrance, though
But in a pledged health.
Therein I was wronged.
No, therein all thy cunning could not hide
The rage of thy malicious heart to us;
Yet know, for trial of thy love we cause
This once•…, we will justify the hight
Of thy disgraces; what they did was ours.
Hence Coward, baffled, kicked, despised and spurned.
Hang thy self; a pox on thee.
O you're undone: What Devil,
Hag, or Witch
Hath stolen your heart away?
I cannot tell.
Not fight it is enough to shame us all.
Happy was I, that living lived alone,
Velasco was a man then, now is none.
Is it even so, no man now; then I smell how things stand: I'll lay my life, his lady sweet heart hath given him the Gleek, and he in return hath gelded himself, and so both lost his courage and his wits together.
Speak o'er the words again; and good my lord
Be sure you speak the same, the very words;
Our Queen, our vetuous Queen; Was it so?
Just so;
And was withal in carriage so most kind,
So Princely, that I must do wrong to gratitude,
In wanting action to express his love.
I am the happiest she that lives. Petruchi,
Was I mistook or no? Why good my lords,
Observe it well. There is a holy league
Confirmed and ratified twixt Love and Fate.
This sacred Matrimonial tie of hearts,
Called marriage, has Divinity within't.
Prithee, Almado, tell me, smiled the King
When he commended to me?
Madam, yes;
And affably concluded all in this;
Commend us, and report us as you find.
For loves sakes, no man prattle of distrust.
It shall be treason whosoever says
The King's unkind. My thinks I am all air,
My soul has wings.
And we are all o'rejoy'd
In this sweet reconciliation.
We'll visit him (my Lords) in some rich mask
Of rare device, as thus; Pish, now I think on it,
The world yields not variety enough
Of cost, that's worthy of his Royal eyes,
Why Herophil?
Here, Madam.
Now beshrew me
But I could weep for anger—If it were possible
To get a chariot cut out of a rock,
Made all of one whole Diamond, drawn all on Pavements
Of pearls and amber, by four Ivory steeds
Of perfect Crystal; this were worth presenting.
Or some bright cloud of Sapphires—Fie you are all
So dull, you do not love me.
You're transported
To strange impossibilities: our service
Shall wait upon your happiness.
Nay, nay,
I know you laugh at me, and well you may;
I talk I know not what. I would it were fit
To ask one queston of ye.
Madam, any thing.
You'll swear that I am Idle, yet you know
It is not my custom; Look upon me well;
Am I as fair as Herophil?
Yes, Madam,
Or any other creature else alive.
You make me blush in troth. O would the King
Could see me with your eyes. Or would I were
Much courser then I am to all the world;
So I might only seem more fair to him.
See here come more. Velasco, thou art welcome.
Welcome kind Lodovico. You I know
Bring fresh supplies of comfort; do not cloud
Your news with circumstance: Say, doth the King
Expect me? Yes, good man, I know he does.
Speak briefly, good my Lord, and truly.
Madam, Take all at once, he is the King;
And Kings may do their pleasures.
True, Velasco.
But I have from my heart forgot remem∣bronco
Of former passages, the world is changed:
Is a'not justly royal?
Would a'were, I wish it for your sake Madam, but my wishes and his inclinations are quite opposite.
What said you, Lodovico?
Thus Petruchi. Velasco hath been by the King disgraced, by his mini∣once abused, baffled, they justified by the King in it. In a word; Alphonso is, and will be the scourge of Arragon.
I'll stop my ears, they shannot let in poison,
Rank treacherous searching poison.
It is impossible.
Yes, it is impossible; but now I see
You're all agreed to curse me in the hight
Of my prosperities. O that at once
I could have leave to dye and shun the times.
His excellent Majesty by me commends to your Royal hands this let∣la, Madam.
Why thus I kiss,
And kiss again; Welcome, what ever it speaks.
That you may all conceive (my Lords) the Kings hearty zeal to u∣nity and goodness, he by me entreats your attendance on the Queen to him: To you Signior, Petruchi, he sends this Diamond from his own finger.
You strike me into wonder.
I should excuse his highness
violence to you, my lord Velasco; but he says, that your own indiscre∣tion deserved your late reproof: And further, (pardon me that I mince not the sum of his injunction) he says your cowardice is now so vulgarly palpable, that it cannot stand with his honour to countenance so degenerating a spirit.
I thank him; yet, if you re∣member well;
Both he and you proved me another man.
The sweetest letter that ever was writ:
Come we must to the King—How! It is my ring,
The first ring that I ever gave the King.
Petruchi, I must have it.
It was the King sent it:
I mean to yield it back again.
No I will.
And in exchange take that of equal value:
But not with me, because it comes from my husband.
Let's slack no time, this day shall crown our peace.
You see my Lord how the world goes.
What your next course?
Would I could leave my self, I am unfit
For company of men: Art thou my friend?
I cannot tell what I am, your patient humour indeed persuades me I am nothing.
Ladies little puppy dogs shortly will break your shins with milke-sops, and you dare not cry, come out cur. Faith tell me for our wonted frindships sake; hath not this Madam sweet heart of yours a share in your Meramorphosis?
You are unkind, as much as in a thought,
To wrong her virtue. Lodovico, no;
I have resolved never to fight again.
It is a very safe resolution: but have you resolved never to be beaten again?
That goodly sound of gallant valiant man
Is but a breath, and dyes as soon as uttered.
I'll seek my fame henceforward in the praise
Of sufferance and patience, for rash man-hood
Adds only life to cruelty, yet by crew∣elty
Takes life away, and leaves upon our souls
Nothing but guilt, while patience if it be
Settled, doth even in bondage keep us free.
Excellent morality; but good my Lord, without more circumstance, the cause, let me know the ground and cause on it.
My will, or if you please my cowardice,
More ask not, more, I vow, you shall not know.
O Fie, fie, I were better be the Hangmans deputy, then my Lord Ve∣lasso's Gentleman usher; all the streets as I pass whoot at me, and ask me if I be so valiant as my master the coward; they swear their children carry wooden daggers to play a prize with him, and there's no talk but of the arrant coward Velasco.
I care not, let 'em talk.
Care not? By these hilts, I had rather then a hundred ducats, I had but as much spirit: as to have drawn upon a couple of men in Ginger-bread, which a hucsters crooked legged whore∣son ape held up, and swore they were two taller fellows then you are.
Your readiest way were to get you into a cloister; for there's no going to Court:
Yes, to have our brains rubbed out with the heel of a brown man∣chet.
As, you're my friend forbear to come more near me.
Gone so quickly? Mopes I'll find out this mystery, and thou shalt be the instrument.
Shall I? Why agree•…d, let me
alone for an instrument, be it a wind or stringed instrument, I'll sound at one end or other I'll warrant ye.
Are all things ready as we gave charge?
Yes all, and the face of the hey∣vans are passing favourable.
Bufo, Be it thy care, the watch word given,
To seize Petruchi suddenly.
If the Devil be not in him, I'll make him fast enough.
Mean time we'll take our place, they are at hand.
Some sound our choicest music t'enter∣tain
This Queen with all the seeming forms of State.
All joy to Aragons great King.
You strive to act in words (my lords) but we our self
Endeavour rather how to speak in act.
Now is a time of peace of amity.
The Queen is present; Lady, seat you here,
As near, as if we placed you in our heart,
Where you are deep enthroned.
As you in mine,
So may I ever live in yours, my Lord.
How so? You are too charity∣ble now,
That cover but equality in love;
A cold, a frozen love; for I must think
The streams of your affections are dried up,
Or running from their wonted champion∣nils, range
In lawless paths of secrecy and stealth;
Which makes us love you more.
I would your words
Dissented not from your resolved thoughts
For then (if I mistake not) you would feel
Extremity of passion, which indeed
Is noble jealousy.
Are you so plain?
I thank you Madam; lend me your fair hand,
What's here? O my presages! Whence got you this ring?
This ring, my lord?
This ring, my lord!
By honours reverend crest it is time to wake.
Art thou not pale, Petruchi?
Gracious, Sir.
This is the ring you sent me by Muretto,
Which because it came from you, the Queen would needs
Exchange it for another of her own.
True, because it came from me, I take it so,
And grant ye, know the word. It is won and lost.
What mean ye, Helhounds? Slaves, let go my sword.
Keep in your chaps, and leave scolding, my small friend, it is now no time to wrangle or to roar.
Nay, nay, with what you please I am content.
What means your Highness?
wrong not Majesty
With such unnoble rigour.
O, my lords,
The weight of all this shame falls hey∣viest here
In my afflicted bosom. Madman like
I would not credit, what mine ears had heard,
From time to time of that adulterous woman.
For this have I liy'd widowed from her bed,
Was deaf to proofs, to oaths, and ever thought
That whoredom could not suit her self so trimly
On virtues outside. But Petruchi there
Hath a loud speaking conscience, can proclaim
Her lust, and my dishonour
Grant me hearing.
Away with him to prison, make him fast
On pain of all your lives.
Come, Sir, there is no playing fast and loose, which fit a ducat now.
But what now for the Queen?
As she deserves.
Our law requires a clear and open proof,
And a juditial trial.
Yes to subjects
It does, but who among you dares speak justice
Against your natural Sovereign? Not one.
Your Majesty hath most wisely considered that point.
I have stood silent all this while, and cannot but with astonish∣meant and unutterable grief bear a share of sadness in these disasters. But, Madam, be not altogether dejected on your part: there is more mercy in this sovereign Prince, then that you should any way distrust.
Nay, even proceed and question me no more.
I will be gentle to you, and the course
That I will take shall merit your best thanks.
If in a month a Champion shall appear,
In single opposition to maintain
Your honour; I will be the man my self
In person to avouch this accusation:
And which of us prevails, shall end this strife.
But if none come, then you shall lose your head.
Mean time your usage shall be like a Queen.
Now by the life of honour, it is a most Princely trial, and will be worth you eternal memory.
Where must I then be led!
No where but here
In our own palace; and as I am King,
None worse then I shall be her Guar∣dian.
Madam, Heaven is the Guardian of the just;
You cannot miss a Champion.
Ever I go,
May I entreat a word?
O yes, you may.
Collumello and Almado, hear me,
I speak to you, and to your fellow Peers,
Remember both by oaths and by alle∣giance
You are my subjects.
Madam, true, we are.
Then as you ever bore respect or truth
To me as to your Sovereign, I conjure ye
Never to levy arms against the King,
Singly or openly, and never else
To justify my right or wrong in this.
For if you do, here I proclaim ye all
Traitors to loyalty and me: for surety,
I crave your oaths a new.
Since you enforce us,
We swear: and heaven protect you.
Let me be gone.
Well as they please for that: Muretto, follow.
Here is fine work, my lord. What's to be done?
Stand still while this proud Tie∣rant cuts our throats.
She's wronged, and this is one∣lie but a plot.
Velasco, now might bind his Country to him;
But he is grown so cowardly and base,
That boys and children beat him as they list.
I have be thought me, we, with the other Peers,
Will set a proclamation our, assuring
What worthy Knight soever undertakes,
By such a day, as Champion for the Queen.
Shall have a hundred thousand ducats paid,
Withal, what honours else he shall de∣mand.
This must be speeded, or twill come to late.
It shall be sudden: Here our hope must stand;
Kings command Subjects; Heaven doth Kings command.
A coward? it is impossible; Ve∣lasso a coward? The brave man? The wonder of the time? Sure, Shapa∣roon, it is a mere scandal raised by an enemy.
It is most certain, most appa∣rent; Taylors, Prentices, nay, Bakers and Weavers; (things that drink can∣not put spirit into, they are such mighty bread-eaters) they as I am an honest woman, fling old shoes at him, and he dares not turn back to give an angry word.
I had been sweetly promoted to such a tame Champion.
Gallants! Out upon 'em, it is your tough clown is your only raiser up of man or woman.
A Proclimation is sent out for certain?
Most assuredly.
The sum proposed, a hundred thousand ducats.
Present payment, without at∣tendance.
It is a glorious reward—speak low, and observe.
Whosoever, man or woman, can, or will procure any such foresaid de∣fondant, against the said day; let them, him, or she repair to the said lords of the Council, and give in such sufficient assurance for such defence, and they or any of them shall receive a hundred thousand ducats in ready cash; with what honours may give them, him, or her content or satisfaction.
O that I durst be valiant: A hundred thousand. A hundred thousand; how it rumbles in my chops.
Prithee, a word, my friend.
Sweet Lady, all fair weather up∣on ye.
As for you, Madam, time was, I recom∣mend to your ancient remembrance, time is past: with my service forwards and backwards, when it is time present, resting yours in the whole Mopes.
Very courtly and pithy.
Pray let me view your paper.
It is your ladyships.
Some proclamation as I take it.
Madam Reverence, you have ta∣ken it in the right cue.
I am o'rejoy'd; there's gold for thy news. Friend. I will make thee the happiest and most welcome messenger to thy lord, that ever received thanks from him; without delay, wait on me for instructions.
I am at your ladyships beck.
True, true, Sir, you are set high upon the stage for action. O the top of my ambition, my hearts Idol!
What a perplexity are you twined into? And justly; so justly, that it is hard to judge, whether your happiness were greater in the possession of an unmatch∣able beauty, or your present misery, by enforcing that beauty to expose her ho∣nor to so apparent a contempt: This is not the least, that might have been in time prevented.
O I am lost Muretto, my sunk eyes
Are buried in their hollows: busy thoughts
Press on like legions of infernal hags
To menace my destruction: Yet my judgment
Still prompts my senses, that my Queen is fair.
Fair! Unspeakable workman∣ship of Heavens bounty. Were all the skilsullest Painters that ever discerned colours, moulded into one, to perfect an Artist. Yet that Artist should sooner want fancy or imagination, for person∣nating a curious medal, then ever to pattern a counterfeit so exquisitely ex∣cellent, as is the Queen by nature.
I have surveyed the wonder of her cheeks,
Compared them with the lilies and the rose
And by my life, Muretto, Roses are
Adulterate to her blush, and lilies pale,
Examined with her white; yet, blair eyed fool,
I could not see those rarities before me.
Every man is blind (my lord) in his own happiness, there's the curse of our mortality.
She was the very tale of the world:
Her perfections busied all tongues.
She was the only wish of Europes chief∣est Monarchs.
Whose full fruition you (and it was your capital sin) most inhumanly abandoned.
Villain, Petruchi, let me for ever curse him: Had he not been the man; who else had durst to hazard a denial from her scorns?
See now herein you are mon∣strous discourteous, above excuse; why, Sir, what hath Petruchi done? Which (from any King to a Vassal) al men would not eagerly have pursued. Alas, my lord, his nobleness is eternal, by this means, in attempting and his felicity unmatchable, in enjoying the glory of his time, a beau so conquering, so unparalleled.
She is superlative.
Divine.
Rich, bright.
immortal.
Too too worthy for a man.
The Gods might enjoy her.
Nature ne'er framed so sweet a creature.
She is self Nature's Nature.
Let me for ever curse the frail condition
Of our deluded faculties: Muretto,
Yet being all, as she is all, her best
Is worst considering that she is a wan∣ton
Build you a Palace, arch it with Diamonds, roof it with Carbun∣cles, pave it with Emraulds, daub it with Gold, furnish it with all what cost can lay on, and then seal up the doors, and at best it is but a solitary nest for Owls and Daws.
Beauty was not merely created for won∣der, but for use: It is you were in the fault; it is you persuaded her, urged, compelled, enforced her: I know it, my truth and plainness trumpets it out to ye: Besides, women (my lord) are all creatures, nor Gods nor Angels.
I must confess it is true, yet by my Crown
She dyes, if none defend her, I'm re∣solved.
It is a •…eroical disposition, and with your honour she cannot, must not live. Here's the point; If she live and you receive her to favour, you will be a no∣ted Cuckold; which is a recognisance dishonourable to all, but to a King fearful∣lie infamous. On the other side, if you prevail, and she be put to death, you do as it were deprive the Firmanent of the Sun, and your self of the treasure of the whole earth.
Right, right, Muretto, there thou strik'st the wound
Too deeply to be cured, yet I must do it.
I would fain see her now.
Pray do, Sir; and let Petruchi come face to face to her; observe them both, but be very mild to both: use ex∣tremity to neither.
Well •…ounsell'd; call them hi∣there, but none with them:
We'll strive with grief; Heaven! I am plunged at full.
Never henceforward shall I slumber out
One peaceful hour; my enraged blood
Turns coward to mine houour. I could wish
My Queen might live now though I did but look
And gaze upon her cheeks, her ravishing cheeks.
But, oh, to be a Cuckold; 's death, she dyes.
My gracious Lord.
Reach yond fair sight a chair, That man a stool, sit both, wee•…l have it so.
It is Kingly done; in any case
(my lord) curb now a while the vio∣lence of your passion, and be tempe∣rate.
Sir, it is my part to kneel, for on your brow
I read sad sentence of a troubled wrath,
And that is argument enough to prove my guilt, not being worthy of your fa∣four.
Let me kneel too, though not for pardon, yet
In duty to this presence: else I stand
As far from falsehood, as is that from truth
Nay, Madam, this not the pro∣mise on your part.
It is his pleasure you should sit.
His pleasure is my law.
Let him sit too, the man,
Sir, you are obeyed.
Between my comforts and my shame I stand
In equal distance; this way let me turn
To thee thou woman. Let me dull mine eyes
With surfeit on thy beauty. What art thou
Great dazzling splendour? Let me ever look
And dwell upon this presence.
Now it works.
I am distract. Say? What! Do not, do not—
My lord the King-Way, Sir?—He is in a trance, or else metamorphis'd to some some pillar of marble: How fix∣edly a' stands.
Do ye hear, Sir? What do ye dream on?
My lord, this is your Queen speak to her.
May I presume with my irreve∣rent lips
To touch your sacred hand.
I am too wretched
To be thought but the subject of your mirth.
Why she can speak, Muretto? O tell me pray,
And make me ever, ever fortunate;
Are you a mortal creature? Are ye in∣deed
Moulded of flesh and blood like other women?
Can you be pitiful? Can ye vou•…hsase
To entertain fair parley? Can you love,
Or grant me leave to love you; can you, say?
You know too well, my lord, in∣stead of granting,
I ow a duty, and must sue to you,
If I may not displease.
Now I am great,
You are my Queen, and I have wronged a merit,
More then my service in the humblest lowness
Can ever recompense. I'll rather wish
To meet whole hosts of dangers, and en∣counter
The flabled whips of steel, then ever part
From those sweet eyes: not time shall sue divorce
Twixt me and this great miracle of Na∣ture.
Muretto?
Sovereign Sir.
I'll turn away,
And mourn my former errors—Worse then death
Look where a Ba•…isk with murdering flames
Of poison, strikes me Blind. Insatiate tempter,
Pattern of lust, it is thou alone hast sun∣dred
Our lawful bride bed, planted on my crest
The horned Satyrs badge; hast soiled a bea•…tie
As glorious, as sits •…onder on her front.
Kill him, Muretto, why should he re∣ceive
The benefit of the law, that used no law
In my dishonours?
Were you more a King
Then Royalty can make you, though oppressed
By your commanding powers, yea, and •…rb'd
In bonds most falsely, yet, give me a sword
And •…ip me to my shirt, I will defend
Her spot•…s virtue, and no more este•…m,
In such a noble cause, an host of Kings,
Then a poor stingless swarm of buzzing flies.
Pe•…uchi, in those words thou dost condemn
Thy loyalty to me, I shall disclaim
All good opinion of thy worth or truth,
If thou persevere to affront my lord.
Then I have done. Here's mise∣rye unspeakable;
Rather to yield me guilty wrongfully,
Then contradict my wrongs.
High impudence.
Could she be ten times fairer then she is,
Yet I would be revenged. You sweet, I would
Again—Her beams quite blast me.
If you will be an Eaglet of the right aerie, you •…used endure the Sun. Can you choose but love her?
No by the Stars. Why would not you be honest; and know how I do door?
May I be hold
To say I am, and not offend?
Yes, yes,
Say so for heavens love, though you be as fowl
As sin can black your purity. Yet tell me
That you are white and chaste; That while you live
The span of your few days, I may re∣joyce
In my deluded follies; least I dye
Throe•…gh ang•…each, ever I have revenged my in i•…y,
And so leave you behind me for another;
Tha•… were 〈◊〉.
Heaven knows, I 〈◊〉 abu•…'d my self or you.
As much sue•…re I, and truly.
Thou proud Devil.
Thou hast a lying tongue; They are con∣scented.
In mischief. Get ye hence sed•…cing horrors.
I'll s•…op mine eyes and ears till you are gone.
As you would be mo•…o merciful, away,
Or as you would find mercy.
Sir, they are gone.
And she too then let me be seen no more.
I am distracted, both ways I seel my blame;
To leave her death, to live with her is shame.
Fare ye well King, this is ad∣mirable, I will be chronicled, all my business ripens to my wishes. And if honest intentions thrive so successfully 〈◊〉 I will henceforth build upon this issue∣rance, that there can hardly be a greater Hell or Damnation, then in being a Vile∣lane upon earth.
I am wonder stricken—And were you i'faith the she indeed, that turned my Lords heart so handsomely, so cunningly? O how I reverence wit. Well, lady, you are as pestilent a piece of po∣lice, as ever made a•… ass of love.
But, Lodovico, I'll salve all a∣gain quickly.
Yes indeed forsooth, she has the trick on it.
You have undertaken with the lords already, you say.
I have, and my life is at stake, but I fear not that.
Pish, you have no need; 〈◊〉 smile, or kind simper from you does all; I warrant ye the sight of so much gold, as you are to receive, hath quickened your love infinitely.
Why, Sir, I was no•… worthy of my lords love before; I was too poor: but now two hundred thousand ducats, is a dower sit for a lord.
Marry is it. I applaud your consideration.
It was neatly thought on.
Have you prevailed yet, lady, time runs on,
You must not dally.
Good my lords, sear nothing:
Were it but two hours to it, I should be ready.
He comes himself, it is fit we stood unseen.
Ply him soundly, lady.
Let us withdraw then.
I cannot be alone, still I am hunted
With my confounding thoughts: Too late I find,
How passions at their best are but sly traitors
To ruin honour. That which we call love,
Was by the wisest power above fore∣thought
To check our pride. Thus when men are blown up
At the highest of conceit, then they fall down
Even by the peevish follies of their frailties.
The best of my lord Velasco's wishes ever.
Crown him with all true content.
Cry ye mercy, Lady.
I come to chide you my Lord; can it be possible that ever any man could so sincerely profess such a migh∣tiness of affection, as you have done to me, and forget it all so soon, and so un∣kindly.
Are you a true very lover, or are you bound
For penance to walk to some holy shrine
In visitation? I have seen that face.
Have you so? O you are a hot lover; a woman is in fine case to weep out her eyes for so uncertain a friend, as your protestations urged me to conceive you: But come I know what you'll say aforehand, I know you are angry.
Pray give me leave to be my own tormentor.
Very angry, extremely angry; But as I respect perfection, tic more then I deserve.
Little know you the misery I have en∣dured, and all about a hasty word of nothing, and I'll have it prove nothing ever we part.
Her pride hath made her luna∣tick, alas!
She hath quite lost her wits, those are the fruits
Of scorns and mockeries.
To witness how indearedly I prefer your merits, and love your per∣son; in a word, my lord, I absolve you, and set you free from the injunction I bound you in; as I desire to thrive, I meant all but for a trial in jest.
these are no words of madness; whither tends
The extremity of your invention, Lady?
I'll swear no more.
I was too blame, but one fault (me thinks) is to be pardoned, when I am yours and you firmly mine: I'll bear with many in you.
So, if you be in earnest; What's the matter?
The sum of all is, that I know it suits not with the bravery of the lord Velasco's spirit, to suffer his Queen and sovereign stand wrongfully accused of dishonour, and dye shamefully for a fault never committed.
Why it is no fault of mine.
Nor shall it be of mine: Go be a famous subject; be a ransomer of thy Queen from dangers, be registered thy Countries patron: Fight in defence of the fairest and innocentest princess a∣live: I with my heart release you.
First conquer; that done, enjoy me ever for thy wife: Velasco, I am thine.
Pish, you release me, all their cunning strains
Of policy that set you now a work,
To treble ruin me, in life, fame, soul,
Are foolish and unable to draw down
A greater wrath upon my head; in troth
You take a wrong course lady.
Very good, Sir, it is prettily put off, and wondrous modestly. I protest, no man hath enjoined me to this task; it is only to do service to the State, and honour to you.
No man enjoined you but your self?
None else, as I ever had truth in me.
Know then from me, you are a wicked woman,
And avarice, not love to me, hath forced ye
To practice on my weakness. I could rail,
Be most uncivil; But take all in short:
I know you not.
Better and better, the man will triumph anon sure; Prithee, good dissemble no longer; I say you shall fight, I'll have it so: I command you fight, by this kiss you shall.
Forbear, let me in peace bid you •…orbear;
I will be henceforth still a stranger to you,
Ever a stranger, look, look up, up there
My oath is booked, no humane power can free me.
I grant you none but I.
Be not deceived, I have
Forgot your scorns; you are lost to me,
Witness the Genius of this place, how ever
You tempt my constancy, I dare not fight.
Not dare to fight, what not for me?
No Lady.
I durst not, must not, cannot, will not fight.
O me not one.
What ails you?
Now my life
Hath run it's last for I have pawned it Sir
To bring you forth as champion for the Queen.
And so should have the pro∣missed Gold.
I, I.
You have revenged my wrongs upon your self.
I cannot help you, nay alas you know
It lay not in me.
O take pity on me,
Look heer, I hold my hands up, bend my knees,
Heaven can require no more.
Then kneel to heaven
I am no God, I cannot do you good.
Shall not my tears prevail? hard-hearted Man.
Dissembler, loves dishonour, bloody but∣cher
Of a poor Lady, be assured my Ghost
Shall haunt thy soul when I am dead.
Your curse
Is fallen upon youur own head, herein show
A noble piety, to bear your death
With resolution, and for final answer
Lady I will not fight to gain the world.
Gone! I have found at length my just reward,
And henceforth must prepare to welcome Death.
I begin to love thee now.
Now I perceive thou art a noble man,
Composed of Goodness, what a fool was I?
It grieves me more to loose him then to die.
Lady we have heard all that now hath past,
You have deceived your self and us, the time
We should have spent in seeking other means.
Is lost, of which you are the cause.
And for it
The sonnets striekt decree craves execu∣tion,
What can you say?
My Lords I can no more but yield me to the law.
O that ever you were born, you have made a sweet hand on it, have you not.
Here is the right recompense of a vain confidence, Mistress: But I will not torture you being so near your end, lady say your prayers and die in Charity, that's all the pity I can take on ye
Ten times the gold you should have had, now Lady cannot release you.
You alone are she
Ruins your country. Here is the price of sin,
Ill thrift, all loose in seeking all to win.
Nay even go thy ways, it is an old proverb that lechery and cove∣to usnes go together, and it is a true one too, But 〈◊〉 shift for one.
If some proper squire or lustily yeoman have a mind to any thing I have about me, a shall soon know what to trust too for I see the times are very troublesome.
Now is the prosperous season when the whole round of the planets are coupling together. Let birds and beasts observe valentines day, I am a man and all times are with me in season, this same Court ease hath set my blood on tiptoe, I am Madder then a march hare.
Blessing on your fair face, your handsome hand, your clean foot sir, are you a Courtien sir?
Good stars direct me, sweet wo∣man, I am a Courtier, if you have any suit, what is it, what is it? be short.
Lord what a Courteous proper man he is, trust me, he hath a most aloe∣quent heard.—Suit Sir, Yes Sir, I am a country gentlewoman by father and Mothers side, one that comes to see f•…∣shions and learn news. And How I pray sir (if I may be so bold to ask) stand things at Court Sir now a days?
A very modest necessary and dis∣create Qeustion.
Indeed Mistress Countrey-Gentlewoman, things at Court stand as they were over wont, some stiff and some slack, every thing according to the employment it hath.
Mary, the more pity sir, that they have not all good doing a like, me∣thinks, they should be all and at all times ready heer.
You speak by a figure, by your leave, in that.
But because you are a stranger, I will a little more amply inform you.
Heer at our Courts of Arr•…n, Scholars for the most part are the veriest fools for that they are always, beggarly and proud. And foolish citizens the wisest scholars for that they never run at char∣ges for greater learning to cast up their reck'nings, then their Horn-bool•….
Here every old lady is cheaper then a proctor, and will as finely convey an o∣pen act, without any danger of a con∣sistory. Love and money sweeps all be∣fore them, be they cut or longtayle. Do not I deserve a kiss for this discovery Mistress.
A kiss, O my dear chastity, yes indeed forsooth, and I pray please your self.
Good wench by venus, but are you any thing rich?
Rich enough to serve my turn.
I see you are reasonable fair.
I ever thought my self so.
Will you survey my lodgings?
At your pleasure si•… being un∣der your guard a•… I am.
Sirrha Mopes, If my mistress say but the word, thou shalt see what an ex∣ploy•…, I will doe.
You'll undertake it you say, though your throat be cut in your own defence, it is but manslaughter you can never be hanged for it.
Nay I am resolute in that point, heir's my hand, let him shrink, that list, I'll not flinch a hairs breadth Mo∣pas.
What, old huddle and twang so close at it, and the dog days so near, Hark ye, your lady is going the way of all flesh. And so is that 〈◊〉 with you methinkes, though not in the same cu•…, is he not?
He has promised to tell me my fortune at his chamber, and do me some other good for my ladies safety.
I have spoken, the planets shall be ruled by me, Captain, you know they shall.
Let the planets hang themselves in the elements, what careds, I have o∣there matters to trouble my brains.
Signior Pinto take her to you, s•… true a mettall'd blade as ever was turned into a dudgeon, hark in your ear.
I know not how to trust you, you are all so sickle so inconstant.
If I fail
Let me be marked a Strumpet.
I apprehend you use him kind∣lie still,
See where he is, Captain you are well met,
Wer'es one whose heart you have.
He knows he has.
Why by my truth I thank you forsooth, it is more of your courtesy then my deserving; but I shall study to deserve it.
I hope so, and doubt it not.
Madam Cousin Shaproon.
You are welcome sir.
Cousin, Nay then I smell she is a gentlewoman indeed.
Yes, and as antiently descended as Flesh and blood can derive her.
I am a made man and I will have her.
You'll walk with me sir?
Even through fire and water. sweet Mistress.
Let's every one to what con∣corns us most,
For now's the time all must be saved or lost,
This is not kindly done, nor like a friend.
Keep your chamber then, what should owls and barts do abroad by day light? why, you are become so notori∣ously ridiculous, that a Crave•…n is repu∣ted of nobler spirit amongst birds, then Velasco among men.
Why Lodovico dost thou tempt my wrongs?
O friend, it is not an honour or a fame
Can be a gain to me, though I should dare
To entertain this Combatt, say my fate
Did crown mine arm with conquest of the King,
Put case the cause add glory to the jus∣tice
Of my prevaling sword? what can I win?
Saving a pair of lives I lose a soul,
My rich soul Lodovico, Does not yet
The heart even shrill within thee? All thy spirits
Melt into Passions, All thy manhood stagger
Like mine? Nay can thou choose but now confess
That this word Coward is a name of Dignity?
Faint hearts and strong tongs are the tokens of many a tall prattling Ghossipe. Yet the truth is you have half convinced me, But to what end will you be a looker on the Tragedy of this she Beast? it will but breed your greater vexation.
I hope not so, I look for Com∣fort in it.
Mass: that may be too, It can∣not but make your melancholy a little merry, to see the woodcockes neck caught in a worse noose, then she had set for you.
That's but a poor revenge, I'd rather weep
On her behalf, but that I hope her cou∣rage
Will triumph over Death.
My Lord they come.
Let me stand back unseen, Good Angels guard her.
Tic a sad welcome.
To bid you welcome to the stroke of Death.
Yet you are come too't Lady.
And a cause
Throughout the land will be your ge∣nerall 〈◊〉,
For having bin the wilful overthrow,
First of your Countries Champion, 〈◊〉 your Queen,
Your Lawful Sovereign, who this very day.
Must act a part which you must act be∣fore, but with less guilt.
Use no long speeches lady,
The danger of the time, calls us away,
We cannot listen to your farewells now.
I have few words to say, my heart is lodged
In you same upper Parliament, yet now
If ere I part, and shall be seen no more,
Some man of mercy could but truly speak
One word of pardon from the Lord Ve∣lasso,
My peace were made in earth, and I should fly
With wings of speed to Heaven.
Pish here's not any.
Not any? on then, why should I prolong
A minute more of life, that live so late,
Where most I strive for love to purchase hate,
Bear witness Lords I wish not to call back
My younger days in promise that I would
Redeem my fault and do Velasco right,
But could I but reverse the doom of time,
I would with humblest suit make pray∣ers to heaven
For his long flourishing welfare.
Dispatch, dispatch;
You should have thought on this before, pray now
For your own health, for you have need to pray.
Madam Salassa, I am bold to take leave of ye before your long journey: All the comfort that I can give you is, that the weather is like to hold very fair, you need not take much care for either hood or cloak for the matter.
Are you come? Worthy Sir, then I may hope
Your noble friend hath sent one gentle sigh
To grace my funeral: For virtues sake
Give me a life in death; tell me, O tell me,
If he but seal my pardon, all is well.
Say ye so? Why then in a word, go merrily up the stairs; my lord Velasco desires Heaven may as hear∣tily forgive him, as he does you.
Enough, I thank his bounty, on I go
To smile on horror: so, so, I'm up.
Great in my lowness, and to witness fur∣there
My humbleness, here let me kneel and breath
My penitence: O women in my fall,
Remember that your beauties, youth and pride
Are but gay tempters, 'less you wisely shun
The errors of your frailties: let me ever
Be an example to all fickle dames,
That folly is no shrine for virtuous names.
Heaven pardon all my vanities, and free
The lord Velasco, what ever come of me.
Bless, bless, the lord Velasco.—Strike.
Villain, hold, hold! Or thou die, Slave.
What means that counter∣mand?
Hey, do! More news yet, you will not be valiant when it is too late, I trust?
Woman, come down: Who lends me now a sword?
Marry, that do I, Sir, I am your first man; Here, here, here, take heed you do not hurt your fingers; twill cut plaguely: and what will you do with it?
Base woman, take thy life, thy cursed life,
I set thee free, and for it pawn a soul:
But that I know heaven hath more store of mercy,
Then thou and all thy sex of sin and falsehood.
My Lords, I now stand Champion for the Queen:
Doth that discharge her?
Bravest man, it doth:
Lady, you're safe; now, Officers away.
This is a blessed hour!
You shall for ever
Bind us your servants.
Aha: Why then, however things happen, let them fall, as they fall. God a' mercy, my lord, at last.
Ha•…k how the people ring appeal of joy.
For this good news. My lord, time steals away;
We may not linger now.
You give me life;
Take it not, Sir, away again. I see
Upon your troubled eyes such discon∣•…tent
As frights my trembling heart; Dear Sir—
The Gold
You hazarded your life for, is your own,
You may receive it at your pleasure.
Yes,
It is ready for you, lady.
Gold? Let gold,
And all the treasures of the earth besides
Perish like trash; I value nothing, Sir,
But your assured love.
My love! Vain woman,
Henceforth thus turn I from thee, never look
For Apish dotage, for a smile, a how do ye,
A fare ye well, a thought from me: let Snakes
Live in my bosom, and with muderous stings
Infect the vital warmth, that lends them life,
If ever I remember thee or thine.
If I prevail, my services shall crave
But one reward, which shall be, if that ever
Thou come but in my sight, the State will please
To banish thee the land; or else I vow,
My self to leave it.
My ill purchased life!
Ill purchased life, indeed, whose ransom craves
A sadder price, then price of bloodshed saves.
Go, learn bad woman, what it is, how foul,
By gaining of a life, to lose a soul.
The price of one whole doth exceed as far
A life here, as the Sun in light a Star.
Here though we live some threescore years, or more,
Yet we must dye at last, and quit the score
We ow to nature. But the soul once dying,
Dyes ever, ever; no repurifying;
No earnest sighs or groans; no interces∣zion;
No tears; no penance; no too late con∣fession
Can move the ear of justice, if it doom
A soul past cure to an infernal tomb.
Make use of this Salassa.
Think upon that now, and take heed, you look
My lord no more in the face.
Goodness protect him! now my life so late
I strove to save, which being saved I hate.
Are you resolved to dye?
When life is irksome
Death is a happiness.
Yes, if the cause
Make it not infamous: But when a beauty
So most incomparable as yours, is ble∣meshed
With the dishonourable stamp of whore∣doom:
When your black tainted name, which should have been
(Had you preserved it nobly) your best Chronicle,
Wherein you might have lived, when this is stained,
And justly too; then death doth but heap
Affliction on the dying. Yet you see
With what a sympathy of equal grief
I mourn your ruin.
Would you could as clearly
Perceive mine innocence, as I can clearly
Protest it.
Fie to justify a sin
Is worse then to commit it, now you're faulty.
What a royal pair of excel∣lent creatures are heer both upon the castaway. It were a saint like mercy in you (my Lord) to remitt the memory of a past error. And in you Madam (if you be guilty of the supposed crime) to submit your self to the King. I dare promise, his love to you is so unfeigned, that it will relent in your humility. Pray do, good Madam do.
But how if I be free?
By any means, for your honours cause do not yield then one jot. Let not the faint fear of Death deject you before the royalty of an erected heart. Do ye hear this my Lord, it is a doubtful case, almost impossible to be decided, Look upon her well, as I hope to pros∣per, she hath a most virtuous, a most in∣nocent countenance. Never heed it. I know my Lord your jealousy and your affectionswrestle together within you for them astery. Mark her beauty thoroughly. Now by all the power of Love, tic pity She should not be as fair within as without.
Could that •…e proved, I'd give my kingdom straight
And live a slave to her, and her perfect∣once.
Lords welcome, see thus arm in arm we pace
To the wide theater of blood and shame
My Queen and I, my Queen? had she bin still
As she was, mine, we might have lived too happ'ly,
For eiders comfort. Heer on this sweet model,
This plot of wonder, this fair face, stands fixed
My whole felicity on earth. In witness
Whereof, behold (my Lords) those manly tears
Which her unkindness and my cruel sate
Force from their quiet springs, They speak aloud
To all this open ayre, their public eyes,
That whither I kill or die in this attempt:
I shall in both be vanquished.
It is strange my Lord
Your love should seem so mighty in your hatred.
Muretto go, and guard Petruchy safe.
We must be stout now, and give over whining.
He shall confess strange things (my Lords) I warrant ye,
Comes not a champion yet?
None dares I hope.
The Queen you know, hath bound us all by Oath,
We must not undertake to combat you
Although the cause should prove appa∣rent for her.
Must not? why then you're co∣wards all, all base,
And fall off from your duties, but you know
Her follies are notorious, none dare's stand
To justify a sin, they see so plainly.
You are too hard a censurer.
Give me your hand, farewell, thus from my joy's
I part, I ever part, Yet good my Lords,
Place her on yonder throne, where she may sit
Just in mine eye, that so if strength should fail,
I might fetch double strength from her sweet beauty.
I'll hear no answers.
Heaven be always guard
To Noble actions
Heir's a medley love
That kills in Courtesy.
Herald sound a warning to all defendants—What comes no one forth: How like you this my Lords? Sirrah sound again.
ha? art thou the man? although
Thy cowardice hath published thee so base,
As that it is an injury to honour
To fight with one that hath been baffled scorned,
Yet I will bid thee welcome.
Nobly spoken.
Past times can tell you sir, I was no co∣ward,
And now the justice of a gallant quar∣rell
Shall new revive my dullness, Yonder sits
A Queen as free from stain, of your dis∣grace,
As you are foul in urging it.
Thou talk courageously, I love thee for it,
And, if thou can make good what thou avouchest,
I'll kneel to thee, as to another nature
We come not heer to chide, My sword shall thunder
The right for which I strike.
Traitor to loyalty,
Rash and unknown fool, what desperate lunacy
Hath led thee on to draw thy treache∣rous sword
Against thy King, upon a ground so giddy
That thou art but a stranger in the cause
Thou would defend, By all my royal blood
If thou prevailst, thy head shall answer it.
Madam you wrong his truth, and your own fame.
You violate the liberty of arms.
Pish, listen not to her, it is I'm your man.
Why foolish Lords, unsensible and false,
Can any drop of blood be drawn from him
My Lord, your King, which is not drawn from me?
Velasco by the duty that thou ow'st me
I charge thee to lay by thy arms.
I must not,
Unless this man whom you call king, confess
That he hath wronged your honour.
Wilt thou fight then
When I command the contrary?
I will.
Velasco. hear me once more, thou were wont
To be as pitiful as thou were valiant,
I will entreat thee gentle kind Velasco,
A weeping Queen sues to thee, Doe not fight,
Velasco, every blow thou give the King,
Wounds me, did ever love? Velasco hear me.
She must not be endured.
Nor can she win me,
Blush you my Lord at this.
O let me die
Rather then see my Lord affronted thus
Hold up the Queen, she swouns.
Madam Dear Madam.
Can you see her and not be touched my Lord?
Was ever woman false that loved so truly
It is all dissimulation.
You dishonour her,
To prove it I'll fight both quarrels now.
Heydo? here comes more work for mettle men.
A•…other who should he be?
Speak what art thou?
One that am summoned from the power above
To guard the innocence of that fair Queen
Not more against the man that would accuse her
Then all the world besides.
You are welcome too.
You come too late friend, I am he alone
Stand ready to defend that gracious beauty.
You may return.
Ther's not a man alive:
Hath interest in this quarrel but my self,
I out of mine own knowledge can avo•…ch.
Her accusation to be m•…early false,
As hell it self.
What mortal man is he,
So wilful in his confidence, can swear
More then he knows.
I swear but what I know.
Hast thou a name?
Yes, help my beaver down,
Do ye know me now?
Petruchi! death of manhood,
I am plainly bought &amp; sold, why wher's Muretto?
Here as ready to stand in de∣fence of that Miracle of chaste women, as any man in this presence.
Are all conspired against me? what thou too?
Now by my fathers ashes, by my life
Thou art a villain, a gross rank'rous vile∣lain.
Did not thou only first enforce my thoughts to jealousy?
Tic true I did.
Nay more,
Did not thou feed those thoughts with fresh supplies
Named every circumstance?
All this I grant.
Dost grant it, Dog, slave, Hell∣hound?
Will you hear me?
Hear him good my Lord, let us persuade ye,
What can thou say Impostor? speak and choke.
I have not deserved this my Lord, and you shall find it, it is true, I must confess, that I was the only instru∣meant to incense you to this distempera∣ture and I am proud to say it, and say it again before this noble presence, that I was my self the only man.
Insufferable Devil!
Pray my Lord.
Wonder not my Lords, but lend me your attentions, I saw with what violence he pursued his resolutions not more in detestation of the Queen in particular, then of all her sex in gene∣rall. That I may not weary your pati∣ence: I bent all my Studies to devise, which way I might do service to my country, by reclaiming the distraction of his discontents. And having felt his disposition in every pulse, I found him most addicted to this pestilence of jealo∣sy with a strong persuasion of which; I from time to time, ever fed him by de∣grees, till I brought the Queen and the noble Petruchi into the dangers they yet stand in. But with all (and herin I appeal to your Majesties own approba∣tion) I seasoned my words with such an intermixing the praises of the Queens beauty, that from jealosy. I drew the King into a serious examination of her per∣fections.
Thus far I must acknowledge, he speaks truth.
At length having found him indeed surely affected, I perceived, that nothing but the supposed blemish of her dishonour, could work a second divorce between them.
True, truly fates own truth.
Now my Lords, to clear that imputation, I knew how easy it would be, by the apparent certainty it self, In all which, if I have erred, it is the error of a loyal service. Only I must ever ac∣knowledge how justly I have deserved a punishment, in drawing so virtuous a princesses honour into public question; and humbly referr my self to her gre∣cious clemency, and your noble con∣structions.
But can, can this be so?
Let me ever else, be the subject of your rage, in the sufferance of any tor∣ture.
And is she chaste Petruchi?
Chaste by virtue,
As is the new born virgin, for ought I know.
I ever whispered so much in your ears my Lord, and told you, that it was impossible such singular endow∣mints by nature, should yield to the corruption so much, as of an unworthy thought.
Did I not tell you so from time to time,
Lay by your arms, my lords, and join with me.
Let's kneel to this (what shall I call her?) Woman?
No, she's an Angel. Glory of Cry∣tion, All kneel.
Can you forget my wickedness? Your Peers,
Your Senators, your bravest men, make suit on my behalf. Why speak ye not, my lords?
I am I know too vile to be remitted, But she is merciful.
Great Sovereign Lady—
Be not so low, my lord, in your own thoughts:
You are, as you were, Sovereign of my heart;
And I must kneel to you.
But will you love me?
It is my part to ask that: will you love me?
Ever, yours ever; let this kiss new marry us. What say?
It does; and heaven it self can tell
I never did, nor will wrong our first loves.
Speak it no more. Let's rise, now I am King
Of two rich Kingdoms, as the world af∣fords:
The Kingdom of thy beauty, and this land.
But what rests for Muretto?
I account my worthiest thanks his debt.
And he deserves all honour, all respect.
Thus my embraces
Can witness how I truly am his friend.
And I whilst I have life.
Nay when I am dead I, will appear again, clap thee on the shoulder and cry, God a' mercy old Suresby.
I must ask pardon of him, still I thought
His plot had aimed all at his own be∣hoof,
But I am sorry for that misconceit.
My lords, What I have been heretofore, I cannot altogether excuse; but I am sure my desires were always •onest, however my low fortune kept me down: But now I find it is your ho∣nest man is your honest man still, how∣ere the world go.
Muretto, Whilst I live thou shalt be near me,
As thou deserve: And noble Gentle∣men
I am in all your debts: henceforth be∣leeve me,
I'll strive to be a servant to the State.
Long live happy both.
But where are now my brace of new-made Courtiers,
My Scholar and my Captain?
I cry guilty, there is a large story depends upon their exploits, my Lord; for both they thinking in such pe∣rilous times to be shifting every man for one, have took a passing provident course to live without help hereafter. The man in the moon, Signior Pinto, for the raising of his fortune a Planet higher, is by this time married to a kind of loose-bodied widow, called by Surname a Bawd; one that if he follow wholesome instructions, will maintain him, there's no question on it, the captain for his part, is somewhat more delicately resolved for as adventurous (though not as srail) a piece of service. For he in hope to marry this lady, at∣tending on the Queen, granted Petruchi his liberty, and by this time hath recei∣ved a sufficient quietus est.
Are these my trusty servants? What a blindness was I led into!
If your Highnesses both will in these days of mirth crown the Co∣medy; first let me from the Queens roy∣al gift be bold to receive Herophil for my wife; She and I are resolved of the bu∣siness already.
With all my heart, I think her well bestowed,
If she her self consents.
My duty, Madam,
Shall ever speak my thankfulness, in this
I reckon all my services rewarded.
Much comfort to you friend.
All joy and peace.
My duty to my Sovereigns, to all therest at once, my heartiest hearti∣est thanks. Now, lady, you are mine; why so, here's short work to begin with. If in the end we make long work, and beget a race of mad-caps, we shall but do as our fathers and mothers did, and they must be cared for.
Follow me not bawd; my lord the King;
My love, justice, justice.
Justice to me, I was like to have been married to these black moustaches instead of that lady.
I to this ugly bawd.
Justice.
Hence you ridiculous fools, I banish you
For ever from my presence: Sirrah, to thee
I give the charge, that they be forth with stripped,
And put into such rags they came to Court in;
And so turned off.
Dost hear me King?
King hear me, I'm the wiser man.
No more I say.
Come away, come away for shame, you see what it is to be given to the flesh: the itch of lechery must be cured with the whip of correction. Away, away.
What else remains
But to conclude this day in Hymen's Feasts?
To whom; for what;
Your meaning, name, and errand?
At those feet
Lay down those sums of gold, the price of guilt,
Of shame, of horror.
What new riddle's this?
My Gracious lord.
I shall inform your Highness.
Woman of impudence.
Your looks proclaim
My sentence banishment, or if you think
The word of banishment too hard to ut∣la.
But turn away, my lord, and without accent
I'll understand my doom, I'll take my leave,
And like a penitentiary walk
Many miles hence to a religious shrine
Of some chaste sainted Nun, and wash my fin off
In tears of penance, to my last of breath.
You come to new torment me.
I am gone, my lord; I go for ever.
Faith be merciful, the woman will prove a wife worth the having, I'll Pass my word.
Even so; stay, lady, I com∣mand you, stay.
Velasco here's occasion proffered now
For me to purchase some deserving fa∣four
From woman; honour me in my first suit;
Remit and love that lady.
Good my lord.
Nay, nay, I must not be denied, my Queen
Shall join with me to mediate for her.
Yes, I dare undertake, she that presents
Her penance in such sorrow, hearties or∣row,
Will know how to redeem the time with duty,
With love, obedience.
Do ye hear, my lord; all the la∣dies in Arragon, and my wife among the rest, will bait ye like so many wild cats,
if you should triumph over a poor yeel∣ding creature, that does in a manner lye down to ye of her own accord. Come, I know you love her with all the very veins of your heart.
There's more hope of one wo∣man reclaimed (my lord) then of ma∣ny conceited of their own innocence, which indeed they never have but in conceit.
To strive against the ordinance of fate,
I find is all in vain: Lady, your hand,
I must confess I love you, and I hope
Our faults shall be redeemed in being henceforth
True votaries to virtue, and the faith
Our mutual vows shall to each other ow.
Say, are you mine, resolved?
Why that's well said.
Yours, as you please to have me:
Here then ends
All memory of any former strife:
He hath enough who hath a virtuous wife.
Long joy to both.
The money we return
Where it is due; and for Velasco's merits
Will double it. Thus after storms a calm
Is ever welcomest: Now we have past
The worst, and all I hope is well at last

