YOu are welcome, welcome all, to the new Inn;
Though the old house, we hope our cheer will win
Your acceptance: we have the same Cooke,
Still, and the fat, who says, you sha' not look
Long, for your bill of fare, but every dish
Be served in, in the time, and to your wish:
If any thing be set to a wrong taste,
It is not the meat, there, but the mouth's displaced,
Remove but that sick palate, all is well.
For this, the secure dresser bad me tell,
Nothing more hurts just meetings, then a crowd;
Or, when the expectation's grown too loud:
That the nice stomach, would have this or that,
And being asked, or urged, it knows not what:
When sharpe, or sweet, have been too much a feast,
And both out lived the palate of the guest.
Beware to bring such appetites to the stage,
They doe confess a weak, sick, queasy age,
And a shrewed grudging too of eg norance,
When clothes and faces' above the men advance:
Hear for your health, then, But at any hand,
Before you judge, vouchsafe to understand,
Concoct, digest: if then, it doe not hit,
Some are in a consumption of wit,
Deep, he dares say, he will not think, that all—
For Hecticks are not epidemical.
I Am not pleased, indeed, you are in the right;
Nor is my house pleased, if my sign could speak,
The sign of the light Heart. There, you may read it;
So may your master too, if he look on it.
A heart weighed with a feather, and out weighed too:
A brayne-child o'mine own! and I am proud on it!
And if his worship think, here, to be melancholy,
In spite of me or my wit, he is deceived;
I will maintain the Rebus' against all humours,
And all complexionsi'the body of Man,
That's my word, or in the Isle of Britain!
You have reason good mine host.
Sir I have rime too.
Whether it be by chance or art,
A heavy purse makes a light Heart.
There it is expressed! first, by a purse of gold,
A heavy purse, and then two Turtles, makes,
A heart with a light stuck in it, a light heart!
Old Abbot Islip could not invent better,
Or Prior Bolton with his bolt and Ton.
I am an Innkeeper, and know my grounds,
And study 'hem; Brain o'man, I study 'hem:
I must have jovial guests to drive my ploughs,
And-whistling boys to bring my harvest home,
Or I shall hey• no Flails thwack. Here, your master,
And you ha'beene this fortnight, drawing fleas
Out of my mattes, and pounding 'hem in cages
Cut out of cards, &amp; those roped round with pack-thred,
Drawn thorough birdlime! a fine subtlety!
Or poring through a multiplying glass,
Upon a captived crab-louse, or a cheese-mite
To be dissected, as the sports of nature,
With a neat Spanish needle! Speculations
That doe become the age, I doe consesse!
As measuring an Ants eggs, with the Silke-wormes,
By a phantallique instrument of thread,
Shall give you their just difference, to a hair!
Or else recovering o'dead flies, with crumbs!
(Another quaint conclusion in the physics)
Which I ha seen you busy at, through the key-hole-
But never had the fate to see a fl•e—
Alive i'your cups, or once heard, drink mine host,
Or such a cheerful chirping charm come from you.
What's that? what's that?
A buzzing of mine
About a fly! a murmur that he has.
Sir I am telling your Stote here, Monsieur Ferret, host
For that I heare's his name) and dare tell you, Sir,
•f you have a mind to be melancholy, and musty,
There's Footmen Inn, at the towns end, the stocks,
Or Carriers Place, at sign of the broken Wane,
Mansions of State! Take up your harbour there;
There are both flies and fleas, and all variety
Of vermin, for inspection, or dissection.
We ha set our rest up here, Sir, •'your Heart.
Sir set your heart at rest, you shall not doe it:
•nlesse you can be jovial. Brain o'man,
•e jovial first, and drink, and dance, and drink.
Your lodging here, and wi'your daily dumps,
•s a mere libel 'gayn' my house and me;
And, then, your s•andalous commons.
How mine host?
Sir, they doe scandal me, vpo'the road, here
A poor quotidian rack o'mutton, roasted,
•rye, to be grated! and that driven down
With bear, and butter-milke, mingled together,
Or clarified whey, instead of Claret!
It is against my free-hold, my inheritance,
My Magna charta, Cor laetificat,
To drink such balder dash, or bonny clabbee!
Gi'me good wine, or catholic, or christian,
Wine is the word, that glads the heart of man:
And mine's the house of wine, Sack, soy's my bush,
Be merry, and drink Sherry; that's my po•sie!
For I shall never joy i'my light heart,
So long as I conceive a sullen guest,
Or any thing that's earthy!
Humorous Host.
I care not if I be.
But airy also,
Not to defraud you of your rights, or trench
Vpo'your privileges, or great charter,
(For those are every hostlers language now)
Say, you were borne beneath those smiling stars,
Have made you Lord, and owner of the Heart,
Of the Light Heart in Barnet; suffer v•
Who are more Saturnine, t'enioy the shade
Of your round roof yet.
Sir I keep no shades
Nor shelters, I: for either Owls or Rere-mise.
He'll make you a bird of night, Sir.
Bless you child,
You'll make your selves such.
'That your son mine host?
He's all the sons I have Sir.
Pretty boy!
Goes he to school?
O Lord, Sir, he prates Latin
•d it were a parrot, or a play. boy.
Thou—
•ommend'st him fitly.
To the pitch, he flies, Sir,
•ee'l tell you what is Latin for a looking-glasse,
•beard-brush, rubber, or quick-warming pan.
What's that?
a wench, in the Inn-phrase, is al these;
A looking-glasse in her eye,
A beard-brush with her lips,
A rubber with her hand,
And a warming pan with her hips.
This, in your scurrile dialect. But my Inn
•owes no such language.
That's because, mine host,
•u doe profess the teaching him your self.
Sir, I doe teach him somewhat. By degrees,
•d with a funnel, I make shift to fill
•e narrow vessel, he is but yet, a bottle.
O let him lose no time, though.
Sir, he do's not.
And less his manners.
I provide for those, too.
•me hither Frank, speak to the gentleman
Latin: He is melancholy; say,
•ong to see him merry, and so would treat him.
Subtristis vis•' es esse aliquantulùm patri,
•ite lautè excipere, etiam a• tractor ge•tit.
Pulchr•.
Tell him, I fear it bodes vs some ill luck,
•s too reservedness.
Veretur pa•er,
〈◊〉 quid nobis mali ominis apportet iste
•mis praeclusus vultus.
Bellè. A fine child!
•u wou'not part with him, mine host?
Who told you
•old not?
I but ask you.
And I answer.
•o whom? for what?
To me, to be my Page.
I know no mischief yet the child hath done,
To deserve such a destiny.
Why?
Go down boy,
And get your break-fast. Trust me, I had rather
Take a fair halter, wash my hands, and hang him
My self, make a clean riddance of him: then.
What?
Then dam him to that desperate course of life.
Call you that desperate, which by a line
Of institution, from our Ancestors,
Hath been derived down to vs, and received
In a succession, for the noblest way
Of breeding up our youth, in letters, arms,
Fair meine, discourses, civil exercise,
And all the blazon of a Gentleman?
Where can he learn to vault, to ride, to fence,
To move his body gracefuller? to speak
His language purer? or to tune his mind,
Or manners, more to the harmony of Nature
Then, in these nourceries of nobility?—
I that was, when the nourceries self, was noble•
And only virtue made it, not the market,
That titles were not vented at the drum,
Or common out-cry; goodness gave the greatness,
And greatness worship: Every house became
An Academy of honour, and those parts—
We see departed, in the practise, now,
Quite from the institution.
Why doe you say so?
Or think so enviously? doe they not still
Learn there, the Centaurs skill, the art of Thrice,
To ride? or Pollux my stery, to fence?
The Pyrrhick gestures, both to dance, and spring
In armour, to be active for the Wars?
To study figures, numbers, and proportions,
May yield 'hem great in counsels, and the arts
Grave Nestor, and the wise Vlysses practised?
To make their English sweet upon their tongue!
As reverend Chaser says?
Sir you mistake,
To play Sir Pandarus my copy hath it,
And carry messages to Madam Cresside.
instead of backing the brave Steed, o'mornings,
To mount the Chambermaid; and for a leap
Of the vaulting horse, to ply the vaulting house:
For exercise of arms, a bale of dice,
Or two or three packs of cards, to show the cheat,
And nimbleness of hand: mistake a cloak
From my Lords back, and pawn it. Ease his pockets
Of a superfluous Watch, or geld a jewel
Of an odd stone, or so. Twinge three or four buttons
From off my Ladies gown. These are the arts,
Or seven liberal deadly sciences
Of Pagery, or rather Paganism,
As the tides run. To which, if he apply him,
He may, perhaps, take a degree at Tiburne,
A year the earlier: come to read a lecture
Upon Equines at S. Thomas a Waterings,
And so go forth a Laureate in hemp circle!
Yo'are tart, mine host, and talk aboue your sea∣soning,
Ore what you seem: it should not come, me thinks,
Under your cap, this vein of salt, and sharpness!
These strikings upon learning, now and then?
How long have you, (if your dull guest may ask it,)
Drove this quick trade, of keeping the light-heart,
Your Mansion, Palace here, or Hostelry.
Troth, I was borne to somewhat, Sir, aboue it.
I easily suspect that: Mine host, your name.
They call me Good-stock.
S•r, and you con∣feffeit,
B•th i'your language, treaty, and your bearing.
Yet all, Sir, are not sons of the white Hen;
Nor can we, as the Songster say•s, come all
To be wrapped soft and warm in fortunes smock:
When she is pleased to trick, or tromp mankind:
Some may be Cotes, as in the cards; but, then
Some must be knaves, some varlets, bawds, and ostlers,
As aces, duizes, cards o'ten, to face it
Out, in the game, which all the world is.
But,
It being i'your free will (as it was) to choose
What parts you would sustain, me thinks, a man
Of your sagacity, and clear nostril, should
Have made, another choice, then of a place
So sordid, as the keeping of an Inn:
Where every Iouial Tinker, for his chink,
May cry, mine host, to crambe, give vs drink;
And doe not slink, but skinke, or else you stink.
Rogue•, Baud, and Cheater, call you by the surnames,
And known Synonyma of your profession.
But if I be no such; who then's the Rogue,
In understanding, Sir, I mean? who erres?
Who tinkleth then? or personates Thom. Tinker?
Your weasel here may tell you I talk bawdy,
And teach my boy it; and you may believe him:
But Sir at your own peril, if I doe not:
And at his too, if he doe lie, and affirm it.
No slander strikes, less hurts, the innocent:
If I be honest, and that all the cheat
Be, of my self, in keeping this Light Heart,
Where, I imagine all the world's a Play;
The state, and men's affairs, all passages
Of life, to spring new, scenes come in, go out,
And shift, and vanish; and if I have got
A seat, to sit at ease here, i'mine Inn,
To see the Comedy; and laugh, and chuck
At the variety, and throng of humours,
And dispositions, that come jostling in,
And out still, as they one drove hence another:
Why, will you envy me my happiness?
Because you are sad, and lumpish; carry a L•ade stone
I'your pocket, to hang knives on; or let•rings,
T'entice light straws to leap at 'hem: are not taken
With the alacrities of an host! It is more,
And justlier, Sir, my wonder, why you took
My house up, Fiddlers Hall, the Seat of noise,
And mirth, an Inn here, to be drowsy in,
And lodge your lethargy in the Light Heart,
As if some cloud from Court had been your Harbinger,
Or Cheapside debt-Bookes, or some Mistress charge,
Seeing your love grow corpulent, give it a diet,
By absence some, such mouldy passion!
It is guessed unhappily.
Mine host, yo'are called.
I come, boys.
Ferret have not you bin ploughing
With this mad Ox, mine host? nor he with you?
For what Sir?
Why, to find my riddle out.
I hope, you doe believe, Sir, I can find
Other discourse to be at, then my Master
With Hostess, and Host'lers.
If you can, it is well.
Go down, and see, who they are come in, what ghosts;
And bring me word.

O love, what passion art thou!
So tyrannous! and treacherous! first t'en-slaue,
And then betray, all that in truth do serve thee!
That not the wisest, nor the wariest creature,
Can more dissemble thee, then he can bear
Hot burning coals, in his bare palm, or bosom!
And less, conceal, or hide thee, then a flash
Of inflamed powder, whose whole light doth lay it
Open, to all discovery, even of those,
Who have but half an eye, and less of nose!
An Host, to find me! who is, commonly,
The log, a little of this side the signpost!
Or, at the best, some round grown thing! a Jug,
Faced, with a beard, that fills out to the ghosts,
And takes in, fro the fragments o'their jests?
But, I may wrong this, out of sullenness,
Or my mistaking humour? Pray thee, phant'sie,
Be laid, again. And, gentle-Melancholy,
Do not oppress me. I will be as silent,
As the tame lover should be, and as foolish.
My Guest, my Guest, be Jovial, I beseech thee.
In have fresh golden ghosts, ghosts of the game:
Three coach-full! Lords! and Ladies! new come in.
And I will cry them to thee, 'and thee, to them,
So I can spring a smile, but •his brow,
That like the rugged Roman Alderman,—
Old master Gross, surnam'd 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉.
Was never seen to laugh, but at an Ass.
Sir here's the Lady Frampul.
How!
And her train.
Lord Beaufort, &amp; Lord Latimer, the Coronel
Tipto', with Mistress Cis, the Chamber-mayd:
Trundle, the Coachman—
Stop, discharge the house:
And get my horses ready, bid the Groom
Bring 'hem to the back gate.
What mean you Sir?
To take fair leave, mine Host.
I hope, my Guest,
Though I have talked somewhat aboue my share,
At large, and been in the altitudes, th'extrau•gents,
Neither my self, nor any of mine have gi'n you
The cause, to quit my house, thus, on the sudden,
No, I affirm it, on my faith. Excuse me,
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
From such a rudeness; I was now beginning
To taste, and love you: and am heartily sorry,
Any occasion should be so compelling,
To urge my abrupt departure, thus. But—
Necessity's a Tyrant, and commands it.
She shall command me first to fire my bush;
Then break up house: Or, if that will not serve,
To break with all the world. Turn country bankrupt.
In mine own town, vpo' the Mercat-day,
And be protested, for my butter, and eggs,
To the last bodge of oats, and bottle of hay;
Ere you shall leave me, I will break my heart:
Coach, and Coach-horses, Lords, and Ladies pack?
All my fresh ghosts shall stink! I'll pull my sign, down
Convert mine Inn, to an Almes-house! or a Spittle,
For lazers, or switch-sellers! Turn it, to
An Academy o'rogues! or gi'it away
For a free-schoole, to breed up beggars in,
And send 'hem to the canting Universities
Before you leave me.
Troth, and I confess,
I am loath, mine host, to leave you: your expressions
Both take, and hold me. But, in case I stay,
I must enjoin you and your whole family
To privacy, and to conceal me. For,
The secret is, I would not willingly,
See, or be seen, to any of this ging,
Especially, the Lad•.
Brain o'man,
What monster is she? or Cocatrice in velvet,
That kills thus?
O good words, mine host. She is
A noble Lady! great in blood! and fortune!
Fair! and a wit! but of so bent a phant'sie,
As she thinks nought a happiness, but to have
A multitude of servants! and, to get them,
(Though she be very honest) yet she venters
Upon these precipices, that would make her
Not seem so, to some prying, narrow natures.
We call her, Sir, the Lady Frances Frampul,
Daughter and heir to the Lord Frampul.
Who?
He that did love in Oxford, first, a student,
And, after, married with the daughter of—
Silly.
Right, of whom the tale went, to turn Puppet-mr.
And travel with Young Goose, the Motion-man.
And lie, and live with the Gipsies half a year
Together, from his wife.
The very same:
The mad Lord Frampul! And this same is his danghter!
But as cock-brain'd as ere the father was!
There were two of 'hem, Frances and Laetitiae;
But Laetice was lost young; and, as the rumour
Flew then, the mother upon it lost her self.
A fond weak woman, went away in a melancholy,
Because she brought him none but girls, she thought
Her husband loved her not. And he, as foolish,
Too late resenting the cause given, went after;
In quest of her, and was not heard of since.
A strange division of a family!
And scattered, as in the great confusion!
But yet the Lady, th'heire, enjoys the land.
And takes all lordly ways how to confume it
As nobly as she can; if clothes, and feasting,
And the authorised means of riot will doe it.
She shows her extract, and I honour her for it.

Your horses Sir are ready; and the house
Dis-
Pleased, thou think?
Icannot tel, dis∣charged
I'am sure it is.
Charge it again, good Ferret.
And make unready the horses: Thou know how.
Chalk, and renew the rondels. I am, now
Resolved to stay.
I easily thought so,
When you should hear what's purposed.
What?
To throw
The house out of the windo?
Brain o'man,
I shall hawed worst o'that! will they not throw
My household stuff out, first? Cushions, and Carpets,
Chairs, stools, &amp; bedding? is not their sport my ruin?
Fear not, mine host, I am not of the fellowship.
I cannot see, Sir, how you will avoid it;
They know already all, you are in the house.
Who know?
The Lords: they have seen me, &amp; en∣quir'd it.
Why were you seen•
Because indeed I had
No med'cine, Sir, to go invisible:
No Ferne-seed in my pocket; Nor an Opal
Wrapped in a B•y-leafe, i'my left fist,
To charm their eyes with.
He dos give you reasons
As round as Giges ring: which, say the Ancients,
Was a hoop ring; and that is, round as a hoop!
You will ha'your Rebus still, mine host.
I must:
My Lady, too, looked out of the windo, &amp; called me.
And see where Secretary
comes from her,
Employed upon some Embassy unto you—
Isle meet her, if she come upon employment;
Fair Lady, welcome, as your host can make you.
Forbear, Sir, I am first to have mine audience,
Before the complement. This gentleman
Is my address to.
And it is in state.
My Lady, Sir, as glad of the encounter
To find a servant, here, and such a servant,
Whom she so values; with her best respects,
Desires to be remembered: and invites
Your nobleness, to be a part, to day,
Of the society, and mirth intended
By her, and the young Lords, your fellow-seruants.
Who are alike ambitious of enjoying
The fair request; and to that end have sent
Me, their imperfect Orator, to obtain it:
Which if I may, they have elected me,
And crowned me, with the title of a sovereign
Of the days sports devised in the Inn,
So you be pleased to add your suffrage to it.
So I be pleased, my gentle mistress Prudence?
You cannot think me of that course condition,
T'enuy you any thing.
That's nobly said!
And like my guest!
I gratulate your honour;
And should, with cheer, lay hold on any handle,
That could advance it. But for me to think,
I can be any rag, or particle
O'your Ladies care, more then to fill her list,
She being the Lady, that professes still
To love no soul, or body, but for ends;
Which are her sports: And is not nice to speak this,
But doth proclaim it, in all companies:
Her Ladyship must pardon my weak counsels,
And weaker will, if it decline to obey her.
O master Louel you must not give credit
To all that Ladies publicly profess,
Or talk, of the vollee, unto their servants.
Their tongues and thoughts, oft times lie far asunder.
Yet, when they please, they have their cabinet-counsels
And reserved thoughts, and can retire themselves
As well as others.
〈◊〉, the subtlest of vs!
Al that is borne within a Ladies lips—
Is not the issue of their hearts, mine host.
Or kiss, or drink before me.
Stay, excuse me;
Mine errand is not done. Yet, if her Ladyships
Slighting, or disesteem, Sir, of your service,
Hath formerly begot any distaste,
Which I not know of: here, I vow unto you,
Upon a Chambermaids simplicity,
Reserving, still, the honour of my Lady,
I will be bold to hold the glass up to her,
To show her Ladyship where she hath erred,
And how to tender satisfaction:
So you vouchsafe to prove, but the days venture.
What say you, Sir? where are you? are you within?
Yes: I will waite upon her, and the company.
It is enough, Queen Prudence; I will bring him:
And, o'this kiss. I longed to kiss a Queen!
There is no life on earth, but being in love!
There are no studies, no delights, no business,
No intercourse, or trade of sense, or soul,
But what is love! I was the laziest creature,
The most vnprositable sign of nothing,
The veriest drone, and slept away my life
Beyond the Dormouse, till I was in love!
And, now, I can out-wake the Nightingale,
Out-watch an usurer, and out-walke him too,
Stalk like a ghost, that haunted bout a treasure,
And all that phant'si'd treasure, it is love!
But is your name Loue-ill, Sir, or Loue-well?
I would know that.
I doe not know it my self,
Whether it is. But it is Love hath been
The hereditary passion of our house,
My gentle host, and, as I guess, my friend;
The truth is, I have loved this Lady long,
And impotently, with desire enough,
But no success: for I have still forborne
To express it, in my person, to her.
How then?
I have sent her toys, verses, and Anagram's,
Trials of wit, mere trifles she has commended,
But knew not whence they came, nor could she guess.
This was a pretty riddling way of wooing!
I oft have been, too, in her company;
And looked upon her, a whole day; admired her;
Loved her, and did not tell her so; loved still,
Looked still, and loved: and loved, and looked, and sighed;
But, as a man neglected, I came of,
And unregarded—
Could you blame her, Sir,
When you were silent, and not said a word?
O but Ilou'd the more; and she might read it
Best, in my silence, had she bin—
As melancholic
As you are. 'Pray you, why would you stand mute, Sir?
O thereon hangs a history, mine host.
Did you ever know, or hear, of the Lord Beaufort,
Who served so bravely in France? I was his page,
And, ere he died, his friend! I followed him,
First, in the wars; and in the times of peace,
I waited on his studies: which were right.
He had no Arthurs, nor no Rosicleer's,
No Knights of the Sun, nor Amadis de Gaule's,
Primalions, and Pantagruel's, public Nothings;
Abortiues of the fabulous, dark cloister,
Sent out to poison courts, and infest manners:
But great Achilles, Agamemnons acts,
Sage Nestors counsels, and Vlysses slights,
Tydides fortitude, as Homer wrought them
In his immortal phant'sie, for examples
Of the Heroic virtue. Or, as Virgil,
That master of the Epic poem, limned
Pious Aeneas, his religious Prince,
Bearing his aged Parent on his shoulders,
Rapt from the flames of Tree•y, with his young son.
And these he brought to practise, and to use.
He gave me first my breeding, I acknowledge,
Then showered his bounties on me, like the Hours,
That open-handed sit upon the Clouds,
And press the liberality of heaven
Down to the laps of thankful men! But then!
The trust committed to me, at his death,
Was aboue all! and left so strong a tie
On all my powers! as time shall not dissolve!
Till it dissolve it self, and bury all!
The care of his brave heir, and only son!
Who being a virtuous, sweet, young, hopeful Lord,
Hath cast his first affections on this Lady.
And though I know, and may presume her such,
As, out of humour, will return no love;
And therefore might indifferently be made
The courting-stock, for all to practise on.
As she doth practise on all vs, to scorn:
Yet, out of a religion to my charge,
And debt professed, I ha'made a selfe-decree,
Ne'er to express my person; though my passion
Burn me to cinders.
Then yo'are not so subtle,
Or half so read in loue-craft, as I took you.
Come, come, you are no Phoenix, and you were,
I should expect no miracle from your ashes.
Take some advice. Be still that rag of love,
You are. Burn on till you turn tinder.
This Chambermaid may hap to prove the steel,
To strike a sparkle out of the flint, your mistress
May beget bonfires yet, you doe not know,
What light may be forced out, and from what darkness.
Nay, I am so resolved, as still Isle love
Though not confess it.
That's, Sir, as it chances:
We'll throw the dice for it: Cheer up.
I doe.

Come wench, this suit will serve: dispatch, make ready.
It was a great deal with the biggest for me;
Which made me leave it off after once wearing.
How do's it fit? wilt come together?
hardly.
An•u must make shift with it. Pride feels no pain•
Girt thee hard,
Pox of this errand Taylor,
He angers me beyond all mark of patience.
These base Mechanics never keep their word,
In any thing they promise. Pru. It is their trade, madam;
To swear and break, they all grow rich by breaking,
More then their words; their honesties, and credits,
Are still the first commodity they put off.
And worst, it seems, which makes •hem do it so often.
If he had but broke with me, I had not cared,
But, with the company, the body politic
Frustrate our whole design, having that time,
And the materials in so long before?
And he to fail in all, and disappoint vs?
The rogue deserves a torture
To be cropped
With his own Scissor•.
Let's devise him one.
And have the stumpssear'd up with his own sea∣ring candle?
Close to his head, to trundle on his pillow?
Ple have the Leasse of his house cut out in measures.
And he be strangled with 'hem?
No, no life
I would ha'touch't, but stretched on his own yard
He should be a little, have the strappad•?
Or an ell of taf∣fata
Drawn thorough his guts, by way of glister, &amp; fired
With aqua vitae?
Burning in the hand
With the pressing iron cannot save him.
Yes,
Now I have got this on: I doe forgive him,
What robes he should have brought.
Thou art not cruel,
Although streight-lac'd, I see, Pru!
This is well.
It is rich enough! But it is not what I meant thee!
I would have had thee braver then my self,
And brighter far. Twill fit the Players yet,
When thou hast done with it, and yield thee somewhat.
That were illiberal, madam, and mere sordid
In me, to let a suit of yours come there.
Tut, all are Players, and but serve the Scene. Pru,
Dispatch; I fear thou dost not like the province,
Thou art so long a fitting thy self for it.
Here is a Scarf, to make thee a knot finer.
You send me a feasting, madame.
Wear it wenc•
Yes. but, with leave o'your Ladyship, I would tel you
This can but bear the face of an odd journey.
Why Pru?
A Lady of your rank and quality,
To come to a public Inn, so many men,
Young Lords, and others, i'your company!
And not a woman but my self, a Chamber-maid!
Thou doubt to be ouer-layd Pru? Fear it not,
I le bear my part, and share with thee, i'theventer.
O but the censure, madame, is the maine,
What will they say of you? or judge of me?
To be translated thus, above all the bound
Of fitness, or decorum?
How, now! Pru!
Turned fool vpo'the sudden, and talk idly
I'thy best clothes! shoot bolts, and sentences
T'affright babies with? as if I lived
To any other scale then what's my own?
Or sought my self, without my self, from home?
Your Ladyship will pardon me, my fault,
If I have ouer-shot, I'll shoot no more.
Yes shoot again, good Pru, Isle have thee shoot,
And aim, and hit: I know it is love in thee,
And so I doe interpret it.
Then madame,
Il'd crave a farther leave.
Be it to licence,
It sha'not want an ear, Pru, Say, what is it?
A toy I have, to raise a little mirth,
To the design in hand.
Out with it Pru.
If it but chime of mirth.
Mine host has, madame,
A pretty boy in the house, a dainty child,
His son, and is o'your Ladyships name too, Frances,
Whom if your Ladyship would borrow of him,
And give me leave to dress him, as I would,
Should make the finest Lady, and kins-woman,
To keep you company, and deceive my Lords,
Vpo'the matter, with a fountain o'sport.
I apprehend thee, and the source of mirth
That it may br•ed, but is he bold enough,
The child? and well assured?
As I am, madame,
Have him in no suspicion, more then me:
Here comes mine host: will you but please to ask him,
Or let me make the motion?
Which thou wilt, Pr•

Your Ladyship, and all your train are welcome.
I thank my hearty host.
So is your sovereignty,
Madame, I wish you joy o'your new gown.
It should ha'bin, my host, but Stuff, our Taylor
Has broke with vs, you shall be of the counsel.
He will deserve it, madame, my Lady has heard
You have a pretty son, mine host, she'd see him.
I very fine, I pray thee let me see him, host.
Your Ladyship shall presently,
Bid Frank come hither, anon, unto my Lady,
It is a bashful child, homely brought up,
In a rude hostelry. But the light Heart
Is his fathers, and it may be his.
Here he comes. Frank salute my Lady.
I doe.
What, madame, I am desin'd to doe, by my birth right,
As heir of the light Heart, bid you most welcome.
And I believe your most, my pretty boy,
Being so emphased, by you.
Your Ladyship,
If you believe it such, are sure to make it.
Prettily answered! Is your name Francis?
Yes madame.
I love mine own the better.
If I knew yours,
I should make haste to doe so too, good madame.
It is the same with yours.
Mine then acknowledge∣eth
The lustre it receives, by being named, after.
You will win upon me in complement.
By silence.
A modest, and a fair well spoken-child.
Her Ladyship, shall have him, sovereign Pru,
Or what I have beside: divide my heart,
Between you and your Lady. Make your use of it:
My •ouse is yours, my son is yours. Behold,
I tender him to your service; Frank, become
What these brave Ladies would have you. Only this,
There is a chare-woman in the house, his nurse,
An Irish woman, I took in, a beggar,
That waits upon him; a poor silly fool,
But an impertinent, and sedulous one,
As ever was: will vex you on all occasions,
Never be off, or from you, but in her sleep;
Or drink which makes it. She doth love him so,
Or rather dote on him. Now, for her, a shape,
As we may dress her (and I'll help) to fit her,
With a tuft-taffata cloak, an old French hood,
And other pieces, heterogene enough.
We ha'brought a standard of apparel, down,
Because this Taylor •ailed vs in the maine.
She shall advance the game.
About it then.
And send but Trundle, hither, the coachman, to me.
I shall: But Pr•, let Louel ha'faire quarter.
The best.
Our Host (me thinks) is very game some!
How like you the boy?
A miracle!
Good Madame
But take him in, and sort a suit for him,
•e give our Trundle his instructions;
And wait upon your Ladyship, in the instant.
But Pru, what shall we call him, when we ha'drest him?
My Lady-No-body, Any thing what you will.
Call him Laetitia, by my sisters name,
And so t'will mind our mirth too, we have in hand.

Good Trundle, you must straight make ready the Coach,
And lead the horses out but halse a mile,
Into the fields, whether you will, and then
Drive in again, with the Coach-leaues put down,
At the back gate, and so to the back stayres,
As if you brought in some body, to my Lady,
A Kinswoman, that she sent for, Make that answer
If you be asked; and give it out •the house, so.
What trick is this, good Mistress Secretary,
Youl'd put upon vs?
Vs? Do you speak pl•rall?
Me and my Mares are vs.
If you so join 'hem.
Elegant Trundle, you may use your figures.
I can but urge, it is my Ladies service.
Good Mistress Prudence, you can urge enough.
I know you 'are Secretary to my Lady,
And Mistress Steward.
You'll still be trundling,
And have your wages stopped, now at the Audit.
Tic true, you 'are Gentlewoman of the horse too.
Or what you will beside, Pru, I do think it:
My best to obey you.
And I think so too, Trundle•.

Why here's return enough of both our venters,
If we doe make no more discovery.
what?
Then of this Parasite?
O he's a dainty one.
The Parasite of the house.
here comes mine host.
My Lords, you both are welcome to the Heart.
To the light heart we hope.
And merry I swear.
We never yet felt such a fit of laughter,
As your glad heart hath offered vs, senator we entered.
How came you by this property?
who! my Fly!
Your Fly if you call him so.
nay, he is that.
And will be still.
In every dish and pot?
In every Cup, and company, my Lords,
A Creature of all liquors, all complexions,
Be the drink what it will, he will have his sip.
He'is fitted with a name.
And he joys in it:
I had him when I came to take the Inn, here,
Assigned me over, in the Inuentory,
As an old implement, a peace of household-stuff,
And so he doth remain.
Just such a thing,
We thought him,
Is he a scholar?
Nothing less.
But colours for it, as you see: weir's black;
And speaks a little tainted, fly-blowne Latin,
After the School.
Of Stratford of the Bow.
For Lilies Latin, is to him unknown.
What calling has' he?
Only to call in, still.
Inflame the reckoning, bold to charge a bill,
Bring up the shot in the rear, as his own word is,
And do's it in the discipline of the house?
As Corporal of the field, Maestro del Campo,
And visitor general, of all the room,
He has' formed a fine militia for the Inn too.
And means to publish it?
With all his titles.
Some call him Deacon Fly, some Doctor Fly.
Some Captain, some Lieutenant, But my folks
Doe call him Quarter-master, Fly, which he is.

Come Quarter-master Fly.
Here's one, already,
Hath got his Titles.
Doctor!
Noble Colonel!
No Doctor, yet. A poor professor of ceremony,
Here in the Inn, retainer to the host,
I discipline the house.
Thou read a lecture.
Unto the family here, when is the day?
This is the day.
I'll hear thee, and I'll ha'thee a Doctor,
Thou shalt be one, thou hast a Doctors look!
A •ace disputatiue, of Salamanca.
Who's this?
The glorious Colonel Tiptoe, Host,
One talks upon his tiptocs, if you'll hear him.
Thou hast good learning in thee, macte Fly.
And I say macte, to my Colonel.
Well misted of'hem both.
They are matched i'saith.
But Fly, why macte?
Quasi magic a•cte,
My honourable Colonel.
What a Critique?
There's another accession, Critique Fly.
I fear a taint here in the Mathematiques.
They say, lines parallel doe never meet;
He has met his parallel in wit, and schole-craft.
They side, not meet man, mend your metaphor,
And save the credit of your Mathematiques.
But Fly, how came thou to be here, committed
Unto this Inn? Fly, Upon suspicion o'drinke, Sir,
I was taken late one night, here, with the Tipster,
And the vnder-officers, and so deposited.
I will redeem thee, Fly, and place thee better,
With a fair Lady.
A Lady, sweet Sir Glorious!
A Sovereign Lady. Thou shalt be the Bird
To Sovereign Pru, Queen of our sports, her Fly,
The Fly in household, and in ordinary;
Bird of her care, and she shall wear thee there!
A Fly of gold, enamelled, and a schoole-Fly.
The school, then are my stables, or the cellar,
Where he doth study, deeply, at his hours,
Cases of cups, I doe not know how spiced
With conscience, for the Tipster, and the Hostler: as
Whose horses may be cossen'd? or what Iugs
Filed up with froth? that is his way of learning,
What antiquated F•ther's that, that talks?
The worshipful host, my •atron, Mr. Good-stock:
A merry Greek, and cants in Latin, comely.
Spins like the parish top.
I'll set him up, then.
Art thou the Dominus?
Factotum here, Sir.
Host real of the house? and Cap of Maintenance?
The Lord of the light Heart, Sir, Cap a pie;
Whereof the Feather is the Emblem, Colonel,
Put up, with the Ace of Hearts!
But why in Cuerpo?
I hate to see an host, and old, in Cuerpo.
Cuerpo? what's that?
Light, skipping hose and doublet,
The horse boys garb! poor blank, and half blank Cuerpo,
They relish not the gravity of an host,
Who should be King at Arms, and ceremonies,
In his own house! know all, to the goldweights.
Why that his Fly doth for him here, your Bird.
But I would doe it my self, were I my Host,
I would not speak unto a Cooke of quality,
Your Lordships footman, or my Ladies Trundle,
In Cuerpo! If a Dog but stayed below
That were a dog of fashion, and well nosed,
And could present himself; I would put on
The Savoy chain about my neck; the ruff;
And cuffs of Flanders; then the Naples hat;
With the Rome hatband; and the Florentine Agate;
The Millan sword; the cloak of Genoa; set
With Brabant buttons; all my given pieces:
Except my gloves, the natiues of Madrid,
To entertain him in! and complement
With a tame cony, as with a Prince that sent it.
The same deeds, though, become not every man,
That fits a Colonel, will not fit an host,
Your Spanish host is never seen in Cuerpo,
Without his Paramento's cloak, &amp; sword.
Sir he has the father
Of swords, within a long sword; Blade cornish styled
Of Sir Rud Hughdibras.
And with a long sword, bully bird? thy sense?
To note him a tall-man, and a Master offence:
But doth he teach the Spanish way of Don Lewis?
No, the Greek Master he.
what cal you him?
Euclide.
Fart upon Euclide, he is stale, &amp; antique,
Gi'me the modernes.
Sir he minds no modernes,
Go by, Hieronymo!
What was he?
The Italian,
That plaid with Abbot Antony, in the Friars,
And Blinkin-sops the bold.
I mary, those,
Had fencing names, what's become o'them?
They had their times, and we can say, they were
So had Caranza-his: so had Don Lewis.
Don Lewis of Madrid, is the sole Master
Now, of the world.
But this, of the other world
Euclide demonstrates! he! Hoe's for all!
The only fencer of name, now in Elysium.
He do's it all, by lines, and angles, Colonel.
By parallels, and sections, has his Diagrammes!
Wilt thou be flying, Fly?
At all, why not?
The ayre's as free for a fly, as for an Eagle.
A Buzzard! he is in his contemplation!
Euclide a fencer, and in the Elysium!
He played a prize, last week, with Archimedes,
And beat him I assure you.
Doe you assure me?
For what?
For four in the hundred. Gi'me five,
And I assure you, again.
Host, Peremptory,
You may be tan, But where? whence •ad you this?
Vpo' the road, A post, that came from thence,
Three days ago, here, left it with the Tipster.
Who is indeed a thorough fare ofnewes,
Jack I•g with the broken belly, a witty fellow!
Your Bird here heard him.
Did you hear him Bird?
Speak in the faith of a fly.
Yes, and he told vs,
Of one that was the Prince of Oranges fencer,
Steuinus?
Sir the same, had challenged Euclide
A thirty weapons more then Archimedes
Ere saw; and engines: most of his own Invention:
This may have credit, and chimes reason, this!
If any man endanger Euclide, Bird,
Observe, that had the honour to quit Europe
This forty year, tic he. He put down Scaliger.
And he was a great Master.
Not of fence, Fly.
Excuse him, Lord, he went of the same grounds.
On the same earth I think, with other Mortals?
I mean, sweet Lord, the Mathematiques. Basta!
When thou know more, thou wilt take less, greene honour.
He had his circles, semicircles, quadrants—
He writ a book of the quadrature of the Circle,
Cyclometria, I read—
The title only.
And Entice.
If it had one of that quare
What insolent, halfe-witted things, these are?
So are all smatterers, insolent, and impudent.
They lightly go together.
It is my wonder!
Two animals should hawk at all discourse thus!
Fly every subject to the Mark, or retriue—
And never have the luck to be in the right!
It is some folks fortune!
Fortune's a Ba•d
And a blind Beggar: it is their vanity!
And shows most vilely!
I could take the heart now.
To write unto Don Lewis, into Spain,
To make a progress to the Elision fields,
Next summer—
And persuade him die for same,
Of fencing with a shadow! Whore's mine Host?
I would he had heard this bubble break, i'fayth.

Make place, stand by, for the Queen Regent, Gentle∣men.
This is thy Queen, that shall be, Bird, our Sovereign.
Translated Prudence!
Sweet my Lord, hand off;
It is not now, as when plain Prudence lived,
And reached her Ladyship—
The Chamber-pot.
The looking-glasse, mine Host, loose your house• Metaph•
You' have a negligent memory, indeed;
Speak the host's language. Here's a young Lord,
Will maked a precedent else.
Well acted Pru.
First minute of her reign! what will she doe
Forty year hence? God bless her!
If you'll kiss,
Or complement, my Lord, behold a Lady,
A stranger, and my Ladies kinswoman.
I doe confess my rudeness, that had need
To have mine eye directed to this beauty.
It was so little, as it asked a perspicill.
Lady, your name?
My Lord, it is Laetitia.
Laetitia! a fair omen! And I take it.
•et me have still such Lattice for my lips:
But that of your family, Lady?
Silly, Sir.
My Ladies kinswoman?
I am so honoured.
Already, it takes!
An excellent fine boy.
He is descended of a right good stock, Sir.
What's this? an Antiquary?
An Antiquity,
By the dress, you'd swear! An old Welsh Heralds wid∣dow:
She's a wild-Irish borne! Sir, and a Hybrid,
That lives with this young Lady, a mile off here,
And studies Vincent against York.
She'll conquer,
If she read Vincent. Let me study her.
She's perfect in most pedigrees, most descents.
A Baud, I hope, and knows to blaze a coat.
And judges all things with a single eye,
Fly, come you hither; No discovery
Of what you see, to your Colonel Toe, or Tip, here,
But keep all close, tho'you stand in the way o'prefer∣meant,
Seek it, off from the road; no flattery for it:
No lick-foote, pain of loosing your proboscis:
My Licorish Fly.
What says old veluet-head?
He will present me himself, Sir, if you will not.
Who? he present? what? whom? An Host? A Groom?
Divide the thanks with me? share in my glories?
Lay up. I say no more.
Then silence Sir,
And hear the sovereign.
Hostlers? to usurp
Upon my Sparta' or Province, as they say?
No broom but mine?
Still Colonel, you mutter?
I dare speak out, as Cuerpo.
Noble Colonel.
And carry what I ask
Ask what you can Sr.
So't be in the house.
I ask my rights &amp; privileges,
And though for form I please to call it a suit,
I have not been accustomed to repulse.
No sweet Sir Glorious, you may still command.
And go without.
But yet Sir being the first,
And called a suit, you'll look it shall be such
As we may grant.
It else denies it self.
You hear the opinion of the Court.
I 〈◊〉
No Court opinions.
It is my Ladies, though.
My Lady is a Spinster, at the Law,
And my petition is of right.
What is it?
It is for this poor learned bird.
The Fly?
Professor in the Inn, here, of small matters:
How he commends him!
As, to save himself •n him.
So do all Politiques in their commendations.
This is a State-bird, and the verier fly?
Hear him problematize.
Bless vs, what's that?
Or syllogize, elenchize.
Sure, petard's,
To blow vs up.
Some ingenuous strong words!
He means to erect a castle in the ayre,
And make his fly an Elephant to carry it.
Bird of the Arts he is, and Fly by name!
Buzz.
Blow him off good Pru, they'll mar all else.
The Soueraigne's honour is to cherish learning.
What in a Fly?
In any thing industrious.
But Flies are busy!
Nothing more troublesome,
Or importune!
Ther's nothing more domestic,
Tame, or familiar then your Fly in Cuerpo.
That is when his wings are cut, he is tame in∣deed, else
Nothing more impudent, and greedy; licking:
Or saucy, good Sir Glorious.
Leave your Ad∣uocate-ship
Except that we shall call you Orator Fly,
And send you down to the dresser, and the dishes.
A good flap, that!
Commit you to the steam!
Or •s condemn you to the bottles.
And pots.
There is his quarry.
He will chirp, far better,
Your bird, below.
And make you finer Musique.
His buzz will there become him.
Come away.
Buzz, in their faces: Give 'hem all the Buzz,
Dor in their ears, and eyes, Hum, Dor, and Buzz!
I will statuminate and under prop thee.
If they scorn vs, let vs scorn them- We'll find
The thorough-fare below, and Queer him,
Leave these realists, Buzz; they shall see that I,
Spite of their jeers, dare drink, and with a Fly.
A fair remove at once, of two impertinents!
Excellent Pru! I love thee for thy wit,
No less then State.
One must pres•rue the other.
Who's here?
O Lovel, Madam, your sad servant.
Sad? he is sollen still, and wears a cloud
About his brows; I know not how to approach him.
I will instruct you, madame, if that be all,
Go to him and kiss him.
How, Pru?
Go, and kiss him,
I doe command it.
You are not wilde, wench!
No,
Tame, and exceeding tame, but still your Sovereign.
Hath too much bravery made thee mad?
Nor proud
Doe, what I doe enjoin you. No disputing
Of my prerogative, with a front, or frown;
Doe not detract: you know th'authority
Is mine, and I will exercise it, swiftly,
If you provoke me.
I have woven a net
To snare my self in! Sir I am enjoined
To tender you a kiss; but doe not know
Why, or wherefore, only the pleasure royal
Will have it so, and urges—Doe not you
Triumph on my obedience, seeing it forced thus.
There it is.
And welcome. Was there ever kiss
That relished thus! or had a sting like this,
Of so much Nectar, but, with Aloës mixed.
No murmuring, nor ripening, I am fixed.
It had, me thinks, a quintessence of either,
But that which was the better, drowned the bitter.
How soon it passed away! how vnrecouered!
The distillation of another soul
Was not so sweet! and till I meet again,
That kiss, those lips, like relish, and this taste,
Let me turn all, consumption, and, here waste.
The royal assent is past, and cannot alter.
You'll turn a Tyrant.
Be not you a Rebel,
It is a name is alike odious.
You'll hear me?
No, not o'this argument.
Would you make laws, and be the first that break'hem?
The example is pernicious in a subject,
And of your quality, most.
Excellent Princess!
Just Queen!
Brave Sovereign.
A she-Traian! this!
What is it? Proceed incomparable Pru!
I am glad I am scarce at leisure to applaud thee.
It•s well for you, you have so happy expressio•s.
Yes, cry her up, with acclamations, doe,
And cry me down, run all with sovereignty.
Prince Power will never want her Parasites.
Nor Murmur her pretences: Master Lovel,
For so your libel here, or bill of complaint,
Exhibited, in our high Court of Sou'raignty,
At this first hour of our reign, declares
Against this noble Lady, a dis-respect
You have conceived, if not received, from her.
Received, so the charge lies in our bill.
We see it, his learned Council, leave your planing,
We that doe love our justice, aboue all
Our other Attributes; and have the nearness,
To know your extraordinary merit;
As also to discern this Ladies goodness;
And find how loath she would be, to lose the honour,
And reputation, she hath had, in having
So worthy a servant, though but for few minutes.
Do here enjoin.
Good!
Charge, will, &amp; com∣maud
Her Ladyship, pain of our high displeasure
And the committing an extreme contempt,
Unto the Court, our crown and dignity.
Excellent Sovereign! And egregious Pru•
To entertain you for a pair of hours,
(Choose, when you please, this day) with all respects,
And valuation of a principal servant,
To give you all the titles, all the privileges,
The freedoms, favours, rights, she can bestow.
Large, ample words, of a brave latitude!
Or can be expected, from a Lady of honour,
Or quality, in discourse, access, address.
Good.
Not to give ear, or admit conference
With any person but your self. Nor there,
Of any other argument, but love,
And the companion of it, gentile courtship.
For which your two hours service, you shall take
Two kisses.
Noble!
For each hour, a kiss,
To be tan freely, fully, and legally;
Before vs; in the Court here, &amp; our presence.
Rare?
But those hours past, and the two kisses paid,
The binding caution is, never to hope
Renewing of the time, or of the suit,
On any circumstance.
A hard condition!
Had it been easier, I should have suspected
The sovereigns justice.
O you are servant,
My Lord, unto the Lady, and a Rival:
In point of law, my Lord, you may be challenged.
I am not jealous!
Of so short a time
Your Lordship needs not, and being done, in foro.
What is the answer?
He craves respite, ma∣dame,
To advise with his learned Council.
Be you he,
And go together quickly.
You are, no Tyrant?
If I be madam, you were best appeal me!
Beaufort—
I am busy, pray thee let me alone:
I have a cause in hearing too.
At what Bar?
Lou's Court o'Requests!
Bring into the Sovereignty:
It is the nobler Court, before Judge Pru,
The only learned mother of the Law!
And Lady of conscience, too!
It is well enough
Before this mistress of Requests, where it is.
Let 'hem not scorn you. Bear up master Lovel,
And take your hours, and kisses, They are a fortune.
Which I cannot appr•ue, and less make use of:
Still i'this cloud! why cannot you make use of?
Who would be rich to be so soon undone?
The beggars best is wealth, he doth not know:
And, but to show it him, in flames his want:
Two hours at height?
That joy is too too narrow,
Would bound a love, so infinite as mine:
And being past, leaves an eternal loss.
Who so prodigiously affects a feast,
To forfeit health, and appetite, to see it?
Or but to taste a spoonful, would forgo
All gust of delicacy ever after?
These, yet, are hours of hope.
But all hours following
Years of despair, ages of misery!
Nor can so short a happiness, but spring
A world of fear, with thought of loosing it;
Better be never happy, then to feel
A lit•e of it, and then loose it ever.
I doe confess, it is a strict injunction;
But, then the hope is, it may not be kept.
A thousand things may interuene, We see
The wind sh•ft often, thrice a day, sometimes;
Decrees may alter upon better motion,
And riper hearing. The best bow may start,
And th'hand may vary. Pru may be a sage
In Law, and yet not sour, sweet Pru, smooth Pru,
Soft, debonair, and amiable Pru,
May doe as well as rough, and rigid Pru;
And yet maintain her, venerable Pru,
Majestic Pru, and Serenissimous Pru.
Try but one hour first, and as you like
The loose o'that, Draw home and prove the other.
If one hour could, the other happy make,
I should attempt it.
Put it on: and doe.
Or in the blessed attempt that I might die!
I mary, there were happiness indeed;
Transcendent to the Melancholy, meant.
It were a fate, aboue a monument,
And all inscription, to die so. A Death
For Emperors to enjoy! And the Kings
Of the rich East, to pawn their regions for;
To sow their treasure, open all their mines,
Spend all their spices to embalm their corps,
And wrap the inches up in sheets of gold,
That fell by such a noble destiny!
And for the wrong to your friend, that feare's awa•,
He rather wrongs himself, following fresh light,
New eyes to swear by. If Lord Beaufort change,
It is no crime in you to remain constant.
And upon these conditions, at a game
So urged upon you.
Sir your resolution—
How is the Lady affected?
Sou'•aignes use not
To ask their subjects suffrage where it is due;
But where conditional.
A royal Sovereign!
And a rare States-woman. I admire her bearing
In her new regiment.
Come choose your h•uric,
Better be happy for a part of time,
Then not the whole: and a short parr, then never.
Shall I appoint 'hem, pronounce for you?
Your pleasure.
Then he designs his first hour after dinner;
His second after supper. Say ye? Content?
Content.
I am content.
Content.
Con∣tent.
What's that? I am content too.
You have rea∣son,
You had it on the by, and we observed it.
Trot I am not content: in fait' I am not.
Why art not thou content, Good shelee-nien?
He tauk so desperate, and so debauched,
So bawdy like a Courtier, and a Lord,
God bless him, one that tak'th Tobacco.
Very well mixed.
What did he say?
Nay, nothing to the purposh,
Or very little, nothing at all to purposh.
Let him alone Nurse.
I did tell him of Ser•
Was a great family come out of Ireland,
Descended of O Neale, Mac Con, Mac Dermot,
Mac Murrogh, but he marked not.
Nor doe I,
Good Queen of Heralds, ply the bottle, and sleep.

I like the plot of your Militia, well!
It is a fine Militia, and well ordered!
And the diuision's neat! Twill be desired
Only, the'expressions were a little more Spanish:
For there's the best Militia of the world!
To call 'hem Tertias. Tertia of the kitchen,
The Tertia of the cellar, Tertia of the chamber,
And Tertia of the stables.
That I can, Sir,
And find out very able, fit commanders.
In every Tertia.
Now you are in the right!
As in the Tertia of the kitchen, your self
Being a person, elegant in sauces,
There to command, as prime Maestro del Campo,
Chief Master of the palate, for that Tertia:
Or the Cooke under you, because you are the Marshall;
And the next officer in the field, to the Host.
Then for the cellar, you have young Ano no,
Is a rare fellow, what's his other name?
Pierce, Sir.
Sir Pierce, I'll ha'him a Cavalier.
Sir Pierce Anon, will pierce vs a new hogs-head!
And then your thoroughfare, l•g here, his Alferez:
An able officer, giu'me thy beard, round Jug,
I take thee by this handle, and doe love
One of thy inches! In the chambers, Iordan, here.
He is the Don, del Campo of the beds.
And for the stables, what's his name?
old Peck.
Maestro del Campo, Peck! his name is curt,
A monosyllabe, but commands the horse well.
O, in an Inn, Sir, we have other horse,
Let those troops rest a while. Wine is the horse,
That wee must charge with here.
Bring up the troops,
Or call sweet Fly, it is an exact Militia,
And thou an exact professor, Lipsius Fly,
Thou shalt be called, and Iouse: lack Ferret, welcome,
Old Trench-master, and Colonel of the Pyoners,
What can thou bolt vs now? a Coney? or two
Out of Thom: Trundles burrow, here, the Coach?
This is the master of the carriages!
How is thy driving Thom: good, as it was?
It serves my Lady, and our officer Pru.
Twelve mile an hour! •home has the old trundle still.
I am taken with the family, here, fine fellows?
Viewing the muster roll.
They are brave men!
And of the Fly, blown discipline all, the Quarter-Master!
The Fly's a rare bird, in his profession!
Let's sip a private pint with him, I would have him
Quit this light sign of the light heart, my bird:
And lighter house. It is not for his tall
And growing gravity so Cedar-like,
To be the second to an Host in Cuerpo,
That knows no elegancies, use his own
Dictamen, and his Genius, I would have him
Fly high, and strike at all. Heir's young Anon, too.
What wine is it Gentlemen, white or claret?
White. My brisk Anon.
I'll draw you Iuno's milk
That died the Lilies, Colonel.
Do so Pierce.
A plague of all Jade, what a clap he has gi'n m•
Why how now Cousin?
Who's that?
The Hostler.
What ail thou Cousin Peck?
O me, my honchos!
As sure as you live, Sir, he knew perfectly
I meant to Cossin him. He did leer so on me,
And then he sn•erd. As who would say take heed S'ah,
And when he saw our halfe-pecke, which you know
Was but an old court-dish, Lord how he stamp't?
I thought, 't had been for joy. When suddenly
He cuts me a back caper with his heals,
And takes me just of the cropper. Down come I
And my whole ounce of oats! Then he neighed out,
As if he had a Mare by the tail.
Troth Cossin,
You are to blame to use the poor dumb Christians,
So cruelly, defraud 'hem o'their dimensum,
Yonder's the Colonels horse (there I looked in)
Keeping our Ladies Eve! The devil a bit
He he's got, senator he came in yet! There he stands,
And looks and looks, but it is your pleasure, Cosse,
He should look lean enough.
He he's hay before him.
Yes, but as gross as hemp, and as soon will choke him,
Unless he eat it buttered. H'had four shoes,
And good ones, when he came in: It is a wonder,
With standing still he should cast three.
Troth Quarter-Master,
This trade is a kind of mystery, that corrupts
Our standing manners quickly: Once a week,
I meet with such a brush to mollify me.
Sometimes a brace, to awake my Conscience,
Yet still, I sleep securely.
Cossin Peck,
You must use better dealing, faith you must.
Troth, to give good example, to my successors,
I could be well content to steal but two girths,
And now and then a saddle cloth, change a bridle,
For exercise: and stay there.
If you could
There were some hope, on you, Cosse. But the fate is
You' are drunk so early, you mistake whole Saddles:
Sometimes a horse.
I there's—
The wine, come Cosse, Isle talk with you anon.
Doe, loose no time, good Quarter-Master.
There are the horse, come, Fly.
Charge, in Boys, in; Lieutenant of the ordinance.
Tobacco, &amp; pipes.
Who's that? Old Iordan, good!
A comely vessel, and a necessary.
New-scour'd he is: Here's to thee, Martial Fly.
In milk, my young Anon says.
Cream of the grape!
That dropped from Iuno's breasts, and sprung the Lily!
I can recite your fables,
Here is, too,
The blood of Venus, mother of the Rose!
The dinner is gone up.
I hear the whistle.
I, and the fiddlers. We must all go waite.
Pox o'this waiting, Quarter Master, Fly.
When Chambermaids are sovereigns, waite their Lady•
Fly scorns to breath.
or blow upon thē, he.
Old Parcel Peck! Art thou there? how now? lam•
Yes faith: it is ill halting before cripples,
I have got a dash of a Jade, here, will stick by me.
O you have had some phant'sie, fellow Peck,
Some revelation—
What?
To steal the hay,
Out of the racks again:
I told him so,
When the ghosts backs were turned.
Or bring 〈◊〉 pe•
The bottom upwards, heaped with oats; and cry.
Here's the best measure upon all the road! when
You know the guest, put in his hand, to feel,
And smell to the oats, that grated all his fingers
Vpo'the wood—
Mum!
And foūd out your 〈◊〉
I ha'bin in the cellar, Pierce.
You were th• there,
Vpo' your knees; I doe remember it:
To hawed fact concealed. I could tell more,
Soping of saddles, cutting of horse tails,
And cropping—pranks of ale, and hostelry—
Which he cannot forget, he says, young Knight:
No more then you can other deeds of darkness,
Done in the cellar.
Well said, bold professor.
We shall ha'some truth explained.
We are all mortal,
And have our visions.
Truly it seems to me
That every horse has his whole peck, and tumbles
•p to the ears in littour,
When, indeed
There's no such matter; not a smell of provender.
Not so much straw as would tie up a horse-taile!
Nor any thing in the rack, but two old cob webs!
•nd so much rotten hay, as had been a hens riest!
And yet he's ever apt to sweep the mangers!
But puts in nothing.
These are fits, and fancies,
Which you must leave, good Peck.
And you must pray
•t may be reueal'd to you, at some-times,
Whose hōrse you ought to cousin; with what conscience;
The how; and when; a Parsons horse may suffer—
Who's master's double beneficed; put in that.
A little greasing in the teeth; it is wholesome:
And keeps him in a sober shuffle.
His saddle too
May want a stirrup.
And, it may be sworn,
His learning lay of one side, and so broke it.
They have ever oats i'their cloake-bags, to affront vs.
And therefore it is an office meritorious,
To with such soundly.
And a graziers may.
O they are pinching puckfists!
And suspicious.
Suffer before the masters face, sometimes.
He shall think he sees his horse eat half a bushel,
When the slight is, rubbing his gummes with salt,
Till all the skin come off, he shall but mumble,
Like an old woman that were chewing brawn,
And drop 'hem out again.
Well argued Cavalier,
It may doe well: and go for an example:
But Cosse, have care of understanding horses,
Horses with angry heals, Nobility horses.
Horses that know the world; let them have meat
Till their teeth ache; and rubbing till their ribs
Shine like a wenches forehead: They are Devils else
Will look into your dealings.
For mine own part,
The next I cousin of the pampered breed,
I wish he may be found'red.
Foundered.
Prolate it right.
And of all four, I wish it,
I love no cropper complements.
Whose horse w• it?
Why, Mr Bursts.
Is Bat Burst come?
An hour he has been here.
What Burst?
Mas, Bartolmew Burst.
One that hath been a Citizen, since a Courtier,
And now a Gamester. Hath had all his whirls,
And bouts of fortune, as a man would say,
Once a Bat, and ever a Bat! a Rere-mouse,
And Bird of twilight, he has broken thrice
Your better man, the Geno'way Proverb say,
Men are not made of steel.
Nor are they 〈◊〉
Always to hold.
Thrice honourable Colonel!
Hinges will crack-
Though they be Spanish iro•
He is a merchant still, Aduenturer,
At in, and in: and is our thorough-fares friend.
Who? lugs?
The same: and a fine gentle•
Was with him!
Mr Huffle.
Who? Hodge H•
What's he?
A cheater, &amp; another fine gentle•
A friend of the Chamberlains! Iordans! Mr Huf•
He is Bursts protection.
Fights, and vapors for him
He will be drunk so civilly
So discreetly
And punctually! just at his hour.
And then
Call for his Iordan, with that hum and state,
As if he pis•'d the Politiques!
And sup
With his tuft-taffata night-geere, here, so silently!
Nothing but Musique!
A dozen of bawdy songs.
And knows the General this?
O no, Sr. Dormice,
Dormit Patronus, still, the master sleeps.
They'll steal to bed.
In private Sir, and pay,
The Fiddlers with that modesty, next morning.
Take a disiune of muscatel, and eggs!
And pack away in their trundling cheats, like Gipsies•
Mysteries, mysteries, Ferret.
I we see, Trun∣dl,
What the great Officers, in an Inn may doe;
I doe not say the Officers of the Crown
But the light heart.
I'll see the Bat, and Huffl•.
I have some business Sir, I crave your pardon
What?
To be sober.
Pox, go get you gone then.
Trundle shall stay.
No I beseech you Colonel,
Your Lordship he's a mind to bee drunk private,
With these brave Gallants; I will step •side
Into the stables, and salute my Mares.
Yes doe: and sleep with 'hem, let him go-base whip-stocke.
Hee'• as drunk as a fish now, almost as dead.
Come, I will see the flicker mouse, my Fly.

Here set the hour; but first produce the par∣ties:
And clear the court. The time is now of price.
Jug, get you down, and Trundle get you up,
You shall be Crier. Ferret here, the Clerk.
Iordan, smell you without, till the Ladies call you;
Take down the Fiddlers too, silence that noise,
Deep, in the cellar, safe.
Who keeps the watch?
Old Sheelinin here, is the Madame Tel-clocke.
No feet and trot, sweet Moister, I shall sleep;
I feet, I shall.
I p•'y thee, doe then, Schrich. O•.
She brings to mind the fable of the Dragon,
That kept the Hesperian fruit. Would I could charm her.
Trundle will do it with his hum. Come Trundle.
Precede him Ferret, in the form.
Oyez, oyez, oyez.
Whereas there hath been awarded,
By the Queen Regent of Love,
In this high court of soueraig•tie,
Two special hours of address,
To Herebert Lovel, appellant,
Against the Lady Frampul, defendant
Herebert Lovel, Come into the Court.
Make challenge to thy first hour,
And save thee, and thy bail.
O yez, &amp;c.
Whereas, &amp;c.
By the Qu. &amp;c.
•n this high, &amp;c.
Two special, &amp;c
To Herebert, &amp;c.
Against the, &amp;c.
Herebert Lov. &amp;c.
Make, &amp;c.
And •aue, &amp;c.
Lo, louting where he comes into the Court!
Clearke' of the sou'raignty take his appearance.
And how accoutred, how designed he comes!
T's done. Now Crier, c•ll the Lady Frampul,
And by the name of,
Francis, Lady Frampul, defendant,
Come into the Court,
Make answer to the award,
And save thee, and thy bail.
Francis &amp;c.
Come into the, &amp;c.
Make answer, &amp;c.
And save thee, &amp;c.
She makes a noble, and a just appearance.
Set it down likewise, and how armed she comes.
Usher of Loves Court, give 'hem their oath.
According to the f•rme, upon Loue's Missal.
Arise, and •ay your hands, upon the Book.
Herebert Lovel Appellant, and Lady Frances Fram∣pull, Defendant, you shall swear upon the Liturgy of Love, Ouid de art a•andi, that you neither have, no will have, nor in any w•se bear about you, thing, or things, pointed, or blunt, within these theselists, other then
what are natural, and allowed by the Court: No in∣chanted Arms, or weapons, Stones of virtue, Herb of Grace, Charm, Character, Spell, Philtre, or other power, then Loves only, and the iustneste of your cause. So help you Love, his Mother, and the contents of this Book: Kiss it. Return unto yourseats. Crier bid si∣lence.
Oyez. Oyez. Oyez.
In the name of the Sovereign of Love
Notice is given by the Court,
To the Appellant, and Defendant,
That the first hour of address proceeds.
And Love save the Sovereign.
In the &amp;c.
Notice is &amp;c.
To the Ap &amp;c.
That the &amp;c.
And love &amp;c.
Every man, or woman keep silence pain of impri∣sonment.
Do your endeavours, in the name of Love.
To make my first approaches, then, in love.
Tell vs what Love is, that we may be sure
There's such a thing, and that it is in nature.
Excellent Lady, I did not expect
To meet an Infidel! much less an Atheist!
Here in Loue's lists! of so much unbelief!
To raise a question of his being—
Well-charg'd!
I rather thought, and, with religion, think,
Had all the character of love been lost,
His lines, dimensions, and whole signature
Razed, and defaced, with dull humanity:
That both his nature, and his essence might
Have found their mighty instauration he•e,
Here where the confluence of fair, and good,
Meets to make up all beauty. For, what else
Is Love, but the most noble, pure affection
Of what is truly beautiful, and fair?
Desire of union with the thing beloved?
Have the assistants of the Court their votes,
And writ of privilege, to speak them freely?
Yes, to assist; but not to interrupt.
Then I have read somwhere, that man and woman
Were, in the first creation, both one piece,
And being cleft asunder, ever since,
Love was an appetite to be reioyn'd.
As for example—
Cramo-cree! what meansh' tou?
Only, to kiss, and part.
So much is law∣full.
And stands with the prerogative of loves Court!
It is a fable of Plato's, in his Banquet,
And uttered, there, by Aristophanes.
It was well remembered here, and to good use.)
But on with your description, what Love is.
Desire of union with the thing beloved.
I meant a definition. For I make
The efficient cause, what's beautiful, and fair.
The formal cause, the appetite of union.
The final cause, the union it self.
But larger, if you'll have it, by description,
It is a flame, and ardor of the mind,
Dead, in the proper corps, quick in another:
Trans-ferres the Lover into the Loved.
The he, or she, that loves, engraues, or stamps
The Idea of what they love, first in themselves:
Or, like to glasses, so their minds take in
The forms of their beloved, and them reflect,
It is the likeness of affections,
Is both the parent, and the nurse of love.
Love is a spiritual coupling of two souls,
So much more excellent, as it least relates
Unto the body; circular, eternal;
N• feigned, or made, but borne: And then, so precious,
As nought can value it, but it self. So free,
As nothing can command it, but it self.
And in it self, so round, and liberal,
As where it favours, it bestows it self.
And, that doe I; here my whole self, I tender,
According to the practise of the Court.
I'tish a naughty pract•sh, a lewd practish,
Be quiet man, dou shalt not leip her, here.
Leap her? I lip her, foolish Queen at Arms,
Thy blazon's false: wilt thou blaspheme thine office?)
But, we must take, and understand this love
Along still, as a name of dignity;
Not pleasure.
Mark you that, my light young Lord?)
True love hath no unworthy thought, no light,
Loose, vn-becoming appetite, or strain,
But fixed, constant, pure, immutable.
I relish notthese philosophical feasts:
Give me a banquet o'sense, like that of Ovid:
A form, to take the eye; a voice, mine care;
Pure aromatiques, to my sent; a soft,
Smooth, dainty hand, to touch; and, for my taste,
Ambrosiack kisses, to melt down the palate.)
They are the earthly, lower form oflouers,
Are only taken with what strikes the senses!
And love by that loose scale. Although I grant,
We like, what's saire and graceful in an object,
And (true) would use it, in the all we tend to,
Both of our civil, and domestic deeds.
In ordering of an army, in our style,
Apparel, gesture, building, or what not?
All arts, and actions doe affect their beauty.
But put the case, in travail I may meet
Some gorgeous Structure, a brave Frontispiece,
Shall I stay captive •the outer court,
Surprised with that, and not advance to know
Who dwells there, and inhabits the house?
There is my friendship to be made, within;
With what can love me again: not, with the walls,
Doors, windo'es, architrabes, the frieze, and coronice.
My end is lost in loving of a face,
An eye, lip, nose, hand, foot, or other part,
Whose all is but a statue, if the mind
Move not, which only can make the return.
The end of love is, to have two made one
In will, and in affection, that the minds
Be first inoculated, not the bodies.
Give me the body, if it be a good one.
Nay, sweet my Lord, I must appeal the Some∣reign
For better quarter; If you hold your practise;
True. Silence, pain of imprisonment: Hear the Court.
The bodies love is frail, subject to change,
And alter still, with it: The minds is firm,
One, and the same, proceeds first, from weighing,
And well examining, what is fair, and good;
Then, what is like in reason, fit in manners;
That breeds good will: good will desire of union.
So knowledge first, begets benevolence,
Benevolence breeds friendship, friendship love.
And where it starts or steps aside from this,
It is a mere degenerous appetite,
A lost, oblique, deprau'd affection,
And bears no mark, or character of Love.
How am I changed! By what alchemy
Of love, or language, am I thus translated!
His tongue is tipped with the Philosophers stone,
And that hath touched me through every vain!
I feel that transmutation o'my blood,
As I were quite become another creature,
And all he speaks, it is proiection!
Well feigned, my Lady: now her parts begin!
And she will act 'hem subtly.
She fails me else.
Nor doe they trespass within bounds of pardon,
That giving way, and licence to their love,
Di-uest him of his noblest ornaments,
Which are his modesty, and shamefac'tnesse:
And so they doe, that have unfit designs,
Upon the parties, they pretend to love.
For, what's more monstrous, more a prodigy,
Then to hear me protest truth of affection
Unto 〈◊〉 person that I would dishonour?
And what's a more dishonour, then defacing
Another good, with forfeiting mine own?
And drawing on a fellowship of sin;
From note of which, though (for a while) we may
Be both kept safe, by caution, yet the conscience
Cannot be cleans•d. For what was hitherto
Called by the name of love, becomes destroyed
Then, with the fact: the innocence lost,
The bating of affection soon will follow:
And Love is never true, that is not lasting.
No more then any can be pure, or perfect,
That entertains more then one object. Dixie.
O speak, and speak for ever! let min'eare
Be feasted still, and filled with this banquet!
No sense can ever surfeit on such truth!
It is the marrow of all lovers tenants!
Who hath read Plato, Heliodore, or Tatius,
Sydney, 〈◊〉, or all Loves Fathers, like him?
He, is there the Master of the Sentences,
Their School, their Commentary, Text, and Gloss,
And breathes the true divinity of Love!
Excellent actor! how she hits this passion!
Where have I lived, in heresy, so long
Out of the Congregation of Love,
And stood irregular, by all his C•nonce?
But doe you think she plays?
Vpo'my Some∣raignty,
Mark her anon.
I shake, and am half jealous.
What penance shall I doe, to be received,
And reconciled, to the Church of Love?
Go on procession, bare-foot, to his Image,
And say some hundred penitential verses,
There, out of Chasers Troilus, and Cr•id?
Or to his mothers shrine, vow a Waxe-candle
As large as the Town May-pole is, and pay it!
Enjoin me any thing this Court thinks fit,
For I have trespassed, and blasphemed Love.
I have, indeed, despised his Deity,
Whom (till this miracle wrought on me) I knew not.
Now I adore Love, and would kiss the rushes
That bear this reverend Gentleman, his Priest,
If that would expiate—but, I fear it will not.
For, though he be somewhat struck in years, and old
Enough to be my father, he is wise,
And only wise men love, the other covet.
I could begin to be in love with him,
But will not tell him yet, because I hope
T'enioy the other hour, with more delight,
And prove him farther.
Most S•cratick Lady!
Or, if you will Ironic! give you joy
Of you Platonic love here, Mr Lovel.
But pay him his first kiss, yet, in the Court,
Which is a debt, and due: For the houre's run.
How swift is time, and s•lie steals away
From them would hug it, value it, embrace it?
I should have thought it scarce had run ten minutes,
When the whole hour is fled. Here, take your kiss, Sir,
Which I most willing tender you, in Court.
And we doe imitate—)
And I could wish,
It had been twenty—so the Sovereigns
Poor narrow nature had decreed it so—
But that is past, irrevocable, now:
She did her kind, according to her latitude—
Beware, you doe not conjure up a spirit
You cannot lay.
I dare you, doe your worst,
Show me but such an injustice: I would thank you
To alter your award.
Sure she is serious!
I shall have another fit of jealousy!
I feel a grudging!
Cheer up, noble guest,
We cannot guess what this may come to, yet;
The brain of man, or woman, is uncertain!
T•t, she dissembles! All is personated,
And counterfeit comes from her! If it were not,
The Spanish Monarchy, with both the Indies,
Could not buy off the treasure of this kiss,
Or half give balance for my happiness.
Why, as it is yet, it glads my light Heart
To see you roused thus from a sleepy humour,
Of drowsy, accidental melancholy;
And all those brave parts of your soul awake,
That did before seem drowned, and buried in you!
That you express your self, as you had backed
The Muses Horse! or got Bellerophons arms!
What news with Fly?
News, of a newer Lady,
A finer, fresh•, braver, bonnier beauty,
A very bona-Roba, and a Bouncer!
In yellow, glistening, golden Satin.
Pru,
Adiourne the Court.
Cry Trundle
Oyez,
Any man, or woman, that hath any personal attendance
To give unto the Court; Keep the second hour,
And Love save the Sovereign.

O Barnabe!
Welcome Barnabe! Where ha• thou been?
In the foul weather.
Which has wet thee, B•.
As dri• as a chip! Good Jug, a cast o'thy name,
As well as thy office; two jugs!
By, and by.
What Lady's this thou hast brought here?
A great Lad•
I know no more: one, that will try you, Iordan.
She'll find your gage, your circle, your capacity,
How do's old Staggers the Smith? and Tree, the Sadler?
Keep they their peny-club, still?
And th'old catch too,
Of whoop Barnaby-
Doe they sing at me?
They'are reeling at it, in the parlour, now:
Isle to 'hem: Give me a drink first.
Where• thy 〈◊〉
I lost it by the way-Gi'me another.
A hat?
A drink.
Take heed of taking cold, Ban-
The wind blew't off at High-gate, and my Lady
Would not endure me, light, to take it up,
But made me drive bare-headed in the rain.
That she might be mistaken for a Countess?
Troth, like enough! She might be an o're-grown Duchess,
For ought I know.
What! with one man!
At a time,
They cary no more, the best of'hem.
Nor the bravest.
And she is very brave!
A stately gown!
And p•ticote, she has on!
Ha'you spied that, 〈◊〉
You'are a notable poorer, an old Rabbi,
At a smocks hem, boy.
As he is Chamberlain,
He may doe that, by his place.
Whats her Squire?
A toy, that she allows eight pence a day.
A slight Man-net, to port her, up, and down.
Come show me to my play-fellowes, old Staggered,
And father Tree.
Here, this way, Bar•abe.

Come, let'vs take in fresco, here, one quart.
Two quarts, my man of war, let'vs not be stinted.
Advance three iordans, varlet of the house:
I do not like your Burst, Bird; He is saucy:
Some Shop-keeper he was?
Yes, Sir.
I knew it.
A broke-wing'd Shop-keeper? I nose 'hem, straight.
He had no Father, I warrant him, that durst own him;
Some foundling in a stall, or the Church porch;
Brought up it'he Hospital; and so bound Prentice;
Then Master of a shop; then 'one of the Inquest;
Then breaks out Bankrupt; or starts Alderman:
The original of both is a Church-porch—
Of some, my Colonel.
Good faith, of most!
O'your shop Citizens, they are rud• Animals!
And let'hem get but ten mile out a town
Th'out swagger all the wapen-take.
What's that?
A Saxon word, to signify the hundred.
Come let vs drink, Sir Glorious, some brave health
Upon our tip-toos.
To the health of the Bursts.
Why Bursts?
Why Tipto's?
Of I cry you mercy!
It is sufficient.
What is so sufficient?
To drink to you is sufficient.
On what terms?
That you shall give security to pledge me.
So you will name no Spaniard, I will pledge you.
I rather choose to thirst: and will thirst ever,
Then leave that cream of nations, vn-cry'd up.
Perish all wine, and gust of wine.
How spill it?
Spill it at me?
I wreak not, but I spilt it.
Nay pray you be quiet, noble bloods.
No Spa∣niards,
I cry, with my cousin Huffle.
Spaniards? Pilchers?
Do not provoke my patient blade. It sleep's,
And would not hear thee: Huffle, thou art rude,
And dost not know the Spanish composition.
What is the Recipe? Name the ingredients.
Valour.
Two ounces!
Prudence.
Half a dram!
Justice,
A penny weight!
Religion.
Three scruples!
And of grauida'd
A face∣full!
He carries such a dose of it in his looks,
Actions, and gestures, as it breeds respect,
To him, from Savages, and reputation
With all the sons of men.
Will it give him credit
With Gamesters, Courtiers, Citizens, or Tradesmen?
He will borrow money on the stroke of his beard!
Or turn off his Mustaccio! His mere cuello,
Or Ruff about his neck is a Bill of Exchange
In any Bank, in Europe! Not a Merchant
That fees his gate, but straight will furnish him
Upon his pa•e!
I have heard the Spanish name
Is terrible, to children in some Countries;
And used to make them eat—their bread and butter:
Or take their worm-seed.
Huffle, you doe shuffle:
—to them: Stuff, Pinnacia.
Slid heers a Lady!
And a Lady gay!
A well-trimm'd Lady!
Let's lay her a board.
Let's hail her first.
By your sweet favour Lady,
Good Gentlemen be civil, we are strangers.
And you were Flamings, Sir!
Or Spaniards!
The'are here, have been at Seuil i'their days,
And at Madrid too!
He is a foolish fellow,
I pray you mind him not, He is my Protection.
In your protection, he is safe, sweet Lady.
So shall you be, in mine.
A share, good Coronell.
Of what?
Of your fine Lady! I am H•dge,
My name is Huffle.
Huffling Hodge, be quiet.
And I pray you, be you so, Glorious Coronel,
Hodge Huffle shall be quiet.
A Lady gay, gay.
For she is a Lady gay, gay, gay. For •he's a Lady gay.
Bird of the Vespers, Vespertilio, Burst;
You are a Gentleman, of the first head,
But that head may be broke, as all the Body is—
Burst, if you tie not up your Huffle, quickly.
Tie dogs, not man.
Nay pray thee, Hodge, be still.
This steel here rides not, on this thigh, in vain.
Show thou thy steel, &amp; thigh, thou glorious Dirt,
Then Hodge• sings Simpson, and no ties shall hold.
—Pierce. Jug. Iorden.
Keep the peace gentlemen: when• do you m•
I will not discompose my self, for Hue•e.
You •ee what your entreaty, and pressure still
Of gentlemen, to be civil, doth bring on?
A quarrel? and perhaps man-slaughter? You
Will carry your goose about you, still? your ply•ing 〈◊〉
Your tongue to smooth all is not here fine stuff?
Why wife?
Your wife? haven't I for•eden you that•
Doe you think I'll call you husband •'this gown,
Or any thing, in that jacket, but Protection?
Here tie my shoe; and show my vellute petticoat,
And my silk stocking! why doe you make me a Lady,
If I may not doe like a Lady, in fine clothes.
Sweet heart, you may doe what you will, with me.
〈◊〉; I knew that at home; what to doe with you;
But why was I brought hither? to see fashions?
And wear them too, sweet heart, but this wild Company
Why doe you bring me in wild Company?
You'd have me tame, and civil, in wild Company?
I hope I know, wild Company are fine Company,
And in fine Company, where I am fine my self,
A Lady may doe any thing, deny nothing
To a fine party, I have heard you say it.
—To them Pierce.
There are a Company of Ladies aboue
Desire your Ladyships Company, and to take
The surety of their lodgings, from the affront
Of these halfe-beasts, were here even now, the Centaurs,
Are they fine Ladies?
Some very fine Ladies.
As fine as I?
I dare use no comparisons,
Being a servant, sent—
Spoke, like a fine fellow!
I would thou were one; I'd not then deny thee:
But, thank thy Lady.
—To them Host.
Madam, I must crave you
To afford a Lady a visit, would excuse
Some harshness of the house, you have received
From the brute ghosts.
This's a fine old man!
I'd go with him and he were a little finer!
Stu• You may sweet heart, it is mine Host.
mine Host!
Yes madame, I must bid you welcome.
Do then.
But doe not stay.
I'll be aduil'd by you, yes!

What more then Thracian Barbarism was this!
The battle of the Centaurs, with the Lapithes!
There is no taming of the Monster drink.
But what a glorious beast our Tiptoe showed!
He would not discompose himself, the Don!
Your Spaniard, ne'er, doth discompose himself.
Yet, how he talked, and roared in the beginning!
And ran as fast, as a knocked Marro'bone.
So they did all at last, when Lovel went down,
And chased hem bout the Court.
For ell's Don Lewis!
Or fencing after Euclide!
I ne'er saw
A lightning shoot so, as my servant did,
His rapier was a Meteor, and he wau'd it
Over 'hem, like a Comet! as they fled him!
I marked his manhood! every stoop he made
Was like an Eagles, at a flight of Cranes!
(As I have read somewhere.)
Bravely expressed:
And like a Lover!
Of his valour, I am!
He seemed a body, rarefied, to ayre!
Or that his sword, and arm were of a piece,
They went together so! Here, comes the Lady.
A bouncing Bona-roba! as the Fly said.
She is some Giantess! Isle stand off,
For fear she swallow me.
Is not this our Gown, Pru?
That I bespoke of Stuff?
It is the fashion!
I, and the Silk! Feel, sure it is the same!
And the same Petticoat, lace, and all!
Isle swear it.
How came it hither? make a bill of inquiry.
Yo'haue a fine suit on, Madam! and a rich one!
And of a curious making!
And a new!
As new, as Day.
She answers like a fish-wife.
I put it on, since Noon, I doe assure you,
Who is your Taylor?
'Pray you, your Fashioners name.
My Fashioner is a certain man of mine own,
Have is in the house: no matter for his name.
O, but to satisfy this bevy of Ladies:
Of which a brace, here, longed to bid you well-come
Have•s one, in truth, I title my Protection:
Bid him come up.
Our new Ladies Protection!
What is your Ladyships stile?
Countess Pinnaccia.
Countess Pinnacias man, come to your Lady,
Your Ladyships Taylor! mas, Stuff!
How Stuff?
He the Protection!
Stuff looks like a remnant.
I am undone, discovered!
Tic the suit, Ma∣dame,
Now, without scruple! and this, some devise
To bring it home with.
Why, upon your knees?
Is this your Lady Godmother?
M•m, Pinnacia.
It is the Lady Frampol: my best customer.
What show is this, that you present vs with?
I doe beseech your Ladyship, forgive me.
She did but say the suit on.
Who? Which she?
My wife forsooth.
How? Mistress Stuff? Your wife!
Is that the riddle?
We all looked for a Lady,
A Duchess, or a Countess at the least.
She is my own lawfully begotten wife,
In wedlock. We ha'beene coupled now seven years.
And why thus mas'qd? You like a footman, ha!
And she your Countess!
To make a fool of him∣self
And of me too.
I pray thee, Pinnace, peace.
Nay it shall out, since you have called me wife,
And openly dis-Ladied me! though I am dis-Countess'd
I am not yet dis-countenanc'd. These shall see.
si∣lence!
It is a foolish trick Madame, he has;
For though he be your Taylor, he is my beast.
I may be bold with him, and tell his story.
When he makes any fine garment will fit me,
Or any rich thing that he thinks of price,
Then must I put it on, and be his Countess,
Before he carry it home unto the owners.
A coach is hired, and four horse, he runs
In his velvet I ackat thus, to Rumford, Croydon,
Hounslow, or Barnet, the next bawdy road:
And takes me out, carries me up, and throw's me
Upon a bed.
Peace thou immodest woman:
She glory•s in the bravery of the vice.
Tic a quaint one!
A fine species,
Of sornicating with a mans own wife,
Found out by (what's his name?)
Mr Nic. Stuff!
The very figure of preoccupation
In all his customers best clothes.
He lies
With his own Succuba, in all your names.
And all your credits.
I, and at all their costs.
This gown was then bespoken, for the Souer jig•
I marry was it.
And a maine offence,
Committed against the sovereignty: being not brought
Home in the time. Beside, the profanation,
Which may call on the censure of the Court.
Let him be blanketed. Call up the Quarter-ma∣ster.
Deliver him ore, to Fly.
O good my Lord.
Pillage the Pinnace.
Let his wife be stripped.
Blow off her upper deck.
Tear all her tackle,
Pluck the polluted robes over her ears;
Or cut them all to pieces, make a fire o'them:
To rags, and cinders, burn th'idolatrous vestures.
Fly, &amp; your fellows, see that the whole censure
Be thoroughly executed.
Weel toss him, bravely.
Till the stuff stink again.
And send her home,
Divested to her flanell, in a cart.
And let her Footman beat the basin before her.
The Court shall be obeyed.
Fly, &amp; his office•s
Will doe it fiercely.
Merciful queen Pru.
I cannot help you.
Go thy ways Nic. Stuff,
Thou hast nicked it for a fashioner of Venery!
For his own hell! though he run ten mile for it.
O here comes Lovel, for his second hour.
And after him, the tip of Spanish valour.

Servant, what have you there?
A meditation,
Or rather a vision, Madam, and of Beauty
Our former subject.
Pray you let vs hear it.
It was a beauty that I saw
So pure, so perfect, as the frame
Of all the vniuerse was lame,
To that one figure, could I draw,
Or give least line of it a law!
A skein of silk without a knot!
A fair march made without a halt!
A curious form without a fault!
A printed book without a blot.
All beauty, and without a spot.
They are gentle words, and would deserve a note,
Set to 'hem, as gentle.
I have tried my skill.
To close the second hour, if you will hear them,
My boy by that time will have got it perfect.
Yes, gentle servant. In what calm he speaks,
After this noise, and tumult, so vnmou'd,
With that serenity of c•untenance,
As i• his thoughts did acquiesce•e in that
Which is the object of the second hour,
And nothing else.
Well then summon the Court.
I have a suit to the Sovereign of love,
If it may stand with the honour of the Court,
To change the qu•stion but from love, to valour,
To hear, it said, but, what true valour is,
Which oft begets true love.
It is a question
Fit for the Court, to take true knowledge of,
And hath my just assent.
Content.
Content.
Content. I am content, give him his oath.
Herebert Lovel, Thou shalt swear upon the testa∣meant of love, To make answer to this question pro∣pounded to thee by the Court, What true valour is. And therein to tell the truth, the whole truth, and no∣thing but the truth. So help thee love, and thy bright sword at need.
So help me love and my good sword at need.
It is the greatest virtue, and the safety
Of all mankind, the object of it is danger.
A certain mean twixt fear, and confidence:
No inconsiderate rashness, or vain appetite
Of false encountering formidable thing•;
But a true science of distinguishing
What's good or evil. It springs out of reason,
And tends to perfect honesty, the scope
Is always honour, and the public good:
It is no valour for a private cause.
No? not sor reputation?
That's mans Idol,
Set up against God, the maker of all laws,
Who hath commanded vs we should not kill;
And yet we say, we must for reputation.
What honest man can either fear his own,
Or else will hurt another reputation?
Fear to doe base, unworthy things, is valour,
If they be done to vs, to suffer them,
Is valour too. The office of a man
Thats truly valiant, is considerable
Three ways: The first is in respect of matter,
Which still is danger; in respect of form,
Wherein he must preserve his dignity;
And in the end, which must be ever lawful.
But men, when they are heated, and in passion,
Cannot consider.
Then it is not valour.
I never thought an angry person valiant:
Virtue is never aided by a vice.
What need is there of anger, and of tumul•?
When reason can do• the same things, or more?
O yes, it is profitable, and of use,
It makes vs fierce, and fit to undertake.
Why so will drink make vs both bold, and rash.
Or frenzy if you will, doe these make valiant?
They are poor helps, and virtue needs them not.
No man is more valiant by being angry,
But he that could not valiant be without:
So, that it comes not in the aid of virtue,
But in the stead of it.
He holds the right.
And it is an odious kind of remedy,
To owe our health to a disease.
If man
Should follow the dictamen of his passion,
He could not scope—
To discompose himself.
According to Don Lewis!
Or Caranza!
Good Colonel Glorious, whilst we treat of valour,
Dismiss your self.
You are not concerned.
Go drink,
And congregate the Hostlers, and the Tipsters,
The vnder-officers of your regiment;
Compose with them, and be not angry valiant!
How do's that differ from true valour?
Thus.
In the efficient, or that which makes it,
For it proceeds from passion, not from judgment:
Then brute beasts have it, wicked persons, there
It differs in the subject: in the form,
It is carried rashly, and with violence:
Then in the end, where it respects not truth,
Or public honesty; but mere revenge.
Now confident, and undertaking valour,
Sways from the true, two other ways; as being
A trust in our own faculties, skill, or strength,
And not the right, or conscience of the• cause,
That works it: Then in the end, which is the victory,
And not the honour.
But the ignorant valour
That knows not why it undertakes, but doth it
T'escape the infamy merely—
Is worst of all:
That valour lies, in the eyes of the lookers on;
And is called valour with a witness.
Right:
The things true valour is exercised about,
Are poverty, restraint, captivity,
Banishment, loss of children, long disease:
The least is death. Here valour is beheld,
Properly seen; about these it is present:
Not trivial things, which but require our confidence.
And, yet to those, we must object our selves,
Only for honesty: if any other
Respect be mixed, we quite put out her light.
And as all knowledge, when it is removed
Or separate from justice, is called craft,
Rather then wisdom: so a mind affecting,
Or undertaking dangers, for ambition,
Or any self pretext, not for the public,
Deserves the name of daring, not of valour,
And ouer-daring is as great a vice,
As ouer-fearing.
Yes, and often greater.
But as is not the mere punishment,
But cause that, makes a martyr, so it is not
Fighting, or dying; but the manner of it
Renders a man himself. A valiant man
Ought not to undergo, or tempt a danger,
But worthily, and by selected ways:
He undertakes with reason, not by chance.
His valour is the salt to his other virtues,
They are all unseasoned without it. The waiting maids,
Or the concomitants of it, are his patience,
His magnanimity, his confidence,
His constancy, security, and quiet;
He can assure himself against all rumour!
Despairs of nothing! laughs at contumelies!
As knowing himself, advanced in a height
Where injury cannot reach him, nor aspersion
Touch him with soil!
Most manly vtterd all!
As if Achilles had the chair in valour,
And Hercules were but a Lecturer!
Who would not hang upon those lips for ever!
That strike such musique? I could run on them;
But modesty is such a school mistress,
To keep our sex in awe.
Or you can fine! my
Subtle and dissembling Lady mistress.
I fear she means it, Pru, in too good earnest!
The purpose of an injury it is to vex
And trouble me: now, nothing' can doe that,
To him that's valiant. He that is affected
With the least injury, is less then it.
It is but reasonable, to conclude
That should be stronger, still, which hurts, then that
Which is hurt. Now no wickedness is stronger,
Then what opposes it: Not Fortunes self,
When she encounters virtue, but comes off
Both lame, and less! why should a wise man then,
Confess himself the weaker, by the feeling
Of a fools wrong? There may an injury
Be meant me, I may choose, if I will take it.
But we are, now, come to that delicacy,
And tenderness of sense, we think an insolence
Worse then an injury, bear words worse then deeds;
We are n•t so much troubled with the wrong,
As with the opinion of the wrong! like children,
We are made afraid with visors! Such poor sounds
As is the lie, or common words of spite.
Wise laws thought never worthy a revenge;
And it is the narrowness of humane nature,
Our poverty, and beggary of spirit,
To take exception at these things. He laughed at me!
He broke a jest! a third took place of me!
How most ridiculous quarrels are all these?
Notes of a queasy, and sick stomach, labouring
With want of a true injury! the maine part
Of the wrong, is, our vice of taking it.
Or our interpreting it to be such.
You take it rightly. If a woman, or child
Give me the lie, would I be angry? no,
Not if I were i'my wits, sure I should think it
No spice of a disgrace. No more is theirs,
If I will think it, who are to be held
In as contemptible a rank, or worse.
I am kept out a Masque, sometime thrust out,
Made wait a day, two, three, for a great word,
Which (when it comes forth) is all frown, and forehead!
What laughter should this breed, rather then anger!
Out of the tumult, of so many errors,
To feel, with contemplation, mine own quiet?
If a great person doe me an affront,
A Giant of the time, sure, I will bear it
Or out of patience, or necessity!
Shall I doe more for fear, then for my judgment?
For me now to be angry with Hodge Huffle,
Or Burst (his broken charge) if he be saucy,
Or our own type of Spanish valour, Tiptoe,
(Who were he now necessited to beg
Would ask an alms, like Condo Oliuares)
Were just to make my self, such a vain Animal
As one of them. If light wrongs touch me not,
No more shall great; if not a few, not many.
There's nought so sacred with vs but may find
A sacrilegious person, yet the thing is
No less divine, cause the profane can reach it.
He is shot free, in battle, is not hurt,
Not he that is not hit. So he is valiant,
That yields not unto wrongs; not he that scopes 'hem
They that do pull down Churches, and deface
The holiest Altars, cannot hurt the God-head.
A calm wise man may show as much true valour,
Amidst these popular provocations,
As can an able Captain show security,
By his brave conduct, through an enemies country.
A wise man never goes the peoples way,
But as the Planets still move contrary
To the worlds motion; so doth he, to opinion:
He will examine, if those accidents
(Which common fame calls injuries) happen to him
Deservedly, or no? come they deservedly,
They are no wrongs then, but his punishments:
If undeservedly, and he not guilty,
The doer of them, first, should blush, not he.
Excellent!
Truth, and right!
An Oracle
Could not have spoken more!
Been more believed!
The whole Court runs into your sentence, Sir!
And see, your second hour is almost ended.
It cannot be! O clip the wings of time,
Good Pru, or make him stand still with a charm.
Distill the gout into it, cramps, all diseases
T'arrest him in the foot, and fix him here:
O, for an engine, to k•epe back all clocks!
Or make the Sun forget his motion!
If I but knew what drink the Time now loved,
To set my Trundle at him, mine own Barnabe!
Why? I'll consult our Shelee no•n, To-mas.
Er grae Chreest.
Wake her not.
Tower even Cuppan
D'vsque bagh done.
Vsque bagh's her drink.
But'twi' not make the time drunk.
Is it hath her,
Away with her, my Lord, but marry her first. Pru,
I, that 'll be sport anon too, for my Lady.
But she hath other game to fly at yet:
The hour is come, your kiss.
My servants song, first.
I •ay the kiss, first; and I so enjoined it:
At your own peril, doe, make the contempt.
Well Sir, you must be paid, and legally.
Nay nothing, Sir, beyond.
One more-I except.
This was but half a kiss, and I would change it.
The Court's dissolved, removed, and the play ended.
No sound, or air of Love more, I decree it.
From what a happiness hath that one word
Thrown me, into the gulf of misery?
To what a bottomless despair? how like
A Court remoouing, or an ended Play
Shows, my abrupt precipitate estate,
By how much more my vain hopes were increased
By these false hours of converse•ion?
Did not I prophecy this, of my self,
And gave the true prognostics? o my brain!
How art thou turned! and my blood congeald!
My sinews slackened! and my marrow melted!
That I remember not where I have bin,
Or what I am? Only my tongue's on fire;
And burning downward, hurls forth coals, &amp; cinders,
To tell, this temple of love, will soon be ashes!
Come Indignation, now, and be my mistress,
No more of Loves ungrateful tyranny.
His wheel of torture, and his pits of bird-lime,
His nets of nooses, whirlpools of vexation,
His mils, to grind his servants into powder—
I will go catch the wind first in a sieve,
Weigh smoke, and measure shadows, plough the wa•,
And sow my hopes there, ere I stay in Love.
My jealousy is off, I am now secure.
Farewell the craft of crocodiles, women's piety,
And practise of it, in this art of flattering,
And fooling men. I have not lost my reason,
Though I have lent my self out, for two hours,
Thus to be baff•lt by a Chambermaid,
And the good Actor, her Lady, before mine Host,
Of the light Heart, here, that hath laughed at all—〈◊〉,
Who I?
Laugh on, Sir, Isle to bed, and sleep,
And dream away the vapour of Love, if th'house
And your leer drunkards let me. Lad. •rue.
Sweet Madame.
Why would you let him go thus?
In whose power
Was it to stay him, prop'rer then my Ladies!
Why, in her Ladies? Are not you the Sovereign?
Would you, in conscience, Madame, ha me vex
His patience more?
Not but apply the cure,
Now it is vex't.
That's but one bodies work.
Two cannot doe the same thing handsomely.
But had not you the authority, absolute?
And were not you i'rebellion, Lady Frampal,
From the beginning?
I was somewhat froward,
I must confess, but frowardness sometime
Becomes a beauty, being but a visor
Put on. You'll let a Lady wear her masque, Pru.
But how do I know, when her Ladyship is pleased
To leave it off, except she tell me so?
You might have known that by my looks, and language,
Had you been or regardant, or observant.
One woman, reads another character,
Without the tedious trouble of deciphering:
If she but give her mind to it, you knew well,
It could not sort with any reputation
Of mine, to come in •st, having stood out
So long, without conditions, f•r mine honour.
I thought you did expect none, you so jeered him,
And put him off with scorn
Who, I, with scorn?
I did express my love, to idolatry rather,
And so am justly plagued, not understood.
I swear, I thought you had dissembled, Madam,
And doubt, you do so yet.
Dull, stupid, wench!
Stay i'thy state of ignorance still, be damned,
An idiot Chambermaid! Hath all my care,
My breeding thee in fashion, thy rich clothes,
Honours, and titles wrought no brighter effects
On thy dark soul, then thus? Well! go thy way•,
Were not the Tailors wife, to be demolished,
Ruined, uncased, thou should be she, I vow.
Why, take your spangled properties, your gown,
And scarfs.
Pru, Pru, what doest thou mean?
I will not buy this play-boyes bravery,
At such a price, to be upbraided for it,
Thus, every minute.
Take it not to heart so.
The Taylors wife? There was a word of sco•
It was a word fell from me, Pru, by chance.
Good Madame, please to vndeceaue your self,
I know when words do slip, and when they are darted
With all their bitterness: uncased? demolish't?
An idiot—Chambermaid, stupid, and dull?
Be damned for ignorance? I will be so.
And think I doe deserve it, that, and more,
Much more I do.
Here comes mine Host! No cry∣ing!
Good Pru. Where is my servant Lovel, Host?
Yo ha sent him up to bed, would, you would foal∣low him!
And make my house amends!
Would you advise it?
I would I could command it. My light heart
Should leap till midnight.
Pray thee be not •llen,
I yet must have thy counsel. Thou shalt wear, Pru,
The new gown, yet.
After the Tailors wise?
Come, be not angri•, or grieved: I have a pro•ct.
Wake Shele•en Thomas! Is this your Heraldri•?
And keeping of records, to loose the maine?
Where is your charge?
Gre •hreest!
Go ask, th'oracl•
Of the bottle, at your girdle, there you lost it:
You are a sober setter of the watch.

Come Fly, and legacy, the Bird of the heart:
Prime insect of the •nne, Processor, Quarter-master,
As ever thou deserved thy daily drink,
Padling in sack, and licking in the same,
Now show thy self an implement of price,
And help to raise a nap to vs, out of nothing,
Thou saw'st'hem married?
I doe think, I did,
And heard the words, Philip, I take thee, L•tice,
I gave her too, was then the father Fly,
And heard the Priest do his part, far as five nobles
Would lead him in the lines of matrimony.
Where were they married?
•'th no• stable,
Omen•!
I have known many a church been made a stable,
But not a stable made a church till now
I wish 'hem joy. Fly, was he a full priest?
He bellied for it, had his velvet sleeves,
And his branched cassock, a side sweeping gown,
All his for militias, a good crammed divine!
I went not far to fetch him, the next Inn,
Where he was lodged, for the action.
Had they a licence?
Licence of love, I saw no other, and purse,
To pay the duties both of Church, and house,
The angels flew about.
Those birds send luck:
And mirth will follow. I had thought to have sacrificed,
To m•rriment to night, i'my light Heart, Fly,
And like a noble Poet, to have had
My last act best: but all fails in the plot.
Lovel is gone to bed; the Lady Frampull
And Sovereign Pru fallen out: Tiptoe, and his Regiment
Of mine-men, al drunk dumb, from his whop Barnaby,
To his hoop Trundle: they are his two Tropic•.
No project to rear laughter on, but this,
The marriage of Lord Beaufort, with Laetitia.
Stay! what's here! The satin gown redeemed!
And Pru restored in it, to her Ladies grace!
She is set forth in it! rigged for some employment!
An Embassy at least!
Some treaty of state!
It is a fine tack about! and worth the observing.

Sweet Pru, I, now thou art a Queen indeed!
These robes doe royally! and thou become 'hem!
So they doe thee! rich garments only fit
The parties they are made for! they shame others.
How did they show on good'y Taylors back!
Like a Caparison for a Sow, God save vs!
Thy putting hem on hath purged, and hallowed 'hem
From all pollution, meant by the Mechanics.
Hang him poor snip, a secular shop-wit!
H' hath nought but his shears to claim by, &amp; his mea∣sures,
His prentice may as well put in, for his needle,
And plead a stitch.
They have no taint in 'hem,
Now of the Taylor.
Yes, of his wives honchos,
Thus thick of fat; I smell 'hem, of the say.
It is restorative, Pru! with thy but chafing it,
A barren Hinds grease may work miracles.
Find but his chamber door, and he will rise
To thee! or if thou please, fine to be
The wretched party her sell•e, and come unto him
In form pauperise, to crave the aide
Of his Knight errant valour, to the rescue
Of thy distressed robes! name but thy gown,
And he will rise to that! Pru. Isle fire the charm first,
I had rather dye in a ditch, with Mistress Shore,
Without a smock, as the piti•ull matter has it,
Then owe my wit to cloth•s, or have it beholden.
Still spirit of Pru!
And smelling of the Some∣reign!
No, I will tell him, as it is, indeed;
I come from the fine, froward, srampull Lady,
One was run mad with pride, wild with selfe-loue,
But late encountering a wise man, who scorned her,
And knew the way to his own bed, without
Borrowing her warming pan, she hathrecouerd
Par• of her wits: so much as to consider
How far she hath trespast'd, upon whom, and how.
And now sits penitent and solitary,
Like the forsaken Turtle, in the volary
Of the light Heart, the cage, she ha•h abused,
Mourning her folly, weeping at the height
She measures with her eye, from whence she is fallen,
Since she did branch it, on the top of the wood.
I pray thee Pru, abuse me enough, that's use me
As thou think fit, any course way, to humble me,
Or bring me home again, or Lovel on:
Thou doest not know my sufferings, what I fe•le,
•y fires, and fears, are met: I burn, and freeze,
My liuer's one great coal, my heart shrunk up
With all the fevers, and the mass of blood
Within me, is a standing lake of fire,
Curled with the cold wind of my gelid sighs,
T•at d•in a drift of sleet through all my body,
And shoo• a February through my veins.
〈◊〉 I see him, I am drunk with thirst,
And surfeited with hunger of his presence.
I know not where I am, or no, or speak,
Or whether thou doest hear me.
Spare express•ns.
Isle once more venture for your Ladyship,
So you will use your fortunes reverently.
Religiously, dear Pru, Lou• and his Mother,
Isle build them several Churches, Shrines, and Alt•rs,
And over head, Isle have, in the glass windows,
The story of this day be painted, round,
For the poor Layety of love to read,
Isle make my self their book, nay their example,
To bid them take occasion by the forelock,
And play no after-games of Love, hereafter.
And here your Host, and's Fly, witness your vows.
And like two lucky birds, bring the presage
Of a loud jest: Lord Beaufort married is.
H•!
All to be married.
To whom, not your son•?
The same
If her Ladyship could take truce
A little with her passion, and give way
To their mirth now running.
Runn's it mirth, let it come,
It shall be well received, and much made of it.
We must of this, It was our own conception.

Room for green rushes, raise the Fiddlers, Chamberlain,
Call up the house in arms.
This will rouse Lovel.
And bring him on too.
Shelee-neen.
Runs like a Heifer, bitten with the Breeze,
About the court, crying on Fly, and cursing.
For what, my Lord?
Yo'were best hear that from her,
It is no office, Fly, fits my relation.
Here come the happy couple! Joy, Lord Beaufort.
And my young Lady too.
Much joy, my Lord!

I thank you all, I thank thee, Father Fly.
Madam, my Cousin, you look discomposed,
I have been bold with a salad, after supper,
Of your own lattice, here:
You have, my Lord.
But laws of hospitality, and fair rites,
Would have made me acquainted.
In your own house,
I doe acknowledge: Else, I much had trespassed.
But in an Inn, and public, where there is licence
Of all community: a pardon of course
May be sued• out.
It will, my Lord, and carry it.
I doe not see, how any storm, or tempest
Can help it, now.
The thing being done, and past,
You bear it wisely, and like a Lady of judgment.
She is that, secretary Pru.
Why secretary?
My wise Lord? is your brain lately married?
Your reign is ended, Pru, no sovereign now:
Your date is out, and dignity expired.
I am annul'd, how can I treat with Lovel,
Without a new commission?
Thy gown's comes∣zion.
Have patience, Pru, expect, bid the Lord joy.
And this brave Lady too. I wish them joy.
Joy. Ior. Joy. Jug. All joy.
I, the house full of joy.
Play the bells, Fiddlers, crack your strings with joy.
But Lady Lattice, you showed a neglect
Vn-to-be-pardon'd, to'ards my Lady, your kinswoman,
Not to advise with her.
Good politic Pru,
Urge not your state-aduice, your after-wit;
It is near upbraiding. Get our bed ready, Chamberlain,
And Host, a Bride-cup, you have rare conceits,
And good ingredients, ever an old Host
Vpo' the road, has his provocative drinks.
He is either a good Baud, or a Phyfician.
It was well he heard you not, his back was turned.
A bed, the Genial bed, a brace of boys
To night I play for.
Give vs points, my Lord.
Here take 'hem, Pru, my cod-piece point, and all,
I have clasps, my Lattice a•mes here take 'hem boys.
What is the chamber ready? speak, why stare you!
On one another?
No Sir.
And why no?
My master has forbid it. He yet doubts
That you are married.
Ask his vicar general,
His Fly, here.
I must make that good, they are mar∣ried.
But I must make it bad, my hot young Lord.
Give him his doublet again, the jeer is piercing;
You may take cold, my Lord. See whom you ha'marri∣ed,
Your hosts son, and aboy.
You are abused.
Much joy, my Lord.
If this be your Latitia,
She'll pr•ue a counterfeit mirth, and a clip'd Lady.
A boy, a boy; my Lord has married a boy.
Raise all the house in shout, and laughter, a boy!
Stay, what is here! peace rascals, stop your throats.

That magot, worm, that insect! O my child,
My daughter! whore's that Fly? Isle fly in his face,
The •ermine, let me come to him.
Why Nurse Shele•?
Hang thee thou Parasite, thou son of crumbs,
And ottes, thou hast undone me, and my child,
My daughter, my d•are daughter.
What means this?
O Sir, my daughter, my dear child is tuin'd,
By this your Fly, here, married in a stable,
And sold unto a husband.
Stint thy cry,
Harlot, if that be all, did thou not sell him
To me for a boy? and brought'st him in boys rags,
Here to my door, to beg an alms of me?
I did good Mr, and I •rave your pardon.
But it is my daughter, and a g•rle.
Why said thou
It was a boy, and sold'st him then, to me
With such entreaty, for ten s•illings, Carlin?
Because you were a charitable man
I •eard, good Mr, and would br•ed him well,
I would have given him you, for nothing, gladly.
Forgive the lie of my mouth, it was to save
The fruit of my womb. A parents needs are urgent.
And few doe know that tyrant o'er good natures.
But you relieved her, and me too, the Mother,
And took me into your house to be the nurse,
For which heaven heap all blessings on your head,
Whilst there can one be added.
Surethou speak
Quite like another creature, then th'hast lived,
Here, in the house, a Shelee-neen Thomas,
An Irish beggar.
So I am, God help me.
What art thou? tell, The match is a good match,
For ought I see: ring the bells once a gain.
Stint, I say, Fiddlers.
No going off my Lord.
Nor coming on sweet Lady, things thus standing!
But what's the heinousness of my offence?
Or the degrees of wrong you suffered by it?
In having your daughter matched thus happily,
Into a noble house, a brave young blood,
And a prime peer of the Realm?
Was that your plot, Fly?
Give me a cloak, take her again among you.
Isle none of your light-Heart fosterlings, no Inmates,
Supposititious fruits of an Host's bra•no,
And his Flies hatching, to be put upon me.
There is a royal Court of the Star-chamber
Will scatter all these mists, disperse these vapours,
And clear the truth. Let beggars match with beggars.
That shall decide it, I will try it there.
Nay then my Lord, Its not enough, I see
You are licentious, but you will be wicked.
Yo' are not alone content to take my daughter,
Against the law; but having taken her,
You would repudiate, and cast her off,
Now, at your pleasure, like a beast of power,
Without all cause, or colour of a cause,
That, or a noble, or an honest man,
Should dare t'except against, her poverty.
Is poverty a vice?
Th'age counts it so.
God help your Lordship, and your peers that think so,
If any be: if not, God bless them all,
And help the number of the virtuous,
If poverty be a crime. You may object
Our beggary to vs, as an accident,
But never deeper, no inherent baseness.
And I must tell you, now, young Lord of dirt,
As an incensed mother, she hat• more,
And be•la blood, running i'those small veins,
Then all the race of Beauforts have in mass,
Though they distill their drops from the left rib
Of Iohn Of Gaunt.
Old mother of records,
Thou know her pedigree, then: whose daughter is she?
The daughter and coheire to the Lord Framp•ll,
This Ladies sister!
Mine? what is her name?
Laetitia.
That was lost?
The true Latitia.
Sister, O gladness! Then you are our mother?
I am, dear daughter.
On my knees, I bless
The light I see you by.
And to the author
Of that blessed light, I op my other eye,
Which hath almost, now, seven year been shut,
Dark, as my vow was, never to see light,
Till such a light restored it, as my children,
Or your dear father, who (I hear) is not.
Give me my wife, I own her now, and will have her.
But you must ask my leave first, my young Lord,
Leave is but light. Ferret, Go bolt your Master,
Here's gear will startle him. I cannot keep
The passion in me, I am •no turned child,
And I must weep. Fly, take away mine host,
My beard, and cap here, from me, and fetch my Lord.
I am her father, Sir, and you shall now
Ask my consent, before you have her. Wife!
My dear and loving wife! my honoured wife!
Who here hath gained but I? I am Lord Frampull,
The cause of all this trouble? I am he
Have measured all the Shires of England over:
Wales, and her mountains, seen those wilder nations,
Of people in the Peak, and Lancashire;
Their Pipers, Fiddlers, Rushers, Puppet-masters,
Jugglers, and Gipseys, all the sorts of Canters,
And Colonies of beggars, Tumblers, Ape-carriers,
For to these savages I was addicted,
To search their natures, and make odd discoveries!
And here my wife, like a she Mandeuile,
Ventured in disquisition, after me.
I may look up, admire, I cannot speak
Yet, to my Lord.
Take heart, and breath, recover,
Thou hast recovered me, who here had coffined
My self alive, in a poor hostelry,
In pennon•e of my wrongs done unto thee
Whom I long since gave lost.
So did I you,
Till stealing mine own daughter from her sister,
I lighted on this error hath cured all.
And in that cure, include my trespass, Mother,
And Father, for my wife
No, the Star-chamber.
Away with that, you sour the sweetest lattice
Was ever tasted.
Gi'you joy, my Son,
Cast her not off again. O call me Father,
Lovel, and this your Mother, if you like:
But take your Mistress, first, my child; I have power
To give her now, with her consent, her sister
Is given already to your brother Beaufort.
Is this a dream now, after my first sleep?
Or are these phant'sies made in the light Heart?
And sold in the new Inn?
Best go to bed,
And dream it over all. Let's all go sleep,
Each with his Turtle. Fly, provide vs lodgings,
Get beds prepared: yo' are master now of the Inn,
The Lord of the light Heart, I give it you.
Fly, was my fellow Gypsy. All my family,
Indeed, were Gipseys, Tipsters, Ostlers, Chamberlains,
Reduced vessels of civility.
But here stands Pru, neglected, best deserving
Of all that are in the house, or i'my Heart,
Whom though I cannot help to a fit husband,
Isle help to that will bring one, a just portion:
I have two thousand pound in bank, for Pru,
Call for it when she will
And I as much.
There's somewhat yet, four thousand pound! that's better,
Then sounds the proverb, four bare legs in a bed.
Me, and her mistress, she hath power to coy•e
Up, into what she will.
Indefinite Pru.
But I must doe the crowning act of bounty!
What's that, my Lord?
Give her my self,
By all the holy vows of love I doe,
Spare all your promised portions, she is a dowry which here
So all sufficient in her virtue and manners,
That fortune cannot add to her.
My Lord,
Your praises, are instructions to mine ears,
Whence, you have made your wife, to live yo• servant.
Lights, get vs several lights.
Stay let my Mrs
But hear my vision sung, my dream of beauty,
Which I have brought, prepared, to bid vs joy,
And light vs all to bed, twill be instead
Of airing of the sheets with a sweet odour.
Twill be an incense to our sacrifice
Of love to night, where I will woo afresh,
And like Maecenas, having but one wife,
Isle marry her, every hour of life, hereafter.

Plays in themselves have neither hopes, nor fears,
Their fate is only in their hearers ears:
If you expect more then you had to night,
The maker is sick, and sad. But doe him right,
He meant to please you: for he sent things fit,
In all the numbers, both of sense, and wit,
If they have not miscarried! if they have,
All that his faint, and faltering tongue doth cra•,
Is, that you not impute it to his brai•e.
That's yet unhurt, although set round with pain,
It cannot long hold out. All strength must yield.
Yet judgment would the last be, i the field,
With a true Poet. He could have hauled in
The drunkards, and the noises of the Inn,
In his last Act; if he had thought it fit
To vent you vapours, in the place of wit:
But better it was, that they should sleep, or spew,
Then in the Scene to offend or him, or you.
This he did think; and this doe you forgive:
When ere the carcass dies, this Art will live.
And had he lived the care of King, and Queen,
His Art in something more yet had been seen;
But Majors, and Shriffes may yearly fill the stage:
A Kings, or Poets birth doe ask• an age.
A Jovial Host, and Lord of the new Inn,
Clapped the light Heart, with all that past therein,
Hath been the subject of our Play to night,
To give the King, and Queen, and Court delight.
But, then we mean, the Court aboue the stayres,
And past the guard; men that have more of ears,
Then eyes to judge vs: Such as will not hiss
Because the Chambermaid was named Cis.
We think, it would have s•rued our Scene as true,
If, as it is, at first with had called her Pru,
For any mystery we there have found,
Or magic in the let•s, or the sound.
She only meant was, for a girl of wit,
To whom her Lady did a Province fit:
Which shewould have discharged, and, done as well,
Had she been christened Joyce, Grace, Doll, or Nil.

SInce we must part Sophia, to pass further
Is not alone impertinent but dangerous.
We are not distant from the Turkish camp
Aboue five leagues, and who knows but some party
Of his Timarious that scour the country
May fall upon vs, be now as thy name
Truly interpreted hath ever spoke thee,
Wise, and discreet, and to thy understanding
Marry thy constant patience.
You put me Sir,
To the utmost trial of it.
Nay no melting,
Since the necessity that now separates vs,
We have long since disputed, and the reasons
Forcing me to it, too oft washed in teates,
I grant that you in birth were far aboue me,
And great men my superiors rivals for you,
But mutual consent of heart, as hands
Ioynde by true love hath made vs one, and equal;
Nor is it in me mere desire of fame,
Or to be cried up by the public voice
•or a brave soldier that puts on my armour,
Such aerie tumours take not me you know
How narrow our demeans are, and whats more
Having as yet no charge of children on vs
We hardly can subsist.
In you alone sir
I have all abundance.
For my minds content
In your own language I could answer you
You have been an obedient wife, a right one,
And to my power, though short of yo•r desert
I have been ever an indulgent husband.
we have long enjoyed the sweets of love, and though
Not to satisfy, or loathing, yet
We must not live such dotards on our pleasures
As still to hug them to the certain loss
Of profit, and preferment, competent means
Maintains aquiet bed, want breeds dissention
Even in good women.
Have you found in me sir
Any distaste, or sign of discontent
For want of whats superfiuous?
No Sophia.
Nor shalt thou ever have cause to repent
Thy constant course in goodness if heaven bless
My honest undertakings; it is for thee
That I turn soldier, and put forth dearest
Upon this sea of action as a factor
To trade for rich materials to adorn
Thy noble parts, and show'em in full lustre.
I blush that other ladies less in beauty
And outward form, but in the harmony
Of the souls ravishing music the same age
Not to be named with thee, should so out shine thee
In jewels, and variety of wardrobes,
While you (to whose sweet innocence both Indie•
Compared are of no value) wanting these
Pass unregarded.
If I am so rich or
In your opinion, why should you 〈◊〉
Additions for me?
Why? I should be censure••
Of ignorance possessing such a Jewel
Aboue all price, if I forbear to give it
The best of ornaments. Therefore Sophia
In few words know my pleasure and obey me,
As you have ever done to your discretion,
I leave the government of my family
And our poor fortunes, and from these command
Obedienoe to you as to my self,
To the utmost of what's mine live plentifully,
And ere the remnant of our store be spent,
With my good sword I hope I shall reap for you
A harvest in such full abundance, as
Shall make a merry winter.
Since you are not
To be diverted Sir from what you purpose
All arguments to stay you here are useless.
Go when you please Sir, Eyes I charge you waste not
One drop of sorrow, look you hoard all up
Till in my widowed bed I call upon you,
But then be sure you fail not. You blessed Angels
Guardians of humane life, I at this instant
Forbear t'inuoke you, at o•• parting 'tw••
To personate devotion. My soul
•hall go along with you, and when you are
Circled with death and ho•our seek and find you:
And then I will not leave a Saint vnsu'd to
For your protection. To tell you what
I will doe in your absence, would show poorly,
My actions shall speak me, it were to doubt you
To beg I may here from you, where you are,
You cannot live obscure nor shall one post
By night, or day pass unexamined by me.
If I dwell long upon your lips, consider
After this feast the griping fast that follows
And it will be excusable, pray turn from me.
All that I can is spoken.
Follow your mist•sse.
Forbear your wishes for me, let me finde'em
At my return in your prompt will to serve her.
For my part sir I will grow lean with study
To make her merry.
Though you are my Lord,
Yet being her gentlewoman, by my place
I may take my leave, your hand or if you please
To have me fight so high, isle not be coy
But stand a tiptoe for it;
O farewell girl.
A kiss well begged Corisca,
It was my fee,
Love how he melts! I cannot blame my ladies
Unwillingness to part with such marmulade lips.
There will be scrambling for'em in the camp,
And were it not for my honesty I could wish now
I were his leaguer laundress I would find
Soap of mine own, enough to wash his linen
Or I would strain hard for it
How the mammet' twitters!
Come, come my lady stays for vs.
Would I had been
Her ladyship the last night.
No more of that wench.
I am strangely troubled: yet why I should nourish
A fury here, and with imagind food.
Having no real grounds on which to raise,
A buildings of suspicion, she was ever
Or can be false hereafter I in this
But foolishly inquire the knowledge of
A future sorrow, which if I find out,
My present ignorance were a cheap purchase
Though with my loss of being, I have already
Dealt with a friend of mine, a general scholar
One deeply read in natures hidden secrets,
And though with much unwillingness have won him
To doe as much as Art can to resolve me
My fate tha• follows to my wish, Hoe's come.
Iulio Baptist, now I may a•firm
Your promise, and performance walk together.
And therefore without circumstance to the point,
Instruct me what I am.
I could wish you had
Made trial of my love some other way.
Nay this is from the purpose.
If you can,
Proportion your desire to any mean
I do pronounce you happy I have found
By certain rules of Art your matchless wife
Is to this present hour from all pollution
Free and untainted.
Good.
In reason therefore
You should fix here, and make no farther serach
Of what may fall hereafter.
O Baptist
Tic not in me to master so my passions,
I must know farther, or you have made good
But half your promise while my love stood by,
Holding her upright, and my presence was
A watch upon her; her desires being met to
with equal ardor from me; what one proof
Could she give of her constancy being vntempted?
But when I am absent, and my coming back
Uncertain, and those wanton heats in women
Not to be quenched by lawful means, and she
The absolute disposer of her self,
Without, control, or curb nay more invited
By opportunity and all strong temptations
If then she hold out.
As no doubt she will,
Those doubts must be made certainties Baptist
By your assurance, or your boasted Art
Deserves no admiration, how you trifle
And play with my affliction? I am on
The wrack till you confirm me.
Sure Medias.
I am no God, nor can I dive into
Her hidden thoughts, or know what her intents are
That is denied to art, and kept concealed
even from the devils themselves: they can but guess
Out of long observation what is likely,
But positively to foretell that this shall be
You may conclude impossible, all I can
I will doe for you when you are distant from her
A thousand leauges as if you then were with her
You shall know truly when she is solicited,
A•d how far wrought on.
I desire no more.
Take then this little model of Sophia
With more then humane skill limde to the life
Each line, and liniment of it in the drawing
So punctually observed that had it motion
In so much't were her self,
It is indeed
An admirable piece, but if it have not
Some hidden virtue that I cannot guess a•
In what can it advantage me?
Isle instruct you,
Carry it still about you and as oft
As you desire to know how shoe's affected
With curious eyes peruse it while it keeps
The figure it now has entire, and perfect
She is not only innocent in fact
But unattempted: but if once it vary
From the true form, and what's now white, and red
Incline to yellow rest most confident
Shees with all violence courted but vnconquerd
But if it turn all black it is an assurance
The fort by composition, or surprise
Is forced or with her free consent surrenderd.
How much you have engaged me for this favour,
The service of my whole life shall make good
We will not part so, Isle along with you
And it is needful with the rising Sun
The armies meet yet ere the fight begun
In spite of opposition I will place you
In the head of the Hungarian Generals troop
And near his person.
As my better Angel
You shall direct and guide me.
As we ride
Isle tell you more.
In all things Isle obey you.
When came the post?
The last night.
From the camp?
Yes as it is said, and the letterwrit and signed
By the general Ferdinand
Nay then sans question
It is of moment.
It concerns the lives
Of two great armies,
Was it cheerfully
Recciued by the King?
Yes, for being assured
The armies were in view of one another
Having proclaimed a public fast, and prayer
For the good success, dispatched a gentleman
Of his privy chamber to the general
With absolute authority from him
To try the fortune of a day.
No doubt then
The General will come on and fight it bravely
Heaven Prosper him, this military art
I grant to be the noblest of professions
And yet I thank my stars fort I was never
Inclined to learn it, since this bubble honour,
(Which is indeed the nothing soldiers fight for
With the loss of limbs, or life) is in my judgment
Too dear a purchase.
Give me our Court-warfare,
The danger is not great in the encounter
Of a fair Mistress.
Fair and sound together
Doe very well Vbaldo. But such are
With difficulty to be found out, and when they know
Their value prized too high. By thy own report
Thou wast at twelve a gamester, and since that
Studied all kinds of females, from the night-trader
In the street with certain danger to thy pocket,
To the great Lady in her Cabinet,
That spent upon thee more in cullises
To strengthen thy weak back, then would maintain
Twelve Flanders mares, and as many running horses:
Besides Apothecaries and Surgeons bills
Paid upon all occasions, and those frequent.
You talk Ricardo, as if yet you were
A novice in those mysteries.
By no means,
My Doctor can assure the contrary,
I loose no time. I have felt the pain and pleasure
As he that is a gamester, and plays often
Must sometimes be a looser.
Wherefore then
Doe you envy me?
It grows not from my want,
Nor thy abundance, but being as I am
The likelier man, and of much more experience,
My good parts, are my curses, there's no beauty
But yields ere it be summoned, and as nature
Had signed me the monopoly of maidenheads,
There's none can buy till I have made my market,
Satiety cloys me, as I live I would part with
Half my estate, nay travail ore the world
To find that only Phoenix in my search
That could hold out against me.
Be not rapped so:
You may spare that labour, as she is a woman
What think you of the Queen?
I dare not aim at
The petticoat royal, that is still excepted:
Yet were she not my Kings, being the abstract
Of all that's rare, or to be wished in woman,
To write her in my catalogue, having enjoyed her
I would venture my neck to a halter, but we talk of
Impossibilities, as she hath a beauty
Would make old Nestor young, such majesty
Draws forth a sword of terror to defend it,
As would fright Paris, though the Queen of love
Vowed her best furtherance to him.
Have you observed
The gravity of her language mixed with sweetness?
Then at what distance she reserues her self
When the King himself makes his approaches to her,
As she were still a virgin, and his life
But one continued wooing.
She well knows
Her worth, and values it.
And so far the King is
Endue•gent to her humours, that he forbears
The duty of a husband, bxt when she calls for it.
All his imaginations and thoughts
Are buried in her, the loud noise of wa•re
Cannot awake him.
At this very instant.
When both his life and Crown are at the stake,
He only studies her content, and 〈◊〉.
She's pleased to show her self, music and masques
Are with all care and cost provided for her.
This night she promised to appear.
You may •eleeue it by the diligence of the King
As if he were her harbinger.
These rooms
Are not perfumed as we directed.
Not Sir,
I know not what you would have, I am sure the smoke
Cost treble the price of the whole weeks provision
Spent in your Majesties kitchens.
How! I scorn
Thy gross comparison. When my Honoria
Th'amazement of the present time, and envy
Of all succeeding ages does descend
To sanctify a place, and in her presence
Makes it a Temple to me, can I be
Too curious, much less prodigal to receive her?
But that the splendour of her beams of beauty
Hath struck thee blind?
As dotage hath done yon.
Dotage, O blasphemy! is it in me
To serve her to her merit? is she not
The daughter of a King?
And you the son
Of ours I take it, by what privilege else
Doe you reign over vs? for my part I know not
Where the dispairity lies.
Her birth old man,
Old in the Kingdoms service which protects thee,
Is the least grace in her: and though her beauties
Might make the thunderer a rival for her,
They are but superficial ornaments
And faintly speak her, from her heavenly mind
Were all antiquity and fiction lost
Our modern Poets could not in their fancy
But fashion a Minerua far transcending
Th'im•g n'd one, whom Homer only dreamt of,
〈…〉 she's mine, mine Eubulus.
〈…〉 one glance from her fair eyes
〈…〉 her ido•a•ers,
She is so sparing of their influence
That to shun superstition in others,
She shoots her powerful beams only at me.
And can I then, whom she desires to hold
Her Kingly captive aboue all the world,
Whose Nations and Empires if she pleased
She might command as slaves, but gladly pay
The humble tribute of my love and service,
Nay if I said of adoration to her
I did not err?
Well, since you hug your fetters
In loves name weare'em. You are a King, and that
Concludes you wise. Your will a powerful reason,
Which we that are foolish Subjects must not argue.
And what in a mean man I should call folly,
Is in your Majesty remarkable wisdom.
But for me I subscribe.
Doe, and look up:
Upon this wonder.
Wonder? it is more Sir.
A rapture, an astonishment.
What think you Sir?
As the King thinks, that is the surest guard
We Courtiers ever lie at. Was Prince ever
So drowned in dotage? Without spectacles
I can see a handsome woman, and she is so:
But yet to admiration look not on her.
Heaven how he fawns; and as it were his duty,
With what assured gravity she receives it!
Her hand again! O she at length vouchsafes
Her Lip, and as he had sucked Nectar from it
How he's exalted! Women in their natures
Affect command, but this humility
In a husband and a King marks her the way
To absolute tyranny. So, Iuno's placed
In Ioues Tribunal, and like Mercury
Forgetting his own greatness, he attends
For her employments. She prepares to speak,
What Oracles shall we hear now?
That you please Sir,
With such assurances of love and favour,
To grace your handmaid, but in being yours Sir,
A matchless Queen, and one that knows herself so,
Binds me in retribution to deserve
The grace conferd upon me.
You transcend
In all things excellent, and it is my glory,
Your worth weighed truly to depose my self
From absolute command, surrendering up
My will and faculties to your disposure:
And here I vow, not for a day or year,
But my whole life, which I wish long to serve you:
That whatsoever I injustice may
Exact from these my subjects, you from me
May boldly challenge. And when you require it,
In sign of my subjection, as your vassal,
Thus I will pay my homage.
O forbear Sir,
Let not my Lips envy my Robe: on them
Print your alegiance often. I desire
No other fealty.
Gracious Sovereign,
Boundless in bounty!
Is not here fine •ooling?
He's questionless bewitched. would I were g•lt
So that would disenchant him. Though I forfeit
My life for it I must speak. By your good leave sir,
I have no suit to you, nor can you grant one
Having no Power. You are like me a subject.
Her more then serene Majesty being present.
And I must tell you, it is ill manners in you,
Having deposed your self to keep your hat on,
And not stand bare as we doe, being no King,
But a fellow subject with vs. Gentlemen ushers
It does belong to your place, see it reformed,
He has given away his Crown, and cannot challenge
The privilege of his bonnet.
Doe no tempt me.
Tempt you, in what? in following your example?
If you are angry question me hereafter,
As Ladislaus should do Eubulus
On equal terms, you were of late my sovereign
But weary of it, I now bend my knee
To her divinity, and desire a boon
From her more then magnificence.
Take it freely.
Nay be not moved, for our mirth sake let vs hear him,
It is but to ask a question, have you ne'er read
The story of Semiramis and Ninus?
Not as I remember.
I will then instruct you,
And tic to the purpose, this Ninus was a King,
And such an impotent loving King as this was
But now hoe's none, this Ninus (pray you observe me)
Doted on this Semiramis, a smiths wife,
(I must confess there the comparison holds not,
You are a Kings daughter, yet under your correction
Like her a woman) this Assyrian monarch
(Of whom this is a pattern) to express
His love, and service, seated her as you are,
In his regal throne, and bound by oath his Nobles
Forgetting all allegiance to himself
One day to be her subjects, and to put
In execution what ever she
Pleased to impose upon 'em, pray you command him
To minister the like to vs and then
You shall hear what followed.
Well sir to your story.
You have no warrant, stand by, Let me know
Your pleasure Goddess.
Let this nod assure you.
Goddess like indeed, as I live a pretty Idol,
She knowing her power wisely made use of it
And fearing his inconstancy, and repentance
Of what he had granted (as in reason Madam,
Yo may doe his) that hee might never have
Power to recall his grant, or question her
For her short government, instantly gave order
To have his head struck off.
In•t possible?
The story says so and commends her wisdom
For making use of her authority:
And it is worth your imitation Madam,
He loves subjection, and you are no Queen
Unless you make him feel the weight of it.
You are more then all the world to him, and that,
He may be foe to you, and not seek change,
When his delights are sated, mew him up
In some close prison, if you let him live
(Which is no policy) and there diet him
As you think fit to feed your appetite
Since there ends his ambition.
Devilish counsel.
The King's amazed.
The Queen appears too full
Of deep imaginations, Eubulus
Hath put both to it.
Now she seems resolved
I long to know the issue.
Give me leave,
Dear sir to reprehend you for appearing
Perplexed with what this old man out of envy
Of your unequalled graces showered upon me,
Hath in his fabulous story saucily
Applied to me, sir that you only nourish
One doubt Honoria dares abuse the power
With which she is invested by your favour,
Or that she ever can make use of it
To the injury of you the great bestower,
Takes from your judgment, it was your delight
To seek to me with more obsequiousness,
Then I desired. And stood it with my duty
Not to receive what you were pleased to offer?
I doe but act the Part you put upon me,
And though you make me Personate a Queen,
And you my subject, when the play your pleasure
Is at a period, I am what I was
Before I entered, still your humble wife,
And you my royal Sovereign.
Admirable!
I have heard of Captains taken more with dang•
Then the rewards, and if in your approaches
To those delights which are your own, and freely
To heighten your desire, you make the passage
Narrow and difficult, shall I prescribe you?
Or blame your fondness? Or can that swell me
Beyond my just proportion?
Aboue wonder!
Heaven make me thankful for such goodness.
Now Sir,
The state I took to satisfy your pleasure
I change to this humility, and the oath
You made to me of homage, I thus cancel,
And seat you in your own.
I am transported
Beyond my self.
And now to your wise Lordship,
Am I proved a Semiramis? or hath
My Ninus, as maliciously you made him,
Cause to repent th'excesse of favour to me,
Which you call dotage?
Answer wretch.
I dare Sir,
And say how ever the event may plead
In your defence, you had a guilty cause;
Nor was it wisdom in you (I repeat it)
To teach a Lady, humble in her self
With the ridiculous dotage of a lover
To be ambitious.
Eubulus, I am so,
Tic rooted in me, you mistake my temper.
I do profess my self to be the most
Ambitious of my sex, but not to hold
Command over my Lord, such a proud torrent
Would sink me in my wishes; not that I
Am ignorant how much I can deserve
And may with justice challenge.
This • looked for;
After this seeming humble ebb I knew
A gushing tide would follow.
By my birth,
And liberal gifts of nature, as of fortune,
From you, as things beneath me, I expect
What's due to majesty, in which I am
A sharer with your sovereign.
Good again!
And as I am most eminent in place,
In all my actions I would appear so.
You need not fear a rival.
I hope not;
And 〈◊〉 I find one, I disdain to know
What envy is.
You are aboue it Madam.
For beauty without art, discourse, and free
From affectation, with what graces else
Can in the wife and daughter of a King
Be wished, I dare prefer my self.
As I
Blush for you lady, trumpet your own praises?
This spoken by the people had been heard
With honour to you; does the court afford
No oyle-tongu'd parasite, that you are forced
To be your own gross flatterer?
Bee dumb,
Thou spirit of contradiction.
The wolf
But barks against the Moon, and I contemn it.
The masque you promised.
Let'em enter. How!
Heere's one, I fear unlooked for.
From the Camp?
The General victorious in your fortune,
Kisses your hand in this Sir.
That great Power,
Who at his pleasure does dispose of battles,
Be ever praised for it. Read sweet, and partake it:
The Turk is vanquished, and with little loss
Upon our part, in which our joy is doubled.
But let it not exalt you, bear it Sir
With moderation, and pay what you owe for it.
I understand thee Eubulus. Isle not now
Enquire particulars. Our delights deferred,
With reverence to the Temples, there we'll tender
Our Souls devotions to his dread might,
Who edged our swords, and taught vs how to fight.
YOu like my speech?
Yes, if you give it action
In the delivery.
If? I pity you.
I have plaide the fool before, this is not the first time,
Nor shall be I hope the last.
Nay I think so to.
And if I put her not out of her dumps with laughter,
Isle make her howl for anger.
Not too much
Of that good fellow Hilario. Our sad Lady
Hath drank too often of that bitter cup,
A pleasant one must restore her. With what patience
Would she endure to hear of the death of my Lord,
That merely out of doubt he may miscarry
Afflicts her self thus?
Um, it is a question
A widow only can resolve. There be some
That in their husbands sicknesses have wep'd
Their pottle of tears a day: but being once certain
At midnight he was dead, have in the morning
Dri'd up their handkerchers, and thought no more on it.
Tush, she is none of that race, if her sorrow
Be not true and perfect, I against my sex
Will take my oath woman ne'er wep'd in earnest.
She has made her self a prisoner to her chamber,
Dark as a dungeon, in which no beam
Of comfort enters. She admits no visits;
Eats little, and her nightly music is
Of sighs and groans tuned to such harmony
Of feeling grief, that I against my nature
Am made one of the consort. This hour only
She takes the air, a custom every day
She solemnly observes, with greedy hopes
From some that pass by to receive assurance
Of the success, and safety of her Lord:
Now if that your device will take
Ne'er fear it:
I am provided cap a pe, and have
My properties in readiness.
Bring my veil there.
Be gone, I hear her coming.
If I doe not
Appear, and what's more, appear perfect, hiss me.
I was flattered once I was a Star, but now
Turned a prodig•os meteor, and like one
Hang in the air between my hopes, and fears,
And every hour the little stuff burnt out
That yields a waning •ight to dying comfort,
I doe expect my fall and certain ruin.
In wretched things more wretched is delay,
And hope a parasite to me, being vnmasqu'd
Appears more horrid then despair, and my
Distraction worse then madness: even my prayers
When wi•h most zeal sent upward, are pulled down,
With st•ong imaginary doubts and fears,
And in they• sudden precipice orewhelme me.
Dreams, and fantastic! evisions walk the round
About my widowed bed, and every slumber
Broken with loud alarms: can these be then
But sad presages girl?
You make 'em so,
And antedate a loss shall ne'er fall on you.
Such pure affection, such mutual love,
A bed, and undefiled on either part,
A ho••• without con•ention, in two bodies
One will, and Soul like to the rod of concord,
Kiss•g each other, cannot be short lived
Or end in barrenness: if all these dear Madam
(Sweet in your sadness) should produce no fruit,
Or leave the age no models of your selves,
To witness to poster•y what you were
Succeeding times frighted with the example
B•t hearing of your story, would instruct
Their •air•t issue to moose sensually,
Like other cry•uric, and for bea•e to raise
True love, or Himen Altars.
O Corisca,
I know thy reasons are like to thy wishes,
And they are built upon a weak foundation,
To raise me comfort. Ten long days are past,
Ten long days my Corisca, since my Lord
Embarked himse•fe upon a Sea of danger,
In his dear care of me. And if his life
Had not been shipwrecked on the rock of war,
His tenderness of me (knowing how much
I languish for his absence) had provided
Some trusty friend from wohm I might receive
Assurance of his safety.
Ill news Madam,
Are swallow-wing'd, but what's good walks on crutches:
With patience expect it, and ere long
No doubt you shall hear from him.
Ha! What's that?
The fool has got a sowgelders horn
As I take it Madam.
It makes this way still,
Nearer and nearer.
From the Camp I hope.
The messenger appears, and in strange armour.
Heaven if it be thy will!
It is no boot
To strive, our horses tired let's walk on foot,
And that the Castle which is very near vs,
To give vs entertainment may soon hear vs,
Blow lustily my Lad, and drawing nigh a,
Ask for a Lady which is clep'd Sophia.
He names you Madam.
For to her I bring,
Thus clad in in arms, news of a pretty thing,
By name Medias.
From my Lord? O Sir,
I am Sophia, that Medias wife.
So may Mars favour you in all your battles,
As you with speed unload me of the burden
I labour under, till I am confirmed
Both where, and how you left him.
If thou art
As I believe, the pigs-ney of his heart,
Know hoe's in health, and what's more full of glee,
And so much I was willed to say to thee.
Have you no letters from him?
No more words.
In the Camp we use no pens, but write with swords
Yet as I am enjoined, by word of mouth
I will proclaim his deeds from North to South.
But tremble not while I relate the wonder,
Though my eyes like lightning shine, and my voice thunder.
This is some counterfeit braggart.
Hear him Madam.
The Rear marched first, which followed by the Van,
And winged with the Battalion, no man
Durst stay to shift a shirt or louze himself;
Yet ere the armies joined, that hopeful el•e,
Thy dear my dainty duckling, bold Medias
Ad•anc'd, and stared like Hercules or Golias.
A hundred thousand Turks, it is no vaunt,
A••ai•'d him, every one a Termagant,
But what did he then? with his keen edge spear
He cut, and Carbonadode'em, here, and there,
Lay legs and arms, and as it is said truly
Of Beuis, some he quartered all in three.
This is ridiculous.
I must take breath
Then like a Nightingale i'll sing his death;
His death?
I am out.
Recover dunder-head.
How he escaped I should have sung, not did
For, though a knight, when I said so I lide
Weary he was, and scarce could stand upright
And looking round for some courageous Knight
To reskue him, as one perplexed in woe
He called to me, help, help Hilario,
My valiant servant help.
He has spoiled all.
Are you the man of arms then? isle make bold
To take of your martial beard, you had fools hair
Enough without it. Slave, how durst thou make
Thy sport of what concerns me more then life,
In such an antique fashion? am I grown
Contemptible to those I feed? you minion
Had a hand in it to, as it appears,
Your petticoat serves for bases to this warrior.
We did it for your mirth.
For my self I hope,
I have spoke like a soldier.
Hence you rascal.
I never but with reverence name my Lord
And can I here it by thy tongue prophain'd
And not correct thy folly? but you are
Transformed, and turned Knight •errant, take your course
And wander where you please, for here I vow
By my Lords life (an oath I will not break)
Till his return, or certainty of his safety,
My doors are shut against thee.
You have made
A fine piece of work on it: how do you like the quality?
You had a foolish i•ch to be an actor,
And may strowle where you please.
Will you buy my share?
No certainly, I fear I have already
Too much of mine own, I'll only as a damsel
(As the books say) thus far help to disarm you,
And so dear Don Quixote taking my leave,
I leave you to your fortune.
Have I swear
My brains out for this quaint and rare invention,
And am I thus rewarded? I could turn?
Tragoedian, and roar now, but that I fear
'T would get me too great a stomach having no meat
To pacify Colon, what will become of me?
I cannot beg in armour, and steal I dare not:
My end must bee to stand in a corn field
And fright away the crows for bread, and cheese,
Or find some hollow tree in the high way,
And there until my Lord return sell switches
No more Hilario, but Dolorio now.
Isle weep my eyes out, and bee blind of purpose
To move compassion, and so I vanish,
Are the gentlemen sent before as it was ordered
By the Kings direction to entertain
The General?
Long since, they by this have met him,
And given him the beinvenue.
I hope I need not
Instruct you in your parts.
How! vs my Lord!
Fear not, we know our distances and degrees
To the very inch where we are to salute him.
The state were miserable if the Court had none
Of her own breed, familiar with all garbs.
Gracious in England, Italy, Spain or France,
With form, and punctuality to receive
Sranger Ambassadors. For the General
Hoe's a mere native, and it matters not
Which way we doe accost him.
It is great pity
That such as sit at the helm provide no better
For the tiraning up of the Gentry. In my judgment
An Academy erected, with large pensions
To such as in a table could set down
The congecs, cringes, postures, methods, phrase,
Proper to every Nation.
O it were
An admirable piece of work!
And yet rich fools
Throw away their charity on Hospitals
For beggars, and lame soldiers, and ne'er study
The due rega d•o complement and court-ship,
Matters of more import, and are indeed
The glories of a Monarchy.
These no doubt
Are state, points, gallants, I confess, but sure,
Our court needs no aids this way, since it is
A school of nothing else: there are some of you
Whom I for bear to name, whose coining heads
Are the mints of all new fashions, that have donne
More hurt to the Kingdom by superfluous bravery
Which the foo•each gentry imitate then a war
Or a long famine, all the treasure by
This foul excess, is got into the merchants,
Embroiderers, silkemans, Jewellers, Taylors hand,
And the third part of the land to, the nobility
Engrossing titles only.
My lord you are bitter.
the General is alighted, and now entered.
Were he ten Generals I am prepared
And know what I will doe.
Pray you what Ricardo?
Isle fight at complement with him.
Isle charge home to.
And thats a desperate service if you come off well.
Captain command the officers to keep
The soldier as he marched in rank and file
Till they hear farther from me.
Heir's one speaks
In another key, this is no canting language
Taught in your Academy.
Nay I will present you
To the King my self.
A grace beyond my merit,
You vndervalew what I cannot set
Too high a price on,
With a friends true heart
I gratulate your return.
Next to the favour
Of the great King I am happy in your friendship:
By courtship, course on both sides,
pray you receive
This stranger to your knowledge, on my credit
At all parts hee deserves it.
Your report
Is a strong assurance to me, sir most welcome
This said by you, the reverence of your age
Commands me to believe it.
this was pretty.
But second me now, I cannot stoop too lowe
To doe your excellence that due observance
Your fortune claims.
Hee ne'er thinks on his virtue.
For being, as you are, the soul of soldiers,
And bulwark of Bellona,
The protection
Both of the court and King.
and the sole minion
Of mighty Mars
One that with justice may
Increase the number of the worthies.
hoye day.
It being impossible in my arms to circle
Such giant worth.
At distance wee presume
To kiss your honoured gauntlet.
What reply now
Can he make to this •opperie?
You have said
Gallants, so much, and hitherto done so little,
That't ill I learn to speak, and you to doe
I must take time to thank you.
As I live
Answered as I could wish. How the fops gap• now!
This was harsh, and scurvy.
We will be revenged
When he comes to court the ladies, and laugh at him.
Nay doe your offices gentlemen, and conduct
The General to the presence.
Keep your order.
Make way for the General.
What wise man
That with judicious eyes looks one a soldier
B•t must confess that fortunes swinge is more
Ore that profession, then all kinds else
Of life pursued by man, they in a state
Are but as surgeons to wounded men
Even desperate in their hopes, while pain and anguish
Make them blaspheme, and call in vain for death;
Their wives and children kiss the surgeons knees
Promise him mountains, if his saning hand
Restore the tortured wretch to former strength.
But when grimm death by AEsculapius art
Is frighted from the house, and health appears
In sanguine colours on the sick mans face,
All is forgot, and asking his reward
Hoe's paid with curses, often receives wounds
From him whose wounds hee curd, so soldiers
Though of more worth and use, meet the same fate,
As it is too apparent. I have observed
In one hue.
When horrid Mars the touch of whose rough hand
With Palsies shakes a kingdom, hath put on
His dreadful Helmet, and with terror fills
The place where helike an unwelcome guest
Resolve to revel, how the Lords of her, like
The tradesman, merchant, and litigious pleader
(And such like Scarabs bred'ith dung of peace)
In hope of their protection humbly offer
Their daughters to their beds, heirs to their service,
And wash with tears, their sweat their dust, their scars,
But when those clouds of war that menaced
A bloody del•ge to the aff•ighted state,
A•e by their breath dispersed, and over blown,
And famine, blood, and death Bellona's pages
Whipped from the quiet continent to Thrice
Soldiers, that like the foolish hedge sparrow
To their own ruin hatch this Cucckow peace,
Are straight thought burdensome, Since want of means
Growing from want of action breeds contempt,
And that the worst of ills fall to their lot
Their service with the danger soon forgot.
The Queen, my Lord, hath made choice of this room•
To see the masque.
Isle be looker on
My dancing days are past.
This curtsy
To a stranger My Honoria, keep fair rank
With all your rarities, after your travail
Look on our court delights, but first from your
Relation, with erected ears i'll hear
The music of your war which must be sweet
Ending in victory.
Not to trouble
Your majesties with description of a battle
To full of horror for the place, and to
Avoid particulars which I should deliver
I must trench longer on your patience then
My manner will gieue way to, in a word sir
It was well fought on both sides, and almost
With equal fortune, it continuing doubtful
Upon whose tents plumed victory would take
Her glorious stands, impatient of delay
With the flower of our prime gentlemen I charged
Their maine Bartalia, and with their assistance
Brake in, but when I was almost assured
That they were routed, by a Stratagem
Of the subtle Turk, who opening his gross body,
And ralyng up his troops on either side,
I found my self so far engaged (for I
Must not conceal my errors) that I knew not
Which way with honour to come off.
I like
A General that tells his faults, and is not
Ambitious to engross unto himself
All honour as some have, in which with justice
They could not claim a share.
Being thus hemmed in
Their Cimitars raged among vs, and my horse
Killed under me, I every minute looked for
An honourable end, and that was all
My hope could fashion to me, circled thus
With death and horror, as one sent from heaven
This man of men with some choice horse that foe•lowed
His brave example, did pursue the tract
His sword cut for'em, and but that I see him,
Already blush to hear what he being present,
I know would wish unspoken, I should say sir
By what hee did, we boldly may believe
All that is writ of Hector.
General
Pray spare these strange Hyperboles.
Do not blush
To hear a truth, here are a pair of Mon•iuers
Had they been in your place would have run away
And ne'er changed countenance.
We have your good word still.
And shall while you deserve it.
Silence, on.
He as I said, like dreadful lightning thrown•
From Iupiters shield dispersed the armed Ger
With which I was enuirond horse and man,
Shruncke under his strong arm more with his looks
Frighted, the valiant fled with which encouraged
My soldiers (like young Eaglets praying under
The wings of their fierce dame) as if from him
They took both spirit, and fire bravely came on.
By him I was remounted, and inspired
Wiih treble courage, and such as fled before
Boldly made head again, and to confirm 'em
It suddenly was apparent, that the fortune
Of the day was ours, each soldier and commander
Performed his part, but this was the great wheel
By which the lesser moved, and all rewards
And signs of honour, as the Ciuicke garland,
The mural wreath, the enemies prime horse,
With the Generals sword, and armour (the old honours
With which the Roman crown their several leaders)
To him alone are proper.
And they shall
Deservedly fall on him, sit, tic our pleasure,
Which I must serve, not argue,
You are a stranger,
But in your service for the King, a native.
And though a free Queen, I am bound in duty
To cherish virtue wheresoever I find it:
This place is yours.
It were presumption in •e
To sit so near you.
Not having our warrant
Let the masquers enter by the preparation
Tic a French brawl, an apish imitation
Of what you really perform in battle,
And Pallas bound up in a little volume
with his lute attending on her
Serve for the induction.
Though we contemplate to express
The glory of your happiness,
That by your powerful arm have bin
So true a victor, that no sin
Could ever taint you with a blame
To lessen your deserved fame.
Or though we contend to set
Your worth in the full height, or get
C•lestiall singers (•round with baize
With florishes to dress your praise)
You know your conquest, but your story
Lives in your triumphant glory.
Our thanks to all
To the banquet thats prepared to entertaine'em,
What would my best Honoria?
May it please
My King that I who by his suffrage ever
Have had power to command, may now entreat
An honour from him.
Why should you desire
What is your own, what ere it be you are
The mistress of it.
I am happy in
Your grant: my suit sir is, that your commanders
Especially this stranger, may as I
In my discretion shall think good, receive
What's due to their deserts.
What you determine
Shall know no alteration.
The soldier
Is like to have good usage when he depends
Upon her pleasure? are all the men so bad
That to give satisfaction we must
A woman threasourer, heaven help all.
With you sir
I will begin, and as in my esteem
You are most eminent expect to have,
What's fit for me to give, and you to take;
The favour in the quick dispatch being double
Go fetch my casket, and with speed.
The Kingdom
Is very bare of money: when rewards
Issue from the Queens jewel •ouse, give him gold
And store, no question the gentleman wants it.
Good Madam what shall he doe with a hoop ring,
And a spark of diamond in it, though you took it
For the greater honour from your majesties finger,
Twill not increase the value. He must purchase
Rich suites, the gay comparison of courtship,
Revel, and feast, which the war ended is
A soldiers glory, and tic fit that way
Your bounty should provide for him
You are •ude,
And by your narrow thoughts proportion mine.
What I will doe now, shall be worth the envy
Of Cleopatra open it, see here
The Lapidares Idol gold is tree•sh
And a poor salary fit for grooms, wear these
As studded stars in your armour, and make the Sun
Look dim with jealousy of a greater light
Then his beams guild the day with: when it is
Exposed to view, call it Honorias gift,
The Queen Honorias gift that loves a soulder,
And to give ornament, and lustre to him
Parts freely with her own, yet not to take
From the magnificence of the King, I will
Dispense his bounty to but as a page
To wait on mine, for other tosses take
A hundred thousand crowns, your hand dear sir,
And this shall be thy warrant.
I perceive
I was cheated in this woman now she is
I the giruing vein •o soldiers let her be pro•d
And the King dote, so she go on, I ca•e not
This done, our pleasure is that all arrearages
Be paid into the Captains, and their troops
With a large donatiue to increase their Zeal
For the service of the kingdom.
Better still,
Let men of arms be used thus, if they do not
Charge desperately upon the Cannons mouth
Though the Devil roared, and fight like dragons, hang me.
Now they may drink sack, but small beer, with a passport
To beg with as they travail, and no money,
Turns their red blood to buttermilk.
Are you pleased sir
With what I have done?
Yes, and thus confirm it,
With this addition of mine own, you have sir
From our loved Queen received some recompense
For your life hazarded in the late action,
And that we may follow her great example
In cherishing valour without limit, ask
What you from vs can wish
If it be true,
Dread sir as it is affirmed, that every soil•
Where he is well, is to a valiant man
His natural country, reason may assure me
I should fix here, where blessings beyond hope
From you the spring like rivers flow unto me.
If wealth were my ambition, by the Queen
I am made rich already, to the amazement
Of all that see, or shall hereafter read
The story of her bounty, if to spend
The remnant of my life in deeds of arms
No region is more fertile of good knights
from whom my knowledge that way may be better•
Then this your war like Hungary; if favour,
Or grace in court could take 〈◊〉 by your grant
Far far beyond my merit, I may make
In yours a free election, but alas sir
I am not mine own, but by my destiny
(Which I cannot •eases•) forced to prefer
My countries smoke before the g•orious fire
With which your bounties warm me all I ask sir
Though I cannot be ignorant it must relish
Of foul ingratitude is your gracious licence
For my departure.
Whether?
To my own home 〈◊〉
〈◊〉 own poor home, which will 〈◊〉 my return•
Grow rich by your magnificence, I am here
But a body without a •whole, and till I find it
In the embraces of my constant wife, &amp; to set of that constance
In her beauty and matchless excellencies without a rival
I am but half my self.
And is she then
So chaste, and fair as you infer?
O Madam
Though it must argue weakness in a rich man
To show his gold before an armed thief,
And I in praising of my wife, but seed,
The fire of lust in others to attempt her,
Such is my full sailed confidence in her virtue
Though in my absence She were now besieged
By a strong army of lascivious wooers,
And every one more expert in his art,
Then those that tempted chaste Penelope,
Though they raised batteries by Prodigal gifts,
By admorous letters, vows made for her service
With all the Engines wanton appetite
Could mo•ned to shake the fortress of her honour,
Here, he•re is my assurance she ho•des out
And is impregnable,
What's that?
Her fair figure.
As I live an excellent face!
You have seen a better.
I ever except yours, nay frown not sweetest,
The Cyprian Queen compared to you, in my
Opinion is a Negro, as you ordered
I'll see the soldier paid, and in my absence
Pray you use your powerful arguments to stay
This gentleman in our service.
I will doe
My parts.
On to the camp.
I am full of thoughts.
And something there is here I must give for me to
Though yet an Embrion, you Signiers
Have no business with the soldier, as I take it,
You are for other warfare, quit the place,
But be within call.
Employment on my life boy.
If it lie in our road we are made forever.
You may perceive the King is no way tainted
With the disease of jealousy, since he leaves me
Thus private with you.
It were in him Madam
A sin unpardonable to distrust such pureness,
Though I were an Atones.
I presume
He neither does, nor dares: and yet the story
Delivered of you by the General
With your Herc'nk courage (which sinckes deeply
Into a knowing women's heart) besides
Your promising presence might beget some scruple,
In a meaner man, but more of this hereafter
I'll take another Theme now and conjure you
By the honours you have won, and by the love
Sacred to your dear wife, to answer truly
To what I shall demand.
You need not use
Charms to this purpose Madam.
Tell me then
Being your self assured it is not in man
To •ully with one sport•th'immaculate whiteness
Of your wives honour, if you have not since
The Gordian of your love was tide by marriage
Played false with her?
By the hopes of mercy never.
It may be, not frequenting the converse
Of handsome ladies, you were never tempted
And so your faith's vntride yet.
Surely Madam,
I am no woman hater, I have been,
Received to the society of the best,
And fairest of our climate, and have met wi•h
No common entertainment, yet ne'er felt
The least heat that way,
Strange; and doe you think still
The earth can show no beauty that can drench
In Lethe all remembrance of the favour
Your now bear to your own?
Nature must find out
Some other mold to fashion a new creature
• airer then her Pandora, ere I prove
Guilty or in my wishes, or my thought•,
To my Sophia.
Sir consider better
Not one in our whole sex?
I am constant t•
My resolution.
But dare you stand
The opposition, and bind your self
By oath for the performance?
My faith else
Had but a weak foundation.
I take hold
Upon your promise, and enjoy •e your stay
For one month here
I am caught.
And if I do not
Produce a lady in that time that shall
Make you confess your error I submit
My self to any penualtie you shall please
To impose upon me, in the mean space write
To your chaste wife, acquaint her with your fortune
The jewels that were mine you may send to her,
For better confirmation, I'll provide you
Of trusty messengers, but how far distant is she?
A days hard riding.
The• •no retiring
•ll bind you to your word.
Well since there is,
No• way to 〈◊〉 I will stand the hazard
And instantly make r•eddy my dispatch
'Till then, 〈◊〉 your majesty.
How I bu•st
With 〈…〉 there lives besides my self
O•• •air, ••d loyal woman, •it was the •nd
Of my ambition •o be recorded
The o•ely wonder of the age, and shall •
Give way 〈◊〉 a competitor? nay more
To add to my aff•i•tion •the assurances
Tha• I placed in my beauty have decea•d •e
I thought one amorous glance of mine could bring
All heart• 〈◊〉 ••bjection, but this stranger
〈◊〉 •oc••s co•temnes me, but I cannot
Sit down •o with my honour, I will gai••
A double victory by working him
To my desi•e, and taint her in her honour
Or loose my self, I have read that 〈…〉
Is useful, to supplant her isle employ
With any cost Vbaldo, and Ricardo
Two noted courtiers of approved cunning
In all the windings of lusts labyrinth,
And in corrupting him I will ••r go
〈◊〉 Poppy, if he shut his ea••s•
Against my S•ren notes, •e boldly •wea•e
〈◊〉 lives again, or that I have found
A frozen Cynike, cold in spite of all
Allurements, one, whom beauty canoe• mo•e
Nor softest blandishments 〈◊〉 to •ove.
Thin, Thin, provision, I am dieted
Like one set to watch hawks, and to keep me waking
My c•oaking guts make a perpetual larum,
Here I stand sentinel, and though I fright
Beggars from my ladies gate, in hope to have
A greater share I find my commons mend not.
I looked this morning in my glass the river
And there appeared a fish called a poor Iohn
Cut with a lenten face in my own likeness,
And it seemed to speak and say goodmorrow cousin.
•o man comes this way but has a fling at me,
A Surgeon passing by asked at what rate,
I would sell my self, I answered for what use?
To make said he a living Anatomy
And set thee up in our hall, for thou art transparent
•ithout dissection, and indeed he had reason,
•or I am scored with this poor purge to nothing.
•hey say that hunger dwells in the camp, but till
My Lord returns, or certain tidings of him
He will not part with me, but sorrows dry
And I must drink howsoever.
That is her castle
Upon my certain knowledge.
Our horses held out
To my desire: I am a fire to be at it.
Take the jade for thy reward, before I part hence,
I hope to be better carried, give me the Cabinet.
So leave vs now
Good fortune to you Gallants.
Being joint Agents in a design of trust to
For the service of the Queen, and our own pleasure,
Let vs proceed with judgment.
If I take not
This fort at the first assault, make mean Euenuche,
So I may have precedence.
On no terms.
We are both to play one prize he that works best
In the searching this mine shall carry it
Without contention.
Make you your approaches
As I directed
I need no instruction
I work not on your anvil, I'll give fire
With my own linstocke, if the powder be dank
The Devil rend the touch-hole. Who have we here?
What ••elliton's this?
A ghost! or the image of famine!
Where doest thou dwell?
Dwell sir? my dwelling is
In the high way, that goodly house was once
My habitation, but I am banished.
And cannot be called home 'till news arrive
Of the good knight Medias.
If that will
Restore thee thou art safe
We come from him
With presents to his Lady.
But are you sure
Hee is in health?
Never so well, conduct vs
To the lady.
Though a poor snake I will leap
Out of my •kine for joy, break picher break,
And wallet late my cupboard • bequeath thee
To the next beggar, thou red herring swim
To the red sea again me thinckes I am already
Knuckle deep in the flesh pots, and though waking, dream•
Of wine and plenty.
What's the misery
Of this strange passion?
My belly gentlemen,
Will not give me leave to tell you, when I have brought you
To my ladies presence I am di•enchanted,
There you shall shall know all follow if I outstrip you
know I run for my belly.
A mad fellow.
Do not again delude me.
If I doe, send me a grazing with my fellow Hilario,
I stood as you commanded in the turret
Observing all that pas'd by, a and even now
I did decern a pair of Cavaliers
For such their outside spoke them with their guide
Dismounting from their horses, they said something
To our hungry Sentinel that made him caper
And frish'ith ayre for joy, and to confirm this
See Madam they in view.
News from my Lord?
Tidings of joy, these are no counterfeits,
But Knights indeed, dear Madam sign my pardon
That I may feed again, and pick up my crumbs
I have had a long fast of it,
Eat, I forgive thee.
O comfortable words; eat I forgive thee
And if in this I doe not soon obey you
And ramne in to the purpose billet me again
In the high way, butler and Cooke be ready
For I enter like a tyrant.
Since mine eyes
Were never happy in so sweet an object,
Without injury I presume you are
The lady of the house, and so salute you.
This letter with these jewels from your Lord
Warrant my boldness Madam.
in being a servant
To such rare beauty you must needs deserve
This curtsy from a stranger.
You are still
Before hand with me, pretty one I descend
To take the height of your lip, and if I miss
In the altitude hereafter if you please
I will make use of my Iacobs staff,
These gentlemen
Have certainly had good breeding, as it appears
By their neat kissing, they hit me so bat on the lips
At the first sight.
Heaven in thy mercy make me
Thy thankful handmaid for this boundless blessing
In thy goodness showered upon me.
I do not like
This simple devotion in her it is seldom
Practiced among my mistresses.
Or mine
Would they kneel to I know not who for the possession
Of such inestimiable wealth before
They thanked the bringers of it? the poor lady
Does want instruction, but I'll be her tutor
And read her anothr lesson.
If I have
Shown want of manners gentlemen in my shows
To pay the thanks I owe you for your travail
To doe my Lord, and me (howere unworthy
Of such a benefit) this noble favour
Impute it in your elemencie to the excess
Of joy that over whelmed me.
She speaks well
Polite, and courtly.
And howere it may
Increase the offence to touble you with more
Demands touching my Lord, before I have
Inu•ted you to rest, such as the coursenesse
Of my poor house can offer, pray you conuine
On my weak tenderness though I in•reate
To learn from you something hee hath it may bee
In his letter left unmentioned.
I can only
Give you assurance that he is in health,
Graced by the King, and Queen
And in the court
With admire•ion looked on,
You must therefore
Put off these widows garments, and appear
Like to your self.
And en•ertaine all pleasures
Your fortunes marks out for you.
There are other
Particular p•iuacies which on occasion
I will deliver to you.
You oblige me
To your service ever.
Good! your service, mark that.
In the mean time by your good acceptance make
My rustic entertainment relish of
The curiousness of the court.
Your looks sweet Madam
Cannot but make each dish a feast.
It shall be
Such in the freedom of my will to please you.
I'll show you the way; this is to great an honour
From such brave ghosts to me so mean an hostess.
You know your charge, give it action, and expect
Rewards beyond your hopes.
If we but eye'em,
They are ours I warrant you.
May we not ask why
We are put upon this?
Let that stop your mouth,
And learn more manners groom, tic upon the hour
In which they use to walk here, when you haue'em,
In your power, with violence carry them to the place
Where I appointed, there I will expect you,
Be bold, and careful.
These are they.
Are you sure?
Am I sure I am my self?
Cease on him strongly, If he have but meant
To draw his sword. it is ten to one we smart fort,
Take all advantages.
I cannot guess
What her intents are, but her carriage was
As I but now related.
Your assurance
In the constancy of your lady is the armour
That must defend you, whirs the picture?
Here.
And no way altered
If she be not perfect,
There is no truth in art.
By this I hope
She hath received my letters.
Without question
These courtiers are rank riders, when they are
To visit a handsome lady.
Lend me your ear.
One piece of her entertainment will require
Your dearest privacy.
Now they stand fair
Vpon'em.
Villains.
Stop their mouths, we come not
To try your valures, kill him if he offer,
To open his mouth, we have you, tic in vain
To make resistance, mount 'em and a way.
It is late go to your rest, but doe not envy
The happiness I draw near to.
If you enjoy it.
The moderate way the sport yields I confess
A pretty titillation, but to much oft
will bring you on your knees, in my younger days
I was my self a gamester, and I found
By a sad experience, there is no such soker
As a younger spongy wise, she keeps a thousand
Whore sele•hes in her box, and the thieves will suck out
Both blood, and marrow, I feel a kind of cramp
In my joints when I think o'nt, but it may bee Queen•
And such a Queen as yours is, has the art
You take leave
To talk my Lord.
He may since he can do nothing
If you spend this way to much of your royal stock
Ere long we may be puefellowes.
The door shut,
Knock gently, harder. So, here comes her woman,
Take of my gown.
My Lord, the Queen by me
This night desires your pardon,
How Acanthe!
I come by her appointment it was her grant
The motion was her own
It may be sir
But by her Doctors Since she is advised
For her health sake to forbear.
I do not like
This physical lechery, the old down right way
Is worth a thousand out.
Prethe Acanthe.
Meditate for me.
O the fiends of hell
Would any man bribe his servant to make way
To his own wife, if this be the court state
Shame fall on such as use it.
By this jewel
This night I dare not move her, but to morrow
I will watch all occasion
Take this
To be mindful of me
Slight, I though a king
Might have took up any woman at the Kings Price
And must he buy his own at a dearer rate
Then a stranger in a brothel?
What is that
You mutter sir?
No treason to your honour
I'll speak it out though it anger you, if you pay for
Your lawful pleasure in some kind great sir
What do you make the Queen, cannot you clicket
Without a fe•? or when she has a suit for you to grant?
O hold sir.
Off with his head.
Do when you please, you but blow out a taper
That would light your understanding, and in care of't
Is burnt down to the socket, be as you are sir
An absolute monarch, it did show more Kinglike
In those libidino•s Caesars that compelled
Matrous, and virgins of all ranks to bow
Unto their ratenous lusts, and did admit
Of more excuse then I can urge for you,
Tha• slave your self to th'imperious humour
Of a proud beauty.
Out of my sight.
I will sir
Go•e way to your furious passion, but when reason
Hath got the better of it I much hope
The counsel that offends now, will deserve
Your royal thanks, tranquillity of mind
Stay with you sir. I do begin to doubt
Ther's something more in the Queens strangeness, then
Is yet disclosed, and i'll find it out
Or loose my self in the search.
Sure He is honest,
And from your infancy hath truly served you
Let that plead for him and impute this harshness
To the frowardness of his age.
I am much troubled
And do begin to stagger, Ferdinand good night
To morrow visit vs, back to our own lodgings.
You have donne bravely, locke this in that room,
There let him ruminate, I'll anon vnhood him.
The other must stay here, as soon as I
Have quit the p•ace give him the liberty,
And use of his eyes, that donne disperse your selves
As privately as you can, but on your lives
No word of what hath pas'd.
If I doe, sell
My tongue to a tripe wife, come unbind his arms,
You are now at your own disposure and however
We used you roughly, I hope you will find here
Such entertainment, as will give you cause
To thank vs for the service, and so I leave you,
If I am in a prison it is a neat one,
What O edipus can resolve this riddle? Ha!
I never gave just cause to any man
Basely to plot against my life, but what is
Become of my true friend? for him I suffer
More then my self.
Remone tha• idlefeare
Hoe's safe as you are.
Whoso'ere thou art
For him I thank thee, I cannot imagine
Where I should be, though I have read the table
Or errant knighthood, stuffed, with the relations
Of magical enchantments, yet I am not
So sottishly credulous, to believe the devil
Hath that way power, Ha? music!
The blushing rose and purple flower,
Let grow to long are soonest blasted.
Dainty fruits, though sweet, will sower
And rot in ripens, left untasted.
Yet here is one more sweet then these
The more you taste, the more she'll please.
Beauty thotgh enclosed with ice,
Is A shadow chaste as rare,
Then how much those sweets in•ice.
That have issue full as fair,
Earth cannot yield from all her powers
One equal, for Dame Venus •owers.
A song too, certainly be it he, or she
That owes this voice, it hath not been acquainted
With much affliction, whosoere you are
That doe inhabit here, if you have bodies
And are not mere aerial forms appear
And make me know your end with me, most strange
What have I coiur'd up? sure if this be,
A spirit it is no damned one what a shapes here;
Then with what majesty it moves. If Inno
Were now to keep her state among the Gods,
And Her•ules to be made again her guest
She could not put on a more glorious habit
Though her handmaid Iris lent her va•ious colours
Or ou•d Oceanus ravished from the deep
All jewels shipwrecked in it, as you have
Thus far made known your self, if that your face
Have not too much divinity about it
For mortal eyes to gaze on, perfect what
You have begun with wonder, and amazement
To my ashonish'd senses, how! the Queen!
Rise sir, and hear my reasons in defence
Of the rape for so you may conceive, which I
By my instruments made upon you, you perhaps
May think, what you have suffered for my lust
Is a common practise with me, but I call
Those ever shining lamps, and their great maker
As witnesses of my inocence, I ne'er looked on
A man but your best self, on whom I ever
(Except the King) vouchsafed an eye of favour
The King indeed, and only such a King
Deserves your rarities Madam, and but hee
It were giant like ambition in any
In his wishes only to presume to taste
The nectar of your kisses; or to feed
His appetite with that ambrosia, due
And proper to a prince, and what bind mores
A lawful husband, for my self great Queen
I am a thing obscure, di•furnished of
All merit, that can raise me higher then
In my most humble thankfulness for your bounty
To hazard my life for you, and that way
I am most ambitious.
I desire no more
Then what you promise, if you dare expose
Your life as you profess to doe me service,
How can it better be employed, then in
Preserving mine? which only you can doe.
And must doe with the danger of your own.
A desperate danger to, if private men
Can brooke no rivals in what they affect
But to the death pursue such as invade
What law makes their inheritance, the King
To whom you know I am dearer then his crown
His health his eyes his after-hopes with all
His present blessings must fall on that man
L•ke dreadful lightning that is won by prayers,
Threats, or rewards to stain his bed, or make
His hoped for issue doubtful.
If you aim
At what I more then fear you doe, the reasons
Which you deliver should in judgment rather
Deter me, then invite a grant, with my
Assured ruin.
True if that you were
Of a cold temper one whom doubt, or fear,
In the most horrid forms they could put on
Might teach to be ungrateful, your denial
To me, that have deserved so much, is more
If it can have addition.
I know not
What your commands are.
Have you fought so well
Among armi'd men, yet cannot guess what lists
You are to enter when you are in private
With a willingly lady, one, that to enjoy
Your company this night denied the King
Access, to what's his own, if you will press me
To speak in plainer language.
Pray you forbear,
I would I did not understand too much
Already, by yo•r words I am instructed
To credit that, which not confirmed by you,
Had bred suspicion in me of untruth
Though an Angel had affirmed it, but suppose
That cloyed with happiness (which is ever built
On virtuous chastity, in the wantonness
O• appetite, you desire to make trial
Of the false delights proposed by vicious lust:
Among ten thousand every way moreable
And ap•er to be wrought on, such as owe you
Obedience being your subjects, why shou•d you
Make choice of me a stranger?
Though yet reason
Was ne'er admitted in the court of love,
I'll yield you one vnanswerable, as I urged
In our last private conference, you have
A pretty promising presence, but there are
Many in limbs, and feature who may take
That way the right hand file of you, besides
Your May of youth is pas'd, and the blood spent
By wounds, though bravely taken, render you
Disabld for loves service, and that valour
Se• off with better fortune, which it may be
Swells you aboue your bounds 'is not the hook
That hath caught me good sir I need no champion
With his sword to guard my honour, or my beauty,
In both I can defend my self, and live
My own protection.
If these advocates
The best that can plead for me, have no power?
What can you find in me else, that may tempt you
With irrecoverable loss unto your self
To be a gainer from me?
You have Sir
A jewel of such matchless worth and lustre,
As does disdain comparison, and darkens
All that is rare in other men, and that
I must or win, or lessen.
You heap more
Amazement on me, what am I possessed of
That you can covet? make me understand it,
If it have a name?
Yes an imagined one,
But is in substance nothing, being a garment
Worn out of fashion, and long since given ore
By the court and country, tic your loyalty,
And constancy to your wife, it is that I dote on,
And does deserve my envy, and that jewel
Or by fair play, or foul, I must win from you.
These are mere contraries, if you love me Madam
For my constancy, why seek yo to destroy it?
In my keeping it preserve me worth your favour,
Or if it be a jewel of that value,
As you with laboured rhetoric would persuade me
What can you stake against it?
A Queens fame,
And equal honour.
So whoever wins
Both shall be losers.
That is that I aim at
Yet on the by I lay my youth, my beauty
This moist palm, this soft lip, and those delights
Darkness should only judge of, do you find'em
Infectious in the trial, that you start
As frighted with their touch?
Is it in man
To resist such strong temptations?
He begins
To waver.
Madam as you are gracious
Grant this short nights deliberation to me,
And with the rising sum from me you shall
Receive full satisfaction.
Though extremes
Hate all delay, I will deny you nothing,
This key will bring you to your friend you are safe both
And all things useful that could be prepared
For one I love and honour waite upon you,
Take counsel of your pillow, such a fortune
(As with affections swiftest wings flies to you
Will not be often tendered.
How my blood
Rebels! I now could call her back and yet
Ther's something stays me, if the King had tendered
Such favours to my wife it is to be doubted
They had not been refused, but being a man
I should not yield first, or prove an example
For her defence of frailty, by this sans question
She's tempted too, and here I may examine
How she holds out, she's still the same, the same
Pure Christa • rock of chastity perish all
Allurements that may alter me, the snow
Of her sweet coldness, hath extinguished quite
The fire that but even now began to flame!
And I by her confirmed, rewards, nor titles,
Nor certain death from the refused Queen
Shall shake my faith, since I resolve to be
Loyal to her, as she is true to me.
What we spake on the voley begins to work,
We have laid a good foundation
Build it up
Or else tic nothing, you have by lot the honour
Of the first assault, but as it is conditioned
Observe the time proportioned, I'll not part with
My share in the achievement, when I whistle,
Or hem fall off.
She comes Stand by, I'll watch
My opportunity.
I find my self
Strangely distracted with the various stories
Now we•l, now ill, then boubtfully by my ghosts
Delivered of my Lord: and like poor beggars
That in their dreams find treasure, by reflection
Of a wounded fancy, make it questionable
Whither they sleep, or not; yet teickl'd with
Such a fantastic hope of happiness,
Wish they may never wake in some such measure,
Incredulous of what I see, and touch
As it were a fading apparition, I
Am still perplexed, and troubled, and when most
Confirmed tic true a curious jealousy
To be assured, by what means, and from whom
Such a mass of wealth, was first deserved, then gotten
Cunningly steal into me, I have practised
For my certain resolution with these courtiers
Promising private conference to either,
And at this hour, if in search of the truth
I hear or say more, then becomes my virtue
For give me my Medias.
Now I make in,
Madam as you commanded I attend
Your pleasure.
I must thank you for the favour.
I am no ghostly father, yet if you have
Some scruples, touching your Lord, you would be resolved of
I am prepared.
But will you take your oath
To answer truly?
On the hem of your smock if you please
A vow I dare not break it being a book
I would gladly swear on.
To spare sir that trouble
I'll take your word which in a gentleman
Should be of equal value, is my Lord then
In such grace with the Queen?
Yon should best know
By what you have found from him, whether he can
Deserve a grace or no.
What grace do you mean?
Tha special grace (if you'll have it)
He laboured so hard for between a pair of sheets
On your wedding night
When your Ladyship lost you know what.
Fie be more modest
Or I must leave you.
I would tell a truth
As cleanly as I could, and yet the subject
Makes me run out a litt•e.
You would put now
A foolish jealousy in my head my Lord
Hath gotten a new mis•ris.
One? a hundred
But under seal I speak it, I presume
Upon your silence, it being for your profit,
They talk of Hercules, back for fifty in a night
It was well but yet to yours he was a peddler
Such a soldier, and a courtier never came
To Alba regales, the ladies run mad for him,
And there is such contention among 'em
Who shall engross him wholly, that the like
Was never hard of.
Are they handsome women?
Fie no course mammets, and whats worse they are old to
Some fifty, some threescore, and they pay dear fort
Believing, that he carries a powder in his breeches
Will make 'em young again, and these suck shrewdly,
Sir I must fetch you off.
I could tell you wonders
Of the cures he has done, but a buisnesse of import
Ca•ls me away, but that dispatched I will
Be with you presently.
There is something more
In this then bare suspicion.
Save yo• lady
Now you look like your self! I have not looked on
A lady more complete yet have scene a Madam
Were a garment of this fashion, of the same stuff to,
One just of your dimensions, sate the wind there boy.
When• lady si•?
Nay nothing, and me thinks
I should know this ruby ver• good? tic the same
This chain of orient pearl, and this diamond to
Have been worn before, but much good may they do you
Strengh to the gentleman's back he toyld hard for 'em,
Before he got'em
Why? how were they gotten?
Not in the field with his sword upon my life
He may thank his clo•e stille•to, plage upon it
Run the minutes so fast, pray you excuse my manners
I left a letter in my chamber window,
Which I would not have seen on any terms, fie on it
Forgetful as I am, but I strayt attend you
This is strange his letters said these jewels were
Presented him by the Queen, as a reward
For his good service, and the trunks of clothes
That foe•loud them this last night, with hast made up
By his direction.
I was telling you
Of wonders Madam.
If you are so skilful
Without premeditation answer me,
Know you this gown, and these rich jewels?
Heaven.
How things will come out, but that I should offend you,
And wrong my more then noble friend
Your husband for we are sworn brothers, in the discovery
Of his nearest secrets I could.
By the hope of favour
That you have from me out with it.
Tic a a potent spell
I cannot resist, why I will tell you Madam,
And to how many several women you are
Beholding for your bravery, this was
The Wedding gown of Pa•lina a rich strumpet
Worm but a day when she married old Gonzage,
And left of trading.
O my hart.
This chain
Of pear•e was a great widows, that invited
Your Lord to the masque, and the whether pro•ing foul
He lodged in her house all night, and merry they were,
But how he came by it I know not.
Periurd man!
This ring was Iuliettas, a fine piece
But very good at the sport, this diamond
Was Madam Acanthes given him for a song
pricked in a private arbor, as she said
When the Queen asked for it, and she hard him sing t•
And danced to his hornepipe or there are liars abroad
There are other toys about you
The same way purchased but paralleled
With these not worth the relation.
You are happy in a husband never man
Made better use of his strength, would you have him wast,
His body away for nothing? If he holds out,
Theirs not an Embroidered petticoat in the court
But shall be at your service.
I commend him
It is a thriving trade, but pray you leave me
A little to my self.
You may command
Your servant madam, she stung unto the quick lad.
I did my part if this potion work not hang me
Let her sl•epe as well as she can to night, to morrow
We'll mount new batteries,
And till then leave her?
You powers that take into your care, the guard
Of inocence aid me, for I am a creature,
So forfeited to despair, hope cannot fancy
A ransom to redeem me, I begin
To waver in my faith and mark it doubt•ull
Whither the Saints that were canonised for
Their holiness of life •end not in secret.
Since my Medias is fallen from his virtue
In such an open fashion, could it be else
That such a husband so devoted to me,
So vowed to temperance, for lascivious hire
Should prostitute himself to common harlots
Old, and deformed to wast for this he left me?
And in a faind pretence for want of means
To give me ornament? or to bring home
Diseases to me? suppose these are false,
And lusts••ll goats if he were true and right
Why stays he so long from me? being made rich
And that the only reason why he left me.
No he is lost; and shall I wear the spoils.
And Salaries of lust? they cleave unto me
Like Nessus poisoned shirt? no in my rage
I'll tear 'em of, and from my body wash
The venom with my tears, have I no spleen
Nor anger of a woman? shall he build
Upon my ruins and I vureueng'd
Deplore his falsehood? no? with the same trash
For which he hath dishonoured me, I'll purchase
A just revenge, I am not yet so much
In debt to years, nor so mishapped that all
Should fly from my Embraces, chastity
Tho• only art a name, and •••nounce thee,
I am now a servant to vo•uptuousnesse,
Wantons of all degrees and fashions welcome
You shall be entertained, and if I stray
Let him condemn himself, that lead the way.
We are in a desperate straight, ther's no ••asion
Nor hope left to come of, but by your yielding
To the necessity, you must fine a grant
To her violent passion, or
What my Baptist?
We are but dead else.
Were the sword now heaved up,
And my neck upon the block, I would not buy
An hours reprive with the loss of faith and virtue
To be made immortal here, art thou a scholar
Nay almost without parallel, and yet fear
To dye which is inevitable you may urge
The many years that by the course of nature
We may travail in this tedious pilgrimage,
And hou'd it as a blessing, as it is
When innocence is our guide, yet know Ba•ptista
Our virtues are preserved before our years
By the great judge to dye untainted in
Our fame, and reputation is the greatest
And to loose that can we desire to live?
Or shall I for a momentary pleasure
Which soon comes to a period, to all times
Have breach of faith and perjury remembered
In a still living Epitath, no Baptist,
Since my Sophia will go to her grave
Unspotted in her faith, I'll follow her
With equal loyalty, but look on this
your own great work, your masterpiece, and then
She being still• the same teach me to alter.
Ha! sure I doe not sleep! or if I dream,
This is a terrible vision! I will clear
My eiesight, perhaps melancholy makes me
See that which is not.
It is to apparent.
I grieve to look upon it, besides the yellow
That does assure she's tempted there are lines
Of a dark colour, that disperse themselves
Ore every mi•iature of her face, and those
Confirm.
She is turned whore.
I must not say so.
Yet as a friend to truth if you will have me
Interpret it, in her consent, and wishes
She's false but not in fact ye•.
Fact Baptist?
Make not your self a pander to her looseness,
In labouring to palliate what a vizard
Of impudence cannot cover did ere woman
In her will decline from cha•ety, but found means
To give her hot lust few•ll? it is more
Impossible in nature for gross bodies
Descending of themselves, to hang in the ayre,
Or with my single arm to underprop
A falling •ow•r, nay in its violent course
To stop the lightning then to stay a woman
Hue••ied by two •u•ies lust and falsehood
In her full cari•r to wickedness.
Pray you tempter
The violence of your passion.
In extremes
Of this condition, can it be in man
To use a moderation? I am thrown
From a steep rock headlong into a gulf
Of misery, and find my self past hope
In the same moment that I apprehend
That I am falling and this the figure of
My Idol few hours since, while she continued
In her perfection that was late a mirror
In which I saw miracules shapes of duty,
Stayed manners with all excellence a husband
Could wish in a chaste wife, is on the sudden
Turned to a magical glass, and does present
No •hinge but horns, and •orror
You may yet
And it is the best foundation, build up comfort
On your own goodness.
No, that hath undone me
For now I hold my temperance a sin
Worse then excess, and what was vice a virtue,
Have I refused a Queen, and such a Queen
Whose ravishing beauties at the first sight had tempted
A hermit from his beads, and changed his prayers
To amorous Sonnets, to preserve my faith
Inviolate to thee, with the hazard of
My death with tortrne, since she could in••ict
No less for my contempt, and have I made
Such a return from thee? I will not curse thee,
Nor for thy falsehood rail against the sex
It is poor, and common, Isle only with wise men
Whisper unto my self, howere they seem
Nor present, nor past times, nor the age to come
Hath heretofore, can now, or ever shall
Produce on constant woman.
This is more
Then the Satirists wrote against 'em.
Ther's no language
That can express the poison of these Aspicks,
These weeping Crocodiles, and all to little
That hath being said against 'em but I'll mould
My thoughts into another form, and if
She can out-liue the report of what I have donne
This hand when next she comes within my reach
Shall be her executioner.
The Queen sir.
Wait our commnnd at distance, sir you have to
Free liberty to depart.
I know my manners
And thank you for the favour.
Have you taken
Good rest in your new lodgings? I expect now
Your resolute answer, but advise maturely
Before I hear it,
Let my actions Madam,
For no words can dilate my joy in all
You can command with cherefulnes to serve you,
Assure your highness, and in sign of my
Submission, and contrition for my error.
My lips, that but the last night shunt the touch
Of yours as poison, taught humility now
Thus on your foot, and that too great an honour
For such an vndeseruer seals my duty,
A cloudy mist of ignorance equal to
Cimmerian darkness, would not let me see then
What now with adoration, and wonder
With reverence I look up to: but those fogs
Dispersed and scattered by the powerful beams
With which your self the Sun of all perfection,
Vouchsafe to cure my blindness like a suppliant
As low as I can knee•e I humbly beg
What you once pleased to tender.
This is more
Then I could hope, what find you so attractive
Upon my face• in so short time to make
This sudden Metamo•phosis? pray you rise;
I for your late neglect thus sign your pardon.
I now you kiss like a lover, and not as brothers
Coldly salute their sisters.
I am turned
All spirit and fire.
Yet to give some allay
To this hot fervor it were good to remember
The King, whose •ies and •ares are every where
With the danger to that follows, this discovered.
Dang•r? a b•ggebeare Madam let ride once
Like Phaeton in the the Chariot of your favour,
And I con•emne •o•es thunder though the King
In our embraces stood a looker on,
His hang-men and with studied cruelty ready
To drag me from your arms, it should not fright me
From the enjoying that, a single life is
Too poor a price for, O that now all vigour
Of my youth were recollected for an hour
That my desire might meet with yours and draw
The envy of all men in the Encounter
Upon my head, I should, but we loose time,
Be gracious mighty Queen•e
Pause yet a little
The bounties of the King, and what weighs more
Your boasted constancy to your machlesse wife,
Should not soon be shaken.
The whole fabric
When I but look on you, is in a moment
Ore turned, and ruined, and as rivers loose
Their names, when they are swalloed by the Ocean
In you alone all faculties of my sou•e
Are wholly taken up, my wife, and King
At the best as things forgotten.
Can this be?
I have gained my end now.
Wherefore stay you Madam?
In my consideration what a nothing
Mans constancy is.
Your beauties make it so,
In me sweet lady.
And it is my glory:
I could be coy now as you were, but I
Am of a gentler temper, howsoever,
And in a just return of what I have suffered
In your disdain, with the same measure grant me
Iq•all deliberation I ere long
Will visit you again and when I next
Appear, as conquered by it, slauelike wait
On my triumphant beauty.
What a change
Is here beyond my fear but by thy falsehood
Sophia not her beauty is it denied me
To sin but in my wishes? what a frown
In scorn at her departure she threw on me?
I am both ways lost; storms of Con•amped, and scorn
Are ready to break on me, and all hope
Of shelter doubtful I can neither be
Disloyal, no• yet honest, I stand guilty
On either part, at the worst death will end all,
And he must be my judge to right my wrong,
Since I have loved too much and lived too long.
Nor custom nor example, nor vast numbers
Of such as doe offend make less the sin,
For each particular crime a strict account
Will be exacted, and that comfort which
The damned pretend, fellows in misery,
Takes nothing from their torments, every one
Must suffer in himself the measure of
His wickedness, if so, as I must grant
It being un•efutable in reason,
Howere my Lord offend, it is no warrant
For me to walk in his forbidden paths,
What penancet• en can expiate my guilte
For my consent (transported then with passion)
To wan•onnesse? •he wo••des I give my fame
Cannot recover his and though I have fed
These courtiers with promises and hopes
I am yet in fact un•ainted and I trust
My so•row for it with my purity
And love to goodness for it self, made powerful
Though all they have alleged p•ove true or false,
Wi•l be such exorcisines as shall command
This fury jealousy from me, what I have
Determind touching them I am resolved
To put in execution, Within there?
Where are my noble ghosts?
The elder Madam,
Is drinking by himself to your Ladyships health
In Muskadine and eggs and for a rasher
To draw His liquor down he hath got a pie
Of marrow-bones, Pot•os and Eringos,
With many such ingredients, and tic said
He hath sent his man in post to the next town,
For a po•nd of Amber gris, and half a peck
Of fishes called Cantharides.
The younger
Prunes up himself as if this night he were
To act a bridegrooms part, but to what purpose
I am ignorance it self,
Continue so.
Let those lodgings be prepared as this directs you,
And fail not in a circumstance, as you
Respect my favour.
We have o•r instructions
And punctually will follow 'em
Here comes Madam
The Lord Vbaldo.
Pretty on, theirs gould,
To buy thee a new gown, and ther's for thee,
Grow fat, and fit for service, I am now
As I should be at the height and able to
Beget a giant, O my better Angel
In this you show your wisdom when you pay
The lech•r in his own coin, shall you sit p•ling,
Like a patient Grissell, and be laughed at? no
This is a fair revenge, shall we to it?
To what sir?
The sport you promised.
Could it be donne with safety.
I warrant you, I am sound as a bell, a tough
Old blade, and steel to the back, as you shall find me
In the trial on your anvil.
So, but how sir
Shall I satisfy your friend to whom by promise
I am equally engaged?
I m•st conf•sse
The more the merrier, b•t of all men living
Take heed of him you may sa•e• run upon
The mouth of a cannon, when it is unloading
And come off colder.
How! is he not wholesome?
Wholesome? I'll tell you for your good, he is
A spittle of diseases and indeed
More loathsome and infections, the tubbe is
His weekly bath; He hath not drank this seven year
Before he came to your house, but compositions
Of Sassafras, and Guacum, and dry mutton
His daily portion; name what scratch soever
Can be got by women and the Surgeons will resolve you
At this time or at that Ricardo had it.
Bless me from him.
It is a good prayer Lady,
It •eing a degree unto the pox.
Only to mention him, if my tongue burn not hang me
When I but named Ricardo.
Sir this caution
Must be rewarded.
I hope I have mart his market.
But when?
Why presently follow my woman
She knows where to conduct you, and will serve
To night for a page, let the wastcote I appointed
With the cambricq shirt pe•fumd, and the rich cap
Be brought into his chamber.
Excellent Lady.
And a ca•dl too in the morning.
I will fit you.
So •o• on the scent here comes the other beagle.
Take purse and all
If this company would come often.
I should make a pretty term on it,
For your sake
I have put him off, h• only begged a kiss
I gave it and so parted.
I hope better
He did not touch your lips?
Yes I assure you.
The•e was no danger in it.
No? eat presently
These lozenges, of forty crowns an ounce,
Or you are undone.
What is the virtue of 'em.
They are preseruatiues against stinking breath
Rising from rotten lungs.
If so your carriage
Of such dear antidotes in my opinion
May render yours suspected.
Fie no I use 'em
When I ta•ke with him I should be poisoned else.
But •'ll be free with you. Hee was once a creature
It may be of Gods making, but long since
He is turned to a druggists shop, the spring and fall
Hold all the year with him that he lives he owes
To art not nature, she has given him ore.
He moves like the fairy King, on s•rues and wheels
Made by his Doctors recipes, and yet still
They are out of joint, and every day repairing
He has a regiment of whores he keeps
At his own charge in a laser house but the best is
The•e•s not a •ose among 'em: Hoe's acquainted
With the greene water and the spitting pill
Familiar to him, in a frosty morning
You may thrust him in a pottle pot his bones
Rattle in his Skin like beans tossed in a bladder
If he but here a coche the fomentation
The Friction with funigation cannot save him
From the chine evil in a word he is
No• on disease but all, yet being my friend
I wi•l forbear his character, for I would not
Wrong him in your opinion.
The best is
The virtues you bestow on him to me
Are mistress I know not but however
I am at your service. Sirrha let it be your care
T'vncloth the gentleman, and with speed, delay
Takes from delight.
Good, there's my hat, sword, cloak,
A vengeance on these buttons, off with my doublet
I dare show my Skin, in the touch you will like it better
Prethe cut my codpeese point, and for this service
When I leave them off they are thine.
I'll take your word sir.
Dear lady stay not long.
I may come too soon sir
No, no I am ready now,
This is the way sir.
I was much too blame to credit their reports
Touching my Lord that so traduce each other
And with such virulent malice, though I presume
They are bad enough, but I have studied for 'em
A way for their recovery.
What dost thou mean wench?
Why dost thou shut the door upon me? ha
My cloths are taine away to! shall I starve here?
Is this my lodging? I am sure the lady talked of
A rich cap, a perfumed shirt, and a wastcote
But here is nothing but a little fresh straw,
A petticoat for a coverlet and that torn to,
And an old women's biggen for a night cap,
Slight tic a prison, or a pigsty, ha!
The windows grated with Iron I cannot force 'em
And if I leap down here I break my neck
I am betrayed, rog•es villains let me out
I am a Lord, and that's no common tittle,
And shall I be used •hus?
Let him rave, Hoe's fast
I'll parley with him at leisure.
Zoones have you trap •oores?
The other bear•s in the cage too let him flutter.
Whither am I fallen into Hell?
Who makes that noise there?
Help me if thou art a friend?
A friend? I am where
I cannot help my self, let me see thy face.
How Ricardo! prethe throw me
Thy cloak, if thou can to cover me I am almost
Frozen to death.
My cloak, I have no breeches
I am in my shirt as thou art, and heir's nothing
For my self but a clowns cast suite.
We are both undone
Prethe roar a little, Madam.
Lady of the house.
Grooms of the chamber
Gentlewomen, mi• kemaydes.
Shall we be m•rthered?
No but soundly punished
To your diserts.
You are not in earnest Madam?
Judge as you find, and feel it, and now here
What I irr•uocablie purpose to you.
Being received as ghosts into my house
And with all it afforded entertained
You have forgot all hospistable duties,
And with the defamation of my Lord
Wrought on my woman weakness in revenge
Of his injuries, as you fashiond 'em to me,
To yield my honour to your lawless lust.
Ma•ke that poor fellows.
And so far you have
Transgressed against the dignity of men
(who should, bound to it by virtue, still defend
Chaste ladies honours) that it was your trade
To make 'em in famous, but you are caught
In your own toils like lustful beasts, and therefore
Hope not to find the usage of men from me
Such mercy you have forfeited, and shall suffer
Like the most slavish women.
How will you use vs?
Ease and excess in feeding made you wanton
A p•urifie of ill blood you must let out.
By labour, and spare diet, that way got to,
Or perish for hunger, reach him up that distaff
With the f•ax upon it, though no Omphale
Nor you a second Hercules, as I take it
As you spin well at my command, and please me
Your wages in the coursest bread, and water,
Shall be proportionable.
I will starve first.
That's as you please.
What will become of me now?
You shall have gentler work I have oft observed
You were proud to show the fineness of your hands,
And softness of your fingers, you should reel well
What he spins if you give your mind to it, as ill force you
Deliver him his materials. Now you know
Your penance fall to work, hunger will teach you
And •o as slaves to your lust, not me I leave you.
I shall• spin a fine thread out now
I cannot look
On these devices but they put me in mind
Of rope-makers.
F•llow think of thy task
Forge•t such vanities, my linery there
Will serve the to work in.
Let me have my clothes yet,
I was bountiful to thee.
They are past your wearing
And mine by prom•se, as all these can wi•nes
You have no holidays coming, nor will I work
While th•se, and this lasts and so when you please
You may shut up your shop windows.
I am faint
And must lye down.
I am hungry to, and could
Ocursed women
This comes of our whoring.
But let vs rest as well as we can to night
But not ore sleep our selves, least we fast to morrow.
Now you know all sir with the motives why
I forced him to my lodging.
I desire
No more such trials Lady.
I presume sir
You do not doubt my chastity.
I would not,
But these are strange inducements.
By no means sir
Why though he were with violence ceasd upon,
And still detained the man sir being no soldier
Nor used to charge his pike when the breach is open
There was no danger in it: you must conceive sir,
Being religious, she Chose him for a Chaplain
To read old Homilies to her in the dark,
Shoe's bound to it by her Cannons.
Still tormented
With thy impertinence.
By your self dear sir.
I was ambitious only to over throw
His boasted constancy in his consent,
But for fact I contemn him, I was never
Unchaste in thought, I laboured to give proof
What power dwells in this beauty you admire so,
And when you see how soon it hath transformed him,
And with what superstition hee addores it,
Determine as •ou please.
I will look on
This pageant but.
When you have seen and hard sir.
The passages, which I my self discovered,
And could have kept concealed had I meant basely
Judge as you please.
well Ill observe the issue.
How had you took this General in your wife?
As a strange curiosity, but Queen•
Are priuiledgd aboue subjects, and tic fit sir.
You are much altered sir since the last night,
When the Queen left you, and look cheerfully
Your dullness quite blown over.
I have seen a vision
This morning makes it good, and never was
In such security as at this instant,
Fall what can fall, and when the Queen appears
Whose shortest absence now is tedious to me,
Observe 'th encounter.
She already is
Entered the lists.
And I prepared to meet her.
I know my duty.
Not so you may stay now
As a witness of our contract.
I obey
In all things Madam.
Wher's that reverence,
Or rather superstitious addoration,
Which captive like to my triumphant beauty
You paid last night? no humble knee? nor sign
Or vassal duty? sure this is the foot•
To whose proud cover, and then happy in it,
Your lips were glewd; and that the neck then offered
To witness your subjection to be trod on
Your certain loss of life in the Kings anger
Was then to mean a price to buy my favour.
And that false gloweworme fire of constancy
To your wife, extinguished by a greater light
Shot from our eyes; and that it may be (being
To g••r•os to be looked on) hath deprived you
O speech, and motion: but I will take off
A little from the splendour, and descend
From my own height, and in your lowness here you
Plead as a suppliant.
I do remember
I once saw such a woman.
How!
And then
She did appear a most magnificent Queen
And what's more virtuous though somewhat darkened
With pride and self opinion.
Call you this courtship?
And she was happy in a royal husband,
Whom envy could not tax, unless it were
For his too much indulgence to her humours.
Pray you sir observe that touch, tic to the purpose
I like the play the better for'•.
And she lived
Worthy her birth, and fortune; you retain yet
Some part of her angelical form, but when
Envy to the beauty of another woman
Inferior to hers, (one she never
Had seen but in her picture) had dispersed
Infection through her veins and loyalty
Which a great Queen as she was should have nourished
Grew odious to her
I am thunder struck.
And lust in all the bravery it could borrow
From majesty, howere disguised had took
Sure footing in the kingdom of her heart
(The throne of chastity once,) how in a moment
All that was g•atious, great, and glo•ious in her
And won v•o• all hearts, like seeming shadows
Wanting true substance vanished.
How his reasons
Work on my Soul.
Retire into your self.
Your own strengths Madam, strongly manned with virtue
And be out as you were, and there's no offence.
So base beneath the slavery, that men
Impose on beasts, but • wi•l gladly bow to.
But as you play, and jug•e with a stranger
Varying your •••pes like Thetis though the beauties
Of all that are by Poets raptures Sain••d
Were now in yo• united, you should pass
Pitied by me perhaps, but not regarded.
If this take not I am cheated.
To slip once
Is 〈◊〉, and •x•nsde by humane f•aylty,
B•• to fall ever damnab•e we were both
Guilty I grant in tendering our affection,
B•t, as I hope you will doe, I repented.
When we are grown up to ripeness, our life is
Like to this picture. While we run
A constant race in goodness, it retains
The just proportion. But the journeys being
Tedious and sweet temptations in the way,
That may in some degree divert vs from
The rode that we put forth in, e•e we end
Our pilgrimage, it may like this turn yellow
Or be with b•acknesse clouded. But when we
Find we have gone astray, and labour to
Return unto our nuer failing guide
Virtue, contrition wi•h v• fained tears,
The spots of vice washed off will soon restore it
To the first pureness.
I am disenchanted
Mercy, O mercy heavens?
I am 〈◊〉 with
What I have see•• and hard.
L•t vs 〈◊〉 and here
The rest be•••.
This hath fallen out beyond
My expo•ta•ion.
How have I wandered
Ou• of the tract of piety and 〈◊〉
By overweening pride, and flattery
Of fawning sycophants (the bane of greatness)
Could never meet till now a passenger
That in his charity would set me right,
Or stay me in my precipice to ruin.
How ill have I returned your goodness to me?
The horror in my thought oft turns me marble.
But if it may be yet prevented, O sir,
What can I do to show my sorrow or
With what brow ask your pardon?
Pray you rise.
Never, till you forgive me, and receive
Unto your love, and favour a changed woman.
My state, and pride turned to humility henceforth
Shall waite on your commands, and my obedience
Steered only by your will.
And that will prove
A second and a better marriage to me, all is forgot
Sir I must not rise yet
Till with a free confession of a crime,
Unknown to you yet, and a following suite
Which thus I beg be granted.
I melt with you.
Tic pardoned, and confirmed thus.
Know then sir.
In malice to this good knights wife I practised
Vbaldo, and Ricardo, to corrupt her.
Thence grew the change of the picture.
And how far
They have prevailed I am ignorant now if you sir
Or the honour of this good man, may be entreated
To travail thither, it being but a days journey
To fetch 'em off,
We will put on to night.
I if you please your harbinger.
I thank you.
Let me embrace you in my arms, your service
Donne on the Turk compared with this weighs nothing.
I am still your humble creature.
My true friend
And so you are bound to hold him.
Such a plant
Imported to your Kingdom, and here grafted
Would yield more fruit then al• the idle weeds
That suck up your reign of favour.
In my will
Ill not be wanting, prepare for our journey.
In act be my Honoria now, not name,
And to al• after times preser•e thy fame.
Are they then so humble
Hunger and hard labour
Have tamed 'em Madam, at the first they beloved
Like stags tan in a toil and would not work
For sullenness, but when they found with out it
There was no eating, and that to starve to death
Was much against their stomachs, by degree
Against their wills they fell to it.
And now feed on
The little pittance you allow with gladness
I do remember that they stopped their noses
At the sight of beef, and mutton as course fee•ing
For their fine palats, but now their work being ended
They leap at a barley crust and hold che•e parings
With a spoonful of pal'd wine poured in their water,
For festival excedings.
When I examine
M• spinsters work hee trembles like a prentice
And takes a boy on the •are when I spy• faults
And botches in his about, as a favour
From a cu•st mistress.
The other to re•le well
For his time, and if your ladyship would please.
To see 'em for your sport, since they want airing
It would do well in my judgment, you shall here
Such a hungry diologe from 'em.
But suppose
When they are out of prison they should grow
Rebellio•s?
Never 〈◊〉 Ill undertake
To lead 'em out by the nose with a course thread
Of the o•nes spinning and make the other reel after
And without grumbling, &amp; when you are weary of
Their company as easily return 'em.
Dear Madam it will help to drive away
Your melancholy.
Well on this assurance
I am content, bring 'em hither.
I will do it
In stately Equipage.
They have confessed then
They were set on by the Queen to taint me in
My loyalty to my Lord?
It was the maine cause,
That brought 'em hither.
I am glad I know it
And as I have begun before I end
Ill at the height revenge it, let vs steppe aside
They come the objects so ridiculous
In spite of my sad thoughts I cannot but
Lend a forced smile to grace it.
Come away
Work as you go, and loose no time it is pr•cious
You'll find it in your Commons.
commons call you it
The word is proper I have grazed so long
Upon your commons I am almost starved here
Work harder and they shall be bettered
bettered?
worser they cannot be would I might lye
Like a dog under her table and serve for a footstool
So I might have my belly full of that
Her Island cur refuses.
How do you like
Your airing? is it not a favour?
Yes
Just such a one as you use to a brace of gray-houndes
When they are led out of their kennels to scumber
But our case is ten times harder, we have nothing
In our bellies to be vented, if you will bee
And honest yeoman phenterer, feed vs first,
And walk vs after?
Yeomen phenterer?
Such another word to your Governor, and you go•
Supperless to bed fort.
Nay even as you please.
The comfortable names of breake-fasts, dinners.
Collations, supper, beverage, are words
Worn out of our remembrance.
O for the steam
Of meat in a cooks shop?
I am so dry
I have not spittle enough to wet my •ingers
When I draw my flax from my distaff
Nor I strength
To raise my hand to the top of my realer. oh.
I have the cramp all over me
What do you think
Were best to apply to it, a crampstone as I take it
Were very useful.
Oh no more of stones
We have been used to long like hawks already.
We are not so high in our flesh now to need casting
We will come to an empty fist.
Nay that you shall not
So hoe birds, how the eyasses scratch, and scramble
Take heed of a surfeit do not cast your gorges,
This is more then I have commission for, be thankful.
Were all that study the abuse of women
Used thus, the city would not swarm with Cuccholds
Nor so many trads-menbreake.
Pray you appear now
And mark the alteration.
To your work
My Lady is in presence, show your duties
Exceeding well.
How do your scollers profit?
Hold up your heads demurely• Prettily
For young beginners.
Corisca and will do well in time
If they be kept in awe.
In awe I am sure
I quake like an aspen leaf.
no mercy Lady?
Nor in••remission?
Let me see your work.
Fie upon it what a thredds here, a poor cobblers wife
Would make a siner to sow a clones rent start up
And here you reel as you were drunk,
I am sure it is not with wine
O take head of wine
Could water is far better for your healths
Of which I am very tender, you had foul bodies
And must continue in this physical diet
Tell the cause of your disease be tan away
For fear of a relapse and that is dangerous
Yet I hope already that you are in some
Degree recovered and that way to resolve me
Answer me truly, nay what I propound
Concerns both nearer, what would you now give
If your means were in your hands to lye all night
With a fresh and hansume lady?
How a lady?
O I am pasd it, hunger with her razor
Hath made me an euenuch
for a mess of porridge
well sop'd with a bunch of reddish and a carret
I would sell my barr on rye but for women. oh
No more of women not a doyte for a doxy
After this hungry voyage.
These are truly
Good symptoms, let them not venture to much in the ayre
Till they are weaker.
this is tyranny
Scorn upon scorn
You were so
In your malicious intents to me
And therefore tic but justice whats the busnesse?
My Lords great friend signior Baptist Madam
Is newly lighted from his horse with certain
Assurance of my Lords arrival.
How
And stand I trifling here, hence with the mungrells
To there several kennels, there let them houle in private
Isle bee no farther troubled.
O that ever
I saw this fury
Or looked one a woman
But as a prodigy in nature
Silence
No more of this
methincks you have no cause
To repent your being here
have you not learnt
When your states are spent your several trades to live by and never charge the hospital?
Work but titely
And wee will not use a dishe-clou•e in the house
But of your spinning
O I would this hemp
Were tu•nd to a hal••r
Will you march
A soft one
Good general I beseech you
I can hardly
Draw my legs after me
For a crouch you may use
Your distaff, a good wit makes use of all things.
Was he jealous of me?
Ther's no perfect love
Without some touch of't Madam.
And my picture
Made by your devilish art, a spy upon
My actions? I never sate to be drawn,
Nor had you sir commission for it,
excuse me,
At his earnest suit I did it.
Very good,
Was I grown so cheap in his opinion of me?
The prosperous events that cround his fortunes
May qualify the offence.
Rood the events
The sanctuary fools and madmen f•ie to,
when their rash and desperate undertakings thrive well
But good, and wisemen are directed by
Grave counsels, and with such deliberation
Proceed in their affairs that chance had nothing
To do with 'em, howsoever, take the pains sir
To meet the honour in the King, and Queens
Approaches to my house, that breaks upon me
I will expect them with my best of care
To entertain such royal ghosts.
I know it
Leave that to me sir what should mo•e the Queen
So given to ease and pleasure, as fame speaks her,
To such a journey? or work on my Lord
To doubt my loyalty? nay more to take
For the resolution of his fears, a course
That is by holy writ denied a christian?
It was impious in him, and perhaps the welcome
He hopes in my embraces may deceive
His expectation the trumpets speak
The Kings arrival, help a women's wit now,
To make him know his fault and my just anger.
Your majesty must be weary.
No my Lord
A willing mind makes a hard journey easy
Not love attended on by Harms, was
More welcome to the cottage of Philemon,
And his poor Basis, then your gracious self.
Your matchless Queen, and all your royal train
Are to your servant and his wife.
Where is she?
I long to see her as my now loud rival
And I to have a smash at her, it is a cordial
To an old man, better then sack, and a to•t
Before he goes to supper.
Ha is my house turned
To a wilderness? nor wife nor servants ready
Withal rites due to majesty to receive
Such unexpected blessings? you assured me
Of better preparation, hath not
Th'excesse of joy transported her beyond
Her understanding?
I now parted from her,
And gave her your directions.
How shall I beg
Your majesties patience? sure my famelie's drunk
Or by some witch in envy of my glory
A dead sleep thrown upon 'em.
Sir.
But that
The sacred presence of the King forbids it,
My sword should make a massacre among you.
Where is your mistress?
First you are welcome home sir
Then know she says shoe's sick sir, there's no notice
Taken of my bravery.
Sick at such a time!
I cannot be though she were on her death bed,
And her spirit even now departed here stand they
Could call it back again, and in this honour
Give her a second being, bring me to her,
I know not what to urge, or how to redeem
This mortgage of her manners.
Ther's no climate
On the world I think where on •ades trick or other
Reigns not in women,
You were ever bitter
Against the Sex.
This is very strange.
Mean women
Have their faults as well, as Queens.
O she appears now.
The injury that you conceive I have done you
Dispute hereafter, and in your peru•senes
Wrong not your self, and me.
I am pas•d my childhood,
And need no t•to
This is the great King.
To whom I am engaged till death for all
I stand possessed of.
My humble roof is proud sir.
To be the canopy of so much greatness,
Set off with goodness.
My own praises flying
In such pure ayre, as your sweet breath fair Lady
Cannot but please me.
This is the Queen of Queens,
In her magnificence to me.
In my duty
I kiss her highness robe.
You stoop to low
To her whose lips would meet with yours.
Howere.
It may appear prepostrous in women
So to encounter, it is your pleasure Madam
And not my proud ambition, do you here sir.
Without a magical picture in the touch,
I find your print of close and wanton kisses
On the Queens lips
Upon your life be silent.
And now salute these Lords.
Since you'll hane me
You shall see I am experienced at the game
And can play it titely, you are a brave man sit
And do deserve a free and hearty welcome
Be this the prologe to it.
An old mans turn
Is ever last in kissing, I have lips too
However cold ones Madam.
I will warm 'em.
With the fire of mine.
And so she has I thank you.
I shall sleep the better all night for it.
You express
The boldness of a wanton courtesan,
And not a matrons modesty, take up,
Or you are disgraced forever.
How? with kissing
Feelingly as you tought me? would you have me
Turn my cheek to 'em, as proud ladies use
To their inferiors, as if they intended
Some business should be whispered in their •are
And not a salutation, what I doe
I will do freely, now I am in the humour
I'll fly at all, are there any more?
For b•are.
Or you will raise my anger to a height,
That will descend in fury.
Why? you know
How to resolve your self what my intents are,
By the help of Mephostophiles, and your picture,
Pray you look upon it again, I humbly thank
The Queens great care of me, while you were absent.
She knew how tedious it was for a young wife,
And being for that time a kind of widow,
To pass away her melancholy hours
Without good company, and in charity therefore
Provided for me, out of her own store
She could the Lords Vbaldo, and Ricardo,
Two principal courtiers for Ladies service,
To do me all good offices, and as such
Employed by her, I hope I'haue received,
And entertained 'em, nor shall they depart
Without the effect arising from the cause
That brought 'em hither.
Thou dost be-lye thy self,
I know that in my absence thou were it honest,
However now turned monster.
The truth is
We did not deal like you in speculations
On cheating pictures; we knew shadows were
No substances and actual performance
The best assurance, I will bring 'em hither
To make good in this presence so much for me.
Some minutes space I beg your majesties pardon
You are moved now champ upon this bit a little
Anon you shall have another, waite me Hilario.
How now? turned statue sir?
Fly, and fly quickly
From this cursed habitation, or this Gorgon
Will make you all as I am, in her tongue
Millions of adders hiss, and every hair
Upon her wicked head a snake more dreadful
Then that Tisiphon, threw on Athamas,
Which in his madness forced him to dismember
His proper issue O that ever I
Reposed my trust in magic, or beleeud
Impossiblities, or that charms had power
These are the fruits
Of marriage, and old bachelor, as I am,
And what's more will continue so, is not troublde
With these fine figures.
Till you are resolved sir,
Forsake not hope.
Upon my life this is
Dissimulation.
And it suits not with
Your fortitude and wisdom to be thus
Transported with your passion.
You were once
Deceaud in me sir as I was in you,
Yet the deceit please both.
She hath confessed all,
What further proof should I ask?
Yet remember
The distance that is interposed between
A women's tongue, and her hart, and you must grant
You build upon no certaineties.
What have we here?
You must come on and show you selves.
The King •
And Queen too, would I were as far under the earth
As I am aboue it.
Some Poet will
Prom this relation, or in verse, or proo•e,
Or both together blended render vs
Ridiculous to all ages,
I remember
This face when it was in a better plight
Are not you Ricardo•
And this thing I take it
Was once Vbaldo.
I am now I know not what.
We thank your majesty for employing vs
To this subiil• Circa.
How my Lord? turned spinster.
Do you work by the day or by the great?
Is your Theorbo
Turned to a distaff Signior, and your voice
With which you chanted rome for a lusty gallant
Turned to the note of lacreymae?
Prithee tell me
For I know thou art free, how often and to the purpose
Have you been merry with this lady.
Never, never.
Howsoever you should say so, for your credit
Being the only cou•• bull.
O that ever
I saw this kicking heifer,
You see Madam
How I have curd your servants, and what favours
They with their rampaht valour have won from me.
You may as they are phisickd, I presume
Trust a fair virgin with 'em, they have learned
Their several trades to live by, and paid nothing
But cold, and hunger for 'em, and may now
Set up for them selves for here I give 'em over,
And now to you sir, why doe you not again,
Peruse your picture? and take the advice
Of your learned consort? these are the men, or none
That made you, as the Italian says a beco.
I know not which way to entreat your pardon
Nor am I worthy of it my Sophia,
My best Sophia, here before the king,
The Queen, these Lords, and all the lookers on
I do renounce my error, and embrace you
As the great example to all after times
For such as would dye chaste, and noble wives
With reverence to imitate.
Not so sir.
I yet hold of, however I have purged
My doubted innocence, the foul aspertions
In your unmanly doubts cast on my honour
Cannot so soon be washd of.
Shall we have
More ijggobobs yet?
When you went to the wars
I set no spy upon you to observe
which way you wandered, though our sex by nature
Is subject to suspicions and fears,
My confidence in your loyalty freed me from 'em.
But to deal as you did against your religion
With this enchanter to survey my actions
Was more then women's weakness, therefore know
And tic my boon unto the King, I doe
Desire a separation from your bed
For I will spend the remnant of my life
In prayer, and meditation.
O take pity
Upon my weak condition, or I am
More wretched in your innocence, then if
I had found you guilty, have you shown a jewel
Out of the cabinet of your rich mind
To locke it up again? She tur•es away
Will none speak for me? shame, and sin hath robbed me
Of the use of my tongue.
Since you have conquered Madam
You wrong the glory of your victory
If you use it not with mercy.
Any penance
You please to impose upon him I dare warrant
He will gladly suffer.
Have I lived to see
But on good woman, and shall we for a trifle
Have her return nun? I will first pull down the cloister
To the old sport again with a good luck to you
It is not alone enough that you are good,
We must have some of the breed of you, will you destroy
The kind, and race of goodness? I am converted
And ask your pardon Madam for my ill opinion
Against the sex, and show me but two such more
I'll marry yet, and love em.
She that yet
Ne'er knew what it was to bend but to the King
Thus beg remission for him.
O dear Madam
Wrong not your greatness so.
We all are suitors.
I do deserve to bee hard among the rest.
And we have suffered for it
I perceive
Theirs no resistance but suppose I pardon
What's past, who can secure me, He'll be free
From jealousy hereafter.
I will be
My own security, go ride where you please,
Feast, reuele, banquet, and make choice with whom
I'll set no watch upon you, and for proof, oft
This cursed picture I surrender up
To a consuming fire,
As I abuire
The practise of my art.
Upon this terms.
I am reconciled and for these that have paid
The price of their folly, I desire your mercy.
At your request they have it.
Hang all trades now.
I will find a new one, and that is to live honest.
These are my fee's.
Pray you take 'em with a mischief.
So all ends in peace now
And to all married men be this a caution.
Which they should duly tender as their life
Neither to dote to much nor doubt a wife.

THe Duke is moved.
The news displeased him much.
And yet I see no reason, why he should
Engage so great affection to th▪ Daughter
Of Millan, he ne'er saw her.
Fame doth paint
Great beauties, and her picture (by which Princes
Court one another) may beget a flame
In him to raise this passion.
Trust a pencil,
I like not that State▪ wooing, see his Brother 
Has left him, pray my Lord how is it with
His Highness?
Somewhat calmer, Love I think
Will kill neither of vs, although I bee
No Stoic, y•…t I thank•… my •…tarres I have
A power o'er my a•…fection, if he will not
Tame his, let it melt him into Sonnets
Hee will prove the more loving Prince to you,
Get in again; and make wise speeches to him,
There is Aristotles Ghost still with him,
My Philosophical Governor that was,
He wants but you two, and a pair of Spectacles,
To see what folly it is, to love a woman
With that wicked resolution to marry her,
Though he be my elder Brother, and a Duke,
I ha more wit, when there's a dearth of women
I may turn fool, and place one of their Sex
N•…error my heart, farewell, commend me to
My Brother, and the Councell-Table.
Still the same wild Prince, there needs no character
Where he is, to 〈◊〉 him.
Hee said truth,
I doubt there is no room for one, whom hee
Should place in's heart, and honour.
His own Lady
All pity her misfortune, both were too
Unripe for Hymen, it was the old Dukes act,
And in such marriages, hearts seldom meet
When they grow older.
Wherefore would the Duke
Marry his young Son first?
The walk of Princes,
To make provision beti•…es for th•…m:
They can bequeath small legacy, knowing th'heyre
Carries both state and fortune for himself,
His fate•… before him, here comes Grimundo •…
The Duke is recollected, whore's the Prince?
Gone.
I would he were returned once to himself.
He has to soon forgot your precepts.
Your example might still be a Lecture,
I did not deceive the old Dukes trust
While I had power to manage him,
Hoe's now past my tuition, but to th'Duke—
Is it not strange my Lord, that the Young Lady
Of Millan, should b•… forced to marry now, with
Her Uncle?
They're unequal,
It is unlawful.
It is a trifle, reasons of State they urge•…
Against vs, lea•…t their Dnkedome by this match,
•…e subject unto Sauoy, for the scruple•…
O•… Religion, they are in hope, that
A Dispensation may bee procured
To quit exceptions, and by this means,
They shall preserve their Principality,
In the name and blood, so reports Fabrichio
Whom the Duke employed for Treaty, how now?
The Duke calls for you my Lords.
We attend,
Ha? he is coming forth.
His looks are cheerful.
Fabrichio?
My Lord,
Wee will to Tennis.
What your Grace please.
Grimundo?
Because you take no pleasure in such pasti•…es,
Your contemplation may busy it self, with that book.
Book my Lord, it is—
Leonora's picture a fair•… Table-booke.
You may without offence to your young Wife▪
Look on a Picture.
I 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 it, let 〈◊〉 s•…e't •…o m•…re,
Millan and we are parted, our breast wears
Again his natural Temper, allow me pray
The excuse of common frailty, to be moved
At strangeness of this news.
Your Highness said,
You would to Tennis.
And'tis time enough,
Wee have the day before vs: some Prince Grimundo
In such a cause as this would have been angry,
Angry indeed, throw'ne of cold language, and
Called it a high, and loud affront, whose stirring
Imagination would have wakened Death,
And by a miserable war, have taught
Repentance, to a pair of flourishing States,
Such things there have been?
But your Grace is wise—
Nay doe not flatter now, I do•… not Court
Your praise so much, I speak but what our stories
Mention, if they abuse not soft posterity:
I was not come to tell you, what my thoughts,
With a strong murmur prompt me too.
We hope—
Ye fear, and do not know me yet, my actions
Shall clear your jealousy, I'm reconciled
At home, and while I cherished a peace here,
Abroad I must continue it, there are
More Ladiesi'the world?
Most true my Lord.
And as attractive, great, and glorious women
Are there not, ha?
Plenty my Lord in the world.
Ithe world, within the confines of our Duke∣dome
In Sauoy, are there not?
In Sauoy too.
Many choice beauties, but your birth my Lord▪
Was but an honour purchased by another,
It might have been thy chance.
My Father was
No Duke.
It was not thy fault, nor first my virtue,
That I was borne when the fresh Sun was rising,
So came with greater shadow into life,
Then thou, or hee.
But royal Sir be pleased—
No more, wee are not ignorant, you may
Take away this distinction, and allege
In your grave wisdoms, spacious arguments,
For our alliance with some foreign Prince,
But we have weighed their promising circumstance,
And find it only a device, that may
Serve time, and some dark ends, a mere state-tricke,
To disguise hatred, and is empty of
Those benefits, it seems to bring along:
Give me a Lady borne in my obedience,
Whose disposition, will not engage
A search into the nature of her Climate,
Or make a serutinie into the Stars:
Whose language is mine own, and will not need
A smooth Interpreter, whose virtue is
Aboue all titles, though her birth or fortune,
B•… a Degree beneath vs, such a Wife
Were worth a thousand far fetched Brides, that have
More state, and less Devotion.
If your Highness—
Come you shall know our purpose, in the last
We obeyed your directions, not without
Our free and firm allowance of the Lady
Whom we'll forget, it will become your duties,
Follow vs now, wee have not been unthrifty
In our affections, and that Millan may
Know Sauoy can neglect a Millanoise,
And that we need not borrow a delight,
Here we are fixed to marry,
We are Subjects,
And shall solicit Heaven, you may find one
Worthy your great acceptance.
Wee are confident,
And to put off the cloud wee walk in, know
Wee are resolved to place all Love and Honour
Upon Cleona
Nor first a n•…w affection, wee but cherish
Some seeds, which heretofore, her virtue had
Scattered upon our heart.
We cannot be
Ambitious of a Lady, in your own
Dominion, to whom we shall more willingly
Prostrate our duties.
She's a Lady of
A flowing sweetness, and the living virtue
Of many noble Ancestors.
In whom
Their fortunes meet, as their Prophetic Souls
Had taught them thrifty providence, for this
Great honour, you intend her.
Wee are pleased,
And thank your general vote,
You then shall straight prepare our visit, bear our
Princely respects, and say wee shall take pleasure
To bee her Guest to day, nay loose no time,
Wee shall the sooner quit the memory
Of Leonoraes Image.
The Prince your Brother Sir?
Withdraw, but be not at too much distance,
Lodwicke You're welcome.
I shall know that by my success, I want
A thousand Crowns, a thousand Crowns.
For what use?
Why will these foolish questions ne'er be left,
Is it not sufficient I would borrow em,
But you must still capitulate with me?
I would put 'em to that use they were ordained for,
You might as well have asked me, when I meant
To pay you again.
That to some other men,
Might ha been necessary.
And you wo'not
Doe that, I have another easy Suite to you.
What is it?
A thing of nothing, I wo'd entreat you
To part with this same transitory honour,
This trifle called a Dukedom, and retire,
Like a good Christian Brother, into some
Religious house, it would be a great ease to you,
And comfort to your friends, especially
To me, that would not trouble you, with the noise
Of money thus, and I could help it.
Tic a kind, and honest motion, out of Charity,
Mere Charity, so I must needs accept it—
Isle only marry, and get a Boy, or two,
To govern this poor trifle for I'm bound
In duty, to provide for my Succession.
What doe you make of me, cannot I serve?
You, that propound a benefit for my Soul,
Wo not neglect your own I know, w•…i'll both
Turn Fryers together?
And bee low sie?
Any thing.
I shall not have a thousand Crowns?
Thou shalt.
Then be a Duke still, come lets love, and bee
Fine Princes, and thou had but two or three
Of my conditions, by this hand I wot not
Care and thou were immortal, so I might
Live with thee, and enjoy this worlds felicity.
Thast put me in tune, how shall's bee very merry
Now in the instant?
Merry?
Yes.
Merry indeed?
Yes.
Follow me,
Isle bring you to a Lady?
To a Whore?
That is a little the courser name.
And can you play the Pander for me?
A toy, a toy.
What can a man doe less for any Brother,
Th'ordinary complement now a days, with great ones,
Wee prostitute our Sisters with less scruple
Then eating flesh on vigils, it is out of fashion
To trust a Servant with our private sins,
The greater tie of blood, the greater faith,
And therefore Parents have been held of late,
The safest wheels, on which the childrens lust,
Hath hurried into act, with supple greatness,
Nature doth wear a virtuous charm, and will
Doe more in soft compassion to the sin,
Then gold or swelling promises.
O Lodwicke!
These things doe carry Horror, he is lost
I fear, no I ha thought a something else,
You shall with me to a Lady?
With all my heart.
Unto my Mistress.
Your Mistress, who's that?
The fair Cleona.
She is honest.
Yes, were she otherwise, she were not worthy my visit,
Not to loose circumstance I love her.
How?
Honestly.
You doe not mean to marry her?
It sha'not be my fault if she refuse,
To bee a Duchess.
A'my Conscience,
You are in earnest.
As I hope to thrive in my desires, come
You shall bear me company, and witness
How I woe her.
I commend
Your nimble resolution, then a Wife
Must bee had somewhere, wo'd y'ad mine, to cool
Your appetite, take your own course, I can
But pray for you; the thousand Crowns—
Upon Condition, you'll not refuse, to
Accompany.
Your Carriage quickly—stay—
Now I think better on it, my Wife lives with her,
They are Companions, I had forgot that?
She'll take it kindly.
It were enough to put her
Into conceit, I come in love to her,
My Constitution will not bear it,
What?
Not see her?
Yet a thousand Crowns—God buy
Condemn me to my wife.
Ye hear Gentlemen?
With grief my Lord, and wonder at your sufferance.
He is our Brother, we are confident
Though he be wild he loves vs, twill become
Vs t'pray and leave him to a miracle
But to our own affair.
Love and thy golden arrow, we shall try,
How you'll decide our second Destiny.
A kiss, and then tic scaled, this she should know
Better then the impression, which I made,
With the rude signet, tic the same she left
Upon my lip▪ when I departed from her,
And I have kept it warm still, with my breath,
That in my prayers hath mentioned her.
My Lord?
Dulcino welcome. thou art soon returned,
How dost thou like the City?
Tic a heap of handsome building.
And how the people?
My conversation hath not age enough
To speak of them, more then they promise well,
In their aspect, but I have argument
Enough in you my Lord, to fortify
Opinion, they are kind, and hospitable
To strangers.
Thy indulgence to my wound,
Which owes a cure unto thy pretty Surgery,
Hath made thee, too much Prisoner to my Chamber▪
But wee shall walk abroad.
It was my duty?
Since you received it in my cause, and could
My blood have wrought it sooner, it had been
Your balmy Fountain▪
Noble youth, I thank thee. 
How now, did speak with him?
I had the happiness my Lord to meet him
VVaiting upon the Duke abroad, hee bad me,
Make hast with the remembrance of his Service,
Heel bring his own joys with him, instantly,
To welcome your return.
Did thou request
His secrecy?
I did, he promised silence.
So, Isle expect him, thou art sad Dulcino,
I prophecy thou shalt have cause, to bless
The minute, that first brought vs to acquaintance.
Doe not suspect my Lord, I am so wicked,
Not to doe that already, you have saved
My life, and therefore have deserved that duty.
Name it no more, I mean another way.
It is not in your power, to make me richer,
With any benefit, shall succeed it, though
I should live ever with you.
I require,
Not so much gratitude.
There is no way
Left for my hope, to doe you any service,
Near my preserving, but by adding one
New favour, to a suit, which I would name,
To me, I prithee speak, It must be something
I can deny thee.
Tic an humble suite,
You license my departure.
Whither?
Any whether.
Doe you call this a way to doe me service?
It is the readiest I can study Sir.
To tarry were but to increase my debt,
And wast your favours, in my absence, I
May publish, how much virtue, I have found
In Sauoy, and make good unto your fame,
What I doe owe you here, this shall suruine you,
For I will speak the story with that truth,
And strength of passion, it shall doe you honour,
And dwell upon your name sweeter then mythe,
When wee are both dead?
Thou hast art, to move
In all things, but in this, change thy desire,
And Isle deny thee nothing, doe not urge
Thy unkind departure, thou hast met perhaps,
With some that have deceived thee with a promise,
Won with thy pretty looks and presence, but
Trust not a great man, most of them dissemble,
Pride, and Court cunning hath betrayed their faith,
To a secure Idolatry, their soul,
Is lighter then a complement, take heed,
They'll flatter thy to young ambition,
Feed thee with names, and then like subtle Chemists
Having extracted, drawn thy Spirit up,
Laugh, they have made thee miserable.
Let
No jealousy my Lord, render me so
Unhappy, that preferment, or the flatteries
Of any great man, hath seduced my will
To leave you, by my life, and your own honour,
No man hath tempted me, not have I changed
A syllable with any.
Any man?
Still I suspect thy safety?
And thou may thus deceive me, it may be,
Some wanton Lady hath beheld thy face,
And from her eyes, shot Cupids into thine,
To abuse that fight, or wrought upon thy frailty,
With their smooth language to undo thy self,
Trust not the innocence•… of thy Soul too far,
For though their bosoms carry whiteness, think,
It is not snow, they dwell in a hot Climate,
The Court, where men are but deceitful shadows,
The women•…n, walking flames; what if this Lady
Bestow a wealthy Carkanet upon thee,
Another give thee Wardrobes, a third promise
A chain of Diamonds, to deck thy youth,
▪Tic but to buy thy virtue from thee, and when
Thy out•…id thrive•…, upon their treacherous bounty
Th'out starve at heart, and lust will leave t•…y body,
Many unpitied ruins, th ouart young—
There is no fear my Lord, that I shall take
Such wicked courses, and I hope you see not,
Any propension in my youth, to sin
For Pride, or wantonness.
Indeed, I doe not,
But being my boy so young, and beautiful,
Thou art apt to bee sedue'd.
Believe me Sir,
I will not serve the greatest Prince on earth,
When I leave you.
Thou shalt not serve me, I
Will make thee my companion.
No reward,
Though just, should buy the freedom I was borne with
Much less base ends, i•… I but meet again
That good man, who in reverence to his habit,
The thieves let go before your happy valour
Came to my rescue.
Hee that was your Conduct?
From Millan, for so—if I remember
You named a Father, what could he advantage?
Your fortune, were he present, more, then with
Religious Council?
I did trust him Sir,
As being the sasest treasurer, with that,
Would make me welcome in Sauoy, and
I know he will be faithful, when we meet,
For his sake, let me beg you would discharge,
A worthless Servant, that inquest of him—
No more to cut of all unwelcome motives,
I charge thee by thy Love, thy Gratitude,
Thy life preserved, which but to stay thee here,
I would not name again, urge no consent
From me, to thy departure, I have now
V•…e of thy faith, thou wo't not run away
I have employment for thee, such a one
As shall not only pay my services,
But leave m•… in arrerage to thy love,
Receive this letter. 
Let me embrace thee, with a spreading arm,
I have dispensed with my attendance, on
The Duke, to bid you welcome Sir, from death,
Fame so, had co•…z'ned our belief, but thus,
She has made you the more pr•…cious.
Then I prospered,
If I may call it so, for I procured
That rumour to be spread, excuse a min•…te,
He tell thee all my Couns•…ls, I need not,
Wast any instructions on thee, Dulcino,
For the con•…yauce of this Paper, let me
Commend it to thy care, tic to my Mistress,
Conceal my lodgings, and doe this for him
Will study noble recompense,
You command me.
What pretty youth is that? sure I have seen
That face before,
Never, I brought him first
To Save•…y, having brought him from the
Bandits, in my passage, ore the Confines,
Is it not a sweet fa•…'d thing? there are some Ladies,
Might change their beauties with him.
And gain by it.
N•…y, •…o his shape he has as fine a Soul,
Which 〈◊〉 that perfection.
You ha not
B•…en long acquainted with him.
I have skill
〈◊〉 〈◊〉: 〈◊〉 my Character,
〈◊〉 full •…xcellent excellent sweetness.
You express him
Passionately.
H•…s virtue will deserve
More praise, he suffers Sir for love, in that
He is a Gentleman, for never could
Narrow, and earthly minds, be capable
Of Loves imp•…occasion, or the injury—
He willingly forsook his friends, and Country,
Because unkindly for unworthy ends,
They would have forced him marry against his heart.
He told me so himself, and it were sin,
Not to believe him, but omitting these,
How fares the best of Ladies my Cleona?
Your Cleon•…?
Mine, she is in affection,
She is not married.
No?
She is in health?
Yes.
There is something in thy looks, I cannot
Read by thy own•… gloss, and make me know,
That doubtful text, to whom hath she given up,
The hope of my felici•…ie, her heart,
Since my too fatal absence?
Unto none,
Within the circle of my knowledge,
Then
I am renewed again, may thy tongue never
Know sorrows 〈◊〉.
Will you p•…esently
Visit her?
I have sent a letter, to
Certify, I am still her living Servant.
No matter, weal be there, before the boy,
There is necessity, if you knew all,
Come lets away.
Again thou dost aflict
My Soul with jealousy, if she have still
The 〈◊〉 poss•…ssion of her heart—
But you are
Dead Sir, remember that.
I shall be living,
And soon enough present my self her fresh,
And active Lower.
If the Duke bee not
Before you▪
How?
The Duke, it is so resolved,
Your rival, if you •…till affect Cleona,
Within this hour, he means his first solicit
And personal siege, loose not your self with wonder,
If you neglect this opportunity,
She having firm opinion of your death,
It will not be a miracle, if the Title
Of Duchess be a strong temptation,
To a weak woman.
I must thank your love,
And Counsel, but for this time, disengage
Your further stay with me, th•… Duke may miss you,
Pr•…serve his favour, and forget me in
Your conference, I would be still concealed,
Let me c•…nsider on my fate, again
I thank you, and dismiss you,
Quiet thoughts,
Dwell in your breast, in all things I obey you,
You know you have my heart.
She's but a women•…n.
Yet how shall I be able to accuse her,
With any Justice, when she thinks me dead,
The Duke, I must doe something, I am full
Of discord, and my thoughts are fighting in me,
From our own army must arise •…ur fear,
When love it self is turned a Mutin•…re. 
So, so, yet more perfume, you're sweet Serving∣men, make eu•…rye corner of the house smoke, bestir your selves, •…very man know his Pr•…uince, and bee officious to pl•…e my •…eddy, according to his Talent, have you furnish•… out the b•…nquet?
Most M•…thodically?
Tic well, here should have been a fresh suite of Arras, but no matter, these 〈◊〉 the ag•… well, let'em hang.
And there were a Mask to entertain his Highness?
Hang Masks, let every conceit show his own face, my Lady would not diguise her entertainment, and now I talk of disguising, wheres the Butler?
Here Sir.
Where Sir? tic my Ladies pleasure, that you be drunk to day, you will deal her wine abroad, the more liberally among •…he Dukes Servants, you two are tall fellows, make good the credit of the Buttery, and when you are drunk, I will send others to relee•…e you, go to your stations, if his Grace c•…me hither a Suitor to my Lady, as wee have some cause to suspect, and after mar∣rye her, I may be a great man, and ride upon a reverend Move•…e by Patent, t•…ere is no end of my preferment, I did once teach my Lady to dance, she must then help me to rise; for indeed, it is just▪ that on•…lie those, who ger their living by their legs, should rid•… upon a Foot∣cloth.
Here's a young Gentleman: desires to speak
with my Lady.
More young Gentlemen? tell him I am busy.
With my Lady—
Busy with my Lady Sir?
Would speak with my Lady Sir?
I ha not done with my Lady my self yet, hee shall stay, tic for my Ladies s•…te, no time to inter∣rupt my Lady, but now, Isle know his business, and taste it for my Lady, if I like it, she shall hear more, but bid him come to me, me thinks I talk, like a peremptory States man already, I shall quickly learn to forget my self, when I am in great office, I will oppress the Subject, flatter the Prince, take bribes a both sides, doe right to neither, serve Heaven as far as my profit will give me l•…aue, and tremble, on∣lie at the Summons of a Parliament.
Hum? a Page, a very Page, one that would wriggle and prefer himself to be a Wag, tic so, have you any Letter of commendations?
I have a Letter Sir.
Let me see the complex•…on of the face, has it a handsome Title Page, is it Stilo 〈◊〉.
I have command Sir, to deliver it,
To none, but to my Lady.
A forward youth, I like him, hee is not modest, I will assist his preferment, to engage him to my faction, a special Court policy, see my Lady.
Yet •…ay Belinda—
I beseech you Madam
Allow excuse to my abrupt departure,
There is a business of much consequence,
And which you will not morn to see effected,
Besides the duty that I owe my Lord,
Compels me to it Madam.
Well, but that
Wee are acquainted with your virtue, this
Would move suspicion you were not in
Charity with the Duke.
You are pleasant Madam,
You are severe, to bind your self too strictly,
From Court and entertainments, sure your Lord
Should chide you for it.
If it please you stay
Your Ladyship and i'll converse together,
My unkind fate hath indisposed me,
To these state ceremonies too.
You will oblige me by your pardon?
Use your pleasure.
Nay you shall give me leave a little further.
Here I am vsele•…e.
May it please you Madam,
This pretty Gentleman, has a suite to you,
And I in his behalf, he will be serviceable,
And active in his place, a friend of mine.
Your Steward Madam, is too full of zeal,
To doe me a preferment, but I have
No other ambition, then to commend
This paper to your white hands,
Never doubt,
Tic done, be bold and call me fellow.
Be
You circumspect I pray, that all things have
Their perfect shape and order, to receive
The D•…ke, you know our pleasure, not to spare
Or •…oct, or study, to delight his Highness.
I hope I have not been your S•…award so long,
But I know how to put your Ladyship
To cost enough without study.
Shall I credit
So great a bliss? the date is fresh, Foscari
Whom I thought dead? give him five hundred Crowns
We will divide em.
Stay.
You need not bid,
I use to make 'em stay, and long enough,
Ere they receive such bounties.
Treasure is
Too cheap a payment for so rich a message.
This is the right Court largess.
I must call thee,
My better Genius, have you known this youth?
If your Ladyship like him, I have known him long
If otherwise, I ne'er saw him in my life.
The day breaks glorious to my darkened thoughts,
He lives, he lives yet, cease ye amorous fears,
More to perplex me, prithee speak sweet youth,
How far•…s my Lord? upon my Virgin heart,
Isle bui'd a flaming Altar, to offer up
A thank▪ full Sacrifice for his return,
To life▪ and me, speak and increase my comforts,
Is he in perfect health?
Not perfect Madam, until you bless him with
The knowledge of your constancy.
O get thee wings and fly then,
Tell him my love doth burn like Vestal fire,
Which with his memory, richer then all spices,
Dispersed odours round about my Soul,
And did refre it•…sh when it was dull, and sad,
With thinking of his absence.
This is strange,
My Lady is in Love with him.
Yet stay
Thou goosed too soon away, where is he speak?
He gave me no Commission for that Lady▪
He will soon save that question, by his presence.
Time he has no feathers, he walks now on crut∣ches,
Relate his gesture when he gave thee this,
What other words, did mirth smile on his brow,
I would not for the wealth of this great world,
He should suspect my faith, what said he prithee,
He said, what a warm lover, when desire
Makes eloquent could speak, he said you were
Both star and Pilot.
Not to fast, my joys
Will be too mighty for me.
I have found it,
That boy comes from the Duke, that letter love,
Twill be a match, and please your Ladyship—
Forbear your Ceremonies, what needs all this
Preparation, if the Duke vouchsafe
His person for my guest, duty will teach me,
To entertain him without half this trouble,
Isle have noryot for his Highness.
Hum?
How's this.
Be less officious, you forget—
Sweet youth, go forward with thy story.
Hum?
This is a Favrie, and the Devil sent him
To make my Lady mad, it were well to try
Whether he be flesh and blood, ha, Isle pinch him first.
How now?
My care shall see nothing be wanting, for
Your honour, and the Dukes.
Your place I see,
Is better then your manners, go too, be
Less troublesome, his Highness brings intents
Of grace, not burden to vs, know your duty.
So, I were best keep my self warm with my own office, while I may, the Tide is turned I see with∣in two Minutes, here was nothing but look to the
Gallery, perfume the Chambers, what Muficke for the Duke, a Banquet for the Duke, now, be less officious, We'll have noryot for his Highness, tic this Vrchin he has undone all our preferment.
The Suns loved flower, that shuts his yellow cur∣taine,
When he declines, opens it again
At his fair rising, with my parting Lord,
I closed all my delights, till his approach,
It shall not spread it self.
Madam the Duke?
Already.
Hee is entered.
Do not leave me,
I shall remember more.
Excellent Cleona,
The humble duty of a Subject to your High∣ness.
Rise high in out thoughts, and thus
Confirm we are welcome, to these eyes, our heart,
Shall pay a lower duty, then obedience
Hath taught your knee.
Your Grace much honours me,
Till this white hour, these walls were never proud,
T'inclose a guest, the genius of our house,
Is by so great a presence waked, and glories,
Te entertain you.
Every accent falls
Like a fresh level, to increase her value,
Wee can but thank Clean.
Royal Sir—
Let me revoke that hasty syllable,
But thank thee, yes, wee can doe more, and will,
Wee have a heart to do it, our much grieved sister
I know you doe not wear this sadness, for
Our presence.
If I'ue any skill in mine own eyes,
Since they beheld you, they have looked
More cheerfully, then they are wont.
And yet I see a tear is ready to break prison,
It is of joy to see you sit in health,
I hope the Prince is well?
He will bee so
when he leaves to be unkind
To thee, but let's forget him,
Fame he's not
Injured him, in the Character of his person,
And his shape promises a richer Soul,
I feel a new, and fiery spirit dance,
Upon my amorous heart-strings.
We are come
My fair Cleona.
With your Highness pardon,
That name was never so attended, it
Becomes your bounty, but not me to wear
That Title.
What?
Of, fair my Lord?
I said you were my fair Cleona—
Sir?
I did apply,
I hope't does not offend to call you so,
You're yet my Subject.
When I leave that name, may Heaven—
Be pleased to change it for a better▪
It cannot.
Doe not sin, tic in our power
With your consent, to work that wonder Lady.
I want my understanding.
Isle explain,
Doe not believe it youth, by all the faith
Of Virgins▪ Isle not change my service, to
Thy Master for his Dukedom.
You're too noble.
What boy is that? Ha Giotto?
Madam, the Duke observes vs.
I ha seen him,
It is no common face.
My Lord we know not,
Where is Grimundo?
Not yet come my Lord.
Send for him straight, and bid him bring the picture
We gave into his keeping, yet, forbear,
It is in vain.
My Lord, Cleona waits
Your farther Courtship.
Whither am I carried?
I hope dread Sir, my house affords no object,
To interrup your quiet.
None but Heavenly,
〈◊〉 this roof be capable of ill,
〈◊〉 only presence Lady would convert it.
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 rtuous Magic in your eye,
For where soar it calls a beam, it does
Create a goodness, you've a handsome boy.
The Duke is troubled?
He's a pretty youth.
I hope he wo'not take me from my Lady,
In say I am her Servant.
Something binds
My speech, my heart is narrow of a sudden,
Giotto take some opportunity
To enquire that youth condition▪ name, and Country,
And give vs private knowledge, to cut off
* Circumstance Lady, I am not your fresh,
And unacquainted Lover, that doth wast 
The tedious Moons with preparation
To his amo•…os suite, I have been Cleona,
A long admirer of your virtues, and
Doe want the comfort or so sweet a Partner,
In our young state.
You mock your humble handmaid.
A stranger say?
He brought some welcome Letter
To my Lady.
Not know his name nor whence?
No my good Lord.
So so, I like this well,
My Lady does apply her to the Duke,
There is some hope again, things may succeed
This Lords discoursing with me, is an Omen
To my familiarity with Greatness.
Grimundo not come yet? I am not well.
Good Heaven defend, Angels protect your Highness.
Your holy prayers cannot but doe me good.
Continue that Devotion, Charity
Will teach you a consent, to my departure,
I am unhappy.
Make not me so Lady,
By the least trouble of your self, I am
Acquainted with these passions, let me breath
A hart upon thy lip farewell again
Your pardon.
It is a very strange distemper,
And sudden, noble Lady we must waite
Upon the Duke.
My bud is niptagen,
Would all the Banquet were in his belly for it.
Let not my eyes betray me.
I'm sick too,
Let not your Ladyship repent your cost,
Isle have a care the Sweet meates bee not lost.
Acquaint him with these passages of the Duke.
Tell him I long to see him, and at last
To crown the story, say my heart shall know
No other Love but his.
I fly with this
Good news.
Madam here is Prince Lodwicke,
Newly discoach'd.
Attend him?
Most officiously.
Stay it can doe no harm.
Even what you please.
If he enquire for his Lady, answer
She is not very well, and keeps her Chamber.
Isle say she's dead if you please, it is my duty
Isle never speak truth while I live, that shall
Offend your Ladyship.
You may hear all, 
And when you please appear.
Sick? whore's her Doctor,
Isle be acquainted with him, noble Lady.
Your Grace is here most welcome,
I am bold?
I'm happy that my duty to the Prince
Brought me to kiss your hand.
Beside the honour done to me, your person
Will add much comfort to Astella, your
Weak Lady,
She is sick, mend let her mend, sheele spend her time worse, yet she knows my mind, and might doe me the courtesy to die once, id take it more kindly, then to be at charge with a Physician.
You wo'd not poison her?
I think I must be driven to it, what shall a man doe with a woman that wo'not be ruled, I ha given cause e∣nough to break any reasonable women's heart in Savoy, and yet you see how I am troubled with her, but leave her to the Destinies, where is my Brother all this while? I came to meet him, what first a match already? when shall we dance, and triumph in the Tilt-yard, for honour of the high and mighty nuptials: where is he?
My Lord he is gone.
How?
Distempered.
Not with wine?
Departed sick.
She jeers him, by this lip Isle love thee, and thou wot abuse him, I knew he would but shame himself, and therefore durst not come with him, for mine own credit, I warrant, he came fierce upon thee with some parcel of Po∣etry, which he had coned by hart out of Tesco Guarrini, or some other of the same melting Tribe, and thought to have brought thy Maiden Town to his obedience, at the first noise of his furious Artillery.
My Lord, you understand me not, your Brother
Is not in health, some unkind pain within him
Compelled him to forsake vs,
Is it true?
That he is sick, my Brothers sick Piero.
I am very well here.
So am not I, pray Sir appear more civil
Or I shall leave you.
True?
Tic too true my Lord.
No, no, truth is a virtuous thing, and we cannot have too much on it, do ye hear, if I may counsel you be wise, and stay for me, you may bee my wife within this Month, and the Durchesse too.
Your Wife my Lord, why you are married,
What Shall become of her?
Is she not sick?
But are you sure sheele dye?
What a ridiculous question, do you make, if death wo'not take a fair course with her, are there not reasons e∣nough in state think you, to behead her, or if that seem cruel, because I do not affect blood, but for very good ends, I can be divorced from her, and leave her rich in the Title of Lady Dowager.
Upon what offence can you pretend a Divorce?
Because she is not fruitful, is not that a sin.
Would your Lordship have her fruitful, and you
Ne'er lye with her.
Have not I known a Lady, whose husband is an Eunuch, upon Record, mother to three or four children and no free conscience but commends her.
But these things wo▪not be easily perfect, unless
You were Duke to enforce em.
Is not my brother in the way? sick already, and perhaps as fit for Heaven, as an other, I know hee cannot l•…ue long▪ he's so well given, they never thrive, and then d'•… think il•… keep such a Religious Court, in this corner lodge a Covey of Capouchins, who shall zealously pray for me without stockings, in that a nest of Carthusians, things which in fi•… turn to Otters, appear flesh, but really are fish, for that they feed on: no▪ no▪ give me a Court of flourishing pleasure where delight in all her shapes, and studied vary∣ties, every minute courts the Soul, to actuate her chief felicity.
Doe you never think of Hell?
Faith I doe, but it always makes me melancho∣lie, and therefore as seldom as I can, my contemplation shall point thither, I am now in the spring of my life, winter will come on fast enough, when I am old, I will be as methodical an hypocrite, as any pair of lawn sleeves in Sauoy.
I dare not hear him longer, Madam relea•…e me.
How now, whence come you, were you sick?
At heart my Lord, to think of your unkindness.
At heart? isle ne'er believe, without inspection, am I unkind, go to, there's not a friend in the whole world can wi•…h you better, would you were Canonised a Saint, it is more then I wish my self yet, I doe not trouble thee much on earth, and thou were in Heaven, I would not pray to thee, for fear of di•…turbing thy Serape•…icall deu•…tion.
What sin have I committed Sir, deserves
This distance?
In Christian charity salute her.
I would not have your Ladyship too ve•…trous,
The ayre is some what cold, and may endanger
A weak body.
There's an other duty, my Lord required frō husband▪
My Madam would to rut, hath your honour, no pretty dapper Monkey, each morning to give you a heat in a dance, is not your Doctor gamesome.
If the suspicion that I am unchaste—
Unchaste? by this hand I doe not know one honest woman i•… the Dukedom.
How my Lord, •…hat doe you think of me?
•… know not whether you be a woman or no, yet.
Fie my Lord.
What would you have me doe, I have not seen her this six Months.
Oh rather my Lord conclude my sufferings,
T•… thus with tortures lengthen out my death,
O•… kill me, and I beseech you I will kiss
The instrument, which guided by your hand,
Shall give my grief a period, and pronounce 
With my last breath, your free for giuenesse.
No kill your self, more good will come on'•…, how now? nay then w'are like to have a precious time on it.
The Duke my Lord enquired for you.
I met
His Highness in return, and he employed me
To bring back knowledge of his better health,
Which hee says, shall enable him, but to
Exp•…esse how much he honours fair Cleona.
I am his studious Servant, and reioy•…e
In this good news: your Brother is recovered.
II, I knew he would doe well enough, now Sir?
I have some business, with you my Lord,
Were you at opportunity.
Some moral exhortations, they are fruitless, I shall never eat garlic with Diogenes in a Tub, and la•… the Stars without a shirt, prithee enjoy thy Religion, and live at last most Philosophy call lousy.
My design is of an other nature.
May I obtain so great a favour Sir,
You'd be my Go•…t in absence of the Duke,
I'm but ambitious, to remember
His health in Greeke-wine.
So this Lady will be temperate, and use me but like a stranger, without pressing me to inconveniences of kiss∣sing her, and other superstitious Courtship of a Husband.
I will engage sheele not offend you▪
And yet it goes against my conscience to tarry so long in honest company, but my 〈◊〉 is I doe not use it, come away Piero, you have had a fine time on it.
My Lord.
I follow Madam, yet have comfort,
Though reason and example 〈◊〉 our fears,
Heaven will not let you loose so many tears.
Did she receive my Letter with such joy?
I wont express•…on my Lord, to give you
The circumstance, with a flowing Love,
Or rather with what glad devotion
She entertained it, at your very name,
For so I guest, to which her covetous sight
Made the first has•…e, one might have seen her heart
Dance in her eyes, and as the wonder strove
To make her pale, warm love did fortify
Her cheeks, with guilty blushes, she did read
And kiss the paper often, mingled questions,
Some half propounded, as her Soul had been
Too narrow, to receive what you had writ,
She quite forgot.
This was before the Duke
Came thither?
Yes my Lord.
And did thou not
Observe her at his presence slack that fervor,
H•…r former passion had begot of me?
Was she not co•…tly to him boy?
So far
As her great birth, and breeding, might direct
A Lady to behave her self to him,
That was her Prince.
She kissed him, did she not?
She kissed.
He did salute her?
Yes my Lord.
And did not see a flame hang on her lip,
A spirit busy to betray her love,
And in a sigh convey it to him? Oh,
Thou can not read a woman, did he not
Woe her to be his Duchess?
Yes my Lord.
Thou should ha watched her ch•…eke then, there a blush
Had cene a guilt indeed, a feeble answer,
With half a smile, had been an argument
•…ee had been lost, and the temptation
Aboue her strength, which h•…d I known, I could
Ha slept, and never been disturbed, although
I had met her in a dream.
My Lord, you wea•…e
A causeless trouble to your self.
Oh Jealousy.
I am ashamed—
If ever woman loved
With faith, Cleona honours you aboue
Mankind, it were sin but to suspect so chaste,
So furnished with all virtue, your Cleona,
It were indeed, I am too blame Dulcino,
Yet when thou come to beso ripe, for so
Much misery, as to love, thou wo't excuse me,
My Lord if I might not offend with my
Opinion, it were safest that you loose
No time, your presence would confirm a joy
To either, and prevent the Duke, whose strong
Solicits, may in time. endanger much
The quiet of your though•…ts.
Why can there be
Su•…pition she will vary, doe not ch•…ke
The confidence thou had, vnsettle not,
The faith I have in thee, she c•…n prove false.
Mistake me no•…, I do•… not doubt her truth,
But shoe's a woman, and if you d•…lay
To in•…erpose your self, his Greatness may
In time, without injustice to your Love,
Win upon her aff•…ction, you shall doe
A great impiety to 〈◊〉 her now.
With so m•…ch proof, and loyal•…e of honour.
On never, never, and I will 〈◊〉
H•…r lo•…▪ beyond example, thus Dulls•…
Th•… 〈◊〉 return.
My Lord I had much rather
Waite on •…ou to her.
Iush, •…thou vnderstandst not
What I have pu•…posed, thou shall•… presently
Go back, and tell Cleona, I am dead.
How dead?
I boy, that I am dead, may mark
The i•…sue.
But my Lord, she hath your Letter
To check that.
Thou shalt frame something, to take
That off, some fine invention may be made,
To say it was forged, we'll•… study that anon,
In the assurance of my death, which must
Be so delivered, as she shall believe the•…,
She may aff•…ct the Duke.
How Sir, the Duke?
I, I, the Duke, for that's the plot,
I must advance.
And will you thus reward
So great a love to you.
Best, b•…st of all,
Shall I be so ungrateful to •… Lady,
Of such rare merit, when a Prince desires
To make her g•…eat, by my unworthy interest
Destroy her blessing•…, hinder such a fortune•…
From fair Cleona, let her love the Duke,
In this I will express the height, and glory
Of my best service.
Are you sir in earnest?
I love her, and can never see her more,
Posterity shall learn new piety
In love from me, it will become me look on,
Cleona a far off, and only mention
Her name, as I doe Angels in my Prayer,
Thus she deserves I should converse with her▪
Thus I most nobly love her.
Doth she languish
Expecting you, and shall I carry death
To comfort her? good Heaven forbid this Sir.
Heaven d•… 〈◊〉 me to it, she shall reign
Glorious in power, while I let fall my beads
That she might prosper, be not tho•… an enemy
To her and me, I see thouart unwilling
To this employment, if you have any wish
To see me happy, to preserve my life,
And honour, which was never more engaged,
If I shall think thou art not very wicked,
A false, di•…sembling boy, deny me not
This office, use what circumstance thou wilt,
To thrive in this report, and thy sad breath,
Shall give a fai•…ed, save a real death.
I'm lost ith springing of my hope, shall I
Obey him to destroy my self? I must,
I dare not be my self, no need have they▪
Of other force, that make themselves away.
I smell a match again, the Duke will fetch her about, here was another Amba•…adour at Dinner, and his Highness
is again expected, in confidence of my place that shall bee, I will continue my state posture, use my toothpick with dis∣creation, and cough distinctly, what can hinder my rising? I am no Scholar, that exception is taken away, for most of our states men, doe hold it a saucy thing, for any of their Ser∣uants, to be •…ser then themselves, observe the inuentorie of a great Noble•… mans house, mark the number of the learned, Isle begin with them. •…mprimis, Chaplains and School▪ ma∣sters one, two Page•…s, 3. Gentlemen, 4. Footmen, 6. Horses, 8 Serving cr•…uric, and 10. couple of Dogs. a very Noble family.
Worthy Sir—
My Lady shall be at leisure for you presently—
It may bee you would speak with me first?
I only entreat my Lady may have knowledge that
I wa•…te he•…e.
I will enrich my Ladies understanding, Isle say no∣thing else but that you are here shall I? that's enough if you have another Letter.
What then?
I would wish you deliver it to her own hand, but under your favour, the contents of the last Chapter, had like to undone vs all, and Cupped had not bin more merciful.
Fear nothing, the news I bring, will make you mer∣rye.
•…de laugh at that, howsoever you are heartily welcome and ever shall bee, you doe hear no harm of the Duke?
No harm?
You shall hear more shortly, I say no more, but hey∣uen bless my Lady and his Highness together, for my part though I speak a proud word—Isle tell my L•…die that you attend her.
I prithee do, and hasten the discharge
Of my sad Embassy, which when I have done,
And that it prospers in mine own misfortune,
Isle teach my breath to pray.
A glorious fate
Co•…rts your ac•…eptance, and I hope your 〈◊〉
Will teach you how to meet it, you've received
His H•…ghnesse bosom, now Isle take my leave,
Will you not see the Prince again?
I saw his Highness walking with Grimund▪
Toward the Garden, and the Duke expects me▪—
Think of a Duchess Madam.
I'm not worthy,
And needs must sink, under the weight of such
A title, my humblest Service to his Grace,
I am his beades-woman.
Madam, here's the Youth.
Art thou returned already? why were you
So rude to make him waite.
Since I arri•…'d,
Tic but a pair of minutes.
They are worth
As many days.
He shall be with your Ladyship,
Next time, before he come, when I but spy him
A mile off, Isle acquaint you, in my duty
To your self, and my honour unto him.
Withdraw.
Here is no couch, I doe not like
My Ladies familiarity with a boy,
Me thinks a man were fitter, and more able
To give her a refreshing, but this Lobby
Shall be my next remove.
You will ripen•…
This welcome Madam.
What harsh sound is that?
Thy looks upon a sudden are become
Dismal, thy brow dull as Saturnes i•….
Thy lips are hung with black, as if thy tongue
Were to pronounce some Fun•…rall.
It is,
But let your virtue place a g•…art about
Your •…are, it is too weak a sense to trust
With a sad tale, that may disperse too soon.
The killing Syllables, and some one, or other
Find out your heart.
The Mandrake hath no voice
Like this, the Raven, and the night birds sing
More soft, nothing in Nature, to which fear
Hath made vs superstitious, but speaks gently
Compared with thee, discharge thy fatal burden,
I am prepared, or stay, but answer me,
I will and save thee breath, and quickly know
The total of my sorrow, is Fosse•…ari
Dead since I saw thee last? Or hath some wound,
Or other dire misfortune sealed him for
The grave, that though he yet live, I may bid
My heart despair to see him?
None of these,
Since last I saw you Madam.
None of these?
Then I despise all sorrow boy, there is
Not left another mischief in my fate,
Call home thy beauty, why dost look so pale?
See I am armed, and can with valiant blood,
Hear thee discourse of my terror row,
Me thinks I can in the assurance of
His safety, hear of Battles, Tempest, Death,
With all the horrid shapes that Poets fancy,
Tell me the tale of Troy, or Rome on fire,
Rich in the trophies of the conquered world,
I will not shed so many tears, to save
The temples, as my joy doth sacrifice,
To hear my Lord is well.
Turn them to grief,
Again, and here let me kneel, the accuser
Of him, that hath deserved more punishment,
Then your wronged piety will inflict.
Dost kneel,
And call thy self accuser?
Yes.
Of whom?
Thy Lord, take heed, for if I be a Judge
I shall condemn thee ere thou speak.
You may,
But I accuse my self, and of an injury
To you.
To me?
Too great to be forgiven.
My love to him thou serve, hath found a pardon
Already for it, be it an offence
Against my life.
For his sake, you must punish,
Dear Madam, I have finn'd against his Ghost,
In my deceiving you.
His Ghost?
And if.
His Soul hath not forgotten how he loved you,
I must expect him to aff•…ight my dreams.
And prove my waking evil, the truth is,
My Lord is dead.
How dead? when? where? did I
Not hear thee say, since I received his Letter,
He was alive?
No Madam.
Be not impious.
I said that neither death, nor any black
Misfortune had befallen him, since I gave
The Letter to you.
Grant this truth, I am
Secured again.
Alas he was dead before,
I'm sure you could not choose but hear as much,
It was my wickedness arrived, to mock
Your credulous heart, with a devised Letter,
I know you are in wonder, what should move me,
To this imposture, sure it was no malice,
For you ne'er injured me, and that doth make
My crime the more deformed, all my aim was,
Being a stranger here, and wanting means
After my Lords death, by this cunning, to
Procure some bounty from you, to sustain
My life, until by some good fortune, I
Might get another Master, for I knew
There was no hope to benefit my self,
By saying he was dead, good Heaven forgive me
And keep my eyes from weeping.
Thou hast undone me,
Like a most cruel boy.
Madam, I hope
I shall repair the ruins of your eye,
When I declare the cause, that leads me to
This strange confession, I have observed
The Duke does love you, love you in that way,
You can deserve him, and though I have sinned,
I am not stubborn in my fault, to suffer you,
In the belief of my deceitful story,
To wrong your fortune, by neglect of him,
Can bring your merit such addition,
Of state and title.
Doest thou mock again?
Heaven knows, I have no thought of such impiety,
If you will not believe, that for your sake
I have betrayed my self, yet be so charitable,
To think it something of my duty, to
The Duke, whose ends, while they are just, and noble,
All loyal Subjects, ought to serve, for him.
Whom I am bound to honour, and I love him,
Else may I never know one dayof comfort,
I durst not without guilt of treason, to
His chaste desires, deceive you any longer,
Collect your self dear Madam, in the grave,
There dwells no music, in the Dukes embrace
You meet a perfect happiness.
Begone,
And never see me more, who ever knew
Falsehood so ripe at thy years?
Is not yet
My poor heart broke? hath nature given it
So strong a temper, that no wound will kill me?
What charm was in my gratitude to make me
Undo so many comforts with one breath,
Or was it for some sin I had to satisfy?
I have not only widowed Cleona,
But made my self a misery beneath,
An Orphaned, I ne'er came to have a friend,
I ha destroyed my hope, that little hope,
I had to be so happy.
Is it even so?
My friend, what make you here? who sent for you? begone dee hear, begone I say the word too, there is a Porters lodge else, where you may have due chastisement, you'll be∣gon.
I'm•… sorry,
I have offended Sir.
So am not I,
Let me see, somebody is dead, if I knew who, no matter it is one that my Lady loved, and I am glad to hear it, for mine ownesake, now Uenus speed the Dukes plough and turn me loose to a privy Conncellor.
Signior Iacomo, whore's your Lady?
She is within my good Lord, wilt please you Walk this way?
Prithee make hast, the Duke is coming.
I small him hither to,
So so, I will take this opportunity, to present my self to his Highness, that hee may take particular notice, of my bulk and personage, hee may chance speak to me, I have common places to answer any ordinary question, and for other, he shall find by my impudence, I come not short of a perfect Courtier. Here hee comes, I will dissemble some contemplation, and with my hat on, give him cause to obe∣serve me the better.
What fellows that?
A Servant of Cleona's.
Signior?
Your Highness humble creature, you have blessed my lips, and I will wear them threadbare, with my prayers, for your Graces immortal prosperity.
Soranzo is returned,
How fares Cleona?
My Lord not well, I found her full of sadness, which is increased, she cannot as becomes her duty, observe your Highness.
One word with your Grace in private, she is as well, as either you, or I.
Say thou so?
There came indeed before you certain news, that a noble Gentleman, I know not who, and therefore he shall bee nameless, but some dear friend of hers, is dead, and thats all, and that has put her into a melancholy mood, with your gracious pardon, if I were worthy to bee one of your Counsellours—
What then?
I would advise you, as others doe, to take your own course, your Grace knows best, what is to be done.
So Sir; Did thou not see that pretty boy I told thee of?
No my good Lord.
We are resolved to comfort her, set forward.
You had simple grace?
A touch or so, abeam with which his Highness,
Doth use to keep desert warm, good my Lord,
It is not come to that yet.
Go to the next religious house, and pray,
Some Holy Father come and speak with me,
But hasten thy return, I dare not look on 
My self, least I forget to doe her honour,
And my heart prove a partial Advocate,
I must not entertain with the same thought,
Cleona and my Love, least my own passion
Betray the resolution, I ha made,
To make my service famous to all ages,
A legend that may startle wanton blood,
And strike a chillness through the active veins
Of noblest Lovers, when they hear, or read,
That to advance a Mistress, I have given her▪
From mine own heart, if any shall be so
Impious at my memory, to say
I could not doe this act, and love her too,
Some power divine, that knew how much I loved her,
Some Angel that hath care to right the dead,
Punish that crime for me, and yet me thinks,
In such a cause my own enraged Spirit,
In pity of my ashes, so profaned,
Should nimbly lift my sweating marble up,
And leap into my dust, which new inlifen'd
Should walk to him, that questioned my honour,
And be its own revenger, he is come. 
Welcome good Father,
I sent to entreat your help, but first, pray tell me,
I have no perfect memory, what Saint
Gives title to your Order?
Wee doe wear
The Scapular of Saint Bennet Sir.
Your Charity
Make you still worthy of that reverend habit,
I have a great Devotion, to bee made
A Brother of your sacred institution,
What persons of great birth hath it received?
To fashion my reply to your demand,
Is not to boast, though I proclaim the honours
Of our profession; Four Emperors,
Forty six Kings, and one and fifty Queens,
Have changed their Royal Ermines for our sables,
These Cowles have clothed the heads of fourteen hundred,
And six Kings Sons, of Dukes, great Marquises,
And Earls, two thousand and aboue four hundred
Have turned their Princely Coronets, into
An humble Coronet of hair of hair▪ left by
The Razor thus.
No, it is not.
There is a Sun ten times more glorious,
Then that which rises in the East, attracts me
To feed upon his sweet beams, and become
A Bird of Paradise, a religious man
To rise from earth, and no more to turn back,
But for a burial.
Think what tic you doe,
It is no thing to play the wanton with,
In the strong bended passion of an humour,
For a friends death, a Kings frown, or perhaps
Loss of a Mistress.
O still bless the guide
What ever, that shall lead this happy way.
My Lord, the truth is like your coat of arms,
Richest when plainest, I doe fear the world
Hath tired you, and you seek a cell to rest in,
As Birds that wing it o'er the Sea, seek ships,
Till they get breath, and then they sly away.
Doe not mistake a piety, I am prepared
And can endure your strict mortifications,
Good Father then prefer my humble Suite,
To your Superior for the habit, and
Let me not long expect you, say I am,
Noble, but humblest in my thoughts.
I go,
Mean time examine well this new desire,
Whether't be a wild flash, or a Heavenly fire.
Now my good boy.
Sir, your command is done,
And she believes?
That I am dead Dulcino?
That you are dead, and as she now scorned life▪
Death lends her cheeks his paleness, and her eyes
Tell down their drops of silver to the earth,
Wishing her tears might rain upon your grave▪
To make the gentle earth produce some flower,
Should bear your names and memories.
But thou see,
I live Dulcino.
Sir I should bee blessed,
If I did see you sought the means to live,
And to live happily, O noble Sir,
Let me untried my steps, unsay my words,
And tell your love, you live.
No my sweet Boy,
She thinks not much amiss, I am a man
But of an hour or two, my will is made,
And now I go, never more cheerfully,
To give eternal farewell to my friends.
For Heavens sake Sir, whats this you mean to do?
There is a fear sits cold upon my heart,
And tells me—
Let it not misinform thee Boy,
Isle use no violence to my self, I am
Resolved a course, wherein I will not doubt,
But thou wilt bear me company? weal enter
Into Religion.
Into Religion?
O tic a Heavenly life, go with me boy,
We'll imitate the singing Angels there,
Learn how to keep a Quire in Heaven, and scorn
Earths transitory glory, wo't Dulcino?
Alas my Lord, I am too young.
Too young
To ferue Heaven? Never, never, O take heed.
Of such excuse.
Alas, what shall I doe?
And yet I'm weary of the world, but how
Can I doe this? I am not yet discovered,
Sir, I shall still attend you.
You are my comfort,
I have propounded it already, to
A Benedictine, by whose means we may
Obtain the habit, stay thou and expect him,
I must bee absent for a little time,
To finish something, will conduce, to my
Eternal quiet, if th'haft any scruple,
Hee will direct thee, having both made even
With earth, weal travail hand, in hand to heaven.
Fortune hath lent me a prospective glass,
By which I have a look beyond all joys,
To a new world of misery, whats my best
Let it be so, for I am hopeless now,
And it were well, if when those weeds I have,
That I might go disguised to my grave.
This is strange.
You know I have given you many precepts of honesty?
And you know how I have followed em.
To mine own heart, I have made tedious dis∣courses of Heaven to ye, and the moral virtues, numbered up the duties of a good Prince, urged examples of virtues, for your imitation.
To much purpose.
Seemed to sweat with agony and vexation, for your obstinate courses, reproved you, nay sometimes made complaints of you, to the Duke.
And I ha cursed you for it, I remember.
Alas my Lord, I durst doe no otherwise, was not the Duke your Father an honest man, and your Brother now foolishly takes after him, whose credulities, when I had al∣ready coozened, I was bound to appear stoical, to preserve the opinion they had conceived of me.
Possible.
It speaks discretion and abilities, in States-men, to apply themselves to their Princes disposition, vary a thou∣sand shapes, if he be honest, we put on a form of gravity, if he be vicious, we are Parasites, indeed in a politic Com∣mon wealth, if you observe well, there is nothing but the ap∣pearance, and likeness of things that carries opinion, your great men will appear odd, and fantastical, and fools
are often taken for wise Officers, your most active gallants, seem to carry their own hair, and your handsomest La∣dies their own faces, you cannot know a Secretary from a Scholar in black, nor a Gentleman Usher in Scarlet, from a Captain, your Judge that is all composed of Mercy, hath still the face of a Philosopher, and to some is more la∣rible and crabbed, then the Law it self. All things are but representation, and my Lord, howsoever I have appeared to you, I am at heart one of your own Sect, an Epicure, bee but so subtle to seem honest, as I doe, and we will laugh at the foolish world in our Cells, declaim against intemperate livers, and hug our own Licentiousness, while wee surfeit our Souls in the dark with Nectar and Ambrosia.
Can this be earnest, you did talk of Hell and Bug∣bears.
I confess, and were you in public, I would urge many other empty names to fright you, put on my Ho∣lyday countenance, and talk nothing but divinity, and gol∣den sentences, look like a superlicious Elder, with a starched face, and a tunable nose, whilst he is edifying his Neighbours woman.
You were a Christian, how came you to be converted.
I think I had a name given me, and thats all I re∣taine, I could never endure really, their severe discipline, marry for my preferment, and other politic ends, I have, and can still dispense, with fasting, prayer, and a thousand fond austerities, though I doe penance for em in private.
Let me ask you one question, were you never drunk?
A thousand times in my study, that's one of my re∣creations.
How chance I could never see it in you, you know I would ha been drunk for company.
But I durst not trust so young a sinner, for I al∣ways held it a maxim, to doe wickedness with circum∣spection.
Wickedness?
I speak in the phrase of the foolish world, that holds voluptuousness a crime, which you and I, and every
wise man knows, to be the only happiness of life, and the inheritance, we are borne to.
But stay, how comes it to pass, that accounting me so young a sinner, you now adventure to discover your self?
To you?
To me.
Good my Lord conceive me, you were a young sinner, and in your Nonage, does that infer that you have made no growth, that you're a child still, doe think that I ha not wit to distinguish a Principiant in vice, from a Gradu∣ate, shall I be afraid to lay open my secretest impieties to you, that are almost as perfect as my self in Epicurisme, I beseech you, doe not think, I ha so little manners to undervalue you.
Very well, proceed.
And yet my Lord, with your princely license, you may learn too, and indeed the first virtue that I would com∣mend to your practice should be that, by which I have at∣tain'd to this height, and opinion, and thats Hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy?
Yes, a delicate white devil, doe but fashion your self to seem holy, and study to be worse in private, worse, you'll find your self more active in your sensuality, and it will be an other titillation, to think what an ass you make a'the believing world, that will be ready to dote, nay super∣stitiously adore you, for abusing them.
This is pretty wholesome doctrine, and hark you, ha you no wenches now and then?
Wenches? would the Duke your Brother had so many for his own sake, or you either.
Hast in faith?
Faith? why judge by your self, how dee think a man should subsist, winching? why tic the top-branch, the heart, the very Soul of pleasure, isle not give a chip to bee an Emperor, and I may not curuet as often as my consti∣tution requires, Lechery is the Monarch of Delight, whose Throne is in the blood, to which all other sins doe homage, and bow like serviceable Vassailes, petty Subjects in the Dominion of flesh—Wenches
Why I have as many—yet now I think better on it, Isle keep that to my self, store makes a good proverb.
Nay nay, be free and open to me, you have my oath not to betray.
Well, Isle not bee nice to you, you little imagine (though I be married,) that I am the greatest whoremaster •…'th Dukedom.
Not the greatest?
Have a strong faith and save my proofs, I? the Usurer doe not hoard up his gold, nor the Country op∣pressor his Corn more against a dear year, but Caute si non Caste, my Nun at home knows nothing, like a Mole in the earth, I work deeps, but invisible; I have my private Houses, my Granaries, my Magazines bully, as many Concubines, as would collected, furnish the Great Turks Seraglio.
How doe you conceal 'em, I should ne'er keep half so many▪ but't would be known.
You are then a Novice in the Art of Uenus, and will tell Tales out a'the School, like your weak Gallants of the first chin, that will brag what Ladies they have brought to their obedience, that think it a mighty honour, to discourse how many Fortes they have belea∣guard, how many they have taken by battery, how many by composition, and how many by Stratagem; that will proclaim, how this Madam kisses, how like Ivy the tother bone Robe embraced em, and with what activity, a third plays her amorous prize, a fine commendation for such Whelps first not?
A fault, a fault, who can deny it? But what are those you practice with? A touch, come, what Commodities?
Not Sale-ware, Mercenary stuff, that ye may have in the Suburbs, and now maintain traffic with Am∣bassadours Servants, nor with Laundresses, like your Stu∣dents in Law, who teach her to argue the case so long, till she find a Statute for it, nor with Mistress Silkeworme in the City, that longs for cream and cakes, and loves to
Cuckold her Husband in fresh ayre, nor with your waiting Gentlewoman, that is in love with poetry, and will not part with her honour, under a Copy of fine verses, or an Ana∣gram, nor with your course Lady her self, that keeps a Stallion and cozens the old Knight, and his two pair of Spectacles, in the shape of a Serving-man, but with your rich, fair, high▪ fed, glorious and springing Catamountaines, Ladies of blood, whose eyes will make a Soldier melt, and he were composed of marble, whose every smile, hath a magnetic force to draw up Souls, whose voice will charm a Satire, and turn a mans prayers into ambition, make a Hermit run to Hell for a touch on her, and there hug his own damnation.
I have •…eard you, and now I think fit to discover my self to you, you are a Rascal.
Sir, I think I am one.
Let not your wisdom think, I can bee so easi∣lie guide.
How Sir?
Thou think you have talked very methodically, and cunningly all this while, and that I am as they say, a credu•…os cox•…comb, and cannot perceive, that by your po∣litique jeers upon my pleasures, you labour to discredit, not only my recreations, but my self to my own face, Do ye hear? the time may come you will no•… dare these things, and yet you shall see, I will not now so much as seem angry, pre∣serve your humour, twill appear fresh o'ch Stage my lear∣ned Gymnosophist, very well, excellent well.
Why does not your Lo•…dship believe me then?
Do'•…t thou think throughout the year, I will loose one minute of my pastime, for this your tooth-lesse Satyr•…▪ your mock▪ balled, go get some pretty tune, twill doe you a great deal of credit, the next Lent to be presen∣ted by folly in an Anti▪ mask, isle to a wench presently.
I came to carry you to one.
How? thou?
Doe not deceive your self, come you shall believe and thank me, will that serve turn, shall I bee thought worthy to bee trusted then, if I doe the office of a Bawd
for you, and play the Pander wit•… dexterity, will that co•…∣uince you?
Yes, yes, then I will believe thee.
T•…en go with me, and I will demonstrate.
Whither?
I will carry you to a Lady bee not afraid she is hon•…st, a ha•…ome piece of fl•…sh, a Lady that will bound ye, and rebound, a Lady that will ravish you.
Me?
Wi•…h delight and admiration, one in whom doth flowers•… all the excellence of women, honesty only excepted, such a charming brow speaking eye, springing cheek, temp∣ting lip, swelling bosom.
W•…l you lead me to such a creature?
Yes.
And shall I enjoy her in dalliance?
Yes, and think your self 〈◊〉, then to be Lord of both the Indies, here is my hand cut it off if I doe not this feat for you, when you please, and when you are satisfy∣ed with her, Isle help you to forty more, but wee are in∣terrupted.
There he is with Grimundo.
His late Governor, he is giving him good counsel.
Pray heaven he have the grace to follow it.
Consider Sir, but what will be the end▪
Of all these wicked courses.
Precious villain.
We must be circumspect.
No more, I have a cro•…et new sprung,
Where shall I mere thee?
Isle expect you in the park—be very secre•…
My Lord I can but grieve for you.
How have we all been co•…n'd?
What is my brother here?
This hour my Lord▪ he is now upon te•…rne.
Isle see him, and then prepare me for this L•…die.
I feel a boiling in my veins already,
This is the li•…e of greatness, and of Court
They are fools that will be frighted from their sport.
Do it and thou love me?
What do ye mean my Lord?
Nay •…ee must have such a deal of circumstance▪
I say doe it.
What, that?
That? Is that such a piece of matter, does it ap∣pear so horrid in your imagination, that you should look as if you were frighted now?
My Lord it is—
A thing your lust will prompt you to, but that
You aff•…ct Ceremony, and love to bee entreated.
With your Lady?
Yet again, must I voice it like the Town∣Crier, and ram it into your head with noise, you have not been observed so dull, in a business of this supple Na∣ture.
But think on it again, I pray you think a little bet∣t•…r, I ha no great ambition to ha my throat cut.
By whom?
By you, you cannot choose but kill me for it, when I have done, name any other Lady, or half a score on 'em, as far as flesh will go, I ha but a body, and that shall ven∣ture upon a disease to doe you se•…vice, but your Lady.
Have I not told thee my end?
I Sir, but I am very loath to begin with her, I know she will not let me doe the feat, I had as good never attempt it.
Is your mountanous promise come to this? Re∣member, if I doe not turn honest—
My Lord doe but con cider—well I will do•…
what I can, and there be no remedy—but
No butting.
Nay for butting, your Lordship is like to doe that better, when I have done with your Lady, upon one con∣dition, Isle resolve.
Whats that?
I must be a little plain w'ee my Lord, that you wonot ask me blessing, I am like to bee one of your God∣fathers.
How?
The •…ew name that I shall add to your other title•… will stick in your head and I fear corrupt your brains too many wise men have run mad upon it in the City.
Never fear it, for if thou can but corrupt her.
Isle show a divorce presently.
And bring me in for a witness.
She's here fear nothing, Isle be thy protection, it were not amiss to cast away some kindness upon her, nay I was coming to take my leave.
I know you never meant it▪
Thus my best intents are rewarded still, the more sin upon your conscience, you've a hard heart, but heaven for give vs all, Astella farewell, Piero expect my re∣turn here—pray entertain this Gentleman courteously in my absence, you know not how kindly I may take it.
I would you would enjoin me any testimony,
So I might be in hope to win your lo•…e.
Tic in the will of women to doe much, doe not despair, the proudest heart is but flesh, think a that.
Of w•…at?
Of flesh, and so I leave you.
Wilt please you Madam, walk into your chamber▪
I have something to impart, will require more pri•…acie.
If it bee grief, tic welcome.
My Soul I have examined, and yet find
No reason for my foolish passion
Our hot Italian doth affect these boys,
For sin, l'ue no such flame, and yet me thought
He did appear mo•…t lovely, nay in's absence
I cherish his Idea, but I must
Exclude him, while he hath but soft impression,
Being removed already in his person,
I loose him with less trouble.
Please your Highness,
A stranger but some Gentleman of quality,
Intending to leave Sauoy, humbly prays
To kiss you hand.
A Gentle•…man, admit him.
You are a gracious prince, and this high favour
D•…ferns my person, and my Sword, when you
Vouchsafe so much addition to this honour,
To call them to your Service.
You are noble.
It is not complement my Lord alone
Made me thus bold, I have a private message,
Please you command their distance,
Wai•…e without.
Have you forgot this face?
Foe•…caries shadow?
The substance Sir, and once more at your feet,
Returned to lise. Rise, meet our arms▪ why i•…
This Cloud?
Your pardon royal Sir, it will
Concern your Highness to permit me walk
In some Eclipse.
How?
Be but pleased to grant
A little freedom to my speech, I shall
Demonstrate the necessity of this
Action, I said I had a message•…,
I come Sir from Cleona.
From Cleona?
From her indeed, and in her name, I must
Propound a question, to which she prays,
You would be just and noble in your answer,
Without disputing your Commission,
Upon mine Honour—
Princes cannot stain it, dee you love her?
Doe I love her? Strange?
Nay she would have you pause, and think welle're
You give her resolution, for she bad me tell you
She has been much aflicted since you left her,
About your love.
About my love? I prithee
Bee more particular.
I shall, so soon
As you were gone, being alone, and full
Of melancholy thoughts.
I left her so.
Willing to ease her head upon her couch,
Through silence, and some friendship of the dark,
She fell asleep, and in a short dream thought,
Some Spirit told her softly in her ear,
You did but mock her with a smooth pretence
O•… Love.
Ha?
More, that you are fallen from honour,
Have taken impious flames into your bosom,
That you're a Bird of prey▪ and while she hath
No household Lar, to waite upon her three should
You would fl•…e in, and 〈◊〉 upon her honour.
I hope she he's no faith in dreams▪
And yet
Divinity hath oftentimes descended
Upon our sl mbers, and the blessed troupes
Have in the calm, and quiet of the Soul,
Conversed with vs, tag•…t men and women happy
Ways to prevent a tyrants rage, and lust.
But this was some most false malicious Spirit,
That would insinuate with her white Soul,
There's danger if she cherish the infusion.
She cannot tell, she hath some fears my Lord,
Great men have left examples of their vice,
And yet no jealousy of you, but what
A miracle doth urge, if this be one;
If you but once more say you love Cleona,
And speak it unto me, and to the Angels,
Which in her prayers, she hath invoked to hear you,
She will be confident, and tell her dream,
She cannot be eluded.
Though I need not
Give an account to any, but to Heaven
And her fair self, Foscari, thou fhalt tell her
With what alacrity I display my heart,
I love her with chaste and noble fire, my intents are
Fair as her brow, tell her I dare proclaim it,
In my devotions, at that minute, when
I know a million of adoring Spirits
Hover about the Altar, I doe love her—
Enough, enough, my Lord be pleased to hear,
What I have now to say, you have expressed
A brave and virtuous Soul, but I must not
Carry this message to her, therefore take
Your own words back again—I love Cleona
With chaste, and noble sire, my intents are
Fair as her brow, I dare proclaim it Sir,
In my devotions, at that minute, when
I know a Million of adoring Spirits,
Hover about the Altar.
Doe ye mock me?
Pardon a truth my Lord, I have apparel
My own sense with your language.
Doe you come
To affront vs, you had better ha been sleeping
In your cold urn, and fame late gave you out,
And mingltd with the tude forgotten ashes,
Then live to move our anger.
Spare your frowns.
This earth weighs not my Spirit down, a fear
Would die the paleness of my Fathers dust,
Into a blush, Sir many are alive,
Will swear, I did not tremble at a Canon,
When it struck thunder in mine ear, and wrapped
My head in her blew mists, it is not breath
Can fright a noble truth, nor is there Magic
In the person of a King that plays the Tyrant,
But a good Sword can easily uncharm i•…,
You threaten vs.
Heaven avert so black a thought,
Though in my honours cause I can be flame,
My blood is frost to treason make me not
Belly my heart, for I doe love Cleona?
And my bold heart tells me, aboue all height,
You can affect her with, no birth or state
Can challenge a Prerogative in love;
Nay be nor partial, and you shall ascribe
To mine loves victory, for though I admit,
You value her aboue your Dukedom, health,
That you would sacrifice your blood, to avert
Any mishap should threaten that dear head,
All this is but aboue your self, but I
Love her aboue her self, and while you can
But give your life, and all you have, to doe
Cleona service, I can give away
Her self, Cleona's self, in my love to her,
I see you are at loss, Isle reconcile
All, she is yours, this minute ends my claim,
Live, and enjoy her happily, may you
Be famous in that beauteous Empire, she
Blessed in so great a Lord.
I must not be
Overcome in honour, nor would doe so great
A wrong, to enjoy the blessing, I knew not
You were engaged.
Ere you proceed, I must
Beseech you hear me out, I am but fresh,
Returned from travail, in my absence, she
Heard I was sla•…e, at my return, upon
The hearing of these honours you intend her,
And which I now believe from your own lip,
I found a means, and have wrought her already,
Into a firm belief that I am dead,
(For I have but pretended I came from her)
If for my sake you leave her now, I can
Make good her faith and dye, 't sha'not be said,
I lived▪ and 〈◊〉 C•…eona's fort•…no.
Stay miracle of honour, and of love.
If you proceed, as i•… concerns your happiness,
I can secure all fear of me, I am
R•…solved •… course wherein I will bee dead
To he•…, yet live to pray for her, and you,
Although I never see you more, will you
M•… R•…yall Lord?
D•…d ever Lover plead
Again•…t himself before?
I lou•… her still,
And in that study her advancement Sir,
In you. I cannot give•… her.
Well, I will still love her, and solicit.
And not open
That I am liu•…ng.
Not a Syllable.
I am confident, let me but kiss your hand.
Ag•…n, may blessings dwell with you for ever.
He was a•…ways noble, but this passion
Has outgone History, it makes for me,
Hail to my courteous fate, Fosse•…ri thanks,
Like the aged P•…enix, thy old love expires,
And from •…uch Death, springs li•…e to my d•…fires.
The Father is not come yet, nor my Lord
〈◊〉, yet when they doe, I have no way
T•… •…lp my self, nor have I power to go
From hence, sure this is the Religious man.
Ha tic the s•…me.
Father Valentio?
Dear Leon•…ra.
Sir the same.
Oh let
My tears express my joys, what miracle•…
Gave you this liberty?
I was rescued,
By th'happy valour of a Gentleman,
To whom in gratitude, I pay this service,
He bad me here expect a holy man,
And is it you?
The ci•…cumstance confirms it.
Are you the goodman whom my Lord expect•…▪
Tic so me refreshing in the midst of sorrow,
To meet again.
And Heaven hath heard my prayer.
But I am miserable still unless
Your counsel doe relieve me.
Why my charge?
This noble Gentleman, to whom I owe
My preservation, who appointed you
To meet him here, having resolved to enter,
Into Religion, hath been very urgent,
For me to doe so too, and overcome
With many importunities, I gave
Consent, not knowing what was best to doe,
Some cure or I am lost, you know I cannot
Mix with religious men.
Did you consent?
I did, and he is now upon •…he point
Of his return.
You're in a straight▪ I must
Confess, no matter, hold your purpose, and
Leave all to me, he is returned.
Good Father.
Now I am ready, have you disposed him
For such a life.
Hee is constant to attend you,
I have prepared him, and made way to the Abbot,
For your reception,
I am b•…est, Dulcimo,
Nay no distinction now, me thinks we move
Upon the wings of Cherubins already,
Tic but a step to heaven, come my sweet boy
Wee climb by a short ladder to our joy▪
This my Lord is her garden, into which you see
My key hath given vs private access,
Tic full of curiosity,
You see that g•…ove.
I doe.
There is her house of pleasure, let your eye entertain
Some delight here, while I give her happy
Knowledge you are entered▪
Doe so, an honest knave I see that, how happy
Shall I bee in hi•… conversation, I sha'not need
To keep any in fee to procure, and he bee
So well furnished, i•… ever I come to be Duke, I will
Erect a magnificent College, endow it
With reuen•…w to m•…entertain wenches, and
With great pensions inuit the fair•… Ladies
From all part•… of Christendom, into my Seraglio,
Then, will I have this fellow gelded, and make him
My chie•…e Eunuch ranger, or ouers•…er of all,
My precious tame foul
How now? What's this so me fury asleep, Isle take ano∣there path, another? Into what wilderness has this firedrake brought me? I dare not cry out for fear of waking 'em, would Grimundo were come back.
Rise you drowsy Satyrs rise,
What strong charm doth bind your eyes?
See who comes into your grove,
To embrace the Queen of Love,
Leap for joy, and frisk about,
Find you•… pretty Dryad•… out,
Hand in hand compose a ring,
Dance and circle you new King,
Him, Sell•…anus must obey, 
Hence and cry a holy day.
Some mask, a device, to entertain me, ha? And yet I see not how they should prepare so much ceremony, un∣less they had expected me, a curse upon their ill faces, they shook me at first, how now?
Have ye no tongues? yes I will venture my self in your company, and you were my destinies, wo'd there were no worse in Hell, must I walk like a bride too, fortune set on before then, and thou doest not guide into a handsome place, wo'd thy eyes were out, and so thou moist be taken for the blind Goddess indeed, forward to Venus Temple.
V•…nished like Fairies? Ha what music this? the motion of the Spheres, or am I in Elisium.
Here is 〈◊〉 ha? What glorious creatures this commit•… a rape upon my senses on every side, but when I look on her, all other admirations are forgot, and leslen in her glory.
My Lord you're welcome, nay our lip is not too pre∣tious, for your salute, most welcome,
I have kept my, word Sir,
Thou hast obliged my soul,
Be high and frolic, she loves to see one
D•…mineere, when you're thoroughly acquainted, you'll
Give me thanks.
Let vs be private with as much speed as may be.
Away with those gipsies, so so. 
I forgot to •…ske her name-Lady I am com•….
Wilt please you use that Chair▪
You are not ignorant
O•… the intents my blood hath brought with me▪
Grimundo, I hope, hath told my coming Lady▪
And you l'me confident, will justify his promise
O•… some pastime.
He's a Servant,
Whose by•…ome I dare trust, the Son of night,
And yet more•… •…cret then his mother, hee
Hath power to engage m•…e, and I shall
Take•… p•…de in my obedience•…, first be pleased
T•… taste, what in my duty I prepared
F•… your first 〈◊〉, these but serve
To 〈◊〉 appeti•…e.
I like this well, 
I 〈◊〉 use muse•… cou•…ship, whore's this music?
Doth it 〈◊〉 your ear?
'•…is ravishing
W•…ence doth it breath?
If you command, weal change
A •…housand airs▪ till you find one is sweet,
And high enough, to rock your wanton Soul
In•…o 〈◊〉 s•…mbers.
Spare them all,
I h•…are '•…m in thy accents.
〈◊〉
Call•…ops famed Son, upon whose lute
Mire•…ds of lou•…rs Ghosts doe waite, and hang
Upon the golden strings to have their own
G•…iefes softn•…d with his noble touch, shall come
Ag•…in from hell, with fresh, and happier strains,
Tomoue your fancy.
That were very •…trange,
She is poetical, mo•…e then half a Fury,
But wee prate all this while, and loose the tim•…
W•… should employ more pretiously, I need
No more provocative•…, my veins are rich
And swell with expectation, shall we to
This vaulting business?
I shall hope my Lord
You will be silent in mine honour, when
You have enjoyed me, and not boast my name,
To your disgrace, not mine.
Your name, why Lady?
By my d•…sires I know it not, I hope
You have received a better Character,
Then to suspect my bla•…binge, Isle not trust
My Ghostly Father with my sins, much less
Your name.
O let me fly into your arms,
These words command my freedom, I shall love you
Aboue my self, and to confirm how much,
I dare repose upon your faith, Isle not
Be nice to tell you who I am.
Pray doe.
I am a Princess.
How?
Believe me Sir.
I'm glad a that, but of what Country Lady?
And my dominions are more spreading then
Your Brothers.
H•…? thats excellent, if the villain
D•…e prosper with my wife, Isle marry her.
I was not borne to perch upon a Dukedom▪
Or some such spot of earth, which the dull eyes
Examine by a multiplying glass,
And wonder at, the Roman Eagles never
Did spread their wings upon so many shores,
The Silver Moon of Ottoman looks pale
Upon my greater Empire, Kings of Spain,
That now may boast their ground, doth stretch as wide
As day▪ are but poor Landlords of a Cell,
Compared to mine inheritance, the truth is▪
I am the Devil.
How a Devil?
Yes.
Be not a•…righted Sir, you see I bring
No horror to distract you, if this presence,
Delight you not Isle weary a thousand shapes
To please my Lord.
Shapes quoth,
Doe not tremble,
A Devil? I see her cloven foot, I haven't,
The heart to pray, Grimundo has undone me,
I did command my spirits, to put on
Satyrs, and N•…mphes to entertain you first
Whiles others in the ayre, maintained a quire
For your delight, why doe you keep such distance,
W•…th one that loves you? recollect your self,
You came for pleasure, what doth fright my love,
See I am covetous to return delight,
And sa•…isfie your lustful genius,
Come lets withdraw, and on the bed prepared
Beget a race of smooth and wanton Devils—
Hold, come not near me, ha? now I compare,
The circumstances, they induce me to
A sad belief, and I had breath enough,
I would ask a question.
Any thing, and be
Resolved.
How came Grimnndo, and your deuilship,
Acquainted▪
He hath been my agent long,
And hath deserved for his hypocrisy,
And private sins, no common pl•…ce in Hell,
H•…es now my favourite, and we enjoy,
Each other daily, but hee never did,
By any service more endear my love,
Then by this bringing you to my acquaintance,
Which I desired of him long since▪ with many,
And fierce soll•…cite, but •…e urged his fear,
You were not ripe enoug•… in sin, for his,
Disco•…ery.
I feel•… my self dissolve▪
In sweat,
My Lord I must acknowledge▪ I
Have ever had you in my first regard,
Of any mortal sinner, for you have
The same propention with me, though with
Less malice▪ spirits of the lower world
Have several offices assigned, some are
To advance pride, some avarice, some wrath,
I am for lust, a gay, voluptuous Devil,
Come lets embrace, for that I love my Lord,
Doe, and command a regiment of hell,
They all are at your service.
O my foul!
Be•…id my Lord, it is another mote•…e
To honour you, and by my c•…aines which now
I have l•…ft behind, it makes me grow enamoured,
Your wife, that says her prayers at home, and weeps
Away her sight, O•… let me hug you for it,
Despise her vow•… still, spurn her tears again
Into her eyes thou shalt be prince in hell
And have a Crown of flames▪ brighter then that,
Which Ariadue wears of fixed sty•…res,
Come shall we dally now?
My bones within
Are dust already, and I wear my fl•…sh
Like a loose, upper garment,
You're afraid▪
Be not so pale at liver, for I see
Your blood turn Coward, how would you be frighted
To look upon me clothed with all my horror,
That shudder at me now? call up your spirit.
There are too many spirits here already,
Would thou were conjured, what shall I doe?
What other then to bath your soul in pleasure
And never heard of rauishings, wee two,
Will progress through the ayre in Venue•… charret▪
And when her silver doves grow faint, and tir•…,
Cupped and Mercury shall lend vs wings,
And we will visit new worlds, when we are,
Weary of this, we both will back the wind•…s.
And hunt the Phoenix through the Arabian D•…serts
H•…r we will spoil of all her shining plumes.
To make a blazing Coronet for thy temples,
Which from the Earth beheld, shall draw up wonder
And puzzle learned Astronomy, to distinguish it
From some new Constellation, the Sea
Shall yield vs pastime, when inuelop•…d
With Clouds, blacker then night, wee range about
And when with storms we overthrow whole Navies,
We'll laugh to hear the Mariners exclaim
In many thousand shipwrecks, what doe I
Urge these particu•…ers? let vs be one Soul,
Ayre, Earth and Hell, is yours.
I have a suit,
But da•…e •…ot speak.
Take courage, and from me
B•…e confident to obtain.
I am not well,
The name of Dive ll came to quick upon me,
I was not well prepared for •…uch a sound,
It turned my blood •…o ice, and I ha•… not
R•…covered so much warmth yet, to desire
The sport I came for, would you please but to
D•…miss me for a time, I would return,
When I have heate and strength enough, for such
A sprightful action.
I do•… find your cunni•…g,
You pretend this excuse, but to gain time,
In hope you may repent.
And please your Grace,
Not I.
You will acquaint some Priest, or other,
A tribe of all the world, I most abhor,
And they will •…oole you with their Ghostly council,
Pe pl•…xe you with some fond divinity,
To make you loose the Glories I have promised.
I could never abide such mel •…neholly people.
In this I must betray, we spirits have
No perfect knowledge of men's thoughts, I see
Your bloods •…nfeebled, and although my love
Be infinite, and every minute I
Shall languish in your absence, yet your health
I must preserve, tic that that feeds my hopes,
Hereafter I shall perfectly enjoy thee,
You will be faithful, and return.
Suspect not,
One kiss shall seal consent,
Her breath smells of brimstone.
When next wee meet, like to the Gemini
Weal twine our limbs in one another, till
Wee appear one creature in our active play,
For this time •…le dismiss you—doe not pray,
A spirit shall attend you.
Doe not pray, when did I last? I know not, farewell horror.
He wants a wench, that goes to the D•…uell for her.
Touch me not villain•…, piety defend me
Art thou a man, or have I all this while
Conversed with some ill Ang•…ll in the shape
Of my Lords friend,
What needs all this stir
I urge your benefit.
To undo my name
N•…v Soul for ever with one act.
One act,
There be those Ladies that have acted it
A hundred times, yet think themselves as good
C•…ristians as other women, and doe carry
As much opinion too for virtue.
Heaven.
What harm can there be in it, can you neglect
Revenge so just, so easy and delightful?
T•…y breath doth scatter an infection.
Scatter a toy, be wise, and loose no time
You know not when-such opportunity,
May tempt you too't again, for my own part
I can but doe you pleasure in it, your blood
Should need no other argument.
Isle sooner
Empty my veins, not to redeem thy Soul,
Should Sin betray mine honour to one loose
Embrace, hence traitor I doe feel corruption
In the ayre already, it will kill me if
I stay, hereafter Isle not wonder how
My Lord became so wicked.
You will lead me
To some more private room, Isle follow Madam.
More private room, said hee? I smell a business I thought this Gamester had been gone, is it even so, have at your borough Madam, hoe's a shrewd Fer•…et I can tell you, and just in the nick here comes the Warrener.
This devil does not follow me, nor any of her Cubs I hope, I'm glad I came off so well, I never was so hot to engender with the Night-mare, could Grimundo find no other creature for my coupling but a Succubus, me thinks I smell the Fiend still.
He talks on her already.
I am very jealous.
Not without a cause my Lord.
Ha? there she is again.
No my Lord, she is new gone into the withdrawing Chamber.
Ha? who? who is gone?
A Gentlewoman that you were late in company with.
The Devil? look well about you then, a Spirit,
Of her constitution will set the house on fire
Instantly and make a yonghell on it when
Came she? I shall be everlastingly haunted
With goblings, are sure thou saw her?
Saw her, yes and him too.
Grimundo?
No not Grimundo, but I saw an other Gentleman
That has been held a notable spirit,
Familiar with her.
Spirit and familiar.
Piero my Lord
Piero?
I wonot say what I think, but I think somewhat,
And I know what I say, if she be a Devil▪ as she
Can be little less, if she be as bad as I imagine
Some bodies head will ache for it, for mine own
Part, I did but see and hear, thats all, and
Yet I ha not told you half.
Let me collect sure this fellow by th'circumstance
Means Astella, thou talk all this while of my Lady
Doest not?
Yes my Lord, she is all the Ladies in the house,
For my Lady and mistress was sent for
To the Abbey.
I had forgotten my self this is new horror,
Is my Lady and Piero so familiar say and
In private?
What I have said, I have said, and what they have
Done, they have done, by this time.
Done? and Isle be active too.
Show what feats of act•…ity you please but
I bell•…eve hee hath vaulted into your saddle 
Already—so so now I am alone which is as
The learned say, Solves cumsola I will entertain
Some honourable thoughts of my preferment, 
Hum the gamester is returned what melancholy, then
Hee he's don't I lay my head to a fools cap on it
I was always so my self after my capering▪
Did you not meet the Prince sir.
No, wh•…re is he?
He was here but now, and enquired how his Lady did, and I told him you could tell the •…ate of her body bet∣la then I, for I thought you were gone in before him.
I did but see her.
Thats not the right on it, it runs for I did but kiss her, for I did but kiss her.
It was enough for me to kiss her hand.
And feel her pulse.
How Sir?
As a noble Gentleman should Sir?
I am suspected, I must turn this fools discourse,
Another way, the present theme is dangerous;
What I hear say 〈◊〉, your Lady is like to rise?
My Lady does rise as early as other Ladies doe that go to bed late.
And there will be notable preferment for you?
Tic very likely my Lady understands her self▪
There is a whisper abroad▪
Tic a good hearing.
What if she be married in this absence?
Very likel•…, I say nothing but I think I know my Ladies secrets for the triumph, as pageants, or running at tilt, you may hear more shortly, there may bee reasons of state to have things carried privately, they will break out in Bells and bonfires hereafter; what their Gre∣ces have intended for me, I conceal.
He is wound up already.
You are a Gentleman I shall take particular notice of.
I hope a man may get a place for himself or his friend for ready money.
It were pity of my life else, you shall command the first that falls, but you must swear you came in without cha∣fering or buying, imagine it a plump Parsonage, or other Church living, the oath will go down the more easily. Di∣vines make no scruple.
But what if after all this imagination of a marri∣age, fortune should forbid the banes.
How? Fortune's a slut, and because she is a whore her self, would have no Lady marry and live honest.
Piero, whore's Piero?
Ha, my Lord, I ha don't.
Ha? what.
I have pleased thy Excellence, and you had made more hast, you might ha come to the falla'th Dear, deli∣cate Venison.
You have not enjoyed her?
They talk of Jupiter and a golden shower,
Give me a Mercury with wit and tongue
He shall charm more Ladies on their backs,
Then the whole bundle of Gods pshaw.
Shoot not so much compass, bee brief and an∣swer me, hast thou enjoyed her?
I have, shall I swear?
No, thou wilt bee damned sufficiently without an oath, in the mean time, I do purpose to reward your nimble diligence, draw?
What dee mean.
And you be so sharpe set, I do e mean to withdaw.
I doe mean to cut your throat, or perish•…'th at∣tempt you see your destiny, my birth and spirit wo'not le•… me kill thee in the da•…ke, draw and be circum•…pect.
Did not •…ou engage me to it, have I done any thing but by your directions? my Lord.
Tic all one, my mind is altered, I will see what complexion your heart bears, doe not negl•…ct my fury, bu•… guard your self discreetly, if I hit upon the right v•…in I may cure your diseasea'th blood.
Hold, and there bee no remedy, I will dye better then I ha lived, you shall see Sir that I dare fight with you, and if I tall by your Sword, my base consent to act your will de∣serves it.
Ha?
I find your policy, and by this storm,
You'd prove my resolution, how boldly I
Dare stand too't when this great
Dishonour comes to question prepare
To be displeased—she is a miracle
Of chastity impenterable like.
A marble she returned my sinful arro•…es
And they have wounded me, forgive me Lady.
I prithee tell me true, now thou shalt swear
Hast thou not don't.
Not by my hope of heaven
Which I had almost forfeited, had not she
Relieved me with her virtue, in this truth
I dare resig•…e my breath.
I dare believe thee
What did I see in her to doubt her firmness.
Here they are Madam, you doe not mean to
Run upon their naked weapons.
Piero thou shalt wonder.
What means my Lord?
You shall know that a non
My Lady go with me.
Whither you please
You shall not need to force me si•…, you ma•…
Lead me with gossamer, or the least thread
The industrious spider weaues.
Whimsies caribit soes.
What fury thu•… transports him at some distance
Isle follow him, he may intend some violence
She is too good to suffer I shall grow
In love with my conversion.
Grow in love with a cockscomb his last words
Stick on my stomach still fortune forbid the banes
Quoth, slid if fortune should forbid the banes
And my Lady be not converted into a Duchess
Where are allmy offices?
Hum where are they quoth I, I doe not know
But of all tunes I shall hate fortune my foe.
Know you not who they are my Lord this day
Receive the habit.
I can meet with no intelligence.
They are persons of some quality.
The Duke does mean to grace their ceremony.
He was invited by the Abbot to their clothing.
Which must be in private too hear in his lodgings.
Well, we shall not long expect'em his grace enters.
It helped much that he never saw my wife.
Dost think twill take.
There•…'s some hope my Lord already
And heaven may prosper it.
Wee cannot endear thee to thy merit.
How the Duke embraces him.
Cleona you are welcom' tic a blessed
Occasion that makes vs meet so happily.
It pleased my Lord Abbot to inuit me hither.
I appeared too upon his friendly sommons
Weal thank him for this presence,
The Abbot enters.
Speak your desire.
We kneel to be received into the number,
O•… those religious men that dedicate
Themselves to Heaven, in the habit of St. Bennet,
And humbly pray, that you would rectify
And teach our weak d•…uotion, the way
To imitate his life, by giving vs
The precepts of your order,
Let me tell you,
You must take heed, the ground of your resolve
Be perfect, yet look back into the spring
Of your desires, religious men should be
Tapers, first lighted by a holy beam,
Meteors may shine like stars, but are not constant.
We covet not the blaze, which a corrupt,
And flimy matter may advance, our thoughts
Are slam'd with Charity.
Yet ere you embark
Think on your hard adventure, there is more
To be examined, beside your end,
And the reward of such an undertaking,
You look on Heaven a far off, like a Land▪ skip,
Whether wild thoughts, like yours imperfect eye,
Without examination of those ways,
Oblique, and narrow are transported, but
In the walk, and try all of the difficulties
That interpose, you tire like inconsiderate,
And weary Pilgrims.
We desire to know
The rules of our obedience,
They will startle
Your resolutions, can your will, not used
To any Law beside it self, permit
The knowledge of severe, and positive limits?
Submit to be controlled, employed sometime,
In servile offices, against the greatness
Of your high birth, and sufferance of nature?
Can you, forgetting all youthful desires,
And memory of the worlds betraying pleasures,
Check wanton heate, and consecrate your blood
To Chastity, and holy solitude?
I wo not be religious Giotto?
Nor I, upon these term•…s I pity em.
Can you quit all the glories of your state,
Resign your titles, and large wealth to live
Poor and neglected, change high food and surfeits,
For a continual fasting, your down beds
For hard and humble lodging, your guilt roofs,
And galleries for a melancholy Cell
The pattern of a grave, where, stead of music
To charm you into slumbers, to be waked
With the sad chiming of the sacring bell;
Your robes, whose curiosity hath tired
Invention, and the silke-worme to adorn you,
Your blaze of jewels, that your pride hath worn
To burn out envies eyes, must be no more
Your ornament, but course, and rugged clothing
Harrow your soft skins, these and many more
Unkind austerities will much offend
Your tender constitutions, yet consider.
Hee does insist much on their flate and honour
May wee not know'em yet;
One of them sir
Doth owe this character.
It is Foscary
I find his noble purpose, hee is perfect
I honour thee young man, she must not see
This paper.
This doth speak the other Sir.
Tic at large—ha—Grimundo I prithee read,
I dare not credit my own eyes Leonora
So it begins, Leonora.
Leonora daughter to the late Gonzaga Duke
Of Millan, fearing she should be compelled to marry
Her Uncle, in the habit of a Page and the conduct
Of Father Valentio, came to Sauoy, to try the
Love and honour of his Excellence, who once
Solicited by his Ambassador—
No more, I am extasied
If so much blessing may be met at once
Isle doe my heart that justice to proclaim
Thou had a deep impression, as a boy
I loved thee too, for it could be no other,
But with a Divine flame, fair Leonora
Like to a perfect Magnes, though inelos'd
Within an Ivory box, through the white wall
Shot forth embracing virtue, now, oh now
Our Destinies are kind.
This is a mystery, Dulcino?
No my Lord, I am discovered,
You see Le•…nor now, a Millan Lady,
If I may hope your pardon—
Love; and honour
Thou dost enrich my heart, Cleona read
And entertain the happiness, to which
Thy fare predestined thee, whilst I obey
Mine here.
How, my Lord Foscary?
If he believing, I must dye before
This separation be confirmed, my joy
Doth overcome my wonder, can you leave
The world while I am in it?
Decr'•… Leonora!
Then willingly I dispense with my intention
And if the Duke have found another Mistress,
It shall be my devotion to pray he•…re,
And my religion to honour thee.
Many blessings crown
This vnlon.
Your pardon gracious Princess
I did impose too much.
I studied
To be your grateful servant, as your self
Unto the fair Cleona wee are all happy.
The'yr here; by your leave brother, my Lord Abbot?
Witness enough.
Why thus kneels Lodowick?
To make confession brother, and beg heavens
And every good mans pardon, for the wrong
I 〈◊〉'done this excellent Lady, whom my soul
New marries, and may heaven—ha doe not hold
A Justice back, Grimunde is a traitor
Take heed on him and say your prayers, hee is
The Deulls grand solicitor for souls,
Hee hath not such another cunning engine
In the world, to ruin virtue.
I my Lord?
You are no hipocrite, he does every night
Lye with a Succubus, he brought me to one
Let him deny it, but heaven had pity on me.
Ha? there she is, doe you not see her? Devil!
I doe defy thee, my Lord stand by me,
I will be honest, spite of him and thee,
And lye with mine own wife.
Sure the Prince is mad,
Oh rise most noble Lady, well deserning
A statue to record thy virtue.
Ha?
This is Grimundoes wife,
It is so my Lord.
No Devil•… but the servant of your virtue,
That shall rejoice, if wee have thrived in your
Co•…ersion.
I hope it.
Have I bin mocked into honesty? are not you a fury?
And you a •…lye and subtle Epicure?
I doe abhor the thought of being so,
Pardon my seeming Sir.
Oh go not back,
Prevent thus seasonably your real •…orment.
I am fully wakened, be this kiss the pledge
Of my new heart.
True love stream in your bosoms
Lady forgive me too.
Most willingly.
Our joy is perfect, Lodowisk 〈◊〉
A 〈◊〉 in this Lady, Leonora,
The object of our first love, take the story
As wee 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 Abbot wee must thank
You 〈◊〉 con•…revenge this, and you good Father,
E•…bassedors shall be dispatcht to Millan,
〈◊〉 where and how their absent Princess
Leonora 〈◊〉 disposed her self, mean while,
Poets shall stretch inn•…ntion, to express
Triumphs for thee, and Sauoyes happiness.

DOe not expect strong Lines, nor Mirth, though they
Justly the Towne-wits, and the Vulgar sway:
What hope have we then that our Play can please
This more Judicious Presence, wanting these?
We have a hope (the Author says) this Night
Love in our weakness shall express his might.
He in each Noble breast himself will place;
The Subject being all Love then, must find grace:
Yes you may say, if it bee well expressed,
Else love doth censure him from out our breast:
Thus what he hoped should help him, if he err
In the expression, turns his Censurer.
I for the Author stand, and in his Name
Doe here renounce the glory or the shame
Of this Nights work: Great Love, this Play is thine,
Work Miracles, and show thy self Divine;
Change these rude lines into a sweet smooth Strain,
Which were the weak effects of a dull Brain:
If in this Prologue Contradictions move,
That best expresses: it was writ by Love.
COme, prithee tell me brother, why ar't sad.
From thee my dearest Sister
I have not hid my nearest touching secrets:
Thou know how truly I did love,
And how at last I gained my dear Clarinda.
I doe; and wish that I could tell you such a secret of mine own; for of all men living, I think you most happy.
Most miserable of men.
How can that be! is not Clarinda yours?
In which (were I a man) I should believe
More happiness consisted, then for to be a Monarch.
Clarinda yet is mine.
Nothing can take her from you but the grave,
I hope she is not sick.
Nothing can take her from me dear Mariana,
But I must give her.
Why, love you any one so well to give away your heart
I know shoe's dearer to you?
She's so much dearer to me then my heart,
That I must kill my heart if I doe give her.
Be plain sweet brother.
The Duke who is too near a kin in love
And blood to our dread Sovereign to be denied,
Dyes for Clarinda.
Why, think you she'll prove false?
She false! Oh no:
It is I must play the traitor to my self
Virtue doth undermine my happiness,
And blows it up. I must release my interest
In Clarinda, that she may marry this loue-sicke Duke,
And save his Life.
Why who compels it?
Gratitude compels it;
For to the Duke I owe my life and fortunes,
My fortunes when my wicked Uncle would have
Wrested from me by false witness that state
Which I am now possessed of; which the Duke finding,
He employed his power, and so I had my right:
My life I then received: when I was rescued
By his valour from the dreadful bore,
Which I (too young) thrust on by honour, venterd to assail,
Yet all these obligations touch me not so near,
As doth the danger of the Count Ʋtrante,
(Clarinda's Father) who hath been long a prisoner,
For the same cause for which my Father fled.
He is now at liberty.
It is true he hath his liberty, and greater honours
Are proposed if he can win his Daughter
To marry with the Duke, then he hath lost:
But on the other side, if she deny.
And it doth wholly lie in me to make her grant,
Her Fathers head is in danger, the King
So passionately doth love the Duke.
How came you by this miserable knowledge.
Sister, you know I often visited
The Count Ʋtrante in the prison, besides
The wished occasions which I ever took
To waite upon his Daughter thither;
This he so gratefully accepted,
That now that he hath liberty,
He still sends for me, where I chanced to be last night,
And as a friend heard when he did propound it to Clarinda.
Then he doth no way suspect there's love betwixt you;
But tell me Brother how poor Clarinda
Did receive her Fathers deadly proposition.
Her Father not believing that she would deny
So great a blessing, came with joy to tell her,
That which once told, forced tears from her fair eyes,
At which, he being amazed, desired to know
The cause, why she received his and her happiness
With so much sorrow: she answered him with broken sighs,
Offering to tear her hair; which when I would not,
Give her leave to doe, she cursed her beauty,
As the cause of all this mischief: at last
Considering who it was that spoke,
A Father, that deserved an answer:
Her judgment shut her passions in a less room;
For having calmed the tempest of her griefs,
She mildly answered that she was happy
In his liberty, though now she saw
It was but given him to procure her bondage;
For such she did account all ties of marriage
Made by the parents without the child's consent,
Though ne'er so rich or hononrable.
And having said so, did she not cast her watery eyes
Upon you, and in this sad, yet pleasing language,
Tell you, that she would not forsake you for the Duke.
It is true, she did so; there is no tongue
That can express the hearts of those that love
Like their own eyes: but Sister, it will be late
Before you reach the Forest, the Princess too
May wonder at your stay.
Brother it's true; but I so seldom see you,
That I'll not go, unless you promise to come and see me.
You know the strict command,
That none but those appointed should come near the Lodge.
That is but your excuse;
I have told you how often the Princess
Earnestly hath desired to see you; yet you would never go.
Sister, I fear these sad occasions will hinder me;
But I will write.
Will you not come six miles to see a Sister
That so dearly loves you?
Sister, I know you love, nor will I be a debtor;
You are both my Friend and Sister.
My Lord Vtrante, can you not then
Persuade your Daughter to receive a Blessing,
Which even the greatest Ladies in this Kingdom
Would desire on their knees:
Is this a Man to be neglected? Though he were not
A Kinsman to your King: besides, my Lord,
Remember you may draw upon your self
Our high displeasure by her refusal.
Great Sir, let not your love and care of me
Barfaire Clarinda the freedom of her choice,
By threatening punishments unto her Father,
If she choose not me: for, should she, offended,
Which she might justly be, if I should seem
To force Love from her, it were not within your power;
Though that you would give all that you possess,
To make me satisfaction for the wrong.
Yes, I could make you satisfaction,
Though she were offended; by forcing her
Into your arms, to whom the wrong was done.
Her Person Sir you might, but not her Mind;
Which is indeed the object of my Love,
That's free from your subjection: for it's free
From Love, a greater power by far.
My Lord, I think shoe's free from reason too,
For did that govern her, she could not thus neglect
Her happiness: or rather she may yet suspect, your Lordship
Doth not mean what you profess; and from that fear
Seems coy, till she be more assured.
I cannot pluck my heart out of my breast
To show her (I wish I could) yet live to doe her service:
There she might see her worth truly engraven
In lasting Characters, not to be razed out
By the hand of Time; nor (which is more) her scorn.
Cozen, if you will be ruled by me,
I'll make her leap with joy into your arms.
Sir, so that it be by no way of violence,
I will obey you.
In act I'll use no way of violence;
Yet I must threaten it.
Sir, if you threaten her, you ruin me;
Her Sun-bright Eyes, by faithful service,
May in time shine gently on me, and warm
My frozen hopes. But on the contrary,
She knowing there I'm the cause of these your threatenings,
Will from her just vexed soul throw curses on me.
I would not see thee heaven of her fair face,
Clouded with any raised by my power, to be a Monarch.
You know my love, and you presume upon it,
Take your own way of love, deliver up your self
Unto her mercy, that I would make at yours,
Would you be ruled: go, see your Mistress,
Tell her you love her more then ever man did woman;
To prove which true, pray her that she'll command you
Tasks more dangerous, then did the envious Iuno
To great Hercules: all which you will perform
With much more ease; since you by her command
Shall undertake 'em whose virtue hath the power
To arm you against a world of dangers: doe,
Make her proud with praises, and then see
How she will torture you.
Sir, she may torture me, and justly too,
For my presumption: since I have dared
To tell so much perfections that I love,
Not being first made worthy by my suffering
For her.
My Lord, if you'll be pleased to grace my house
This day she either shall requite your sufferings,
O I will deny her for a child of mine.
My Lord, most willing, I would see fair Clarinda,
But not upon such conditions; nothing
But gentle entreaties must be used: for tho the King
Were pleased to say that my humility
Would make her proud; I would not have a subject
Say, not you that are her Father, that she can
Doe an act or think a thought that tends not
To perfection.
Come my Lords, we will go hunt a Stag to day,
And leave my Cozen to his amorous thoughts.
I thank your Majesty for this days licence:
My Lord Vtrante, shall I then see Clarinda,
And will you lend your best assistance
To make me Master of a happiness, the world may envy.
My Lord, you make an Idol of a peevish Girl,
Who hath indeed no worth but what you please
To give her in your opinion.
I must not hear you thus blaspheme.
You might as well say Pallas wanted wisdom,
Diana chastity, or Ʋenus beauty,
As say she wanted worth, for every several excellence
That shined in them, and made them
By men's admirations Goddesses,
Flow mixed in her; indeed she hath
Too much of Deans Ice about her heart,
And none of Ʋenus heate: but come my Lord,
I lose my self in her vast praises, and so
Defer the joy of seeing what I so commend.
Good morrow honest Iacomo, is my young Lady ready?
She is my Lord.
And whore's her Father?
He was this morning early sent for by the King.
Tell your Lady I would speak with her.
My Lord I will.
The Count Ʋtrante is happy in this honest servant:
Let me before I doe persuade Clarinda, consider well;
Surely that hour in which I see her led to the Temple,
And there made fast with Hymeneal rights unto another,
Will be my utmost limit, and death is terrible;
Not where there is so glorious a reward proposed,
As is her happiness: she shall be happy,
And in her happiness consists mine,
Have I not often sworn I loved her better
Then my self? and this is only left to make it good.
Good morrow noble Brother, for by that title
I am proud to call you, being denied a nearer.
It is a title that I am blessed in,
Nor can there be a nearer betwixt vs two,
Our souls may embrace, but not our bodies.
Let vs go walk into the Garden, and there
Wee may freely speak, and think upon some remedy
Against this disaster.
What a dull Slave was I; had not I last night over∣heard their loving parley, I never once should have suspected that they had been in love: she always seemed an enemy to love, yet hath been long most desperate in love with this young Lord, which quite will spoil my hopes at Court; yet when I better think, it will be for my advantage, as I may handle it and further my revenge; for I will insinuate my self into the Dukes good opinion, by making a discovery of their loves: and then advise him that there is no way to gain Clarinda's heart, till first Lysander be removed by some employment; for out of sight with women out of mind; or if hee impatient of delays; I will advise him to use some bloody means; which if he want an Instrument to do, I will effect it my self, pretending that it is out of love to him when it is indeed the satisfaction of mine own revenge; and when the Duke is once a partner of my vile∣lany, I will be richly paid for what I do, or else for all his great∣ness I will affright him.
For though great men for bloody deeds
Give money to a Knave;
Yet if hee bee a witty one like me,
He will make that Lord his Slave.
Come, let vs sit down, for I am tired
With walking; and then I will tell you
How I am resolved to free vs from this torment.
I fear there is no remedy, but we must part.
Yes, if you will give consent to what
I shall propound.
First let me hear it.
My Father, though he have his liberty,
Is not yet restored to his Lands: when next
The Duke doth visit me, which I believe will
Be to day; Isle seem as if I did mistrust his love
To be but feigned; he then will strive by some strong
Testimony, to prove hee truly loves:
Then will I urge my Fathers restoration
To his Lands, which he being once possessed of,
Will not be hard for me, the world knowing
How well he loves me, to get some coin and Jewels
In my power, sufficient to maintain vs
In some other Country, where we like shepherds
Or some Country folks may pass our time with joy:
And that we may without distrust effect this,
I to the Duke will promise, that when a month
Is expired, if he will come and lead me to the Church,
I'll not refuse to go, doe you approve
Of this Lysander?
No, dear Clarinda,
Though most men hold deceit in love for lawful,
Lysander doth not; Ere you for me shall spot
Your yet pure self with such a stain, as to be
A deceiver, this sword shall pierce my heart:
The debt I owe you is too great already,
And till I clear some part, I shall unto my self
Appear a most ungrateful man. When first I saw you,
The height of all my aims was only to have leave
To love you, so excellent I then esteemed you:
But you in time, out of your bounty,
Not for my desert; for no desert can reach
Your height of merit, gave love for love,
For which I owe my life saved by that mercy
From despair, and lent me for to serve you.
You are too thankful, and attribute that
To my bounty, which was the wages of your true
And faithful service.
Were this granted, yet how ever I shall be able
To free my self from that great burden of debt
Which your intended flight for my sake
Will lay upon me, as yet I cannot see;
For did at all value your own happiness,
You could not thus fly the means
That can best make you so.
Lysander, to what tends this great acknowledgment?
I understand you not, what is your meaning?
My meaning, dear Clarinda, is to make you happy,
And I conjure you by your affection,
And all that's dear to you, to lay by
That little portion of wilfulness
Which being a woman you are forced to have,
And hear me with your best attention,
And with the same affection, as if I were
Your Brother, which if the heavens had pleased
To make me, I had been most happy,
With your best reason look upon your present fortune;
Look first upon the man from whence you had your being,
And see in reason what pity it will challenge from you;
A noble ancient Gentleman, deprived of Lands
And honours, by injustice, that as a stranger
Might exact your pity; but as a Child,
It being within your power, it forces your consent
To give a remedy: If pity of your Fathers fortune
Cannot move you, pity your own I beseech you,
Consider not of me as a tormented Lover,
That hath lost his Mistress, but as a fortunate Brother,
Fortunate in seeing of his Sister, whom he dearly loves
Married to one so worthy, whose merits
Compels fortune to waite upon him, for such the Duke is,
Whom you must not refuse, for such a poor
Unworthy man as I am.
should I grant your want of worth,
I then must give consent to the committing
Of a Sacrilege against the Gods, in suffering you
To rob your self, you being the purest Temple,
That yet they ever built for to be honoured in:
And for the Duke each worth which you express of him to me,
Is but a doubling of your own,
The way to speak for him, were to appear
Your self less, worthy, in this your words increase.
Would you but look with an impartial eye,
On our deservings; you soon would find me
The less worthy; for even in that, wherein
You think me not to be equalled, he goes
Far beyond me, (I mean in true affection)
For being but a private man as I am,
Who would not think him blessed to love, and be beloved
By you that are esteemed the water of this Age:
But for the Duke, within whose power it lies
To choose the most transplendent Beauty of this Kingdom,
Set off with Fortunes best endowments; for him, I say,
To choose out you amongst a world of Ladies,
To make the sole Commandress of him self,
Deserves (if you would give your reason leave to rule)
The nearest place in your affection.
Doe not thus vainly strive to alter my opinion,
Of your worth with words, which was so firmly grounded
By your real actions; it is a fault, but I will strive
To wash it from you with my tears.
These tears in her stagger my resolution;
For sure he must be worthiest for whom she weeps:
Clarinda, dry your eyes.
How now Jasper, where is my Father?
Madame, he doth desire that you will make you ready,
To come to Supper to the Dukes to night.
He was resolved to have supped here,
How hath he changed his mind!
Madame he desires you not to fail.
But come and bring my Lord here with you.
Well, I will obey him.
Come, prithee be careful, we shall gain
More upon my Lords good opinion,
If we please him this day, then hereafter
In the whole service of our lives.
Why prithee?
Here will this day be his fair Mistress Clarinda
And her Father.
I thought it was some extraordinary occasion,
He was himself so careful; will there be none else?
Will not the King be here? the entertainment
Would be worthy of him.
It may be brave Lysander will be here, none else;
For he is always with the Count Ʋtrante.
When came he home from travail?
I did not see him since hee lay here in my Lords house
To be cured of the wounds the bore gave him.
He owes my Lord for saving of his life then,
I helped to bring him out of the field.
My Lord was happy in saving of so brave a Gentleman.
Can I love Clarinda, yet go about
To hinder her of being Mistress of all this riches;
Each room we pass through is a Paradise,
The Music like the Music of the Spheres,
Ravishing the hearers with content and admiration;
But that which adds unto all the rest,
Is the Dukes true affection; I am ashamed
When I consider of my indiscretion
That would have brought her to the counterpoint
Of this great happiness.
Noble Lysander, welcome; Excellent Lady,
All the honours that my great and royal Master.
Hath bestowed upon me, equals not this,
That you have done, in gracing at my request
This now most glorious house, since it contains within it
The glory of the world.
My Lord, your praises fly too hie a pitch to light on.
They must doe so, or they'll fall short
Of your great worth.
A reasonable pitch would sooner strike
Me with belief.
To give you a firm belief of the respect
I bear you, is that I only aim at.
My Lord, it lies in your choice whether I shall
Believe you or no; for if you will speak
Only that which in reason is likely to be true,
I am no Infidel, I shall believe.
You are so far from being an Infidel
That you are a Saint, at whose blessed shrine
I offer up my life, and Fortunes
With a truer devotion then ever Lover did.
I see I must allow you the Lovers Phrases,
Which is to call their Mistress St. and their affection
Devotion: but to let your Phrases pass,
And answer the meaning of your protestation,
How can I believe that you can love me
Better then any man did ever love his Mistress,
There being such an inequality in our present fortunes,
When equality doth give birth to more affection,
And those more violent, there being no respect
To be a hindrance, I mean both the equalities
Of Birth and Fortunes, in both which we far differ,
You being the next a kin unto the King,
And I the Daughter to a condemned man,
Though now for your own ends at liberty.
If it be lawful for your devoted servant
To contradict you in any thing, it is
In the defence of his affection.
You know that Rivers being stopped by any impediment,
As rocks, or bridges, run the more fierce
When they are from that which did incomber them;
So might I say for my affection,
If I should acknowledge, which yet I will not,
That the consideration of my Greatness
Was for a while an Impediment to the current
Of my Love; but alas, those considerations
Could never find harbour in that heart
Where love and admiration had already
Taken up their lodgng; nor doe they in my opinion
Deserve to be happy, who mix the consideration
Of the good of fortune, with their affections.
My Lord, in this last I doe unfeignedly believe you,
I mean in your opinion, which is, that true love
Cannot be mixed with respects, and to show now
How well I believe you, I will make it my shield
Both to defend me against your worthy affection.
(I confess if your thoughts and words agree)
And against my Fathers unjust commands;
For since you confess, that to mix love with respects
Spoils the purity of it, and that they
Who so mix it, deserve not to be happy;
It must needs be great injustice in you
And my Father to desire me to love you
Unworthily; since I cannot love you
Without mixing the consideration
Of the benefits my Father shall receive
By my Marriage with your Grace, besides
The satisfaction of me own ambition
In being a Duchess, may make any stream
Of affection which can proceed from me,
Unfit to mix with so pure a stream
As you profess yours is.
Madame I cannot deny what you affirm,
Since you ground your argument upon my confessed
Opinion; but know dear Lady, that as you manifest
In this your cruel answer, your disdain of me,
Which will incense my despair; yet on the
Other side the excellence of your wit
Will increase my desire; for even out of that
Which I brought as an argument to move you
The more to love, you conclude that you are
To neglect, and with a seeming Justice,
Which shows that your wit can bring ny thing
To pass, that your will shall employ it in.
I should account my self happy, were I
So furnished: but my Lord, I must not look
Upon my self in the flattering glass
Of your praises; for I hate flattery though a woman;
And as I am my self armed against flattery,
So would I have you be; therefore I tell you
That I can never be yours, to arm you against
The flattery of hope; yet I must tell you
That your deserts, if it were possible
For me to love, might sooner doe it then any other,
But as I am a votaress to Diana, in whose Temple
I doe shortly mean to dwell, I am free
From any fire that can bee kindled
By desert in Man.
Tho your intention in this cruel answer
May bee charitable, as intending
To allay my heat, by manifesting your boldness,
Yet it hath wrought deadly Effects; for it
Forces me tell you, that I must disobey you:
For rather then I and the rest of the world
Will lose so great a blessing, there shall not
Be a Temple left standing, that is sacred
To Diana within this Kingdom, when this is done,
To make your cruelty admired. Isle build
An Alter to selfe-lone; it is that power you obey,
And not Diana's, on which some friend shall lay
My bleeding heart, which now in thought,
And then in act, shall be a real Sacrifice:
Smile not, nor think this jest;
For by that Dian whom you seem to worship
Being your self a greater Deity,
When you doe cruelly perform what
You have rashly said, this heart
Which now seals what my tongue hath spoke,
Shall make the covenant perfect.
I see this is no way my Lord,
This rash oath you have made, may cost you dear.
In that consider the greatness of my love.
The greatness of your folly rather,
That think by threatening punishments to your self,
To make me pity you, when since I doe not love you,
I am not touched with any feeling of your griefs.
If not for mine, yet for your Goddess sake,
Give over your ill grounded resolution.
My Lord the King is newly lighted at the garden gate,
And in all hast calls for you.
Madame the King, to whom my person is a subject,
Commands my presence, and I must obey him:
But my heart which I have made you Sovereign of
Shall stay to wait on you; my return must needs
Be speedy, since I leave my heart at the mercy
Of you my cruel enemy.
My Lord I shall so martyr it before I come again,
That you will repent you.
You cannot give it deeper wounds
Then you have done already, and in that
Confidence Isle leave you.
Madame, will it please you walk into the gallery,
There are some pictures will be worth your seeing.
Will none go call the Duke? Welcome dear Cozen;
You lost a brave chase to day, but you had other game
A foot: what says your cruel Mistress will she love you?
I hope she will Sir, she doth hear me speak.
How hear you speak?
Of love I mean Sir.
Fie, passionate man.
Why Sir, doe you not think him happy
Whom she will vouchsafe to hear?
You know my love hath made you what you are
Out of an opinion that you deserved it;
Not for that you were my Kinsman. I never yet denied
What you would ask, relying on your judgment
And your virtue. Should you have asked my Sister,
For your Wife, I sooner should have given consent
And taxed your judgment less, then I doe now
For doting on this Lady. Call back for shame then
That judgment which had wont to govern all
Your actions, and make me once more proud
That I have such a Kinsman, whose judgment
Can control his strongest passions, even love it self,
When it is prejudicial to his honour.
Sir, You have always been a Father to me,
And studied that which hath been for my good,
Better then I could think. I know your Majesties
Intent in this, is to persuade me from that
Which you believe is prejudicial to me:
But since without her love gained the fair way
Of service, not by threatenings I can take joy,
In nothing this world can afford me;
Pardon me Sir, if I desire you to spare
Your Counsel, since I am capable of none,
Except you persuade me to love more.
Well Sir, I will leave you to your amorous passions,
See me no more till I send for you.
The King is moved;
Should he take from me all that he hath given me,
Yet it were a happiness, if for her sake I lost it.
My noble Lord.
Friend, what is your suit to me?
If it be reasonable, it shall not bee denied
For your young Ladies sake.
My Lord, the business I have to deliver,
Concerns your Grace.
How! me; what is it? speak.
My Lord, it is a secret, and doth concern Clarinda,
And therefore send your people off,
That with more freedom I may speak with you.
Waite me without, now speak.
What thinks your Lordship is the cause
That moves Clarinda to neglect your Love?
The knowledge of her own worth and my unworthiness,
Which defect I hope in time my faithful service
Shall make good, and she will love me.
Never, my Lord.
Why, is her vow of Chastity already past?
She vow Chastity!
Why villain dost thou smile at that,
Think thou Diana's self is Chaster?
Great Sir, mistake me not. I smile to think
How she deceives your Grace, telling you
She never means to marry, when I dare
Pawn my life she is already contracted.
Traitor to my best hopes;
Thou hast kindled in my breast a jealous fire
That will consume me; fiends take thee for thy news;
Would thou had been borne dumb: betrothd; it cannot be:
Who durst presume, knowing I loved her once,
To think of Love, much less to name it to her?
My Lord, if you will with patience hear me,
I will tell you whom.
Speak quickly, give me that case.
For I vow the earth shall not long bear vs both.
I will not tell you, unless you will promise
To follow my advice, which if you will,
I will show you a clear way to your desires.
What, do you riddle me; is she contracted,
And can I by your counsel attain my wishes?
No, the House of Fate, though they should all
Take Counsel, cannot back restore the happiness
You have robed me of in saying shoe's contracted.
My Lord, do not thus wast your self
In fruitless passion, but hear the remedy
That Isle propound.
First let me know which of the Gods it is,
That in a mortal shape hath gained her love,
That thou suspect'st she is contracted,
Or else some King, that in disguise hath left
His Kingdom, to obtain her Love
Who is worth many Kingdoms.
Name not a meaner Rival, if thou dost
Expect I should believe.
My Lord, it is a man, to whom
Your valorous hand gave life.
Cursed be my hand then for that unkind office,
Against my heart; name him.
It is the young Lord Lysander.
Take that ignorant fool, Lysander!
How! struck: is this my hoped reward?
By all that's good, Isle be revenged.
I was too rash,
She is a Woman, and may dissemble, Lysander to
Is noble courteous valiant, handsome,
But yet compared with me his fortunes nothing.
Alas, that cannot barr love, out of a noble breast,
Such as Clarinda's is: what ways my Birth
Or greatness with the King, in her consideration?
Lysanders equal fortunes, and her own,
In that their Fathers suffer for one cause,
His banished, hers a prisoner (till I releast him)
Hath I fear, begot a mutual love betwixt them.
Friend, prithee pardon me, I was too rash,
Isle heal thy hurt with gold.
My Lord, I am a Gentleman,
And were you not a Kinsman to the King,
The blow you gave me might have cost you dear.
Isle healechy reputation, and thy head
With store of crowns; here: but prithee tell me,
What moved thee to discover this to me?
Or how came thou thy self to know of it?
I think her Father doth not.
I think he doth not, it is long since,
Since I suspected it; and to assure my self,
The other night I crept behind the Arbour,
Where they use to meet sometimes, and soon by their
Discourse, I found what I suspected, to be most true:
My love unto your Grace made me so curious;
For I protest there is no man alive,
That's more ambitious to do your Lordship service;
It grieved my soul to see a man that so deserved,
So much neglected and abused. Some of this is true.
If thou wilt make thy fortune,
Bring me where unseen, I may overhear them.
So your Grace will not discover your self,
Isle promise you once within three nights.
By mine honour I will not, perform
Thy promise, and I will make thee happy.
Be sure you show not
At your return to them the least distemper.
Fear not that.
Sir, you have showed vs many Pictures;
But aboue all the rest, I like that of your Lords.
Madame, I know my Lord would think him happy
Would you accept the picture; but much happier
If you would take the substance.
It may be Sir I will.
Daughter, I charge you on my blessing,
When the Duke returns to use him with respect.
Father, I see you have no skill, you doe not know
The craft we women use to make men love the more;
The smallest favour I shall show him after this harsh usage,
Will make him think himsele in heaven.
Before you part, when he comes back,
I pray you urge my restoration,
But first promise to marry him.
Leave that to my Discretion
Gentle Lady, I crave your pardon for my stay,
Which was drawn out beyond my expectation.
Me thinks my Lord looks sour upon me.
My Lord, indeed I wondered how you stayed so long,
O rather how you lived your heart and you being parted;
For that you left behind you when you went.
Madame, I doe confess it is a miracle
Proceeding from your beauty, that I could live
So long wanting a heart; but trust me,
If my faithful service cannot procure me yours,
But that you needs will send my own again,
The Miracle will then be altered quite;
For now the Miracle consists in that I live
And yet you have my heart; and then it will
Be a Miracle indeed if I doe live after
Your scorn shall give it back again.
My Lord, I see it was not bounty
But hope of gain made you give me your heart;
For you expect that I should give you mine
By way of recompense, which yet I cannot doe:
But that I may be sure they are true Miracles
That you are pleased to say my Beauty works;
For there are many false ones here in Loves Religion;
Isle take a Month for trial of the truth,
All which time my charity compels me to keep your heart;
For should I send it backs, you say it would kill you,
Or work another Miracle, which I desire not,
In that time I shall be acquainted with your heart,
If then it doth appear the same it now doth,
Clad in the same pure zeal that now it wears,
Isle make a change, and give you mine for it;
For when a Month is once past, come you
And lead me to the Church, Isle not refuse to go.
Slave that I was to trust that villain Iacomo,
That told me she loved Lysander. Dear Lady
You have in this comfortable answer
Revived a dying man, this mercy at the block,
Shows you to be divine, and so an object
Fit for my affection, which hath been still
Aboue my reason: but would you in the mean time
Command me something, where my faithful service
Might appear, more then in words, I then should be
Most happy.
This offer I expected;
My Lord, you know the injuries my Father
Hath received: if you will see him righted,
His Lands and Honours back to him restored,
Which is but Justice for a bribe, for even just causes
Now have need of bribery: Isle give you thanks,
And trust me that is more then great men
Should expect for doing justice.
Rather if it please you,
Let it be something, wherein I shall have no other tie
Upon me but only your command, my honour
Ties me to see this performed.
This once performed,
Since you so much desire it, I will study
Some Command, that may add honour to you
In the fair performance.
Come my Lord, we will draw near,
I see their parley's at an end.
Come sit fair Lady.
My Lord, what says my Daughter?
Will she yet yield to his own happiness.
I hope she will at last make me a fitter mark
For Envy, in that I am beloved of her,
Then for my present greatness.
My Lord, there is no cause of Envy for either,
The greatness of your hnors being but the Just
Reward of your unequalled merit: and for Clarinda,
Tho her worth be great as you can wish it;
Yet you doe well deserve her, both for your worthy Love,
And for the many favours you have done her Father.
My Lord, believe me, he hath spoke my thoughts.
Now when the King sent for me, I had prevented
Your Daughter in a command that she laid upon me
Concerning your restoring to your Lands,
But that the King was angry at something that I said.
I thought it had been Impossible,
He could have been offended with your Grace.
It is true, at other times he could not,
But the Lords told me that his Sister
Fair Cleonarda, had received a hurt,
By rescuing of the hounds from the Stags fury,
When he stood at bay, and that made him it may be
So apt for to be angry.
Why did they suffer her so to endanger her self?
My Lord, she apprehends not danger,
Which you'll confess your self, when you have heard
Me tell, what I have seen her doe.
This act to me my Lord, is a sufficient testimony
That she doth not fear; for by the laws of hunting
It is not to any man thought a disparagement,
To give way to a Stag, his head being hard.
She is a Lady of that noble Spirit,
That she wants nothing but the person of a Man
To be one, her heart being equal
To the most valiant, with these eyes I saw her,
(The King her brother being in the Forest)
Break from the company, and pursue a wolf,
Which the hounds following of a Stag,
Did bring out of a thicket, and being well horsed,
She plied him with so many wounding shafts,
That he at length was forced to stay his course,
And seeing there was no way to scope by flight,
He turnd', for to revenge the wounds he had
Received, in which he showed himself a beast indeed
And led by brutish fury; for had he been
Endowed with reason, he would have tan the wounds
She gave for favours, and kissed the instrument,
That honoured him with death from her fair hand.
My Lord, it is strange a woman should do this.
I was the nearest, but ere I could come in
She had cut off his head, the service
That I could doe her, was to carry to the King
Her brother, that Trophy of her Victory,
Whilst she followed the hounds, and so fled
From the hearing of her own just praises,
Which all with admiration did bestow upon her.
But that your Grace doth tell it,
I should not think a woman could doe this.
My Lord, did I love you so well as to be jealous,
These praises of the Princess, were apt food
For it to feed on.
Madame, I honour her as the beloved Sister
Of my Sovereign; but adore you as my Goddess,
At whose blessed shrine, I offer up my life, and fortunes.
My Lord, I should account it as the most acceptable
Service that you could doe, to bring me to kiss the hands
Of this much to be admired Lady.
Madame, once every week She comes to see the King,
And the King every time he hunts, fails not
To see her, when next she comes to the Court,
I will wait upon you to her.
What is the reason
She lives not with her brother at the Court,
Since he so dearly loves her as they say?
It's certain no Brother loves a Sister better,
For there's no Brother hath a Sister so worthy,
You having never a Brother.
My Lord, it is late;
And though heretofore the company of a Father
Were a sufficient buckler to bear off slanders darts;
Yet now world is ehanged, grown so vicious,
That Fathers are become the likeliest Instruments
Of sin, and women are not to satisfy themselves
Alone, with being good; but they must give the world
A firm belief of all their actions,
That they are so; there may be some seeing me here
Thus late, that will not stick to say, my honour
Is the bribe paid for my Fathers restoration.
Though there were found one envious woman foolish
And wicked to report it; (for both these she must be)
There could not sure be found another Fiend
Of the same stamp, that would believe it;
I dare not though I wish it bid you stay longer:
I will wait upon you to your Coach.
My Lord, it shall not need.
My Lord, I hope it will not be long
Before this ceremony of parting will be quite lost,
And that you will not be so far asunder.
In hope of that blessed hour I live.
Doe not too strongly apprehend your happiness,
A month's a long time, all things are uncertain,
Especially the promises of women.
Fortune, I see thou art a friend to working spirits,
Thou would not else have given me this occasion
So soon to compass my ends by; I ouer-heard Clarinda,
When she entreated Lysander to meet her in the
Accustomed place, and thither will I bring the Duke.
He from Clarinda's promise of Marriage,
Is now grown something doubtful, whether that
Which I did tell him be true or no; but now his own ear
Shall be his witness; for which service he cannot choose
But both love an reward me.
But I lose precious time, which wise men ever
Consider of, but fools seldom or never.
Had you not sent me word, I had not come to night,
It is so dark.
It is dark indeed, the fitter for one orecharged
With grief in heart as I am.
Why dear Clarinda, are you not resolved
To marry with the Duke?
I see Lysander you doe not love me now,
Nor wish my happiness, you would not else
Persuade me from loving you, wherein it only
Can consist.
Will you still for the aerie name of Constant,
Rob your self of a substantial happiness,
Besides, think what duty bids you, doe it
In respect of your Father; if he should marry
He must needs fall into the Kings displeasure,
He being his Kinsman, so what happiness
Could you enjoy? Will you be ruled by me,
And Isle show you a direct way to happiness;
Doe you love me as you profess?
You know I love you more
Then I have words to utter.
Yet you would never give consent to marry me
Though it were still my Suite, alleging
That our fortunes were too mean, and had we
Without Marriage enjoyed the sweets of love,
It had been dangerous unto your honour,
Should you have proved with child; but will be now
Secure in that respect, if you marry with the Duke;
And for our difficulty in meeting,
Twill add to our delights; now every time
That we shall meet in secret, will far pass
A wedding-night in joy, stolen pleasures give
An appetite, secure delights but cloy.
O my vexed soul!
Must I then hear a villain speak thus to her
I love, and not revenge it presently?
My Lord, remember your Oath.
Lysander, why do ye stare so and look pale?
Your hair stands up an end, as if your sense
Began to fail you sure you are fallen mad,
Nay, I doe hope you are so; for if you be not,
I am more miserable then if you were:
For, can Lysander be himself, and speak thus
To his Clarinda? No, he cannot: either Lysander
Is changed from what he was; or else he never
Was what I esteemed him, either of which
Makes me most miserable.
You would seem to think me mad, when indeed
Your self are so, you would not else thus weep
When I advise you to that which will be most to our content.
Pardon me Lysander, that I have seemed
For to believe; for sure I did no more,
That which you have spoke proceeded from your heart.
Why doe you think that I dissembled in what I said.
Yes, Lysander; I know you did dissemble;
For if you did not, you were a loathed villain.
I doe confess if I were that Lysander
Which I have seemed to be; it were impossible
For me to think what I have spoke; but know
Clarinda, Though hitherto I have seemed
To carry in my breast a flame so pure,
That never yet a spark of Lust appeared,
It hath been a dissembled show of modesty,
Only to cozen you; and if Clarinda,
The requital of my affecton be that which
Hinders you from these great honours, be not deceived,
For you shall have more power then to requite it,
When you are greater: we are now equal;
But when you are a Duchess, then t'enioy you
Will be a double pleasure, then you shall have
Occasion to express your love in my advancement
Isle kill him instantly.
Your oath my Lord.
The merit of the act being so just,
Will expiate the sin of perjury.
My Lord,
What, shall I hear her whom I have adored
Almost with as much zeal as I have offered up
My prayers to the Gods, tempted to acts of Lust
And not revenge it?
My Lord, hear me but speak, and then doe what you will: if you should thus in the night, and in the house of the Count Ʋtrante kill Lord Lysander, your honour Clarinda's, and her Fathers would be tainted, and so breed strange combu∣stions: but if you be resolved that he must die, which in my judgment is most necessary, if you still love Clarinda, I will undertake for to dispatch him by some means or other; but should you now here in Clarinda's presence kill him she loves, her mind is so noble she would never endure you.
This is a villain, an incarnate Devil:
Yet will I follow some part of his counsel:
Lead me the way back unseen. Isle stay no longer;
For if I hear him speak again in that base Key,
I shall doe that which I hereafter may repent.
No. Isle take the noblest way to my revengement.
Clarinda, you have long been silent,
What is it you consider of? if it bee my words,
You must needs find them full of reason.
Isle seem as base as he would have me,
And so find out whether he speaks this from
His heart or no.
I must confess that this which you have spoken
Stands with good reason; and reason is the rule
By which we ought to square our actions:
Dare I believe that you would counsel me
To any thing, but that which will be most
For my content, and for the Duke, will it not be
Far less to his content, not to enjoy at all
Me whom he loves, then if he should possess me,
And yet you have a share with him in my embracings:
For what is that husband worse, whose wife abuses him,
If she have but the wit to keep it from his knowledge.
It is true the Duke is so noble, and doth withal
So truly love you, that it will quite banish
All base distrust, so that we might with all security
Enjoy our loves.
Leave, leave.
Or if he should find out our craft,
How soon might we dispatch him by poison?
There have been such things done.
You doe ouer-act your part,
I see the end you aim at, your virtue shows it self
Quite through that mask of vice, which love to me
And to my Father made you put on; you thought
If you could have given me a belief
Of your unworthiness, that then I would have given
Consent to have married with the Duke:
Leave your dissembling then, since you're discovered,
Lest you offend the Gods; I only seemed
To give applause to what you said, to find
Your craft.
I see my heart lies open to you,
You have spoken my very thoughts, indeed
This was my end.
Lysander, I perceive that your affection
Is altogether governed by your reason,
For which if it be possible, I love you more,
Because it well becomes a man to doe so:
But I should hate my self, if I should love
According to your rule, which I will manifest;
For here I take the heavens to witness,
That if within three days you do not marry me,
Isle kill my self, speak quickly; for if you do not
Love me, it is a greater mercy to tell me so,
(That I may dye) then to persuade me
To love another, that being impossible,
But death is easy.
Clarinda, you have overcome by this rash oath
My resolution: for I perceive the fates
Had foreordained we should enjoy each other,
After such real testimonies, to make our love the firmer.
I doe with joy embrace what you compel
Me to by your rash oath; and if your Father
Wilfully will stay, and not fly with vs,
Rather then I will ever draw tears
From those bright eyes.
I so dearly love, we'll leave him to the danger.
Shall I still love one that neglects my faithful service?
Alack I cannot help it now, I yielded up
My heart at the first summons, her fair eyes made,
Me thought it was a kind of treason, once
To doubt that she was not the sovereign of all hearts:
Thus she that came to Court, to beg her Fathers liberty,
Had not that granted only, but that I who begged
It for her, became my self her prisoner,
And never man was prouder of his bondage
Then I was: what though she love a villain
Whose intemperate lust, and base dissembling,
Kather deserves her hate; yet she is fair
And virtuous still; it is my part to let her
See her error, tho with the danger of my life,
If I survive the combat, and that she know
For what respect I fought, she cannot choose
But love me, and if the heavens have so ordained,
That I must fall under Lysanders sword,
Yet I have written that, which shall give a better
Testimony that I did love her more then he.
Who waits there?
My Lord.
I mean to ride abroad this morning,
And if I come not back at night, carry this letter
To the King; Bernardo, carry this presently
Unto the young Lord Lysander.
My plots are dashed, the Duke doth turn his eyes upon me as though he would look me dead, I shall gain hate on all sides, if I bee not wary and cunningly dissemble; revenge and profit are the ends I aim at; since I have mist the one, Isle make the other sure. Lysander, I doe hate thee for coming into the world to rob me of my land; yet I doe think thou art not only false; my Brother did tricks, which when I would have proved in open Court the Dukes power boulstred up against me; but I doe hope I shall bee now revenged upon them both. Isle poison the Duke my self, and to the King accuse Lysander, as if he had done it, fearing that the Duke should rob him of his Mistress: I have a servant shall swear what I would have him, I keep him for the purpose; since the Duke would not give me leave to use my drugs for him, he shall himself taste of them; lest for that kindness I offered him, I should my self bee punished: Hee that to honour looks is not for my black ends,
Revenge &amp; profit Isle pursue through blood of foes and friends.
Where is the Duke Sir?
He is this morning ridden forth,
Whither I doe not know.
Your Letter Sir, do's not require an answer,
It will not be long before I see his Grace my self.
Good morrow to your Lordship.
Good morrow Sir, Isle read them once more over,
Few words, but I believe a Prologue to much mischief.
I fear that my affection and Clarinda's
Is to the Duke discovered; and now disdain
And anger to be out-riual'd, boyle within his breast,
If it be so, he takes the noblest way,
To use no other force but his own arm:
But how shall I employ my Sword to take
His life that gave me mine, my conscience tells me
Though it be not apparent to the world,
That I am even with him; for that since I to him
Would have given up my interest in Clarinda,
Would she have given consent. It may be
I am deceiud in this my apprehension,
And rat it is in love he sends for me;
If it be so, I shall be glad; if not, however
I will meet him according to his desire;
But first Isle write a Letter to Clarinda,
It may be I shall never see her more:
If I come not home to night, carry a Letter
You shall find within upon the Table to Clarinda:
Honour thou teased vs men to strange conditions;
For rather then weel lose the smallest part of thee,
We on an even lay venture Souls and Bodies,
For so they doe that enter single Combats.
It is hot Mariana; we'll rest our selves a while,
And when the day grows cooler have another course.
I wonder how the Dear escaped; the follow-dog
Once pinched him.
It was the bushes saved him.
Why will you course among the bushes?
Gerard the Keeper would have brought you
To a fairer course; but you will never let
Him go along.
I hate to have a tutor in my sport.
I will find and kill my Game my self;
What satisfaction is it to me if by another skill
I purchase any thing?
Yet you must have
Your husband chosen to your hand; the King your Brother
Will take that pains for you.
He shall have leave to name me one;
But if I doe not think him worthy of me,
Isle break that Kingly custom, of marrying
For the good of the State; since it makes Princes
More miserable then Beggars; for Beggars marry
Only those they love.
Madame, it's true, we not alone in Princes
See the bitter effects of such forced Marriages;
But even in private Families, Murders and
Adulteries, doe often wait upon those Couples
Whose Bodies are compelled by Parents or Friends
To join for worldly respects, without the souls consent.
It is true Mariana, how many careful Parents
That love their children dearly, thinking
To make them happy by marrying of them richly,
Make them miserable, both here and in the other world.
Madame, it is very hot, will you go bathe your self
In the River.
With all my heart Mariana,
It will refresh vs well against the Evening:
I am resolved to kill a Decree to night,
Without the Keepers help.
I hope your Grace hath not long staid for me.
No, Lysander, you are come before
My expectation, though not before my wish:
You cannot guess the cause that I sent for you.
My Lord, I cannot,
Unless fortune be so favourable to give me
A fair and just occasion by being your Second,
To hazard that life for you, which by your valour
Was preserved; but why to hope so great a blessing
I cannot see; since who within this Kingdom
Dare injure you; yet you commanded
That I should come armed.
For being my Second, banish that thought,
And yet I mean to fight to day, and for an injury
That is done to me; and you Lysander shall fight to,
Not as a Second, but a Principal.
With whom?
With me Lysander.
With you my Lord, upon what quarrel.
I will maintain that I doe love Clarinda
Better then you, and better doe deserve
To be beloved by her.
My Lord. I doe confess it,
And so this cannot be a cause of quarrel;
She is your Mistress and deserves to be so,
There being no other worthy of your Service:
But for my part I have no interest in her
More then a friend. Why should your grace think
I love her then so well, to make my love
To her, the quarrel?
Lysander, I did not think
Th'adst been so base to have denied thy Mistress;
But I will further maintain, thou art thy self
A Villain, a base dissembling lustful one.
Had these words,
(Which wound you deeper far then they doe me,
Since they are scandalous) come from another,
My sword should first have answered, not my tongue;
But since you are one to whom I owe my life,
Isle keep another method: First, Isle let you see
The wrong you doe me, which if you shall not
Straight acknowledge, our swords shall then decide
Whether this title be my due or no,
And lest you may condemn me for an enemy,
As thinking me your debtor, Isle let you see
That you my Lord, are as much bound to me,
As I to you, though you did save my life.
Lysander, doe not think,
You owe me any thing for saving of your life,
The thanks if any was due to Fortune,
Who brought me thither; for what I did
A peasant might have done, you being your self
Almost a Conqueror before I came,
Though sure enough for want of blood to perish,
Had I not brought you home, which yet indeed,
Was but my duty to help a wounded man:
But how Lysander, I should stand engaged to you
For greater obligations, (though this, I grant,
Be small) I cannot see.
Tho you should amplify, as you diminish
What you did form; yet it would never equal
The pulling of my heart out of my breast,
For to give you content.
I cannot understand your Riddle;
Yet fear it tends to base submission.
Duke, be not deceived for after the discovery
Of that secret which I will tell you,
Isle give you an assurance with my sword,
I doe not fear.
What secret is this?
I did but now deny that I did love Clarinda,
But now I call the heavens to witness
Who must assist me in so just a quarrel,
That I doe love her equal with my life;
And now I will maintain that I deserve
To be better beloved by her then you.
Come then, may the truest Lover
Prove the Victor.
First let me show you,
How I acquit the obligation, I ought you,
Clarinda loves me more then I can her, yet though
She thus love me, I out of my gratefulness to you,
Used the best part of my eloquence,
To persuade her to marry you; and is not this
A secret, and a discharging of the debt I owed you.
These ears indeed can witness thou did persuade her
To marry me, but it was to satisfy
Thy own base ends thy lust and thy ambition,
Not out of thy gratitude to me as thou pretendst.
My lust the vestal Virgins that keep in the holy fire,
Have not more cold desires then I have.
I in her Fathers Garden late last night,
Overheard thee tempt that bright Angel
Which my soul adores, to acts of lust;
And with such moving reasons, that flesh and blood
Could never have resisted, considering
That she loved thee; but that there was a power
That governs aboue reason, guarded her
From thy strong temptation.
My Lord, that curiosity hath undone you,
For I doe call the heavens to witness,
That what I then spake when I seemed vicious,
Was all dissembled; intending you the fruit
Of that dissimulation; for when I once
Have made my self a peer unworthy,
I thought that she would then have turned
The stream of her affection upon you.
Can this be true?
Sure fear makes him invent this; no sure,
He cannot bee a Coward. Lysander,
Thou hast told me that, if it be true,
Doth render thee a perfect man; but not
A perfect lover: and trust me if there were
A possibility that I could live without Clarinda,
I should be friends with thee; but since she
Is the mark at which we both aim, the one must
By the blood of the other, purchase that happiness:
And therefore guard your self.
My Lord, the injustice of your cause,
Not Fortune hath deformed you, and therefore yield.
If fear of death could make me
Forget Clarinda, wear the Victors prize
Then I perchance might yield; but since it cannot,
Make use of your advantage.
I scorn to gain a victory so poorly,
But to this man that saved my life.
You are a noble enemy, and have so won
Upon me by my curtsy, that could you
Quit your interest in Clarinda, I should with joy
Share fortunes with you.
We lose time; for since we cannot both
Enjoy Clarinda, both must not live.
Fortune, I thank thee,
Now I am even with you, rise.
I owe you for my life; we were but quit before;
I would our quarrel were of another nature.
I would it were; but as it is
One of vs must lye cold upon this grass,
Before we part.
Ah poor Clarinda, this is too sad a witness
Of thy perfections; would thou were here yet,
That I might take my last farewell.
O dear Madame, what a sad obiect's this?
Bee not afraid,
See if the breath have quite forsaken that body.
O my best love Clarinda,
Receive from my dying lips, a dying kiss.
How's this!
Madame, the breath hath quite forsaken this body, as I think: O my dear Brother!
Is it Lysander then, whom I have longed so much to see?
I saw him not since he came home from travail,
And much it grieves me that I see him thus,
This is the second time that I have seen him:
Besmeared in blood!
Dear Brother speak, who hath hurt you?
Dear Sister,
What blessed Angel hath brought you hither?
This it no fit time for questions Mariana,
Let's help him to the Lodge, before his loss of blood
Overcome his spirits.
Fair and courteous Lady, pardon me,
My sight did fail through my excessive bleeding,
Which made me to mistake.
Brother it is the Princess.
O Madame, lead me no further then;
For you will curse your charity if you preserve me.
Why Sir?
Because I have by this unlucky hand,
Robbed you of such a Kinsman, as our Sovereign
And your self were justly proud of.
Who is that?
The Duke, who lies there as you see.
It cannot be.
Madame, it is too true.
Alas my Cozen!
Sir, you have an unlucky hand indeed;
For you have this day murdered two:
Justice will at your hands require his blood.
O Madame say not so, had you but even now
So great a care to save his life, and are you now
So cruel to say that he must perish by the hand
Of Justice, though he should scope these wounds?
Would not the Duke have kilt him if he could?
Isle pawn my life upon 't, my Brother kilt him fairly.
What shall I doe, if I help to preserve him
That kilt my Kinsman, it is unnatural in me,
And I besides may lose my Brothers good opinion;
And should I be the cause that Mariana's brother perish,
I shall lose her for ever; either she'll dye for grief,
Or else she'll hate me. Isle doe as I did first intend,
My conscience tells me it is the nobler course;
Besides, there is something, I know not what it is,
Bids me preserve Lysander, the great desire I had
To see him, bred from the general commendations which
The world bestows upon him, imported something.
Dear Brother, what was your quarrel?
Come Sir, be of good comfort, neither your wounds
Nor the cold hand of Justice, if it be
Within my power to help it, shall rob
Your loving Sister of you, she is by me
So well beloved.
I want words to express how much I love
And honour you.
Madame I would not have you go about
To preserve me with your own danger,
I mean the Kings displeasure, besides, I fear
Your labour will be fruitless; for if the Lodge
Be not hard by, sure I shall bleed to death,
Before we can come thither.
It is but hard by.
Then I may live to doe you service,
Rather let me perish before I trouble you.
You are her Brother, and cannot trouble me,
We'll lay the body behind yon bush, until we
Send for it.
Can you not find the Dukes body
Say you Gerard?
No where Madame can I find it,
And yet I have sought it round about the place
Where you appointed me; I found the bloody plot
Where it had been, his horse I found to
Tied fast to a tree.
It is strange, what can become of it, Gerard,
Upon your life keep secret what you know,
And see that none come near the Lodge.
I will send you all provision necessary,
Pretending that Mariana is sick.
Madame, I fear she will be so indeed,
She doth so apprehend her Brothers danger.
She hath no cause, no wounds of his are mortal;
Or if they were, I have applied such sovereign remedies
That they shall cure 'em: but who shall be my Surgeon?
Love, I must fly to thee I fear for remedy,
I pray thee go back, and see that all things be well,
And in the morning bring me word how she hath
Slept to night.
Madame, there shall bee nothing wanting
That lies within my power.
How careful am I
Of his wounds? me thinks I would not
Have him dye for all the world: fie Cleonarda,
Taken at the first sight with outward beauty,
Nor being assured first of the inward worth!
I wrong my self, and him: It was
The inward bravery of his mind, which all
The Kingdom doth admire, that turned my heart,
Which until now hath been like adamant
To Kings, to melting Ice to him, and not his
Outward beauty, that never could have found
A passage to my heart, but that the way
Was chalked out to it by his Fame: but stay,
Whither doe my vain imaginations carry me?
Though Lysander could in worth equal the Gods,
Yet it were not fit for me to love him as a husband;
He is my Brothers Subject, shall he be my Master?
No. To my old sports again: to morrow
I will bee up by break of day,
And Reason (as I chase the Stag)
Shall chase these thoughts away.
When rode your Lord abroad?
Early this morning.
How chances you then did not sooner
Bring me this Letter?
I was commanded otherwise by him.
Royal Sir, add to the number of your many favours, the perfor∣mance of this my last request:
What doth hee mean by this?
I pray you see Clarinda (who is my wife) possessed of what was mine, and withal, pardon him that kills me; for I will compel him to fight. How's this? Begin not after my death to deny me that which is just, since in my life time you never did see the will of the dead effected, as you desire to have your Testament performed after your death, which I pray the Gods that it may be yet a long life.
O what a Character is here delivered, of a pure mind,
Which only seems to show the greatness of my loss
The plainer, his death is not yet certain,
Let me not like a woman spend that time
In fruitless lamentations which may perchance
Afford a remedy, but now it is night:
What shall I do? call all the Court, and let them all
Disperse themselves, each man a several way;
He that brings word the Duke is alive,
Shall have a thousand pounds: he is gone to fight
A Combat with whom I know not; but he that
Apprehends the man that kilt him, shall have his land
Is there none here that knows of any falling out
Between him and some other Lord? speak,
Is there none can tell me?
And if it please your Majesty, I think
I have a guess.
Speak then.
If he bee gone to fight, it is with
Young Lysander.
Let one go look for Lysander presently.
What grudge was betwixt them? or fell they lately out?
I will tell your Majesty in private. I am a servant to the Count Ʋtrante, and was employed by that most noble Duke, (whom I doe fear sleeps now in death) for to solicit his true love to my young Lady, which I did faithfully perform: but I found all I did was vain, for she long time hath been in love with young Lysander, which when I knew, I gave the Duke straight notice; this hath so far incensed the Duke against Lysander, that they are gone to fight.
This that thou hast told is cerraine true,
Else she would never have denied to have married
With the Duke, and for thy love and faithful service to him,
Which I believe is now no more; for else by this time,
He would have returned. I will requite thee.
He was the noblest Gentleman
That I shall ever know.
Alas goodman, he weeps.
He that can bring me word the Duke is alive,
Redeems his King from misery.
I hope he never shall come back alive, he knows I am a villain, I was too forward in my offers to him, till I had tried his dispositions better. It is kindly done of him and of Lysander yet to spare my pains: there now wants nothing of my wish but that the Duke be kilt, and I to find out where Lysander is, then I shall be revenged upon them both, and be possessed of that which is my due, (Lysanders land) for so the King hath pro∣missed. My way to find Lysander if he hath kilt the Duke, is for to give Clarinda a firm belief that I doe dearly love him; for sure if he be living, she shall hear of him, and if I find him, I have another villainy in my head, which I will put in act, besides my giving notice of him to the King.
My vile••ny shall Virtue be in show,
For all shall think me honest Iacomo.
I fear the Duke hath notice of our loves; for he hath sent to me to meet him armed, I fear it is to fight, if it be so, and I survive the Combat, I will send you word where I a∣bide, if I be kilt, I doe conjure you by your virtues, not to to bee ungrateful unto the Duke, who you see doth not desire to live, without he may enjoy you for his wife.
No my Lysander, in that hour when I shall hear
That thy fair soul is parted from thy body,
I will quickly follow thee.
Madame, the King is at the gate, and in a rage,
Threatens your Fathers death and yours, they say Lysander
Hath kilt the Duke.
I feared as much,
This comes of my dissembling.
Why is your Majesty offended with your Vassal,
Who as yet never so much as in a thought offended you.
Where is that Enchantress, which you call Clarinda?
Here Sir, is the unhappy object of your anger.
I am amazed, I never till now saw true beauty.
Why kneel you Lady?
It is my duty Sir, you are my Sovereign.
Rise fair Creature; came I to chide, and doe I kiss.
This is the force of Beauty; who lives
That can be offended with so sweet a Creature?
I cannot now blame the Duke, for valuing
Her so much. I would she were the Daughter.
Of some neighbouring King, that I without
Disparagement might love her: but I forget
My self, these are poor humble thoughts,
And far beneath the Majesty of a King.
Lady, I came to chide, I fear you are the cause
That I have lost a Kinsman, a worthy one
In all the worlds opinion, excepting yours.
Sir, pardon me you were your self the cause
By your excessive love to him; for that made me
Dissemble my affections to Lysander,
Fearing to daw your frowns upon my Father,
Should I have showed neglect unto the Duke.
Who ever was the cause, you shall not feel
The punishment; the Duke did truly love you,
Lady, which you shall see here in this Letter
Apparently, may you see your error,
And grieve to death for your past folly,
In refusing the quintessence of Mankind:
Read it not now, you shall have time to grieve in,
He shows there in his Letter, that you are his wife,
That by that means I might be drawn the sooner,
To perform his will, which is, that you should
Be possessed of that which was his, and so you shall
If hee be dead.
Sir, I doe utterly refuse it, all that I desire,
Is that your Majesty will give me leave
To depart, my griefs doe so oppress me,
That I am sick at heart.
When you please Lady. 
My Lord how chanced it that you never told me
That your Daughter loved Lysander?
Sir, let me perish it I knew it,
I am amazed to hear it now.
But Sister, can you think it possible,
The Princess should thus love me.
Brother, I know you see it your self,
Though you will not take notice of it.
Believe me Mariana, it doth grieve me much
So great a Princess should bee so unhappy
To love a man whose heart is not his own;
For he that had a heart at his disposing
Could not deny to give it her.
When she shall know you have another Mistria,
She will call back her judgment, and quickly
Free her self: but Brother, I doe fear
You love her too; you look and speak to her
With more affection then well becomes your faith,
Being promised to Clarinda.
What would you have me to doe?
Shall I not back return those courteous looks,
That she the saver of my life bestows upon me?
One knocks without.
Isle see who it is.
How hath your brother slept to night?
Exceeding well Madame;
Brother, here is the Princess.
Lysander, how doth your wounds?
Is your pain lessend?
Madame, I have no pain
But that I fear I never shall be able to requite
This undeserved favour.
Let not that trouble you; it is to me
You owe the debt, and I will find some way
To pay my self, that shall not make you poorer.
What shall I say, each virtuous deed
Rewards it self, and that's the coin with which
You must be paid, or else you will be a loser.
Tell me Lysander, and tell me truly,
Have you a Master?
I dare not lye Madame.
I have one that loves me equally.
Lysander, she hath reason, were I your Mistress,
I think I should love you better then my self:
But tell me Lysander, what was the quarrel,
Betwixt the Duke and you.
Madame, I cannot tel you without discovering
That which I would gladly keep concealed;
Yet why I should deny you the knowledge of any
Secret my heart holds. I cannot see, except I should
Be most ungrateful, you being the only cause
That I have now a heart to keep a secret in.
What was it, speak; I long, yet fear to know it.
The Duke and I were rivals,
Clarinda was the mark at which both aimed.
Which of you loved she best?
Madame, she loved me best.
Wee being brought up together,
Which was her great misfortune;
For had she known the Duke before me,
Her judgment would have taught her
To love the worthier,
And one indeed that loved her better,
At least, with greater passion.
But did not half so well deserve to beloved
By her as you, since hee did go about
To force love, or at the least to take from her
The loved, that which she most delighted in, her servant.
Having once removed me, he hoped she
Would accept of him, who would have made
A worthier servant far, since he had power
To raise her to that glorious height of fortune,
Which well would have become her merits:
But on the other side, he knew the means
Of my Fortune, must needs obscure and darken
Her perfections, so that he out of love
To her rather then to himself, desired
To make her his.
He could not choose but know that if he kilt
The man beloved by her she needs must hate him,
If she were worthily constant; if not,
Then he with danger of his life had purchased,
Her too dearly; for I should still believe,
If once she changed, she always would become
The victors Prize.
Madame, there was some unlucky mistaking
Betwixt vs, or else we had not fought.
Would it had pleased heaven you had not fought
Or that the Duke had scoped with life; but since
Your quarrel was not to be reconcild, though I
Doe blush to say so. I am glad t'was he that perished,
For I have ever wished you well;
I would not have you think I am now in love
With you; yet by my life I cannot say, but I may be
Hereafter, tho I know you have a Mistress,
Whose perfections darken mine, give me those
Things to dress his wounds with.
The wounds sure were given to me to make me happy,
In being touched by your soft hands, my wounds
Can never heal, my prayers are against it;
Because being well I cannot have this blessing.
What a strange alteration doe I feel now!
When I touch you, a certain coldness seizes
On my heart, and all my blood flies to my face:
Sure I do love you; I ne'er yet knew what it was
For to dissemble; if I love I say so,
And if I hate, I keep it not concealed,
I will not give a thought that is base
A harbour in any breast; what need I then
Conceal my heart? the praise Lysander
Which was bestowed upon thee had bred in me
A great desire to be my own assurance,
Whether thou were the master of so many
Excellencies, as fame bestowed upon thee.
And now that I doe find they rather doe
Come short, then any whit out-goe thy merit,
Wonder not that I, though a Princess, am in love
With thee, for I have still professed to love the
Richest mind, which is in thee complete,
With the addition of a comely Personage.
I hope your Grace doth not mock me.
No by my life, I take delight
In looking upon you.
I cannot think you are in earnest, yet I will
Answer you, as if you were: should you love me
Think you, or would you wish that I should break
My forepast vows unto Clarinda.
No, it must be for your worth if I do love you,
And when your prove inconstant, you are
No longer worthy.
If I be constant,
What fruit can you receive from your affection?
A barren Love will ill become
So great a Princess.
Be you still constant, love your Clarinda still;
For when you cease to be so, I shall hate you;
Only respect me as a Sister: for when my reason
Shall have leave to combat against my passion,
It will convert it to a Sisterly affection.
Madame, I know
In that you say you love me, you doe it only
For to make a trial how strongly I am armed
By my Clarinda's merits against inconstancy;
And I confess, if it were possible
To undermine my faith, and blow my former
Promises into the ayre, your pleasing speech,
And those, yet majestic glances
Of your eyes, were the only Instruments that yet
I ever saw to doe it.
But speak you as you think Lysander.
Else may I perish; but mistake me not;
For though I could believe your beauty
And merit to be aboue Clarinda's;
Which is unpossible, either that it should be,
Or that I should believe it; yet where my word
Is once past, though all the tortures mans wit
Can invent should at one instant environ me
To torture the mind and body, yet
I would not break my faith.
May I be miserable if ere I persuade you to 't;
Yet I could wish that you did love me,
And with a little passion; but doe not make show
Of more then you doe truly feel, thinking
To please me; for if I find it I shall be angry,
I will not hide a thought from you.
But Madame, is it possible that
(You) should love him thus?
I scorn for to dissemble; for who stand
I in fear of? were the King my Brother here,
Sure I should not deny that I loved Lysander.
Madame, I rather wish
My Brother never had been borne,
Then that the King should know you love him,
Nay, I hope you know it not your self:
Shall I believe that your great heart, that ever
Yet contemned love, can on a sudden in four
Or five days knowledge, be struck by my unworthy
Brothers slender merits, and one that must
Be perjured too, if he should love you.
Mariana, take heed how you doe pursue
This Subject; for if you doe, I should begin
To hate you, are you not ashamed to contradict
Your self? How oft hath your own tongue
Given him the highest attributes of worth?
Nay, you have been so lavish of his praises,
That I have checked you for it though I believed
Them to bee true, because it comes
Something too near the praising of our selves,
To praise a Brother, I am my self a witness
Of his valour and his wit, and those are sure
The maine supporters to all other virtues,
Blush not Lysander to hear thine own just praises,
Except it be that I doe sully them in the delivery,
Thou gau'st too sad a witness of thy valour
In overcoming him, which through this
Kingdom was esteemed the bravest man.
Madam, a braver man by far then he
Under whose sword he fell: Fortune that did envy
His worth, because his mind was fortified
Aboue her reach, applied her self that day,
Unto the ruin of his body; and then though
Never before nor since fought on my side.
When next I come,
I will entreat you tell me every particular
Accident through the whole Combat.
Most willingly, for I by that Relation,
Shall make apparent the difference betwixt
His worth and mine.
So many days o'repast, and yet no news
Of my dear Cozen, whether he be alive or dead!
Sir, there is a Hermit,
Which hath brought sad news.
What of his death, or that he's deadly hurt?
Sir, to your Majesty he only will relate
That which he hath to say, and yet by the sadness
Of his countenance, know his news is ill.
Call him in,
Whilst with patience I fore-arme my self;
Speak Father, is the Duke dead? what sad news
Is this you bring? give me my torment in a word.
Your fears are true indeed, the Duke
Is dead.
How doe you know.
Your Majesty shall hear,
As I was gathering Roots within the Forest,
The best part of my food, casting my eye aside,
I saw a man lie weltering in his gore,
Straight I was stricken with a sudden fear;
But Charity prevailing aboue fear,
I stepped to see, if yet the soul had left
That comely Mansion, for so indeed it was;
Finding some sparks of life remaining, I took
A cordial water which I ever carry with me,
And by the help of that I brought him to his senses,
So that he was able to deliver these few words.
Death I embrace thee willingly, thou being
A far less torment, then for to live
And know Clarinda loves another better.
May she enjoy Lysander, whom now I doe
Believe is worthy of her: for I that
Most unjustly went about to cross it,
Must pay my life down for my error;
Lysander, I forgive thee my death, and so
I hope the King, and with that word the King,
He sunk between my arms, and never
Spoke word.
O what a man was this, what marble heart
That would not melt it self in tears to hear
This sad relation? but what became of the body?
There Sir begins occasion of new grief,
Whilst I did vainly strive to call back life,
Three barbarous thieves seeking some booty,
Came by chance that way, and seeing his garments
Rich, they went about to strip him; but hearing
Of some noise within the wood, one of them
Did advise to carry him to their boat, which lay
Hard by within a Creek. I went about
To hinder them, and for my pains they did compel
Me to carry the body upon my shoulders,
Threatening to kill me if I did refuse;
But not content with this, they made me row
Them down the stream, three days together,
Until they came unto their fellow Pirates.
What did they with the body?
Threw it ouerbord, when they had
Rifled it first.
How chance you came no sooner to tell
This news, though yet too soon, they are so ill?
I see the King did dearly love him,
He weeps.
Sir, the current of the water bare vs farther
In three days, then I was able to return in ten.
Give the poor Hermit something,
Though his news deserve it not,
Yet his sufferngs doth:
It is an addition to my grief, that when I parted
With him last, I seemed to be offended with him
For his dotageon Clarinda, which he hath
Dearly paid for; and yet I cannot blame him,
For she is the fairest creature that yet I ever saw.
O Sister, we have lost our dearest Kinsman,
And that which ads unto my grief, is, that I cannot
Be revenged on him that kilt him.
Are you certain Sir that he is dead, or
Who it was that kilt him?
Too certain of them both,
It was Lysander that kilt him,
Whom If I ever get within my power,
The sharpest kind of death that justice can inflict
Upon him, he shall feel.
Say you so brother, hee shall
Not come within your power if I can help it then;
But royal brother, if the Duke had kilt Lysander,
I know you would have pardoned him.
Sister I think I should.
With what Justice then can you pursue
Lysanders life, who as the Duke himself
Informs you in his Letter, sought
Only to maintain what was his own;
But on the other side, the Duke like an usurper
Without any title would have taken from him
That which he valued far aboue his life
His Love.
It is not I
That pursues Lysanders life, but Justice;
The Law condemns him to dye,
Had it been but a private man, much more
Being so near a kin to me.
There is no Law; but doth allow vs to defend
Our selves, Lysander did no more; for who can deny
He was compelled, honour compelled him,
The Duke compelled him, and love (which cannot be
By noble minds resisted, did aboue all compel him;
Then all the fault Lysander did commit in my
Opinion, is that hee was too slow, needing
Compulsion in so just a cause, and therefore Sir
If you should apprehend Lysander, though by
The letter of the Law his life is forfeit;
Yet remember that mercy is the greatest attribute
Belonging to those pours, whose substitute you are.
Sister, you often have had occasion
To show your Charity, in being a Suitor to me
For the lives of those that had offended;
Yet until now you never begged my mercy unto any.
Sir, you never had occasion given you
Till now to whet the sword of Justice by your own
Particular revenge, that it might cut the deeper,
And being not intressed, your mercy of it self
Did blunt the edge, and needed not my intercession.
I do conjure you by my love,
To speak no more of this unpleasing subject;
For if I get Lysander once within my power,
I will sacrifice his heart-bloud to the Ghost
Of my deceased Cozen.
You know it is bootless,
The King is so incensed, in begging mercy
For Lysander, you may prove cruel to your self,
And unto me your Father.
O Sir, how ill you doe requite Lysander;
His love to you was the only cause
That pulled these miseries upon him;
For had not he so dearly tendered you,
Fearing to draw on you the Kings displeasure,
We had long since bin married, then this unlucky
Combat had not bin, nor I had need of that
Which now I am to beg: Mercy, great Sir.
Why, know you where Lysander is?
Ono, but I doe fear he cannot escape
Your hands.
Why Lady,
Can you hope that if hee were taken
I would pardon him: hath he not kilt the man
That in the world was nearest to my heart?
I cannot grant this; rise, and by mine honour
Ask or command what is within my power
(But this) and it shall be performed.
Sir, all the suite
Isle make, since this cannot be granted, is
That in the self same hour that my Lysander
Is to suffer; I who have been the fountain
From whence these bloody streams have issued,
May be permitted to show Lysander the dark
Yet pleasing way to the Elision Fields;
For though we could not here, yet there we shall
Enjoy each other.
Lysander, should thou prove false to her,
Though I my self were cause of thy inconstancy;
Yet I should hate thee.
I hope you will better consider
Of the general loss the world shall sustain,
In losing such a Jewel as your self:
Sister, I will leave you to advise her better,
And pray you use her with your best respect,
Her worth and beauty doth deserve it;
My Lord Vtrante, have you in your daughters name
Taken possession of all that was the Dukes,
As I commanded?
My Lord, I have the full possession;
But she doth utterly refuse them.
I know my Sister will advise
Her better. 
The Princess is the fairest Creature
That yet mine eyes ever beheld, why does she look
So steadfastly upon me? Gracious Madame,
What see you in this worthless frame,
That so attracts your eyes.
I see Clarinda,
In each particular of the whole frame,
Which thou term'st worthless, an excess of beauty,
Which in another Lady might breed envy;
But by my life I take deligt to look on thee.
And Madame, may I perish,
If ere mine eyes yet met an object, wherein
I took half that delight that I doe now
In looking upon you; were I a man,
And could frame to my self a Mistress by my wishes
Having the wide world to choose in, for each
Particular to make up the whole. I should believe
It were a fruitless labour, if I went farther
Then your self thus framed.
Clarinda, as I am Sister to a King,
I see I must partake of their misfortunes,
Which is to be grossly flattered: but it may be
You give me this fair language by instinct;
For I have pleasing news to tell you,
If that you had come to Court, I thought
To have sent for you, which unto you
I know appears most strange, for till this hour
I never had the happiness to see you.
Madame, it does indeed.
It will appear more strange,
When you shall know the cause for which
I would have sent for you.
Dear Lady, what is it for?
I would have sent for you,
To know what you would have given willingly,
To one that would undertake to save Lysanders life.
I cannot name you a particular,
But all that I have, or can give.
I mean not goods or money,
But could you bee content if it were
A woman that could doe this,
To quit your interest in Lysander,
And give him leave to marry her?
If it should come to that, I know
I sooner should be willing,
Then I should draw him to give his consent.
It is nearer it then you believe,
I know a Lady that hath saved his life already.
How, begged his pardon of the King!
And upon those conditions hath he given consent?
He hath not yet; but when he knows
Your mind I think he will.
Is she a handsome Lady, and well borne?
Not very handsome; but her birth is great,
In both she equals me, and in affection to
Lysander, you.
Madame I doe beseech you
Leave this too harsh discourse: for it hardly
Can be true, since there is no Lady
In this Kingdom, that ever I saw
That equals you in beauty, yet
The imagination that it may be so,
Doth from mine eyes draw tears, and chases
From my heart the usual heate.
Weep not Clarinda, I cannot hold thee
Longer in suspense. I am the Lady that I mean,
And therefore chase away thy fear.
I never saw true cause of fear till now,
The tale you told appears much likelier truth,
Now, that you are the Lady, then it did before;
For you have in you that full excellence,
That would make Gods forswear themselves,
If they had made an oath, should you propose
Your self as the reward of that their perjury:
Shall I believe then that Lysanders frailty,
Can resist such an assault, if you be so resolved;
Besides, what Lady hath the power to beg
Lysanders life, at your incensed brothers hands;
But only you that are his Sister:
Go poor forsaken maid, and melt thyself
Away in tears, and doe not live to be an eye-sore
To this noble Lady, nor to upbraid Lysander
With his falsehood.
Stay sweet Clarinda,
And for as many tears as I have made thee shed
From those fair eyes, so oft Isle kiss the Crystal
Fountains from whence they flowed; believe me,
Dearest maid, though I doe love Lysander,
Yet I would not wrong thee for a world,
Of which to give the more assurance,
Thou shalt see, and speak with thy Lysander,
For thou art only worthy of him;
He is now at Gerards Lodge within the Forest,
None knows of it but Gerard, and his own Sister
Mariana, how I brought him thither wounded,
Isle take another time to tell you: when you would
See him you must go disguised: farewell Clarinda,
Be confident I love you dearly. I will stay
No longer lest it should breed suspicion. 
Madame, your humble servant.
How strange a tale is this! yet sure it's true,
Why should the Princess say so else?
But can it be the Princess loves Lysander?
Can it be otherwise, if she doe know him?
If it be true, sure Lysander will not neglect
So great a blessing: hence Jealousy, the canker
Of true love, that dost in time consume that
Which did give thee being; why should I wrong
Lysander, to mistrust his faith, till I have
Better cause, I must to him, and in disguise,
Which how to get my self I know not,
I must trust some body, and who so fit
As honest Iacomo, who I know loves Lysander.
Come hither honest Iacomo.
Madame.
I know thou love me,
And wilt doe any thing that I command thee.
Madame, I hope you make no doubt of it.
No thou shalt see I doe not doubt;
For I will make thee privy to a secret,
That torture should not draw from me.
If it be that that I suspect, torture shall
Hardly make me to conceal it.
What say thou Iacomo?
Madame, I say although I should be racked,
Yet what you tell me shall be still concealed.
I know it should; come trusty Iacomo,
Isle tell thee all the Story as wee go. 
How am I bound to thee for this disguise,
I think my Father if I had met him
Could not have known me, how far is it
Yet to the Lodge?
It is not aboue a Mile; but are you sure
He is there?
I would not else have come so far a foot
Nor put on this disguise.
Madame, if you be weary, here is a fair
Cool shade, where you may rest your self a while.
Though I befaint and weary;
Yet I will not stay, the great desire I have
To see Lysander, doth support my weakness.
But Madame, I am weary, and I have
No such strong desire as love to carry me.
For shame say not so, can you being a man
And used to walk, be weary in so short a journey?
Madame. you must refresh me with a kiss,
I cannot walk else.
How Iacomo?
Why, doth not the pains that I have taken
Deserve a greater recompense then that?
I doe confess
The pains that thou hast taken, and
I intend thee a reward equal to it,
But it amazes me to hear thee ask,
That which would trouble me to give;
And yet to thee that shoul'st receive it,
Doe no good at all.
If it will trouble you to give it, then let
Me take a kiss.
How stingily art thou transported.
With a fond desire!
You will not kiss me then?
I prithee be not angry Iacomo,
Isle give thee that which is better;
Here take this Jewel; yet let me tell thee,
The Duke would not thus boldly have demanded
What thou did ask.
He was a fool then,
And did not know his own advantage,
Which you shall find I doe, you that
Denied me now a kiss, shall give me that
Which you perchance the first night
Would have denied your husband.
I do not like this, whats that honest Iacomo?
Your Maidenhead.
How! I know thou dost but speak this
For to excuse thy self from going; sit still,
Isle find the way my self.
Are you so crafty, stay and hear me.
What say thou honest Iacomo?
Not too honest neither, I know you are wise, and there¦fore Isle use no persuasions, else, but only letting of you see the danger.
O, I fear this villain.
Lysander you told me was at the Lodge, and there the King shall find him, except you will redeem him from that dan∣ger, by the loss of your Virginity; I know you would bee well content to kiss me now, but now it will not serve.
Will honest Iacomo then prove a villain?
Who would not prove a villain for so sweet a recom∣pence: How I doe glory in this purchase of my wit, the Duke striving to gain the happiness, I shall have offered me, paid down his life fort; besides, he went about the ceremonial way of Marriage; but I shall meet my happiness a nearer way, which will be an addition to the pleasure. Come, are you resolved?
Why villain, dost thou prize Lysanders life
Aboue mine honour?
If for a word, for honour is no more,
You can endure to see Lysander suffer cruel death,
It seems you love him little, doe as you will;
Make hast unto the Lodge, you know the way well
The King may chance be there before you,
As I will handle the business.
Stay Iacomo, can thou be such a villain
As thou dost seem; I doe not think
Thou art in earnest.
All torments that man did ever feel,
Light upon me, if I doe not perform
What I say.
Then may they all light on thee;
For thou deserve them all.
Stay Lady.
Dost thou relent?
I knew thou did it but to try me.
It is true indeed, I did so.
I thought thou still were honest.
Be not deceived: I tried indeed if you would give con∣sent, because the pleasure would have been the greater so; but since I have you once again within my power, I will enjoy you whether you will or no.
Can thou believe, the heavens that have the power,
To strike thee dead, will suffer such a wicked Act?
It is in vain to strive or cry,
There is none to help you.
If the fear of Heaven
Cannot deter thee from this villainy;
Yet tremble at the punishments my Father
And Lysander will inflict upon thee;
For doe not think there's any place that's so remote,
But they will find thee out.
Tush, they shall still believe me to be
Honest Iacomo;
Yet I will let the King know where Lysander is.
Why villain, dost thou think I will not Discover thee?
Yes, I doe know you would; but I will take a course with your Ladyship for telling, when I have done with you.
I know thou wilt not be so merciful to kill me.
Yes, fear it not, rather then I will be hanged for a short minutes pleasure.
Then kill me first, before thou dost dishonour me.
It may bee you'll bee of another mind anon, and wish to live. The trees stand here too thin, Isle carry you into a thicker place.
Help, Murder: is there no power that will transform me to a tree, and save my honour?
Yes, Isle transform you, you may bear fruit too, if you will be willing.
How happy are those men that lead a Country life,
And in the nature of each several creature,
View the great God of Natures power, who can find
Nothing in the whole frame, but either for the composition
Or the existence, is worth our admiration!
Murder, help, help, Murder!
It was a women's voice sure.
Slave that I was, that did not stop her mouth, as well as bind her hands; it was well the bushes were so thick; for had he once got sight of me, he would have cooled my heate: since I have mist this pleasure, my revenge shall be the greater; Isle to the King and tell him what I know concerning Lysander, which will engraft me in his favour, and for Clarinda's accusall, let me alone.
Tell me pretty Boy, why did the villain bind thee?
I thought thou had been a woman, when I heard thee cry:
How pale thou look of a sudden; be not afraid,
He dare not come again to hurt thee.
My hard hearted Master I fear will come again.
He had a hard heart indeed, that could hurt thee:
It is the pretiest boy that yet I ere did see,
And yet me thinks I have seen a face like this before:
Where were thou borne sweet child?
Sir, I was borne in Naples.
Sure I have seen a face like thine,
Why dost thou blush?
Where Sir, doe you think you have seen
A face like mine?
Not in this Country, for I am here a stranger.
Then Sir,
you doe not know the way to Gerards Lodge.
Would thou go thither?
I think I doe.
Yes Sir, if I did know the way.
Isle bring thee thither if I can.
Sir, I doe owe you much,
And have no other payment but my thanks:
But might I be so happy as to meet you
In the City, I have some friends that would
Perchance doe you some pleasure.
If thou wilt stay with me here in the Forest,
At a little house where I doe lie, to morrow
I will bring thee to the City.
You are the most
Courteous man that ere I met with:
I am so weary that it is not possible
For me to reach the City, and at the Lodge,
Lysander must not stay, nor must I fly
With him; I am not yet provided of money,
For our flight. Fool that I was to trust
That villain Iacomo, alas, I did not know
Him then to be a villain. Sir, if you'll bring
Me to the Lodge, I will only speak one word
With one that is there, and go along with you.
Come then.
He takes me for a Boy, and so long
There's no danger.
Lay on the Hounds where the young Dear went in,
These old fat Dear make no sport at all.
If it please your Grace he is not a Stag.
No matter Sir,
I am the Mistress of the field this day,
My Brother not being here, and I will
Have it so: the sorer that the Chase is
My being absent will the less be marked.
Brother, me thinks now your wounds being well.
It were good to quit this Country for a while:
For it is impossible but by some means or other,
If you stay hear, you will be discovered.
Sister, it is my intent; but I without
The Princess leave, who hath preserved my life,
Will certainly resolve of nothing.
The time hath been, that you without
Clarinda's leave would have done nothing.
And is so still,
For may I perish when I prove false
To my Clarinda; yet should I say I doe not
Love the Princess, and with some passion too,
I should but lye. See where she comes
And with the splendour of her heavenly eyes
Amazes my weak senses; not Dean's self
Looked half so lovely when she wooed
The pale-fac'd Boy Endymion;
Nor Pallas when she stood Competitor
With the two Goddesses to gain the golden apple,
Appeared with half that Majesty
That she doth thus attired: hold faith,
Thou never were in such a danger.
Lysander, I am glad to see you thus
Recovered: I glory in my cure.
Madame, I am so well,
That I desire your license to depart,
There's danger surely in my being here
Both to your self and me.
Lysander, I know you doe but jest▪
For should I give you leave, I know
You would not go.
Madam, it's best we part, should I stay here
And daily look upon those Sun-bright eyes,
And hear your charming tongue, my faith I fear
Would prove like wax, and melt, Clarinda's picture
Would be soon defaced, and I should then deserve
The hate of all the world.
Lysander, do not fear it, You shall this day
See fair Clarinda, whose merits will arm you,
Too strongly to misdoubt a change.
Did your Grace see her then?
Yes Lysander. I saw Clarinda,
Whose perfections have compelled the heavens,
In Justice, to give her the most deserving man alive
To be her servant.
Madame, its true,
She hath indeed the most deserving man
That then did live, the Duke, given to her
For a servant: but when the heavens saw
That she did refuse him whom they knew
Was only worthy of her, they left her then
To her unhappy choice, in me, in which
She cannot fail to be miserable,
And that they might torment her with
The knowledge of her error, they took from
The earth unto themselves whom she refused,
Making him equal unto one of them.
Lysander,
I will give you leave to praise the Duke,
Because it still tends to your greater praise,
Since you did overcome him both by your valour,
And your other merits: for fair Clarinda
Whose judgment is complete, esteem you
For the worthier, Lysander never was there man
So blessed as you are, in a Master, for it is
As impossible to equal her in love,
As in perfection; for though she know that her
Perfections far transcended mine, yet her
Excess of love did make her jealous,
When as I told her I had saved your life;
And how, but I to show her that I loved
You only as a brother, did tell her where
You were, and much I wonder that she
Is not come.
It may be she doth wisely fear that there
Are some that watch each step she makes,
Hoping by that to find me out; for now
It is no news that she doth love me,
When I am at Florence Isle send her word,
For so I promised her in a Letter when I went
To fight, if that I escaped with life.
You shall not go to Florence to day,
Yet doe so, and bee not sad to go;
For when my Brothers passion is once over,
And that he shall consider the justness
Of the Dukes request, in his last Letter,
I mean your pardon, hee cannot sure
Be any longer cruel.
Why Madame,
Did he write a Letter to the King,
In which he begged my pardon?
Yes Lysander, he did;
And the last word that ere hee spake, was
To that purpose, the letter I can show you,
I never till this day could get it from my Brother.
He in this Letter doth express himself
To be so near the composition of the Gods,
So filled with all perfections, me thinks it's strange
They should not build him altars: yet my unfortunate
Hand did rob the world of this precious Jewel;
For which offence my heart shall drop in justice
As many bloody tears, as now my womanish tears
Doe drops of brinish water.
Worthy Lysander,
Each pearl like drop false from thy manly eyes,
May expiate a greater sin then that thou did
Commit in thy intention: I cannot choose
But kiss thee for this noble sorrow. Say Mariana,
Have I done ill to kiss your Brother?
Madame, it were in me presumption
To censure any of your actions.
Lysander, Must you go to day?
Sure you doe not love me as a Sister, else
You would not part so soon.
By this kiss, which I believe shall be
The last that I ever shall be blessed with,
Did not my faith oblige me otherwise,
I should love you equal with Clarinda,
Nay had I known you first, I should
Have loved you better; but as it is
I know you are so noble in you self,
That you wold hate me if I should prove inconstant
It is true, it were a baseness for which
My judgment would condemn you as unworthy
To be beloved; but yet I think my passion
Would make me change that saying of loving
Of the Treason; yet hating of the Traitor;
For I should hate the Treason, and yet I fear me
Too much love the Traitor.
It were impossible that you should love
A perjured man.
I doe but fear it;
I know your worth will never put it to the trial.
Dear Princess,
Gerard, to whom I am much bound,
Hath horses ready for me, so that there is
Nothing wanting but your leave to make
My journey happy.
Which I unwillingly doe grant you, yet
Pray the heavens to make your journey prosperous.
O Mariana, would I had never seen thy brother,
Or having seen him, that I might enjoy him
For my Husband: but I doe ill to wish another
Right; that happiness belongs to fair Clarinda's
Merits only.
Go Gerard, get the horses ready.
Lysander, let me hear from you,
And if you think it no way prejudicial
To your faith. I pray you wear this favour
For my sake.
Madame, most willingly,
And think it for the greatest honour that ere
Was done me.
What noise is that Mariana?
Madame, Isle go see.
O Madame 'we are undone, it is the King,
Who threatens to hang up Gerard for concealing
Of my Brother.
Dear Madame, hide your self,
What will the King your Brother say,
If he doe find you here?
I will Lesander fly from his anger now,
That I may have more power hereafter
To doe thee service; what will you doe Lysander?
It is no matter what becomes of me,
So that you be safe from the Kings anger.
Sir, set the houseround, lest he should scope
At some back door.
Be that thy charge, take half the Guard, Isle search
The house my self: Where is this bloody Traitor?
Sir, hears a bloody-handed, though not a bloody
Minded man, that doth not yet deserve the title
Of a Traitor. I know it's me you look for.
Bloody villain, it's thou indeed,
Lay hands on him.
Keep off, and hear me speak first,
And then I will deliver up my sword.
What would thou say.
I see poor Gerard bound, whom I
Compelled to conceal me.
How could thou compel him?
Royal Sir, with patience hear me:
When I by the assistance of Fortune, not my valour;
(Yet I did nothing basely) had kilt that noble Duke
I was my self sore wounded, so that I could not
Fly out of your territories, and well I knew
Into what house so ere I came, though they
At first might pity me, not knowing
What I had done; yet when they once should know
That I had kilt the Duke, they then I knew
Would straight discover me, rather to gain reward,
Or else to save themselves from future danger,
Which to prevent. I thought my safest course was
For to compel Gerard, whom well I knew
Lived far remote from company, to swear
Not to discover I was in his house,
Or else I threatened straight to kill him,
Hoping that rather then he would forswear
Himself, he would conceal me, wherein I was
No whit deceived.
If please your Majesty,
He came into my house before I was aware,
With his sword drawn, and setting of it
To my breast, threatening if I would not swear
For to conceal him, to kill me instantly.
I (not knowing what he had done)
Swore all that he would have me.
A God transformed into a humane shape
Could doe or say no more then he hath done.
But when thou knew that he had
Kilt the Duke, how durst thou then
Conceal him?
I then began to fright him with strange
Examples of the cruel punishments that perjured
Men had felt, and awed his conscience that way.
So thou dost mine Lysander;
For I have made a vow, after that I had got thee
Once within my power, the Sun shall not
Twice set, till I had with a sacrifice of thy heart blood
Appeased my Kinsmans Ghost. I dare not
Be forsworn, away with him to prison,
And Gerard. 
It is then no time for to conceal my self.
O cruel Brother! you have in that rash oath
Muttered all virtue that Mansfraile nature
Is capable to receive.
I am amazed,
Tell me dear Sister, what make you here,
I hope you know not of this villainy.
O doe not call a demi-god a villain,
Though Fortune made his valiant arm
The instrument to rob you of a worthy Kinsman.
Sister, you speak with passion, as if
You loved him.
Yes Brother, I doe love him,
With all my heart I love him, which I will
Manifest more then in words,
If you be cruel.
Sister, as you respect my favour,
And your own fair Name, blemish not so
Your royal blood by loving of a murderous
Ungrateful villain.
O that you were no Brother to me,
Nor my King, that I might satisfy mine
Anger by a brave revenge.
By loving of a murderous ungrateful villain.
O that you were no Brother to me,
Nor my King, that I might satisfy mine anger
By a brave revenge; by my life, I would have shed
His heart blood with my Javelin, that should
Have spoke this but your self, but as it is,
Isle let you see your error, you might as well
Call him a murderer that being assaulted
By a barbarous thief, killed him that would
Have robed him; for so Lysander did, and
Whereas you call him ingrate, there you doe
Err, the Duke being his debtor; and so
Indeed is all the world, for he hath left them
Such a Story in his actions, that hee that can
But read and imitate them to the life,
Shall in another juster age, be made a God,
And worshipped for his virtues.
Sister, did you but see how ill
These praises doe become you; (for you indeed
Are drunk with affection) you would leave
Them me. I know when you recover by the help
Of reason, you'll hate your self, and wish that all
You've spoke or done this day were but a dream.
O never, never; poor Clarinda,
What will become of thee when thou shalt hear
This killing News!
It grieves my heart that I have brought thee wrong,
Sir, must we lie here in the wood all night.
I fear there is no other remedy,
O my Lysander thou art lost I fear
For ever, and that same villain Iacomo
is cause of all. There is some comfort yet,
I see a light, sure it's some house.
For Charities sake open the Door.
Lord Sir, where have you been?
Mercy upon vs, how are we mistaken!
This is the old mans house where I have been
Still since I came into the Forest.
Pray heaven he did not miss his way a purpose.
Good Father, if you have any meat
Fetch me some for this sweet youth, I met him
In the Forest, and would have showed him
The way to Gerards Lodge, but lost my self,
And wandered up and down till now.
Here, here's some meat;
I was my self at Gerards Lodge, and saw those
There whom you would little think.
Who were there?
The King and his fair Sister,
Lysander bound as a Prisoner, for killing
Of the Duke.
O my Lysander's lost.
Look to the Boy, he swoons; speak
Child, what dost thou aisle?
That same who is Lysander, now a prisoner,
(And must die) was the only cause I would
So fine have gone to Gerards Lodge,
For that villain who had bound me, I knew
Would tell the King that Lysander was there,
And I would fine have given him warning,
That he might have fled, because hee is
Thy Kinsman.
Be not sad Boy for that,
I heard the Princess swear if the King
Put to death Lysander, that she will not out-liue
Him; and he too well loves his Sister,
To lose her so.
How! Is the Princess so in love with him?
Indeed they say she is.
Come, and eat your meat, tyou shall
Go to bed, I know you ate weary.
Sir, I cannot eat, I had rather sleep,
Come then, Isle show thee to a Bed.
No Sir, Isle lie upon the Rushes, I never use
To lie with any body, and I am sure
Here in this house there are not many beds.
Come, thou shalt lie alone;
There are two beds, we two will lie together.
Please Sir to leave me here, Isle go to bed.
No child, Isle help thee.
If he should see my breasts, I am undone;
I will keep on my doublet.
Go to bed sweet child, we'll leave thee.
What news at Court?
Sad news believe me.
Why, must brave Lysander suffer to day?
The King hath sworn to have his head off ere Sun-set.
The Kingdom will be poor in such a loss,
For he leaves none behind him worth his equal.
I, but is it not strange the King should grace
That villain Iacomo that did betray him?
His extreme love unto the Duke makes him
Love Iacomo, who doth profess that he did not
Discover Lysander in hope of gain; but only
Out of love to the Dukes memory.
At one of the clock he is to suffer, let vs be there betimes and get a place near the Scaffold to hear his last words.
How black and sorrowful this day looks!
This day, in which Lysander is to suffer:
Noble Lysander, to whom my Child and I
Are so much bound; and yet hee is the cause
Of both our ruins; or rather I am cause:
It was my ambition to have a Duke
My Son in Law: no, it was my Clarinda's
Beauty bred all this mischief, and it was
The Heavens that gave Beauty to her:
Why did they then not bless that gift in her,
But turn it to her curse? Peace wretched man
And argue not with those high powers,
But wait their pleasure, and pray for their assistance,
Who can yet change this Scoene of blood into—
A Scoene of joy, and back return thee thy Clarinda.
If it please your Lordship, my young Lady
Is returned and gone again.
How!
She hath been in the house this hour as the maids tell me, hath changed her clothes, and's newly stolen out at the back∣gate, and gon toward Lysanders prison; two of my fellows are gone after her, and I came back to tell your Lordship.
And do's the Kings cruel resolution hold still?
O Madam yes, my poor Brother must dye to day.
And wilt not thou dye with him: speak Mariana.
Madame, I could wish that I might not out-liue him.
Why say thou thou could wish, hast thou not hands?
Or dost thou want a knife? if so, yet there's many ways to die.
Madame, how strangely doe you talk.
Why, would thou wish to live,
After the untimely death of such a Brother?
Madame, we must not go until the Gods do call vs,
Yet I bylieue it is the better place.
The better place, assure thy self of that, they would
Not else thus early call thither the best of Men. I will follow
Him where ere he goes to see.
Madame the King desires your company.
Villain, had he none else to send but thee
That did betray Lysander, hence from my sight.
What did you with the Boy?
I left him at the Count Ʋtrante's house:
He told me he dwelt there.
At what hour say they must Lysander suffer?
At on of the clock, fail not to be there,
And get near the Scaffold.
You need not bid me.
Sister, believe me, you have told me such particular
Arguments of Lysanders worth, that I doe pity
His misfortunes much, and have quite lost my anger;
Yet Justice must be satisfied.
Sir, the offence that he committed, was but against
The Law, although he robed you of a Subject;
You are aboue the Law, and may remit it;
A King should in points of life and death,
Be like the Chancery, in other cases, and help
By mercy against the cruel letter of the Law,
As the Chancery doth by conscience.
Especially when your own conscience tells you
That he was forced against his will to fight.
Sister, it were an example too dangerous
To pardon him that kilt my next of blood:
It might encourage some to strike my self;
And therefore it is in vain to plead for mercy.
O daughter, let not your passionate love
Unto Lysander, make you accuse good Iacomo.
O Sir, you are cozened, he is a Devil incarnate,
Justice. Justice great Sir.
Lady, I thought your plea would have been mercy,
And not Justice.
Sir, I have lost all hope of mercy; but Justice
I hope you will grant me against that villain Iacomo.
Now have at me, but I have fore-arm'd the King with such a tale, that and mine own impudence, which never failed me, shall well enough defend me.
Arise fair Clarinda, and by my Crown,
Bring your sufficient proof, you shall have Justice;
But well I know you hate good Iacomo, because he did
Discover where your Lysander was.
Would I had bit my tongue out of my head,
When I gave it power to tell you where Lysander was.
Your majesty may mark by this how true the rest is that she hath to say. Madame, then you would seem as if I had deceived your trust, and that you had to me discovered where Lysander was; make me not so odious, I never was a traitor, had you to me discovered it, wild horses should have torn me in a thousand pieces, ere I would have confessed; no, this same country fellow one day being within the Lodge saw him, and so discovered it to me.
Though thou deny this with a brazen brow,
Yet thou can not deny thou would have ravished me,
When I did trust thee to go along with me,
I being disguised then, where I to thee discovered
When Lysander was; and more thou threatendst
(If I did not give consent to thy base lust)
To murder me, when thou had done,
Because I should not tell.
Madame, I did not think that love to any man could ere have turned that excellent wit of yours so ill away, as thus unjustly to accuse a man that is innocent, and one that ho∣nors you.
Sir, I doe grieve,
My Daughters love unto Lysander, should
Move her for to seek a most unjust revenge
Against good Iacomo, whose like for honesty
I know not in this Kingdom of his quality.
Sir, here's a witness, that will confirm
What I have said for truth.
What gentle Lady?
Sir, it was I that you rescued yesterday,
From a villain that would have ravished me.
Why Lady, were you in such danger?
Mark you Sir, she knows of no such thing.
I was the Boy you found in the wood,
Whom this villain would then have ravished,
Which then I told you was my master.
I thought no boy could have so sweet a face,
Indeed Sir, tic most true, I found this Lady bound,
And that same villain as I think; for I had but
A glimpse of him in the bushes, his fear making
Him fly as soon as ever he saw me.
I beseech your Majesty let him be hanged,
For on my honour what I doe affirm is truth.
Your affirmation is to me a hundred
Witnesses, yet it were in me injustice to deny
The combat against this gentleman that doth accuse
Him on your behalf, if Iacomo desire it.
Believe it Sir, he that will do such villainies,
Will never dare to fight, Sir send him to the Galleys,
If he will nor fight, it shows his guilt.
Hell take you all, I dare not fight might I have all the world given. Isle rather to the Galleys. I shall get out there with some trick or other, and then Isle poison twenty of you, Isle not discover what I am that will but show me more.
Let him that rescued Clarinda have the land
That Iacomo should have had, for discovering where
Lysander was: call forth the prisoner, and proceed to execution.
Weep not Clarinda, you may live happily
You and the Princess may together make
A kind of Marriage, each one strongly
Flattering themselves, the other is Lysander;
For each of you's Lysanders better part:
Pardon Clarinda that I borrow from
That stream of love a part to pay the Princess,
Which ever yet ran constantly to the Ocean
Of thy perfection only, for now a gratefulness
To her, makes some of it run in another current;
For which I know thou being wise, can never
Love me less, knowing that I have love enough
For both, since I can marry neither.
Lysander, doe not think I grudge that part of Love
You pay the Princess, her merits fair transcending mine,
Besides, you owe her for preserving of your life,
And I have been the only cause, that you must lose it;
But Isle bear you company, and in that pay the debt I owe you.
Why stays the Prisoner?
Only to take
A parting kiss; then when you please, I am prepared.
What mean you Sister, will yon make apparent
To the world your folly?
Sir, doe not hinder me;
For if I may not here speak with him,
We will converse in death sooner then you believe;
Lysander, thou art going to thy lasting home,
And in thee all virtuous men must suffer,
They being but branches, thou the root of all perfection:
Who will be Courteous, Valiant, since these are causes
Of thy death; for thou unto the world did manifest
In thy last action with the Duke, that thou were
Really possessed of these: but I, in summing up thy worth,
Doe but increase my grief; since I must part with thee,
The rich unhappy owner; for they have only served
To revive thee, and those that loved thee for them,
Poor Clarinda, I from my own conceptions
Could weep, to think upon the torment thou wilt feel,
When as the Axe shall sever from thee loves
Worthy person, thy comely head, worthy,
Most worthy, in that it was the Cabinet appointed
By the Gods to keep their richest Jewel in,
His mind, which is indeed an Index,
In which judicious men may read as in a Book,
The whole contents of all their excellence.
Sister, for shame doe not thus wrong
Your self and me, by throwing such high praises
On a man, condemned by Law. Lysander,
Prepare thy self to die, and take no notice of her
Idle praises, which if they could to any mortal
Man be due, they were to him, for whom
Thou now must suffer.
Sir, I doe confess it and am ready to receive Your doom.
I need not to a mind so fortifide as thine is
Give any Antidotes, to arm thee against death.
All the encouragement that I will desire
Shall bee a kiss of your fair hand.
Lysander, thou know my soul embraces thee,
These are the first tears that ere fell from mine eyes,
Although a woman, which I am pleased with,
Since it well expresses this is the greatest grief
That yet I ever felt.
This kiss Clarinda is thy due, thou art
The nearest to my heart in Justice.
Look to Clarinda, carry her home.
I thought she would have out-gon me; but now
Mine shall be the glory: who would live in a world
That's bankrupt of all virtue?
I pray Sir forgive me your death.
Friend, doe thine office; I forgive thee.
Hold villain.
How dare thou hinder the sword of Justice,
From lighting where it is designed.
Sir, if you execute this Lord, you are a Tyrant.
Why Sir, will it bee tyranny in me
To execute the Law? the fellow's mad,
Lay hands on him.
It is a cruel Law that doth condemn the innocent.
Why, is he innocent?
Let me dye for it if I doe not prove
He did not kill the Duke.
And by my Crown, since thou dost interpose thy self
Betwixt the sword of Justice and the Object,
It shall cut through thy life too with Lysanders,
If thou dost fail to prove what thou affirmest.
I doe beseech your Majesty,
Let not this frantic man, (for so he seems to be)
Out of his love to me, ruin himself:
I doe confess again it was this unlucky hand,
And no other, that kilt the Duke.
I call the heavens to witness, it was I
That was the cause he bled that day,
And well he did deserve it, for thinking
So unjustly to rob thee of Clarinda,
Who only dost deserve her.
Carry the fellow hence;
Doe I sit here to hear a mad man talk?
Call me not fellow, I am as good
A Gentleman, as was the Duke your Cozen,
And were he now alive hee would acknowledge it.
Away with him to Prison, Isle have him
Strangely punished for this presumption.
Away with him.
Sir upon my credit,
And men of my Profession should not lye, he's both
In Birth and worth equal unto the Duke.
Though I doe reverence your Profession,
Yet I see no cause to believe you,
For in this Kingdom there is none so worthy.
Sir, yes; every way as worthy,
And one your Majesty doth love so well,
That if he ask you, I know you will pardon
Lord Lysander for his sake.
Sure all the world's infected,
One that I loved so well and equal to the Duke
In Birth; how can thou prove this?
Thus I can prove it,
To your great joy and all the Kingdoms.
I am amazed; art thou a Conjurer,
And from the quiet grave hath raised
The beloved person of my Kinsman to delude me?
For thou were he that said thou foundst his body.
Ghosts doe not use to pay their duty to
The living, Sir, feel my hand, I am your Servant.
O my dear Cozen, can this be true!
Sir, I will make all plain: but first I must
Relieve the worthiest of men, noble Lysander,
Send for Clarinda, and tell her this glad news:
Madame, let me kiss your fair hands,
I ever honoured you, but now I doe adore
That high raised mind of yours, that fears not
To profess your love to virtue, though in distress.
Dear Cozen, I do long to know by what means you were preserved.
This reverend man that did the pious act,
Can best resolve it you.
It was he that brought first word that he
Had found your body, by which we were resolved
That you were dead, he told his tale so punctually.
When I began to bee past danger of my
Wounds, I framed that tale about the thieves,
Intending to conceal my self, and so to make
Trial of your love to me, and of Clarinda's
Love unto Lysander, both which I find
Not to be equalled.
Good Father tell vs how you found him
Wounded, and how you did preserve him.
Sir, what I told you
Concerning the finding of him wounded,
All that was true, and how I did recover him
By a sovereign water; but that he after
Dyed within my arms, you see is false
And yet he spoke those words that I delivered
As his dying speech, he having then indeed
No hope of life: but heaven so ordered it,
That he recovered by my skill in Surgery,
In which Art I shall not boast to say
That I am equal with the most skilful of this age,
Which I think well appears, since I have cured
Him in so short a time; yet I must attribute
His sudden curing to a sovereign balm,
That an Egyptian gave me, from which country
I late came.
Holy man, expect from me a great reward;
For you have back to me restored the comfort
Of my life; but where have you since lived,
Or how came you by this disguise?
I lived with him still in a little Cottage,
And he did some the City fetch me disguises:
Divine Clarinda, pardon me, I was your bedfellow,
And did not know my own happiness then;
If I had known you, I would have done
Just as I did; I see you are amazed, it was I
That in disguise rescued you, and saved your honour,
When that villain would have ravished you;
In which I was most happy; for I shall now present
You, so much the richer gift to your Lysander.
Here brave Lysander, let me deliver up
Into thine arms the Jewel of thy life;
And in that make some part of satisfaction,
For the wrong I did hee, in compelling thee
To fight for that which was thine own before
In justice.
My Lord, the service of my life hereafter
Shall make manifest how much I honour you,
And with what joy I doe receive your gift.
I would have given my life to have redeemed
Lysanders; where is the joy then that I should feel
For his deliverance. O I have found the cause.
That doth suppress it; it's envy that Clarinda's
Happier then my self: why should I envy that
Which is her doe, both by his vows and her
Own merit.
How sad the Princess looks? I wonder
She doth not speak to me.
Heart, though thou burst, the world shall not
See I grieve or envy Lysander and Clarinda,
May you be happy in your loves, which I can never be.
Her noble heart will burst with grief,
Would I had dyed, or rather that I had two hearts,
By death I had been free, this way I am
A debtor to the Princess, and that ingratitude
Torments me worse then death.
Call for the sacred Priest, and let vs change
That which we thought should have been a Scoene
O blood, into a Scoene of joy, by joining
Two despairing Lovers hands together.
O what a happy mans Lysander at this instant
Compared with what he was half an hour since!
Imagination cannot reach it; but on the other side
How far am I fallen from that happiness
That I possessed when fair Clarinda said
That she would marry me within a month.
Come reverent Sir, perform an office
Acceptable to the Gods: Sister, take you Lysanders
Hand, and Cozen you Clarinda's.
O what a cruel office hath my brother put upon me.
I would this task were past,
Virtue I see thou art a cruel Mistress.
I in my soul grieve for the Duke,
His manly eyes shed tears to perform this Office;
I would to heaven he were my Brother,
Or that Lysander were; the consideration
Of his worth and infinite affection,
Which hath appeared in all his actions,
Hath gained much upon me.
Will you Lysander take Clarinda for
Your Wife, forsaking all other till the hand of death
Arrest the one of you?
Say no Lysander.
Reverend Sir, why?
Because the Marriage is not lawful.
Can you prove it unlawful?
You saved my Life, but I shall value that no benefit,
Compared with this, if you can prove
Lysander and Clarinda cannot marry;
Isle make you more then you can wish to be.
Lysander, did not your Father
When you last parted with him, give you
A little Cabinet, in which he bid you look
When you should marry, on his blessing
Not before, not at your death.
It is true, he did so, but I
Was so distracted betwixt joy and grief,
That I had quite forgot it.
Send for it with all haste.
What can this Cabinet produce to stop The Marriage.
I cannot plead desert,
Thou God of Love, because I have so short a while
Been subject to thy Laws; but well thou know
If thou oblige me to become thy subject,
By giving me Lysander, that I shall
More extol thy power then any Subject
That thou hast: but on the contrary,
If thou dost not assist me, I will return again
Unto Diana, thy utter enemy, and in her service
Spend the loathed remnant of my life.
The Cabinet is come.
I make no doubt,
If it be within thy power, thou God of Love,
But thou wilt grant to me thy truest Subject
The wishes of my heart; but I doe fear a greater
Power then thine, doth ouer-rule the destinies.
Here Sir, read that paper; there you shall
Find, what you doe little think.
How! my Sister!
Love thou hast heard my prayer, though I were
Ignorant, and knew not what to ask.
I am amazed, sure this is Witch-craft.
Sir, I beseech you prove this to be true.
My Lord, if you will beg a Pardon from the King,
It is for a fault, that was never proved against me;
I then will make all things so plain, that no man shall deny it.
And please your Majesty, Iacomo is proved to be
The Count Orsinio's Brother.
My Lord, let him be brought, heel help to the clea∣ring of the discourse I am to make.
Sir, I must beg a pardon for the saver of my life.
What hath he done? I pardon him, be it what it will.
Then Sir, behold a banished man.
The Count Orsinio!
My Father! your blessing Sir.
My dear friend! welcome.
Sir, Isle not bid you welcome,
Till you make it plain, it can be no Marriage.
My Brother!
O thou wicked villain! art thou alive yet?
I might have known thee by thy villainies,
Through thy disguises.
Good my Lord proceed unto your discovery.
My second wife being barren, I had
No hope of Issue Male; for I had Mariana
There by my first and it did grieve my Soul
To think that villain there should be my heir;
For he daily practised mischief before unheard of.
It was not long before my wife observed
That the chief cause of all my discontent
Grew from her barrenness, and she being fearful
That my affection might decline as did my hope
Of Issue, thought of a strange and most unwonted
Means, to make her self appear a happy mother.
My friends Wife here, the Count Ʋtrante
Finding her self to bee with Child; my Wife,
By help of Art did seem so too: but strange
To see how gold will work! for by a sum of
Money, my Wife did work the Mid-wiues, Nurse,
And Doctor, to cozen the true Mother of her Child
When ere she should be brought to bed.
How was that possible?
Most easy Sir, as they did handle it,
The Child was borne, and proved a Boy,
As my Wife wished; for had it been a Girl,
It could not then have eased me of my grief,
My land being tied upon the Heirs Male.
Good Sir, proceed.
The Nurse was by the Doctor straight
Commanded to carry into the next room the child,
Alleging that it was most necessary,
The Mother, after so much labour should
Sleep, which the Child's crying might hinder:
Within a short space comes in the Mid-wife
Pitifully weeping telling the Mother
That the Child could hardly live; but straight
The Nurse she entering the Chamber cried out
Alas the Child is dead; the woeful Mother
Falling in a swoon, had almost made
That sorrow real for her, which then but
Counterfeited for the Child.
The Child then was not dead.
No Sir, the crafty Nurse
Had by a backdoor conveyed it out of the house
By help of another Nurse that she had there
For the purpose: having recovered
The Mother out of her trance, the poor Lady
Desired to see her late comfort, though now
Her only cause of sorrow, the dead Child:
But the Doctor utterly denied that,
Alleging that would but increase her sorrow,
Which might impeach her health:
My friend here was not then at home,
And who durst contradict the Doctor
In such a case.
Was there
No servants in the house? Did none of them
Ask for the Child?
Sir, to prevent that,
They had before provided a piece of wood
Shaped like a Child, and about that they put
A winding sheet.
But what excuse then made they
For their haste in dressing of it
For the grave, that was not then
Scarce cold.
For that they told the servants
The Child being deformed they made such haste
To hide it from the neighbours; that they
Might not be witnesses of their Ladies shame,
In bringing such a Monster into the world.
The Nurse the same night came, and told my Wife
What they had done, and she advising with
Her agents, the next night after seemed
To fall in labour, and by the help of those
Her creatures made perfect by their former practise,
She cozened me and the world, by making vs
Believe, that she had truly brought me forth a son.
I did a thousand times kiss my young heir,
And by my careful education and his own
Brave natural parts, hoe's grown to be
What now you find, Lysander, for he's the same.
But how came you to know
Lysander was not your natural son, and these Particulars?
My Wife Sir,
Being upon her death bed, she found her conscience
Troubled with this deceit, and could not
Depart in peace, till she had freely told me
Of this strange Story; I still concealed it
Out of my just anger against my wicked Brother;
Besides that great affection which I bare Lysander,
Continued still, and is now so great,
That if your Majesty by your Prerogative
Will but confirm it. I doe adopt him for my Heir.
It shall.
Thus Sir, was I defeated of my right; My Lord the Duke there by his power, though I did prove this in the open Court, by witness of the Nurse and Midwife; yet he made me to be banished as an iniurer of others.
I doe confess the wrong I did thee
Though ignorant, and for to make thee satisfaction,
I will be a suitor to the King in thy behalf:
Sir, now upon my knowledge I dare affirm
That Lysander is son unto the Count Ʋtrante.
It was nature in me, that made me so much
Love the Count Ʋtrante: you blessing Sir.
It do's not grieve me that you are My Brother.
And for my part, I cannot add
To my own happiness, if I might have my wishes,
Now that you are my Sister; for I did ever love you
As a Sister rather then as a Mistress.
Divine Clarinda,
I cannot claim your promise till a month be past,
There is some part of it to come, but I hope
You will not strictly stand upon the time.
My Lord,
I should too much wrong my self, though I did not
Love you, in deferring of so great a blessing▪
But the large testimony that you have given
Both of your worth and affection to me,
Have turned that great affection in an instant,
That I bare Lysander, as you could wish it,
Upon you; nay to say truth, I ever loved you,
Though not so well as hee, and held your worth As great.
Dear Clarinda, give me not a surfeit.
I fear the King will here consent.
But good Sir,
What made you desire me to beg your pardon.
Or what made you conceal your self so long?
My Lord, Isle tell you;
Your Lordship may remember, for it is not
Five years since, that this my Friend, the Count
Ʋtrante and my self, were both suspected
For poisoning of your 〈◊〉, because we were
His professed Enemies; especially my self,
Which made me fly, though I were innocent▪
For it was known to many, that the villain
Kilt him for's own particular revenge
Yet my wicked Brother there, persuaded the fellow
At his death to say, that we had set him on
And got another rascal to witness with him
That it was true; my friend, not having so great
Enemies, did stay to justify himself,
And for his pains was laid in prison, and kept there
For his lands, till you got him releast,
And yet he was never brought unto his trial;
I, ere I left this Country, did leave this Cabinet
With my son, or rather yours, and withal
The charge of looking in it when he should
Be married. After many a weary step abroad,
I came home to my Country, and in disguise
Have lived here in the Forest, and saw my friends
Full often, although they knew not me;
And having this occasion of doing your Lordship
Service, I thought it would be a sure means
To get my pardon; especially when things
Were grown unto the extremest point
Of danger, I knew a timely remedy would be
Most welcome then of all, and that made me
Conceal my self so long.
We are resolved.
My Lord, I freely pardon you, for I believe
It was indeed a lye, invented by your wicked
Brother, whom I doe give you power to punish
As you think good.
My Lord, I then desire
He may be kept a prisoner all his life;
For should he have his liberty, I know
He would doe mischief that we should all Repent of.
Brother, thou art wise,
Thou should have been the first that should
Have felt mine anger.
Away with him.
I dare not speak for thee thou art so great
A Villain.
Come, let vs set forwards to the Temple.
And pray the Gods to shower a blessing
Tpon this Couple; - What means my Sister?
Thus Sir,
Lysander and my self have made a solemn
Contract, and with our bloods we'll seal it,
Either to go thus to the Temple to be married,
Or to the grave.
How Sister!
What is it Sir, in your opinion, makes
Lysander unworthy of me.
His blood compared with yours, is base.
But Sir, his mind's heroic,
And who will compare the servant with the Master?
The Body is no more unto the Mind.
What would you marry with a Subject?
Who would not
Marry with a Subject that is a King of Virtues,
Rather then with a King that's governed
By his Vices?
Sir, you know the greatness of her
Spirit; If you will have her to live, you must
Consent.
Brother, you stand to vs
Instead of destiny; for you have in your power
Our thread of Life. Say, will you spin vs out
A happy thread, that we may live to serve you,
Or will you cut it short?
O be not cruel to your only Sister;
What's all the out ward glory, if you rob
The mind of that which it delights in?
I know that your intention is to make
Her happy, doe not mistake the way;
Her mind is not taken with the glorious title
Of a King; for if it had, she might have made
Her choice, since all the neigbouring Kings
Admire her: No Sir, she aims at that
Which made men Kings at first, Wisdom,
And Valour, and should she search the world
She cannot find a man where they
Doe meet so fully, as in brave Lysander:
O Sir, then be not cruel, thinking to be
Careful of your Sister.
Shoe's cruel to her self,
And rather let her perish by her rash hand,
Then so dishonour me, by marrying with
A Subject.
Farewell then
Cruel Brother: Lysander, let us part
To meet again for ever; Isle go first,
Because my Brother shall not think of saving me
When you are dead.
No Madame,
Let me show you the way, and when I feel
The pain, Isle tell you if it be too great
For you to suffer.
Hold: take him Sister,
And be happy in him: I love thee more
Then ever, because I see, thy mind is only
Fixed on true Worth without additions.
I learned of Count Orsinio to bring things,
To the extremest point, so to increase
The joy: it had been a sin to part
Those Bodies, whose very Souls seem to bee
Joined together.
Brother, may I perish,
When I forget this benefit, or cease to pay
To you my Lord, my thanks for pleading so
Lysanders Cause and mine.
Great Love this day hath shown his mighty power
Without the help of, Foe••••• In an hour
He hath relieved from death and from despair
Four of his truest Subjects and made fair
This day that was of〈…〉, let vs praise
His power that in 〈…〉 can raise
From misery to an excess of Joy,
And in an instant that content destroy:
He hath to vs been just this day as well as kind.
Rewarding virtuous Love let none then call him blind.
Our Author fears there are some Rebell-hearts
Whose dullness doth oppose Loves piercing darts:
These will bee apt to say the Plot was dull,
The Language rude, and that it was only full
Of gross Absurdities; for such as these
Hee cares not now, nor ere will strire to please:
For if your selves as Masters, and Loves Friends,
Be pleased with this sad Play, hee hath his ends.

Give the word aloud?
Stand?
1. Stand! 2. Stand! 3. Stand!
Our motion has been swift: wee
out-march Time.
Verona, (which with the mornings dim eye
We seemed to view like Landschaip, afar off)
Is our full object now. She must repent;
Our King is Steward unto Fate; the world
Receive from him their destinies.
Sure, the Governor sleeps. My Lord, is'• fit
We waite upon such Silkewormes, crepp'd in wool?
Since we attained the Town not by assault,
But composition free, he shall express
Humility enough to meet vs at the Gate.
Here comes Hermegild.
Hail, young soldier! My noble Paradine!
The King must hold my nature much excused,
If I do greet his safe approach with love,
Less violent then I express to thy
Rich soul. I am resolved thou art in health,
And favour with thy stars.
Ere I return your kind salute, I would
After your fair charge inquire. Say the Queen
Smiles in captivity, my Valdaura
Hurts not her health with grief; then I have heard
Enough to make me cherish life.
Rhodolinda doth become her title
And her birth. Since deprived of popular
Homage, she hath been Queen ore her great self.
In this captivity ne'er passionate
But when she hears me name the King, and then
Her passions not of anger taste, but love:
Love of her Conqueror: he that in fierce
Battle (when the Cannons sulpherous breath
Clouded the day) her noble Father slew:
Our Royal Master once; now sunk into
His soil; where like the Lily withered,
He never shall renew his growth again.
My memory disturbs my Tongue! Your fair
Valdaura makes the Queen her rare and just
Example, and is in patience skilful.
Know, Hermegild, no hasty minute passed
(Since their captivity) wherein I failed
To be a suitor to the King for both.
But he's in kindness prompt, and still doth speak
Like Music, when he Rhodolinda names:
You hear tic his edict we call her Queen?
Thy vanquished Country owes unto thy fame
A tall Pyramid! The captived virgins
Of our Nation shall in their last Dirges
Sing thy praise with mirth. O, I could grow old
Within thy sight. Something we now must talk
Together, and heaven will listen to it,
As to the breath of Saints—
I knew we should have use of conference:
Which made me beg the leading of the Vanne,
The more t'assist our opportune meeting.
Afford your ears in private.
Though Paradine look flourishing, and like
A thing new brushed; a flame of triumph,
(As if his father surfeited in some
O're-growne City when he got him) yet he
Hath in him seeds of war, bold thoughts, and we
In the Camp, esteem him honest too.
He is our Kings Minion, sleeps in his by∣some.
True, &amp; the Royal fool greets him with such
Ravenous kisses, that you would think, he meant
To eat his lips.
The Captive captivates the Conqueror.
Three Moons have not expired their usual change,
Since he was prisoner to the King; though now
His Favourite.
You are too loud! If thou'lt talk safely, go get
A sore throat; hoarse men speak low.
The captived Rhodolinda, (whose father
Albouine deprived of life and kingdom)
Hath with such amorous subtlety behau'd
Her gesture, that Albouine is now her
Prisoner. This martial progress was but made
To visit her. She makes him guilty of
Idolatry, and knows the thrifty use
Of time: as she ascends, her Countrymen
Must rise.
You have called that Hermegild her Creature?
He was her fathers Councellor; a man
Created in the dark: he walks invisibly;
He dwells in Labyrinths; he loves silence:
But when he talks, his language carries more
Promiscuous sense, then ancient Oracles.
So various in his shapes, that oft he is
Disgu•zed from his own knowledge. An error
Much incident to humane Politics,
Who strive to know others more then themselves.
Observe their complement.
Pox of these French legs? Courtiers al∣ways dance.
This is to Hermegild mere lechery:
This wanton gesture doth obscure
Thoughts of such consequence and weight, as hang
Like Plummets on his heart. Paradine is
A soft, easy fool, and must be gulled.
O my sweet Lord—
Now the Motion speaks.
Such indeerements would too much impo∣uerish
My gratitude: yet, tic meet our actions
Carry smooth equality: your consent
Must further all my Suits You are the Kings
Jewel, and hang richly in his ear.
You are precious unto her, whom loud noise
Already calls our Queen: fair Rhodolinda!
We may (if they prove natural and kind)
Govern the Nation that hath conquered vs;
Gain our Country liberty, and yet
Not stray from noble Arts: such hopes our free
Embraces prophecy. The King.
Your Troops (Sir) are so divided into
Mixed files, that to the City you doe march
Between thick walls of men.
Let my Horse-guard bring up the Rear. We will sport
With war. We have no use of safety now,
But of magnificence.
The order is already given. It was
Your Royal will, we hasten in our March,
Therefore each Squadron double their paces.
My Boy, I bring thee home my chief Trophy:
Thou dost delight me more then victory.
Retire. I am in love too violent.
My embraces crush thee, thou art but yet
Of tender growth—
My Countryman would kiss your Royal hands,
And then expect no greater happiness
Till he arrive in heaven. He hath done your
Rhodolinda service—
Rhodolinda is your humblest captive.
She inserts you often in her prayers,
And called it my chief duty to present
Her true service to your Majesty.
Her name doth enrich our Language. My boy
Can witness that I love her: she makes me
Prattle in my sleep: I'ue drunk Mandragora,
To become drowsy, in hope that I might
Dream of her. Rise, and expect Honour.
High and sacred Majesty! Verona
Hath vnhindg'd her wide Gates: proud to admit
The fate of Kingdoms. Our crooked Matrons
Forget their age: and (as the ragged Earth
At the Springs warm approach) look fresh, &amp; young,
To entertain you. Our timorous Virgins
(With the bold Youth) join in one wanton Quire
To sing your welcome.
How the Spaniel fawns, because he dares not bark?
Th'amorous Vine clips not the shady Poplar
With such regard (about whose mossy waste
She hangs a smiling Lover.) Our City is
By the reflection of your blessed approach
Like Pelion decked, whom Tython's Mistress
(Leaving the weeping East) with brightness guilds.
There's not a wrinkle left in all Verona,
Wherein pale sorrow, or rebellious envy
Can find their loathed Mansion. Flattering joy
Swells big each loyal bosom. All implore
You as their safety; who hath hushed the noise
Of discord, and loud war.
The Rascal flatters, as if he had served
His prentiship in Court.
You have done me justice, Governor, &amp; know
The way to make me thankful, but not proud.
I understand thou hast with honoured safety
Preserved those Jewels to thy charge committed,
(My Rhodolinda, and my Boys Valdaura.)
And so increased new motives of our thanks.
Heaven has made your memory too humble,
Thus to record your creatures service.
Let now the knotty Laborer rust with ease,
And aloud proclaim, that the vpland Boor
Release his Teem, and his industrious Plough.
Let him sing glad Iös to the rustic
Powers that guard his fields, and unto me.
It is by you we are: no warlike Ram,
Nor battering engine forced a bloody entrance
Through our thick walls. It was the powerful breath
Of your victorious fame, that conquered vs.
To that we yielded: which as a rough blast
That posts from the cold Arctic Pole, hath borne
Before it captived Nations.
By heaven a good old man! if he be learned,
Isle have him write my Annals.
Indeed he looks like a Chronicler.
Paradine? Inform him of my deeds.
Thou hast beheld my discipline full of
Shape and order, when confusion did oppress
The foe, and stifled them in throngs. Ho! Look!
Rhodolinda's come to guild our Triumph!
And my Valdaura too! let Nature show
A third object so delightful, we will swear
She is not old, nor her first materials
Wasted, but in creation still retains
Her former strength and skill.
But why (my beauteous Captive) art thou still
In Sables wrapped?
Your stars bid you be happy. My cross fa•e
Like the Raven, croaks a funeral note:
This swarthy habit, but paints forth the grief
That chains my soul in darkness. And filial love
Commands me morn for him, whom you too soon
Deprived of life, my conquered father.
Let his ashes rest
At quiet in their Urn. His ghost long since
Hath washed away the memory of his fate
In slow-pac'd Laethe. Take me, modest fair,
Into thy bosom. O hide me there!
My glad soul, how full is thy content?
Now thou feared thing, that guid'st the heavenly Em∣per,
Rend all the murmuring clouds, and dart
Thy Thunder at me: I am safe.
My captivity must needs seem easy,
Whilst the Conqueror proves so kind.
I could gaze thus on thee, till my wonder
Did convert me into marble; and yet
My soul would in her self retain a fire,
Lively as that which bold Prometheus stole.
Were the Sea coagulate, and the world
Returned to the antic Chaos, a blind Lump;
Thy look would force the warring elements
Into a sacred order; and beget
A harmony like this they now enjoy.
You are too powerful in you speech.
Yet when I value thus thy excellence,
Let me not forget my own high being.
I'ue humbled all the Nations of the earth;
Brought home as spoils the whole wealth of Nature:
Yet, Rhodolinda, nought like thee. Let me
Whisper my content, for soft music most
Delights the female ear.
Why, my dear Valdaura, dost thou suspect
My warm embraces? Let hungry death cease
On my honour, before it cease on me,
If in my breast I entertain a thought
Unlawful.
I esteem you (Sir) a friend to virtue,
And in that hope would cherish all your love.
In thy fair brow, there's such a Legend writ
Of timorous chastity, that it doth blind
Th'adulterous Eye. Not the Mountain Ice,
(Congealed to Crystal) is so frosty chaste
As thy victorious soul, which conquers Man,
And Mans proud Tyrant-passion. But I am
Too rough for Courtship, the soft harmony
Which wanton Peace instructs the Tongue to make,
I have forgot. Trust me (bright Maid!)
I love thee dearly. Though I'ue found thy heart
Like Pebble, smooth, but stony.
I'ue heard my mother say: the curled Youth
Of Italy, were prompt in wanton stealths,
And sinful Arts. Till Time had given me
Assurance of your noble thoughts; it was safe
To doubt your love. But now I wish I were
More worthy, and then would prove more liberal
Of my self.
Let me enjoy thy hand! that moist Adamant
That so attracts my soul! We will (ere night
Her black Curtain draws) make complete this love,
With marriage Rites.
How now, Boy! Is my interest so decayed
In your young person, that you give away your self
Without my leave!
Humbly on my knee, I beg the vulgar
Privilege due to all hearts. To love, and not enjoy,
Is a torture, I cannot suffer long,
And still remain possessed with breath.
Thou hast showed me physic for my passion.
Take him, Valdaura, and be proud! Tic I
That love him: nor shall your joys be single.
Isle make the number yet more full. This day
We will consecrate to Hymens use. Behold
Your Queen (who though my Captive) for her birth
And beauty, is the first of Queens.
High Heaven increase your joys!
And may you live together until Time
Shall sicken with his age.
Conrad. Long live Albouine, King of the Loom∣bards!
Cry up Rhodolinda too!
Conrad. Live Rhodolinda, Queen of the Loom∣bards!
Governor! Tic our will that you expect
Honour, and true safety. Your Cities love
I shall perceive by popular noise, and your
Behaviour in this great solemnity.
Let the Sun smile; the Wind sport with our Plumes!
This day let sick-men too forget to groan.
Let all glad Hymns in one mixed concord sound,
And make the echoing heaven your mirth rebound.
The King's head must now convert to rotten wood.
Why, Grimold?
That Court Earewiggs may live there, and devour
His brains. Dost not perceive how they begin
To creep into his ears?
Generous souls are still most subject to
Credulity.
He is a Germane in his drink: busied
With a wanton pride, which his Flatterers
Admire for mirth, but his friends doe pity.
He should be told his sins.
By whom? Vollterri, now the King forsakes
The Camp, he must maintain luxurious mouths,
Such as can utter perfumed breath, and these
Strait compose a faction, engross his ears.
They limit still his conversation.
Even as the slow finger of the Dial
Doth in its motion circular remove
To distant figures: so by a subtle
Leisure, they doe prefix the hours,
When he must change his rotten Parasite,
For one more skilful, how t'admire, and praise.
No honest Tongue can ever interpose
To tell him he is mortal.
It is the chief misery of Princes,
Ne'er to understand their own crimes, to sin
In ignorance.
True, his Confessor, that in sight extern
A Patriarch seems, will gain by flattery,
And superscribe unto the King, as to the Pope
(His holiness.) But Gondibert,
Whom Conclaues here in Court doe canonise
For Saints, will scarce be admitted in heaven
For Angels.
Now Rhodolinda is become his Rival
In high Sovereignty, she will permit
No errors but her own: The King must mend
What she mislikes.
She gives vs leisure to expect
Her character. Women make themselves more known
When they doe rule, then when th'obey.
Valdaura is enriched with a sweetness
So religious, that Paradine must sin
In private, or need no mercy.
You have named her! Though my obdurate suffe∣rance
In active war hath quite deprived me of
All amorous gesture. Though not these forty
Winters, I have seen any of her sex
But Sutlers wives, who, in stead of Fillets,
Wrap their sooty hair in Horses girts. Though
My marrow is frozen in my bones,
Yet I melt before her eyes. When I see her,
I grow proud below the Navel. For she
Is none of the French Noursery, that practice
The sublime frisk. None of your ijgging Girls,
That perch Paraqueeto's on their fists,
And ride to the Court like Venus Falconers.
Grimold, hoarse men speak low, thou hast not caught
A cold yet.
She's none of those that on their heads advance
High, swagg'ring Plumes, like a gay Forehorse
In a Country Teem. O, she's worth the tempting!
Dost thou so commend her virtues, and yet
Would thou tempt her unto vice?
That's a trick I learnt of the devil. Those
That are virtuous, need his temptation,
The wicked have power enough to damn themselves.
Hark how they shout! Away Grimold▪ or we
Shall lose the Triumph!
Room for Cuckolds, whose horns are so high▪
They bore the Moon, as she friskes in the sky▪
This Peace makes me rotten, dusty
As a Cobweb. I live like a Cricket
Ith'corner of an Oven. Pox of these oregrowne
Cities. To be valiant here, is to forfeit
The Statute: and these furred gowns hold,
There is no sin so great as poverty.
Thou art as melancholy as a lean Judge!
I, or a corrupted Officer, at the noise
Of a Parliament. In this division
Of vnualewed Trophies, Territories
Vast and ample, (gained partly by my sweat)
Not a single Acre falls to my share.
Bear back there! They thrust as if they meant
To get me with child—
You sirrah! do ye get the Kings officer
With child?
Bear back there! or we will put ye to the charge
Of Surgery—
Dispatch▪ fellows!
Is not that Cunymond?
The same. He is a great Astrologer.
The mere Anatomy in the front of the Calendar.
You may know where the Sign is, by some toy
In's habit, which he removes, as the Sign
Removes.
Frollo, did they enter here by your permission?
Not by mine, Sir.
Nor yours, Conrad?
They are men of China for ought I know.
Then they must out. Gentlemen, pray avoid
The Presence.
'S death Sir! do ye make vs your Voyders?
Must we carry away your Cheese-parings?
Thrust your Bodkins forth!
Draw in the Presence? Art thou mad?
How he stands? he is created of Starch,
And dares not use a boisterous motion,
Lest he should fall in Rumples.
Sir, you may speak like a Cannon! but you
Shall either go, or—
Or what, Sir?
Or stay, Sir.
By heaven he shall doe one, Sir—
Nay, Captain, doe not look, as if you'd drunk
Vinegar. You must, or go, or—stay Sir—
Hey! we are tumbling in a Drum.
Fellows of the Guard, make way there! Of∣ficers!
Open the door—
Bear back there! Gentlemen! what do ye mean?
Pray bear back—
Phoebus will be thought more rash then Phaeton,
If now he hasten to the West. Sir, this
Glorious day, merits well a longer age,
Then what is limited to all within
Our Calendar.
Hermegild, thy free heart adds to our triumph!
Sir, I'ue some few words, I needs must utter:
Since my last services in Hungary,
You remain on my Tally six thousand
Ducats: I'm loath to skore up still, and pay
My self with my own Chalk.
Would have thy Soul dismissed a natural way?
I would not starve, look, like a parched Anatomy
Sowed in a Kid-skin. Pay your debts, Sir!
I never met with boldness, until now!
My courage is quite puzzled!
Do your ears blister to hear this? My breath is
Wholesome. I cannot tipple like a Duck
In a greene Poole. Nor feed on Berries in
A Hedge, like some lost remnant of my fathers
Scattered lust. Sir, pay your debts!
Sure, thou art some spirit! I cannot kill thee!
In this division of the Lands, I helped
To conquer; I am not furnished with
A Mole-hill for a pillow.
Hermegild sat chief in the Committee
For division of those Lands: bid him reward
Your service: besides, I mistake the custom,
Or tic my Treasurers office to pay
My debts, not mine.
No Sir, (thanks to your Royal thrift) it is
Your office to pay all; your Treasurers
Custom to pay nothing.
Do not interrupt my marriage Rites!
I cannot take your reference for payment.
Would thou were dead!
Sir, Isle make my Ghost, my Executor,
And walk after death, ere Isle lose my money.
Sit, my Rhodolinda: This is thy Sphere!
In th'absence of the Sun, we must receive
Our light from thee. Paradine, thy Bride expects
Thy service.
Sh'as an ill bargain on it, to rule one night,
And ever after to obey.
Captain, though the King be prompt in mercy,
Yet hath he so much anger in him,
As will express him mortal. Tic for your
Safety, to avoid the Presence.
Isle bribe your Lordship with a Ginny Tooth∣pick!
You must repent this language.
He must not, Hermegild!
How, my Lord!
These whom you number in your faction,
Enjoy, by your assistance, proud structures;
And fertile Granges, to maintain their gaudy
Riot. Sir, you had a frail memory,
Or a degenerate heart, when you forgot
His merit; might you incorporate those in one,
The sordid bulk could ne'er make up his shadow.
I am prescribed my discipline in Court!
Grimold, away! Tic my desire you leave
The Presence.
I am obedient (Sir) to your desire.
Slight, thou hast made a brave retreat.
I looked when both of vs should taste
Of immortality.
He that inflamed this fire, will scorch his busy
Fingers. My Lord, it was unkindly done
T'affront my anger thus: but I have hope
It is your last fault.
I cannot reckon it among my faults.
Sir, you involve your meaning in your speech.
The world shall find me honest.
You are a Bridegroom now.
Hermegild, make your anger known,
For else your frowns will cause your loyalty
To be suspected. This night should be as smooth
And pleasant, as that to which we owe our blessed
Nativity.
Sir, you are great on Earth! I am merely
Your creation. My passions doe afford
Your high delight all sympathy.
Old Time hath thrown his feathers from his heals,
And slowly limps in's motion to prolong
This Triumph: but if Paradine affront
Hymen, and me with sullen rage, it shall
Be called my piety to suffer.
How! your Excellence ought t'excuse my speech!
When your victorious sword deprived me of
My Father; I entered to captivity,
As to th'oblique shade, where death inhabits.
Till you allowed me Hermegild; who with
His high Philosophy did make
My bondage sweet. My Father loved him well:
He was his noblest Servant, and must not
For his virtues suffer, until your sacred tongue
Forbid me share with you in Sovereignty.
Boy, this was a bold crime. You must not give
Me cause to chide my fond heart. Valdaura,
Urge him to proffer friendship
Unto Hermegild; you are powerful
Ore his nature. I have deserved to lose
My chief prerogative—
I am too timorous to deal with anger:
If he prove sterne of nature, my Marriage
Is my funeral. My Lord!
Paradine, I'ue an humble love. I will
Present it first to your refusal—
I want your phrase, to make my manners seem
Less rugged. All that is love, I cherish
With such religious heate, as my Valdaura
Claims, since our young Nuptial—
This embrace is a sacrifice
To thee my Queen: whose deity
Consists of love. Sit, and with your
Persons, straight entrench the Table. Some wine!
Fill in my Germane Plate; Isle drink as when
I'm hot with victory. This to my Bride—
Sound high!
More wine, and noise! Now Boy, I celebrate
Valdaura's health —
Bid their Instruments speak louder.
They're afraid to wake the Neighbours.
This is legitimate blood of the rich
Corsick Grape: precious as thy tears
(My Royal Girl) when thou art penitent
To heaven.
Spare me in the next, and Isle esteem you
Courteous; so much wine will put me to the charge
Of Physic.
Your Lordship owns it as a prime virtue —
Shall the world bleed? but frown, and thou renew'st
A Chaos. Malign the pride of some far
Eastern Queen, whom Travellers belly,
And I will forage there, like loud thunder!
Or like the Northern wind upon the Maine,
Where lazy Hulks are tossed like chips.
I merit no such complement.
Isle do it. Tic thought, I am immortal.
The chief of my great Ancestors, that made
A wilde incursion ore this fertile soil,
Was but a tip of me. More wine! — Thy breath
Is as the smoke of spices. I taste thy
Melting lips, and straight engender kisses.
Heart! Boy, you are too ravenous!
I ever held your Majesty my best
Example. Kisses nimbly gathered,
The faster grow.
The Lombards use to share this sport!
Is not your name Pigwiggin?
Pigwiggin! your Grace was wont to call me
Cunymond: I am no Fairy.
Nor I the King of Fairies. Slight, sir, do ye
Present me with a Cup, made, of the bottom
Of an Akehorne, or Queen Mobs Thimble?
Fill me a bowl, where I may swim,
And bathe my head, then rise like Phoebus from
The Ocean, shaking my dewy Locks.
A health to Cesars memory. Boy, doe me
Justice, or thou afrontst my Triumph!
Conrad, the King will drown vs all!
You've now, Sir, but the moiety of his draught.
Though Fame lends you her Trumpet, gives you leave
To speak your own praise, you cannot utter more
Then my belief shall warrant.
Now thou whisper'st like the amorous Lute!
I am the Broom of Heaven, whē th'world grows foul,
Isle sweep the Nations into'th Sea, like dust.
Thy father was magnanimous, and great
King of the Girpides. Yet his title
Sat not so nobly on him, as my conquest.
Know, his unkind fate, was his chief glory:
For it was I that slew him; and thou his
Captived Daughter art my Queen.
Sir, if you continue this narration,
I shall weep.
Doe, weep! then on my heart-strings I will thread
Thy tears in stead of Pearl: such a wealthy
Bracelet, love would present unto his Queen:
And she tuck up her sleeves, to show her gaudy wrists.
More wine! Bring vs the Bowl of Victory.
Sir, you engaged your Royal word, never
To present that fatal object.
Paradine, doe not resist my pleasure.
Isle crush thee into Ayre.
I am in my ambition virtuous,
If I desire t'expire a sacrifice
To loyalty. Sir, ruin what you made,
But doe not violate your Vow.
Hence! I shall delight in fury!
Welcome, the horrid Trophy of my chief war!
Rhodolinda, Isle try thy fortitude.
This was thy Fathers Skull: thou shalt pledge a health
Unto his Ghost.
O fatal! my eyes shrink within my brow!
I gather Agues like the Spring, and tremble
Like the vnlick'd Lamb, newly yeand upon
A sheet of Snow.
Hide me, Paradine! the object doth so
Penetrate, that when I wink, I spy it
Through my Lids.
Tame, feeble Soul! Will she not pledge
What we doe celebrate? Return her person—
Madam, the King—
The King's a Tyrant, and thou his slave.
That's a favour, Signior.
I wear it as a Jewel in my ear.
Fly, dear Valdaura; sweeten her censure
Of this act, and mediate for the King.
Thesina, prithee help me in discourse;
My wonder (Wench) doth so disturb my speech,
I fear I shall grow dumb.
The work is pious we attempt.
The harmony of your sweet tongue is his
Best physic: divorce him from those black thoughts,
Whilst I employ my utmost skill, to win
The Queen to his embraces. She's great of Soul,
And may determine what my fond heart laments
To prophecy.
You're my best Countryman, kind and loyal.
So pale and timorous! Isle sooner couple
With a Mandrake, and beget groans.
My Royal Lord!
Ho! Am I alone? Have they all left me?
Where is my Empire? Doe I govern in
The vacant Ayre?
Sir, am I lost unto your memory?
You were wont to trust my service: the way
Unto your Couch lies here—
None shall be proud but I. My smiles revive
The dead: but when I frown, the living straight
Melt into Ghosts.
Lights for the King there!
Cunymond, you are too officious! The Kings
Departure must be private.
The King is light enough himself: he needs
No Torches.
And heavy enough! for he seems to reel
With his own weight.
No Masks! No Epithelamion now!
Call for a Bone-setter, for Time hath sprained
His feet, and goes awry.
O Hermegild! a general eclipse
In Nature, would not seem so horrid!
To cut those cordial strings which Hymen had
But newly tied.
I, there's the horror! whilst his Vows sat warm
Upon his Lips; his breath not mingled yet
With cooler Ayre; thus to perturb by sterne
Practice your sweet rest, was worse then perjury.
To present my Royal Fathers Skull,
In drunken Triumph.
Take heed! you will distract your memory.
There's a Record, Time strives to lose; and Fame
To hide beneath some oblique fold in her
Thick Volume, as loath to discredit all
Mankind. Your father valued you next to
His interest in heaven. I'ue seen the good
Old King search for his picture in your eyes; then—
No more: Patience is sinful now. Thou art
Deeply read and wise: instruct me to be bold,
For Albouine hath taught me to be cruel.
You're now by holy Church incorporate;
Therefore Divinity forbids me use
My natural motions. How ever I think
It fit, you give him direful cause, soon to
Repent: Repentance sure is physic for his soul.
Paradine and 's young Bride! Your excellence
Shall please that we retire: whilst I disguise
My kind gesture, and seem to flatter in
The Kings behalf—
To bed soft modesty! I will my self
Deliver to the Queen the King's intent.
Sir, the King is cruel. Should you prove so
To me, I'd soon distill my soul to tears,
And weep an Ocean deep enough to drown
My sorrows, and my self.
It were sterne guilt to doubt my nature. Fair Saint,
To bed, I long to lose my Youth in warm
Embraces, and ere the pearly Morn appear,
Make thee a teeming Mother. To bed! with winged hast
Expect my presence.
How smooth appears the Brow of Youth!
Hail Rhodolinda! the Royal Mistress
Of this night. Thus Albouine (our great King) bade
Me say, You're dearer to his eyes then light.
Though every Bride may claim from Hymen
Privilege to rule her Lord, till Hesperus
Appear, and cancel her brief Charter.
Yet he doth humbly beg, you'll not infringe
The Lombards custom, whose Virgins never vow
A continence the Nuptial night.
I yet want your meaning.
Tic his chief hope that you will straight expect
His person in your bed.
How! lye with him? Isle sooner choose a Man∣zion
In a sepulchre: There commit incest
With the raw remnant of my fathers bones:
Sooner embrace an airy Incubus:
Mingle Limbs with some ulcerous Cripple,
Able to infect an Hospital.
O take heed! Take heed, fair Majesty! let not
His rash sin provoke you to intend so dire
An abstinence: ere yet the wine hath lost
Th'vnruly operation. The King disclaims
His wanton pride, and mortifies himself
With sullen grief.
Can thou suspect, I will prove inconstant,
To what in cold temperance I determine?
Heaven avert you should approve your error.
Isle kneel, and vow with all solemnity—
O hold! it were black impiety in vs
To suffer such a horrid crime. You may
Inform the King of my religious loyalty,
Already I have used persuasive speech
To reconcile this odds: but she grows wilde,
Repugnant to all mercy.
As you esteem your Royal self, or vs,
Who (when kinder Planets ruled) were servants
To th'vnhappy King your father; cherish
No more this anger in your breast, lest Time
Afford it growth and violence, till it
Disturb the world.
He councels like a sacred Oracle.
I will inform the King, your continence
You only celebrate to this black night,
And give him hope, that you'll hereafter smile,
His kind enticements meet with equal heate,
And fertile love. Though I'm vnhewne, and shaped
In war, this softens all my faculties—
Stay, Paradine; did thou not name my Father?
I did with a devout remembrance!
And thou know how thy good Country suf∣fers?
I think on it, and my heart hangs heavy
On its strings; galls them with its sullen weight.
Hermegild oft receives certificate
From some in bondage there, which writ in Prose, doe,
In the reading into Verse dissolve: so sad
The business is, so fit for elegy.
So sad a Requiem yet was never sung,
Though the hoarse Raven, and the Whistler shrill,
The Howlet, and the evening Dorr made up
The fatal Quire. The young men there are yoked
In pairs, and stretch their sinews in a Teem,
To draw the wealthy harvest to the Grange,
Where th'insulting foe resides. The aged
(Heretofore in purple clothed) that disposed
Of Law and Justice; are now sowed up
In dunghill clouts; and dwell on parched hills,
To tend the flocks; whose fleece the Victor wears
In gaudy triumph.
O harsh captivity! Our Country groans!
Till now I thought the Conqueror began to ease
Their bondage, not add to the weight of their
Compelled burdens.
The King's a sterne Tyrant.
Yet he hath used me still with gentle power,
Taken me from the cold Earth, and warmed me in
His bosom: and Hermegild has full cause
To bless his bounty. But you (now our Queen)
He valewes next to heaven; however this rash
Error strives to disgrace his love. We are
His captives too; heretofore not heeded
By our Stars; though we now grow tall with titles
And his favour.
My Lord, the King is kind! Our memories
Were frail, should we forget what hath so much
Pertained unto our knowledge. I'm so fond
O'er my Religion, I dare not taste
Ingratitude: yet give me leave to say,
You may mistake his love unto the Queen.
The dry Tartar, who yokes his females neck
With rusty Iron, not with Carckanets
Of threaded Pearl; whom he preserves for physic
More then increase; will the first night of their
Conjunction, feast her in's embroidered tent;
Call her Sovereign; and like some amorous wind,
Sport with her hair.
But my Nuptial the King did celebrate
In Golgotha, where Skulls, and dusty bones
Inhabit.
You're skilful in the deeds that appertain
To strength and fury; but they that aim
At victory in Court, must practise smooth
And subtle Arts. Wise Favourites doe walk
In the dark, and use false lights. Nay, oft disguise
Their breadth and stature; seem lesser then they are:
For know, the slender Worm, or nimble Greg,
May wriggle down into the oblique, and low
Descent of the narrow hole; whilst th'oregrowne Snake
Peepes at the brim, but ne'er can view the bottom.
Think on thy Country, Paradine! Is there
In Story no mention of some great Soul,
That did his Country prize aboue his own
Mortality, and died to gain his Nation Freedom?
The Noble Brutus for his Countries health,
Made Caesar bleed; Cassius was heroic too,
And had in war loud Fame, which he increased
By mingling in this Act.— Tic wrought with skill,
And apt leisure. His thoughts grow numerous,
And engender horrid shapes; such as fright
His fancy.
Paradine, good night!
Hymen and your Bride, will blame your tardy
Service. Sweet Lord, a thousand times good night.
False unto me! when Thunder wakes the dead:
When the Sky looks swarthy: the clouds like ink
In water powered: when the Earth seems to stand
As in a gloomy shade. When the wind blows
Till it grows hoarse: till it convert
And sprinkle Seas even to a Dew; then I
Shall try the King, and fathom his wide Soul.
If he start, complain of his mortality,
Kneel oft; and pray aloud, as Heaven
Were deaf: if thus, I will conclude him false.
For horrid storms that Tyrants waking keep,
Doe rock the noble Conscience safe asleep.
I knew your Excellence did visit me
For mirth and laughter.
So early up? Your Lord is temperate.
I should like their tempers better, if she
Were down, and her Lord up.
Fie, Thesina, your tongue's unruly.
The morning might have shown me too for mirth,
Had not the false King made the night so sad.
Black fancy fly!
She moves as she were sick, this skirmish has
Much weakened her.
Dost thou call it a skirmish?
I, Madam, a French skirmish; where the onset
Is hot and fiery, but the retreat cold and tame.
Madam, the King?
Ho!
He greets your Excellence in a smooth phrase,
And begs, you will permit his early visit.
I'd rather lose my eyes then see him.
When you did triumph in your fathers Court,
My entreaty then had power to alter
Your commands; reward my young service
With kindness to your self. When the tall
Cedar falls, with burly weight it strikes
The neighbouring shrubs, low, into the ground:
So we that spring like Rushes near your root,
Must in your death receive a funeral.
VVhat's this? Do ye moralise?
The King may have his anger warranted.
For heaven forbids such wilde division▪
'Tweene those whom holy Church vnites.
Hark, Thesina! She has been gossiping▪
With the holy Sisters: she preaches to me
Of Matrimonial zeal. Troth Valdaura,
If thy husband doe infuse such schism,
Isle practise a divorce.
We Court Ladies grow so squeamish after
We have tasted Man. Your Majesty may
Much profit her behaviour, if you
A while divide her from her Lord.
So soon? Ere Time permits them second
Their embraces?
I Hermegild. If those embraces doe
Include such high delight, such rapsody;
She makes me envious then▪ since all my hopes
Are widowed by the King. To night, Valdaura▪
You are to sleep beneath my Roof. This I
Impose as a command.
Is not this a harsh compulsion?
Sir, I willingly obey it. But as
You're Noble, use your ablest skill, t'instruct▪
The Queen how of her anger to dispose
A safer way, then against the King.
Alas! I'd rather cut my Eye-lids off
To prevent sleep then lose one minute that
Could advantage a design so pious.
And be it part of your kind charity,
To indeere me to your Lord. Tic all the pride
In my ambition to doe him service.
Sir, he already knows your worth, and thinks
Your friendship precious.
I kiss your fair hands. The King already come?
I must seem pensive as the night.
She's lost, my Boy: blown from my fist: her wings
Have gathered wind: they fly (like those of Time)
Swiftly forward, but never back return.
Sir, I have hope, she will repent this breach
Of duty, and court your Royal smiles again.
Is it a sin to drink? Nature has given
To fishes a prerogative, greater
Then we enjoy. They can ever tipple
And not be drunk.
Fishes are dumb (Sir) they never fox themselves
With talk.
Slave! thy mirth is treacherous! Paradine!
Thou hast consumed to night the wealth of love,
Wasted thy lips in moist kisses, embraced
A warmth, that would give life to marble.
Whilst I, (like the solitary Phoenix)
Expect no heate but in my funeral flame:
And strive t'ingender of my self. Yet Boy,
Thou can not make me envious; thou art more
Delightful; then my Rodolinda's sins.
Let me survey those blue circles: his lids
Fall down, as if weighty Plummets hung on
Their sins. Thou art not temperate. Preserve
Thy dear eyes. Love was pictured blind, because
It makes men blind. I hug thee as my health —
He bruised me in his arms. Can love express
Such violence, and yet be false? Hermegild
Still whispers in my ear, the King doth hate
Thee, Paradine. But Hermegild is read in all
The Arts of Court, and strives perhaps
My sense to poison with lean jealousy.
Sweet Lord! Y' appear blushing like the Morn!
Something your Bride and you have done to increase
The number of the Worthies.
He courts me too! I want a Perspective,
To draw these distant figures near my sight.
I ne'er shall sleep again.
Hermegild, thy aspect shows ominous!
How thrives our embassy?
I have consumed my breath, till I grew faint,
And wept to inuit her mercy; but tears
Were spilt like water in the Forge, only
To enrage the fire. She doth abjure your visit.
Harsh, Iron, nature!
The King seems fettered in his limbs: he wreathes
His arms, as if he meant to bruise his heart.
And Paradine doth find my charms predominant.
He that drinks, forfeits his mortality!
How Sir, must we not drink?
Soldier, to keep thy bladder moist, I will
Permit thee gape in the mornings face, and catch
Her mizzling tears.
If you'll extirpate this vice of drinking,
Give order for a privy search in the the Ocean;
There dwell the greatest drinkers. The Whale (Sir)
Drinks deeper let's hale her on shore, and impound her
In a Cistern.
Good! we will embark for Sea. I press thee up
For this employment.
Stay (Sir) ere I engage my self in new
Services, pay me for my old. You rest
Upon my Ticket, six thousand Ducats;
And I have not seen your Majesties face
In any other metal, but your own
Flesh and blood these three months.
Thou grumble like a gray VVolfe.
Tic then for hunger, Sir.
Captain, you mistake the King. He's Royal
As his blood, and liberal as the Sun
That shines on all. This unruly breath, where
The City meet in council, might perhaps▪
Blow their Purse-strings loose, so fill the Exchequer.
And then you shall number your pay with your own
Fingers.
I will out-rore thunder, or the Cannon!
Must they still walk in wealthy Furs; whilst men
Of merit here are clothed in Cabbage leaves?
Grimold, you endanger your friends.
My Lord, give losers leave to speak. I'ue lost
My youth and blood ith'warres, and I want food,
A reverend Ass bears my wife and her young eggs
In Paniers up and down the streets. I travail
Like a Tartar, with all my family
About me. Nay, nay, nay! you would be gon!
Art thou not yet dead?
You must not move, till you've paid me. I know,
You may be angry with more safety then I.
Bid some Colossus of your Guard cleave me
With his Falchon; yet I shall steal a passage
Ore the black River, when Charon slumbers,
And fright your Grace.
I dare not strike thee (old man) lest thou should fall
To dust, and choke me.
Good King, pay me. I love thy Grace:
And will fight for thee, whilst I'ue motion left
To stir a feather. My want constrains me to it.
By this hand, I'm fine to eat Bran and Parsley
Like a tame Rabbit.
Lend me your ear, Captain!
You'll entice me now t'enter into bond?
You look indeed like a young heir. Well, Sir,
Value me according to my true rate.
I am your friend. You make ill choice of hours
For help of your design. The King hath now
Sad and tumultuous thoughts about his heart.
Great men are always sad, when they should pay
Their debts.
Sir, you interpret ill. Grow more sober,
Then challenge all my power in your behalf.
He that receives a kindness from the Devil,
Shall bee sure to lose by his gains.
Captain, you should choose a luckier minute:
The King is now in love.
With whom?
With the Queen.
In love with his own wife! that's held incest
In Court: variety is more luscious.
Be powerful in thy speech, my Paradine,
Yet gentle too. She is the Star that rules
My faculties.
The Queen will bless your temperance, &amp; repent.
Hermegild is too busy: he must be more
At leisure, and I more active.
Hermegild, wear thy senses near vs—
Your Majesty has a frail memory
To forget me so soon—
You'll forfeit me, and the Kings mercy! away!
Tic no piece of unkindness to wish thee
In hell, for all thy friends dwell there. You have none
Upon the earth. Gentlemen will you be open to me?
In all parts, Sir, but our purses.
Draw near! let vs communicate our hearts!
Does not that wealth, which you disburse for powders,
Perfumes, clothes, and physic for the face,
Return with gain?
Expound your Riddle, Sir.
Have you not each a Mistress that maintains
You in expense and riot? Ho? Fame gives
It out, you smooth Gallants are much obliged
Unto the sins of Ladies.
Conrad can prattle somewhat, Sir, to that
Purpose.
Good faith you do me wrong. I'ue worn, Sir,
A Ladies slipper in my hat, or so.
Frollo is the man that gets their Pendants,
Armelets, Rings, and all the Toys of value.
Excuse me, sir, not I. Signior Cunymond
Has all the voice at Court. We know, Sir, when,
And where, a certain Duchess, Sir;
You copulate with Titles, you.
The Heralds are your Bawds.
Hold! grow particular in such a Theme as this!
Well, Gentlemen, I must be furnished too.
With a Mistress?
Yes, inquire me out some old Land-Carack.
I am content to stretch my loins for a
Pension.
At what rate doe you value your self?
I was never pawned, Sir.
How, Captain!
In this lean age, we value all things
According to the rate, they pawn for.
But we must know, how much you would re∣ceiue
In price of your activity?
You must never stray after fresh pasture.
Some eight; I, I, eight hundred Crowns a year will do it.
I am desirous of no more then will
Maintain my Genet, and my Dwarf.
Your excuse procured, tic fit you now tell,
How far in your defence I may engage
My honour: is not your flesh a little tainted!
Are you not unwholesome?
O death, no; no, no, no! Do not think I have
A conscience so ill bred, to put my self
Upon a Lady, when unfit for the affair.
Well, Captain, now with your own eyes survey
Your limbs; what use can a Lady have
Of you? To propagate the Cough of the lungs?
Or beget Cripples, to people an Hospital?
Or produce another Nation that may
Wage fierce battle against the Cranes?
Yet I can follow your bodies with rough
Motion, and not shed my limbs by the way—
I told ye, he'd make a jest on it.
But I will kick ye in earnest,—kick ye
For my exercise and warmth—till my toes
Grow crooked—
Pursue Valdaura, Sir.
I hate these Iiggeries.
You know, I am material in my speech,
Full of duty; you want the silken garb,
That must indeere you to the Ladies eyes.
Yet I am loving in my drink.
Greet her kindly, Sir: tic Paradines Bride.
You have not seen her since she endeavoured
To increase the number of your subjects,
With loss of her virginity.
Rhodolinda doth so engross my love,
That on other Ladies I'ue but little
To bestow.
Sir, practise but your Courtship here. In troth
You must affect the amorous Cringe, gestures
Smooth and pliant; it will never doe else.
I'ue heard the Queen complain, you are too rough:
And what these Ladies doe observe, will take
A sudden flight unto her ear. Strike but
Their senses gently with your tongue. Often
Flatter'em, and with a vigorous breath;
They'll then implore the Queen in your behalf:
And, Sir, the endeavour of their praise will soon
Procure your peace.
If they would soften Rhodolinda's heart,
And reconcile me to her smiles, I would
Grow fond, and dally then with all the Sex.
Begin your trial. If you salute this,
(And other Ladies too) with some impression on
Their lips; with managing their fingers thus,—
With seizure on her wrist; as if you had
Some business with her Pulse: then you enchant.
Be flexiue in your smiles, and wanton like,
Seek pictures in their eyes: and when they move,
Then with personal conduct, guide their feet.
Amongst them you cannot seem too cheap. They will
Admire you for it, and sing your praises to
The Queen.
I shall be taught to spin, and starch!
The engin's now compact; each wheel doth move
With silent screwes. The Mole's the subtle Pioner:
For when she undermines the earth, her slow
Motion makes no noise.
You're devout, Vauldaura. Teach me to pray:
We have no leisure for it in war; and 't has
Been long time out of fashion here in Court.
I fear I make some breach of duty with
Your Excellence, to hinder thus
The passage of your Royal thoughts.
You teach me now, t'excuse my own abrupt
Demeanour; but I can do it. My harsh Queen
(Whom the perspicuous Eye of heaven forgive)
Doth much mistake the posture of my limbs,
And gesture of my tongue among your Sex.
I never use, like rugged Polypheame,
To dandle Cubs. Thus, I can gently touch
A Ladies lips—yet make no battery on
Her teeth. Was it not an airy pressure?
Tell my proud Queen, I'ue lost my Iron garb,
And now am grown thus fond and smooth.
O Royal Sir, her cruelty hath put
My eyes unto th'expence of many tears.
I, but in vain! Those clouds must weep apace,
That mean to penetrate the Marble, or
The Flint. I wear no Gauntlet on my hand,
Why should you think that I would bruise
Your fingers with my touch—
Is this Paradines Garden?
I Madam, and your Excellence may find
A sudden growth, in all that shadows vs.
Ho I look there!
What is 't your eyes so eagerly discern?
The King! How sportful he is grown? how full
Of amorous game and dalliance?
I spy Valdaura there: but is that the King?
Thou dost inquire, t'affront my sight.
You must inform the Queen of this: Say, I
Am smooth, and musical, and trim, and that
I talk no more of war, nor drink.
Tic my duty to urge all circumstance,
That may credit you in her esteem.
It is a piece of courtship to salute
At parting—
Is that a safe conjunction in so hot a climate!
Hell and death! What raw discipline is this?
I should conduct her in her way—
So violent in pursuit of your game?
Let's follow, Hermegild?
Not for all the Sun beholds in's journey
Through the world—
Why? be nimble in thy speech!
It shows but silly art in industry,
To seek what you would not find.
I pre thee grow particular! Dost think
They purpose ought in the dark? or, was this same
But ceremonious form! such a greeting
As courtship will admit in public interview?
The King was never given to complement,
You know. As for Valdaura—
What of her?
I think that she is chaste, but—
Doe not involve thy language thus
In periods of suspense.
I wish the King had not deserved to be
Deprived of your soft embraces, then
He might have kept his constitution tame.
O, is it so?
It ill becomes the garb of Majesty,
To run thus neighing (like a riotous Horse)
After each female that he spies.
Why, does he use it?
Madam, you question me, as if what I
Declare, were to your knowledge new and strange.
By heaven and so it is.
O my officious Soul! must it be my crime
To give the information up? would I
Had known the King was here, you should have made
Another path, your walk.
Hermegild, you did mis-spend that breath.
Alas, you had enough of grief before.
This addition will but show a tyranny
In fate and me. It works with hight, like new
Mighty wine! as if 't would split the Cask.
O perjured, black, adulterous King! affront
My Fathers Ghost? Disturb his Ashes in
His tomb? Whē drunk with pride, he mocked me with
The gaudy title of a Queen, and now
I am become a stale for all his lust.
Valdaura too! so pure of heart (forsooth)
That she would blush to see her own hand, if naked:
They are proscribed. Know, Hermegild,
Our Country shall be free.
This is a noble rage! Heaven knows how I
Have grieved at your decay of soul. 'T was my
Sad fear, that all the angry sparks, which were
By Justice kindled in your breast, had been
Extinguished quite, now they grow up in flames.
You now like Phoebus show, when he hath washed
His face with Dew. Your influence doth infuse
A noble heate, such as would motion give
Unto aged Statues; make them pluck up
Their Mossy feet, and walk.
Thou giu'st my senses pride! What in this great
Business wilt thou doe, to encourage hope?
I will mingle poison in my Ink, write
With a Ravens Quill! 't will be a fatal
Scripture: and shall charm like to those wise Jigs
The Sirens sing. Some must direction bear
To our Pensioners, that in our Country rule
The sterne Edicts of Law: some to Martial
Spirits, who with their able skill doe lead
Those Regiments, the King hath garrisoned
In the bordering Towns. They shall revolt, my Queen,
And seat thee in thy Fathers Chair: they must
Be drunk with the Elixir of my Gold.
When first I chose thee out for this great work,
I saw thee thorough a Perspective reversed;
For thou did seem much lesser then thou art.
Kneel, and be happy!—Before
The Genius of this place, and what is here
Immortal, I vow to assist with my
Most active skill, all thy designments against
The King; and when my just hopes are finished,
To be thy Wife. Such as doe perjured prove,
Lightning will surely clothe with subtle flames,
And they shall burn like glimmering Tapers
In dark hell: pale, and sickly as that fire
The Ghost of Narrow makes.
This new ambition hath so exalted
All my faculties, that I seem taller
Kneeling, then when I stood. But here with strict
Solemnity I vow to teach my Soul
New ways of merit: to revenge with sterne,
And horrid wrath, the Kings proud tyranny.
To make your Greatness absolute, and high,
Or sink my self lower then a Plummet,
In the Baltic Sea. Should I not this perform,
The Stars would fall like Cinders on my head:
And winds imprisoned in the Earth; break forth,
In a wilde ruin, and shake me into sand:
Then blow me in your Eyes; where if in tears
You drown me, I am entombed in Pearl: and then
My obsequies requite my death.
Enough. I proffet to thy lip, the first
Taste of my affection—
'T was moist and luscious! I will cherish this
Indeerement. Trees that tallest grow, doe take
The deepest root; so I must first sink low
In the Earth; and after climb to fathom clouds.
First, praise her mimic laughter: when she weeps,
Then gather up with covetous regard
Her tears for scattered Pearl. Like her spittle
From the ground: this disguised humility
Is both the swift, and safest way to pride—
Sure, Hermegild, I have amazed thy sense,
Thou look like some ore-growne Fiend, chained up
Within a silent cave. Let vs retire, and Isle
Discover how I'ue practised my revenge.
I project to make you mighty! You shall
Ascend my beauteous Sovereign, till you
Can reach the Moon, and pick those seeds of light
(The lesser Stars) from forth their wandering Spheres;
To wear as new embroidery on your sleeve.
I long to hear your fatal Arts. Let's mix
Our senses, and contrive. A women's will,
Is not so strong in anger, as her skill.
You bring no letters from Cracouia, Sir?
None, my Lord.
Nor from Sienna?
Your Lordship in those few, receives th'in∣tire
Purpose of my journey.
Alas, my Countrymen! Captivity
Is hoarse, they have more griefs then tongue: they speak
Not loud enough to wake the ear of heaven.
Henceforth to Hermegild bid them direct
Their sighs; for I'm so dull, so weary, and
Neglectful of ambitious ends, that I
Shall lose my strength, and favour with the King.
My noble Lord, our prayers will ouer-rule that prophecy.
You may expect, whilst I am able to
Perform. Boy, bespeak the Gentleman a free
And bounteous welcome. Sir, I will hasten
Your dispatch.
My Lord; I have tired my self in your search.
The fair Thesina? You are rarely here
A visitant! Where have you left my Bride?
With the Queen, my Lord, who is so fond
Of her attendance, she'll scarce allow her space
To wink in her own service, and to night
She lies within her chamber.
Ho! so soon divided! Th'approching night
Should help to second our embraces.
You're now to trust my Art. For Valdaura
Sent me t'expresse her joy, in the delivery
Of this message. You shall lye with her to night.
How can my faith admit of this, since she
Is billeted where the Queen sleeps?
Isle perfect my assurance; so you'll please
To obey what I enjoin. When you approach
The Sphere, where your bright Phoebe rules, doe not
Occasion so much noise, as shall express
You living. You must not speak to her, nor
By your gestures, inuit her speech. All this
Perform, lest you should wake the Queen.
To be dumb in copulation! This is
A fine receipt to get a silent Girl.
But I shall prove obedient.
And (Sir) as y' are merciful to Ladies
(Ripe in growth) doe not breathe too loud, lest we
In the neighbouring room, ore-heare the harmony,
And sin in wishes.
Fear not, Thesina: I shall be temperate.
But you young soldiers are so boisterous,
You'll think anon, you're battering some Towne-wall.
Follow, Sir, Isle direct ye to the place,
Where, when the dark hour arrives, you must
Address your visit.
The early Lark climbs higher then his voice;
And whispers into Phoebus ear, a glad
Welcome; who smiles, and seems to prophecy
A gaudy day. Valdaura? Madame? speak,
Sweet Lady! or, if for concealment of
Our stolen rapture you silence still assume;
Yet rise, and bless my eye-sight with thy fair
Presence. Come, and eclipse the envious day!
Not talk in the business, nor yet behold
The ground we till, as if we both were blind
And dumb. Isle no more by stealth engender;
Cripples are got thus. Kind Valdaura, speak!
See, a new day breaks in her hand! These are
The rosie fingers of the Morn!
Ho! the Queen! Valdaura! Bride, where art thou?
In vain thou call. The Cannons Iron throat,
Although high mounted on you' Pinnacle,
Scarce could reach her ear. She's in Pay now,
Two Leagues situate from hence.
Thou art mysterious as an Oracle!
I sent her thither, with pretence she should
Survey the model of a Garden-worke.
But it was done, that Thesina might entice
With apter leisure, thy person to my bed.
At noon thy wife returns.
I'ue mistaken then my warm embraces,
And sinned with thee the adulterous Queen!
Thou hast enjoyed what Albouine with all
His Royal sighs, his tears swollen bigger then
His eyes, despaired to merit.
O horror! gape, rugged Earth! Suck me in
Like some old Pyramid, whose ponderous limbs
Have been thy burden since the Flood, and now
Their own foundation sink. Could you make
No choice to quench your ravenous lust, but me?
Where were the broad-chin'd Zwitzers of your Guard?
This (Paradine) denotes a melting brain:
Which out of vulgar pity I forgive.
It was not the wanton taste of thy smooth limbs,
That could provoke me use this stratagem.
But love of my revenge. I'ue strongly now
Engaged thy power, to kill the King.
Ho!
Which do: and ere the Sun arrive ith'West;
Or with disheuell'd hair, my vestments torn
(As if I'd wandered thorough some Hathorne hedge)
I will approach the Tyrant, acquaint him
With this deed, and call my own adultery
Thy foul rape.
Who 's within there, hoe! My Hogs-head's empty.
I was not borne with so much brains, as would
Bedew a clout, that my cold Nosthrill stopped.
These Court smocks contain the very Devil.
Good heaven! how lean should I have made my heart
With studious thoughts, ere I the skill had reached
Of such a damned proiection.
Collect thy scattered thoughts. What thy respect
To thy captived Country, could ne'er charm thee
To revenge; be prompted to, by a kind
Affection of thy own dear life: revenge
Upon a Tyrant; One, that loves not me,
Nor thee; unless in speech: he hath a smooth
Tongue, but a rugged heart. My Hermegild
Perceives this truth, and can deliver it
With all the pride of knowledge.
Sure Time grows humorous with age: for things
Doe differ much from the sincerenesse of
Their first creation. I will go weep
Till I am blind—
Stay, Paradine. If thou dost mock my hopes
With a slow motion in this just design,
Expect to find my anger fatal. Isle to
The King, and make a forfeiture of both
Our lives: but if with hardy sinews thou dost march
To 's Throat, and slit the swarthy Pipe, I'll call
Thee then my Soldier. Besides thy Countries thanks,
Thou shalt enjoy me for thy Queen, thy Wife,
Paradine.
New Arts, t'inuolue imagination!
How can this be, and my own wife strongly
Possessed of health and nature!
VVould'st thou embrace so eminent a bliss,
Without some danger to thy soul?
My memory betrays my skill! I know
There are a thousand ways to discard her,
From this foul, dirty Orb.
Alas, good easy Soul! She'll ne'er be missed
Among the living. Know, Valdaura's false.
How! False!
She is a open whore, and hath taught me
This Art of lust.
More horrible then Hell!
Now furnish but my hands with an Hower-glasse,
And a long Dart, then seat me on some rotten
Monument for the picture of lean Death.
Make me the common Executioner
Of Nature. For ere long I shall become
The Sextons Pensioner to fill his Graves.
Valdaura false!
Wilt thou thus leave me in a wilde suspense,
Whether I shall find thy courage active?
For credit of your own humanity,
Doe not infringe the vulgar privilege
Due to all hearts. Give me but leave to think;
And ne'er doubt your business! Though I'm a young
Sinner; yet I shall soon inquire the way
To hell. Tic a continued thoroughfare
From this Climate thither. Or let me but
Delay my journey, till the trivial rage
Of Christian Princes, meet in horri'd battle;
And then I shall have company enough:
Whole throngs to choke the throat of hell.
Good night, Madame.
Ere yet the Morn 's fair cheek hath lost her tears,
Dost call it night?
To me it seems the Eye of heaven doth wink.
All things are clothed in darkness, black as your
Design.
Stay, for else my rage will not permit
That we survive another meeting.
If thou suspectst we are too loud, I will
Distill my thoughts into thy ear.
Though t'assist my great hopes with opportune
Induction, I consented to this act:
Yet now I chide my fond spirits. For who
Dares trust the unruly appetite of youth?
What I decreed she should but taste, she may
Delight to surfeit on. It shows fulsome!
Here's the precious medicine that must restore
Health to my hopes. Follow, gentle Lady.
You see 'em now?
Fall, fall, you thick and spungy clouds, until
You choke my sight. Doe not my eyes begin
To bleed at this object?
Mark how close they meet: what variety
They use in lust: now she hath melted quite his lips
With her hot breath, she hangs upon his ear.
Survey their gestures still. Now they depart.
Isle summon all the hierarchy of heaven
To censure'em!
Who knows but they are gone to wallow in
Their active sweats again? Alas, pure soul!
You perceive these figures no Idea,
No object of the mind, or ayre incorporate
To cheat imaginary view.
Was this the cause, that made th'adulterous Queen
So strictly urge my swift journey unto
Pay?
I, and the motive that provoked my soft
Conscience to hasten your return, that you
Might tell sad tales to heaven. For I
(That still was nursed upon a Sybils Lap)
Who with prophetic Milk did nourish me,
Can deeply guess at th'ominous portent
Of sin. I hate such loose-rein'd Stallions;
Such lascivious harmony in guilt.
So soon prove false? ere the celebration
Of our marriage Rites were fully ended?
Ere the Sun in's journey o'er this Region
Had twice beheld thus incorporate
By holy Church, and smiled upon the hopes
Of our increase?
I, there's a contemplation that would crack
Even heart-strings made of wire. Hymens Taper
But newly lighted, and he with rude breath
Blows from the quickening week the gaudy flame.
Then in the dark, thus wilfully misse-takes
Your bed, and riots 'tweene unlawful sheets.
Horror! horror!
O my sinister Stars! Thus I shall weep
Till I have emptied all my veins.
What should such white and harmless souls as we
Do crawling o'er this mountainous Earth? Alas,
We cannot drink, till we intoxicate
A Whale, nor surfeit, till our greazie cheeks
Doe swell like Th'vdders of a Cow. Nor can
We kneel like warm Idolaters, unto
The rusty metal in a bag. We want
These helps to gain vs honour and esteem.
I have a resolute intent to die,
And seek my Mansion in a purer Orb.
But ere you doe begin your last walk, in the path
Invisible, some meritorious act
(Joined to the Charter of your Creed) should help
T'assure your future bliss.
O name it, ere my sorrow shall decay
Me strength: for I would mix ability
With will.
Your Lord (foul, and sinful as mortality
Can make him) Salamander-like, shall bathe
In blue fires, unless by sufferance here
On earth, he penetrate the hearth of heaven,
And soften their decree. It will be called
Your merit to revenge his crime, even with his death.
Would you have me kill him?
Since I am strict to virtue, I must needs
Be cruel unto vice. Let him not live
To increase his own guilt, and betray more
Ladies.
But shall I justice take from powerful Heaven,
And use it with such cruelty?
Believe me skill in sacred Oracles,
My piety to warrant the design
Nor will I fright the frailty of your Sex,
With horrid circumstance; he shall not bleed,
This Viol doth contain a draught; which if
In's usual Beverage powered, will cousin him
Of's leprous soul in his most quiet sleep.
I doe suspect my courage!
Tak't, fair Pupil! think on it in your prayers.
If you but enjoy one single motion
That informs you it is good: do it with pride
And boldness masculine. Distinguish thus
Its operation. Four days must fully take
Their room ith'Kalendar, ere it effect
Our hopes. Before that hour arrive, he must
Be wrought to kill the King.
The Viol liquid Lead contains, or else
Some far more ponderous Metal: for whilst
I bear it thus, the weight seems to infuse
A Palsy in my hand. I tremble like
A string touched on my Lute.
It is the Fiend, that would dehort you from
A pious act: trust not his whispring charms
But with a hardy courage, (more then is
Natural in thy modest Sex) proceed
To merit heaven. And now requite my forward zeal
To virtue, with concealment of my name,
And interest in this act. Let not the Queen
Nor your false Lord, know me the Perspective,
Through which you saw their ravenous lusts, but say,
The King reueal'd it to your ear. Twill make
Them wilde, and doubt their own confedrate Bawds.
Think not I forbid it as a danger
To my person; for I affect not life.
So soft and easie-metald is my heart,
So well I love your sinful Lord, that when
I hear the surly Bell proclaim his death,
Like some new weand Babe, I shall dye crying.
Would you have him killed, yet love him thus?
I, but I love heaven better. Where, when
I come, troth I shall prove too fond a Saint.
Those Votaries that pray to me, shall find
Their business soon dispatched: here, let this key
Obscure ye in my Closet until noon:
For then the Queen expects you will return
From Pay. Farewell, the most abused,
But noblest Lady in the world.
This is the privy Gallery: place the Chair,
Vollterri, where it needs must interrupt
The Kings passage.
If thy disguise should fail vs, Gondibert
And I must be attached for Impostors.
And then be crop-card too, like Irish Nags.
You'll both prove fleet in a Race, provided
The foe charge ye in the Rear. Seat me with
Tender motion— This luxurious City
Hath made me so rotten, I dare not walk
Ith'winde, lest I should be blown in pieces.
Quick now counterfeit! Here comes Hermegild. Grimold groans.
Groan out like a Bore.
Who owns that sick clamour?
One (Sir) presented here to tempt compassion
From all charitable eyes.
Want hath betrayed him to hunger, hunger
To this disease.
O, O, O, the Cramp! the Cramp!
Where, Sir?
In my stomach.
That's indeed a clear symptom of famine.
I'ue eaten nothing this month but raw ayre,
And that gives but weak nourishment to age.
It is my wonder, in a State so rich
As ours, a climate still befriended thus
By nature (flourishing with hopeful Springs,
And Summers choked with wealth) a Soldier should
Be forced to make his hunger a disease.
A prodigy unparalleled, that want
Should ever occasion such a dangerous fast.
Wast not devotion made him thus abstain
From meat?
Pure want, Sir, I know small devotion, I.
For though I fast much, I pray as little
As most Christians of my Calling.
He must be sent unto some Hospital,
There eat warmth broths, till he recover health:
And then I will procure him from the State
Some thrifty pension, to maintain the short
Remainder of his life in sober works.
He shall sing Hymns, and pray to the kind Saints
In a blue gown.
Alas, Sir, I am grown so hoarse, the Saints
Can hardly hear my Orisons.
He will prove (my Lord) a chargeable Cure:
For the Physicians do prescribe him nought
For med'cine, but Aurum-Palpabile.
The Elixir of Gold would surely much
Assuage the grief in my stomach—
He must needs be hungry, that like th'Ostridge
Can digest Metal.
The King for his last services remains
His debtor six thousand Ducats. My Lord,
You shall express much charity, if you
Procure it in a sudden payment. The same will
Defray his sickness charge, and maintain him
Well in's health.
Your Lordship shall engage vs then to drown
Your chief Title in the best Grape. We'll drink
Your health, until we raise the price of wine.
Let him continue there his seat. Perhaps
They (whom I shall straight conduct this way)
Will so commiserate his want, that he
Will soon relieue't, though he increase his own.
There is some Art in this, which I must needs
Discover, or forfeit my pains.
The Fiend is gone!
Will all the vast accruements I project
From this disguise, convert into
The slender purchase of an Hospital?
Thou turn Votary?
He'll pray in no language but the High-Dutch,
The angry Tongue, which seems to threaten more,
Then implore.
Six thousand Ducats for a Mansion in
An hospital, no bigger then a coffin:
Where like Carthusians, we must feed, not to
Prevent hunger, but to hinder lust. Princes
May easily pay their debts, when they enforce
Their Creditors to buy Titles and Place
At their own rates.
Hark! there's somebody approaching hither.
Tic no safe game to sport with Kings. I'll be gon.
Grimold, now trust to your own performance,
I may have use for my ears, I would not
Yet leave them in the Pillory.
Gondibert, Vollterri! forsake the storm
Ere ye are wet? Weasels! Monkeys! Dogs!
Madame, you are now fully satisfied
Ith'intention of this visit. I wish
You'd be as free, and sportive with him, as
Your modesty will give you leave.
Trust my obedience, and my skill, Sir.
He looks like a watchman in that Rug.
Your Majesty receives new cause to doubt
The truth of his disease, from my Servants
Information. Who swears, this very Morn
Hee hath been seen in all the violence
Of drink, and in the Burdelli too. For, Sir,
Though he be old, he's given much to propagation.
Let vs retire 'tweene th'Arras, and we
Shall share, ith'whole discovery.
Alas, who is it, that so provokes the tongue
Of pity!
An old soldier of the Kings—
Ho! Captain Grimold! how come you thus
Imprisoned in a Chair? have you the Gowte?
I am not rich enough t'inioy the Gowte.
What name then doe you give to your disease!
The Physicians call it famine.
How? Heaven secure the State! I hope we are
Not guilty of a sin so horrible,
To deny a Soldier fit materials
For conservation of his life.
Tic fourteen days since I have had a just
Occasion but to pick my teeth.
Alas the day!
Each of my thighs are dried, and hardened like
An old West-Falia Flitch. All m'interals
Are shrunk up. My bladder is no bigger then
A Pigs: and were my lean jaws unmuffled,
You should see me mump, like a Matron that
Had lost her teeth.
O cruel stars! —
Ho! Does she weep?
Could you on this wide Earth, find no object
For your fury, but brave Grimold? Or is it
Because you saw, it was my chief virtue
To affect a Soldier?
If she should be in earnest now?
I hope you doe not utterly despair of life?
I may linger out a score of years, or so;
But I cannot live long.
Since you are marked for sudden death, cold death
That silences all tongues: and since this place
Is so secure from neighbouring ears, I will
Disclose, what until now my modesty
Enforced me to conceal.
I shall forget to counterfeit!
Know, Sir, that I have loved you long; loved you
With soft and tender passion.
O Rogue! What doe I like the picture
Of Winter, in this withered habit? I must
Recover my health. But alas, Madame,
Doe not deride his destiny, that now
Is taking flight to reach that place, where your
Best Star inhabits, and shall have power
To tell loud tales: if you prove thus cruel.
How could you ever love me? I have been old,
Even since your first original growth.
But if you will permit, I may express
A little vanity in love, I can
Inform you, Sir, how much we Ladies prize
Age before Youth in Lovers. Old men are
Discreet sinners, and offend with silence.
But young men, when the game is done, doe crow
Like pregnant Cocks: boast to the world their strength
In folly. Besides (Sir) an authentic
Lady says in her Problems thus:
The Young and slender Graft is easly broke,
But who can shake, or bruise the aged Ok?
A rare Adage.
The Lady Author sure, is o'th'Moddernes.
My joy is turned to a disease; it makes
Me speechless! I ever thought these Court-Tits
Were much taken with my smooth looks; but that
Their modesty still kept them from my reach.
Foolish modesty! It has hindered my
Preferment much for since I left the Camp,
I have been in love with some three hundred
Of'em, yet never durst lay claim to one.
Vh! vh! If Heaven should so affect
Our mutual appetites, as to restore
My health, would you continue still to dote
Upon an old sinner?
O, I should grow more fond; preserve you long
Alive with zealous Orisons!
Las! poor Malkin! She's caught! I shall grow rich.
For I have heard, these Court-Ladies allow
Large pensions to their Paramors. Help! help!
To move me higher in my seat—
Bless vs! me thinks, Sir, you begin to use
Your legs with active strength.
A precious Ape!
He will show fine tricks anon!
Some strange influence from your touch, hath given
A second Youth unto my faculties:
Before, I seemed to crawl like to a Crab:
Now my joints grow supple, as if I were
Provided for a Race. This hand inspires my strength—
I have a Key, will give vs passage here to th'Park!
Vnhand me, Sir, for I shall forfeit all
My fame else. They'll think, I am immodest—
Captain Grimold!
He sits like a Witch, sailing in a sieve.
Ho! sick! Gentlemen, avoid the windy side,
Lest he infect ye with his breath. I know
His disease, and whence it came, shortly
You'll see him wear a Curtain sore his Nose;
That's now the newest fashion that came from Paris.
I, tic it: he has them growing on his
Temples here—They'll shortly be as big
As Turnips.
He must to Rotterdam, to the fat Doctor there,
And be stewed in a Stoue, until he spit
His venom out.
And whilst you are in physic (Captain)
You fare like Oberon. Tic a very
Slender diet. The lean thigh of a Wasp
To dinner; and some two or three of your
Own penitent tears for your beverage.
I'ue but so much breath left, as would make up
A short prayer to secure my last iaunt:
Yet I will spend it in a hearty curse
For your dear sakes.
March on! If he doe find himself aggrieved,
Let him send me a challenge after his death;
And I will meet him, In the Elision Fields.
I will eat that Cunymond!
How prompt the Slave is, in 's metamorphosis?
To him again, Madame?
Alas, dear Captain, what bodily hope
Can a young Lady have of your performance,
That fall so soon in a relapse?
When you deprived me of your hand, you took
Away my strength and heate: touch me again,
And I shall walk stiff as Cacus.
Take leisure in your motion, Sir.
Look, Madame. I creep as other mortal do,
On the surface of the Earth—
Me thinks you stand upright too.
I, a Ladies warm hand will make it stand.
A little physic from your Lip, and then
My cure is quite finished — Hem! Sure this was
Nestors receipt to recover his Youth. Hem!—
I shall be fainted for this miracle.
I am as wholesome as a Nut, and have
As proud flesh about me, as the youngest
Gamester of 'em all.
Fie, Sir!
If this heate continue, I must even call
For a Iulip, or sow my wilde Oats
In the next soil I meet.
Your tongue is blistered▪
When shall we solace our bodies?
Your meaning, Sir?
I mean in the dark. Speak, pretty Finch with the
Greene tail? Ho! Must we kiss close, and often?
Wriggle up and down like young Eels—
Captain, I have brought the King here to view,
And to commiserate your lean sickness,
And your feeble wants.
Thou old ravenous Goat!
He looks now like an Alchemist, that is
Broiling o'red Herrings.
Or like the brazen head, when it was about
To speak—
You mean to hang me now!
Hast thou deserved an easier sentence?
When I am dead, then all my debts are paid.
For I leave small Lands and Chattels behind me.
But hark ye (my Liege) you may pay your debts
In your life time, so deprive your Executor
Of a trouble.
O what a trivial exit shall I make
From my own world? for when I die, I die
For love.
And I for lechery. Sir, I would fine
Depart in quiet like other young Chrysomes:
Fine make all even between the world and me.
I beseech your Highness discharge my arrears
For my last service in Hungary,
Then hang me when you please.
Captain, I will be a Suitor for your reprieve.
You shall only forfeit what his Grace owes you;
And then your life's secured.
I will rather die twice. O Sir▪ pay me
Six thousand Ducats, and then proclaim
Your sentence here aloud. I would fine dye
Merrily. I have not been drunk at my own charge
This four months.
Hermegild, iterate now thy sweet raptures.
Speak to her; for, by the gentle carriage of
Her eyes, I doe perceive she gins to penetrate.
Away Captain! be gone whilst you are yet
Mortal. I have much power with Hermegild,
And will upon your patient sufferance
Redeem my credit with your thoughts. Quick then,
Move with silence.
Madame, the feathered Arrow sings in the Ayre,
Ere it arrive where it must wound; so this
Sweet harmony, I 'ld have you counterfeit,
But tempts him to security in sleep,
Before his death.
I'm much obliged to that good soul.
True, my Royal Lady! yet now peruse
The greatness of his being▪ his fate in battles,
And by your own remembrance be informed
Of our captivity.
Honest Hermegild?
He was too cruel to a nature so
Remiss, and timorous as mine?
Alas, this crime he expiats with sighs
So hot, that they would singe his Royal Beard,
Did not his numerous tears opportunely drop,
To quench the flame.
That's complement!
These angry frowns upon your brows make you
Appear aged.
Could I assure my heart; he would no more
Triumph o'er my dear Fathers memory;
I then should meet his love with too much passion.
When I am more my Chronicle, or speak
My deeds with pride, may my tongue blister, till't
Infect my breath with Epidemick-heate.
You hear his vows?—Seem fond. If you can shed
A tear, or two, the more to credit this
Atonement, twill much advantage our pretence.
Sir, now enjoy what your indulgent grief
Merits to keep, even from the hands of death.
Good heart, see how she weeps?
I'm soon overcome in this soft war. S'death all
Can thaw but I. I never wept, but when
Th'vnruly wind blew in my eyes; and tic
No argument for sterne battle: else I
Would fight. To testify the joy my soul
Conceives, Isle drink—
Sir, you neglect to use her like a Lover;
With amorous gestures.
Fill me a Bowl with Negro's blood, congealed
Even into Livers! Tell her, Hermegild,
Isle swallow Tar, to celebrate her health!
Sir, this dull Germane phrase, makes her suspect
Your temperance. Mark how she trembles.
I must go learn to complement. Dost hear?
Is it fit I proffer her to mingle limbs—Thou know—
Sir, not to night. That was a serious suit
She bade me make, when first she purposed this
Atonement.
I do obey. Though I have thoughts would fine
Persuade me to rebellion.
This was a subtle caution! else my hopes
Had twice been Cuckolded. Let'em revel
With their salt Lips. The other sport is fulsome.
But Paradine disturbs my sleep: he's young,
Enriched with all the fertile strength of nature:
And needs must prove more riotous in sin,
Then I. My dark practice, and use
Of silent contemplation; has made
My marrow thin and black; like Ink within
My bones. I want the prompt alacrity. The Queen
Hath tasted him, and may (perhaps) still to
Possess his lust; remove Valdaura from
This foggy Soil; then make him Lord of all
My hopes. This to prevent, I have decreed,
Valdaura first shall minister his death.
I u'e taught her too; to insinuate to his Creed,
That the King told her of 's adulterous lust;
Good, for whē he thinks the King doth know that guilt,
His own safety then, will soon provoke him
Hasten our prodigious murder. This may
Be done, before the Poison operate
In dire effect; for that delays its power;
Till fourscore hours expire their course: which then
No Antidote, nor humane skill resists.
Mount, mount my thoughts, that I may tread on Kings,
Or if I chance to fall, thus soaring high;
I melt like Icarus, in the Suns Eye.
The Sun doth melt vs with his scorching beams.
Go fill my usual Beuiridge: Isle drink
Till I am cold.
The constitution of my Soul, agrees
Not with this Climate. I grow weary
Of mortality. Even in my first growth
(Since my Corselet was my load) I have took
My breeding in the Camp; where had I still
Remained a dull practike soldier, and ne'er seen
A Woman, nor the Court, I might have had
Some hope, to gain by faith, but now I reach
At wilde despair.
My Lady, Sir, commends her love, and this
To your acceptance; she made the mixture
With her own hands.
The Queen prescribed this hour for her return.
That she grows black with sin, peruerts my sense,
I must seem not to know it. Say, I greet her health-drinks.
Ho! why, Valdaura, dost thou appear like
A funeral night, in dark, and swarthy weeds!
I morn for you, since you must hasten your
Eternal absence now from me, and all
That else are mortal.
Speak things, that are less dangerous to my sense.
This wonder will distract me.
Ere winged Time, shall with swift motion add
Another hour, to the life of this sick day;
Thou shalt begin thy last sleep.
A pale Swan hath sung my Dirge! O fatal
Music! but how comes this intelligence
To Ears of flesh and blood? have you of late
Been gossiping with the grim Stygian Dames,
And seen their Cisers gall my vital Thread?
For to my own sense I need no Physic.
My faculties enjoy that pleasant strength
Which appertains to youth and temperance;
Why should I yet die?
How, Paradine? Art thou so full of guilt,
(Most ulcerous and deformed) yet think to keep
Thy life at Natures charge, to exist till age
Makes thee a Cripple: then in thy bed,
(Like some good old Patriarch) thy soul dismiss
With a divine rapture? No, no; just Heaven
Provides more rash and horrid deaths for such,
As in adultery bathe their silken limbs.
Ho!
I know thy guilt; the King hath told me all.
It was wondrous strange! Our vows but new arrived
In heaven, that did obliege our mutual Faiths
In love: and thou with savage lust to break them?
Though grief hath much consumed my tears, yet I
Have some still left to express my pity.
My adultery already known, both to
The King and her? why, these are prodigies
Indeed. How sin emboldens the aspect!
She doth accuse me for a guilt, which yet
Remains vnpardon'd in her self. Mine was
A dire mistake: but hers—that must be known,
And then her veins shall weep.
You are poisoned, Paradine.
With that cold draught you sent me now in the Bowl?
The Vipers vomit, nor the blue steam,
Which fat Toads doe breathe in tired motion,
Bears not such a dangerous enmity
Against humane Nature, as that you drunk.
Stay! Me thinks I feel no insurrection
In my blood, nor need an Iron Corselet
To contain my flesh; sure it swells not yet.
It takes a subtle leisure to disperse
Thorough all your Organs, and your Arteries,
That it may strait with abler violence
Consume your strength.
And then I shall look goggle-ey'd! and stretch
In the cheeks, till my face show like a Pompeon,
Round and yellow?
Far, far more deformed.
Will it make my eyes start from my skull, or drop
Like bullets at my feet? Speak, shall I some
At mouth like some young Courser, that is hot
And angry with his bit?
Not the first Chaos was so ugly and
Confused, as you'll appear, when this distilment works.
Yet I forgive you all, even from my heart:
Whilst my cogitations now are sober,
And can distinguish things with pregnant sense.
I doe applaud this cruel benefit.
These subtle vanities of Court have tired
My observation. I was nursed within
Some Armoury, and took a proud delight
In active War; but since our Drums have ceased
Their noble clamour, I find no business
Upon Earth for me; tic fit I grow immortal.
I did not think, his fancy, at this news,
Could prove so temperate.
To sleep in cold earth, whilst my dead neighbour
Never at my Coffin knocks, to inquire my health,
By way of visit: for all are silent
In the grave. Harsh destiny! Such as I
Could ne'er expect from thee, Valdaura.
My nature you shall find much different,
From what your knowledge heretofore discerned.
I have contrived another way to punish
Thy adulterous heate.
You find my sufferance tame enough. Publish all!
To meet your sin with apt revenge, I'm grown
A foul loose whore.
Ho! contain thy speech. Express but so much
Modesty, as may secure thy life: for
My death doth not concern my rage so much,
As this foul murder of thy fame.
Tic truth: and I confirm't with pride.
Oh, oh! these are the Mandrakes groans (fatal!)
For whosoever hears them, straight encounters death.
Now smile (sweet Heaven) since thus I but return
Her own justice. For my adulterous act,
She takes my life, and shall I let that bold
Adulteress live?—
Oh, oh! Hold, hold! Leave me a little breath
To use in prayer.
I am not fraught with devils spleen; I would
Not hurt thy soul: here solitary sit,
Whilst I send up an humble sacrifice,
That shall bespeak a pardon for thy crime,
Ere thou arrive near heaven.
Dare you trust my last utterance?
O speak, ere thou dost catch an everlasting cold,
And shalt be heard no more.
I am not false unto your bed: I ne'er
In act, nor guilty thought, did violate
My Marriage vows.
Art thou not a Whore?
No Vestal that preserved with quickening oil,
The sacred flame, was in her chastity
More cold, more timorous then I: nor are
You poisoned.
Ho! was not that a mixture of distilled
Venom, which I drunk?
It was healthful, as the blood of Grapes to age,
And all your faculties doe still preserve
Their wonted harmony.
Sweet spirit, doe not riddle thus with Heaven,
Nor sport thy soul away. Why did accuse
Thy self of sterne murder, and pernicious lust;
Yet art thus clear from both?
It was to enrage your violence, with hope
To make you soon my executioner.
For hearing you were false, I found no joy
In life: your hand hath sealed my wishes.
New Arts t'increase my wonder: I'm orereach'd,
Where I thought my nature was most skilful!
Even in love! O stay: had not distraction
Ceased my memory; I should at first have told you
The mistake, by which the sinful Queen
And Hermegild betrayed my chaste Honour.
Named you Hermegild, guilty of that sin?
He's then a horrid hypocrite: he did
Entice me by a poisonous practice to
Contrive your death, but found my nature loyal.
New wonders still!
I feel the frozen hand of death. Oh! oh! oh!
Valdaura! Bride! Onoble Girl!
Mercy! mercy!
Already turned a Ghost! There's rare music
Now in heaven, since thou art gone t'increase
The sacred Quire. I may behold thee in
The purple sky, mixed there with other Stars,
But never on this soil again. Be this
Thy Tomb awhile. The Curtains softly drawn—
Hermegild treacherous! with poison too?
That was her word. Tic fit I seem to have drunk
The med'cine up. Good! The rough young Soldier
May spy at last these spirits of the Court,
That walk in artificial clouds: or if
Their high conceptions soar aboue my reach,
Yet they have mortal hearts; such as our own
Country steel, may with feeble motion prick,
Prick till they groan: for I have now decreed,
Whom my dull sense cannot subdue, shall bleed.
Shall I belie my own silence?
Be sudden in your speech! confirm my words:
Then dispose even of my wealth and person.
I will consent to matrimony; make
Any use of this new interest.
Sir, you'll forget my merit in this danger?
Never.— My Lord, I have discovered all.
See, how aguish her guilt hath made her.
How she trembles like a frosty Russian
On a hill. Nay, Lady, ne'er scatter thus
Your wilde looks. Confess the truth, and you'll gain
Mercy. Valdaura (whose Soul Heaven keep
From purging fires) hath told her Lord; the King
Knows of his wanton stealth with our good Queen.
You were the Instrument that betrayed him
To th'mistake, and whose secrecy to doubt
But yours, our reason cannot yet inform vs.
Thus kneeling, I confess with penitence,
'T was I reueal'd it to the King.
Tear forth her eyes, and let her then grope out
Her way to hell—
Stay, dear Madame!
Paradine is poisoned, who knows, but she
Doth amply share in that guilt too?
At my humble suit, contain your fury!
We shall discover all. My noble Lord,
It is a grief that will deprive my life
Of many years, to think, I'm held by your
Suspect, an Agent in that practice.
I have reueal'd the evidence, that doth
Persuade my Creed.
What, Lady, doe you know of this?—Speak with
Courage, I am your safety.
I saw the King reach to Valdaura's hand
A poisonous viol; and with religious hints,
Taught her to mix it in her husbands draught.
Ho!
Persist in my instructions!
'T was that night when he enjoyed her person—
Enjoyed her! how?
As you enjoyed the Queen.
Heaven! will these miracles ne'er cease?
I shall convert to stone!
Now retire, Thesina, till I have begged
Your free restorement to the Queene's mercy.
My Lord, you'll not forget your kind promise
Of matrimony.
I'ue nought else, to trouble my remembrance.
Away, Away!
What did remain suspense, is here confirmed:
My forehead feels as rugged now as his.
Now Sir, you've heard such real circumstance,
As needs must settle your belief, and free
My heart, from your unkind dislike.
Valdaura's damned! she howls so loud, that she
Disturbs all hell! O perjured Whore!
Now Paradine! Instruct thy self with thoughts.
Is it evident he ever could affect
Thy person with sincere dotage, yet thus
Betray thy strength in thy Fort? Where thy
Honour still stood sentinel?
I have other motives to teach you doubt
His loyalty in love. Which my fond heart
Cannot conceal, though't would advantage much
My own profit. He hath of late, hung thus—
Upon my neck; until his amorous weight
Became my burden: and then lay slabbering o'er
My lips; like some rhumatick Babe. This sport
My serious brain abhorred. It was my wonder
(Since you are called his Minion) he could ere
Affect my look. I that am like coffing
Winter, old, and froward; you the darling
Of the lusty Spring.
Speak, is that Bag, that should contain thy Gall,
Shrunk up; hast thou nothing bitter in thee?
Thou art far, far more opportunely stored
With time and place for thy revenge, then wee.
In the middle age of day; when the bright Sun
Most powerfully doth warm the world; in thy
Secret Closet he takes his usual sleep.
Go, drill his heart! and make the Couch whereon
He lies, his easy monument.
And then enjoy a Queen, with all that doth
Belong to her achievement, or her birth.
As for my services, they merit no
Reward. I know my own creation much
Unfit for Court affairs. If you but wrap
Me in a shirt of hair, then seat me in
A dark and gloomy Cell, where I may tumble o'er
Some deep voluminous Rabbin, you make
Me safe, and happy.
Do it, Paradine! and Fame no Trumpet then
Shall need to speak thy praise. Thy Country will
Afford thee power to sanctify the chief
Of the days within our Calendar.
And to thy memory high Statues build,
About which our Noblest virgins once a year
Shall dance in Circles, and sing, until they make
The Marble move, like to those loose Quarries;
Which ore-heard Orpheus and his Harp. Or if
These cannot inspire heroic fury,
Yet argue thus; you knew his Bed, but by
Mistake; which was our guilt, not yours; and for
Our Countries benefit contrived. But he
Defiled your sheets in the salt pride of lust.
Horror! this would incense the temperate Dove;
Turn all his moisture into gall; teach him
To wear spurs on his heals, and make him fierce
In Duel, as a British Cock.
Fire! fire! and warm blood!
Follow, follow him, my dear Sovereign!
Add new heate unto his rage. And do ye hear!
Since he is poisoned, it were most fit, some learned
Physician, did endeavour to secure
His health.
I heard him say, he is already furnished
With a powerful med'cine.
Should you now forget your Royal promise,
I lose all my industrious merit,
And remain a sacrifice to love.
Dost thou grow jealous?
Valdaura now is severed from her Soul:
And Paradine is abler in delights
Of Youth, more moist and amorous then I.
Away fool! I seal thy safety with my lip.
Thus Nurses hush their froward babes asleep.
Shortly she'll present me with a Corall-club,
A Whistle strung with Bells. These female Arts
Can ne'er my dark authentic practice cheat.
Paradine must die! So I still secure
My hopes. When that sad hour arrives,
Wherein the poisonous draught must work,
No charmed med'cine can resist its strength.
I hug my Genius! 'T was a subtle reach,
To tell him, that the King hath horned his brow:
For that will more incense his wrath, and aggravate
The Queens revenge. The weight I bear, doth make
My motion slow: slow as the Snail I tread,
Who travails with his tenement on 's head.
The King has paid him all 's arrears.
'T was by Thesina's suit to Hermegild:
The Snake has cast his skin too now.
I, Sir, it is a poor Snake that cannot cast,
His skin once in a Summer.
Slight, here's Grimold! Did not thou say he was dead?
But I have heard since, his ghost walks.
Look! 't has found the hiddē treasure then, which
Made it walk; for the Ghost hath bought it self
New clothes.
Nay, nay, stay, Gentlemen! Let vs forget
Old quarrels, then end our new acquaintance.
We are for the Country now. Isle but tell ye
A few of your faults, and leave the amendment
To your own leasures: but you all think
You're wiser then I.
We should abuse our judgements else.
Mark! This is a new Court-thrift: when you are
Loath to maintain flatterers, you publish
Your selves with your own praise. Lay your fingers
Here—Not a word, lest I return ye a blow.
I know ye cannot speak without a complement.
They use it in their prayers, they.
Cunymond, in one single complement
So much wasted his Lungs, that I was fine
To call for Aqua vita to recover
His breath.
I'ue heard you have transported from Paris
The Geometrical cringe, and the Art
Of numbering the hairs upon your chins.
And of starching your Beards.
Yes, and of perfuming your very shadows.
And they say, it is your custom to sleep
In Pomatum Masques.
And that you paint your pretty Vis'gnomies.
Yes, and colour them so red, that you seem
To blush more, then the Sign of the Kings head
Before a Country Inn.
Y'abuse Astrology too; for you clip
Black-Taffeta into Stars; and for a foil
To your beauty; fix 'em in several Regions
Of your face.
Which makes it look, like the picture of Doomsday;
When all the Planets are darkened.
Nay, nay, stay awhile!
Leave off your ijgging motion, when you mix
Your selves in a salute; your bodies seem
To dance upon your knees. You pinion up
Your Elbows thus:—like Pullets trust upon
A spit. Then wreath your Hams in thus; and move
With a discreet leisure, as if you meant
To number all the Pebbles in the street.
And then you fleer, as if y' had washed your gummes
In vinegar. This you admire for gesture
Of the newest fashion. I say, it is skiruy!
For he that greets a Lady so, does look
Like a Sope-boyler, upon a Close-stoole.
If you will take Physic for your soules-health,
Retire into that part of the Kingdom
Which lies farthest from France.
He counsels well: for the French ayre hath made
Many of our Gentry drunk.
And now move hence; but with your lips sowed up,
For fear of a complement. You two shall strait
Take horse with me, and be billeted in
My Quarter. Stay, Gentlemen! One word more!
This is a hot Climate: when you must needs
Marry to increase your Tribe, your best way
Is to go a wooing in the City:
For certain rich widows there, love Court-fooles;
And use to play with their bibles.
To make him bleed, and leave his arteries
(Where the delighted spirits walk) shrunk up,
Until they curl with heate. The withered frame
Strait to convert to dust. Then the vmerous wind,
To fan it o'er the world. Speak, just Heaven!
Is this fit usage for a King? Cassius
Was rash: perhaps to gain noise it's funeral;
Or in 's Elision fields; beneath a pleasant Hedge
To tell some prattling ghost what he had done—
Ho! but Brutus, noble Brutus! the pride
Of Arts and War: so temperate, his soul
Was more harmonious then the Spheres. Instruct
(Heroic Lord) thy young Pupil! Why did
The mighty Caesar fall, by thy cold wrath?
All silent as the night! He sleeps: before
Him too, those papers that concern my house
Affairs; and my Official rule in State.
Here he comments on my Letters! here with
Thrifty documents limits my expense.
Can this indulgent care be counterfeit?
And merely carry a pretence of love? he made
My wife a black adulteress. O horror!
Yet who knows, but it was rather his revenge,
Then lust; a furious riot, after that
He knew I whored his Queen—
Sir! My Lord the King! Sir!
Ho! Paradine! What witty emblem's this?
The more to certify thy love, dost thou
Appear blind.
O Sir, do not mock my penitence, nor seem
Thus to disguise the knowledge of that crime,
Which hath defiled my modest blood, and makes
Me now ashamed to encounter with your eyes.
He is drunk! Maudlin drunk!
Sir, I could creep alive into my Tomb,
And mix society with Ghosts, whilst I
Have yet warm motion left, could I but hide
My guilt from your perspicuous sight.
By heaven drunk with Cider, or with thin Beer;
That looks like the urine of a Babe: I'm sure
The Corsicke Grape infuses no
Such whining passion.
Those immaterial powers, that see the thoughts of men,
When growing in their hearts, can witness I
Abused your Royal bed, but by a dire
Mistake.
Ho!
Your black adulterous Queen betrayed
Me to her lust by wicked Arts.
This is a sober passion, but implies
Something that is horrid.
Had not heroic war taught me to affect
No rage, but noble; she and Hermegild
Had enticed me now to lengthen this your sleep,
Until the day of general accounts.
Suspect must now be rash. Make your face known!
He blushes like a Bride; whom through her thin
Curtains, the peeping Sun beholds in soft
Skirmish with her Lord. I must counterfeit,
And seem to know all. Paradine, it was far
From my conjecture, that a heart so much
Obliged unto my love as thine, should wrong
My Honour in a sense, which but to mould
In words would teach my tongue to stammer, and
Deafen all that hear it.
Thunder and sulpherous fire snatch my cold limbs
From this dull earth. Sir, whilst my soul affords
Me reason, and can direct me unto whom
My true allegiance is a debt, kill me!
When I am mad, I shall forget all duty,
And refuse to obey your Royal Charter.
Thrust your good Sword home, till my heart shall kiss
Your Hilts. Are you so slow in justice? Think,
How by a dark mistake, I whored your Queen:
Whored your Queen! O prodigious phrase!
Houle, meager Wolves! empty Tigers! let the hoarse
Thracian Bull bellow, till he rent his throat;
And the hot mountaine-Lion roar, until
Their clamour wake the dead. The resurrection
Is too long delayed, since we want horror
To celebrate this news. Good! I have now
Decreed it. Draw thy bright weapon!—
For what dire use?
That we may meet in single battle here,
And struggle till we want our Souls.
Though this high enticement charms my blood, like
The music of the Drum. Yet my remembrance
Calls you King; My Royal Master. I would
Not join rebellion and ingratitude
To the prolix number of my sins.
O fond, indulgent Boy! I morn at this
Decay of thy humanity and sense.
Does it become my great being, and my
Glorious name in story, to offend
Without resistance? Draw: and be nimble
In thy motion—
I dare not so disgrace my Religion,
And my love.
Tic time that I were dead, for I shall else
Outlive my chief prerogative. I have
Forgot how to command. Unsheathe thy Sword!
Or this breach of Duty shall teach me think,
I ne'er enjoyed thy real love, and it was
Not a mistake, that ushered thee to sin between
My sheets, but a considerate lust—
No provocation like to this, could tempt
A danger from my Arm—
Why dost thou dally thus with feeble motion?
Bear up! and use more violence!
Some surgery from heaven! Are you hurt, Sir?
You willingly opposed your breast against
My steel, and never sought to endanger me
With yours.
'Thast performed, what my wish did prophecy:
I'm pricked here, about the heart; and my veins
Grow empty.
Then glorious war, and all proud circumstance,
That gives a soldier noise, for evermore farewell—
Hold, Paradine. Tic my last suit, that thou survive
To minister a just revenge on those
Whom I proscribe, help my quivering Limbs,
And seat me in the Chair—
Shall posterity read it in story
And believe; a Prince that doth deserve to be
The first in the List of those, that gatherd noise
In war, can be thus covetous to expire
In silence dark. Fall on my fatal point,
And yet command that I survive the Tragedy!
It were in me an affectation trivial
To cherish life, now Rhodolinda's false.
For should I still preserve my soul in flesh,
I know my mercy is so fond to her;
I should forgive her all: and were thou dead,
My hope were then deprived of future justice.
Live to revenge her falsehood. I know thy heart
So sincere and noble, that I suspect not thee
A sharer in her guilt. When thou
Did first confess th'adulterous crime, joined with
Thy own mistake, through Hermegilds deep Art,
My faith conceived the truth: for thy Nature
Is much too blunt, and credulous for Court.
Should I but speak each cunning circumstance—
Contain thy breath! To hear that told, would make
My soul wander in my last journey.
'Till thy relation brought it to my Ear,
I never knew her false.
Still my amazement doth increase! Were you
Not told of this before!
My knowledge only learnt it of thy Tongue.
Stay! Nor with Valdaura, you did ne'er project
My death by poison?
Never.
Yet one reply, then make my joy exceed
My wonder. Did you never in my bed,
Commit a lustful stealth?
Angels in that, are not more free from guilt.
What Potter made this earthy Skull! pardon
(Dear Valdaura) my dull suspect! Sing out
Thy Hymns in heaven▪ and never listen more
To my fond speech; for they have made me mad!
I cannot gripe the Ayre. Mark how it steals
Through all my knotty Fingers—
Ecstasy!
Now my last, and short minute is arrived;
I doe, resign my Crown—
To whom sir?
To him I hate. But be thou sure, he wear
It not 'till near his death: for it's a happiness
To live enthroned, but tic not safe to dye
A King.
He doth pervert my sense.
Let the Drum cease! Isle have no more battles.
He that to waste his trivial rage, doth fight
A battle, rides a Hawking with the devil.
Mad as the Northern wind!
He sends a thousand drinking Animals
To take their flight in the ayre, whilst little black
Devils (do ye not see 'em?) They look like Ravens.
Mark how they prey on those immortal Foul,
And plume 'em in their Talents! I doe not like
This Falconry: it is too sad a game
For sinners—Oh, oh, oh!—
There died the noblest Trophy of our war!
The Lombards now have lost their victory.
So hardy of creation, his heart-strings
Were as Cordage, tough; cracked like a Cable,
When the frighted Bark starts from the Anchor.
All that are nursed in war, shall morn for thee.
Our Ensigns now we will of Cypress make▪
Ho! It is the wind that whispers▪ he must
Be hid. I'm sure this noise can never wake him—
O, are ye come?
Thou hast a wilde aspect! Is it done?
He has paid for his wharfage already,
And is now entering Charons Boat.
You are precious as my Soul!
There's the old Face.
He looks like a pale Country Virgin
That longed to eat Mortar. Our chief design
Is finished: but thou must add one knot more
To obliege my gratitude, and then we shall
Triumph with safety. Hermegild must die▪
He knows too much.
It is as if the Parca spoke. If there
Be any other whom your envy, or
Your hate would have dismissed the world, make him
But known, and he is numbered with the dead.
Dear Paradine, I sure shall 〈◊〉 thee,
My appetite is grown so fierce. Let me
Begin with thy moist lip— 
Let's to it like Monkeys, or the reeking Goat.
Oh! oh! oh! Help! help!
Cease your loud clamour, Royal Whore.
Thou did eat my lips.
Thy flesh is sour, musty; more tainted then
A Carrion in a phlegmatic ditch for else
Like the Anthropophagus, I had devoured thee up.
This made Valdaura bleed, and must let forth
Thy swarthy soul—
Oh! oh! oh!—
For Albouine my Royal Master, this—
And this to pacify Valdaura's Ghost—
Oh, oh, oh!
So hard and stony is thy heart, that it
Reuerts the point of my bright steel.
Mercy Heaven!
Since thou hast received my justice, I wish
Thee mercy too—
My Lord.
Tic Hermegild, now I shall end my chief
Discovery. What a full Sepulchre is this—
Now I must practise my disguise. Revert
The Spring twice, and you may enter.
My Lord, I have lost my honour in your service,
You may choose one that shall affect you worse.
Lady, this is no time to woo: but
Do ye think I'm so profane to violate
My vow? Nimbly depart, I doe conjure
Your absence with this kiss—
If you should prove false—
Slight, these Wenches at
Fifteen, are as riotous as Elephants.
Marry a Court Kitten! There he sits! Ho, sick!
My sweet Lord, how thrives your health? D'your pulses
Still preserve their temperate music? have you
Effected yet our great business?
The King is dead, that sanguine instrument
Did set his Soul at liberty.
The Laurel, Myrtle, and the Bay shall still
Cold and naked stand before the Winters
Frosty breath; still strip their Boughs, to make
Your head triumphant wreathes. Where is the Queen?
Me thinks (my Lord) your body and your mind
Seem much disturbed.
Oh, oh! the poison works—
Alas, my sweet dear Lord! (precious med'cine!)
He cannot possibly survive the next
Minute. Does it destroy your strength?
Oh, oh! It skorches all my entrails up:
As if like Portion I had swallowed coals.
I spit scum, such as o'er the hot Cauldron boils—
And are you fastened in the chair with weakness?
I cannot rise. A stiff conuulsion in
My Sinews fetters all my limbs—
Ho! ho! ha!
O heaven, will you permit him laugh?
I know th'Ingredients of thy poysnous draught.
It was I that gave it to thy wife. It was I
Did counsel her to mingle it in thy wine,
When thou were hot, and all thy Pores open
As thy mouth.
Oh, oh, oh!
Doe, groan, till thou raise an echo in this
Square roof. Ere long thy Ribs will start from thy
Loose Chine, thy lank Belly swell into a hill.
O horror! horror! Is Heaven asleep?
The King ne'er knew of thy adultrous crime▪
It was I told it to Valdaura, and made
Her think, thy guilt proceeded not from a
Mistake, but from thy wilful lust▪ I'ue strung
Thy Nosthrill with a spinners thread, so led
Thee through subtle Labyrinths, t'inuolue
Thy senses; and now I triumph o'er thy fate.
This is Italian Spleen.
Had I but strength to actuate my revenge?
Good, dull Soldier! why did thou leave the Camp,
Thy rusty Moriō there; thy battered Corselet;
And thy shivered Lance, to amble here at Court
In slippery silks; to walk in cloudy mists
Of perfumed ayre? Tic I have shook thy brains
That heretofore were thick as Curds, into
A pale, thin whey.
Draw near, and let me then but kill thee—
Troth, thou art so feeble now, that were I killed
By thee, I scarce should think that I were dead.
No! that shall arrive unto the 〈◊〉. Dog! grim
As th'angry Fiend, that must devour thy soul!
I am not poisoned.
Ho! does he counterfeit?
See here, what abject ruins thou hast made
Of the noblest structures in the world—
The Queen there too! O trivial Arts with my
Own Mine I'ue blown my self even into dust!
I will now see, if thou can bleed like things mortal—
Deprived of my defence! If you have a soul
(Great as thy fame) restore my Sword.
Thou bark'st against the Moon! I will requite
Thy own tyrannous scorn. That destiny
Was just, that thus betrayed thee to my mirth.
There, Stygian Dog—
Oh, oh! whilst I have warmth, Isle move with violence—
Where now are all the subtle Trophies of
Thy brain? Plots, dark as hell! proiections grimm!
Such, as threatened Nature, and seemed to fright
The Genius of the world. Now, now prevent
These dire salutes—
Return my Sword, then manage Steeples like
To Pikes; yet, Isle affront thy fury—
Hardy as the Scythians race, I greet thy heart—
I stagger, and am drunk with my own blood!—
Take my last anger, and good night!
Oh, oh! thou hast stuck Needles in my heart!
Now I doe swell with horror and sterne rage:
I will distract the whole world. Fire! fire! fire!
Murder, Treason, &amp; incestuous rapes! Fire! fire!
I spy
A white Soul hovering in the ayre! one when
Corporeal, was sure some humble Hermit
Here on earth. He's acquainted with the way
To Heaven: should mine take flight alone, I fear
'T would stray! Hoe! you, you that ascend the Spheres!
We sinners still seem hoarse to Angels ears.
What, hoe! he turns not yet: who knows but he
Still lived in low Valleys, built his Mansion
In some aged wall? but my path ever lay
On hills, where the good Patriarchs never trod.
Vain Arts! Ambition in all sacred Schools,
Is held the sin of Heathens, and of Fools.
O dire and tragic sight! The King, the Queen
And fair Valdaura slain!
Heere's another object fit for wonder,
Though not for pity.
Ho! he dead too? Whence should these sorrows flow?
Lay hold on Paradine.
All stay. Isle bore his haggard soul that strives
With saucy strength, to captivate my Limbs:
Hark, the big drum recovers breath, and speaks!
March on! The scattered foe retires, and all
The glorious Horse are slain. I am magnanimous,
And high! O ye unkind false stars! ye mock
Poor Paradine! A few clean Tears to wash
My sins away, and I am seen no more.
Cease on him; on forfeit of your lives!
Their lives are forfeited to me —
Here, here, it gauld my very heart!—
Convey him gently in, and use all help
Of surgery to stop his wounds: for from
His mouth, wee must receive the knowledge of
These fatal deeds. Some give th'Allarum to
The Ports! You Siginors, lead to th'Cittadell;
Where, we will proclaim Albouines young Issue
By's former wife, to bee his lawful heir.
Wilde Fancy may project things strange and new:
But Time records no Tale so sad, and true.

