Our Scene is Sparta. HE whose best of Art
Hath drawn this Piece, calls it the Broken Heart.
The Title lends no expectation here
Of apish laughter, or of some lame Ieere
At place or persons; no pretended clause
Of east's fit for a brothel Courts' applause
From vulgar admiration: such low songs,
Tuned to unchaste e•res, suit not modest tongues.
The Virgin• Sister then deserved fresh baize
When Innocence and Sweetness crowned their lays•
Then vices gasped for breath, whose whole Commerce
Was whipped to Exile by unblushing verse.
This law we keep• in our Presentment now,
Not to take freedom more then we allow;
What may be here thought a fiction, when Times youth
Wanted some• riper years, was known A Truth:
In which, if words have clothed the subject right,
You may partake, a Pity, with Delight.
DAlly not further, I will know the reason
That speeds thee to this journey.
Reason? good Sir•
I can yield many.
Give me one, a good one;
Such I expect, and ever we part must have•
Ath••s? pray why to Athens? you intend not
To kick against the world, turn Cynic, Stoic,
Or read the Logic Lecture, or become
An Are••pagite; and Judge in causes
Touching the Common wealth? for as I take it,
The budding of your chin cannot prognosticate
So grave an honour,
All this I acknowledge,
You doe: then (〈◊〉) if books and love of knowledge
Inflame you to this travel, here in Sparta
You may as freely study.
It is not that Sir.
Not, that Sir? As a father I command thee
To acquaint me with the truth•
Thus I obey ••:
After so many quarrels, as 〈◊〉
Fury, and R•ge had 〈◊〉 in blood, and 〈◊〉
Wit• 〈…〉
With now 〈…〉
Our present King 〈…〉
Your eager swords, and Sealed a 〈◊〉 peace:
Friends you prosest your selves, which to conf••me,
A resolution for a lasting league
Betw••t your Families was entertained,
By joining in a 〈◊〉 bond,
Me, and the fair Penned, only daughter
To Thrasus.
What of this?
Much, much (dear sir)
A freedom of converse, an interchange
Of holy, and chaste love, so sixth our souls
In a firm grouth of union, that no Time
Can eat 〈…〉 pledge: we had enjoyed
The sweets our vows expected, had not cruelty
Prevented all those triumphs we prepared for,
By Thrasus his untimely death.
Most certain.
From this time splouted up that poisonous stalk
Of Aco•it•, whose ripened fruit hath ravished
All health, all comfort of a happy life:
For Ithocles her brother, proud of youth,
And prouder in his power, nourished •loosely
The memory of former discontents.
To glory in re•enge, by 〈◊〉 partly,
Partly by threat•, a woo•s at once, and forces
His virtuous sister to admit a marriage
With Basanes, a Noble-man, in honour
And riches, I confess beyond my fortunes.
All this is no sound reason to import me
My leave for thy departure.
Now it follows,
〈◊〉 P•uthe• wedded to this torture
By an insulting brother, being secretly
Compelled to yield her virgin freedom up
To him, who ••for can vs•rp• her hear•
Before contracted mine, is now so 〈◊〉
To a most barbarous thr•ldome• misery,
Affliction, that he sauo•• not humanity•
Whose• sorrow melts not into more then pity,
In hearing but her name.
As how pray?
Baseness
The man that call• her wife; considers truly
What Heaven of perfections he is Lord o•,
By thinking fair Penth•• his: This thought
Begets a kind of Monster-Loue, which Love
Is nurse unto a fear so strong, and servile,
As brands all dotage with a Jealousy.
All eyes who gaze upon that shrine of beauty,
He doth resolve, doe homage to the miracle;
Some one, he is assured, may now or then
(If opportunity but sort) prevail:
So much out of a selfe-vnworthinesse
His fears transport him, not that he finds cause
In her obedience, but his own distrust.
You spin out your discourse.
My griefs are violent•
For knowing how the Maid was heretofore
Courted by me, his jealousies grow wild
That I should steal again into her favours,
And undermine her virtues: which the gods
Know I nor dare, nor dream of: hence, from hence•
I undertake a voluntary exile.
First, by my absence to take off the ears
Of Jealous Baseness, but chiefly (Sir)
To free Penned from a hell on earth:
Lastly, to lose the memory of something,
Her presence makes to live in me afresh.
Enough (my Orgilus) enough• To Athens
I give a full consent: — Alas good Lady —
Wee shall hear from thee often?
Often.
See
Thy Sister comes to give a farewell.
Brother.
〈1 line〉
A brothers kiss 〈…〉
Thy health, and thy well-doing, then my life.
Before we part, in presence of our father,
I must prefer a lu•t to '〈◊〉.
You may stile it,
My brother, a command.
That you will promise
To pass never to any man, how ever worthy,
Your faith, till with our Fathers leave
I give a free consent.
An easy motion,
I'll promise for her, Orgilus.
Your pardon;
Euphrania's oath must yield me satisfaction.
By Vista's sacred fires I swear.
And I
By great Apollo's be•mes join in the vow;
Not without thy allowance, to bestow her
On any living.
Dear Euphrania
Mistake me not; far, far it is from my thought,
As far from any wish of mine, to hinder
Preferment to an honourable bed,
Or fitting Fortune: thou art young, and handsome;
And it were injustice; more, a tyranny
Not to advance thy merit. Trust me Sister,
It shall be my first care to see thee matched
As may become thy choice, and our contents:
I have your oath.
You have: but mean you brother
To lea•e us as you say?
I, I, Euphrania•
He has just grounds direct him: I will prove
A father and a brother to thee.
Heaven
Does look into the secrets of all hearts:
Gods you have mercy with 'ee, else—
Doubt nothing
Thy brother will return in safety to vs.
Souls sunk in sorrows, never are without 'em;
They change fresh airs, but bear their griefs about 'em.
The Spart•no gods are graciou•, our humility
Shall bend before their Altars, and per•••••
Their Temples with abundant sacrifice.
•ee Lords, Amyclas your old King is entering
Into his youth again. I shall shake on
This silver badge of age, and change this snow
For hairs as gay as are Apollo's lockes;
Our heart leaps in new vigour.
May old time
Run back to double your long life (great Sir)
It will, it must Armostes, thy bold Nephew,
Death-brauing Ithocles, brings to our gates
Triumphs and peace upon his conquering sword.
Laconic is a monarchy at length;
Hath in this latter war trod vnderfoot
Messiness pride; Mizzen bows her neck
To Lacedemons royalty: ô it was
A glorious victory, and doth deserve
More then a Chronicle; a Temple Lords,
A Temple, to the name of Ithocles.
Where did thou leave him Prophilus?
At Pephon
Most gracious Sovereign; twenty of the noblest
Of the Messenians, there attend your pleasure
For such conditions as you shall propose.
In settling peace, and liberty of life.
When comes your friend and General?
He promised
To follow with all speed convenient.
Our daughter — Dear Calantha, the happy news,
The conquest of Mizzen, hath already
Enriched thy knowledge.
With the circumstance
And manner of the fight, related faithfully
By Prophilus himself; but pray Sir, tell me,
How doth the youthful General demean
His actions in these fortunes?
Excellent Princess,
Your own fair eyes may soon report a truth
Unto your judgement, with what moderation,
Calmness of nature, measure, bounds and limits
•f thankefulne••• and joy, he doth digest
Such amplitude of his success, as would
In others, moulded of a spirit less clear,
Advance 'em to comparison with heaven.
But Ithocles.—
Your friend.—
He is so Madam,
In which the period of my Fate consists:
He in this Firmament of honour, stands
Like a Star fixed, not moved with any thunder
Of popular applause, or sudden lightning
Of selfe-opinion: He hath served his Country,
And thinks it was but his duty.
You describe
A miracle of man.
Such Crotolon,
On forfeit of a Kings word thou wilt find him:
Hark, warning of his coming, all attend him.
Return into these arms, thy home, thy sanctuary.
Delight of Sparta, treasure of my bosom,
Mine own, own Ithocles.
Your humblest subject.
Proud of the blood I claim an Interest in;
As brother to thy mother, I embrace thee
Right noble Nephew.
Sir, your love's too partial.
Our Country speaks by me, who by thy valour,
Wisdom and service, shares in this great action;
Returning thee, in part of thy due merits,
A general welcome.
You exceed in bounty.
Chrystalla, Philena, the Chaplet. — Ithocles
Upon the wings of Fame, the singular
And chosen fortune of an high attempt,
Is borne so past the view of common sight,
That I my self, with mine own hands, have wrought
To crown thy Temples, this provincial garland;
Accept, wear, and enjoy it, as our gift
Deserved, not purchased.
You're a royal maid.
She is in all our daughter.
Let me blush,
Acknowledging how poorly I have served,
What nothings I have done, compared with the honours
Heaped on the issue of a willing mind;
In that lay mine ability, that only
For who is he so sluggish from his birth?
So little worthy of a name, or country,
That owes not out of gratitude for life,
A debt of Service, in what kind soever
Safety or Counsel of the Common-wealth
Requires for payment?
A speaks truth.
Whom hey•en
Is pleased to stile victorious, there, to such,
Applause runs matting, like the drunken priests
In Bacchus sacrifices without Reason;
Voicing the Leader on a Demi god:
When as indeed, each common soldiers blood
Drops down •s current coin in that hard purchase,
As his, whose much more delicate condition
Hath sucked the milk of ease. Judgment commands,
But Resolution executes: I use not
Before this royal presence, these fit sleights,
As in contempt of such as can direct:
My speech hath other end; not to attribute
All praise to one mans fortune, which is strengthed
By many hands. — For instance, here is Prophilus
A Gentleman (I cannot flatter truth)
Of much desert; and, though in other rank,
Both Hemophil and Groans were not missing
To wish their Countries peace; for in a word,
All there did strive their best, and it was our duty.
Courtiers turn soldiers?— we vouchsafe our hand.
Observe your great example.
With all diligence.
Obsequiously and hourly.
Some repose
After these toils are needful• we must think on
Conditions for the Conquered; they expect 'em.
On, — come my Ithocles.
Sir with your favour,
I need not a support•.
Fate instructs me.
With me?
Indeed I dare not stay.
Sweet Lady
Soldiers are blunt,— your lip.
Fie, this is rudeness;
You went not hence such creatures.
Spirit of valour
Is of a mounting nature.
It appears so:
Pray in earnest, how many men apiece
Have you two been the death of?
Faith not many;
We were composed of mercy.
For our daring
You heard the Generals approbation
Before the King.
You wished your Countries peace:
That showed your charity; where are your spoils,
Such as the Soldier fights for?
They are coming.
By the next Carrier, are they not?
Sweet Philena,
When I was in the thickest of mine enemies,
Slashing off one mans head, another nose,
Another arms and legs.
And altogether.
Then would I with a sigh remember thee;
And cry dear Philena, it is for thy sake
I doe these deeds of wonder:— dost not lo•e me
With all thy heart now?
Now as heretofore.
I have not put my love to use, the principal
Will hardly yield an Interest.
By Mar•
I'll marry thee.
By Vulcan you're forsworn,
Except my mind doe alter strangely.
One word.
You lye beyond all modesty,— forbear me.
I'll make thee mistress of a City, it is
Mine own by conquest.
By petition; sue for it
In Form pauperise: — City? Kennel. Gallants
Off with your Fathers, put on aprons, Gallants;
Learn to reel, throm, or trim a Ladies dog,
And be good quiet souls of peace Hobgoblins.
Christalla?
Practise to drill hogs, in hope
To share in the Acorns. Soldiers? Corn•cutters;
But not so valiant: they oft times draw blood,
Which you durst never doe. When you have practised
More wit, or more civility, we'll rank 〈◊〉
I th list of men: till then, brave things at arms
Dare not to speak to vs, — most potent Groans.
And Hemophill the hardy, — at your services.
They scorn vs as they did before we went.
Hang 'em, let vs scorn them, and be revenged.
Shall we?
We will; and when we slight them thus,
Instead of following them, they'll follow vs.
It is a women's nature.
It is a s••ruy one.
Tempt not the Stars (young man) thou can not play
With the severity of Fate: this change
Of habit, and disguise in outward view,
Hides not the secrets of thy soul within thee,
From their quicke-piercing eyes, which dive at all times
Down to thy thoughts: in thy aspect I note
A consequence of danger.
Give me leave
(Grave Tecnicus) without fore-dooming destiny,
Under thy roof to ease my silent griefs,
By applying to my hidden wounds, the balm
Of thy Oraculous Lectures: if my fortune
Run such a crooked by-way, as to wrest
My steps to ruin, yet thy learned precepts
Shall call me back, and set my footings straight:
I will not court the world.
Ah Orgilus,
Neglects in young men of delights, and life,
Run often to extremities• they care not
For harms to others, who contemn their own.
But I (most learned Artist) am not so much
At odds with Nature, that I grutch the thrift
Of any true deserver: nor doth malice
Of present hopes, so check them with despair,
As that I yield to thought of more affliction
Then what is incident to frailty: wherefore
Impute not this retired course of living
Some little time, to any other cause
Then what I justly render: the information
Of an unsettled mind, as the effect
Must clearly witness.
Spirit of truth inspire thee.
On these conditions I conceal thy change,
And willingly admit thee for an Auditor.
•let my study.
I to contemplations:
In these delightful walks — thus metamorphiz'd,
I may without suspicion hearken after
Penthe•s usage, and Euphranias faith:
Love! thou art full of mystery: the Deities
Themselves are not secure, in searching out
The secrets of those flames, which hidden wast
A breast, made tributary to the Laws
Of beauty; Physic yet hath never found
A remedy, to cure a Lovers wound.
Ha? who are those that cross yo• private walk
Into the shadowing grove, in amorous foldings?
My Sister; ô my Sister? it is Euphrania
With Prophilus, supported too; I would
It were an Apparition; Prophilus
Is Ithocles his friend: It strangely pusles me:
Again? help me my book; this Scholars habit
Must stand my privilege• my mind is busy,
Mine eyes, and ears are open.
Doe not wast
The span of this stolen time (sent by the gods
For precious use) in niceness! Bright Euphrania,
Should I repeat old vows, or study new,
For purchase of belief to my desires —
D•sires?
My service, my integrity —
That's better.
I should but repeat a lesson
Oft conned without a prompter; but thine eyes,
My Love is honourable —
So was mine
To my Penned: chastely honourable.
Nor wants there more addition to my wish
Of happiness, then having thee a wife,
Already sure of Ithoclas a friend,
Firm, and unalterable.
But a brother
More cruel then the grave.
What can you look for
In answer to your noble protestations,
From an unskilful maid, but language suited
To a divided mind?
Hold out Euphranc•.
Know Prophilus, I never vnder-valued
(From the first time you mentioned worthy love)
Your merit, means, or person: It had been
A fault of judgment in me, and a dullness
In my affections, not to weigh and thank
My better Stars, that offered me the grace
Of so much blissfulness. For to speak truth,
The law of my desires kept equal pace
With yours, nor have I left that resolution;
But only in a word, what-euer choice
Lives nearest in my heart, must first procure
Consent, both from my father, and my brother,
Ever he can own me his.
She is forsworn else.
Leave me that task.
My brother ever he par•ed
To Athens, had my oath.
Yes, yes, •a had sure.
I doubt not with the means the Court supplies,
But to prevail at pleasure.
Very likely.
Mean time• best, dearest, I may build my hopes
On the foundation of thy constant suffrance
In any opposition.
Death shall sooner
Divorce life, and the joys I have in living,
Then my chaste vows from truth.
On thy fair hand
I seal the like.
There is no faith in woman —
Passion? ô be contained: my very heart strings
Are on the Tenters.
Sir, we are over-heard;
Cupped protect vs: it was a stirring (Sir)
Of some one near.
Your fears are needless, Lady;
None have access into these private pleasures,
Except some near in Court, or bosom Student
From Tecnicus his Oratory; granted
By special favour lately from the King
Unto the grave Philosopher.
Me thinks
I hear one talking to himself: I see him.
It is a poor Scholar, as I told you Lady.
I am discovered — Say it: is it possible
With a smooth tongue, a leering countenance,
Flattery, or force of reason (— I come t'ee Sir)
To turn, or to appease the raging Sea?
Answer to that, — your Art? what Art to catch
And hold fast in a net the Suns small Atoms?
No, no; they'll out, they'll out; ye may as easily
Out-run a Cloud, driven by a Northern blast,
As fiddle faddle so. Peace, or speak sense.
Call you this thing a Scholar? alas hoe's lunatic.
Observe him (sweet) it is but his recreation.
But will you hear a little Lyon are so teatchy,
You keep no rule in argume•t; Philosophy
Works not upon impossibilities,
But natural conclusions. — Mew? — absurd;
The metaphisicks are but speculations
Of the celestial bodies, or such accidents
As not mixed perfectly, in the Ayre engendered,
Appear to vs unnatural; that's all.
Prove it; — yet with a reverence to your gravity,
I'll balk illiterate saw•inesse, submitting
My sole opinion to the touch of writers.
Now let vs fall in with him.
Ha ha ha.
These Apish boys, when they but taste the Grammates,
And principals of Theory, imagine
They can oppose their teachers Confidence
Leads many into errors.
By your leave Sir.
Are you a Scholar (friend?)
I am (gay creature)
With pardon of your Deities, a mushrome•
On whom the dew of heaven drops now and then:
The Sun shines on me too, I than•e his beams,
Sometime I feel their warmth; and eat, and sleep.
Does Tecnicus read to thee?
Yes forsooth,
He is my master surely, yond• door
Opens upon his Study.
Happy creatures;
Such people toil not (sweet) in heats of State,
Nor sink in thawes of greatness: Their affections
Keep order with the limits of their modesty:
Their love is love of virtue. — What's thy name?
Aplotes (s•mptuous master) a poor wretch.
Dost thou want any thing?
Books (Venus) books.
Lady, a new conceit comes in my thought,
And most available for both our comforts.
My Lord.—
Whiles I endeavour to deserve
Your fathers blessing to our loves, this Scholar
May daily at some certain hours attend,
What notice I can write of my success,
Here in this grove, and give it to your hands:
The like from you to me; so can we never,
Barred of our mutual speech, want sure intelligence;
And thus our hearts may talk when our tongues cannot.
Occasion is most favourable, use it.
Aplotes, wilt thou wait vs twice a day;
At nine in the morning, and at four at night,
Here in this Bower, to convey such letters
As each shall send to other? Doe it willingly,
Safely, and secretly, and I will furnish
Thy Study, or what else thou can desire.
Jove make me thankful, thankful, I beseech thee
Propitious Jove, I will prove sure and trusty•
You will not fail me books.
Nor ought besides
Thy heart can wish. This Ladies name's Euphra•ea,
Mine Prophilus.
I have a pretty memory,
It must prove my best friend. — I will not miss
One minute of the hours appointed.
Write
The books thou would have bought thee in a note,
Or take thy self some money.
No, no money:
Money to Scholars is a spirit invisible,
We dare not finger it; or books, or nothing.
Books of what sort thou wilt: doe not forget
Our names.
I warrant 'ee, I warrant 'ee.
Smile Hymen on the grouth of our desires,
We'll feed thy torches with eternal fires.
Put out thy Torches Hymen, or their light
Shall meet a darkness of eternal night.
Inspire me Mercury with swift deceits;
Ingenious Fate has leapt into mine arms,
Beyond the compass of my brain. — Mortality
Creeps on the dung of earth, and cannot reach
The riddles, which are purposed by the gods.
Great Arts best write themselves in their own stories,
They dye too basely, who out-liue their glories.
I'll have that window next the street damned up;
It gives too full a prospect to temptation,
And courts a Gazers glances: there's a lust
Committed by the eye, that sweats, and t•a•else,
Plots, wakes, contrives, till the deformed bear-whelpe
Adultery be licked into the act,
The very act; that light shall be damned up;
Do ye hear Sir?
I doe hear my Lord; a Mason
Shall be provided suddenly.
Some Rogue,
Some Rogue of your confederacy, (factor
For slaves and strumpets) to convey close packets
From this spruce springall, and the tother youngster;
That gaudy Eare-wrig, or my Lord, your Patron,
Whose p•usioner you are.— I'll tear thy throat out
Son of a Cat, ill-looking Hounds-head; tip up
Thy vlterous maw, if I but scont a paper,
A scroll, but half as big as what can cover
A wart upon thy nose, a spot, a pimple,
Directed to my Lady: it may prove
A mystical preparative to lewdness.
Care shall be had. — I will turn every thread
About me to an eye. — here's a sweet life.
The City housewives, cunning in the traffic
Of Chamber-merchandise, set all at price
By whole-sale, yet they wipe their mouths, and simper,
Cull, kiss, and cry Sweet-hart, and stro•ke the head
Which they have branched, and all is well again:
Dull clods of dirt, who dare not feel the rubs
Stuck on the fore-heads?
It is a villainous world,
One cannot hold his own in it.
Dames at Court
Who flaunt in riots, run another by as•
Their pleasure heaves the patient Ass that suffers
Up on the still•d of Office, titles, Incomes;
Promotion justifies the shame, and •ues for it:
Poor Honour! thou art stabbed, and bleed to death
By such unlawful hire. The Count•y mistress
Is yet more wary, and in blushes hides
What ever trespass draws her trow•h to guilt;
But all are false. On this truth I am bold,
No woman but can fall, and doth, or would —
Now for the newest news about the City;
What blab the voices sirrha?
O my Lord,
The rarest, quaintest, strangest, tickling news
That ever —
Hey da, up and ride me Rascal,
What is it?
Forsooth (they say) the King has mewed
All his gray beard, in stead of which is budded
Another of a pure Carnation colour,
Speckled with Greene and Russet.
Ignorant block.
Yes truly, and it is talked about the streets,
That since Lord Ithocles c•me home, the Lyons
Never left roaring, at which noise the •ears
Have danced their very hearts out.
Dance out thine too.
Besides, Lord Orgilus is fled to Athens
Upon a fiery Dragon, and it is thought
A' never can return.
Grant it Apollo.
Moreover, please your Lordship, it is reported
For certain, that who ever is found jealous
Without apparent proof that's wife is wanton,
Shall be divorced: but this is but she-newes,
I had it from a midwife. I have more yet.
Antique, no more; Idiots and stupid fools
Grate my calamities. Why to be fair
Should yield presumption of a faulty soul?
Look to the doors.
The horn of plenty crest him.
Swormes of confusion huddle in my thoughts
In rare distemper. Beauty? ô it is
An unmatched blessing, or a horrid curse.
She comes, she comes, so shoots the morning forth,
Spangled with pearls of transparent dew,
The way to poverty is to be rich;
As I in her am wealthy, but for her
In all contents a Bankrupt. — Loved Penned,
How fares my hearts best joy?
In sooth not well,
She is so ouer-sad.
Leave chattering Mag-pye.—
Thy brother is returned (sweet) safe, and honoured
With a Triumphant victory: thou shalt visit him:
We will to Court, where, if it be thy pleasure,
Thou shalt appear in such a ravishing lustre
Of Jewels aboue value, that the Dames
Who brave it there, in rage to be out-shin'd,
Shall hide them in their Closets, and unseen
Fret in their tears; whiles every wondering eye
Shall crave none other brightness but thy presence.
Choose thine own recreations, be a Queen
Of what delights thou fa•ciest best, what company,
What place, what times, doe any thing, doe all things
Youth can command; so thou wilt 〈…〉
From the pure firmament of thy fai•e looks•
Now it is well said my Lord, what Lady? laugh,
Be merry, time is precious.
Furies whip thee.
Alas my Lord, this language to your Hand-maid
Sounds as would music to the deaf: I need
No braueries nor cost of Art, to draw
The whiteness of my name into offence;
Let such (if any such there are) who covet
A curiosity of admiration,
By laying out their plenty to full view,
Appear in gaudy out-sides; my attires
Shall suit the inward fashion of my mind;
From which, if your opinion nobly placed,
Change not the Liuory your words bestow,
My Fortunes with my hopes are at the highest.
This house me thinks stands somewhat too much inward•
It is too melancholy, we'll remove
Nearer the Court; or what thinks my Penned
Of the delightful Island we command?
Rule me as thou can wish.
I am no Mistress;
Whither you please, I must attend; all ways
Are alike pleasant to me.
Island? prison:
A prison is as gaysome: we'll no Islands:
Marry out upon 'em, whom shall we see there?
Sea-guls, and Porpiseis, and water-rats,
And Crabs, and Mews, and Dogfish? goodly gear
For a young Ladies dealing, or an old ones.
On no terms Islands, I'll be stewed first.
Gransis,
You are a Juggling Bawd. — This sadness (sweetest)
Becomes not youthful blood, — (I'll have you pounded)
For my sake put on a more cheerful mirth,
Thou't mar thy cheeks, and make me old in griefs.
—(Damnable Bitch-foxe.)
I am thick of hearing
Still when the wind blows Southerly. What think 'e•,
If your fresh Lady bre•d young bones (my Lord?)
Wood not a chopping boy do ye good at heart?
But as you said,
〈1 line〉
Or chop thee into collo••
Pray speak louder•
Sure, 〈◊〉, the wind blows South still,
Thou prai'st madly.
It is very hot, I sweat extremely• — Now.
A heard of Lords, Sir.
Ha?
A 〈◊〉 of Indies.
Where?
Shoalds of horses.
Peasant, how?
Caroches
In drifts—th'one enter, the other stand without, sir.
And now I vanish.
Noble Baseness.
Most welcome Prophilus, Ladies, Gentlemen•n,
To all, my heart is open, you all honour me.
(A timpani swe•s in my head a•r•eddy)
Honour me bountifully. — (How they flutter,
W•• •ails and •ayes together?)
From your brother,
By virtue of your love to him, I require
Your instant presence fair•h
He is woll Sir.
The gods preserve him ever: yet (dear beauty)
I find some alteration in him lately,
Since his return to Sparta. My good Lord,
I pray use no delay.
We had not needed
An invitation, if his sisters health
Had not fallen into question. — Hast Penned,
Slack not a minute: lead the way good Prophilus,
I'll follow step by step•
Your arm fair Madam.
One word with your old Bawdship: the had bin better
Raild at the sins thou worshipst, thou have thwarted
My will. I'll use thee cursedly.
You dote.
You are beside your self. A Politician
In jealousy? No, you're too gross, too vulgar.
Pish, teach not me my trade, I know my •ue:
My crossing you, sinks me into her trust,
By which I shall know all: my •rade's a sure one.
Forgive me, Gransis, it was consideration
I relished not, but have a care now.
Fear not,
I am no new-come-too't.
Thy life's upon it,
And so is mine. My Agonies are infinite.
Ambition? it is of vipers breed, it knawes
A passage through the womb that gave it motion.
Ambition? like a seeled Dove, mounts upward,
Higher and higher still to perch on clouds,
But tumbles headlong down with heavier ruin.
So squibs and crackers fly into the ayre,
Then only breaking with a noise, they vanish
In stench and smoke: Morality applied
To timely practice, keeps the soul in tune,
At whose sweet music all our actions dance;
But this is form of books, and schoole-tradition,
I• physics not the sickness of a mind
Broken with grief••: strong Fe••ers are not eased
With counsel, but with be•• receipts, and mean•:
Means, speedy means, and certain; that's the cure.
You stick (Lord Crotolon) upon a point
Too nice, and too unnecessary. Prophi•us
Is every way desertfull. I am confident
Your wisdom is too 〈◊〉 to need instruction
From your 〈…〉
•et not so ripe
(My Lord Armoster) th•t •t dares to do•e
Upon the paint• 〈…〉 smooth persuasion,
Which tempts me to breach of faith.
Not yet
Resolved (my Lo•••) 〈…〉 consent
Be so available, we'll wri•• to 〈◊〉
For his 〈◊〉 to 〈◊〉. The Kings 〈◊〉
Will join with our d•••res, he •as been •••'d too•.
Yes, and the King himself •mportun'd Crotol••
For a dispatch.
〈…〉 command, their will•
Are Laws not to be questioned.
By this marriage
You k•it an union so denote, so hearty,
Between your loves to me, and mine to yours,
As if mine own blood had an interest in it;
For Prop•ilus is mine, and I am his.
My Lord, my Lord.
What, good Sir? speak your thought.
Had this sincerity been real once,
My Orgilus had not been now vn-wi•'d,
Nor • our lost Sister buried in a Bride bed.
Your Uncle here, Armoster knows this truth,
For had your father Thrasus lived, but peace
Dwell in his grave: I have done.
You're bold and bitter.
He presses home the injury, it smarts;
No reprehensions Uncle, I deserve 'em.
Yet gentle Sir, consider what the heat
Of an unsteady youth a giddy bra••e,
Greene indiscretion, flattery of greatness,
Rawness of judgment, wilfulness in folly,
Thoughts vagrant as the wind, and as uncertain
Might lead a boy in years too; it was a fault,
A Capital fault, for then I could not dive
Into the secrets of commanding Love:
Since when, experience by the extremities (in others)
Hath forced me to collect. And trust me Crotolon,
I will redeem those wrongs with any service
Your satisfaction can require for currant.
Thy acknowledgement is satisfaction.
What would you more?
I'm conquered: if E•phra•••
Her self admit the motion, let it be so.
I doubt not my sons liking.
Use my fortunes,
Life, power, sword, and heart, all are your own.
The Princess with your sister.
I present 'e•
A stranger here in Court (my Lord,) for did not
Desire of seeing you, draw her abroad,
We had not been made happy in her company.
You are a gracious Princess.— Sister, wedlock
Holds too severe a passion in your nature,
Which can engross all duty to your husband,
Without attendance on so dea• a mistress.
It is not my brothers pleasure, I presume,
To immure her in a chamber.
It is her will,
She governs her own hours; (noble Ithocles)
We thank the gods for your success, and welfare.
Our Lady has of •ate been indisposed,
Else we had waited on you with the first.
How does Penned now?
You best know brother,
From whom my health and comfort• are derived.
I like the answer well; it is sad, and modest;
There may be tricks, yet, tricks.— Have an eye Gransis.
Now Crotolon, the suit we joined in must not
Fall by too long demur.
It is granted, Princess,
For my part.
With condition, that his son
Favour the Contract.
Such delay is easy.
The joys of marriage make thee, Prophilus,
A proud deserver of Euphrama's love,
And her of thy desert.
Most sweetly gracious.
The joys of marriage are the heaven on earth,
Life's paradise (great Princess) the souls quiet,
Sinews of concord, earthly immortality,
Eternity of pleasures; no restoratives
Like to a constant woman. — (but where i• she?
It would puzzle all the gods, but to create
Such a new monster.) — I can speak by proof,
For I rest in Elizium, it is my happiness.
Euphrania how are you resolved, (speak freely)
In your affections to this Gentlemen•n?
Nor more, nor less th•n a• his love assures me,
Which (if your li•ing with my ••••hers warrants)
I cannot but approve in all point• worthy.
So, so, I know your answer.
'T had bin pity
To sunder hearts so equally consented.
The King (Lord Ithocles) commands your presence;
And (fairest Princess) yours.
We will attend him.
Where are the Lords? all must unto the King
Without delay: the Prince of Argos—
Well Sir.
Is coming to the Court, sweet Lady.
How!
The Prince of Argos?
It was my fortune, Madam,
To enjoy the honour of these happy tidings.
Penthe•!
Brother!
Let me an hour hence
Meet you alone, within the Palace grove,
I have some secret with you — Prethe friend
Conduct her thither, and have special care
The walks be cleared of any to disturb vs.
I shall.
How's that?
Alone, pray be alone.
I am your creature, princess.— on my Lords.
Alone, alone? what means that word alone?
Why might not I be there? — hum! — hoe's her brother;
Brothers and sisters are but flesh and blood,
And this same whoreson Court ease is temp••tion
To a rebellion in the veins • — Besides,
His fine friend Prophilu• mus• be her guardian.
Why may not he dispatch a business nimbly
Before the other come? — or — pa••ring, pondering,
For one another? be it to sister, mother,
Wife, Cousin, any thing, amongst youths of met•all,
Is in request: It is so — stubborn Fate:
But if I be a Cuckold, and can know it,
I will be fell, and fell.
My Lord, you're called for.
Most heartily I thank y•, 〈◊〉 my wi•e pray?
Retired amongst the 〈◊〉
〈◊〉 thank •ee•
There's an old waiter with 〈◊〉 ••w you 〈◊〉?
She 〈…〉 p•essence Lobby fast a••e•pe •ir.
Asleep? sleep Sir•
Is your Lordship troubled•
You will not to the King?
Your humblest Vassal.
Your servant my good Lord.
I wait your foot st•ps.
In this walk (Lady) will your brother find you:
And with your favour, give me le••e a little
To work a preparation, in his fashion
I have observed of late, some kind of slackness
To such alacrity as Nature
And custom took delight in: Sadness grows
Upon his recreations, which he he h••rds
In such a willing silence, that to question
The grounds will argue skill in friendship,
And less good manners.
Sir, I'm not inquisitive
Of secrecies without an invitation.
With pardon, Lady, not a syllable
Of mine implies so rude a sense; the drift.—
Doe thy best
To make this Lady me•rye for an hour•.
Your will shall be a law, Sir.
Prethe leave me,
I have some private thoughts I would account with:
Use thou thine own.
Speak on, fair nymph, our souls
Can dance as well to music• of the Spheres
As any's who have feasted with the gods.
Your School terms are too troublesome.
What heaven
Refines mortality from dross of earth,
But such as vncompounded beauty hallowes
With glorified perfection.
Set thy wits
In a less wild proportion.
Time can never
On the white table of unguilty faith
Write counterfeit dishonour; turn those eyes
(The arrows of pure love) upon that fire
Which once rose to a flame, perfumed with vows
As sweetly scented as the L•cense smoking like
The holiest A•tars, Virgin tears
On Vista's odours) sprinkled dews to feed 'em,
And to increase their fervor.
Be not frantic.
All pleasures are but mere imagination,
Feeding the hungry appetite with steam,
And sight of banquet, whilst the body pines,
Not relishing the real taste of food,
Such is the le•nnesse of a heart divided
From intercourse of troth-contracted lones;
No horror should deface that precious figure
Sealed with the lively stamp of equal souls.
Away, some fury hath bewitched thy tongue:
The breath of ignorance that flies from thence,
Ripens a knowledge in me of afflictions,
Aboue all suffrance. — Thing of talk be gone,
Be gone without reply.
Be just, Penned,
In thy commands: when thou send forth a doom
Of banishment, know first on whom it lights;
Thus I take off the shroud, in which my cares
Are folded up from view of common eyes;
What is thy sentence next?
Rash man, thou lay
A blemish on mine honour with the hazard
Of thy too desperate life: yet I profess,
By all the Laws of ceremonious wedlock,
I have not given admittance to one thought
Of female change, since cruelty enforced
Divorce betwixt my body and my heart:
Why would you fall from goodness thus?
O rather
Examine me how I could live to say
I have bin much, much wronged; it is for thy sake
I put on this Imposture; dear Penned,
If thy soft bosom be not turned to marble,
Thou't pity our calamities; my Interest
Confirms me thou art mine still.
Lend your hand:
With both of mine I clasp it thus, thus kiss it,
Thus kneel before ye.
You instruct my duty.
We may stand up: Have you ought else to urge
Of new demand? as for the old forget it,
It is buried in an everlasting silence,
And shall be, shall be ever; what more would ye?
I would possess my wife, the equity
Of very reason bids me.
Is that all?
Why it is the all of me my self.
Remo•e
Your steps some distance from me; at this space
A few words I dare change; but first put on
Your borrowed shape.
You are obeyed, it is done•
How (Orgilus) by promise I was thine,
The heavens doe witness; they can witness too
A rape done on my truth: how I doe love the•
Yet Orgilus, and yet, must best appear
In tendering thy freedom; for I find
The constant preservation of thy merit,
By thy not daring to attempt my fame
With injury of any loose conceit,
Which might give deeper wounds to discontents:
Continue this fair race, then though I cannot
Add to thy comfort, yet I shall more often
Remember from what fortune I am fallen,
And pity mine own ruin. — Live, li•e happy.
Happy in thy next choice, that thou moist people
This barren age with virtues in thy issue:
And ô, when thou art married, think on me
With mercy, not contempt: I hope thy wife,
Hearing my story, will not scorn my fall:
Now let vs part.
Part! yet advise thee better:
Penned is the wife to Orgilus,
And ever shall be.
Never shall nor will.
How!
Hear me, in a word I'll tell thee why•
The Virgin dowry which my birth bestowed,
Is ravished by another: my true love
Abhors to think, that Orgilus deserved
No better favours then a second bed.
I must not take this reason.
To confirm it,
Should I outlive my bondage, let me meet
Another worse then this, and less desired,
If of all the men alive thou should but touch
My lip, or hand again.
Penned, now
I tell 'ee you grow wanton in my sufferance;
Come sweet, you are mine.
Uncivil Sir, forbear,
Or I can turn affection into vengeance;
Your reputation (if you value any)
Lies bleeding at my feet. Unworthy man,
If ever henceforth thou appear in language,
Message, or letter to betray my frailty,
I'll call thy former protestations lust,
And curse my Stars for forfeit of my judgment.
Go thou, sit only for disguise and walks,
To hide thy shame: this once I spare thy life;
I laugh at mine own confidence; my sorrows
By thee are made inferior to my fortunes.
If ever thou did harbour worthy love,
Dare not to answer. My good Genius guide me,
That I may never see thee more. — Go from me.
In tear my veil of politic French off,
And stand up like a man resolved to doe
Action, not words shall show me. O Penned.
He sighed my name sure as he parted from me,
I fear I was too rough: Alas poor Gentleman,
He looked not like the ruins of his youth,
But like the ruins of those ruins: Honour,
How much we fight with weakness to preserve thee.
Fie on thee, damb thee, rotten magot, damb thee,
Sleep? sleep at Court? and now? Aches, convulsions,
Impostumes, themes, gouts, palsies clog thy bones
A dozen years more yet.
Now you're in humours.
Shoe's by her self, there's hope of that; shoe's sad too,
Shoe's in strong contemplation: yes, and •ixt.
The signs are wholesome.
Very wholesome truly.
Hold your chops night mare.— Lady, come your brother
Is carried to his closet; you must thither.
Not well, my Lord?
A sudden •it, twill off;
Some surfeit or disorder. — How doest d•erest?
Your news is none of the best.
The chief of men,
The excellentest Ithocles, desires
Your presence Madam.
We are hasting to him.
In vain we labour in this course of life
To piece our journey out at length, or crave
Respite of breath, our home is in the grave.
Perfect Philosophy: then let vs care
To live so that our reckonings may fall even
When w' are to make account.
He cannot fear
Who builds on noble grounds: sickness or pain
Is the deservers exercise, and such
Your virtuous brother to the world is known.
Speak comfort to him Lady, be all gentle;
Stars fall but in the grossenesse of our sight,
A good man dying, the Earth doth lose a ligh•.
BE well advised, let not a resolution
Of giddy rashness choke the breath of reason.
It shall not, most sage Master.
I am jealous:
For if the borrowed shape so late put on,
Inferred a consequence, we must conclude
Some violent design of sudden nature
Hath shook that shadow off, to fly upon
A new-hatch'd execution: Orgilus,
Take heed thou hast not (under our integrity)
Shrouded unlawful plots: our mortal eyes
Pierce not the secrets of your hearts, the god•
Are only privy to them.
Learned Tecnicus,
Such doubts are causeless, and to clear the truth
From misconceit, the present State commands me.
The Prince of Argos comes himself in person
In quest of great Calantha for his Bride,
Our kingdoms heir; besides, mine only sister
Euphrania is disposed to Prophilus.
Lastly, the King is sending letters for me
To Athens, for my quick repair to Court.
Please to accept these Reasons.
Just ones, Orgilus,
Not to be contradicted: yet beware
Of an unsure foundation; no fair colours
Can fortify a building faintly jointed.
I have observed a growth in thy aspect
Of dangerous extent, sudden, and (•ooke too't)
I might add certain —
My aspect? could Art
Run through mine inmost thoughts, it should not sift
An inclination there, more then what suited
With justice of mine honour.
I believe it.
But know then Orgilus what honour is:
Honour consists not in a bare opinion
By doing any act that feeds content;
Brave in appearance, because we think it brave:
Such honour comes by accident, not nature
Proceeding from the vices of our passion
Which makes our reason drunk. But real Honour
Is the reward of virtue, and acquired
By Justice or by ••lore, which for Bases
Hath Justice to uphold it. He then fails
In honour, who for lucre of Revenge
Commits thefts, murders, Treasons and Adulteries,
With such like, by entrenching on just Laws,
Whose sou'raignty is best preserved by Justice.
Thus as you see how honour must be grounded
On knowledge, not opinion: For opinion
Relies on probability and Accident,
But knowledge on Necessity and Truth:
I leave thee to the fit consideration
Of what becomes the grace of real Honour.
Wishing success to all thy virtuous meanings.
The gods increase thy wisdom (reverend Oracle)
And in thy precepts make me ever thrifty.
I thank thy wish. — Much mystery of Fate
Lies hid in that mans fortunes, Curiosity
May lead his actions into rare attempts;
But let the gods be moderators still,
No humane power can prevent their will.
From whence come 'ee?
From King Amycl••; (pardon
My interruption of your Studies) — Here
In this sealed box he sends a treasure dear
To him as his Crown, he prays your gravity
You would examine, ponder, si•t and bolt
The pith and circumstance of every tittle
The scroll within contains.
What is it Armostes?
It is the health of Sparta, the Kings life,
Sinews and safety of the Common-wealth,
The sum of what the Oracle delivered,
When last he visited the prophetic Temple
At Delph•s; what his reasons are for which
After so long a silence he requires
You counsel now (grave man) his majesty
Will soon himself acquaint you with.
Apollo
Inspire my Intellect. — The Prince of Argos
Is entertained.
He is, and has demanded
Our Princess for his wife; which I conceive
One special cause the King importunes you
For resolution of the Oracle.
My duty to the King, good peace to Sparta,
And fair day to Armostes.
Like to Tecnicus.
CAn you paint a thought? or number
Every fancy in a slumber?
Can you count soft minutes roving
From a dials point by moving?
Can you grasp a sigh? or lastly,
Rob a Virgins honour chastely?
No, ô no; yet you may
Sooner doe both that and this,
This and that, and never miss,
Then by any praise display
Beauties beauty, such a glory
As beyond all Fate, all Story,
All arms, all arts,
All loves, all hearts,
Greater then tho•e, or they,
Doe, shall, and must obey.
All silent, calm, secure.— Gransis, no creaking?
No noise; dost hear nothing?
Not a mouse,
Or whisper of the wind.
The floor is matted,
The bed-posts sure are steel or marble. — Soldiers
Should not affect (me thinks) strains so e••eminate;
Sounds of such delicacy are but fawnings
Upon the floth of Luxury: they heighten
Cinders of covert lust up to a flame.
What doe you mean (my Lord) speak low; that gabling
Of yours will but undo vs.
Chamber-combats
Are felt, not hard.
A wakes.
What's that?
Who's there
Sister? all quit the room else.
It is consented.
Lord Baseness, your brother would be private,
We must forbear; his sleep hath newly left him.
Please 'ee withdraw?
By any means, it is fit.
Pray Gentlewoman walk too.
Yes, I will Sir.
Sit nearer sister to me, nearer yet;
We had one Father, in one womb took life,
Were brought up twins together, yet have lived
At distance like two strangers. I could wish
That the first pillow whereon I was cradell'd,
Had proved to me a grave.
You had been happy:
Then had you never known that sin of life
Which blots all following glories with a vengeance,
For forfeiting the last will of the dead,
From whom you had your being.
Sad Penned,
Thou can not be too cruel; my rash spleen
Hath with a violent hand plucked from thy bosom
A louer-blest heart, to grind it into dust,
For which mine's now a breaking.
Not yet, heaven
I doe beseech thee: first let some wild fires
Scorch, not consume it; may the heat be cherished
With desires infinite, but hopes impossible.
Wronged soul, thy prayers are heard.
Here lo I breathe
A miserable creature led to ruin
By an unnatural brother.
I consume
In languishing affections for that trespass,
Yet cannot dye.
The handmaid to the wages,
The untroubled of Country toil, drinks streams
With leaping kids, and with the bleating lambs;
And so allayes her thirst secure, whiles I
Quench my hot sighs with fleerings of my tears.
The labourer doth eat his coursest bread,
Earned with his sweat, and lies him down to sleep;
Which every bit I touch turns in digestion
To gall, as bitter as Penthea's curse.
Put me to any penance for my tyranny,
And I will call thee merciful.
Pray kill me,
Rid me from living with a jealous husband,
Then we will join in friendship, be again
Brother and sister. — Kill me pray: nay, will 'ee?
How does thy Lord esteem thee?
Such an one
As only you have made me; a faith-breaker,
A spotted whore, forgive me; I am one
In art, not in desires, the gods must witness.
Thou dost be lye thy friend.
I doe not Ithocles•
For she that's wife to Orgilus, and lives
In known Adultery with Baseness,
Is at the best a whore. Wilt kill me now?
The ashes of our parents will assume
Some dreadful figure, and appear to charge
Thy bloody gilt, that hast betrayed their name
To infamy, in this reproachful match.
After my victories abroad, at home
I meet despair; ingratitude of nature
Hath made my actions monstrous: thou shalt stand
A Deity (my sister) and be worshipped,
For thy resolved martyrdom: wronged maids,
And married wives shall to thy hallowed shrine
Offer their orisons, and sacrifice
Pure Turtles crowned with myrtle, if thy pity
Unto a yielding brothers pressure, lend
One finger but to ease it.
O no more.
Death waits to waft me to the Stygian banks,
And free me from this Chaos of my bondage,
And till thou wilt forgive, I must endure.
Who is the Saint you ser•e?
Friendship, or
Of birth to any but my sister, durst not
Have moved that question as a secret, Sister:
I dare not murmur to my self.
Let me,
By your new protestations I conjure 'ee,
Partake her name.
Her name,— it is, — it is, I dare not.
All your respects are forged.
They are not.—Peace
Calantha is the Princess, the Kings daughter,
Sol• heir of Sparta — Me most miserable,
Doe I now love thee? for my injuries
Revenge thy self with bravery, and gossip
My treasons to the Kings ears. Doe; Colonel••
Knows it not yet, nor Prophilus my nearest.
Suppose you were contracted to her, would it not
Split even your very soul to see her father
Snatch her out of your arms against her will,
And force her on the Prince of Argos?
Trouble not
The fountains of mine eyes with thine own story,
I sweat in blood for it.
We are reconciled:
Alas, Sir, being children, but two branches
Of one stock, it is not fit we should divide:
Have comfort, you may find it.
Yes in thee:
Only in thee Penned mine.
If sorrows
Have not too much dull•'d my infected brain,
I'll cheer invention for an active strain.
Mad man! why have I wronged a maid so excellent?
I can forbear no longer: more, I will not;
Keep off your hands, or fall upon my point:
Patience is tired, for like a slow-pac'd Ass
Ye ride my easy nature, and proclaim
My sloth to vengeance, a reproach and property.
The meaning of this rudeness.
Hoe's distracted.
O my grieved Lord.
Sweet Lady come not near him•
He holds his perilous weapon in his hand
To prick he cares not whom, nor where,— see, see, see.
My birth is noble, though the popular blast
Of vanity, as giddy as thy youth,
Hath reared thy name up to bestride a cloud,
Or progress in the Chariot of the Sun;
I am no clod of trade, to lackey pride,
Nor like your slave of expectation wait
The bawdy hinges of your doors, or whist••
For mystical conveyance to your bed-sports.
Fine humour•, they become him.
How he stares,
Struts, puffs, and sweats: most admirable lunacy?
But that I may conceive the spirit of wine
Has took possession of your soberer custom,
I'd say you were unmannerly.
Dear brother.
Unmannerly — Mew Kitling— smooth formality
Is usher to the rankness of the blood,
But Impudence bears up the train: Indeed, sir,
Your fiery mettle, or your springall blaze
Of huge renown, is no sufficient Royalty
To print upon my forehead the scorn Cuckold.
His Jealousy has robed him of his wits,
He talks he knows not what.
Yes, and he knows
To whom he talks; to one that franks his lust
In Swine-security of bestial incest.
Ho devil.
I will hallo't, though I blush more
To name the filthiness, than thou to act it.
Monster!
Sir by our friendship.
By our bloods,
Will you quite both undo vs, Brother?
Out on him,
These are his megrims, firks and melancholies.
Well said, old Touch-hole.
Kick him out at doors.
With favour let me speak.— My Lord? what slackness
In my obedience hath deserved this rage?
Except humility and sin lent duty
Have drawn on your unquiet, my simplicity
Ne'er studied your vexation.
Light of beauty,
Deal not ungently with a desperate wound!
No breach of reason dares make war with her
Whose looks are sovereignty, whose breath is balm
O that I could preserve thee in fruition
As in devotion!
Sir, may every evil
Locked in Pandora's box; shower (in your presence)
On my unhappy head, if since you made me
A partner in your bed, I have been faulty
In one unseemly thought against your honour.
Purge not his g••e•e•, Penned.
Yea, 〈◊〉 on,
Excellent creature— Good be not a hinderance
To peace, and praise of virtue. — O my senses
Are charmed with sounds celestial. — On, dear, on•
I never gave you one ill word; say, did I?
Indeed I did not.
Nor, by Iuno's forehead,
Was I ever guilty of a wanton error.
A goddess, let me kneel.
Alas kind Animal.
No, but for p•nnance.
Noble sir, what is it?
With gladness I embrace it; yet pray let not
My rashness teach you to be too unmerciful.
When you shall show good proof that manly wisdom•
Not ouer-sway'd by passion, or opinion,
Knows how to lead judgment; then this Lady
Your wife, my sister, shall return in safety
Home to be guided by you, but till first
I can, out of clear evidence approve it,
She shall be my care.
Rip my bosom up•
I'll stand the execution with a constancy:
This torture is unsufferable.
Well Sir,
I dare not trust her to your fury.
But
Penned says not so.
She needs no tongue
To plead excuse, who never purposed wrong.
Virgin of reverence and antiquity
Stay you behind.
The Court wants not yo•r diligence.
What will you doe my Lord? my Lady's gone,
I am denied to follow.
I may see her.
Or speak to her once more.
And feel her too, man,
Be of good cheer, she's your own flesh and bone.
Diseases desperate must find cures alike:
She swore she has been true.
True on my modesty.
Let him want truth who credits not her vows•
Much wrong I did her, but her brother infinite;
Rumour will voice me the contempt of manhood,
Should I run on thus. Some way I must try
To out-doe Art, and cry a Jealousy.
Cozen of Argos, what the heavens have pleased
In their vnchanging Counsels to conclude
For both our kingdoms weal, we must submit to:
Nor can we be unthankful to their bounties,
Who when we were even creeping to our graves,
Sent vs a daughter; in whose birth, our hope
Continues of succession: As you are
In title next, being grandchild to our Aunt,
So we in hear• desire you may sit nearest
Calantha's love; since we have ever vowed
Not to enforce affection by our will,
But by her own choice to confirm it gladly.
You speak the nature of a right just father:
I come not hither roughly to demand
My Cozens thraldom, but to free mine own:
Report of great Calantha's beauty, virtue,
Sweetness, and singular perfections, courted
All ears to credit what I find was published
By constant truth: from which if any service
Of my desert can purchase fair construction,
This Lady must command it.
Princely Sir,
So well you know how to profess observance
That you instruct your hearers to become
Practitioners in duty; of which number
I'll study to be chief.
Chief, glorious Virgin,
In my devotions, as in all men's wonder.
Excellent Cozen, we deny no liberty•
Use thine own opportunities. — Armoste•,
We must consult with the Philosophers,
The business is of weight.
Sir, at your pleasure•
You told me, Crotolon, your sonne's returned
From Athens? wherefore comes he not to Cou•t
As we commanded?
He shall soon attend
Your royal will, great Sir.
The mar•age
Between young Prophilus and Euphranea,
Tafts of too much delay:
My Lord.
Some pleasures
At celebration of it would give life
To the entertainment of the Prince our kinsman
Our Court wears gravity more then we relish.
Yet the heavens smile on all your high attempts,
Without a Cloud.
So may the gods protect vs.
A Prince, a subject?
Yes, to beauties sceptre•
As all hearts kneel so mine.
You are too Courtly.
Your safe return to Sparta is most welcome,
I joy to meet you here, and as occasion
Shall grant vs privacy, will yield you reason•
Why I should covet to deserve the title
Of your respected friend: for without Complement
Believe it, Orgilus, it is my ambition.
Your Lordship may command me your poor servant.
So amorously close close? — so soon? — my heart!
What sudden change is next?
Life to the King,
To whom I here present this Noble gentleman,
New come from Athens; Royal Sir, vouchsafe
Your gracious hand in favour of his merit.
My son preferred by Ithocles!
Our bounties
Shall open to thee Orgilus; for instance,
Hark in thine ear; if out of those• inventions
Which flow in Athens, thou hast there engrossed
Some rarity of wit to grace the Nuptials
Of thy fair sister, and renown our Court
In the eyes of this young Prince, we shall be debtor
To thy conceit, think on it•
Your Highness honours me.
My tongue and heart are twins.
A noble birth
Becoming such a father. — worthy Orgilus,
You are a guest most with'd for.
May my duty
Still rise in your opinion, sacred Princess.
Euphranea's brother, sir, a Gentleman
Well worthy of your knowledge.
We embrace him,
Proud of so dear acquaintance.
All prepare
For Revels and disport: the joys of Hymen,
Like Phoebus in his lustre•, puts to flight
All mists of dullness; crown the hours with gladness:
No sounds but music, no discourse but mirth.
Thine arm I prethe Ithocles. — Nay, good
My Lord keep on your way, I am provided.
I dare not disobey.
Most heavenly Lady.
The King hath spoke his mind.
His will he hath•
But were it lawful to hold plea against
The power of greatness, not the reason, happily
Such vnder-shrubs as subjects, sometimes might
Borrow of Nature, Justice, to inform
That licence sovereignty holds without check
Over a meek obedience.
How resolve you
Touching your sisters marriage? Prophilus
Is a deserving, and a hopeful youth.
I envy not his merit, but applaud it:
Could with him thrift in all his best desires,
And with a willingness inleague our blood
With his, for purchase of full growth in friendship•
He never touched on any wrong that maliced
The honour of our house, nor stirred our peace;
Yet, with your favour, let me not forget
Under whose wing he gathers warmth and comfort,
Whose creature he is bound, made, and must live so.
Son, son, I find in thee a harsh condition,
No courtesy can win it; it is too ranckorous.
Good Sir be not severe in your construction,
I am no stranger to such easy calms
As sit in tender bosoms: Lordly Ithocles
Hath graced my entertainment in abundance;
Too humbly hath descended from that height
Of arrogance and spleen which wrought the rape
On grieved Penthea's purity; his scorn
Of my untoward fortunes is reclaimed
Unto a Coutship, almost to a fawning:
I'll kiss his foot, since you will have it so.
Since I will have it so? Friend I will have it so
Without our ruin by your politic plot•,
Or Wolf of hatred snarling in your breasts
You have a spirit, Sir, have ye? a familiar
That posts in the ayre for your intelligence?
Some such Hobgoblin hurried you from Athens,
For yet you come unsent for.
If unwelcome,
I might have found a grave there.
Sure your business
Was soon dispatched, or your mind altered quickly.
It was care, Sir, of my health, cut short my journey;
For there, a general infection
Threatens a desolation.
And I fear
Thou hast brought back a worse infection with thee,
Infection of my mind; which, as thou say,
Threatens the desolation of our family.
Forbid it our dear Genius, I will rather
Be made a Sacrifice on Thrasus monument,
Or kneel to Ithocles his son in dust,
Then woo a fathers curse: My sisters marriage
With Prophilus, is from my heart confirmed:
May I live hated, may I dye despised,
If I omit to further it in all
That can concern me.
I have been too rough,
My duty to my King made me so earnest;
Excuse it Orgilus.
Dear Sir•
H••e comes
Euphranea, with Prophilus and Ithocles.
Most honoured — ever famous.
Your true friend,
On earth not any true•. — With s••oath eyes
Look on this worthy couple, you• cousin•
Can only make them one.
They have it. — Sister,
Thou pawn'dst to me an oath, of which engagement
I never will release thee, if thou aim
At any other choice then this.
Dear brother,
At him or none.
To which my blessing's •dded.
Which till a greater ceremony perfect,
Euphran•a lend thy hand; here take her Prophilus,
Live long a happy man and wife; and further,
That these in presence may conclude an omen,
Thus for a Bridal song I close my wishes:
Comforts lasting, Loves increasing,
Like soft hours never ceasing;
Plenties pleasure, peace complying
Without jars, or tongues envying;
Hearts by holy Union wedded
More then theirs by custom bedded;
Fruitful issues: life so graced,
Not by age to be defaced;
Budding, as the year ensued,
Every spring another youth:
All what thought can add beside,
Crown this Bridegroom and this Bride.
You have sealed joy close to my soul: Euphranea,
Now I may call thee mine.
I but exchange
One good friend for another.
If these Gallants
Will please to grace a poor invention,
By joining with me in some •light devise,
I'll venture on a strain, my younger days
Have studied for delight•
With thankful willingness
I offer my attendance.
No endeavour
Of mine shall fail to show it self.
We will
All join to wait on thy directions, Orgilus.
O my good Lord, your favours flow towards
A too unworthy worm; but as you please,
I am what you will shape me.
A fast friend.
I thank thee son for this acknowledgemen•,
It is a sight of gladness.
But my duty.
Who ever would speak with vs deny his entrance•
Be careful of our charge.
We shall m•dam.
Except the King himself, 〈◊〉 none admittance,
Not any.
Madam it shall be our care.
Being alone, Penned, you have granted
The opportunity you sought, and might
At all times have commanded.
It is a benefit•
Which I shall owe your goodness even in death for•
My glass of life (sweet Princess hath few minutes
Remaining to run down; the sands are spent;
For by an inward messenger I feel
The summons of departure short and certain.
You feed too much your melancholy.
Glory•
Of humane greatness are but pleasing dreams,
And shadows soon decaying: on the stage
Of my mortality, my youth hath acted
Some scenes of vanity, drawn out at length
By varied pleasures, sweetened in the mixture,
But Tragical in issue; Beauty, pomp,
With every sensuality our giddiness
Doth frame an Idol, are inconstant friends
When any troubled passion make• assault
On the unguarded Castle of the mind.
Contemn not your condition, for the proof
Of bare opinion only: to what end
Reach all these Moral texts?
To place before 'ee
A perfect mirror, wherein you may see
How weary I am of a lingering life,
Who count the best a misery.
Indeed
You have no little cause; yet none so great
As to distrust a remedy.
That remedy
Must be a winding sheet, a sold of lead,
And some vntrod-on corner in the earth.
Not to detain your expectation, Princess,
I have an humble suit.
Speak, I enjoy it.
Vouchsafe then to be my Ex••••ria,
And take that trouble o• 'ee, to dispose
Such Legacies, as I bequeath impartially•
I have not much to give, the pains are easy,
Heaven will reward your piety, and thank it
When I am dead; for sure I must not live,
I hope I cannot.
Now beshrew thy sadness;
Thou turn me too much woman.
Her fair eyes
Melt into passion; Then I have assurance
Encouraging my boldness. — In this paper
My Will was Character'd; which you, with pardon,
Shall now know from mine own mouth.
Talk on, prethe,
It is a pretty earnest.
I have left me
But three poor Jewels to bequeath; The first is
My youth; for though I am much old in griefs,
In years I am a child.
To whom that?
To Virgin wives, such as abuse not wedlock
By freedom of desires, but covet chiefly
The pledges of chaste beds, for ties of love,
Rather than ranging of their blood• And next
To married maids, such as prefer the number
Of honourable issue in their virtues,
Before the flattery of delights by marriage,
May those be ever young.
A second Jewel
You mean to part with.
It is my Fame, I trust,
By scandal yet un•ouch'd; this I bequeath
To memory, and Times old d•ughter Truth•
If ever my unhappy name find mention
When I am fallen to dust, may it deserve
Be seeming charity without dishonour.
How handsomely thou playst with harmless sport
Of mere imagination; speak the last,
I strangely like thy will.
This Jewel, Madam,
Is dearly precious to me; you must use
The best of your discretion to employ
This gift as I entend it.
Doe not doubt me.
It is long agon• since first I lost my heart,
Long I have lived without it, else for certain•
I should have 〈…〉
Of it, to great Calantha, 〈…〉
By service bound, and by affection vowed,
I doe bequeath in holiefe rites of love
Mine only brother Ithocles.
What said thou?
Impute not, heauen-blest Lady, to ambition,
A faith as humbly perfect as the prayers
Of a devoted suppliant ••••endow it?
Look on him, Princess, with an eye of pity;
How like the ghost of what he 〈◊〉 appe•red•
A' moves before you.
Shall I answer here,
Or lend my ear too gr•ffely?
First, his hear•
Shall fall in Cinders, scorched by your disdain,
Ever •e will dare, poor man; t• •pe an eye
On these divine looks, but with low-be•t thoughts
Accusing such presumption; as for word•,
A' dares not utter any but 〈…〉
Yet this lost creature lo•es'••. — Be a 〈◊〉
In sweetness as in blood; give him his do••e,
Or raise him up to comfort.
What new change
Appears in my behaviour, that th•• 〈◊〉
Tempt my displeasure?
I 〈…〉 the world
To revel Elizium, and it is 〈◊〉
To wish my brother some advantage her••
Yet by my best hopes, Ithocles is ignorant
Of this pursuit. But if you please to kill him,
Lend him one angry look, or one •••sh w•rd,
And you shall soon conclude how ••rong a power
Your absolute authority h•lt• 〈◊〉
His life and end.
You hau• forgot, P•nthea,
How still I have a father.
But remember
I am a sister, though to me this •••there
Hath been you know vnki••e• • most unkind!
〈…〉 — Lady,
Your check lies in my 〈◊〉.
Madam, here.
I think 'ee sleep, •ee dro•es; wait on Penth•a
Unto her lodging. — Ethos••s• wronged Lady!
My reckonings are made even, Death or Fate
Can now nor strike too soon, nor force too late.
Forbear your Inquisition; curiosity
Is of too subtle, and too searching nature:
In fears of love too quick; too slow of credit:
I am not what you doubt me.
Nephew, bethen
As I would wish; — alilis not right, — Good heaven
Confirm your Resolutions for dependence
On worthy end• which may advance your quiet.
I did the Noble Orgilus much injury,
But grieved Penned more: I now repent it;
Now, Uncle, now; this Now, is now too late:
So provident i• 〈◊〉 in sad iss••,
That after-wit, like Bankrupts debts, stand tallye•
Without all possibilities of payment:
Sure he's an honest, very honest Gentleman;
A man of single• meaning.
I believe it:
Yet Nephew, it is the tongue informs our cares;
Our eyes can never pierce into the thoughts,
For they are lodged too inward: — but I question
No truth in Orgilus. — The Princess (Sir)
The Princess? ha?
With her the Prince of Erg•s.
Great (fair one) grace my hopes with any instance
Of Livery, from the allowance of your f•uour,
This little spark.
A Toy•
Love fea•• on Toys,
For Cupped is a child, — vouchsafe this bounty•
It cannot denied.
You shall not value
(Sweet Cozen) at a price what I count cheap,
So cheap, that let him take it who dares stoop for it,
And give it at next meeting to a Mistress,
She'll thank him for it, perhaps.
The Ring, Sir, is
The Princesses, I could have took it up.
Learn manners, prethe. — To the blessed owner
Upon my knees.
You're saucy.
This is pretty,
I am, belike, a Mistress. — wondrous pretty:
Let the man keep his fortune, since he found it;
He's worthy on it. — On Cozen.
Follow Spaniel.
I'll force'•e to a fawning else.
You dare not.
My Lord, you were too forward.
Looke'ee Uncle:
Some such there are whose liberal contents
Swarm without care in every sort of plenty;
Who, after full repasts, can say them down
To sleep; and they sleep, Uncle: in which silence
Their very dreams present 'em choice of pleasures:
Pleasures (observe me Uncle) of rare object:
Here heaps of gold, there Increments of honours;
Now change of garments, then the votes of people;
Anon varieties of beauties, courting
In flatteries of the night, exchange of d•lliance,
Yet these are still but dreams: give me felicity
Of which my senses waking are partakers;
A real, visible, material happiness:
And then too, when I stagger in expectance
Of the l•ast comfort that can cherish life:
I saw it (Sir) I saw it; for it came
From her own hand.
The Princess threw it t'ee:
True, and she said — well I remember what.
Her Cozen Prince would beg it.
Yes, and parted
In anger at your taking on it.
Penned!
Oh thou hast pleaded with a powerful language•.
I want a fee to gratify thy myrit.
But I will doe—
What is it you say?
In anger,
In anger let him part; for could his breath,
Like whirlewinds, toss such ser•isle slaves as like
The dust his footsteps print, into a vapour,
It durst not stir a •air of mine; It should not,
I'd rend it up by the roots first. To be any thing
Calantha smiles on, is to be a blessing
More sacred than a petty-Prince of Argos
Can wish to equal, or in worth or Title.
Contain your self, my Lord, Ixion aiming
To embrace Iuno, bosomed but a cloud,
And begat Centaurs: it is an useful moral,
Ambition hatched in clouds of mere opinion,
Proves but in birth a prodigy.
I thank 'ee;
Yet, with your Licence, I should seem uncharitable
To gentler Fate, if relishing the dainties
Of a souls settled peace, I were so feeble
Not to digest it.
He deserves small trust
Who is not privy Counsellor to himself.
Brave me?
Your Excellence mistakes his temper•
For Ithocles in fashion of his mind
Is beautiful, soft, gentle, the clear mirror
Of absolute perfection.
Was it your modesty
Termed any of the Prince his servants Spaniel?
Your Nurse sure taught you other language.
Language.
A gallant Man at arms is here: a Doctor
In feats of Chivalry; blunt, and rough spoken,
Vouchsafing not the fustian of civility,
Which rash spirits stile good manners.
Manners.
No more (Illustrious Sir) it is marchlesse Ithocles.
You might have understood who I am.
Yes,
I did — else — but the presence calmed the affront;
Y' are Cozen to the Princess.
To the King too;
A certain Instrument that lent supportance
To your Collossicke greatness: — to that King too
You might have added.
There is more divinity
In beauty then in Majesty.
O fie, fie
This odd youths pride turns heretic in loyalty.
Sirrah! low Mushroms never rival Ced•rs.
Come back: what pitiful dull thing am I
So to be tamely scolded at? Come back;
Let him come back and echo once again
That scornful sound of Mushrome; painted colts,
Like Heralds coats, guilt o'er with Crowns and Scepters,
May bait a musled Lion.
Cozen, Coxen,
Thy tongue is not thy friend.
In point of honour
Discretion knows no bounds. Amelus told me
It was all about a little Ring.
A Ring
The Princess threw away, and I took up:
Admit she threw't to me; what arm of brass
Can snatch it hence? No, could a' grind the hoop
To powder, a' might sooner reach my heart
Then steal and wear one dust on it. — Orgilus,
I am extremely wronged.
A Ladies favour
Is not to be so slighted.
Slighted.
Quiet
These vain vnr•lie passions, which will render ye
Into a madness.
Griefs will have their vent.
Welcome; thou come in season (reuereud man)
To power the balsam of a supplying patience
Into the festering wound of ill-spent fury.
What makes He here?
The hurts are yet but mortal,
Which shortly will prove deadly: To the King,
Armostes, see in safety thou deliver
This sealed up counsel; bid him with a constancy
Peruse the secrets of the gods: — ô Sparta,
O Lacedemon! double named, but one
In fate: when Kingdoms reel (mark well my Saw)
Their heads must needs be giddy: tell the King
That henceforth he no more must enquire after
My aged head: Apollo will• it so;
I am for Delphos.
Not without some conference•
With our great master.
Never more to see him,
A greater Prince commands me. — Ithocles,
When youth is ripe, and Age from time doth part,
The lifeless Trunk shall wed the Broken Heart.
What's this, if understood?
List Orgilus,
Remember what I told thee long before,
These tears shall be my witness.
Alas good man.
Let craft with courtesy a while confer,
Revenge proves its own Executioner.
Dark sentences are for Apollo's Priests:
I am not Oedipus.
My hour is come;
Cheer up the King: farewell to all. — O Sparta,
O Lacedemon.
If prophetic fire
Have warmed this old mans bosom, we might construe
His words to fatal sense.
Leave to the powers
Aboue vs, the effects of their decrees;
My burden lies within me. Servile fears
Prevent no great effects. — Divine Calantha.
The gods be still propitious. —
Something oddly
The bookmen prated; yet a' talked it weeping•
Let craft with courtesy a while confer,
Revenge proves its own executioner.
Conn it again; for what? It shall not puzzle me;
It is dotage of a withered brain. — Penned
Forbad me not her presence; I may see her,
And gaze my fill: why see her then I may;
When if I faint to speak, I must be silent.
Pray use your Recreations, all the service
I will expect, is quietness amongst 'e•:
Take liberty at home, abroad, at all times,
And in your charities appease the gods
Whom I with my distractions have offended.
Fair blessings on thy heart.
Here's a rare change•
My Lord, to cure the itch, is surely gelded;
The Cuckold, in conceit, hath cast his horns.
Betake 'ee to your se••rall occasions,
And wherein I have heretofore been faulty,
Let your constructions mildly pass it over,
Henceforth I'll study reformation, — more,
I have not for employment.
O sweet man!
Thou art the very hony-combe of honesty.
The garland of good-will; — Old Lady, hold up
Thy reverend snout, and trot behind me softly,
As it becomes a Moil of ancient carriage.
Beasts only capable of sense, enjoy
The benefit of food and ease with thankfulness;
Such silly creatures, with a grudging, kick not
Against the portion Nature hath bestowed;
But men endowed with reason, and the use
Of reason, to distinguish from the chafe
Of abject scarscity, the Quintessence,
Soul, and Elixir of the Earths abundance,
The treasures of the Sea, the Ayre, nay heaven
Ripening at these glories of creation,
Are verier beast• than beasts; and of those beasts
The worst am I; I, who was made a Monarch
Of what a heart could wish, for a chaste wife,
Endeavoured what in me lay, to pull down
That Temple built for adoration only,
And leuel't in the dust of causeless scandal:
But to redeem a sacrilege so impious,
Humility shall power before the deities:
I have incensed a largeness of more patience
Then their displeased Altars can require:
No tempests of commotion shall disquiet
The calms of my composure.
I have found thee,
Thou patron of more horrors then the bulk
Of manhood, hooped about with ribs of Iron,
Can cramb within thy breast: P•nthea (Baseness)
Cursed by thy Jealousies; more, by thy dotage•
Is left a prey to words.
Exercis•
Your trials for addition to my penance,
I am resolved.
Play not with misery
Past cure• some angry Minister of Fate hath
Deposed the Empress of her soul, her r••son,
From its most proper Throne; but what's the miracle
More new, I, I have seen it, and yet live.
You may delude my senses, not my judgment:
It is anchored into a firm resolution,
Dalliance of Mirth or Wit can ne'er vnfixe it.
Practise yet further.
May thy death of love to her
Damn all thy comforts to a lasting fast
From every joy of life: Thou barren rock,
By thee we have bee split in ken of harbour.
Sister look up, your Ithocles, your brother
Speaks t'ee: why doe you weep? Dear, turn not from me:
Here is a killing sight: lo, Baseness,
A lamentable object.
Man, dost see it?
Sports are more gamesome; am I yet in merriment?
Why dost not laugh•
Divine, and best of Ladies,
Please to forget my out-rage? mercy ever
Cannot but lodge under a root so excellent:
I have cast off that cruelty of frenzy
Which once appeared, Impostors, and then iugled
To cheat my sleeps of rest.
Was I in earnest?
Sure if we were all Sirens, we should sing pitifully;
And it were a comely music, when in parts
One sung another knell: the Turtle sighs
When he hath lost his mate; and yet some say
A' must be dead first: it is a fine deceit
To pass away in a dream: indeed I'ue slept
With mine eyes open a great while. No falsehood
Equals a broken faith; there's not a hair
Sticks on my head but like a leaden Plummer
It sinks me to the grave: I must creep thither.
The journey is not long.
But thou, Penned,
Hast many years, I hope, to number yet
Ever thou can travel that way.
Let the Swan first
Be wrapped up in an everlasting darkness,
Before the light of nature, chiefly formed
For the whole worlds delight, feel an Eclipse
So universal.
Wisdom (look 'ee)
Begins to rave: — art thou mad too, antiquity•
Since I was first a wife, I might have been
Mother to many pretty prattling Babes:
They would have smiled when I smiled; and, for certain•
I should have cried when they cried; — truly brother,
My father would have picked me out a husband,
And then my little one• had been no bastards:
But it is too late for me to marry now,
I am past child-bearing; it is not my fault.
Fall on me, if there be a burning Etna,
And bury me in flames; sweats hot as sulphur,
Boyle through my pores: affliction hath in store
No torture like to this.
Behold a patience•
Lay by thy whining gr•y dissimulation,
Doe something worth a Chronicle; show Justice
Upon the Author of this mischief; dig out
The Jealousies that hatched this thraldom first
With thine own poniard: every antique r•pture
Can roar as thine does.
Orgilus forbear.
Disturb him not, it is a talking motion
Provided for my torment: what a fool am I
To bawdy passion? ever I'll speak a word
I will look on and burst.
I loved you once.
Thou did, wronged creature, in despite of malice;
For it I love thee even.
Spare your hand,
Believe me, I'll not hurt it.
Pain my heart to
Complain not though I wring it hard: I'll kiss it;
O it is a fine soft palm: hark in thine care,
Like whom doe I look, pre•he? nay, no whispering.
Goodness! we had been happy: too much happiness
Will make folk proud they say — but that is he;
And yet he paid for it home; alas, his heart
Is crept into the cabinet of the Princess;
We shall have points and bridelaces. Remember
When we last gathered Roses in the garden
I found my wits, but truly you lost yours:
That's He, and still it is He.
Poor soul, how idly
Her fancies guide her tongue.
Keep in vexation,
And break not into clamour.
She has tutored me:
Some powerful inspiration checks my laziness:
Now let me kiss your hand, grieved beauty.
Kiss it.
Alack, alack, his lips be wondrous cold;
Dear soul, he has lost his colour: have 'ee seen
A straying heart? all crannies, every drop
Of blood is turned to an Amethist,
Which married Bachelors hang in their ears.
Peace usher her into Elizium:
If this be madness, madness is an Oracle.
Christalla, Philema, when slept my sister,
Her ravings are so wild.
Sir, not these ten days.
We watch by her continually; besides,
We cannot any way pray her to eat.
Oh — misery of miseries!
Take comfort,
You may live well, and dye a good old man:
By yea and nay, an oath not to be broken,
If you had joined our hands once in the Temple,
It was since my father died, for had he lived
He would have don't: I must have called you father:
Oh my wracked honour ruined by those Tyrants,
A cruel brother, and a desperate dotage!
There is no peace left for a ravished wife
Widowed by lawless marriage; to all memory,
Penthea's, poor Penthea's name is strumpeted:
But since her blood was seasoned by the forfeit
Of noble shame, with mixtures of pollution,
Her blood (it is just) he henceforth never heightened
With taste of sustenance. Star•e, l•• that fullness
Whose pleurisy hath •averred faith and modesty,
Forgive me: ô I faint.
Be not so wilful.
Sweet Niece, to work thine own destruction.
Nature
Will call her daughter, monster,— what? not eat?
Refuse the only ordinary mean•
Which are ordained for life? be not, my sister,
A murthresse to thy self. — Hear thou this, Baseness?
Foe, I am busy; for I have not thoughts
Enough to think all shall be well anon.
It is tumbling in my head there is a mastery
In Art to fatten and keep smooth the outside;
Yes, and to comfort up the vital spirits
Without the help of food, fumes or perfumes,
Perfumes or fumes: let her alone, I'll search out
The trick on it.
Lead me gently; heavens reward ye
Griefs are sure friends; they leave (without control)
Nor cure nor comforts for a leprous soul.
I grant t'ee; and will put in practice instantly
What you shall still admire: it is wonderful,
It is super singular, not to be matched:
Yet when I'ue don't, I'ue don't; ye shall all thank me.
The sight is full of terror.
On my soul
Lies such an infinite clog of massy dullness,
As that I have not sense enough to feel it.
See, Uncle, th'augury thing returns again,
Shall's welcome him with Thunder? we are haunted,
And must use exorcism to conjure down
This spirit of malevolence.
Mildly, Nephew.
I come not, Sir, to chide your late disorder:
Admitting that the inurement to a roughness
In Soldiers of your years and fortunes, chiefly
So lately prosperous, hath not yet shook off
The custom of the war in hours of leisure:
Nor shall you need excuse, since y• are to render
Account to that fair Excellence, the Princess,
Who in 〈◊〉 private Gallery expect it
From your own mouth alone: I am a messenger
But to her pleasure.
Excellent Nearchus,
Be Prince still of my services, and conquer,
Without the combat of dispute, I honour 'ee.
The King is on a sudden indisposed,
Physicians are called for; it were fit, Armostes,
You should be near him.
Sir, I kiss your hands.
Amelus, I perceive Calantha's bosom
Is warmed with other fires then such as can
Take strength from any fuel of the love
I might address to her: young Ithocles,
Or ever I mistake, is Lord ascendant
Of her devotions; one, to speak him truly,
In every disposition nobly fashioned,
But can your Highness brooke to be so riual'd,
Considering th'inequality of the persons?
I can, Amelus; for affections injured
By tyranny, or rigour of compul•ion,
Like Tempest-threatned Trees vnfirmely rooted,
Ne'er spring to timely growth: observe, for instance,
Life-spent Penned, and unhappy Orgilus.
How does your grace determine?
To be jealous
In public, of what privately I'll further;
And though they shall not know, yet they shall find it.
Our daughter is not near?
She is retired, Sir,
Into her gallery.
Whore's the Prince our Cozen?
New walked into the Grove (my Lord.)
All leave vs,
Except Armostes, and you Cr•tol•n,
We would be private.
Health unto your Majesty•
What, Tec•i•us is gone?
He is to Delpho••
And to your Royal hands presents this box.
Vnseale it, good Armostes, therein lies
The secrets of the Oracle; out with it;
Apollo live our patron: read, Armostes.
The plot in which the Vine takes root,
Begins to dry, from head to foot,
The stock soon withering, w•ned of sap
Doth cause to quail the budding grape:
But from the neighboring Elm, a d•w
Shall drop and feed the Plot 〈◊〉
That is the Oracle, what exposition
Makes the Philosopher?
This brief• one, only:
The plot is Sparta, the 〈◊〉 a Vine the King;
The quailing grape his daughter; but the thing
Of most importance, not to be reu•al'd,
Is a near Prince, the Elm• the r•st concealed.
Enough; although the opening of this Riddle
Be but it self a Riddle, yet we construe•
How near our labouring age dr•was 〈◊〉 rest•
But must Calantha quail to the young grap•
Untimely budded! I could morn for her,
Her tenderness hath yet deserved no •igor
So to be crossed by Fate.
You misapply, Sir•
With favour let me speak it what Apollo
Hath clouded in hid sense: I here co•gesture•
Her marriage with some neighbouring Prince, the dew
Of which befriending Elm shall ever strengthen
Your Subjects with a Sovereignty of power.
Besides, most gracious Lord, the pith of Oracles
Is to be then digested, when th• events
Expound their truth, not brought 〈◊〉 to ligh•
As uttered; Truth is Child of Time• and herein
I find no scruple, rather cause of comfort•
〈1 page duplicate〉
〈1 page duplicate〉
With unity of kingdoms.
May it prove so•
For weal of this dear Nation. — where is Ithocles?
Armostes, Crotolon; when this withered Vine
Of my frail carcass, on the funeral Pile,
Is fired into its ashes, let that young man
Be hedged about still with your cares and loves;
Much owe I to his worth, much to his service.
Let such as wait come in now.
All attend here.
Dear Sir, King, Father!
O my royal Master!
Clean not my heart (sweet Twins of my life's solace)
With your fore-iudging fears: there is no Physic
So cunningly restorative to cherish
The fall of Age, or call back youth and vigour,
As your consents in duty: I will shake off
This languishing disease of time, to quicken
Fresh pleasures in these drooping hours of sadness:
Is fair Euphranea married yet to Prophilus?
This morning, gracious Lord.
This very morning•
Which with your Highness leave you may observe too
Our sister looks (me thinks) mirthful and sprightly;
As if her chaster fancy could already
Expound the riddle of her gain in losing
A trifle; Maids know only that they know not:
Pish, prethe blush not; it is but honest change
Of fashion in the garment, loose for straight,
And so the modest maid is made a wife:
Shrewd business, is it not sister?
You are pleasant.
We thank thee, Orgilus, this mirth becomes thee:
But wherefore sits the Court in such a silence?
A wedding without Revels is not seemly.
Your into indisposition, Sir, forbade it.
Be it thy charge, Calantha, to set forward
The bridal spo•ts, to which I will •e •resent:
If not, at least consenting• 〈◊〉 own Ithocles,
I have done little foe th•e yet.
You've built me
To the full height I stand in.
Now or never
May I propose a suit.
Demand and have it.
Pray Sir give me this young man, and no further
Account him yours, then he deserves in all things
To be thought worthy mine; I will esteem him
According to his merit.
Still you are my daughter,
Still grow upon my heart, give me thine hand;
Calantha take thine own; in noble actions
Thou'lt find him firm and absolute: I would no•
Have parted with thee, Ithocles, to any
But to a mistress who is all what I am.
A change (great King) most wished for, cause the sam.—
You are mine. — Have I now kept my word.
Divinely.
Rich fortunes guard to favour of a Princess,
Rock thee (brave man) in ever crowned plenty;
You're minion of the tim•, be thankful for it:
Ho, here's a swinge in Destiny. — Apparent,
The youth is up on tiptoe, yet may stumble.
On to your recreations; now convey me
Unto my bed-chamber: none on his forehead
Were a distempered look.
The gods preserue'ee.
Sweet be not from my sight.
My whole felicity.
Shall I be bold my Lord?
Thou can not, Orgilus;
Call me thine own, for Prophilus must henceforth
Be all thy sisters; friendship, though it cease not
In marriage, yet is oft at less command
Then when a single freedom can dispose it.
Most right, my most good Lord, my most great Lord,
My gracious Princely Lord, I might add royal.
Royal, a Subject royal?
Why not, pray Sir?
The Sovereignty of Kingdoms in their nonage
Stooped to desert, not birth: there's as much meri•
In clearness of affection, as in puddle
Of generation: you have conquered Love
Even in the loveliest; if I greatly err not,
The son of Venus hath bequeathed his quiver
To Ithocles his manage, by whose arrows
Calantha's breast is opened.
Can't be possible?
I was my self a piece of suitor once,
And forward in preferment too; so forward,
That speaking truth, I may without offence (Sir)
Presume to whisper, that my hopes, and (hark 'ee)
My certainty of ma•riage stood assured
With as firm footing (by your leave) as any's
Now at this very instant — but. —
It is granted:
And for a league of privacy between vs,
Read o'er my bosom, and partake a secret;
The Princess is contracted mine.
Still: why not?
I now applaud her wisdom; when your kingdom
Stands seated in your will secure, and settled,
I dare pronounce you will be a just Monarch:
Greece must admire, and tremble.
Then the sweetness
Of so imparadised a comfort, Orgilus,
It is to banquet with the gods.
The glory
Of numerous children, potency of Nobles,
Bent knees, hearts paved to tread on.
With a friendshi•
So dear, so fast as thine.
I am unfitting
For Office, but for service.
We'll distinguish
Our fortunes merely in the Title; partners
In all respects else but the bed.
The bed?
Foresend it Ioues own Jealousy, till lastly
We slip down in the common earth together;
And there our beds are equal, save some Monument
To show this was the King, and this the Subject.
List, what sad sounds are these? extremely sad ones.
Sure from Penthea's lodgings.
Hark, a voice too.
Oh no more, no more, too late
Sighs are spent; the burning Tapers
Of a life as chaste as Fate,
Pure as are unwritten papers,
Are bur•t out: no heat, no light
Now remains it is ever night.
Love is dead, let lovers eyes,
Locked in endless dreams,
The extremes of all extremes,
Op no more, for now Love dyes,
Now Love dyes, implying
Loves Martyrs must be ever, ever dying.
Oh my misgiving heart!
A horrid stillness
Succeeds this deathful ayre, let's know the reason:
Tread softly, there is mystery in mourning.
It is done, that on her right hand.
Good, begone.
Soft peace enrich this room.
How fares the Lady?
Dead.
Dead!
Starved.
Starved!
Me miserable!
Tell vs
How parted she from life?
She called for music,
And begged some gentle voice to tune a farewell
To life and griefs: Christalla touched the Lute,
I wept the funeral song.
Which scarce was ended,
But her last breath sealed up these hollow sounds,
O cruel Ithocles, and injured Orgilus!
So down she drew her veil, so died.
So died.
Up; you are messengers of death, go from vs;
Here's woe enough to court without a pr•mpter.
Away; and hark ye, till you see vs next,
No syllable that she is dead. —Away,
Keep a smooth brow. — My Lord.
Mine only sister,
Another is not left me.
Take that chair,
I'll seat me here in this: between vs sits
The object of our sorrows; some few tears
We'll part among vs; I perhaps can mix
One lamentable story to prepare 'em.
There, there, sit there, my Lord.
Yes, as you please.
What means this treachery?
Caught, you are caught
Young master: it is thy throne of Coronation,
Thou fool of greatness: see, I take this veil off;
Survey a beauty withered by the flames
Of an insulting Phaeton her brother.
Thou mean to kill me basely.
I foreknew
The last act of her life, and trained thee hither
To sacrifice a Tyrant to a Turtle.
You dream't of kingdoms, did 'ee? how to bosom
The delicacies of a youngling Princess,
How with this nod to grace that subtle Courtier,
How with that frown to make this Noble tremble,
And so forth; whiles Penthea's groans, and tortures,
Her agonies, her miseries, afflictions,
Ne'er touched upon your thought; as for my injuries,
Alas they were beneath your royal pity,
But yet they lived, thou proud man, to confound thee:
Behold thy fate, this steel.
Strike home; a courage
As keen as thy revenge shall give it welcome:
But prethe faint not; if the wound close up,
Tent it with double force, and search it deeply.
Thou look that I should whine, and beg compassion,
As loath to leave the vainness of my glories;
A statelier resolution arms my confidence,
To cozen thee of honour; neither could I,
With equal trial of unequal fortune,
By hazard of a duel, it were a bravery
Too mighty for a slave intending murder:
On to the Execution, and inherit
A conflict with thy horrors.
By Apollo,
Thou talk a goodly language; for r•quitall,
I will report thee to thy mistress richly:
And take this peace along; some few short minutes
Determined, my resolves shall quickly follow
Thy wrathful ghost; then if we tug for mastery,
Pentheas sacred eyes shall lend new courage.
Give me thy hand, be healthful in thy parting
From lost mortality: thus, thus, I free it.
Yet, yet, I scorn to shrink.
Keep up thy spirit:
I will be gentle even in blood; to linger
Pain, which I strive to cure, were to be cruel.
Nimble in vengeance I forgive thee; follow
Safety, with best success ô may it prosper!
Penned, by thy side thy brother bleeds:
The earnest of his wrongs to thy forced faith,
Thoughts of ambition, or delicious banquet,
With beauty, youth, and love, together perish
In my last breath, which on the sacred Altar
Of a long looked for peace-now-moues-to heaven.
Farewell, fair spring of manhood; henceforth welcome
Best expectation of a noble suffrance:
I'll locke the bodies safe, till what must follow
Shall be approved•— Sweet Twins shine stars for ever.
In vain they build their hopes, whose life is shame,
No monument l•sts but a happy Name.

AThens, to Athens I have sent, the Nursery
Of Greec• for lea•ning, and the Fount of knowledge:
For here in Sparta there's not left amongst vs
One wise man to direct, we're all turned madcaps:
It is said, Apollo is the god of herbs;
Then certainly he knows the virtue of 'em:
To Delphos I have sent to; if there can be
A help for nature, we are sure yet.
Honour
Attend thy counsels ever.
I beseech thee
With all my heart let me go from thee quietly,
I will not ought to doe with thee of all men.
The doublers of a Hare, or, in a morning,
Salutes from a splay-footed witch, to drop
Three drops of blood at the nose just, and no more,
Croaking of Ravens, or the screech of Owls,
Are not so boding mischief as thy crossing
My private meditations: shun me, prethe;
And if I cannot love thee heartily,
I'll love thee as well as I can.
Noble Baseness
Mistake me not.
Phew, then we shall be troubled;
Thou were ordained my plague, heaven make me thankful,
And give me patience too, heaven I beseech thee.
Accept a league of amity; for henceforth
I vow by my best Genius, in a syllable,
Never to speak vexation; I will study
Service and friendship with a zealous sorrow
For my past incivility towards 'ee.
Heyday! good words, good words, I must believe 'em,
And be a Coxcomb for my labour.
Use not
So hard a Language; your misdoubt is causeless
For instance; if you promise to put on
A constancy of patience, such a patience
As Chronicle, or history ne'er mentioned,
As follows not example, but shall stand
A wonder, and a Theme for imitation,
The first, the Index pointing to a second,
I will acquaint'ee with an unmatched secret,
Whose knowledge to your griefs shall set a period.
Thou can not (Orgilus) it is in the pow•r
Of the gods only; yet for satisfaction,
Because I note an earnest in thine utterance,
Unforced, and naturally free, be resolute
The Virgin Baize shall not withstand the lightning
With a more careless danger, than my constancy
The full of thy relation: could it move
Distraction in a senseless marble statue,
It should find me a rock: I doe expect now
Some truth of unheard moment.
To your patience
You must add privacy, as strong in silence
As mysteries looked up in Ioues own bosom.
A skull hid in the earth a treble age,
Shall sooner prate.
Lastly, to such direction
As the severity of a glorious Action
Deserves to lead your wisdom and your judgment,
You ought to yield obedience.
With assurance
Of will and thankfulness.
With manly courage
Please then to follow me.
Where ever, I fear not.

We miss our servant Ithocles and Orgilus,
On whom attend they?
My son, gracious Princess,
Whispered some new device, to which these; Revels
Should be but usher: wherein I conceive
Lord Ithocles and he himself are Actors.
A fair excuse for absence: as for Baseness.
Delights to him are troublesome; Armostes
Is with the King.
He is.
On to the dance:
Dear Cozen, hand you the Bride, the Bridegroom must be
Entrusted to my Courtship: be not ica•o•••
Euphranea, I shall scarcely prove a temptress:
Fall to our dance.
The King your father's dead. — in Calantha's ear•
To the other change.
Is it possible?
O Madam!
Penned, poor Penthea's starved.
Beshrew thee,
Lead to the next.
Amazement dulls my senses.
Brave Ithocles is murdered, murdered cruelly.
How dull this music sounds? strike up more sprightly?
Our footings are not active like our heart
Which treads the nimbler measure.
I am thunder-strooke.
So, let us breath a while: hath not this motion
Raised fresher colour on your cheeks?
Sweet Princess.
A perfect purity of blood enamels
The beauty of your white.
We all look cheerfully:
And Cozen, it is, me thinks, a rare presumption
In any, who prefe•s our lawful pleasures
Before their own sour censure, to interrupt
The custom of this Ceremony bluntly.
None dares, Lady.
Yes, yes; some hollow voice delivered to me
How that the King was dead.
The King is dead:
That fatal news was mine; for in mine arms
He breathed his last, and with his Crown bequeathed 'ee
Your mothers wedding Ring, which here I tender.
Most strange!
Peace crown his ashes: we are queen then.
Long li•e Calan•ha, Sparta's Sovereign Queen.
Long live the Queen.
What whispered Bass••••?
That my Penned, miserable soul,
Was starn'd to death.
Shoe's happy; she hath finished
A long and painful progress.— A third murmur
Pierced mine unwilling ears.
That Ithocles
Was murdered; rather butchered, had not bravery
Of an undaunted spirit, conquering terror,
Proclaimed his last Act triumph over mine.
How? murdered?
By whose hand?
By mine; this weapon
Was instrument to my revenge: the reasons
Are just and known: quit him of these, and then
Never lived Gentleman of greater merit,
Hope, or habiliment to steer a kingdom.
Fie Orgilus.
Fie brother.
You have done it.
How it was done let him report, the forfeit
Of whose allegiance to our laws doth covet
Rigour of Justice; but that done it is,
Mine eyes have been an evidence of credit
Too sure to be convinced: Armostes, rent not
Thine Arteries with hearing the bare circumstances
Of these calamities: thou'st lost a Nephew,
A Niece, and I a wife: continue man still,
Make me the pattern of digesting evils,
Who can out-liue my mighty ones, not shrinking
At such a pressure as would sink a soul
Into what's most of death, the worst of horrors:
But I have sealed a covenant with sadness,
And entered into bonds without condition
To stand these tempests calmly; mark m•, Nobles,
I doe not shed a tear, not for Penth•a:
Excellent misery!
We begin our reign
With a first act of Justice: thy confession,
Unhappy Orgilus, dooms thee a sentence;
But yet thy fathers, or thy sisters presence
Shall be excused: give, Crotolon, a blessing
To thy lost son• Euphranea, take a farewell,
And both be gone.
Confirm thee, noble sorrow,
In worthy resolution.
Could my tears speak,
My griefs were slight.
All goods dwell amongst ye•
Enjoy my sister, Prophilus; my vengeance
Aimed never at thy prejudice.
Now withdraw:
Bloody relator of thy staines in blood;
For that thou hast reported him whose fortunes
And life by thee are both at once snatched from him,
With honourable mention; make thy choice
Of what death likes thee best, there's all our bounty.
But to excuse delays, let me (dear Cozen)
Entreat you and these Lords see execution
Instant before 'ee part.
Your will commands vs.
One suit, just Queen, my last; vouchsafe your clemency
That by no common hand I be divided
From this my humble frailty.
To their wisdoms
Who are to be spectators of thine end,
I make the reference: those that are dead,
Are dead; had they not now died, of necessity
They must have paid the debt they owed to nature,
One time or other. — Use dispatch, my Lords,
We'll suddenly prepare our Coronation.
It is strange, these Tragedies should never touch on
Her female pity.
She has a masculine spirit:
And wherefore should I pull, and like a girl,
Put finger in the eye: let's be all toughness,
Without distinction betwixt sex and sex.
Now Orgilus thy choice.
To bleed to death.
The Executioner.
My self, no Surgeon.
I am well skilled in letting blood: bind fast
This arm, that so the pipes may from their conduits
Convey a full stream: here's a skilful Instrument:
Only I am a beggar to some charity
To speed me in this Execution,
By lending the other prick to the tother arm,
When this is bubbling life ou•.
I am for 'ee.
It most concerns my art, my care, my credit;
Quick, fillet both this arms.
Gramercy friendship•
Such courtesies are real, which flow cheerfully
Without an expectation of requital.
Reach me a staff in this hand: if a proneness,
Or custom in my nature, from my cradle,
Had been inclined to fierce and eager bloodshed;
A coward guilt, hid in a coward quaking,
Would have betrayed fame to ignoble flight,
And vagabond pursuit of dreadful safety:
But look upon my steadiness, and scorn not
The sickness of my fortune, which since Baseness
Was husband to Penned, had lain bed-rid:
We trifle time in words: thus I show cunning
In opening of a vein too full, too lively.
Desperate courage.
Honourable infan•y.
I tremble at the sight.
Would I were loose.
It sparkles like a lusty wine new broached;
The vessel must be sound from which it issues;
Grasp hard this other stick• I'll be as nimble.
But prethe look not pale; have at 'ee stretch out
Thine arm with vigour, and vnshooke virtue.
Good; ô I envy not • Rival fit•ed
To conquer in extremities; this pastime
Appears majestic: some high tuned poem
Hereafter shall deliver to posterity
The writers glory, and his subjects triumph:
How is it man, droop not yet.
I feel no palsies:
On a pair royal doe I wait in death;
My Sovereign, as his Liegeman; on my Mistress,
As a devoted servant; and on Ithocles,
As if no brave, yet no unworthy enemy:
Nor did I use an engine to entrap
His life, out of a slavish fear to combat
Youth, strength, or cunning, but for that I durst not
Engage the goodness of a cause on fortune,
By which his name might have out-fac'd my vengeance:
〈◊〉 Tecnicus, inspired with Phoebus fire,
I call to mind thy Augury, it was perfect;
Revenge proves its own Executioner•
When feeble man is bending to his mother,
The dust he was first framed on, thus he totters.
Life's fountain is dried up.
So falls the Standards
Of my prerogative in being a creature:
A mist hangs o'er mine eyes; the Sun's bright splendour
Is clouded in an everlasting shadow:
Welcome thou ice that sit about my heart,
No heat can ever thaw thee.
Speech hath left him.
A' has shook hands with time: his funeral urn
Shall be my charge: remove the bloodless body;
The Coronation must require attendance:
That past, my few days can be but one mourning.
Our Orisons are heard, the gods are merciful:
Now tell me, you whose loyalties pays tribute
To vs your lawful Sovereign, how unskilful
Your duties or obedience is, to render
Subjection to the Sceptre of a Virgin,
Who have been ever fortunate in Princes
Of masculine and stirring composition?
A woman has enough to govern wisely
Her own demeanours, passions, and divisions.
A Nation warlike and inu•'d to practice
Of policy and labour, cannot brooke
A feminate authority: we therefore
Command your counsel, how you may advise vs
In choosing of a husband whose abilities
Can better guide this kingdom.
Royal Lady,
Your law is in your will.
We have seen tokens
Of constancy too lately to mistrust it.
Yet if your highness se•tle on a choice
By your own judgment both allowed and liked of,
Sparta may grow in power, and proceed
To an increasing height.
Hold you the same mind.
Alas great mistress, reason is so clouded
With the thick darkness of my infinites woes
That I forecast, nor dangers, hopes, or safety:
Give me some corner of the world to wear out
The remnant of the minutes I must number,
Where I may hear no sounds, but sad complaints
Of Virgins who have lost contracted partners;
Of husbands howling that their wives were ravished
By some untimely fate; of friends divided
By churlish opposition, or of fathers
Weeping upon their childrens slaughtered carcasses;
Or daughters groaning ore their fathers hearses,
And I can dwell there• and with these keep consort
As musical a• their•• what can you look ••r
From an old foolish peevish doting man,
But craziness of age?
Cozen of Argos.
Madam.
Were I presently
To choose you for my Lord, Isle open freely
What articles I would propose to treat on
Before our marriage.
Name them virtuous Lady.
I would presume you would retain the royalty
Of Sparta in her own bounds: then in Argos
Armostes might be Viceroy; in Mess•no
Might Crotolon bear sway, and Baseness —
I, Queen? alas! what I?
Be Sparta's Marshall:
The multitudes of high employments could not
But set a peace to private griefs: these Gentlemen,
Groan•as and Lemophil, with worthy pensions
Should wait upon your person in your Chamber:
I would bestow Crystal• on Amelus,
She'll prove a constant wife, and Phil•m.
Should into Vista's Temple.
This is a Testament,
It sounds not like conditions on a marriage.
All this should be performed,
Lastly, for Prophilus•
He should be (Cozen) solemnly invested
In all those honours, titles, and preferments
Which his dear friend, and my neglected husband
Too short a time enjoyed.
I am unworthy
To live in your remembrance.
Excellent Lady!
Madam, what means that word neglected husband?
Forgive me: now I turn to thee thou shadow
Of my contracted Lord: bear witness all,
I put my mother wedding Ring upon
His finger, it was my fathers last bequest:
Thus I new marry him whose wife I am;
Death shall not separate vs: ô my Lords,
I but deceived your eyes with Antique gesture,
When one news straight came huddling on another,
Of death, and death, and death, still I danced forward,
But it struck home, and here, and in an instant,
Be such mere women, who with shrieks and out-crie•
Can vow a present end to all their sorrows,
Yet live to vow new pleasures, and out-liue them:
They are the silent griefs which cut the hart-strings;
Let me dye smiling.
It is a truth too ominous.
One kiss on these cold lips, my last; crack, cr•cke.
Argos now's Sparta's King: command the voices
Which wait at the Altar, now to sing the song
I fitted for my end.
Sirs, the •ong•
Glories, pleasures, pomps, deligh•s, and ease,
Can but please
outward senses, when the mind
Is not untroubled, or by peace refined.
Crowns may flourish and decay,
Beauties shine, but fade away.
Youth may revel, yet it must
Lye down in a bed of dust:
Earthly honours flow and wast,
Time alone doth change and last.
Sorrows mingled with contents, prepare
Rest for care;
Love only reigns in death: though Art
Can find no comfort for a broken heart.
Look to the Queen.
Her heart is 〈…〉
O royal ma•d, would thou had mis• this part:
Yet it was a brave one: I must weep to see
Her smile in death.
Wise Tecnicus, thus said •e•
When youth is ripe, and age from time doth part,
The lifeless Trunk shall wed the broken hearts
It is here fulfilled.
I am your King.
Long live
Nearchus King of Sparta.
Her last will
Shall never be digressed from; wait in order
Upon these faithful lovers as becomes vs.
The Counsels of the gods are never known,
Till men can call the effects of them their own•

NVtmegge?
Sugar? well met, how chance
you waite not upon your Moister,
whore's Wine now?
Oh sometimes without Sugar,
all the while he's well if I bee in his company, tic but for
fashion sake, I waite upon him into a room now and then,
but am not regarded: marry when hee is ill, hee makes
much of me, who but Sugar? but to my remembrance I
have not been in his presence this fortnight, I hope short∣lie
hee will not know me, though he meet me in his drink.
Thou hast a sweet life in the mean time Sugar.
But thou art tied to more attendance Nutmegge up∣on
your Moister Beer.
Faith no, I am free now and then, though I bee his
Prentice still, Nutmegge hath more friends to trust to then
Beer: I can be welcome to wine thy master sometimes, and
to the honest Country man Ale too. But now I talk of Ale,
when did see his man prithee?
Who, Tossed?
The same.
I meet him at Tavern every day.
When shall thou, and he, and I, meet and be mer∣rye
over a Cup?
Isle tell thee Nutmegge, I doe not care much for his
company, he's such a choleric piece, I know not what
he's made of, but his quarrelling comes home to him, for
hoe's every day cut for it, I marvel how he scopes, this more∣ning
he had a knife thrust into him.
Indeed he will be very hot sometimes.
Hot? I, till he look black ith'face again, besides, if
he take an opinion ther's no turning him, he will be burnt first.
I did but by chance let fall some words against Ale, and hee
had like to have beaten me to powder for it.
How; beaten Sugar? that would be very fine in faith;
but hee being bread, and thou a loaf, you should not dif∣fer
so. Stand, look where he is.
Then Isle be gone, for we shall quarrel.
Come, fear not, Isle part you, but hoe's drunk, rea∣die
to fall; whence comes he dropping in now? How now
Tossed?
Nutmeg? round and sound and all of a colour, art
thou there?
Heere's all that's left of me.
Nutmeg, I love thee Nutmeg. What's that a Ghost?
No▪ tic your old acquaintance Sugar.
Sugar: Isle beat him to pieces.
Hold, hold. Nutmegge.
Cannot Tossed stand without holding?
Where have you been Tossed?
Isle tell thee, I have bin with my M. Ale. Sir, I was
very dry, and he has made me drunk: doe I not crumble? I
shall fall a pieces; but Isle beat Sugar for all that: I doe not
weigh him, hee is a poor Rogue, I have known him sold
for two pence, when hee was young, wrapped in swaddling
clouts of Paper. I know his breeding, a Drawer brought
him up, and now hoe's grown so lumpish.
You're a rude Tossed.
Rude? Let me but crush him: Rude? Sir, tic well
known you come from Barberry your self, and because of
some few Pounds in a Chest, you think to domineer over
Tossed: you're a little handsome, I confess, &amp; Wenches like
their lips after you; but for all that, would I might sink to
the bottom, if I doe not—: I will give Sugar but one box.
Come, come. you shall not.
Prithee Nutmeg, take out Tossed a little, to morrow
weal meet and be drunk together.
So, so, I am glad hoe's gone: I doe not love this Tosts com∣pany,
yet some occasion or other, puts me still upon him. Ha,
who's this?
Tic Wine my Master.
Sugar, you are a sweet youth, you wait well.
A friend of mine called me forth, to cure a cut fin∣ger.
You'll turn Surgeon or Physician shortly.
But your diseases need none: for inflammations, which
are dangerous to others, makes you more acceptable, nor
doe you blush to have it reported sir, how often you have
been burnt.
So sir, now you put me in mind on it, I hear say
you run a winching, and keep women's company too
much.
Alas sir, like will to like, Sugar being of his own
nature sweet, has reason to make much of women, which
are the sweetest creatures.
But some of them are sower enough.
I sir, Widows at fifteen, and Maids at twenty
five; but I keep them company, for no other thing, then
to convert them, some of them could even eat me, but for
fear of spoiling their teeth.
Indeed one of your sweet hearts complained t'other
day you made her teeth rotten.
Alas sir, it was none of my fault, she bit me first, and
I could doe no less, then punish her sweet tooth.
Well sir, I say, take heed of women.
Nay sir, if I may credit my own experience they
are the best friends I have, for I am always in their mouths.
If I come to a banquet, as none are made without me, in
what fashion soever I appear, every woman bestows a
handkercher upon me, and strive to carry me away in their
cleanest linen: nay, but for shame, to betray their affections
to me, they would bring whole sheets for me to lie in▪
Why sure thou were wrapped in thy mothers smock.
I think if the Midwife were put to her oath, I was
wrapped in hers, oath Christing day.
But see sir, here's Master Beer.
How, Beer? we are not very good friends, no mat∣la,
I scorn to avoid him.
Beere-leaue sir.
So me thinks? how now Beer, running atilt, dost
not know me?
I doe mean to have the wall on you.
The wall of me, you would have your head and the
wall knocked together, learn better manners, or I may chance
to broach you.
Broach me, alas poor Wine, tic not your Fieri
facias can make Beer afraid, thy betters know the strength
of Beer. I doe not fear your high colour sir.
So, so, here will be some scuffling.
You'll leave your impudence, and learn to know
your superiors Beer, or I may chance to have you stopped up.
what never leave working? I am none of your fellows.
I scorn thou should.
I am a companion for Princes, the least drop of
my blood, worth all thy body. I am sent for by the Citizens,
visited by the Gallants, kissed by the Gentlewomen▪ I am their
life, their Genius, the Poetical fury, the Helicon of the Mu∣ses,
of better value then Beer; I should be sorry else.
Thou art sorry wine indeed sometimes: Value?
you are come up of late, men pay dear for your company,
and repent it: that gives you not the precedence; though
Beer set not so great a price upon himself, he means not to
bate a grain of his worth, nor subscribe to Wine for all his
braueries,
Not to me?
Not to you: why whence come you pray?
From France, from Spain, from Greece.
Thou art a mad Greek indeed.
Where thou must never hope to come: who dares
deny that I have been a travailer?
A travailer? in a tumbrel, a little Beer will go far∣there:
why Wine, art not thou kept under locke and key, con∣find
to some corner of a Cellar, and there indeed common∣lie
close prisoner, unless the Jailer or Yeoman of the Boat∣tles
turn the Key for the chamber-maid now and then, for
which she vows not to leave him, till the last gasp, where
Beer goes abroad, and rendezvous in every place.
Thou in every place? away hop of my thumb:
Beer, I am a shamed of thee.
Be ashamed of thy self, and blush Wine thou art no
better. Beer shall have commendations for his mildness and
virtue, when thou art spit out of men's mouths, &amp; distasted:
thou art an hypocrite, Wine, art all white sometimes, but
more changeable then Proteus: thou would take upon thee
to comfort the blood, but hast been the cause that too many
noble veins have been emptied: thy virtue is to betray se∣crets,
the very preparative to a thousand rapes and murders,
and yet thou dare stand upon thy credit, and prefer thy
self to Beer, that is as clear as day.
Well said Beer, hee bears up stiff like a Constable.
Now will I play my part with 'em both. Sir, 
This is intolerable.
The vessel of your wit leaks, Beer, why thou art
drunk.
So art thou Wine, every day in the week, and art
fine to be carried forth of doors.
How sir?
I scorn thy words, thou art base Beer: Wine is well
borne, has good breeding, and bringing up; thou deserve
to be carted, Beer.
Suffer this, and suffer all, to him again.
Carted? thou would be carted thy self, racked and
drawn for thy baseness, Wine. Welborne? Did not every
man call you Bastard tother day? borne? ther's no man able
to bear thee much: and for breeding, I know none thou
hast, unless it bee Diseases.
How, diseases? you have been held always to bee
wholesome Wine, sir.
Sir, if I take you in hand, I shall make you small
Beer.
Take heed I doe not make Vinegar of you first.
Doe, doe, make him peace it, in my opinion sir, it were
not for your honour to run away: yet Beer being a common
quarreler, I fear may prove too hard for you.
Too hard for me? away Boy, Isle be as hard as he
for his hart: alas, hoe's but weak Beer, if I give him but a
tap, it shall stay him from running out thus.
So, so, they are high enough fall too, and well∣come.
Who's this? Ale? Oh for the three-men-Song: this Ale is a
stout fellow, it shall go hard, but Sugar which makes all
sweet sometimes, shall set him in his part of Discord.
Come, come, Beer, you forget how low you were
tother day: provoke me not too much, lest I bestow a firkin
on you.
Strike and thou dare Wine, I shall make thee an∣swear
as quick as the objection, and give you a dash.
Vmh: what's this? it seems theres great difference
between Wine and Beer. Sugar, what's the matter?
Oh goodman Ale, I am glad you're come, heare's no∣thing
but contention: I have gone betwixt 'em twice or
thrice, but I fear, one or both will be spilt.
What doe they contend about?
For that, which for ought I can apprehend, belongs
as much to you, as to either of them.
Ho? to me? what's that?
Ale, by judicious men hath been held no despicable
drink, for my own part, tic nothing to me: you are all one
to Sugar, whosoever be King, Sugar can be a subject, but yet,
it were fit, Ale had his measure.
Are they so proud?
They mind not you, as if you were too unworthy a
Competitor; See, tic come to a challenge.
Pray take no knowledge that I discovered any thing of their
Ambition; Sugar shall ever bee found true to Ale, else would
I might never be more drunk in your company.
No matter for protestation.
So, so, now I have warmed Ale pretty well, Isle leave
'em: if Wine Beer and Ale agree together, would Sugar
might never bee drunk but with Water, nor never help to
preserve any thing but old women, &amp; elder brothers.
Remember the place, and weapon.
Stay, stay, come together again, why how now, what
fight, and kill one another?
Alas poor Beer, I account him dead already.
No sir, you may find Beer quick enough, to pierce
your Hogshead. I shall remember.
But ith mean time you both forget your selves: dee
hear? Ale is a friend to you both, let me know your dif∣ference.
Hee has disgraced me.
Thou hast disgraced thy self in thy comparisons.
Wine must be acknowledged the Nectar of all drinks, the
prince of Liquors.
To wash Boots.
Hark you, are you both mad? who hath heat you,
that you run over, do you contend for that in justice belongs
to another? I tell you Wine and Beer, I do not relish you,
Isle tell you a tale: Two spruce hot-spurre fiery gallants meet∣ing
ith streets, iustled for the wall, drew, would he been fight∣ing:
there steps me forth a correcter of soles, an vnderlaid
cobbler, and cries out, Hold, hold your hands Gentlemen, are
you so simple to fight for the wall? why the wall's my Land∣lords.
Have you but so much wit as to apply this, you shall
never need fence for the matter. Superiority is mine, Ale
is the prince of liquors, and you are both my subjects.
Wee thy Subjects?
O base Ale.
O muddy Ale.
Leave your railing, and attend my reasons, I claim
your duties to me, for many prerogatives: my antiquity,
my riches, my learning, my, strength, my gravity.
Antiquity? your first reason's a very small one.
Dare any of you deny my antiquity? I say.
We must bear with him, tic in his Ale.
It only pleads for me: who hath not heard of the
old Ale of England?
Old Ale; oh there tic grown to a Proverb,
Iones Ale'new.
These are trifles, and convince me not.
If wee should grant your argument, you would
gain little by it, go together, I doe allow you both a couple
of stale companions.
Wine, you're very harsh.
Let him, my second prerogative is my riches and
possessions; for who knows not how many houses I have?
Wine and Beer are fine to take up a corner, your ambition
goes no further then a Cellar, where the whole house where
I am is mine, goes only by my name, is called an Alehouse;
but when is either heard, the Wine-house, or the Beer∣house?
you cannot pass a street, wherein I have not thou∣ses
of mine own, besides many that go by other men's
names.
I confess you have here and there an Alehouse,
but whose are all the rest? hath not Beer as much title to
them?
And yet I have not heard that either of you both
have fined for Aldermen, though I confess something has bin
attempted out of nick and froth. Be ruled by me, Beer and
Ale, &amp; aspire no heigher then the Common-Councell-hous∣es.
Oh impudence, that either of you should talk of houses,
when sometimes you are both glad of a tub: dee hear Ale?
doe not you know the man that did the bottle bring?
Thou art glad of a Bottle thy self, Wine, some∣times,
and so is Beer too, for all he froaths now.
So, so.
My third Prerogative, is my Learning.
Learning? If you have the Liberal Sciences, pray
be free, and lets hear some.
For that, though I could give you demonstration,
for breuities sake I remit you to my books.
Books? printed Cum priuilegio no doubt on it, and
sold for the Company of Stationers: what are the names?
Admire me, but when I name learned, though not
the great Alexander Ale and Tostatus the Iesuite.
O learned Ale, you scorn to make Indentures any
more, but you might as well have concluded this without
book.
Why, you will shortly be Towne-Clerke, the Ci∣tie
Chronicler is too mean a place for you.
Now for my strength and invincibility.
But here let me interrupt you, talk no more of
strength, none but Beer deserves to bee called strong, no pen
is able to set down my victories. I? why, I have been the
destruction.—
Of Troy, hast not? here your own mouths con∣damn
you: if killing be your conquest, every Quacksaluing
knave may have the credit of a rare Physician, that sends more
to the Church and Churchyard, then diseases doe: I Wine,
comfort &amp; preserve, let that be my Character. I am cousin Ger∣man
to the blood, not so like in my appearance as I am in na∣ture,
I repair the debilities of age, and revive the refrigera∣ted
spirits, exhilarate the heart, and steel the brow with con∣fidence.
For you both the Poet hath drawn you memory∣all
in one.
—nil spissus isle
Dum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur, vnde
Constat quote muled as foeces in corpora linquat.
Nothing goes in so thick,
Nothing comes out so thin:
It must needs follow then,
Your dregs are left within.
And so I leave you Stygiae monstrum conform paludi,
monstrous drink, like the river Styx.
Nay but hark, tic not your Latin must carry it a∣way,
I will not loose a drop of my reparation, and by your
favour, if you stand so much upon your preserving, Isle put
you to your Latin again, and prove my self superior, for
Ale as if it were the life of mankind, hath a peculiar name
and denomination, being called Ale from Aloe, which every
School boy can tell, signifies to feed and norish, which nei∣there
Wine nor Beer can show for themselves; and for my
strength and honour in the wars, know that Ale is a Knight
of Malta, and dares fight with any man bears a head, tic
more safe to believe what a Soldier I am, then try what I
can doe.
If you look thus ilfauouredly Ale, you may fright
men well enough, and be held terrible by weak stomachs;
but if you call to mind the puissance and valour of Beer, in∣vincible
Beer, tumble down Beer, you must sing a Pal∣linode.
I? why I have overthrown armies, how easy is it
for me to take a city, when I can tame Constables, which
in their presence are formidable at midnight, in the midst
of their rugged Bill-men, make 'em all resign their weapons,
and send 'em away to sleep upon their charge.
How? upon their own charge? take the Constable
committing that fault, and he will never bee good in his office
after it.
Now for my virtue in preserving and nourish∣ing
the body wherein you both so glory, you are not to com∣pare
with me, since thousands every day come to receive
their healths from me.
Kings and Princes from me, and like them I am ser∣ued
in plate.
But thou art come down of late to a glass, Wine:
and that's the reason I think, so many Vintners have broke:
now observe my last Reason.
Yes, pray where lies your gravity?
Not in my Beard, I speak without mental reserve∣tion,
Isle tell you, and you shall confess it: the Wise men of
ancient time were called Sages, and to this day it signifies
judgment, discretion, gravity; for by what other would
you excite to good manners more aptly, then to show a young
man to bee sage, that is grave: and with what title can you
better salute him that is grave, or more honour him, then to
call him one of the Sages? Now this appellation neither of
you can challenge, yet every man gives me the attribute;
for who knows not I am called Sage Ale?
One may guess what brains he caries by the Sage
now.
And thus having given you sufficient reasons for
your acknowledgment of my principality, let your knees
witness your obedience to your King, and I will grace you
both by making you Squires of my body, right honourable
Ale-Squires.
This is beyond suffering: was ever Wine so under∣valued?
Barbarous detractors, whose beginning came from
a dunghill, I defy you Bacchus, look down, and see me
vindicate thine honour, I scorn to procrastinate in this, and
this minute you shall give account of your insolences: my
spirit's high, I am enemy to both.
Is Wine drawn? then have at you, Isle make good Ale.
I stand for the honour of Beer, were you an army.
Hold, hold, hold.
How now? what comes water running hither for?
Let my fear ebb a little.
What tide brought you hither, Water?
The pure stream of my affection: oh how I am
troubled! I am not yet recovered.
So me thinks you look very thin upon it Water:
but why doe we not fight?
Doe not talk of fighting, is it not time that Wa∣la
should come to quench the fire of such contention? I tell
you, the care of your preservation made me break my banks
to come to you, that you might see the overflowing love I
bear you: your quarrel hath echoed unto me; I know your
ambition for superiority: you are all my kinsmen, near al∣lied
to Water, and though I say it, sometimes not a little be∣holding
to Water, even for your very makings. Will you
refer your selves to me, and wade no further in these dis∣contentments?
I will undertake your reconcilement and qua∣lification.
To thee, Water? wilt thou take upon thee to cor∣rect
our irregularity? Thou often goosed beyond thy bounds
thy self. But if they consent, I shall.
I am content.
And I.
Then without further circumlocution or insinua∣tion,
Water runs to the matter: you shall no more contend
for excellence, for Water shall allow each of you a singular∣tie.
First, you Wine, shall be in most request among Cour∣tiers,
Gallants, Gentlemen, Poetical wits, Queen melioris
lute homines, being of a refined mould, shall choose as a more
nimble and active watering, to make their brains fruitful,
Fecundi calices quem non? but so as not confined to them, nor
limiting them to you, more then to exhilarate their spirits,
and acuate their inventions.
You Beer, shall bee in most grace with the Citizens, as
being a more stayed Liquor, fit for them that purpose retire∣meant
and gravity, that with the Suaile carries the cares of a
house and family with them, tied to the attendance of an illi∣barrel
profession, that neither trot nor amble, but have a sure
pace of their own, Boss lassus fortius figit pedem, The black
Ox has trod upon their foot: yet I bound you not with the
City, though it bee the common entertainment, you may
bee in credit with Gentlemen's Cellars, and carry reputation
before you from March to Christmas—tide I should say; that
Water should forget his Tide.
You Ale I remit to the Country as more fit to live where
you were bred: your credit shall not be inferior, for people
of all sorts shall desire your acquaintance, specially in the
morning, though you may be allowed all the day after: the
Parson shall account you one of his best Parishioners, &amp; the
Church wardens shall pay for your company, and drawing
their Bills all the year long, you shall bee loved and main∣tained
at the Parish charge till you be old, bee allowed a
Robin-hood, or Mother Red-cap, to hang at your door, to
beckon in Customers: and if you come into the City, you
may be drunk with pleasure, but never come into the fashi∣on.
At all times you shall have respect, but ith Winter
Morning without comparison. How doe you like my cen∣sure
now?
Water has a deep judgment.
And yet the world says sometimes Water is shallow:
nay, Isle see you shake hands, and tie a new knot of
friendship.
We are henceforth brothers.
Stay, who's here?
I tell thee, Sugar, I am now friends with thee. But
if it bee as you say—
What's the matter?
Let's observe him a little, Tossed is angry.
What need you be so hot, Tossed?
Hot? tic no matter, Sugar: you will justify that
Wine and Beer offered this wrong unto Ale.
I know not whose pride began; but I was sorry to see
Wine, Beer, and Ale at such odds.
Odds quoth? I do mean to be even with some body.
An even Tossed shows well,
They shall find that Ale has those about him that
are not altogether dow.
Thou hast been baked, Isle swear.
And new come out of the Oven too, I think: son he
is very fiery.
Ale must not be put down so long as Tossed has a
crum of life left. Beer too?
What doe you mean to doe with your knife, Tossed?
that will scarce cut Beer and it were buttered.
Come not near me, Nutmeg, least I grate you, and
slice you: Nutmeg, doe you mark?
Let's in, and make 'em friends. How now Tossed?
Tic all one for that: Oh, are you there? pray tell me
which of 'em first?
Is what?
Why they are friends: what did you mean Sugar,
to make Tossed burn thus?
No such matter.
You will not tell me then. Hark you Beer, March-Beere,
this way a little.
What dost thou mean to doe with thy knife?
I must stir you a little Beer: what colour had
you to quarrel with my Master?
Ale. We are sworn brothers.
We were at difference, and Wine too. but—
Wine too But, but me no buts, I care not a straw
for his buts; dee here sir, doe you long to be Graves Wine?
We are all friends.
I, I, all friends on my word, Tossed.
Fire and water are not to bee trusted, away new
River, away, I wash my hands on thee.
Come hither again, Tossed.
Over head and ears in Ale.
How comes this about, Sugar?
The truth is, sir, I told him of some difference be∣tweene
you, for he and I had been fallen out, and I had no o∣there
security to put in for my self, then to put him upon
some body else.
Nutmeg durst scarce speak to him, hee was ready
to put me in his pocket.
I am cool again: I may believe you are friends; then
I am content to put up.
Sugar and Nutmeg, come, we be three.
Let's be all one rather: and from henceforth since
they are so well accorded, let's make no difference of our Ma∣sters,
but belong to 'em in common: for my part, though I
wait upon Wine, it shall not exempt my attendance on
Beer, or Ale, if they please to command Sugar.
A match. I am for any thing but Water.
And I.
But my service shall be ready for him to, Water and
Sugar I hope, may be drunk together now and then, and not
bee brought within compass of the Statute, to bee put ith
stocks for it,
Godamercy Sugar with all my hart, I shall love thy
company, fer I am solitary, and thou wilt make me plea∣sant.
Stay.
Hark Music? Oh some friends of mine, I know 'em, they
often come upon the water: let's entertain the ayre a little,
never a voice among you?
I Jovial Wine exhilarate the heart.
March Beer is drink for a King.
But Ale, bonny Ale, with Spice and Tossed,
In the Morning's a dainty thing.
Then let vs be merry, wash sorrow away,
Wine, Beer, and Ale, shall be drunk to day.
I generous Wine, am for the Court.
The City calls for Beer.
But Ale, bonny Ale, like a Lord of the Soil,
In the Country shall domineer.
Then let vs be merry, wash sorrow away,
Wine, Beer and Ale shall be drunk to day.
Why, now could I dance for joy.
Now you talk of dancing, Wine, tic one of your
qualities, let's pay the Musicians all together: wee have of∣ten
made other men have light heads and heals, there's no
hurt a little in tripping for our selves, what say you?
Strike up Piper.
Lustily, make a merry day on it; nay, leave out
none, at Dancing and at Foot-ball, all fellows.
Be your leave gentlemen—will it please you
be here sir?
Who's this Tobacco?
Why comes he into our company?
I do hear say there is a controversy—among
you, and I am come—to moderate the business,
It shannot need, wee are concluded sir.
Your name is Tobacco I take it.
No sir you take it not—deesee, tic I that take it.
But wee take it very ill, you should intrude your
self into our mirth.
I did guess, by the chimney your nose that you
might stand in need of water, to quench some fire in your
kitchen.
Ho? Water.
He has spit me out already
Sugar tossed and nutmeg. puh. vanish.
He has blown away the spice too.
Now, doe you not know me—what do ye
stand at gaze—Tobacco is a drink too.
A drink?
Wine, you and I come both out of a pipe.
Prithee go smoke somewhere else, we are covetous
of your acquaintance.
Do not incense me, do not inflame Tobacco.
We do not fear your puffing sir, and you have any
thing to say to vs be brief and speak it.
Then briefly—and without more circumstance
—not to hold you in expectation.
Heed, this is prolixity it self.
Oh sir his words are not well dyed in his mouth.
Or his understanding is not sufficiently lighted
yet gin him leave I pray.
I do come—
Not yet to the purpose methinkes.
And I do mean—
Somewhat—wo'd hear out.
And I entend—
Yet again, think, think, till to morrow, wee may
chance meet again.
Stay, I command you stay.
How, you command vs by whose autority.?
That must be disputed.
Attend my argument; The sovereign ought to
cōmand, I am your sovereign, the sovereign drink Tobacco.
Ergo.—
I see Tobacco is sophisticated.
I ought to command you, and it will become your
duty to obey me—
You our sovereign a mere whiffler.
I say again I am your Prince, bow, and doe homage.
You have turned over a new leaf Tobacco.
You are very high Tobacco, I see ill weeds grow
apace.
Most high and mighty trinidado.
For whose virtue would you be exalted, if it
shall please your smoky excellence?
Not yours,—nor yours—nor yours—but altoge∣there,
all the virtues which you severally glory in, are in me
united,—look not so coy, Call water to spread your facti∣on,
and you are but like the giddy elements changing and
borrowing creatures, whilst I Tobacco am acknowledged a
Heavenly quintessence, a divine herb.
Tobacco you are out.
After what rate is this an ounce?
Let vs beseech your excellence, for less title wee
must not give you having so much virtue as you pretend,
to let vs understand some of your particular graces and qua∣lites.
I pray discourse alitlle, what's the first?
You have named it—tic discourse which you are so
far from being able to advance that you destroy it, in all
men when you are most accepted, when my divine breath
mixing with theirs, doth distill eloquence and oracle upon
the tongue, which moves with such deliberation—words
flowing in so sweet distinction, that many ears are chained
to the lips of him that speaks.
Da puer accensum selecto fictile Poeto,
vt Phaebum ore bibam.
And yet wee are not enchanted with the music of
your pipe to dance after it. My most excellent discourser.
And a help for the imperfections of nature. For
when a man he's not wit enough to express himself in
words, you being taken, do presently help him,—to spit
forth gentleman like.
Indeed the most part of our common complement
is but smoke, and now I know how Gentlemen come by it.
Thus swine do value pearl—
But as you have the eloquence of Vlysses, I suppose
you have not the strength of Aiax, wee should move in
great fear, if you were valiant, I hope you are but weak
Tobacco.
Weak? whose brain hath not felt the effects of my
mightiness? He that opposes me shall find me march like a
tempest, waited upon with lightening and black Clouds.
Here is no crack.
Yet he thunders it out.
Yes yes, I remember I have heard him reported a
solidier, and once being in company with a knap-Iack man a
companion of his, I obtained a copy of his military po∣stirs,
which put down the pike and pot-gun clean,
pray observe 'em.
1 Take your seal.
2 Draw your box.
3 Uncase your pipe.
4 Produce your rammer.
5 Blow you pipe.
6 Open your box.
7. Fill your pipe.
8. Ram your pipe.
9. Withdraw your Rammer.
10. Return your rammer.
11. Make ready.
12. Present.
13. Elbow your pipe.
14. Mouth your pipe.
15. Give fire.
16. Nose your Tobacco.
17. Puff up your smoke,
18. Spit on your right hand.
19. Throw off your loose ashes.
20. Present to your friend.
21. As you were.
22. Cleanse your pipe.
23. Blow your pipe.
24. Supply your pipe.
Exercise this discipline till you stink, defile the room,
offend your friends, destroy your liver and lungs, and bid
adieu to the world with a scouring flux.
You have a good memory.—
I'm sure Tobacco will spoil it.
These are but childish inventions.
They are most proper to illustrate your magni∣ficence,
for howsoever you pretend that you converse with
men, it is apparent, that you make men children again, for
they that use you most familiarly, doe but smoke all the day
long.
You dishonour me.
Not so much as Gentlemen dishonour themselves,
to turn common pipers: but if you have any more conditions,
pray enrich vs with the story.
I am medicinal.
How?
And preserve the health of man.
I hope they are not come to drink healths in To∣basso.
I repair the bodies which your immoderate cups have
turned to fens and marshes. The wisest Physicians pre∣scribe
my use, and acknowledge me a salutary herb.
Physicians are no fools, they may commend you for
their profit, you are one of their harbingers to provide
for a disease; yet howsoever you call them wise, and glory
in their flatteries, they make but a very simple of you.
Methinkes this should cut Tobacco.
Not at all, I am aboue their poor derision; at my
pleasure I could revenge their malice, for I am in favour, and
grown to be the delight of poets and princes.
How poets and princes? Ego &amp; Rex mouse, a stopper
for Tobacco, wee shall have pretty treason anon else.
Does it scruple your judgment Mr. small beer
that I say poets and Princes? I am not to learn their distinc∣tion,
nor doth it take from any allegiance, they are both sa∣cred
names: yet I am confident it is easier for a poet not borne
to sovereignty to aspire to a kingdom, then for a King not
borne with fancy to be made a poet. I mentiond these
names, not in their method and order, but to show my grace
with them, that are most able to punish insolence, such as
yours,
How the vapour rises.
This ruffler may be troublesome, wee were best
admit him to our society, he is a dry companion, and you
may observe, how he hath insinuated already with the great∣est;
the ladies begin to affect him, and he receives private
favours from their lips, every day he kisses their hands, when
he appears in a fair pipe; though wee allow him not a pri∣oritie,
for our own sakes, let vs hold correspondence with
him, least he seduce men to forsake vs, or at least to make
use of vs but for their necessity.
Hum! he says well, now I better consider it were sa∣fest
to use him kindly, least by degrees he overthrow vs, and
jet upon our privileges, for I heard a geutleman t'other
day affirm, he had fasted 3 or 4 days, only with Tobacco.
Beside, if we continue friends he will be a proper∣ratiue
for our reception, without vs he may subsist, but with
him wee are sure of liberal entertainment.
I am converted, Wine you are the best orator, speak
for vs.
Tobacco, you are a good fellow, all ambition laid
aside, let vs embrace as friends; excuse vs, that wee have been
a little merry with you, wee acknowledge you a gentle drink
and you shall have all the respect will become Wine, Beer,
or Ale to observe you with: what should we contend for pri∣macie,
quarrel about titles, which if to any wee acknowledge
most properly belong to you, for they are all but smoke.
Let vs unite and be confederate states for the benefit of men's
low countries, live and love together. Wine doth here
enter into league with Tobacco.
And beer.
And Ale.
Are you in earnest? why then Tobacco is so far
from pride, that he vows to serve you all, and when I leave
to be a true friend, may fire consume me, and my ashes want
a burial.
W. B. A. and when wee falsify, may thunders shrike vs
dead.

WHY looks my Lord like to a troubled sky,
When heavens bright shine, is shadowed with a fog:
Alate we ran the Dear and through the Iawnds
Stripped with our Nagges the lofty frolic Bucks,
That scudded fore the teisers like the wind,
Ne'er was the Dear of merry Fresingfield,
So lustily pulled down by jolly mates,
Nor shard the Farmers such fat venison,
So frankly dealt this hundred years before:
Nor have I seen my Lord more frolic in the chase,
And now changed to a melancholy dump.
After the Prince got to the Keepers lodge
And had bin incond in the house a while:
Tossing of Ale and milk in country cannes,
Whether it was the Countries sweet content,
Or else the bonny Damsel filed vs drink
That seemed so stately in her stammel red:
Or that a qualm did cross his stomach then,
But straight he fell into his passions.
Sir Raphe, what say you to your master,
Shall he thus all amort live malecontent?
Hear thou Ned? nay look if he will speak to me.
What say thou to me, Fool?
I pree thee tell me Ned, art thou in love with the
Keepers daughter?
How if I be, what then?
Why then sir, Isle teach thee how to deceive Love.
How Raphe.
Marry sir Ned, thou shalt put on my cap, and my
coat, and my dagger, and I will put on thy clothes, and thy
sword, and so thou shalt be my fool.
And what of this?
Why so thou shalt beguile Love, for Love is such a
proud scab, that he will never meddle with fools nor children.
Is not Raphes counsel good, Ned.
Tell me Ned Lacie, did thou mark the maid,
How lively in her country weeds she looked?
A bonier wench all Suffolk cannot yield,
All Suffolk, nay all England holds none such.
Sir, Will Ermsby, Ned is deceived.
Why Raphe?
He says all England hath no such, and I say, and
Isle stand to it, there is one better in Warwickeshire.
How proves thou that Raphe?
Why is the Abbot a learned man, and hath he read
many books, and think thou he hath not more learning then
thou to choose a bonny wench, yes warrant I thee by his whole
Grammar.
A good reason Raphe.
I tell thee Lacie, that her sparkling eyes
Doe lighten forth sweet Loves alluring fire:
And in her tresses she doth fold the looks
Of such a gaze upon her golden hair,
Her bashful white mixed with the mornings red,
Luna doth boast upon her lovely cheeks,
Her front is beauties table wherr she paints
The glories of her gorgeous excellence:
Her teeth are shelves of precious Margaritas,
Richly enclosed with ruddy curroll cleues.
Tush Lacie, she is beauties overmatch,
If thou suruaist her curious imagery.
I grant (my Lord) the Damsel is as fair,
As simple Suffolks homely towns can yield:
But in the Court be qainter Dames then she,
Whose faces are enriched with honours taint,
Whose beauties stand upon the stage of fame,
And vaunt their trophies in the Court of Love.
Ah Ned, but had thou watched her as my self,
And seen the secret beauties of the maid,
Their courtly coins were but foolery.
Why how watched you her my Lord?
When as she swept like Venus through the house,
And in her shape fast folded up my thoughts:
Into the Milk chose went I with the maid,
And there amongst the cream-boles she did shine,
As Pallas, amongst her Princely housewifery:
She turned her smock over her lily arms,
And dived them into milk to run her cheese:
But whiter then the milk her crystal skin,
Checked with lines of Azure made her blush,
That Art or Nature durst bring for compare,
Ermsby if thou had seen as I did note it well,
How beauty plaid the huswife, how this girl
Like Lucrece laid her fingers to the work,
Thou would with Tarquine hazard Rome and all
To win the lovely maid of Fresingfield.
Sir Ned, would fine have her?
I Raphe.
Why Ned I have laid the plot in my head, thou
shalt have her already.
Isle give thee a new coat and learn me that.
Why sir Ned, weell ride to Oxford to Fryer Bacon, oh
hee is a brave scholar sir, they say he is a brave Necromancer,
that he can make women of devils, and he can juggle cats into
Costermongers.
And how then Raphe?
Mary sir, thou shalt go to him, and because thy fa???there
Harry shall not miss thee, he shall turn me to thee; and
Isle to the Court, and Isle Prince it out, and he shall make thee ei???there
a silken purse, full of gold, or else a fine wrought smock.
But how shall I have the maid?
Marry sir, if thou be a silken purse full of gold,
then on Sundays she'll hang thee by her side, and you must not
say a word. Now sir when she comes into a great press of peo???ple,
for fear of the Cut-purse on a sudden?? she'll swap thee into her
plackerd, then sir being there, you may plead for your self.
Excellent policy.
But how if I be a wrought smock?
Then she'll put thee into her chest and lay thee into
Lavender, and upon some good day she'll put thee on, and at
night when you go to bed, then being turned from a smock to
a man, you may make up the match.
Wonderfully wisely counselled, Raphe.
Raphe shall have a new Coat.
God thank you when I have it on my back, Ned.
Lacie the fool hath laid a perfect plot,
For why our Country Margret is so coy,
And stands so much upon her honest points,
That marriage or no market with the maid:
Ermsby, it must be nigromanticke spells,
And charms of Art that must enchain her love,
Or else shall Edward never win the girl,
Therefore my wags we will horse vs in the morn,
And post to Oxford to this jolly Fryer,
Bacon shall by his magic doe this deed.
Content my Lord, and thats a speedy way
To wean these head-strong puppies from the teat.
I am unknown, not taken for the Prince,
They only deem vs frolic Courtiers,
That revel thus among our Lieges game:
Therefore I have devised a policy,
Lacie, thou know next Friday is St. Iames,
And then the Country flocks to Harlston fair,
Then will the Keepers daughter frolic there,
And ouer-shine the troupe of all the maids,
That come to see, and to be seen that day.
Haunt thee disguised among the Country swains,
Fine you are a Farmers son, not far from thence,
Espy her loves, and who she likes best:
Coat him, and court her to control the clown,
Say that the Courtier tyred all in greene,
That helped her handsomely to run her cheese,
And filled her fathers lodge with venison,
Commends him, and sends fairings to her self,
Buy something worthy of her parentage,
Not worth her beauty, for Lacie, then the Fair
Affords no Jewel sitting for the maid:
And when thou talk of me, note if she blush,
Oh then she loves, but if her cheeks wax pale,
Disdain it is. Lacie, send how she fares,
And spare no time nor cost to win her loves.
I will, my Lord, so execute this charge,
As if that Lacie were in love with her.
Send letters speedily to Oxford of the news.
And sir Lacie, buy me a thousand thousand million
of fine bells.
What wilt thou doe with them, Raphe?
Mary every time that Ned sighs for the Keepers
daughter, Isle tie a bell about him, so within three or four
days I will send word to his father Harry, that his son and
my master Ned is become Loves Morris dance.
Well, Lacie, look with care unto thy charge,
And I will haste to Oxford to the Fryer,
That he by Art, and thou by secret gifts,
Moist make me Lord of merry Fresingfield.
God send your Honour your hearts desire.
Miles, where are you?
Hic sum doctissime &amp; reuerendissime Doctor.
Attulisti nos libros meos de Necromantia.
Ass quam bonum &amp; quam incundum habitare libros in
vnum.
Now Masters of our Academic State,
That rule in Oxford Vice-roies in your place,
Whose heads contain Maps of the liberal Arts,
Spending your time in depth of learned skill,
Why flock you thus to Basins secret Cell,
A Fryer newly stalde in Brazennose,
Say whats your mind, that I may make reply.
Bacon, we hear, that song we have suspect,
That thou art read in Magicks mystery,
In Piromancy, to divine by flames,
To tell by Hadromaticke, ebbes and tides,
By Aeromancy, to discover doubts,
To plain out questions, as Apollo did.
Well Master Burden, what of all this?
Mary sir, he doth but fulfil by rehearsing of these
names, the Fable of the Fox &amp; the Grapes, that which is aboue
vs, pertains nothing to vs.
I tell thee Bacon, Oxford makes report,
Nay England, and the Court of Henry says,
Thart making of a brazen head by Art,
Which shall unfold strange doubts and Aphorisms,
And read a Lecture in Philosophy,
And by the help of Devils and ghastly fiends,
Thou meanst ere many years or days be past,
To compass England with a wall of brass.
And what of this?
What of this, Master? why he doth speak mystical???lie,
for he knows if your skill fail to make a brazen head, yet
Mother Waters strong Ale will fit his turn to make him have
a copper nose.
Bacon, we come not grieving at thy skill,
But joying that our Academy yields
A man supposed the wonder of the world,
For if thy cunning work these miracles,
England and Europe shall admire thy fame,
And Oxford shall in characters of brass,
And statues, such as were built up in Rome,
Eternize Fryer Bacon for his Art.
Then gentle Fryer, tell vs thy intent.
Seeing you come as friends unto the Fryer,
Resolve you Doctors, Bacon can by books,
Make storming Bores thunder from his cave,
And dim fair Luna to a dark Eclipse,
The great Arch-ruler, potentate of hell,
Trembles, when Bacon bids him, or his fiends,
Bow to the force of his Pentageron.
What Art can work, the frolic Fryer knows,
And therefore will I turn my Magic books,
And strain out Necromancy to the deep,
I have contrived and framed a head of brass,
(I made Belcephon hammer out the stuff)
And that by Art shall read Philosophy,
And I will strengthen England by my skill,
That if ten Caesars lived and reigned in Rome.
With all the Legions Europe doth contain,
They should not touch a grass of English ground,
The work that Ninus reared at Babylon,
The brazen walls framed by Semiramis,
Carved out like to the portal of the Sun,
Shall not be such as rings the English strond:
From Dover to the market place of Rye.
Is this possible?
Isle bring ye two or three witnesses.
What be those?
Marry sir, three or four as honest Devils, and good
companions as any be in hell.
No doubt but Magic may doe much in this,
For he that reads but Mathemoticke rules,
Shall find conclusions, that avail to work
Wonders that pass the common sense of men.
But Bacon roves a bow beyond his reach,
And tells of more then Magic can perform:
Thinking to get a fame by fooleries,
Have I not past as far in state of schools,
And read of many secrets? yet to think.
That heads of brass can utter any voice,
Or more to tell of deep Philosophy,
This is a Fable Aesope had forgot.
Burden, thou wrongst me in detracting thus,
Bacon loves not to stuff himself with lies:
But tell me fore these Doctors if thou date,
Of certain questions I shall move to thee.
I will, ask what thou can.
Mary sir, he will straight bee on your pick pack to
know whether the feminine or the masculine gender be most
worthy.
Were you not yesterday Master Burden at Henly upon
Themes?
I was, what then?
What book studied you thereon all night?
I, none at all, I read not there a line.
Then Doctors, Fryer Basins Art knows nought.
What say you to this, Master Burden, doth hee not
touch you?
I pass not of his frivolous speeches.
Nay Master Burden, my master ere hee hath done
with you, will turn you from a Doctor to a dunce, and shake
you so small, that he will leave you no more learning in you then
is in Balams Ass.
Masters, for that learned Burdens skill is deep,
And sore he doubts of Basins Cabalisme:
Isle show you why he haunts to Henly oft,
Not Doctors for to taste the fragrant air:
But there to spend the night in Al???umy,
To multiply with secret spells of Art.
Thus private steals he learning from vs all,
To prove my saying true, Isle show you straight,
The book he keeps at Henly for himself.
Nay, now my master goes to conjuration, take heed.
Masters, stand still, fear not, Isle show you but his
book.
Per omnes deos infernales Belcephon.
Oh master cease your conjuration, or you spoil all,
for her's a she devil come with a shoulder of mutton on a spit,
you have mart the devils supper, but no doubt he thinks our
College fare is slender, and so hath sent you his cooke with a
shoulder of mutton to make it exceed.
Oh where am I, or whats become of me?
What art thou?
Hostess at Henly, mistress of the Bell.
How came thou here?
As I was in the kitchen amongst the maids,
Spitting the meat against supper for my guess:
A motion moved me to look forth of door,
No sooner had I pried into the yard.
But straight a whirlwind hoisted me from thence,
And mounted me aloft unto the clouds:
As in a trance I thought nor feared nought,
Nor know I where or whither I was tan:
Nor where I am, nor what these persons be.
No, know you not master Burden?
Oh yes good sir, he is my daily guest.
What, master Burden, it was but yesternight,
That you and I at Henly plaid at cards.
I know not what we did, a pox of all conjuring
Fryers.
Now jolly Fryer tell vs, is this the book
that Burden is so careful to look on?
It is, but Burden, tell me now,
Think thou that Basins Nicromanticke skill
Cannot perform his head and wall of brass,
When he can fetch thine hostess in such post?
Isle warrant you, Master, if Master Burden could con???jure
as well as you, he would have his book every night from
Henly to study on at Oxford.
Burden, what are you mated by this frolic Fryer?
Look how he droops, his guilty conscience
Drives him to bash and makes his hostess blush.
Well Mistress for I will not have you mist,
You shall to Henly to cheer up your guests
Fore supper gin. Burden, bid her adieu,
Say farewell to your hostess fore she goes,
Sir away, and set her safe at home.
Master Burden, when shall we see you at Henly?
The Devil take thee and Henly too.
Master, shall I make a good motion?
Whats that?
Mary sir, now that my hostess is gone to provide
supper, conjure another spirit, and send Doctor Burden flying
after.
Thus Rulers of our Academic State,
You have seen the Fryer frame his Art by proof:
And as the College called Brazen-nose,
Is under him, and the Master there:
So surely shall this head of brass be framed,
And yield forth strange and uncouth Aphorisms:
And Hell and Heccate shall fail the Fryer,
But I will circle England round with brass.
So be it, &amp; nuns &amp; semper, Amen.
By my troth, Margret, here's a whether is able to
make a man call his father whoreson, if this whether hold, we shall
have hay good chape, and butter and cheese at Harlston will
bear no price.
Thomas, maids when they come to see the fair
Count not to make a cope for dearth of hay,
When we have turned our butter to the salt,
And set our cheese upon the rackes.
Then let our fathers prise it as they please,
We Country sluts of merry Fresingfield,
Come to buy needless noughts to make vs fine,
And look that young-men should be frank this day,
And court vs with such fairings as they can.
Phoebus is blithe and, frolic, looks from heaven,
As when he courted lovely Simile:
Swearing the Peddlers shall have empty packs,
If that fair weather may make chapman buy.
But lovely Peggy Simile is dead,
And therefore Phoebus from his Palace pries,
And seeing such a sweet and seemly saint,
Shows all his glory for to court your self.
This is a fairing gentle sir indeed,
To sooth me up with such smooth flattery,
But learn of me, your scoffe's to broad before:
Well Ione, our beauties must abide their jests,
We serve the turn in jolly Fresingfield.
Margret, a Farmers daughter for a Farmers son,
I warrant you the meanest of vs both,
Shall have a mate to lead vs from the Church:
But Thomas, whats the news? what in a dump?
Give me your hand, we are near a Peddlers shop,
Out with your purse, we must have fairings now.
Faith Ione and shall, Isle bestow a fairing on you, and
then we will to the Tavern, and snap off a pint of wine or two.
Whence are you sir, of Suffolk? for your terms
are finer then the common sort of men.
Faith lovely girl, I am of Backless by,
Your neighbour not aboue six miles from hence,
A Famers son that never was so quaint,
But that he could doe curtsy to such Dames:
But trust me Margret I am sent in charge,
From him that reveled in your fathers house,
And filled his Lodge with cheer and venison,
Tyred in greene, he sent you this rich purse:
His token that he helped you run your cheese,
And in the milkehouse chatted with your self.
To me? you forget your self.
Women are often weak in memory.
Oh pardon sir, I call to mind the man,
It were little manners to refuse his gift,
And yet I hope he sends it not for love:
For we have little leisure to debate of that.
What, Margret, blush not, maids must have their
loves.
Nay by the mass she looks pale as if she were
angry.
Sir are you of Backless? I pray how doth goodman
Cob? my father bought a horse of him, Isle tell you Margret, a
were good to be a Gentleman's jade, for of all things the foul
hilding could not abide a dung-cart.
How different is this Farmer from the rest,
That carst as yet hath pleased my wandering sight
His words are witty, quickened with a smile,
His curtsy gentle, smelling of the Court,
Facile and debonair in all his deeds,
Proportioned as was Paris, when in gray,
He courted Aenon in the vale by Troy.
Great Lords have come and pleaded for my love,
Who but the Keepers Lass of Fresingfield?
And yet me thinks this Farmers ioylly son,
Passes the proudest that hath pleased mine eye.
But Peg disclose not that thou art in love,
And show as yet no sign of love to him,
Although thou well would wish him for thy love:
Keep that to thee till time doth serve thy turn,
To show the grief wherein they heart doth burn.
Come Ione and Thomas, shall we to the Fair,
You Backless man will not forsake vs now.
Not whilst I may have such quaint girls as you.
Well if you chance to come by Fresingfield,
Make but a stepped into the Keepers Lodge,
And such poor fare as Woodmen can afford,
Butter and cheese, cream, and fat venison,
You shall have store, and welcome therewithal.
Gramarcies Peggie, look for me ere long.
Great men of Europe, Monarchs of the West,
Ringed with the walls of old Oceanus,
Whose lofty surges like the battlements,
That compassed high built Babel in with Towers,
Welcome my Lords, welcome brave western Kings,
To Englands shore, whose promontory cleeues,
Shows Albion is another little world,
Welcome says English Henry to you all,
Chiefly unto the lovely Eleonor,
Who dared for Edwards sake cut through the seas,
And venture as Agenors Damsel through the deep,
To get the love of Henries wanton son.
Englands rich Monarch brave Plantagenet,
The Pyren mounts swelling aboue the clouds,
That ward the wealthy Castle in with walls,
Could not detain the beauteous Eleanor,
But hearing of the same of Edwards youth,
She dared to brooke Neptunus haughty pride,
And bide the brunt of froward Eolus,
Then may fair England welcome her the more.
After that English Henry by his Lords,
Had sent Prince Edwards lovely counterfeit,
A present to the Castle Elinor,
The comely portrait of so brave a man,
The virtuous fame discoursed of his deeds,
Edwards courageous resolution,
Done at the holy Land fore Damas walls,
Led both mine eye and thoughts in equal links,
To like so of the English Monarchs son,
That I attempted perils for his sake.
Where is the Prince, my Lord?
He posted down, not long since from the Court,
To Suffolk side, to merry Fremingham,
To sport himself amongst my fallow Dear,
From thence by packets sent to Hampton house,
We hear the Prince is ridden with his Lords,
To Oxford in the Academy there,
To hear dispute amongst the learned men:
But we will send forth letters for my son,
To will him come from Oxford to the Court.
Nay rather Henry, let vs as we be,
Ride for to visit Oxford with our train,
Fine would I see your Universities,
And what learned men your Academy yields,
From Haspurg have I brought a learned Clerk,
To hold dispute with English Orators.
This Doctor surnam'd Iaques Vandermast,
A Germane borne, past into Padua,
To Florence, and to fair Bolonia,
To Paris, Rheims, and stately Orleans,
And talking there with men of Art, put down
The chiefest of them all in Aphorisms,
In Magic, and the Mathematike rules,
Now let vs Henry try him in your Schools.
He shall my Lord, this motion likes me well,
Weal progress straight to Oxford with our trains,
And see what men our Academy brings.
And wonder ??andermast welcome to me,
In Oxford shalt thou find a jolly Fryer,
Called Fryer Bacon, Englands only flower,
Set him but Non-plus in his magic spells,
And make him yield in Mathematicke rules,
And for thy glory I will bind thy brows,
Not with a Poets Garland made of Baize,
But with a Coronet of choicest gold,
Whilst then we sit to Oxford with our troupes,
Lets in and banquet in our English Court.
Where be these vagabond knaves, that they attend
no better on their master?
If it please your Honour, we are ready at an inch.
Sir Ned, Isle have no more poste-horse to ride on,
Isle have another fetch.
I pray you how is that, my Lord?
Mary sir, Isle send to the Isle of Eely for four or five
dozen of Geese, and Isle have them tide six and six together
with whip-cord. Now upon their backs will I have a fair
field bed, with a Canopy, and so when it is my pleasure, Isle slay
into what place I please; this will be easy.
Your honour hath said well, but shall we to Brazen???nose
College before we pull off our boots.
Warren, well motioned, we will to the Fryer
Before we revel it within the town.
Raphe, see you keep your countenance like a Prince.
Wherefore have I such a company of cutting knaves
to wait upon me, but to keep &amp; defend my countenance against
all mine enemies? have you not good swords and bucklers?
Stay, who comes here?
Some Scholar, and we will ask him where Fryer Ba???con
is.
Why thou arrant dunce, shall I never make thee good
scholar, doth not all the Town cry out, and say, Fryer Basins
subsiser is the greatest block-head in all Oxford? why thou can
not speak one word of true Latin.
No sir, yes what is this else; Ego sum tuiu homo, I am
your man, I warrant you sir, as good Tullies phrase as any is in
Oxford.
Come sir, what patt of speech is Ego.
Ego, that is I, mary nomen substantino.
How prove you that?
Why sir, let him prove himself and a will, I can be
heard felt and understood.
Oh gross dunce.
Come let vs break off this dispute between these
two. Sir, where is Brazen-nose College?
Not far from Copper-smiths hall.
What doest thou mock me?
Nor I sir, but what would you at Brazen-nose?
Mary we would speak with Fryer Bacon.
Whose men be you?
Mary scholar, here's our master.
Sir, I am the master of these good-fellowes, moist
thou not know me to be a Lord by my reparrell?
Then here's good game for the hawk, for here's the
master fool, and a couie of Cockscombs, one wise man I think
would spring you all.
Gogs wounds Warren kill him.
Why Ned, I think the devil be in my sheath, I can???not
get out my dagger.
Nor I mine, Swones Ned, I think I am bewitched.
A company of Scabs, the proudest of you all draw
your weapon if he can.
See how boldly I speak now my master is by.
I strive in vain, but if my sword by shut,
And conjured fast by magic in my sheath,
Villain here is my fist.
Oh I beseech you conjure his hand too, that he may
not lift his arms to his head, for he is light-finger'd.
Ned strike him, Isle warrant thee by mine honour.
What means the English Prince to wrong my man?
To whom speak thou?
To thee.
Who art thou?
Could you not judge when all your swords grew fast,
That Fryer Bacon was not far from hence,
Edward King Henries son, and Prince of Wales,
Thy fool disguised cannot conceal thy self,
I know both Ermsby and the Sussex Earl,
Else Fryer Bacon had but little skill.
Thou come in post from merry Fresingfield,
Fast fancied to the Keepers bonny Lass,
To crave some succour of the jolly Fryer,
And Lacy Earl of Lincoln hast thou left,
To treat fair Margret to allow thy loves:
But friends are men, and Love can baffle Lords.
The Earl both woos and courts her for himself.
Ned, this is strange, the Fryer knows all.
Apollo could not utter more then this.
I stand amazed to hear this jolly Fryer,
Tell even the very secrets of my thoughts:
But learned Bacon since thou know the cause,
Why I did post so fast from Fresingfield,
Help Fryer at a pinch, that I may have
The love of lovely Margret to my self,
And as I am true Prince of Wales, Isle give
Living and lands to strength thy College state.
Good Fryer help the Prince in this.
Why servant Ned, will not the Fryer doe it? Were
not my sword glued to my scabbard by conjuration, I would
cut off his head and make him doe it by force.
In faith my Lord, your manhood and your sword is all
alike, they are so fast conjured that we shall never see them.
What Doctor in a dump? tush help the Prince,
And thou shalt see how liberal he will prove,
Crave not such actions, greater dumps then these,
I will my Lord strain out my magic spells,
For this day comes the Earl of Fresingfield;
And fore that night shuts in the day with dark,
They 'le be betrothed each to other fast:
But come with me, weal to my study straight,
And in a glass prospective I will show
What's done this day in merry Fresingfield.
Gramercies Bacon, I will quite thy pain.
But send your train, my Lord, into the Town,
My scholar shall go bring them to their Inn:
Mean while weal see the knavery of the Earl.
Warren, leave me and Ermsby, take the fool,
Let him be master, and go revel it,
Till I and Fryer Bacon talk a while.
We will, my Lord.
Faith Ned, and Isle Lord it out till thou comes, Isle
be Prince of Wales over all the black pots in Oxford.
Now frolic Edward, welcome to my Cell,
Here tempers Fryer Bacon many toys:
And hold this place his Consistory Court,
Wherein the devils plead homage to his words,
Within this glass prospective thou shalt see
This day what's done in merry Fresingfield,
Twixt lovely Pigs and the Lincoln Earl.
Fryer, thou gladst me, now shall Edward try,
How Lacy means to his Sovereign Lord.
Stand there and look directly in the glass.
What sees my Lord?
I see the Keepers lovely lass appear,
As bright-sunne as the Paramour of Mars,
Only attended by a jolly Fryer.
Sit still and keep the crystal in your eye.
But tell me Fryer Bungay, is it true,
That this fair courteous Country Swain,
Who says his father is a Farmer ny,
Can be Lord Lacy Earl of Lincolnshire.
Peggie it is true, it is Lacy for my life:
Or else mine Art and cunning both doe fail,
Left by Prince Edward to procure his loves:
For he in greene that help to run your cheese,
Is son to Henry, and the Prince of Wales.
Be what he will, his lure is but for lust.
But did Lord Lacie like poor Margret,
Or would he deign to wed a Country Lass?
Fryer, I would his humble hand-maid be,
And for great wealth, quite him with curtsy.
Why Margret dost love him?
His personage like the pride of vaunting Troy,
Might well avouch to shadow Hellens cape:
His wit is quick and ready in conceit,
As Greece afforded in her chiefest prime
Courteous, ah Fryer full of pleasing smiles,
Trust me I love too much; to tell thee more,
Suffice to me he is Englands Paramour.
Hath not each eye that viewed thy pleasing face,
Surnamed thee fair maid of Fresingfield?
Yes Bungay, and would God the lovely Earl
Had that in esse, that so many sought.
Fear not, the Fryer will not be behind,
To show his cunning to entangle Love.
I think the Fryer courts the bonny wench,
Bacon, me thinks he is a lusty churl.
Now look, my Lord.
Gogs wounds Bacon, here comes Lacy.
Sit still my Lord, and mark the Comedy.
Here's Lacy, Margret, step aside a while.
Daphne the Damsel, that caught Phoebus fast,
And locked him in the brightness of her looks,
Was not so beauteous in Apollo's eyes,
As is fair Margret to the Lincoln Earl,
Recant thee: Lacy, thou art put in trust,
Edward thy Sovereigns son hath chosen thee
A secret friend to court her for himself:
And dare thou wrong thy Prince with treachery???
Lacy, Love makes no exception of a friend,
Nor deems it of a Prince, but as a man:
Honour bids me control him in his lust,
His wooing is not for to wed the girl,
But to entrap her and beguile the lass:
Lacy, thou love, then brooke not such abuse,
But wed her, and abide thy Princes frown:
For dye, then see her live disgraced.
Come, Fryer, I will shake him from his dumps,
How cheer you sir, a penny for your thought:
Your early up, pray God it be the near,
What 'are come from Backless in a morn so soon?
Thus watchful are such men as live in love,
Whose eyes brooke broken slumbers for their sleep.
I tell thee, Peggie, since last Harlston fair,
My mind hath felt a heap of passions.
A trusty man that court it for your friend,
Woo you still for the Courtier all in greene?
I marvel that he sues not for himself.
Peggie, I pleaded first to get your grace for him:
But when mine eyes surveyed your beauteous looks,
Love like a wag, straight dined into my heart,
And there did shrine the Idea of your self:
Pity me though I be a Farmers son,
And measure not my riches, but my love.
You are very hasty for to garden well,
Seeds must have time to sprout before they spring,
Love ought to creep as doth the dials shade,
For timely ripe, is rotten too too soon.
Deus hic, room for a merry Fryer,
What, youth of Backless, with the Keepers Lass?
It is well, but tell me here you any news,
No, Fryer, what news.
Hear you not how the Purseuants doe post,
With Proclamations through each Country town?
For what, gentle Fryer? tell the news.
Dwelst thou in Backless, &amp; hear not these news?
Lacy the Earl of Lincoln is late fled
From Windsor Court, disguised like a Swain,
And lurks about the Country here unknown.
Henry suspects him of some treachery,
And therefore doth proclaim in every way,
That who can take the Lincoln Earl, shall have
Paid in the Exchequer twenty thousand Crowns.
The Earl of Lin???olne? Fryer, thou art mad,
It was some other, thou mistake the man:
The Earl of Lincoln? why it cannot be.
Yes, very well my Lord, for you are he,
The Keepers daughter took you prisoner,
Lord Lacy yield, Isle be your gailor once.
How familiar they be, Bacon.
Sit still, and mark the sequel of their loves.
Then am I double prisoner to thy self,
Peggie, I yield, but are these news in jest?
In jest with you, but earnest unto me:
For why, these wrongs doe wring me at the heart,
Ah how these Earls and Noble-men of birth,
Flatter and fine to forge poor women's ill!
Believe me, Lass, I am the Lincoln Earl,
I not deny, but tyred thus in rags,
I lived disguised to win fair Piggies love.
What love is there where wedding ends not love?
I meant, fair girl, to make thee Laces wife.
I little think that Earls will stoop so low.
Say, shall I make thee Countess ere I sleep?
Handmaid unto the Earl so please himself:
A wife in name, but servant in obedience.
The Lincoln Countess, for it shall be so,
Isle plight the bands and seal it with a kiss.
Gogs wounds, Bacon, they kiss, Isle stab them.
Oh hold your hands (my Lord) it is the glass.
Collar to see the traitors gre so well,
Made me think the shadows substances.
It were a long Poinard, my Lord, to reach between
Oxford and ???resingfield, but sit still and see more.
Well, Lord of Lincoln, if your loves be knit,
And that your tongues and thoughts doe both agree:
To avoid ensuing jars, Isle hamper up the match,
Isle take my Portico forth, and wed you here,
Then go to bed and scale up your desires.
Fryer, content, Peggie how like you this?
What likes my Lord, is pleasing unto me.
Then hand-fast hand, and I will to my book.
What sees my Lord now?
Bacon, I see the Lovers hand in hand,
The Fryer ready with his Portico there,
To wed them both, then am I quite undone,
Bacon, help now, if ere thy magic served,
Bacon, help now, if ere thy magic served,
Help, Bacon, stop the marriage now,
If Devils or Necromancy may suffice,
And I will give thee forty thousand Crowns.
Fear not, my Lord, Isle stop the jolly Friar,
For mumbling up his orisons this day.
Why speak not Bungay? Friar, to thy book.
How look thou, Friar, as a man distraught,
Reft of thy senses, Bungay? show by signs
If thou be dumb, what passion holds thee.
He's dumb indeed: Bacon hath with his Devils
Enchanted him, or else some strange disease,
Or Apoplexy hath possessed his lungs:
But, Peggie, what he cannot with his book,
We will twixt vs both unite it up in heart.
Else let me die (my Lord) a miscreant.
Why stands Friar Bacon so amazed?
I have struk him dumb, my Lord, &amp; if your honour please:
Isle fetch this Bungay straightway from Fresingfield,
And he shall dine with vs is Oxford here.
Bacon, doe that, and thou contentest me.
Of curtsy, Margret, let vs lead the Friar
Unto thy fathers lodge, to comfort him
With broths to bring him from this haplesse trance.
Or else my Lord, we were passing unkind
To leave the Friar so in his distress.
O help, my Lord, a Devil, a Devil, my Lord,
Look how he carries Bungay on his back:
Let's hence, for Basins spirits be abroad.
Bacon, I laugh to see the jolly Fryer
Mounted upon the Devil, and how the Earl
Flees with his bonny lass for fear.
As soon as Bungay is at Brazen-nose,
I will in post hie me to Fresingfield,
And quite these wrongs on Lacy ere it be long.
So be it, my Lord, but let vs to our dinner:
For ere we have taken our repast awhile,
We shall have Bungay brought to Brazen-nose.
Now that we are gathered in the Regent house,
It sits vs talk about the long repair,
For he troop't with all the Western Kings,
That lye along the Dansick Seas by East,
North by the clime of frosty Germany,
The Almaine Monarch, and the Scocon Duke,
Castle, and lovely Ellinor, with him,
Have in their jests resolved for Oxford Town.
We must lay plots for stately Tragedies,
Strange Comic shows, such as proud Rossius
Vaunted before the Roman Emperors.
To welcome all the Western Potentates,
But more the King by letters hath fore-told,
That Frederick the Almaine Emperor,
Hath brought with him a Germane of esteem,
Whose surname is Don Iaques ??andermast,
Skilful in Magic and those secret arts.
Then must we all make suit unto the Fryer,
To Friar Bacon, that he vouch this task,
And undertake to countervail in skill
The Germane, else there's none in Oxford can
Match and dispute with learned ??andermast.
Bacon, if he will hold the German play,
We will teach him what an English Friar can doe:
The Devil I think dare not dispute with him.
Indeed mas Doctor, he pleasured you,
In that he brought your hostess with her spit,
From Henly, posting unto Brazen-nose.
A vengeance on the Friar for his pains,
But leaving that, let's to Bacon straight,
To see if he will take this task in hand.
Stay! what rumour is this? The town is up in a
mutiny, what hurly burly is this?
Nay masters, if you were ne'er so good, you shall
before the Doctors to answer your misdemeanour.
Whats the matter, fellow?
Mary sir, here's a company of Rufflers, that drin???king
in the Tavern, have made a great brawl, and almost kilt
the Vintner.
Salve, Doctor Burden, this lubberly Lurden,
Ill shaped and ill faced, disdained and disgraced,
What he tells unto vobis, mentitur de nobis.
Who is the master and chief of this crew?
Ass asinum mundi, figure retundi,
Neat, sheat and sine, as brisk as a cup of wine.
What are you?
I am, father Doctor, as a man would say, the Belwea???there
of this company, these are my Lords, and I the Prince of
Wales.
Are you Edward the Kings son?
Sir Miles, bring hither the Tipster that drew the
wine, &amp; I warrant when they see how soundly I have broke his
head, thei'le say it was done by no less man then a Prince.
I cannot believe that this is the Prince of Wales.
And why so, sir?
For they say the Prince is a brave &amp; a wise Gentleman.
Why, and think thou, Doctor, that he is not so?
Dare thou detract and derogate from him,
Being so lovely and so brave a Youth?
Whose face shining with many a sugared smile,
Betrays that he is bred of princely race.
And yet, master Doctor, to speak like a Proctor,
And tell unto you, what is veriment and true,
To cease off this quarrel; look but on his apparel,
Then mark but my talis, he is great Prince of Walis,
The chief of our gregis, and filius Regis,
Then ware what is done, for he is Henries white son.
Doctors, whose doting night-caps are not capable of
my ingenious dignity, know that I am Edward Plantagenet,
whom if you displease, will make a ship that shall hold all your
Colleges, and so carry away the Niniuersity with a fair wind,
to the Bankeside in Southwark, how say thou Ned Warraine,
shall I not doe it?
Yes my good Lord, and if it please your Lordship,
I will gather up all your old pantophles, and with the cork,
make you a Pinnace of five hundred tun, that shall serve the
turn marvelous well, my Lord.
And I my Lord will have Pioners to undermine the
Town, that the very Gardens and Orchards be carried away
for your Summer walks.
And with scientia and great diligentia,
Will conjure and charm, to keep you from harm,
That vtrum horum manis, your very great nauis,
Like Bartlets ship, from Oxford doe skip,
With Colleges and schools, full laden with fools,
Quid dices ad hoc, worshipful Domino Dawcocke?
Why harebraind Courtiers, are you drunk or mad,
To taunt vs up with such scurrilitie?
Deem you vs men of base and light esteem,
To bring vs such a fop for Henries son?
Call out the Beadles and convey them hence
Straight to Bocardo, let the Roisters lie
Close clapped in bolts, until their wits be tame.
Why, shall we to prison my Lord?
What say, Miles, shall I honour the prison with my presence?
No, no, out with your blades, and hamper these Jade,
Have a fiurt and a crash, now revel dash,
And teach these Sacerdos, that the Bocardos,
Like Pezzants and clues, are meet for themselves.
To the prison with them, Constable.
Well (Doctors) seeing I have sported me,
With laughing at these mad and merry wags,
Know that Prince Edward is at Brazen-nose,
And this, attired like the Prince of Wales,
Is Raphe, King Henries only loved fool,
I, Earl of Essex, and this Ermsby,
One of the privy Chamber to the King,
Who while the Prince with Friar Bacon stays,
Have reuel'd in Oxford as you see.
My Lord, pardon vs, we knew not what you were???
But Courtiers may make greater scopes then these,
Wilt please your Honour dine with me to day?
I will, master Doctor, and satisfy the Vintner for
his hurt; only I must desire you to imagine him all this fore???noon
the Prince of Wales.
I will, sir.
And upon that I will lead the way, only I will have
Miles go before me, because I have heard Henry say, that wise???dome
must go before Majesty.
Lacie, thou can not shroud thy traitrous thoughts,
Nor cover, as did Cassius, all his wiles,
For Edward hath an eye that looks as far,
As Lincaeus from the shores of Grecia.
Did not I sit in Oxford by the Fryer,
And see thee court the maid of Fresingfield,
Sealing thy flattering fancies with a kiss?
Did not proud Bungay draw his portasse forth,
And joining hand in hand, had married you,
If Friar Bacon had not struck him dumb,
And mounted him upon a spirits back,
That we might chat at Oxford with the Friar?
Traitor, what answer? Is not all this true?
Truth all, my Lord, and thus I make reply,
At Harlstone Fair there courting for your Grace,
When as mine eye surveyed her curious shape,
And drew the beauteous glory of her looks,
To dive into the center of my heart,
Love taught me that your Honour did but jest,
That Princes were in fancy but as men,
How that the lovely maid of Fresingfield
Was fitter to be Laces wedded wife,
Then Concubine unto the Prince of Wales.
Injurious Lacy, did I love thee more
Then Alexander his Hephestion?
Did I unfold the passions of my love,
And locke them in the closet of thy thoughts?
Were thou to Edward second to himself,
Sole friend, and partner of his secret loves;
And could a glance of fading beauty break
Th'inchained fetters of such private friends?
Base coward, false, and too effeminate,
To be corival with a Prince in thoughts!
From Oxford have I posted since I dined,
To quite a Traitor before that Edward sleep?
It was I, my Lord, not Lacy stepped awry:
For oft he sued and courted for your self,
And still wooed for the Courtier all in greene:
But I, whom fancy made but ouer-fond,
Pleaded my self with looks as if loved,
I fed mine eye with gazing on his face,
And still bewitched loved Lacie with my looks,
My heart with sighs, mine eyes pleaded with tears,
My face held pity and content at once,
And more I could not cipher out by signs,
But that I loved Lord Lacy with my heart:
Then worthy Edward, measure with thy mind,
If women's favours will not force men fall,
If beauty, and if darts of piercing love,
Is not of force to bury thoughts of friends.
I tell thee, Peggie, I will have thy loves,
Edward, or none shall conquer Margret;
In Frigates bottomed with rich S???thin planks,
Topped with the lofty Firs of Lebanon,
Steamed and incast with burnished Ivory,
And ouer-laid with plates of Persian wealth,
Like Thetis shalt thou wanton on the waives,
And draw the Dolphins to thy lovely eyes,
To dance Lauoltas in the purple streams,
Sirens with harps and silver Psalteries,
Shall wait with music at thy Frigates stem,
And entertain fair Margret with her lays;
England and Englands wealth shall wait on thee,
Britain shall bend unto her Princes love,
And doe due homage to thine Excellence,
If thou wilt be but Edwards Margret.
Pardon, my Lord, if Ioues great Royalty
Sent me such presents as to Dane,
If Phoebus tied in Latonas webs,
Come courting from the beauty of his lodge,
The dulcet tunes of frolic Mercury,
Not all the wealth heavens treasury affords,
Should make me leave Lord Lacy, or his love.
I have learned at Oxford then this point of schools,
Ablata causa, la effectus.
Lacy, the cause, that Margret cannot love,
Nor fix her liking on the English Prince.
Take him away, and then the effects will fail.
Villain, prepare thy self: for I will bathe
My poinard in the bosom of an Earl.
Rather then live, and miss fair Margrets love,
Prince Edward, stop not at the fatal doom,
But stab it home, end both my loves and life.
Brave Prince of Wales, honoured for Royal deeds,
It were sin to stain fair Venus courts with blood,
Loves conquest ends, my Lord, in curtsy,
Spare Lacy, gentle Edward, let me dye,
For so both you and he doe cease your loves.
Lacie shall die as Traitor to his Lord.
I have deserved it, Edward, act it well.
What hopes the Prince to gain by Laces death?
To end the loves twixt him and Margaret.
Why, thinks King Henries son that Margrets love
Hangs in the uncertain balance of proud Time,
That death shall make a discord of our thoughts?
No, stab the Earl, and before the morning Sun
Shall vaunt him thrice over the lofty East,
Margret will meet her Lacy in the heavens.
If ought betides to lovely Margret,
That wrongs or wrings her honour from content,
Europes rich wealth, nor Englands Monarchy,
Should not allure Lacy to ouer-liue.
Then Edward, short my life, and end her loves.
Rid me, and keep a friend worth many loves.
Nay, Edward, keep a love worth many friends.
And if thy mind be such as fame hath blazed,
Then Princely Edward, let vs both abide
The fatal resolution of thy rage,
Banish thou fancy, and embrace revenge,
And in one tomb knit both our carcasses,
Whose hearts were linked in one perfect love,
Edward, art thou that famous Prince of Wales,
Who at Damasco beat the Saracens,
And broughtst home triumph on thy Lances point?
And shall thy plumes be pulled by ??enus down?
Is it princely to dissever Lovers loves?
Leave, Ned, and make a virtue of this fault,
And further Peg and Lacy in their loves;
So in subduing fancies passion,
Conquering thy self, thou got the richest spoil.
Lacy, rise up. Fair Pigs, here's my hand,
The Prince of Wales hath conquered all his thoughts,
And all his loves he yields unto the Earl.
Lacy, enjoy the maid of Fresingfield,
Make her thy Lincoln Countess at the Church.
And Ned, as he is true Plantagenet,
Will give her to thee frankly for thy wife.
Humbly I take her of my Sovereign,
As if that Edward gave me Englands right,
And rich't me with the Albion Diadem.
And doth the English Prince mean true?
Will he vouchsafe to cease his former loves,
And yield the title of a Country maid,
Unto Lord Lacy?
I will, fair Peggie, as I am true Lord.
Then Lordly Sir, whose conquest is as great,
In conquering love, as Casars victories,
Margret as mild and humble in her thoughts,
As was Aspatia unto Cirrus self,
Yields thanks, and next Lord Lacy, doth enshrine
Edward the second secret in her heart.
Gramercy, Peggie, now that vows are past,
And that your loves are not to be revolt:
Once, Lacy, friends again, come, we will post
To Oxford: for this day the King is there,
And brings for Edward Castle Ellinor.
Peggie, I must go see and view my wife;
I pray God I like her as I loved thee.
Beside, Lord Lincoln, we shall hear dispute,
Twixt Fryer Bacon, and learned Vandermast,
Peggy, we will leave you for a week or two.
As it please Lord Lacy: but loves foolish looks
Think footsteps miles, and minutes to be hours.
Isle hasten, Peggie, to make short return.
But please your Honour go unto the Lodge,
We shall have Butter, Cheese, and Venison.
And yesterday I brought for Margret,
A lusty bottle of neat Claret wine:
Thus can we feast and entertain your Grace.
It is cheer, Lord Lacy, for an Emperor,
If he respect the person and the place.
Come, let vs in, for I will all this night
Ride post until I come to Basins cell.
Trust me, Plantagenet, these Oxford Schools
Are richly seated near the River side:
The mountains full of fat and fallow Dear,
The battling pastures laid with Kine and Flocks,
The Town gorgeous with high built Colleges,
And Scholars seemly in their grave attire,
Learned in searching the principles of Art.
What is thy judgment, Iaques ??andermast?
That Lordly are the buildings of the Town,
Spacious the rooms, and full of pleasant walks:
But for the Doctors, how that they be learned,
It may be meanly, for ought I can hear.
I tell thee, Germane, Haspurge holds none such,
None read so deep, as Oxenford contains,
There are within our Academic state,
Men that may lecture it in Germany,
To all the Doctors of your Belgic Schools.
Stand to him, Bungay, charm this Vandermast,
And I will use thee as a Royal King.
Wherein dare thou dispute with me?
In what a Doctor and a Fryer can.
Before rich Europes Worthies put thou forth
The doubtful question unto ??andermast.
Let it be this, Whether the spirits of Piromancy or
Geomancy, be most predominant in Magic?
I say, of Piromancy.
And I of Geomancy.
The Cabalists that write of Magic spells,
As Harms, Melchre, and Pythagoras,
Affirm that amongst the quadruplicity
Of elemental essence, Terra is but thought,
To be a punctum squared to the rest:
And that the compass of ascending elements
Exceed in bigness as they doe in height;
Judging the concave Circle of the Sun,
To hold the rest in his Circumference;
If then, as Harms says, the fire be greatest,
Purest, and only gives shapes to spirits:
Then must these Demones that haunt that place,
Be every way superior to the rest.
I reason not of elemental shapes,
Nor tell I of the concave latitudes,
Noting their essence, nor their quality,
But of the spirits that Piromancy calls,
And of the vigour of the Geomanticke Fiends.
I tell thee, Germane, Magic hints the grounds,
And those strange Negromanticke spells,
That work such shows and wondering in the world,
Are acted by those Geomanticke sprites,
That Harms calls Tarry silij.
The fiery spirits are but transparent shades,
That lightly pass as Heralds to bear news,
But earthly Fiends closed in the lowest deep,
Dissever mountains, if they be but char'd,
Being more gross and massy in their power.
Rather these earthly Geomantike spirits,
Are dull and like the place where they remain:
For when proud Lucifer fell from the heavens,
The spirits and Angels that did sin with him,
Retained their local essence as their faults,
All subjects under Lunas Continent,
The which offended less, hang in the fire,
And second faults did rest within the air,
But Lucifer and his proud-hearted fiends,
Were thrown into the Center of the earth,
Having less understanding then the rest,
As having greater sin, and lesser grace.
Therefore such gross and earthly spirits doe serve,
For Jugglers, Witches, and wild Sorcerers,
Whereas the Piromanticke Genij,
Are mighty, swift, and of far reaching power.
But grant that Geomancie hath most force,
Bungay, to please these mighty Potentates,
Prove by some instance what thy Art can doe.
I will.
Now English Harry, here begins the game,
We shall see sport between these learned men.
What wilt thou doe?
Show thee the Tree leaved with refined gold,
Whereon the fearful Dragon held his seat,
That watched the Garden called Hesperides,
Subdued and won by conquering Hercules.
Well done.
What say you Royal Lordlings to my Fryer?
Hath he not done a point of cunning skill?
Each Scholar in the Negromanticke spells
Can doe as much as Bungay hath performed.
But as Alemenas bastard raised this Tree,
So will I raise him up as when he lived,
And cause him pull the Dragon from his seat,
And tear the branches piecemeal from the root,
Hercules, Prodi, Prodi, Hercules.
Quis me vult?
Ioues bastard son, thou Lybian Heroules,
Pull off the sprigs from off the Hesperian Tree,
As once thou did to win the golden fruit.
Hercules. Fiat.
Now Bungay, if thou can by Magic charm
The Fiend, appearing like great Hercules,
From pulling down the branches of the Tree,
Then art thou worthy to be counted learned.
I cannot.
Cease Hercules, until I give thee charge.
Mighty Commander of this English Isle,
Henrie, come from the stout Plantagenets,
Bungay is learned enough to be a Fryer:
But to compare with Iaques Vandermast,
Oxford and Cambridge must go seek their Celles,
To find a man to match him in his Art.
I have given non-plus to the Paduans,
To them of Sign, Florence, and Bologna,
Rheims, Louain, and fair Rotterdam,
Franckford, Lutrech, and Orleans:
And now must Henrie, if he doe me right,
Crown me with Laurel, as they all have done.
All hail to this Royal Company,
That sit to hear and see this strange dispute:
Bungay, how standst thou as a man amazed?
What, hath the Germane acted more then thou?
What art thou that questionst thus?
Men call me Bacon.
Lordly thou look, as if that thou were learned?
Thy countenance, as if science held her seat
Between the circled arches of thy brows.
Now Monarchs, hath the Germane found his match?
Bestir thee Iaques, take not now the foil,
Lest thou doest lose, what foretime thou did gain.
Bacon, wilt thou dispute?
No, unless he were more learned then Vandermast.
For yet tell me, what hast thou done?
Raised Hercules to ruinate that tree,
That Bungay mounted by his Magic spells.
Set Hercules to work.
Now Hercules, I charge thee to thy task,
Pull off the golden branches from the root.
I dare not. See thou not great Bacon here,
Whose frown doth act more then thy Magic can?
By all the Thrones, and Dominations,
Virtues, Powers, and mighty Hierarchies,
I charge thee to obey to Vandermast.
Bacon, that bridles headstrong Belzephon,
And rules Asmenoth guitar of the North:
Binds me from yielding unto Vandermast.
How now, ??andermast, have you met with your match?
Never before was it known to ??andermast,
That men held Devils in such obedient awe.
Bacon doth more then Art, or else I fail.
Why, Vandermast, art thou overcome?
Bacon dispute with him, and try his skill;
I come not, Monarchs, for to hold dispute
With such a Novice as is Vandermast;
I came to have your Royalties to dine
With Fryer Bacon here in Brazen-nose;
And, for this Germane troubles but the place,
And holds the Audience with a long suspense,
Isle send him to his Academy hence.
Thou Hercules, whom Vandermast did raise,
Transport the Germane unto Haspurge straight,
That he may learn by travel against the Springs,
More secret dooms and Aphorisms of Art,
Vanish the Tree, and thou away with him.
Why, Bacon, whither doest thou send him?
To Haspurge, there your Highness at return,
Shall find the Germane in his Study safe.
Bacon, thou hast honoured England with thy skill,
And made fair Oxford famous by thine Art,
I will be English Henry to thy self.
But tell me, shall we dine with thee to day?
With me, my Lord; and while I fit my cheer,
See where Prince Edward comes to welcome you:
Gracious as the morning-starre of heaven.
Is this Prince Edward, Henries Royal son?
How martial is the figure of his face!
Yet lovely and beset with Amorets.
Ned, where hast thou been?
At Framingham, my Lord, to try your Bucks,
If they could scope the teisers or the toil:
But hearing of these Lordly Potentates
Landed, and progressed up to Oxford town,
I posted to give entertain to them,
Chief to the Almaine Monarch, next to him,
And joint with him, Castle, and Saxonie,
Are welcome as they may be to the English Court.
Thus for the men. But see, ??enus appears,
Or one that overmatched ??enus in her shape,
Sweet Ellinor, beauties high-swelling pride,
Rich natures glory, and her wealth at once:
Fair of all fairs, welcome to Albion,
Welcome to me, and welcome to thine own,
If that thou dain'st the welcome from my self.
Martial Plantagenet, Henries high-minded son,
The mark that Ellinor did count her aim,
I liked thee before I saw thee; now I love,
And so as in so short time I may:
Yet so, as time shall never break that so,
And therefore so accept of Ellinor.
Fear not, my Lord, this couple will agree,
If love may creep into their wanton eyes:
And therefore, Edward, I accept thee here,
Without suspense, as my adopted son.
Let me that joy in these consorting greets,
And glory in these honours done to Ned,
Yield thanks for all these favours to my son,
And rest a true Plantagenet to all.
Saluete omnes Reges, that govern your Greges, in
Saxony, and Spain, in England, and in Almaine: for all this
frolic rabble must I cover the table, with trenchers, salt, and
cloth, and then look for your broth.
What pleasant fellow is this?
Tic, my Lord, Doctor Basins poor Scholar.
My master hath made me sewer of these great Lords,
and (God knows) I am as serviceable at a table, as a Sow is
under an Apple tree: it is no matter, their cheer shall not be
great, and therefore what skils where the salt stand before or
behind?
These Scholars know more skill in Axioms,
How to use quips and sleights of Sophistry,
Then for to cover courtly for a King.
Spill, sir? why, doe you think I never carried
two-penny chop before in my life? By your leave, Nobel decus,
for here comes Doctor Basins pecus, being in his full age, to car???rye
a mess of pottage.
Lordlings, admire not if your cheer be this,
For we must keep our Academic fare,
No riot where Philosophy doth reign:
And therefore, Henry, place these Potentates,
And bid them fall unto their frugal cates.
Presumptuous Fryer, what, scoft'st thou at a King?
What, doest thou taunt vs with thy peasants fare,
And gives vs cates fit for Country Swains?
Henrie, proceeds this jest of thy consent,
To twit vs with a pittance of such price?
Tell me, and Frederick will not grieve thee long.
By Henries honour and the Royal faith
The English Monarch bears to his friend,
I knew not of the Fryers feeble fare,
Nor am I pleased he entertains you thus.
Content thee, Frederick, for I showed thee cates,
To let thee see how scholars use to feed:
How little meat refines our English wits.
Miles take away, and let it be thy dinner.
Mary sir, I will, this day shall be a festival day with me:
For I shall exceed in the highest degree.
I tell thee, Monarch, all the Germane Peers
Could not afford thy entertainment such,
So Royal and so full of Majesty,
As Bacon will present to Frederick,
The Basest waiter that attends thy cups,
Shall be in honours greater then thy self:
And for thy cates rich Alexandria drugs,
Fetched by Carueils from Aegypts richest straights:
Found in the wealthy strond of Africa,
Shall Royallize the table of my King,
Wines richer then the Gyprian Courtesan
Quaft to Augustus Kingly countermatch,
Shall be caroused in English Henries feasts:
Candy shall yield the richest of her canes,
Persia down her Volga by Canows,
Send down the secrets of her spicery.
The Africa Dates, mirabiles of Spain,
Conserves, and Suckets from Tiberias,
Cates from Iudea choicer then the lamp
That seared Rome with sparks of gluttony,
Shall beautify the board for Frederick,
And therefore grudge not at a Fryers feast.
Come frolic, Keeper of our Lieges game,
Whose table spread hath ever Venison,
And lacks of wine to welcome passengers.
Know I am in love with jolly Margret,
That ouer-shines our Damsels, as the Moon
Darkneth the brightest sparkles of the night,
In Laxfield here my land and living lies,
Isle make thy daughter jointer of it all,
So thou consent to give her to my wife,
And I can spend five hundred marks a year.
I am the Lands-lord Keeper of thy holds,
By copy all thy living lies in me.
Laxfield did never see me raise my due,
I will infeoffe Margret in all,
So she will take her to a lusty Squire.
?????? Keeper. Now courteous Gentles, if the Keepers girl
Hath pleased the liking fancy of you both,
And with her beauty hath subdued your thoughts,
It is doubtful to decide the question.
It joys me that such men of great esteem,
Should lay their liking on this base estate,
And that her state should grow so fortunate,
To be a wife to meaner men then you.
But sith such Squires will stoop to Keepers fee,
I will t'auoyd displeasure of you both,
Call Margret forth, and she shall make her choice.
Content, Keeper, send her unto vs.
Why, Serlsby, is thy wife so lately dead?
Are all thy loves so lightly passed over,
As thou can wed before the year be out?
I live not, Lambert, to content the dead,
Nor was I wedded but for life to her,
The grave ends, and begins a married state.
Peggie, the lovely flowers of all towns,
Suffolks fair Helen, and rich Englands star,
Whose beauty tempered with her housewifery,
Makes England talk of merry Fresingfield.
I cannot trick it up with poesies,
Nor paint my passions with comparisons,
Nor tell a tale of Phoebus and his loves,
But this believe me, Laxfield here is mine,
Of ancient rent seven hundred pounds a year,
And if thou can but love a Country Squire,
I will infeoffe thee, Margret, in all,
I cannot slatter, try me if thou please.
Brave neighbouring Squires, the stay of Suffolks clime,
A Keepers daughter is too base in gre
To match with men accounted of such worth:
But might I not displease, I would reply.
Lambert. Say, Peggie, nought shall make vs discontent.
Then Gentiles, note that love hath little stay,
Nor can the flames that ??enus sets on fire,
Be kindled but by fancies motion,
Then pardon, Gentiles, if a maids reply
Be doubtful, while I have debated with my self,
Who, or of whom love shall constrain me like.
Let it be me, and trust me, Margret,
The meads environed with silver streams,
Whose battling pastures fatten all my flocks,
Yielding forth fleeces stapled with such wool,
As Lempster cannot yield more finer stuff,
And forty kine with fair and burnished heads,
With strutting dugs that puggle to the ground,
Shall serve thy dary if thou wed with me.
Let pass the Country wealth, as flocks and kine,
And lands that wave with Ceres golden sheaves,
Filling my barnes with plenty of the fields:
But, Peggie, if thou wed thy self to me,
Thou shalt have garments of imbrodred silk,
Lawns, and rich net-works for thy head attire,
Costly shall be thy fair habiliments,
If thou wilt be but Lambert loving wife.
Content you, Gentles, you have proffered fair,
And more then fits a Country maids degree:
But give me leave to counsel me a time,
For fancy blooms not at the first assault;
Give me but ten days respit, and I will reply,
Which or to whom my self affectionates.
Lambert, I tell thee, thou art importunate,
Such beauty fits not such a base Esquire:
It is for Serlsby to have Margret.
Think thou with wealth to ouer-reach me,
Serlsby? I scorn to brooke thy Country braves.
I dare thee, Coward, to maintain this wrong,
At dint of Rapier single in the field
Isle answer Lambert what I have avouched.
Margret, farewell, another time shall serve.
Isle follow. Peggie, farewell to thy self,
Listen how well Isle answer for thy love.
How Fortune tempers lucky hippos with frowns,
And wrongs me with the sweets of my delight!
Love is my bliss, and love is now my bale.
Shall I be Helen in my forward fates,
As I am Helen in my matchless hue,
And set rich Suffolk with my face a fire?
If lovely Lacy were but with his Peggie,
The cloudy darkness of his bitter frown
Would check the pride of these aspiring Squires,
Before the term of ten days be expired,
When as they look for answer of their loves,
My Lord will come to merry Fresingfield,
And end their fancies, and their follies both;
Till when, Peggie be blithe and of good cheer.
Fair lovely Damsel, which way leads this path?
How might I post me unto Fresingfield?
Which footpath leads to the Keepers Lodge?
Your way is ready, and this path is right,
My self doe dwell hereby in Fresingfield;
And if the Keeper be the man you seek,
I am his daughter: may I know the cause?
Lovely and once beloved of my Lord,
No marvel if his eye was lodged so low,
When brighter beauty is not in the heavens,
The Lincoln Earl hath sent you Letters here,
And with them, just an hundred pounds in gold.
Sweet bonny wench, read them, and make reply.
The scrolls that love sent Dana??,
Wrapped in rich closures of fine burnished gold,
Were not more welcome then these lines to me.
Tell me, whilst that I doe unrip the scales,
Lives Lacy well, how fares my lovely Lord?
Well, if that wealth may make men to live well.
THe blooms of the Almond tree grow in a night, &amp; vanish
in a morn, the flies Haemerae (fair Peggie) take life with
the Sun, and die with the dew, fancy that slips in with a
gaze, goes out with a wink; and too timely loves, have ever
the shortest length. I write this as thy grief, and my folly,
who at Fresingfield loved that which time hath taught me to
be but mean dainties, eyes are dissemblers, and fancy is but
queasy, therefore know, Margret, I have chosen a Spanish La???die
to be my wife, chief wayting-woman to the Princess Elli???nor,
a Lady fair, and no less fair then thy self, honourable and
wealthy, in that I forsake thee, I leave thee to thine own li???king,
and for thy dowry I have sent thee an hundred pounds, &amp;
ever assure thee of my favour, which shall avail thee and thine
much. Farewell. Not thine, nor his own.
Fond Atae, doomer of bad boasting fates,
That wraps proud Fortune in thy snaky locks,
Did thou enchant my birth-day with such stars,
As lightened mischief from their infancy?
If heavens had vowed, if stars had made decree,
To show in me their froward influence,
If Lacy had but loved, heavens, hell and all,
Could not have wronged the patience of my mind.
It grieves me, Damsel, but the Earl is forced
To love the Lady, by the Kings command.
The wealth combined within the English shelves,
Europes Commander, nor the English King,
Should not have moved the love of Peggie from her Lord.
What answer shall I return to my Lord?
First, for thou came from Lacy whom I loved,
Ah, give me leave to sigh at every thought,
Take thou, my friend, the hundred pound he sent:
For Margrets resolution craves no dower;
The world shall be to her as vanity,
Wealth, trash; love, hate; pleasure, de spear:
For I will straight to stately Fremingham,
And in the Abbey there be shorn a Nun,
And yield my loves and liberty to God.
Fellow, I give thee this, not for the news,
For those be hateful unto Margret,
But for you are Laces man, once Margrets love.
What I have heard, what passions I have seen,
Isle make report of them unto the Earl.
Say, that she joys his fancies be at rest,
And prays that his misfortunes may be hers.
Miles, where are you?
Here, sir.
How chance you tarry so long?
Think you that the watching of the brazen head
craves no furniture? I warrant you, sir, I have so armed my self,
that if all your devils doe come, I will not fear them an inch.
Miles, thou know that I have dived into hell,
And sought the darkest palaces of the Fiends,
That with my Magic spells great Belzephon
Hath left his lodge and kneeled at my cell,
The rafters of the earth rent from the poles,
And three-form'd L??????a hid her silver looks;
Trembling upon her concave continent,
When Bacon read upon his Magic book,
With seven years tossing Nigromanticke charms,
Poring upon dark Hecats principles,
I have framed out a monstrous head of brass,
That by th'inchanting forces of the Devil,
Shall tell out strange and uncouth Aphorisms,
And girt fair England with a wall of brass.
Bungay and I have watched these threescore days,
And now our vital spirits crave some rest,
If Argos lived and had his hundred eyes,
They could not ouer-watch Phobeters night,
Now Miles, in thee rests Fryers Basins weal,
The honour and renown of all his life,
Hangs in the watching of this brazen-head;
Therefore I charge thee by the immortal God,
That holds the souls of men within his fist,
This night thou watch; for ere the morning star
Sends out his glorious glister on the North,
The head will speak; then (Miles) upon thy life,
Wake me: for then by Magic Art Isle work,
To end my seven years task with excellence,
If that a wink but shut thy watchful eye,
Then farewell Basins glory and his fame,
Draw close the curtains, Miles, now for thy life,
Be watchful and
So, I thought you would talk your self asleep anon,
and it is no marvel, for Bungay on the days, and hee on the
nights, have watched just these ten and fifty days, now this is
the night, and it is my task and no more. Now Iesus bless me,
what a goodly head it is, &amp; a nose! You talk of nos atom glory???ficare;
but here's a nose, that I warrant may be called nos atom po???polars
for the people of the parish. Well I am furnished with
weapons, now sir, I will set me down by a post, and make it as
good as a watch-man to wake me if I chance to slumber.
I thought, goodman head, I would call you out of your moment???
passion a God, I have almost broke my pate: Up, Milet, to your
task, take your browne bill in your hand, here is some of your
masters Hobgoblins abroad. With this, a great noise.
Time is.
Time is. Why, Master Brazen-head, have you such
a capital nose, and answer you with syllables, Time is? is this
all my masters cunning, to spend seven years study about
Time is? Well, sir, it may be, we shall have some orations of it
anon; well, Isle watch you as narrowly as ever you were watched,
and Isle play with you as the Nightingale with the Slow-worme,
Isle set a prick against my breast; now rest there,
Miles, Lord have mercy upon me, I have almost kilt my
self: up, Miles, list how they rumble.
Time was.
Well, Friar Bacon, you have spent your seven years
study well, that can make your Head speak but two words at
once, Time was: yea mary, time was when my Master was
a wise man, but that was before he began to make the Brazen-head.
You shall lye while you arse ache, and your Head speak
no better: well, I will watch and walk up and down, and be
a Peripatetian and a Philosopher of Aristotles stamp. What,
a fresh noise? Take thy Pistols in hand, Miles.
Time is past.
Master, master, up, hell's broken loose, your head
speaks, and there's such a thunder and lightning, that I war???rant,
all Oxford is up in arms; out of your bed, take a browne
bill in your hand, the latter day is come.
Miles, I come. O passing warily watched;
Bacon will make thee next himself in love.
When spake the Head?
When spake the Head? did not you say that he should
tell strange principles of Philosophy? Why sir, it speaks but
two words at a time.
Why villain, hath it spoken oft?
Oft, I mary hath it thrice: but in all those three times
it hath uttered but seven words.
As how?
Mary sir, the firs time he said, Time is, as if Fabuis
Commentator should have pronounced a sentence: he said, Time
was: and the third time with thunder and lightning, as in great
choler, he said, Time is past.
Tic past indeed. A villain, time is past:
My life, my fame, my glory, all are past:
Bacon, the turrets of thy hope are ruined down,
Thy seven years study lies in the dust:
Thy Brazen-head lies broken through a slave
That watched, and would not when the Head did will.
What said the Head first?
Even, Time is.
Villain, if thou had called to Bacon then,
If thou had watched and waked the sleepy Fryer,
The Brazen-head had uttered Aphorisms,
And England had been circled round with brass:
But proud Astmeroth, ruler of the North,
And Demegorgon, master of the Fates,
Grudge that a mortal man should doe so much.
Hell trembled at my deep commanding spells,
Fiends frowned to see a man their ouer-match,
Bacon might boast more then a man might boast:
But now the braves of Bacon have an end,
Europes conceit of Bacon hath an end:
His seven years practice sorts to ill end:
And villain, sith my glory hath an end,
I will appoint thee fatal to some end.
Villain, avoid, get thee from Basins sight:
Vagrant, go rome and range about the world,
And perish as a vagabond on earth.
Why then, sir, you forbid me your service.
My service, villain? with a fatal curse,
That dire full plagues and mischief fall on thee.
Tic no matter, I am against you with the old proverb,
The more the Fox is cursed, the better he fares. God be with
you, sir, Isle take but a book in my hand, a wide sleeved gown
on my back, and a crowned cap on my head, and see If I can
want promotion.
Some fiend or ghost haunt on thy weary steps,
Until they doe transport thee quick to hell:
For Bacon shall have never merry day,
To lose the same and honour of his Head.
Now lovely Prince, the Prince of Albions wealth,
How fares the Lady Ellinor and you?
What, have you courted and found Castle fit,
To answer England in equiuolence?
Wilt be a match twixt bonny Nil and thee?
Should Paris enter in the courts of Greece,
And not lye fettered in fair Hellens looks?
Or Phoebus scope those piercing amorits,
That Daphne glanced at his deity?
Can Edward then sit by a flame and freeze,
Whose heat puts Helen and fair Daphne down?
Now Monarchs, ask the Lady if we gre
What, Madam, hath my son found grace or no?
Seeing my Lord his lovely counterfeit,
And hearing how his mind and shape agreed,
I come not, trooped with all this warlike train,
Doubting of love, but so affectionate,
As Edward hath in England what he won in Spain.
A match, my Lord, these wantons needs must love:
Men must have wives, and women must be wed,
Let's haste the day to honour up the rites.
Sir Harry, shall Ned marry Nil?
I, Raphe, how then?
Mary Harry, follow my counsel, send for Fryer Ba???con
to marry them, for heel so conjure him and her with his
Necromancy, that they shall love together like Pig &amp; Lamb
whilst they live.
But hearst thou, Raphe, art thou content to have Elli???nor
to thy Lady?
I, so she will promise me two things.
Whats that, Raphe?
That she will never scold with Ned, nor sight with
me, Sir Harry, I have put her down with a thing unpossible.
Whats that, Raphe?
Why Harry, did thou ever see that a woman could
both hold her tongue and her hands? no: but when egge-pyes
grow on Apple-trees, then will thy gray Mare prove a Bag-piper.
What says the Lord of Castle and the Earl of
Lincoln, that they are in such earnest and secret talk?
I stand, my Lord, amazed at his talk?
How he discourses of the constancy
Of one surnam'd for beauties excellence,
The fair maid of Fresingfield.
Tic true, my Lord, tic wondrous for to hear,
Her beauty passing Marses Paramour:
Her virgins right as rich as ??estas was,
Lacy and Ned have told me miracles.
What says Lord Lacy? shall she be his wife?
Or else Lord Lacy is unfit to live.
May it please your Highness give me leave to post
To Fresingfield, Isle fetch the bonny girl,
And prove in true appearance at the Court,
What I have vouched often with my tongue.
Lacy, go to the Quiry of my Stable,
And take such Coursers as shall fit thy turn,
Hie thee to Fresingfield, and bring home the Lass,
And, for her fame flies through the English coast,
If it may please the Lady Ellinor,
One day shall match your Excellence and her.
We Castle Ladies are not very coy,
Your Highness may command a greater boon:
And glad were I to grace the Lincoln Earl
With being partner of his marriage day.
Gramercy, Nil, for I doe love the Lord,
As he that's second to my self in love.
You love her? Madam Nil, never believe him you,
though he swears he loves you.
Why Raphe?
Why, his love is like unto a Tipsters glass that is
broken with every tutch; for he loved the fair maid of Fre???singfield
once out of all hoe; nay Ned, never wink upon me,
I care not, I.
Raphe tells all, you shall have a good Secretary of him.
But, Lacy, haste thee post to Fresingfield:
For ere thou hast fitted all things for her state,
The solemn marriage day will be at hand.
I go, my Lord.
How shall we pass this day, my Lord?
To horse, my Lord, the day is passing fair,
Weal fly the Partridge, or go rouse the Dear.
Follow, my Lords, you shall not want for sport.
What means the Fryer that frolicked it of late,
To sit as melancholy in his Cell,
As if he had neither lost nor won to day?
Ah Bungay, my brazen-head is spoiled,
My glory gone, my seven years study lost:
The fame of Bacon bruited through the world,
Shall end and perish with this deep disgrace.
Bacon hath built foundation on his fame,
So surely on the wings of true report,
With acting strange and uncouth miracles,
As this cannot infringe what he deserves.
Bungay, sit down, for by prospective skill,
I find this day shall fall out ominous,
Some deadly act shall betide me ere I sleep:
But what and wherein little can I guess.
My mind is heavy whatsoere shall hap.
Who's that knocks?
Two Scholars that desire to speak with you.
Bid the?? come in. Now, my youths, what would you have?
Sir, we are Suffolk men &amp; neighbouring friends,
Our fathers in their Countries lusty Squires,
Their lands adjoin, in Crack field mine doth dwell,
And his in Laxfield, we are College mates,
Sworn brothers; as our fathers live as friends.
To what end is all this?
Hearing your worship kept within your Cell
A glass prospective wherein men might see,
What so their thoughts or hearts desire could wish,
We come to know how that our fathers fare.
My glass is free for every honest man.
Sit down, and you shall see ere long,
How or in what state your friendly fathers live,
Mean while tell me your names.
Mine Lambert.
And mine Serlsby.
Bungay, I smell there will be a Tragedy.
Serlsby, thou hast kept thine hour like a man,
You are worthy of the title of a Squire:
That durst for proof of thy affection,
And for thy mistress favour prize thy blood;
Thou know what words did pass at Fresingfield,
Such shameless braves as manhood cannot brooke:
I, for I scorn to bear such piercing taunts,
Prepare thee, Serlsby, one of vs will die.
Thou see I single thee the field,
And what I spake, Isle maintain with my sword:
Stand on thy guard, I cannot scold it out.
And if thou kill me, think I have a son,
That lives in Oxford in the Brodgates hall,
Who will revenge his fathers blood with blood.
And Serlsby, I have there a lusty boy,
That dares at weapon buckle with thy son,
And lives in Brodgates too as well as thine;
But draw thy Rapier: for weal have a bout.
Now lusty yonkers, look within the glass,
And tell me if you can discern your sires.
Serlsby, tic hard, thy father offers wrong,
To combat with my father in the field.
Lambert, thou least, my fathers is the abuse,
And thou shalt find it, if my father have harm.
How goes it, sirs?
Our fathers are in combat hard by Fresingfield.
Sit still, my friends, and see the event.
Why standst thou, Serlsby, doubt thou of thy life?
A venue, man, fair Margret craves so much.
Then this for her.
Ah, well thrust.
But mark the ward.
Oh, I am slain.
And I, Lord have mercy on me.
My father slain, Serlsby ward that.
And so is mine, Lambert, Isle quite thee well.
O strange stratagem!
See, Fryer, where the fathers both lye dead.
Bacon, thy magic doth effect this massacre:
This glass prospective works many woes,
And therefore seeing these lusty Brutes,
These friendly youths did perish by thine Art.
End all thy magic and thine Art at once:
The poniard that did end the fatal lives,
Shall break the cause officiate of their woes,
So fade the glass, and end with it the shows,
That Necromancy did infuse the crystal with.
What means learned Bacon thus to break his glass?
I tell thee, Bungay, it repeuts me sore,
That ever Bacon meddled in this Art,
The hours I have spent in Piromanticke spells,
The fearful tossing in the latest night,
Of papers full of Nigromanticke charms,
Conjuring and adiuring Devils and Fiends,
With Stole and Alb, and strange Pentaganon,
The wresting of the holy Name of God,
As Sother, Eloim, and Adonai,
Alpha, Manoth, and Tetragrammaton,
With praying to the fiue-fold powers of heaven,
Are instances that Bacon must be damned,
For using Devils to countervail his God.
Yet, Bacon, cheer thee, drown not in despair,
Sins have their salves, repentance can doe much:
Think mercy sits where Justice holds her seat,
And from those wounds those bloody Jaws did pierce???
Which by thy magic oft did bleed afresh,
From thence for thee the dew of mercy drops,
To wash the wrath of hie Iehouahs ire,
And make thee as a new-borne babe from sin.
Bungay, Isle spend the remnant of my life
In pure devotion, praying to my God,
That he would save what Bacon vainly lost.
Margret, be not so head-strong in these vows.
Oh bury not such beauty in a Cell:
That England hath held famous for the hue.
Thy fathers hair like to the silver blooms:
That beautifies the shrubs of Africa
Shall fall before the dated time of death,
Thus to forgo his lovely Margret.
A father, when the harmony of heaven
Sounds the measures of a lively faith:
The vain Illusions of this flattering world,
Seem odious to the thoughts of Margret.
I loved once, Lord Lacy was my love,
And now I hate my self for that I loved,
And doted more on him than on my God:
For this I scourge my self with sharpe repents;
But now the touch of such a spiring sins
Tells me, all love is lust, but love of heavens:
That beauty used for love is vanity,
The world contains nought but alluring baits:
Pride, flattery, and inconstant thoughts,
To shun the pricks of death, I leave the world,
And vow to meditate on heavenly bliss,
To live in Fremingham a holy Nun,
Holy and pure in conscience and in deed:
And for to wish all maids to learn of me,
To seek heavens joy before earths vanity.
And will you then, Margret, be shorn a Nun, and
so leave vs all?
Now farewell world, the engine of all woe,
Farewell to friends and father, welcome Christ:
Adieu to dainty robes, this base attire
Better befits an humble mind to God,
Then all the show of rich habiliments.
Love, oh Love, and with fond Love farewell,
Sweet Lacy, whom I loved once so dear,
Ever be well, but never in my thoughts,
Lest I offend to think on Laces love:
But even to that as to the rest, farewell.
Come on my wags, we're near the Keepers Lodge,
Here have I oft walked in the watery Meads,
And chatted with my lovely Margret.
Sir Ned, is not this the Keeper?
Tic the same,
The old lecher hath gotten holy mutton to him,
a Nun, my Lord.
Keeper, how forest thou holla man, what cheer,
How doth Peggie thy daughter and my love?
Ah, good my Lord! oh, woe is me for Pig,
See where she stands clad in her Nuns attire,
Ready for to be shorn in Fremigham:
She leaves the world, because she left your love,
Oh good my Lord, persuade her if you can.
Why how now Margret, what a malecontent,
A Nun? what holy father taught you this,
To task your self to such a tedious life,
As dye a maid? it were injury to me,
To smother up such beauty in a Cell.
Lord Lacy, thinking of thy form miss,
How fond the prime of wanton years were spent
In love, Oh fie upon that fond conceit,
Whose hap and essence hangs in the eye,
I leave both love and loves content at once,
Betaking me to him that is true love,
And leaving all the world for love of him.
Whence, Peggie, comes this Metamorphosis?
What, shorn a Nun, and I have from the Court
Posted with coursers to convey thee hence,
To Windsor, where our marriage shall be kept?
Thy wedding robes are in the Taylors hands.
Come, Peggie, leave these peremptory vows.
Did not my Lord resign his interest,
And make divorce twixt Margret and him?
It was but to try sweet Piggies constancy:
But will fair Margret leave her love and Lord?
Is not heavens joy before earths fading bliss?
And life aboue sweeter then life in love?
Why then, Margret will be shorn a Nun.
Margret hath made a vow, which may not be revoked.
We cannot stay, my Lord, and if she be so strict,
Our leisure grants vs not to woo afresh.
Choose you, fair Damsel, yet the choice is yours,
Either a solemn Nunnery, or the Court,
God, or Lord Lacy, which contents you best,
To be a Nun, or else Lord Laces wife?
A good motion. Peggie, your answer must be short.
The flesh is frail, my Lord doth know it well,
That when he comes with his enchanting face,
Whatsoere betide, I cannot say him nay.
Off goes the habit of a maidens heart,
And seeing fortune will, fair Fremingham,
And all the show of holy Nuns, farewell,
Lacy for me, if he will be my Lord.
Peggie, thy Lord, thy love, thy husband,
Trust me, by truth of Knighthood, that the King
Stays for to marry matchless Ellinor,
Until I bring thee richly to the Court,
That one day may both marry her and thee.
How say thou Keeper, art thou glad of this?
As if the English King had given
The Park and Dear of Fresingfield to me.
I pray thee my Lord of Sussex, why art thou in a
browne study?
To see the nature of women, that be they never so
near God, yet they love to dye in a mans arms.
What have you fit for breakfast? we have hied and
posted all this night to Fresingfield.
Butter and cheese, and humbles of a Dear,
Such as poor Keepers have within their Lodge.
And not a bottle of wine?
Weal find one for my Lord.
Come, Sussex, let's in, wee shall have more, for she
speaks least, to hold her promise sure.
How restless are the ghosts of hellish sprites,
When every Charmer with his Magic spells
Calls vs from nine-fold trenched Phlegiton,
To scud and ouer-scoure the earth in post,
Upon the speedy wings of swiftest winds?
Now Bacon hath raised me from the darkest deep,
To search about the world for Miles his man,
For Miles, and to torment his lazy bones,
For careless watching of his brazen-head.
See where he comes: Oh he is mine.
A Scholar, quoth you, mary sir, I would I had been
made a bottle-maker, when I was made a scholar; for I can
get neither to be a Deacon, Reader, nor Schoolmaster; no,
not the Clarke of a Parish; some call me dunce: another saith,
my head is as full of Latin, as an eg's full of oate-meale: thus
I am tormented, that the Devil and Friar Bacon haunts me.
Good Lord, here's one of my masters Devils??? Isle go speak to
him: what master Plutus, how cheer you?
Dost thou know me?
Know you, sir, why are not you one of my masters
Devils, that were wont to come to my master Doctor Bacon, at
Brazen-nose?
Yes mary am I.
Good Lord, M. Plutus, I have seen you a thousand
times at my masters, and yet I had never the manners to make
you drink; but sir, I am glad to see how conformable you are
to the state; I warrant you, he's as yeomanly a man, as you shall
see, mark you masters, here's a plain honest man, without welt
or guard; but I pray you sir, doe you come lately from hell?
I mary, how then?
Faith, tic a place I have desired long to see, have you
not good tippling houses there? may not a man have a lusty fire
there, a pot of good Ale, a pair of cards, a swinging piece of
chalk, and a browne toast that will clap a white waistcoat on a
cup of good drink?
All this you may have there.
You are for me, friend, and I am for you: but I pray
you, may I not have an office there?
Yes, a thousand: what would thou be?
By my troth, sir, in a place, where I may profit my
self. I know hell is a hot place, and men are marvelous dry,
and much drink is spent there; I would be a Tipster.
Thou shalt,
There's nothing lets me from going with you, but
that tic a long journey, and I have never a horse.
Thou shalt ride on my back.
Now surely here's a courteous devil, that for to plea???sure
his friend, will not stick to make a Jade of himself: but
I pray you goodman friend, let me move a question to you.
What's that?
I pray you, whether is your pace a trot or an amble?
An amble.
Tic well, but take heed it be not a trot,
But tic no matter, Isle prevent it.
What doest?
Mary, friend, I put on my spurs: for if I find your
pace either a trot, or else uneasy, Isle put you to a false gallop,
Isle make you feel the benefit of my spurs.
Get up upon my back.
Oh Lord, here's even a goodly marvel, when a man
rides to hell on the Devils back.
Great Potentates, earths miracles for state,
Think that Prince Edward humbles at your feet,
And for these favours on his martial sword,
He vows perpetual homage to your selves,
Yielding these honours unto Ellinour.
Gramercies, Lordings, old Plantagenet,
That rules and sways the Albion Diadem,
With tears discovers these conceived joys,
And vows requital, if his men at arms,
The wealth of England, or due honours done
To Ellinor, may quite his Favourites.
But all this while what say you to the Dames,
That shine like to the crystal lamps of heaven?
If but a third were added to these two,
They did surpass those gorgeous Images,
That gloried Ida with rich beauties wealth.
Tic I, my Lords, who humbly on my knee,
Must yield her horizons to mighty Jove,
For lifting up his handmaid to this state,
Brought from her homely cottage to the Court,
And grist with Kings, Princes and Emperors,
To whom (next to the noble Lincoln Earl)
I vow obedience, and such humble love,
As may a handmaid to such mighty men.
Thou martial man, that wears the Almaine Crown,
And you the Western Potentates of might,
The Albion Princess??? English Edwards wife,
Proud that the lovely star of Fresingfield,
Fair Margret, Countess to the Lincoln Earl,
Attends on Ellinour: gramercies, Lord, for her???
Tic I give thanks for Margret to you all,
And rest for her due bounden to your selves.
Seeing the marriage is solemnised,
Let's march in triumph to the Royal feast.
But why stands Fryer Bacon here so mute?
Repentant for the follies of my youth,
That Magicks secret mysteries misled,
And joyful that this Royal marriage
Portends such bliss unto this matchless Realm.
Why, Bacon, what strange event shall hap?? to this La??d?
Or what shall grow from Edward and his Queen?
I find by deep praescience of mine Art,
Which once I tempered in my secret Cell,
That here where Brute did build his Troynouant,
From forth the Royal Garden of a King,
Shall flourish out so rich and fair a bud,
Whose brightness shall deface proud Phoebus flower,
And ouer-shadow Albion with her leaves.
Till then, Mars shall be master of the field,
But then the stormy threats of wars shall cease,
The horse shall stamp as careless of the pike,
Drums shall be turned to timbrels of delight,
With wealthy favours, plenty shall enrich
The strond that gladded wandering ????????? to see,
And peace from heaven shall harbour in these leaves,
That gorgeous beautifies this matchless flower,
Apollos Hellitropian then shall stoop,
And ??enus hyacinth shall veil her top,
Iuno shall shut her Gilliflowers up,
And Pallas Bay shall bash her brightest greene???
Ceres carnation in confort with those,
Shall stoop and wonder at Diana's Rose.
This Prophecy is mystical,
But glorious Commanders of Europe's love,
That makes fair England like that wealthy Isle,
Circled with Gihen??? and first Euphrates,
In Royallizing Henries Albion,
With presence of your prin???ely mightiness,
Let's march, the tables all are spread,
And viands such as Englands wealth affords,
Are ready set to furnish out the bords,
You shall have welcome, mighty Potentates,
It rests to furnish up this Royal Feast,
Only your hearts be frolic: for the time
Craves that we taste of nought but iouysance.
Thus glories England over all the West.

BE not deceived, I have no bended knees,
No supple tongue, nor speeches steeped in Oil,
No candied flattery, nor honied words.
I come an armed Prologue: armed with Arts,
Who by my sacred charms and mystic skill,
By virtue of this all-commanding Wand
Stolen from the sleepy Mercury, will raise
From black Abyss and sutty hell, that mirth
Which fits this learned round. Thou long-dead Show,
Break from thy Marble prison, sleep no more
In miry darkness, henceforth I forbid thee
To bathe in Lethe's muddy waives, ascend
As bright as morning from her Tithons bed,
And red with kisses that have stained thy cheek,
Grow fresh again: What? is my power contemned?
Dost thou not hear my call, whose power extends
To blast the bosom of our mother Earth?
To remove heavens whole frame from off her hinges,
As to reverse all Natures laws? Ascend,
Or I will call a band of Furies forth,
And all the Torments wit of hell can frame
Shall force thee up.
O spare your too officious whips a while,
Give some small respit to my panting limbs,
Let me have leave to speak, and truce to parley,
Whose powerful voice hath forced me to salute
This hated ayre! are not my pains sufficient,
But you must torture me with the sad remembrance
Of my deserts, the Causes of my exile?
It is thy release I seek, I come to file
Those heavy shackels from thy wearied limbs,
And give thee leave to wa••e the Stage again,
As free as virtue: Burn thy withered Baize,
And with fresh Laurel crown thy sacred Temples,
Cast off thy mask of darkness, and appear
As glorious as thy sister Comedy.
But first with tears, wash off that guilty sin,
Purge out those ill-digested dregs of wit,
That use their ink to blot a spotless fame,
Let's have no one particular man traduced,
But like a Noble Eagle seize on vice,
As she flies bold and open! spare the persons:
Let vs have simple mirth, and innocent laughter;
Sweet-smiling lips, and such as hide no fangs,
No venomous biting teeth, or forked tongues,
Then shall thy freedom be restored again,
And full applause be wages of thy pain.
Then from the depth of truth I here protest,
I doe disclaim all petulant hate and malice,
I will not touch such men as I know vicious,
Much less the good: I will not dare to say
That such a one paid for his fellowship,
And had no learning but in's purse; no Officer
Need fear the sting of my detraction,
I'll give all lcaue to fill their guts in quiet:
I make no dangerous Almanacs, no gulls,
No posts with envious News and biting Packets,
You need not fear this Show, you that are bad,
It is no Parliament: you that nothing have
Like Scholars, but a Beard and Gown, for me
May pass for good grand Sophies: all my skill
Shall beg but honest laughter and such smiles
As might become a Cato: I shall give
No cause to grieve, that once more yet I live.
Go then, and you Beadles of hell avaunt,
Return to your eternal plagues.
Here, take these purer robes, and clad in these,
Be thou all glorious and instruct thy mirth
With thy sweet temper, whilst my self entreat
Thy friends that long lamented thy sad fates,
To sit and taste, and to accept thy Cates.
Sit, see, and hear, and censure he that will,
I come to have my mirth approved, not skill:
Your laughter all I beg, and where you see
No jest worth laughing at, faith laugh at me.
SEcundum gradum compossibilitatis, &amp; non secundum gradum
incompossibilitatis. What should this Scotus mean by his
possibilities &amp; incompossibilities? my Cooper, Rider, Thomas,
and Minshew are as far to seek as my self: not a word
of compossibilitas or incompossibilitas is there. Well, I know
what I'll doe. I have heard of a great Philosopher: I'll try
what he can doe; They call him Aristippus, Aristippus, A∣ristippus:
sure a Philosophers name. But they say he lies at the
Dolphin, and that me thinks is an ill sign: yet they say too,
the best Philosophers of the town never lye from thence:
they say it is a Tavern too; for my part I cannot tell, I know
no part of the Town but the Schools and Aristotles Well:
but since I am come thus far, I will enquire: for this same
compossibilitas and incompossibilitas sticks in my stomach.
Anon, Anon Sir.
What Philosophy is this?
Anon, Anon Sir.
Please you see a Room Sir? what would you have
Sir?
Nothing but Aristippus.
You shall Sir.
What is this? the Dolphin? now verily it looks
like a Greene Fish: what's yonder Greek too? Now surely
it is the Philosophers Motto: Hippathi-happathi; aut disc, aut
dissed incontinenter, a very good disjunction.
A pint of Aristippus to the Bar.
Here Sir.
Ha? what's this?
Did you not ask for Aristippus Sir?
The great Philosopher lately come hither.
Why, this is Aristippus.
Verily then Aristippus is duplex, Nominalis &amp; Re∣alias;
or else the Philosopher lives like Diogenes in dolio: the
President of Hogges-head College: but I mean one A∣ristippus
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 the great Philosopher.
I know not what you mean by Losopher, but here
be Scholars in the house, I'll send them to you: Anon, anon
Sir, I cannot be here and there too. Anon, anon Sir.
This boy would have put a fallacy upon me, in
Interrogation plurium. This boy is a mere Animal; ha, ha, he.
He has not a jot of Language in him more then Anon, anon,
Sir. O Giggleswicke, thou happy place of education! This
poor wretch knows not what a Philosopher means. To
see the simpleness of these people; They doe ever thing
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, and have not a jot, not an inch of 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉 in them. O
what had become of me, if I had not gone bare-foot to my
Praeceptor, with a Satchel at my back?
Slaves are they that heap up mountains,
Still desiring more and more,
Still let's carouse in Bacchus fountains,
Never dreaming to be poor,
Give vs then a Cup of liquor,
Fill it up unto the brim,
For then me thinks my wits grow quicker,
When my brains in liquor swim.
Ha brave Arstippus.
Pox of Aristotle and Plato, and a company of dry Raskalls:
But hey brave Aristippus.
Certainly, there are Aristippus his Scholiers: Sir, pray
can you resolve me what is Gradus compossibilitatis?
What ails thou, thou musing man?
Diddle diddle do.
Quench thy sorrows in a Canne,
Diddle diddle do.
Compossibilitas? Why, that's nothing man, when you ne'er
drink beyond your poculum necessitates, you are in gradu in∣compossibili
to all good fellowship: Come, hang Scotus, we'll
lead you to Aristippus, one Epitome of his in quarto, is worth
a volume of these Dunces.
O Gentlemen, you will bind me to thank you in
Poculo Gratiarum. But what Philosophy doth hee read, and
what hours doth he keep?
None at all precisely, but indistinctly all: Night and
day he powers forth his instructions, and fills you out of mea∣sure.
He will make the eyes of your understanding see double,
and teach you to speak fluently, and utter your mind in a∣bundance.
Hath he many Scholars, Sir?
More than all the Philosophers in the Town besides.
He never rests but is still called for. Aristippus says one, A∣ristippus
says another: He is generally asked for, yea, and by
Doctors sometimes.
And as merry a man: There can be no Feast, but hee is
sent for, and all the company are the merrier for him.
Did you but once hear him, you would so love his
company, you would never after endure to stand alone.
O pray help me to the sight of him.
Wee will, brave boy: and when you have seen him,
you'll think your self in another world, and scorn to bee
your own man any longer.
But I pray you at what price reads he?
Why truly his price hath been raised of late, and his ve∣rye
name makes him the dearer.
A diligent Lecturer deserves eight pence a Pint tuition:
Nay, if you will learn any thing, Scholarships must be paid
for. Academical Simone is lawful: Nay did you ever hear
of a good Preacher in a fat Benefice, unless his purse were
the leaner for it? Make much of him, for wee shall have no
more such in haste.
But who is this?
The University Ramist, a Malt Heretic; alias the
Wilde man that is grown mad to see the daily resort to Ari∣stippus:
but let vs leave him to his frenzy••.
But come you Lads that love Canary,
Let vs have a mad fegary:
Hither, hither, hither, hither,
All good Fellows flock together.
Brains, wits, senses, all sly hence: let fools live limed in
Cages: I am the Wilde-man, and I will be wilde: is this an
age to be in a mans right wits, when the lawful use of the
throat is so much neglected, and strong drink lies sick on
his death-bed? It is aboue the patience of a Malt-horse, to see
the contempt of Barley, and not run mad upon it. This is
Aristippus, Aristippus, now a Devil or two take his red∣nosed
Philosophy: It is he, my beer, that has vowed thee to
the Vinegar-bottle; but I'll be revenged: when next I meet
him, I'll twist and twitch his bush-beard from his Tavern
face: It is not his hypathie happithi can carry him out. Let him
look to bee sound••er dashed by me, then ever hee was by
Dr•were for his impudence. I'll teach my Spanish Don a
French trick, I'll either plague him with a Pox, or have
some Claret whore burn him for an heretic, and make
him challenge acquaintance of M•ld-Sack•: If he was not
either sent hither from the Britch Politic, or be not im∣ployed
by Spinola to seduce the Kings lawful Subjects from
their allegiance to strong Beer, let me hold up my hand at
the bar, and be hanged at my Signpost, if hee had not a
hand in the Powder-treason! Well, I say nothing, but hee
has blown up good store of men in his days, house and
land and all. If they take no order with him here in the Uni∣uersity,
the poor Coūtry were as good have the man in the
Moon for their Pastor, as a Scholar. They are all so info∣cted
with Aristippus his Arminianisme, they can preach no
Doctrine but Sack and red Noses. As for the Wilde-man,
they have made him horne-mad already.
Heighday, there goes the Hunts-vp: this is the Mandrakes
voice that vndoe's me: you may hear him in faith. This is
the Devil of his that goes up and down like a roaring-Sheeps-head
to gather his Pewter Library. I'll fit him I faith.
Now you Calf-skin impudence, I'll thresh your Jacket.
What a coyl's here? what fellowe's that? hee
looks like a mad hogs-head of March-beere that had run
out, and threatened a deluge: what is hee?
O'tis the Wilde-man sir! a zealous brother that stands
up against the persecution of Barly-broth, and will maintain
it a degree aboue the reputation of Aquavitae.
I have heard him swear by his horaoctaua, that Sack
and Rosa Solis is but Water-grewell to it.
O art thou there, Saint Dunstar? thou hast undone
me, thou cursed Fryer Bacon, thou hellish Marlin: but I'll be
revenged upon thee. It is not your Mephostopho is, nor any
other spirits of Ruby or Carbuncle, that you can raise, nor
your good father in law Doctor Faustus, that conjures so ma∣ny
of vs into your Wives Circle, that with all their Magique,
he shall secure you from my rage, you have set a Spell for any
mans coming into my house now.
Why, none of my credit hath choked up your
doors.
But thou hast bewitched my threshold, distur∣bed
my house, and I'll have thee hanged in Gibbets for mur∣thering
my Beer: I'll have thee tried by a Jury of Tipsters,
and hanged in Anon anon Sir, thou dismal and disastrous
Conjurer.
Why dost thou call me Conjurer? I send no
Fairies to pinch you, or Elves to molest you: has Robin
Good fellow troubled you so much of late? I scarce believe it,
for I am sure, since Sack and I came to town, your house
hath not been so much haunted.
I'll put out thine eyes, Don Canario, I'll scratch
thee to atoms, thou Spanish Guzman.
If hee and his Beer will not be quiet, draw um
both out.
Yet I'll be revenged, you rascal, I do not fear
the Spanish Inquisition, I'll run to the Council, and be∣tray
thy villainy; I'll carry thee bound for a Traitor: but for
you Sir, we had taken Cales, and might afterwards have con∣quarrelled
Lisbon, and Siuill. You notorious villain, I knew thee
for a Rogue at first, thy Ruff looked so like the Moon Cries∣cent
in 88. thy very breath is invincible, and stinks of an
Armado.
Kick him out of the presence, his company will
metamorphose vs to balderdash.
Well Diogen•s, you were best keep close in
your tubbe, I'll be revenged on you; I'll complain on you for
keeping ill hours, I suffer noue after eight, by Saint Iohus,
not I.
Well Domino, though the whore octave be not come,
yet you may be gone.
Come Pupil, have you any mind to study my
Philosophy?
Yes Mehercule Sir, for I have always accounted
Philosophy to be omnibus rebus ordine, nature, Tempore, honour
prius; and these Schoolmen have so puzzled me, &amp; my Dicti∣onaries,
that I despair of vnderstāding them either in summo
gradu, or remisso. I lay sick of an Ha•ceitas, a fortnight, and
could not sleep a wink for it; therefore good Sir teach me us
〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, as you can, and pray let it be Conceptis vorbis, and ex∣mente
Philosophi.
I warrant thee a good proficient, but ere you can be
admitted to my Lectures, you must be matriculated, and have
your name recorded in A•b• Academic.
With all my heart Sir, and totaliter, for I have as
great a mind as materia pri•• to be informed with your in∣structions.
Give him the oath.
Lay your hand on the book.
Will tactus virtualis serve the turn Sir?
No▪ it must be real quid, &amp; extra intellectum.
Well Sir, I will doe it qu•ad poten•jam obedientialem.
First, you must swear to defend the honour of
Aristippus, to the disgrace of Brewers, Alewiues, &amp; Tipsters,
and profess your self a foe •, to Maltmen, Tipsters,
and red Lattices.
Kiss the book.
Next, you shall swear to observe the customs
and ordinances instituted and ordained by an Act of Parley∣meant
in the reign of King Sigebert, for the establishing of
good government in the ancient foundation of M•er Col∣ledge.
Kiss the book.
I Sir, Secundum veritatem intrinsecam, &amp; non equi∣u•ce.
That you keep all acts and meetings, tam privy∣tim,
in private houses, quam public, in the Dolphin Schools:
that you dispute in tenebris, yet be not asleep at reckonings:
but always and every where show your self so diligent in
drinking, that the Proctor may have no just cause to suspend
you for negligence.
Kiss the book.
Lastly, that you never walk into the Town,
without your habit of drinking, the Fuddling Cap, and ca∣sting
Hood; especially when there is a Convocation, and of
all things take heed of running to the Assizes.
Is this the end, I pray you Sir, is this the Finis? 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
It is vltimum Sir.
How pray you Sir, intention, or execution?
〈◊〉, that follows the Assizes.
But me thinks there is one Scrupulum, it seems to
be actus illicitus, that we should drink so much, it being lately
forbidden, and therefore Country formam statute.
I but therefore you are sworn to keep customs,
Non omnino secundum formam statute.
What, have you enrolled him in Albo? have you
fully admitted him into the society, to be a member of the
body Academic?
Yes Sir, I am one of your Pupils now, vnitate n••e∣rica,
we have made an end of it, secundum vltimum Comple∣mentum,
&amp; actualitatem.
Well then, give the attendance.
Most grave audience, considering how they thirst after my
Philosophy, I am iuduced to let you taste the benefit of my
knowledge, which cannot but please a judicious palate: for
the rest I expel them my Schools, as fitter to hear Thales,
and drink Water.
We will attend Sir, and that bibulis auribus,
The many errors that have crept into the science, to
distract the curious Reader, are sp•ung from no other causes,
then small Beer, and sober sleeps; whereas were the lauda∣ble
custom of Sack drinking better studied, we should have
fewer Gowns, and more Scholars.
A good note, for wee cannot see wood for trees,
nor Scholars for Gowns.
Now the whole University is full of your honest
Fellows, that breaking loose from a Yorkshire Belfry, have
walked to Cambridge with Satchels on their shoulders:
these you shall have them study hard for four or five years,
to return home more fools then they came; the reason
whereof, is drinking College taplash, that will let them have
no more learning, then they size; nor a drop of wit more then
the Butler sets on their heads.
It were charity in him to sconce'vm soundly,
they would have but a poor Quantum else.
Others there be that spend their whole lives in A∣then•,
to die as wise as they were borne; who as they brought
no wit into the world, so in honesty they will carry none out
on it. It is Beer that drowns the souls in their bodies: H•∣sons
Cakes, &amp; Paix his Ale hath frothed their brains: hence
is the whole tribe contemned, every Prentice can ieere at
their brave Cassocks, and laugh the Velvet Caps out of
countenance.
And would it not anger a man of Art to be the
scorn of a what lake you Sir?
It is Beer that makes you so ridiculous in all your
behaviour: hence comes the Bridelike simpering at a Justice
of Peace his Table, and the not eating methodically, when
being laughed at, you show your teeth, blush, and excuse it
with a Rhetorical Husteron Proteron.
It is very true, I have done the like my self, till I
have had a disgrace for my Mittimus.
It is Beer that hath putrefied our Horsemanship,
for that you cannot ride to Ware, or to Barkway, but your
Hackneys sides must witness your journeys. A Lawyers
Clarke, or an Innes a Court Gentleman that hath been fed
with false Latin, and Pudding Pie, contemn you as if you
had not learning enough to confute a Now•rent vniuersi.
Per prasentes me Simplicium.
If you discourse but a little while with a Courtier,
you presently betray your learned Ignorance, answering him
he concludes not Syllogistically, and asking him in what
Mood and figure he sp•aches in, as if Learning were not as
much out of fashion at Court, as clothes at Cambridge. Nor
can you entertain discourse with a Lady, without ending∣ring
the half of your Buttons; all these, and a thousand such
errors, are the friends of Beer, that nurse of Barbarism, and
foe to Philosophy.
Oh I am ravished with this admiral Metaphysical
Lecture, if ever I drink Beer again, let me turn civil Law∣yer,
or be powdered up in one of Luthers barrels, pray lend
me the book again, that I may forswear it. Fie upon it, I
could love Sir Giles for presenting those notorious Alewiues.
Oh, Aristippus, Aristippus, thou art equally divine 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
the only father of Quodlibets, the Prince of For∣militias,
I ask my Stars whose influence doth govern
this •rbem sublunarem, that I may live with thee, and die like
the royal Duke of Clarence, who was soused up to immor∣tality
in a But of Malmesey.
You interrupt him Sir, too much in his Lecture,
and prevent your ears of their hoppinesse.
Oh heavens, I could hear him, ad •ternitatem, and
that •àm à part ante quàm à part post. O proceed, proceed, thy
instructions are mere. Orthodoxall, thy Philosophy canoni∣call,
I will study thy scieutiam both speculatiuam &amp; practicam.
Pray let me once more forswear the pollution of Beer, for
it is an abominable heretic, I'll be his perfect enemy, till I
make him and bottle-Ale fly the Country.
But Sack is the life, soul, and spirits of a man,
the fire which Prometheus stole, not from Ioues Kitchen, but
his Wine-Cellour, to increase the native heat and radical
moisture, without which, we are but drowsy dust, or dead
clay: this is Nectar, the very Nepenthe the gods were drunk
with, it is this that gave Ganymede, beauty, Hebe youth, to Jove
his heaven and eternity; doe you think Aristotle drank
Perry, or Plato Cider? doe you think Alexander had ever
conquered the world, if he had bin sober? he knew the force &amp;
valour of Sack, that it was the best armour, the best encou∣regiment,
and that none could be a good Commander, that
was not double drunk, with Wine and Ambition.
Only heir's the difference: Ambition makes
them rise, and Wine makes them fall.
Therefore the Garrisons are all drinking Schools,
the Soldiers trained up to the mustering of pewter pots dai∣lie,
learning to co•temne death, by accustoming to be dead∣drunk:
scars doe not so well become a Captain, as Car∣buncles.
A red nose is the grace of a Sergeant Mayor, and
they unworthy the place of Ancients that have not good co∣lours,
the best shot to be discharged is the Tavern bill, the
best Alarm is the sounding of healths, and the most abso∣lute
March is reeling.
And the best Artillery yard is the Dolphin.
Thus you may easily perceive the profit of Sack
in military discipline, for that it may justly seem to have ta∣ken
the name of Sack from sacking of Cities.
Oh wonderful, wonderful Philosophy• If I bee a
coward any longer, let me swear a little to drink Sack, for I
will be as valiant as any of the Knights Errant: I perceive it
was only culpa ignorantiae, not pra•ae disposition•s that made
me a coward: but O Enthusiastique, rare, Angelical Philoso∣phie,
I will be a Soldier, a Scholar, and every thing, I will
hereafter nec peccare in mat•rid, nec informd. Beer, raskally
Beer was the first parent of Sophisters, and the fallacies:
But proceed, my Pythagoras, my ipse dixit of Philosophy.
Next, it is the only Elixir of Philosophy, the very
Philosophers stone, able, if studied by a young Heir, mu•drere∣rum
specus, to change his House, Lands, Livings, Tenc••ants,
and Liveries into aurum potabile: So that though his Lord∣ships
be the f•were for it, his manners shall be the more; whose
L•nds being dissolved into Sack, must needs make his soul
more capable of divine meditation, he being almost in the
state of separation, by being purged, and freed from so
much earth.
Therefore why should a man trouble himself
with so much earth? he is the best Philosopher, that can omnia
sua secum porter.
And since it is the nature of light things to
ascend, what better way, or more agreeing to nature can bee
invented, whereby we might ascend to the height of know∣ledge,
then a light head? A light head being as it were allied
with heaven, first found out, that the motion of the orbs was
circular like to its own, which motions, teste Arrest•tele, first
found that intelligence: so that I conclude all intelligence, in∣tellect,
and understanding to be the invention of Sack, and
a light head; what mists of error had cloaded Philosophy,
till the never sufficiently praised Copernicus found out that the
earth was moved, which he could never have done, had hee
not been instructed by Sack, and a light head?
Hang me then when I turn grave.
This is the Philosophy, the great Stagirite read
to his Pupil, Alexander, wherein how great a proficient he
was, I call the faith of History to witness.
It is true, per sidem Historicam, for I have read how
when he had vanquished the whole world in drink, that he
wept there was no more to conquer.
Now, to make our demonstration to prove, no
wine, no Philosophy, is that admirable Axiom, in vino
veritas, and you know that Sack and truth are the only Buts
which Philosophy aims at.
And the Hogshead is that puteus Democriti, from
whence they might both be drawn.
Sack, Claret, Malmsey, White-wine and Hippo∣cras
are your five Predicables, and Tobacco your indiuiduum,
your Money is your substance, full cups your quantity, good
wine your quality, your Relation is in good company, your
action is beating, which produces another predicament in
the Drawers, called passion, your quando is midnight, your
v•i the Dolphin, your situ• leaning, your habitus carousing,
afterclaps are your post predicaments, your priorums breaking
of jests, your post•riorums of glasses, false bills are your fallacies,
the shot is subtle• obiectio, and the discharging of it is, veraso∣lutio,
several humours are your moods, and figures, where
quarta sigura, or gallons must not be neglected, your drink∣ing
is Syllogisms, where a pottle is the mayor terminus, and
a pint the minor, a quart the medium, beginning of healths
are the premises, and pledging the conclusion, for it must not
be divided, Topicks or common places are the Ta•earns, and
Hamon, Wolf, and Farlowes are the three best Tutors in
Universities.
And if I be not entered, and have my name admit∣ted
into some of their books, let form misti bee beaten out
of me.
To persuade the Vintner to trust you, is good
Rhetoric, and the best figure is Synechdoche to pay part
for the whole, to drink aboue measure, is a Science beyond
Geometry, falling back-ward is star-gazing, and no lacobs
Staff comparable to a Tobacco pipe, the sweet harmony of
good-fellowship, with now and then a discord, is your ex∣cellent
music, Sack it self is your Grammar, sobriety a
mere solecism, and Latin be it true, or be it false, a very cud∣gell
to your Priscianus pa•es, the r•ckoning is Arithmetic
enough, a receipt of full cups are the best physic to procure
vomit, and forget•ing of debts an art of memory; and here
you have an Encuelopoedia of Sciences, whose method being
circular, can never be so well learned, as when your head
runs round.
If mine have any other motion, it shall be pr•la na∣turam,
I, and country too, if I li•e: I like that art of music
wondrous well, life is not life without it; for what is life but
an harmonious lesson, played by the soul upon the Organs
of the body. O witty sentence! I am mad already, I see the
immortality, ha brave Aristippus: but in Poetry, it is the sole
predominant quality, the sap and juice of a verse, yea, the
spring of the Muses is the fountain of Sack, for to think
Helicon a bartell of Beer, is as great a sin, as to call Pegasus
a Brewers Horse.
I know some of these halfe-penny Almanac ma∣cares
doe not approve of this philosophy, but give you most
abominable counsel in their Beggars Rhymes, which you
are bound to believes as faithfully, as their predictions of foul
and fair weather, you shall hear some of Erra Paters Poetry.
I wish you all carefully,
Drink Sack but sparingly,
Spend your coin t••ifuly,
Keep your health warily,
Take heed of •,
Wine is an enemy▪
Good is sobriety,
Fly baths and Venery.
For your often potations much crudities cause, by hen∣dring
the course of mother Natures laws, therefore he that
desires to live till October, ought to be drunk in July, but I
hold it to be a great deal better that hee went to bed sober.
And let him alone, thou man in the Moon, yet had thou
but read a leaf in this admired Author, this aureum flumen,
this torrens cloquentiae, thou would have scorned to have bin
of the water Poets Tribe, or Skeltons family, but thou hast
never tasted better Nectar than out of Fennors Wassail
Bowl, which hath so transformed him, that his eyes look
like two Tunnels, his nose like a Faucet with the Spicket
out, and therefore continually dropping: the Almanac∣makers,
and Physicians are alike grand enemies of Sack, as
for Physicians being fools, I cannot blame them if they
neglect Wine, and minister simples, but if I meet with
you, I'll teach you another receipt.
Why meet him Tutor? you may easily meet him. I
know him Sir, &amp; cognition distinctâ &amp; confu•â I warrant you,
doe you not smell him Tutor? I know who made this Al∣manic
against drinking Sack? ha Stroffe? have I found
you Stroffe? you will show your self, I see, when all is done,
to be but a Brewers Clarke.
But far better speaks the divine Ennius against
your Ale, and Barly-broth, who knew too full well the
virtue of Sack, when Nunquam •isi potus ad arma prosiluit di∣cenda;
his verses are in Latin, but because the audience are
Scholars, I have translated them into English, that they
may be understood. Here read them.
There is a drink made of the Stygian Lake,
Or else of the waters the suries doe make,
No name there is bad enough by which it to call,
But yet as I wist, it is ycleped▪ Ale;
Men drink it thick, and peace it out thin.
Mickle filth by Saint Loy that it leaves wit•in,
But I of complexion am wondrous sanguine,
And will love by the Morrow a cup of wine,
To live in delight was ever my won,
For I was Epicurus his own son,
That held opinion that plainly delight
Was very felicity perfect:
A Bowl of wine is wondrous boon cheer
To make one blithe, buxom and deboneere,
Twill give me such valour and so much courage,
As cannot be found twixt Hull and Carthage.
But aboue the wit of humanity, the divine Virgil
hath extolled the Encomium of Sack in these verses.
Fill me a Bowl of Sack with Roses crowned,
Fill't to the brim, I'll have my temples bound
With flowery Chaplets, and this day permit
My Genius to be free, and frolic it;
Let me drink deep, then fully warmed with wine,
Ill' chant Aeneas praise, that every line
Shall prove immortal, till my moistened quill
Melt into verse; and Nectar-like distill;
I'm sad, or dull, till bowls brim filed infuse
New life in me, new spirit in my Muse,
But once revived with Sack, pleasing desires
In my childhood kindle such Active fires,
That my gray hairs seem fled, my wrinkled face,
Grown smooth as Hebes, youth, and beauties grace,
To my shrunk veins, fresh blood and spirits bring,
Warm as the Summer, sprightful as the spring,
Then all the world is mine: Croesus is poor
Compared with me, he is rich that asks no more:
And I in Sack have all, which is to me
My home, my life, health, wealth, and liberty,
Then have I conquered all, I boldly dare
My Trophies with the Pelcan youth compare,
Him I will equal, as his sword, my pen
My conquered world of cares, his world of men,
Doe not, Atrides, Nestors ten desire
But ten such drinkers as that aged sire,
His stream of ho•yed words flowed from the Wine,
And Sack• his Counsel was, as hee was thine.
Who •u•r purchased a rich Indiaen mine,
But Bacchus first, and next the Spanish wine?
Then fill my bowl, that if I dye to morrow,
Killing cares to day, I have out-liu'd my sorrow.
Thus resting in the opinion of that admirable Po∣et,
I make this draught of Sack, this Lectures period.
Dixie, dost thou say? I, and I'll warrant thee the best
Dixie in Cambridge: who would sit poring on the learned
Barbarism of the Scholemen, that by one of thy Lectures
might confute them all, pro &amp; con? I begin to ha•e distinct∣on,
&amp; actualiter, &amp; habitualiter, yet a pox to see, I cannot
leave them, nec principaliter, nec formaliter; yet I begin to love
the Fox better than subtilnesse. Oh Tutor, Tutor, well
might Fox be a College Porter, that hee might open the
Gates to none but thy Pupils: come fellow Pupils, if I did
not love you, I were 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉, and an absurdity in
the abstract; Let's practise, let's practise, for I'll •ollow the
steps of my Tutor night and day: by this Sack, I shall love
this Philosophy: before I heard this Lecture, Banks his
Horse was an Aristotle; in comparison of me: I can laugh to
think what a foolish Simpli••us I was this morning, and
how learn•dly I shall sleep to night.
Sleep to night! why? that's no point of our Phi∣losophy;
we must sit up late, and roar till we rattle the Well∣kin:
Sleep! what have we to doe with deaths Cater-cou∣sin?
doe you think Nature gave stars to sleep by? have
you not day enough to sleep in, but you must sleep in the
night too? it is an arrant Paradox.
A Paradox? let me be cramped if I sleep then, but
what, must we sleep in the day then?
Yes, in the morning.
And why in the morning?
Why, a pox of the morning, what have we to
doe with the sober time of the day?
It is true, I see, we may learn something of our fell∣low
Pupils, and what must wee doe now, fellow pupils?
What must wee doe now?
Why? confer our notes.
What is that?
Why? conferring of notes, is drinking off cups,
half pots are saying of parts, and the singing of Catches is
our repetition.
Fellow Pupil, I'll confer a note with you.
Gramercy brave lad, and it's a good one, an excel∣lent
Criticism; I would not have lost it for Eustathius and
his Bishopric, it's a general rule, and true without ex∣caption.
Fellow Pupil, I'll confer a note with you too.
Faith, let me have it, let's share and share like
boon Rascals.
I'll say my part to you both.
By my troth, and you have a good memory, you
have coned it quickly Sir.
But what shall we have for repetitions now?
I, what for repetitions?
Why the Catch against the Schoolmen in praise
of our Tutor Aristippus: Can you sing Simplicius?
How begins it pray you?
Aristippus is better.
O God Sir, when I was in the state of ignorance, I
co•'d it without book, thinking it had been a Position.
Aristippus is better in every letter,
Then Fab•r the Parisiensis,
Then Scotus, Soncinas, and Thomas Aqui•as,
Or Gregory Gandanensis:
Then Cardan and •amus, then old Paludanus,
Albertus and Gabriella,
Then Peso Mercatus, or Scaliger Natus,
Then Niphus or Zabarella.
Hortado, Trombetus, were fools with Toletus,
Zanardus, and Will de Hales,
With Occham, In•ellus, and mad Algazellus,
Philoponus and Natali•,
The Conciliator, was but a mere praetor,
And so was Apollinaris:
Iandunus, Plotinus, the Dunc• Eugubinus,
With Masius, Sauil, and Swears,
Fonseca, Durandus, Becanus, Holandus,
Pererius, Auienture:
Old Trismigistus, whose volumes have mist vs,
Ammonius, Bonauenture,
Mirandula Comes, with Proclus and So••es,
And Guido the Carmelita:
The nominal Schools, and the College of fools,
No longer is my delight:
Hang Brirewood and Carter, in Crakenthorps garter,
L•t Keckerman too be•oane vs,
I'll be no more beaten, for greasy lack Seato•,
Or conning of Sandersonus.
The censure of Cato's, shall never amate vs,
Their frosty beards cannot nip vs:
Your Ale is too muddy, good Sack is our study,
Our Tutor is Aristippus.
There they be, now for the valour of Brewers,
knock um soundly, the old Rogue, that's hee, doe you not
see him there? soundly, soundly, let him know what Cham∣peons
good Beer has.
Now let them know that Beer is too strong for them,
and let me be hanged, if ever I be milder to such Rascals, they
shall find these but st•le courtesies, How now? what's her•?
the learned Library, the Philosophical volumes: these are
the books of the black-Art; I hate them worse than Bellar∣mine,
the golden Legend, or the Turkish Alcharon. I wonder
what virtue is in this p•w•er-faced Author, that it should
make every one fall into love with it so deeply: In•l try if I
can find any Philiru••, any loue-potion in 't: by my Domino not
a drop; O stultum ingeniur• hominum, to delight in such vani∣tie•!
Sure these are Comments upon Tobacco, dry and j•ice∣less
vanities. I'll try again, by my bonafide, but this doth
relish some learning, still better, an admirable witty rogue, a
very flash. I'll turn another leaf, still better, has he any more
Authors like this? what's here, Aristippus? a most incompa∣rabble
Author, O Bodly, Bodly, thou hast not such a book in
all thy Library, heir's one line worth the whole Vatican.
O Aristippus, would my brains had been broken out when
I broached thy hogs-head: O cursed Brewers, and most accur∣sed
am I, to wrong so learned a Philosopher as Aristippu•?
what penance is enough to clear me from this impardona∣ble
offence? twenty purgations are too little; I'll suck up all
my Beer in Toasts to appease him, and afterwards live by
my Wife and Hackneys. Oh, that I had never undertook
this selling of Beer, I might have kept my house with Fell∣lowes
Commons, and never have come to this: But now I
am a Wild-man, and my house a Bedlam: Aristippus, A∣ristippus,
Aristippus.
How now neighbour Wild-man?
O Aristippus, Aristippus, what shall I doe
for thee, Aristippus?
What ecstasy is this?
O Aristippus, Aristippus, what shall I doe for
thee Aristippus?
Why neighbour Wilde-man, disclose your
griefs to me, I am a Surgeon, and perchance may cure um?
O cry you mercy, you are the welcomes
man on earth, Sir Signior Medico de campo, the welcmomest
man living, the only man I could have wished for, O Aristip∣pus,
Aristippus.
Why what's the matter, neighbour? O I hear
he has seduced away your Parishioners, is this the cause of
your Lamentation?
O no Sir, a learned Philosopher, one that I
love with my soul: but in my rage I cannot tell you Sir, it is
a dismal tale, the sharpest Razor in your shop would turn
edge at it.
Never fear it, I have one was sent from a—
faith I cannot think on's name, a great Emperor, hee that
I did the great cure on, you have heard on it I am sure: I fet∣ched
his head from China, after it had been there a fort∣night
buried, and set it on his shoulders again, and made
him as lively, as ever I saw him in my life; and yet to see I
should not think on's name. O I have it now, Proctor Iohn,
a pox on it, Proctor Iohn, it was hee, hee, I faith, it was Proctor
Iohn; I might have had his Daughter if I had not been a fool;
and have lived like a Prince all the days of my life; nay, and
perchance have inherited the Crown after his death; but a
pox on it, her lips were too thick for me, and that I should
not think on Proctor Iohn.
O Aristippus, Aristippus, pox on your Proctor
Iohn Sir, will you think on Aristippus?
What should I doe with him?
Why? in my rage Sir, I have almost killed him,
and now would have you cure him in sober sadness.
Why call him out Sir.
Sir, yonder comes one of his Pupils.
Salve Mr. Simplicius.
Salve me, it is but a Surgeons complement, Signior
Medico de Campo; but you are welcome Sir, my Tutor wants
help. Are you there you Vsquebaugh Rascal, with your Me∣theglin
juice? I'll teach you Sir to break a Philosophers pate;
I'll make you leave your distinctions as well as I have done.
O pardon, pardon me, I repent Sir heartily, O
Aristippus, Aristippus, I have broken thy head, Aristippus, but
I'll give thee a plaster, Aristippus, Aristippus.
I pray Sir bring him out in his Chair, and if the
house can furnish you with Barbers provision, let all bee in
readiness.
Pray Sir doe you think you can cure him?
Him? why neighbour, doe you not remember
the Thumb?
What of the Thumb? I have not heard of it
as yet Sir.
Why the Thumb, the Thumb, doe you not
know the cure of the Thumb?
No Sir, but I pray tell the cure of the Thumb,
doe you still remember't Sir.
Remember't? I, and perfectly, I have it at my fin∣gers
end, and thus it is. Two Gentlemen were fighting, one
lost his Thumb, I bychance coming by, took it up, put it
in my pocket, some two months after, meeting the Gentle∣man,
I set on his Thumb again; and if he were now in Cam∣bridge,
I could have his hand to show for it: why did you ne'er
hear of the Thumb Sir? it is strange you never heard me
speak of the Thumb Sir.
Signior de Medico Campo, if you have any art or
skill, show it now, you never had a more deserving Patient.
Yet I have had many, and royal ones too; I have
done Cures beyond Seas, that will not be believed in Eng∣land.
Very likely so, and Cures in England, that will not
be believed beyond seas, nor here neither, for in this kind,
half the world are infidels.
The great Turk can witness, I am sure, the eyes
that he wears, are of my making.
Hee was then an eye-witnesse: but I hope hee
wears spectacles, Signior.
Why, won't you believe it? why I tell you I am
able to say it, I saw't, I saw't my self, I cured the King of Po∣land
of a Wart on's nose, and Bedlam Gaber of a Ring∣worm.
The one with raw Beef, and the other with Ink∣horns.
Pox of your old Wi•es medicines; the worst of
mine Ingredients is an Unicorns Horn, and a Bezars stone:
Raw Beef and Inkehornes! Why, I cured Shirley in the
Grand Sophies Court in Persia, when he had bin twice shot
through with Ordinance, and had two bullets in each thigh,
and so quickly, that he was able at night to lie with his wife
the Sophies niece, and beget a whole Church of Christians;
and could this have been done with Raw Beef and Ink∣horns?
No sure, this could not have been done without
Eggs and Greene-sauce, or an Oatmeal Poultice at least.
The King of Russia had dyed of the worms, but
for a powder I sent him.
Some of that you mean, that stuck on the bull∣let
which you took out of Sherleyes legs.
In the siege of Ostend, I gave the Duchess of
Austria a receipt to keep her Smock from being animated,
when she had not shifted it of a twelvemonth.
Believe me, and that was a Cure beyond Scoggins
Fleas.
I am able by the virtue of one Salve, to heal all
the wounds and breaches in Bohemia.
I, and close up the Bung-hole in the great Tub at
Heidlebergh, I warrant you.
I cured the state of Venice of a Dropsy, the Low-Countries
of a Lethargy, and if it had not been treason, I had
cured the Fistula, that it should have dropped no more then your
nose. By one Dram on a knifes point, I restored Mans∣field
to his full strength and forces, when he had no men left,
but was only skin and bones. I made an Arm for Bruns∣wick,
with so great art and skill, as nature her self could not
have mended it; which had it not come too late, and after his
death, would have done him as much service as that which
was shot off.
I easily believe that I faith.
I could make a Purgation, that should so scour
the Seas, that never a Dunkirk durst show his head.
By my faith, and that would bee a good State
Glister.
I have done as great wonders as these, when I
extracted as much chastity from a Sanctimony in the English
Nunnery, as cured the Pope of his lechery.
And yet had as much left, as served five Cardinals
on Fasting-dayes.
And there was no man in the Realm of France,
either French or Spanish or Italian Doctors, but my self, that
durst undertake the King of France his Corns, and after∣wards
having cured him, I drank a health to him.
Would we had the pledging on it. O happy man that
hast conferred a note with the King of France!
And doe you seem to misdoubt my skill, and
speak of my Art with ifs and ands? Doe you take me for
a Mountebank? and hath mine own tongue been so silent
in my praise, that you have not heard of my skill?
No, pardon vs Signior, only the danger our Tu∣tor
is in, makes vs so suspicious; we know your skill Sir, we
have heard Spain and your own tongue speak loud on it,
we know besides, that you are a Travailer, and therefore give
you leave to relate your words with authority.
Danger? what danger can there be, when I am his
Surgeon?
His head Sir is so wondrously bruised, it is almost
past cure.
Why, what if he had never an head? am not I able
to make him one? or if it were beaten to atoms, I could set
it together, as perfectly as in the womb.
Believe me neighbour, but that would be as great
a wonder, as the Thumb, or Proctor Iohns head.
Why? I'll tell you Sir, what I did, a far greater
wonder then any of these, I was a Travailer.
There is no such great wonder in that, but what
may be believed.
And another friend of mine travailed with me, and
to be short, I came into the Country of Cannibals, where
missing my friend, I ran to seek him, and came at last into a
Land where I saw a company feeding on him, they had eaten
half of him, I was very pensive at his misfortune, or rather
mine▪ at last I bethought me of a powder that I had about
me, I put it into their wine, they had no sooner drank of it,
but they presently disgorged their stomachs, and fell asleep;
I Sir, gathered up the miserable morsels of my friend, placed
them together, and restored him to be a perfect man again;
and if he were here still alive, he were able to witness it him∣self,
and doe you think I cannot cure a ten-groates dam∣mage,
or a cracked Crown.
Good Signior make no such delay, cure him,
and have one wonder more to fill up your Legend.
Here hold the Basin, you the Napkins, and you
Mr Simplicius t•e Boxes, how shall we do to lay his feet up∣on?
By my troth Sir, he is wonderfully hurt, his piam•la I
perceive is clean out of joint; of the 20. bones of the Cra∣nium
there is but three only whole, the rest are miserably
crushed and broken, and two of his Sutures are clean pe∣rished,
only the Sagitall remains free from violence, the
four Tunicates of his eyes are thred-bare, the Meninx of his
•are is like a cut Drum, and the hammers lost: there is not a
Ca•tilago in his head worth three pence, the top of his nose is
dropped away, there is not a Muskle left in the Cavities of his
Nostrils, his dentes molars are past grinding, his Pa••et is lost,
and with it his gurgulio, yet if he can swallow, I warrant his
drinking safe: help open his mouth. So, so, his throat is
sound: he's well I warrant you; now give him a cup of
Sack: so let me chafe his Temples, put this powder into ano∣there
glass of Sack, and my life for his, he is as sound as the
best of vs all: let down his legs. How doe you Sir?
Why as young as the Morning, all life, and soul,
not a dra•• of body; I am newly come back from hell, and
have seen so many of my acquaintance there, that I wonder
whose Art hath restored me to life again.
The Catholic Bishop of Barbers, the very Me∣tropolitan
of Surgeons, Signior de Medico Campo.
One that hath engrossed all Arts to himself, as if
he had the Monopoly.
The only Hospital of soars.
And Spittle-house of infirmities, Signior de Me∣dico
Campo.
One that is able to undo the Company of Bar∣bersurgeons,
and College of Physicians, by making al disea∣ses
fly the Country.
Yea, he is able to give his skill to whom he please,
by Act of deed, or bequeath it by Legacy, but he is determi∣ned
as yet to entail it to his heirs males for ever.
Sir, death it self dares not anger him, for fear
he should beggar the Sextons by suffering no grave to bee
made, he can choose whether any shall dye or no.
And he do's't with such celerity, that a hundred
pieces of Ordinance in a pitched field, could not in a whole
day make work enough to employ him an hour; you owe
him your life Sir, I'll assure you.
Sir I doe owe you my life, and all that is mine:
think of any thing that lies in the compass of my Philo∣sophie,
and it is your own.
I have gold enough Sir, and Philosophy enough,
for my house is paved with Philosophers stones, mine only
desire is, that you forgive the rage of this wildeman, who is
heartily sorry for his offence to you.
O reverend Philosopher, and Alchemy of under∣standing,
thou very Sack of Sciences, thou noble Spaniard,
thou Catholic Monarch of Wines, Archduke of Canary,
Emperor of the sacred Sherry, pardon me, pardon my rude∣ness,
and I will forswear that Dutch heresy of English
Beer, and the witchcraft of Middletons water, I'll turn my
self into a Gown, and be a professed disciple of Aristippus.
Give him a Gown then, ere we admit him to our
Lecture hereafter. Now noble Signior Medico de Campo, if
you will walk in, let's be very jovial and merry, it is my se∣cond
birth-day, let's in, and drink a health to the company.
We car• not •or money, riches, or wealth,
Old Sack is our money, old Sack is our health,
Then let's flock hither
Like Birds of a feather,
To drink, to fling,
To laugh and sing,
Conferring our notes together,
Conferring our notes together.
Come let vs laugh, let vs drink, let vs sing,
The winter with vs is as good as the Spring,
We care not a feather
For wind, or for weather,
But night and day
We sport and play,
Conferring our notes together,
Conferring our notes together.
Hark, they are drinking your healths, within, and I
must have it too, I am only left here to offer my supplicate to
you, that my grace may pass, and then if I may but com∣mence
in your approbation, I will take a degree in drinking,
and because I am turned a jovial mad rascal, I have a great
desire to be a Midsummer Batch'lor, I was only stayed to
ask your leaves to go out.

I must not be so rude as to believe
That you (my Lord) can your affections set;
Upon a Maid, so humble in her birth
As she you name, for regard of honour
Doe not mock the sister of your servant.
This way to madness leads, teach not my heart
Such modern Heraldry. Let it dispose
Of charitable thoughts, with natural eyes,
Vnlimmited by customary form,
Which gain, and nicety have made an Art,
Virtue, not blood ennobles vs, and earns
Her attribute, without hereditary help
From ancestors. O my dear Forest?
Thy sister with such noble wealth is fraught,
That to be covetous for her, appears,
A holy sin. But thou art cruel grown
Thy memory is sick. The old effects
That witness how I love thy learned soul,
Are quite forgot.
Young Lord, disclaim that thought!
Hear I Promulgate, you my Patron are;
You found me in estate so poor, so lowe,
That you were fine to stoop to lift me up,
You are the Dukes Creature! who dotes by Art,
Who in his love, and kindness, Method keeps:
He holds thus his Arms, in fearful care
Not to bruise you with his dear embraces,
And what is she whose Virgin blood disdains
To quench your lawful fire? or whom the Duk
Would not procure to climb your Marriage be
Upon her Knees? And shall I then
(Like to the treacherous Moon) strive to eclip
The Sun that gives me light? Shall I consent
That she, that tumbled in a Womb with me,
Shall give your Issue birth? The royal Duke
Would thank me for such charity. My Lord
Though you are wise, you are but young.
Heart of Viper!
Sure Time hath lost his feathers from his Heals,
Mark how slow he goes? Shall I near be old
That my designs may repute have,
And credit in the World. I doe not ask
Thy Sister for my Whore; but for my Wife.
Sir it is already joined unto my Creed▪
For I would eat your Heart, should it contrive
A way in thought, how to cheat my Sister
Of her pure Chastity. I love you so
That I with care suppose; She not deserves
To be your Wife, and so esteem of her
That she is much too good, to be your Whore.
In this new Argument, I am too bold,
You know my duty well. The Dukes abroad
Though but the birth of day. Go Sir!
My glorious Boy, you are too vigilant:
The Sun, and you, doe visit me at once.
This courtship is not safe. You must not meet
Your Lover, with a Rival, glorious
As your self. Forest! welcome from Genoa,
How fares our Brother Cardinal?
In health, and ease. He bad me tell your Grace
It was a deed of charity to think
Him worthy of this same great employment.
And this letter he humbly recommends
To your perusal.
How can it choose
But choke the very Soul, and bruise the Heart
To think that such a giddy Snipe: a Fool
(That merely lives to disparage Nature)
Should creep to this ambitious government.
Still he rules the Ruler. The Duke is Ward
Unto a Page; whose Eie-browes wear more Beard,
Then doth his Chin: And there's his Instrument,
A dark fellow; that with d•sguised Looks
Cou•d cheat an Hypocrite, older then Time.
I'ue heard a better Character of both,
Such, as to the young Count, Wit, and valour gives:
Unto Forest, honest Spirits.
R•port is then become a Bawd to Luck;
Whom Fortune do henrich, Fame doth flatter.
Sure this tame Priest will make vs all Cowards.
We must a truce confirm with Genoa.
Well, be it so. Where now (my noble Boy)
Shall I occasion find, to testify
That you deserve my love, by virtue of your own?
In sickly times, when War and civil Spleen
Besiege the Heart, with treacherous designs,
A friend shall find a cause to make him known,
But now in fair weather: I need not ask
What Houell's ne'er?
In this, I dare discredit Fate.
They are not so wealthy in affliction:
With sorrow so well stored; as could suffice
To try my sufferance: in the behalf
Of you my Prince, and still royal Master.
Dare thou then die for me?
Here—make thy self a sacrifice to Fame,
Take it: and I will be thy Chronicler.
It were (Sir) but ingratitude in me
To l•ssen thus, the number sanctifide
Of your true friends. Be you pleased to sheath it,
In that same part, which you doe most abhor.
O Lucio! thou art my Earew•g now,
Creep'st in my ear, to feast upon my Brains.
When in my private grave I lye enclosed,
More silent then my ruined Fame: no tongue
Shall pay his tribute to my memory
But thine: for thou art likely to survive.
Thy years are few, but full of gratitude.—
Come: hye we to the Park: The sprightful morn
Gives motion wings, and liberty to those
Whom lameness stakes unto the ground.
Royal dotard, like tinder, thou dost waste
Thy forced fire: to give another light
Whose saucy flame will darken thine. Monstrous!
Why dost thou spend thy gall in secret thus?
A pox upon it: turn thoughts to action:
Heaven knows, I had rather enrich my self,
Then envy others wealth. Employ thy brain.
Get the Dukes fist to this; and thou shalt share
Five hundred Crowns.
What is it?
The old business.
And not yet signed: This it is to be modest.
Had I had reputation in thy Creed
It had been done long since. There's my agent.
Hence and provide me thanks. Save you Signior.
You may with charity.
Am I in your remembrance sir?
Signior Castruchio, as I take you.
The same. Because I never did desire
To gain by being troublesome, I lost
The dear benefit of the practique part.
Custom's a suitors safe encourager.
I the Duke have served, since I was able
To serve my self. Yet never had the luck
To get by it: and as the times promise,
Never shall: Unless I imitate the Crab,
And find my way (as he doth his) backwards.
That is. to make petition to the foot
That he will please t'instruct, and teach the head
When to comiserate my affair.
Signior. I need a comment to your words.
If you will move my Lord (the Count)
To get the Dukes fair hand, subscribed here;
Then shall I feel my self well understood.
Sir my abilities are most pregnant
When I find I may be profitable
To any Courtiers just, and modest suit.
I pray what sense carries the inscription?
Only this Sir. There is an Engine made
Which spends its strength by force of nimble wheels,
For they once screwed up, in their return
Will rive on Oak: but with such subtle force
That motion gives no leisure to impediment.
The large and ponderous Log is soon consumed,
To shauings more transparent then a Glass.
Of these the skillull Boxes make, Scabbards,
Sheathes, Chests, and molds for childrens Cabinets.
Trust me an Engine of importance great.
But now, what would the Enginere himself?
Faith Signior, nought but a Monopoly
For all those wares, his Engine makes.
Keep it. Good sir keep it. A monopoly
Why sir the common-wealth hath been so crushed,
With th'insulting Charter of such Parents,
That now the very word defiles the cause.
I had thought you Signior would have engaged
My industry in such a suit as might
Noway disparedg though it did enrich;
How ever not abuse the public weal.
Very good Sir. My Lord the Count, your self
(His servile Instrument) and some others,
Of this new faction that now, engross
All Offices, and send your Scouts abroad
Intelligencers strict, that bring you home
The number, and the rate of what your selves,
Or others in the dark can put to sale.
Nature hath not altered yet: the first
And antic method to preserve our breaths.
We must eat bread if we intend to live;
Which how to get (unless this humble way
That you deride) In troth I cannot tell.
It makes me mad to think you should expose
Vs Men of Heart, to those fastidious helps
That scope your own acceptance. Your wide Threats,
That soon will swallow any thing which fills
Although it nourish not. A pox upon you all!
I did expect you would begin to rail.
Good troubled Soul! I knew you well before.
You are the only Man, whose wealthy Muse
Doth furnish all the Fiddlers in the State
With d•spirit Ballads, and invective Songs.
Libels of such weak fa•cy and composure
That we doe all esteem it greater wrong
T'haue our Names extant in such paltery Rhyme
Then in the slanderous sense.
Very well Sir!
You, you must be a Satyrist forsooth,
Calumniate by instinct and inspiration.
As if just Heaven would borrow Gall of you,
Wherewith to write our faults. (O strict account!)
Your Gall, which in the Pen so overflows,
That still it blots, where in inscribs.
You imitate the property of Dogs,
Who bark and snarl most at him they know not
For else among all those you scandalise
Why named you me? (almost a stranger to your Eye)
My Ancestors that built no Monument
For their fems to dwell in; You also bring
Into the knowledge of the critic World.
Why I could never see thee yet but dru•ke:
Which makes thy Verses reel and stagger so.
Come sir! We may exchange one thrust unseen.
They draw fight, close, For stings down Cas &amp; disarms him.
A pretty Cur! dare it bite as well as bark!
How now sir, your Mathematical thrusts!
Then have at ye—Yield me thy Sword, or else thou dy'st.
I have no joy to set a• liberty
A Soul so unprepared. And as thou art
My Enemy, I take a full revenge,
By suffering thy corrupted blood to dwell.
And taint within th• veins. W'are discovered—
Take thy sword Now get thee home and rail upon it,
Because t'would fight no better.
Yet we may meet in the dark. You have a throat
And there are Knives in Italy.
A good day attend my ghostly Father!
Doth this your tarriance here discover ought,
You would with me?
Your leisure shall produce my utterance.
O Son, your fame is of complexion clear,
Such as ensnares the virtuous Eye, to love
And adoration. Such as would procure
All the skilful Angels suitors to her,
And such as serves for my encouragement
For I no letters have from Noble friends,
Which a requital from themselves inuit,
By Courtship bold, and troublesome to others,
Noram I with that wicked mettle stored,
That rules the mighty, and betrays the mind
To toil in a design, which angers Heaven,
And makes the Devil blush. But yet (dear Son)
I have a suite to thee.
Which I desire to know.
In the ancient Covent of S. Austine
There is a holy brother lately dead,
Whose place if you will but confirm on me
By the Dukes letter to the brother-hood,
Then shall I better leisure have to pray
For you my Patron.
Alas my Father!
The times are more observant to your Tribe.
It is the method now that your deserts
Need not to usher but succeed reward.
The Treatise (written lately) to confute,
The desperate sect in Mantua, calls it you
The Author?
It knows no other.
There your preferment safely takes root.
Believe me (ghostly Father) I will choose
The fittest time to woke in your behalf.
Heaven prosper your designs.
What throngs of great impediments besiege
The virtuous mind? so thick in multitude,
They iostle one another as they come.
Hath Vice a charter got, that none must rise
But such, who of the Devils faction are?
The way to honour is not evermore
The way to Hell: a virtuous Man may climb.
Let the flatterer sell his Lies, else where
It is unthrifty merchandise to change
My gold for breath. Of all Antagonists
Most charity I find in envious men.
For they doe sooner hurt themselves, then hurt
Or me, or him, that raised me up.
An envious man is made of thoughts.
To ruminate much doth melt the brain,
And make the heart grow lean. Such men as these:
That in opposing waste their proper strengths:
That sacrifice themselves in silly hope,
To butcher vs; save Revenge a labour,
And dye to make experiment of Wrath.
Let Fame discourse aloud until she want
An Antidote: I am not scared with noise.
Here I dismiss my fears. If I can swell
(Vnpoyson'd by those helps, which Heaven forbids)
Fond love of ease, shall near my soul dehort:
Maugre all flattery, envy, or report.
O good your Grace hear vs, hear the complaints
Of vs poor Men: O hear vs! we are all
Undone! Good your Honour hear vs.
Death encounter 'em! Lucio shut the door!
Tic the plague of greatness, the curse
Of pomp, that in our darkest privacy, wee must
Even public be to every Mans affairs.
How now! All these saucy Troops of brawling
Suitors, attend on you my glorious Boy.
It is their humble skill not to arrive
Before your Grace, but by an Advocate
A Mediator blessed in your Eyes.
How apt am I to love! yet now observe
Unkindness in my care, and bitterness
In Physic. I study how to make thee less
That I may make thee more and more my own.
Office and Dignity are Enemies
To health, and ease. Respect grows tedious
Observance troublesome, where ti's most due.
He that gives his Soul no more employment
Then what's her own: may sleep within a Drum.
While busy Hearts, that love to undertake
Beyond their reach of years: are fine to use
Drowsy potions: yet watch the Winter night
With more distinction then the Parish Clock.
Coldest thou resign thy titles and thy cares
To make me yet more capable of still
Enjoying thee?
My zeal unto my self forbids my speech.
Since if I make reply to this, I but
Disparedge duty, and consume my breath.
Where •ight is young, and clear, there Spectacles
Are troublesome; and rather hide, then show
The object. The most devout obedience
Which I shall ever owe unto your Grace
Becomes my heart, much better then my tongue.
But yet observe (my Lucio)
Th'vnkind tricks of Nature: how we are fooled
By a religious constancy in Love.
A Princes hate doth ruin where it falls:
But his affection warms where it shines
Until it kindle fire to scorch himself.
If we are subject to the sin of Heaven,
(Too much charity) extremity of love:
Let there be mercy shown in punishment.
Why is the corrupted use of Royal love
Imputed to our charge, to our Audit laid?
We that with all those Organs furnished are
All those faculties natural in Men:
Yet limited in use of each: prescribed
Our conversation, by a saucy form
Of State. How can we choose (by this restraint)
But struggle more for liberty? make choice
Of some one Ear; wherein to empty out our Souls,
When they are full of busy thoughts; of plots
Abortive, crude, and thin. It is cheap, and base
For Majesty not to be singular
In all effects. O then, if I must give my heart
To the command of one: send him (sweet Heaven!)
A modest appetite: teach him to know
The stomach sooner surfeits with too much,
Then starves for lack of that supply
Which covetous Ambition calls want.
For when my Friend begs, my bounty then
Concludes to make me poor before that he
Shall so unthrifty be of breath to ask in vain.
Distraction! tameness! O my Lucio.
How can thou construe this. After I have chid
I seem to flatter thee.
My gracious Lord!—
Peace—
I will no more employ my memory
Thus to discourage thine. Whore's Forest!
It is fit he know you are not vigilant
In his behalf. Farelo de Sforza
(My old Secretary) is newly dead:
The place is his. I shall expect no thanks
From you, nor yet from him:
My bounty is requited in her choice.
Your Grace will bring vs both within the reach
Of public envy.
Thou now would certify,
His birth obscure and base discourages
Such earnest help to his so great promotion.
Not a jot: Know my Boy! it is the vulgar,
Not the Royal trade to patch up things:
Or seek to mend what was before of quality
Perfect enough it self. To make a Man
Of nothing: why this same creation
Inclines a little near Divinity.
Near the old performance; which from Chaos
Drew this multitude of subtle forms.
Since you (the royal maker) doe commend
The mettle, and your workmanship; it shows
There's little skill in those which envy him.
Forest is your Creature. Many times
I doe acquaint him what the general voice
Doth urge in his disgrace. He laughs it out
And swears he would not loose that privilege
Which Nature gave him by her kind mistake
In his nativity, for the Seas worth.
As if from his Issue, he could ne'er deserve.
A ••nument, v•less himself doe hew
The stones whereof it is built: unless he raise
His Monument on a Wart; his dignity
On poverty obscure and base.
We doe aff•ct his thoughts Such industry
Proclaims him fit for high designs: Some Men
Attend the talking Drum, and riddle out
Their lives on Earth; with Madness Sophistry:
Calling their loss, their gain, danger, delight.
Some men converse with Books, and melt the brain
In sull•n study how to vindicate
The liberal Arts. Those loose formality,
Then grow Methodical; and die in the dark.
Some practise rules of State, and suffer much
For Honours sake: nay tread upon themselves
At first; to reach the higher. Some pursue
The Plough; and in their wholesome sweat doe swim.
And some that furnished are with nimbler souls,
Employ their times in wanton exercise;
Masques and Revels: the complements of Love,
And Love I find the easiest vanity.
O gentle Corsa! make it so with me,
Fine would I (if I durst) reveal to him
The heate of my affection, and where it is fixed.
Hark: sure the gallery door is left unlocked.
Are we debarred all place of privacy?
Nature in vs hath lost her vulgar right.
A loud, bawling suitor; doth not waken
Charity, but deafen her.
A shame upon 'em all? In Lucio.
1. Heaven bless his Grace!
2. Amen: and my Lord the Count's good Honour.
3. Friend▪ went the Duke this way?
2. Here. This way.
3. Pray show me him: they call Signior Lucio
2. The Count. Come, I'll show you him.
1. Follow, follow, follow.
Dost here? Cosimo.
What say thou?
I prithee stay, why slip but here asid•
And thou shalt see the most resplendent Fop,
That ever did discredit Nature. Sigmor.
Lothario; a Country Gentleman
But now the Court Baboon: who persuades himself,
(Out of a new kind of madness) to be
The Dukes favourite. He comes. The other is
A bundle of Proverbs: whom he seduced
From the Plough; to serve him for Preferment.
Borachio.
My Lord?
Survey my garments round, and then declare
If I have hit it?
You have sir: but not the mark.
What mark? thou bold Parishioner of Hell.
Why Sir, the mark I aim at: Preferment.
After a storm, comes a calm: the harder
You blow, the sooner your Cheeks will ache: and he
That cares for your anger, may have more of't
When he list, for my part, I know my Mother.
The froward Sisters have conspired Slave! Dog
Wilt thou never leave this immense folly?
Can nothing serve these dull Lips but Proverbs?
Sir, I know none of your Proverbs. First come,
First served. These words that are nearest the tongue,
Have opportunity soonest to leave
The mouth.
Is it then decreed, I must grow mad?
I'll be no more flow•ed, nor bruised, not I
What need my Lord, be beholding to me
For's mirth; when he may laugh it's own folly?
Besides though motion and exercise
Be good for gross bodies; therefore, must they
Of the Guard, pitch me up and down like a bar?
Sa, sa, sa, A mutiny in Heaven!
If there be; You are not likely to come
Thither to appease it, first end this quarrel
Upon earth, I have served you this six Months,
In hope of an Office; and am no more
An Officer then she that bore me.
Alas poor fool!
I pity thee. Thou wilt believe nothing
But that which may be seen or understood.
I say thou art an Officer. Or if thou art not
Thou shalt be; which is better: for that same
Which we now enjoy is in some danger
To be lost: but that which we never had
Cannot be lost before we have it.
O rare conclusion:
Besides. Look here and then rejoice, Is the Count
(Whom they call my Rival in the Dukes favour)
Is he (I say) accoutred like to me?
Why his sleeves sit like stockings on his Arms.
His Breeches are like two Clokebags, half sowde
Together in the Twist: and his other
Garments show like Plasters on him. Follow.
And make thy fortune fat.
Well. He that still expects, but tires his hope,
What One cannot, another can: it is so
With days and hours too. And for my part
Let the Glass run out.
His Man's as full of Proverbs
As a Constable: he coins 'em himself.
And such another Heade-peece filled with Whey
As is the Master here, the Sun ne'er saw.
He walks like a Zealand-storke.
But sure the Duke
Enables error in their fancy, by some
Behaviour equivalent to what
The Master, and the Man expect: for else
Folly cannot be so sickely-Eied; but time
Will give it strength to know it self.
Why sir; this dignifies the Jest. They scarce
Ere saw the Duke: and are less known
Unto the world. His Grace well apprehends,
These voluntary mistakes of Nature,
In preservation of their intellects,
Are fitter subjects for accidental mirth,
Then a Comical continuance. It is
A levity too humble in a Prince
To heed such trifles.
Nay—Prithee lead the way▪
I cannot tell, why thou (my Girl) should joy
In my advancement thus. Honour, and place
Bring sullen thoughts with them: business of such
A ragged quality, as takes away
The amorous garb: those soft wanton touches,
Wherewith the youthful flatterer betrays
The weaker side to action: whose effects
More weakness brings. I shall no leisure have
To comfort thee with smiles: when it is assigned
That I must venture for a Boy: t'will be
In haste. My business will not suffer me
To stay, and make a prologue to the act,
To kiss, or simper invitation.
It is not fit I apprehend you now,
But I wish that you would know; My duty
Is so well preserved from all corruption:
Which either youth: or foul example might
Produce: that it in plores for ••fferance,
To certify the world how strong it is.
I was assured before. This is the time,
In which I shall oblige posterity
Or fall (my wench) by flattering error.
Hast thou to my sister counsel given?
Instructions safe! whereby her actions
May warrant her promotion well deserved.
It was my tongues last employment.
I would have her wear her growing fortunes,
In a handsome fashion: Doe but observe
The unpolished garb of City dames: of those
Whom •others purse-strings hoyfe up to honour.
How they doe suck their Chins into their Necks.
Simper with unskilful levity: and trip
On their wanton Toes; like Kibe•heel'd-Fayries.
The Devils damme shows like a vestal Nun
To them: more powerful in humility.
Instruct my Sister, gentle wife.—
I shall be earnest to my utmost skill.
My Lord is come, whore's my Sister.
With the Horentine: who instructed her▪ in music.
Signior Forest,
You see my love is rude, and bold. •am
The usher to my own entrance.
My good Lord, The proverb will persuade you:
To be bold, with when•s your own.
Your title's strong, by•• to the house, and me.
I am in debt for both. wilt thou not child.
To see my heart assume this liberty.
Upon my Tongue: before it rightly knows!
Thy sisters heart:
The Duke consent, as yet unasked too: h•arc?
Cease that noise, tic troublesome:
How Forest? Hast thou ears? and wilt thou•
〈◊〉 such hopeful harmony, 〈…〉
Thy thrist unnatural, wilt thou forbid
Thy friend to share in what is good, sweet tongue
And hand, persist in what your kindness proffered.
Obey him, if the music not deserve
Your strict attention: You must blame your self.
Show me the way Forest.
Whither sir?
My heart is stolen out of my ear; let me
But know the thief, and Isle forgive the robbery.
Speak; who first that, with a voice so amorous
And shrill, confounds the others hollow organ?
Still so reserved, and unto me.
Why then look there, the voice was hers, go sir
And take what else you would enforce from my possession.
Is this that child of Orpheus? how? kneel to me?
Stay Sir—If she consent but to abuse
The property of motion in such kind
As may exalt her person but on such
Aboue this height: I am her enemy
For evermore. Consider what you doe.
She brings no portion but humility,
If her first payment fail: who dares assure
The future debt? Pray look into her lap:
You'll find she comes not from the East enriched
With Diamonds, bright wealth: whose wanton worth
Unskilful fancy prises not from use
But from the idolatrous doting of the eye.
Her chaste obedience is all her dowry.
O bitter speech! it cuts my very soul
To think that fortune should create vs two
Mere patterns of your charity.
Dare you authorize this Idolatry?
Then I'll kneel too.
And I,
Will join to make th'offence seem virtuous.
Now interchange your souls. Where passion is
So fond, it cannot well be counterfeit.
Each vnbusied Angel, hear me speak!
O send, send down unto this youthful pair
Celestial heate. Such serious love as makes
A business of delight; Instruct her soul
To practise duty in the humble strain.
And furnish him with an acceptance prompt.
Make her fruitful as the Vine; which grows
Crooked with the weight of its own increase.
So blessed in their Issue, that when time
Shall think them fit to taste the privilege
Of Death: they shall not need a Monument
Yet dwell as chief in the memory of Fame.
Amen, Amen.
Such is my prayer too. O Forest!
Excessive joy disturbs my utterance.
My words are parted on any tongue. O speak!
Thou know my heart! Tell her, there may lie hope,
I shall deserve those Tears that show like dew
Upon the Morning cheek. Entreat her, that
My years may not disgrace my love. Though I
Am young, I cannot counterfeit,
I ever speak my thoughts. I am overcome.
Alas sir, so am I, There needs no Art,
To help belief, where no suspicion is.
Now; I'll leave you to your selves.
I'ue much to promise in my own behalf:
Of my future love, and humble duty
To you my dearest Lord. Time lays his hand
On Pyramids of Brass, and ruins quite
What all the fond Artificers did think
Immortal workmanship. He sends his worms
To Books, to old Records: and they devour
Th inscription. He loves Ingratitude,
For he destro•d the memory of Man:
But I shall near forget on what strange terms
You ta•• me to your bed.
Excellent wretch! I am undone with joy
I will not blame the Coward to fear death,
Since the world contains such joy as this.
Why doe you weep Lady? can you suppose
Forest would consent to what is done,
Unless he knew there were no danger in it?
Sure his Mother was a Sibyl; he sees
With a prophetic aim; the end of his
Designs; before they come to action.
He is too wise to err. Why weep you then?
It is a folly in my Eyes.
I know not why they weep: unless they weep
Because they now have lost their liberty;
Heretofore each man, which chance presented,
Was to them a lawful object: but now,
They are to look on none but you.
Mark then the bondage I impose on mine,
My poor eyes have no object, but your face:
Of which I will deprive them thus—
Shroud thee in thy vestal ornaments.
Creep, creep, my glorious Sun, behind a cloud.
For else my eyes, will su•feit with delight.
I never felt true joy till now. Me thinks
A brisk alacrity, a nimble fire,
Con•ayes me strangely from my flesh.
Not the Cannons, Iron-entraile, when wrapped
Within a swarthy case of troubled Air,
Could •quall me in emphasis of Motion.
Though Mo•est would suffer me to boast,
Yet it were not in the power of breath, to make
My joy so known, as i• is felt.
Come then (my dear Corsa) the Priest attends
Within; the world wants Men; and Hymen is
A nimble God. When all is past prevention
The Duke shall know my choice.
This disgrace, makes thy Cousin boyle his heart
In his own blood.
He hath writ a most pestilent Libel
Which must be sung all about the city,
By one he calls his Daw; A tall, big, fellow.
I know him. He sings like Phalaris Bull.
I supposed at first, he would have sent him
A Challenge.
But that's contingent now: Forest
Being made Secretary of State.
I'haue heard of the new edict, which institutes
A mysterious toy, •the H•tband, for those
Of the faction.
Why about two days since: one of the sect
Sent me a Challenge. Because my sister
Drunk his Lords health, with her Quoife on. Each hour
These giddy Participles doe embark
Themselves for Duels. The one is a kin
To my honourable Lady. Ih'other
To my very good Lord.
There comes my Cousin, chawing his lean heart.
Good morrow to the Court Satyrist.
The world is altered Dorido, Forest
Is stepped beyond my reach: we cannot meet
In Duel: The Heralds stand between.
But my sine Thrush, can sing you a new Libel.
We shall have your Thrush, in a Cage shortly.
Remember, who you deal withal.
Hang him, d•ll, open slave, His thoughts may be
Discerned, through the shaving of a deal by•d.
I'll sift and winnow him, in an old hat.
Prithee (sweet Castruchio) leave thy barkeing.
Twill bet treason shortly for any man,
To carry ears, within three, miles of thy Tongue.
Why Signior, what Faction are you of:
Not of your faction (Sir) if none return
Unto the prison for your libelling.
You remember your Vices-strip'd, and whipped.
Your trim Eclogues, the fulsome Satyr too,
Written to his Grace. Wherein you flatter,
Whine, and damn your self to get a pardon
For what seems there a resolute offence.
Satyrs, are more useful, now then ever.
Nor grieves it me to see the humour used,
But thus abused. To see a Bard still reach
At ho• Baize, Passion o'me! I'll tell thee.
Thy R•mes i•clude not so much Brains, as would
Suffice to fill a Cherry-stone.
Yo'ld fine make me angry.
I, with thy self.
And then thou spend thy Gall, with more justice,
Then when, thou rail against Forest.
Cry you mercy (precious Cox) Hath Forest,
So great a share in your tongue too? Sympathy
Is corrupted. Behold society
Amongst the wicked: whilst a virtuous man,
Is left alone to resist his bad fate.
Let him chide the fulsome Age, rail against
The Times, aloud; though in a Vault: or'tweene
Two Hills. He shall find no zealous echo,
To second his bold Language. When I dye,
I dye a Martyr to the Commonwealth.
Dull Caitiff, leave these abortive Provosts,
And talk in the newest fashion. I'll have
My very Dug bark in the Courtly garb.
Steppe aside. They are as mad as thy Cousin.
The excrements and mere defects of nature,
shall be reduced to Ornaments in me.
I'll feed upon the tongues of Nightingales,
For so each fart I let, will be a Song—
For the Peripateticks being Butchers
Here in Sienna:—
A Pallas hewn in an entire Carbuncle.
Encircled with a More that flows with Lhasis—
Derin'd their Angury from the warm Entrails
Of a Calfe.
Sir. These are some of those, that laughed at ye
In the presence.
At me? thou lie. They laughed at thee.
Why then the Devil, will ne'er give a Ma•
Leisure, to believe a truth.
Seignior Lothario, the great Minion
To our Duke: I greet your health, with all joy.
And I with all humility.
And I with all celerity.
Hark! thou dull Sinner. Is this real? ho?
Sir, let him, that hath a heart of his own
Think what he list.
Doe they adore, or flout me now?
All is witc•craft. know when the Moon winks
There's something in'•, besides an eclipse.
Miscreant: What suspicious follies
Dost thou creat within that Wolden-skull?
And with what Heathen-phrase uttered? Know Dog,
If I employ my wrath—
Allas sir l'ue more faults then misbeliefe.
Therefore give me your bless•ing, and let me
Go home in peace. It is true, wh•n the sky falls
We shall have Larks. But let weaker stomachs,
Ex•ect such curious meat. I can eat
Oats, and Garlic, under my own Roof.
How? will Borachio leave the Court?
What accident of dire portent is fallen?
G•ntlemen applaud my patience: Because,
He cannot furnish me with wholesome Suits,
He doubts my power to get 'em granted.
Why we, will furnish him with Suits.
But wont ye flout, and play the knave with one?
How (Knave!) was that the word?
Interpret the word, as your self shall please.
I scorn to be your Dictionary.
Marry come up: Are your ears so tender?
I hope I'm a Man, although a sinner.
Use no choler Amorous child. But if
Thou want suits, thy Lord being near the Duke,
May furnish thee with—
Or me thinks thou would become a knighthood
Get him to beg it for thee.
No, no, Hot words make but warm air, A fig
For a Knight-errant; that hath a stile, and ne'er a hedge.
Then get a Patent to survey Brine-pits.
Or else for casting Ordinance in Loom.
Or else search Saint Peters patrimony,
Lay Prebendrys are good, and Symony
Is an old Paradox.
Hold, hold
Enough suffices all women but whores.
He that expects the Morning lengthens the Night
Therefore straitway let my Lord get the Duke
To sign these Patents: which done
I'll return to the wife of my bowels,
And dye for joy.
Why this, is fit, and requisite.
If Signior Lothario doe consent.
It is decreed.
Who would hasten Time, when we may be old
Too soon. Let me take down a Cushion, and pray.
For I shall have more dignity then will suffice
To damn a Monk.
Who could perish in a better cause?
Why, can I help it? If a man be borne
To Offices. Or as my Master said,
Predestinate in the womb of greatness.
Tic not our faults. Each man obeys his Star,
In spite of his Teeth,
All this is Alcaron.
One thing grieves me. I'ue a bad memory
Already, and now t'will be made worse.
How can preferment hurt thy memory?
O Sir! preferment makes a man forget
His dearest friends; nay his kindred too.
Look, Thy Master's building more Castles, in the Air.
He has intelligence from Spain, and fortifies,
To no purpose against the next Spring.
All offices shall be sold in the dark—
How! Grow not old in another garment,
Sell what's your own, Some of those offices
Are mine by promise.
Still, cross to my designs. Isle stretch your Sinus•
Hold! Signior Lothario, hold! Mercy
Becomes the powerful,
Let the Devil take the Knighthood, and make
His Damme a Lady. I'll not be his Ass,
That served for blows, and Provender.
Lets relieve Borachio, or all our Comic Scenes
Are at an end.
Forest
My gracious Lord.
Are yet our Letters to his Holiness
Dispatched?
They are so please your Grace.
Did the French-Embassador make some show
Of discontent at his departure hence?
Both in his words and looks: for when he heard
The English-Leiger had opposed his Treaty
Concerning trassique with the Florentine,
His anger straight dismissed the Argument,
And seized upon the Nation, nay railed
Against the Leiger too, whose opposition,
Might be chidden as too nice a Virtue,
But could not be accused as a vice,
Tic known indeed the French doe take a prides,
In the emphasis of sudden anger,
As if alacrity in ill did make,
The fault look handsomely, and dullness add
Deformity to sin.
Tic faithfully observed.
Swelled with uncharitable pride: such as
Admits no stile of Neighbour; as if grown
Aboue the use of friendship. They seem to call
Those mighty Ilanders nearest their soil,
Poor borderers to their Continent. Such,
Whose thin numbers, have in bloody battle,
Made their multitudes their impediments,
Worn their Ensigns, instead of gaudy Skarfes.
The chance of war,
Admitted many times of Miracles,
Even such, as doe discredit History,
High-prouidence confers the conquest there,
Where probability conferd the loss.
And this is done, that we may attribute
The praise to him that gave the victory,
Not to them that got it. Observe besides,
That when the weak doe overcome: the strong,
Doe leave that stain, for their Posterity
To wipe away: which is already done;
The French, have fiery no•ble spirits.
Your Grace deals justly in your praise. They (have
Spirits: but they all are useless made,
By forward and affectate violence.
He that spends his fury, and his strength
In the first charge, must not hope to mike's retreat,
So nobly, as the modest Combarant,
Whose onset slowly moos: as careful not
T'outride his skill. Their valour is t'attempt.
Not to perform. It is a giddy Nation;
And never serious but in trifles.
Thou doest mistake in natural effects,
Where Fanc• is so rich, the incident
To s•me u•expense. These 〈◊〉
Divulge the wealth o••h' Brain. ••uite that is ripe
Is prone to fall, or to 〈◊〉 self.
〈◊〉 to the ••e of ••arches:
Th•y now are full• ripe: they reach
The height, and 〈◊〉 of mortal •aeuleies.
Nature 〈◊〉 them doth stand upon the verge
Of her 〈◊〉 y•uth The English want
Three •u•dred y•eres of that perfection.
And as the Moo•e ner'e changes but i'th'full
Even so the mighty Nations of the Earth,
Change in their greatest glory. First their strict
And rugged d•scipline, to vain delights.
Their solemn Marches next to wanton •eggs.
Their Battles fierce to Duels spleenatiue,
Or witty quarrels of the Pen.
Here may my knees take root: whilst I doe grow
A living Statue of true obedience,
Or let my royal Master grant his pardon.
Sure we may trust, the judgment of our eyes,
Thou dost not look as if thou coldest commit
A sin so horrid, so ugly as can fright
Our mercy from vs. Rise, we pardon thee.
Now let vs know thy crime.
It is no crime
Unless against that great prerogative
Your ear hath overrun. Perhaps my Heart,
Hath made escape through these fond Eyes. And I
(In the rash discretion of my youthful blood)
Confined my self in Matrimonial bonds.
Ho! married? speak suddenly, to whom?
Io my Sister. Sir pardon the permission,
Or frown, and leave your creature more obscure
Then when you owned him first. Now is the time
To show your charity Divine. Preserve
What you have made.
Forest this is ill.
What confederate with ungoverned youth?
But 〈◊〉, we pardon you. Whore's the Lady?
Rare beauty!—
You have our pardon, and our favour too.
I thus inuit more knowledge of your worth.
Believe me Lady: you have a feature
That •old b•tray a more experienced Eye
Then Lucio's is. Excellent wretch! with a
Timorous modesty, she stifles up
Her v•terence. O such a pregnant Eye!
And yet • slow of speech; is a wonder
More d••ightfull, then any Nature makes.
Hast thou Lucio, so much vnh•ppy wit,
As to be •jealous yet? with thou suppose
Thy self s•c•re in our disco•se?
Heaven •orb•d, your Grace should ever employ
Your 〈…〉 as to discourse with her
'Till grew 〈◊〉.
Come hither Lady, come, confess, how chance
Y•u have b•witched my Boy with subtle smiles,
With wan•on hauiour of those pretty Eyes?
Doth H••uen bestow such Noble ornaments,
To be abused in the use: and now
He is your Prisoner too, in cheerful bonds,
How can you have the heart to make s•ch spoil,
And havoc of his beauty? ho! speak Lady!
I hope your Grace hath thoughts more me•cifull.
I know this match was made in Heaven; and not
Provoked by any sinful art in me.
How I have v•'d him in this little time
That he hath bin my Lord: let him declare.
My duty is so strict, I need not blush
To hear the story told.
No! look, look there. His Eyes for very shame
Their luster's lost are crep't into his head:
Encircled with the weakly cullor blew.
The Roses in his Cheeks are withered quite
His clear and brisk aspect is muddy now
And dull: His voice (that was so shrill; and could
Even Trumpet-like, outscolde the Echo)
Is hollow grown, and horse. Have you then used him well?
Alas (most gracious sir) go not about
To make my Lord suspect my Loyalty.
If Nature sickne in his faculties;
Which (heaven be thanked) I perceived not yet,
It cannot prove a guiltiness in me.
Believe (young wife) I am no Proselyte,
I still auerr, you are that greedy Nymph,
That hath devoured the rich complexion of my Boy.
See how his feature's shrunk? his beauty stained?
The Scythian Dame (whose cruelty is such,
Whose lust so prodigal, that she doth strive
To kill the able Lecher in the act;
Making her womb his Sepulchre) would yet
Have spared that wanton handsomeness; to show
As pattern of her Lenity.
I hope, your Grace will pardon Ignorance,
That so ill mannerd is, as not to know
Your meaning.
No matter Lady.
My accusation shall withdraw it self.
Pretty innocence! Lucio, prepare.
Tic our will to make thy Wife a Courtier;
She shall be high in favour; if she'll leave
Her modesty; that's out of fashion now:
In Neighbour Courts, the Ladies so prevail
With masculine behaviour: they grow
In factions able to depose their Husbands
From the charter of their Sex.
It is strange that his dislike is fled so soon.
Your Marriage we will solemnise with masques,
And Revels. If Invention •for mean,
To get reward for subtlety; tic now.
We take notice (Lucio) She is thy wife,
And thy sister our Forest.
We your Graces humblest Creatures.
Affection is become a Parasite;
Strives to please, whom it cannot benefit.
Known, by whom by City wits!
Or my Ladies workmen.
Who ne'er saw verse, but what their Suitors writ,
Which they read like Prose too.
I'll not discredit my patience, talk on.
They say you are particular with a
Great Lady.
Yes, and her Pensioner.
Some loose thing (belike) yet will be at charge,
To secure her fame from noise. For thou prayst
Against all lechery but thine own.
And she hath wished in witty-penitence,
Thou had been single in the world,
I, for then she had lived chaste. He grows angry,
His eyes look red.
No Sir. They blush to see a Fool.
It were fit they would employ their modesty
At home. For thou art a fool in print.
Yet had he lived, when the old Sybill,
Presented her divine Manuscripts, to
The dull Roman; he would have scolded with her,
Unless his Pamphlets had attained the first
Acceptance.
True, for every Poet thinks himself
The best Poet in the world.
And that Satyr not the worst; wherein
He chides Women, for wearing their Halfe-Ruffes,
Which pinned behin'd trance sc•tuates the face,
Or makes'em look, like Ianus with two faces.
A just exception: for going hastily
To kiss his whore; he could not find her Mouth.
Why sure her breath was strong enough
To direct him to it.
Yet I have heard nothing, but what deserves
More pity, then anger.
Now when he hath provided some high toy
For the Press; he thinks on d•dic•tion,
Strait chooses one of the faction; who must
Not Patronise, but buy what he makes vendable,
With praise in the Epistle.
Can you deny this Cousin Satyrist?
And nothing makes Learning so cheap; but that
Every writer sells his works.
Nay let's follow; and worry him to pieces.
Our ruin is contrived aboue.
If our Master p•ocue vnkin'd, the Planets
Govern ill: For our gratitude, and care,
Deserves more constancy.
Looks he so strangely on ye?
As if the object were but new to him.
And his own heart unsettled in his b••ast.
Is his violence so soon tired? survey
The Register of your own deeds. Speak Sir,
Have you so engrossed his ears, as if their
Organ, were yours, not his. Confined 'em to
Your own tongue: and so d•priu'd the sorrowful,
The grieved in heart, of an easy audience?
•ever.
Since you have shared the Dukes prerogative,
And by his love, held opposition.
At such great advantage. did you ever slight
With cheap regard, those of high, and Noble birth?
My soul abhors such tyranny.
Have those who wear th'Eternalls Livery
Bought their wages of ye? Or have they found
Bold, and skilful flattery, more helps
Adieu•cement; then deep and modest Learning?
Never, since my distinction was of power,
To help its choice.
In nice trial, or evidence of Law,
Hath Custom (which only gives vs hope
Of certainty in Justice) bin traduced
By your obscure help?
Never.
Hath the desolate Wid•ow scared mercy
From your eyes, with her old ruined beauty,
(For grief was never amorous) or hath
The torn Beggar too soon dismissed your charity
Because not giddy enough to delight
Wantonness.
Never.
Then if our great Master withdraw his love;
The weight of sufferance cannot bruise ye;
For the whole world will share in the burden.
From whom is this sir?
From my Lord Marquise de Loretta.
I humbly kiss his hand.
Now luck flatter me but once, and I am made—
Tic short, pray heaven it be sweet, or I'll ne'er love
The Proverb.
Sir, have you ever bin in service,
Under any eminent Commander?
Never yet.
Read these Forest.
How Reputation lessens in esteem.
Curtsy grows so cheap, that denial,
Seems less troublesome then consent.
And performance is only Lazy.
The labour of subscription hinders more,
Then thought of that, to which it doth subscribe.
This Letter would fine make you a Captain
In the new Troupes, sent to the Valtaline.
But sure your modesty will teach you balk
The grant, though I should beg ye to receau't.
Sir. Shall the grey head, the old Soldier.
That tries misfortune by his constancy
In sufferance; •ffronts the winters rage;
Whilst his blood is frozen into Corrall,
His sins into Wire: whole Valour thinks
To wear Chained shot, as bracelets on his Loins.
Shall his preferment be intercepted?
Shall he now trail a Pike under a Boy,
Whose experience is younger then his face?
No, the frien•ship of the noble Marquisse
Shall never countenance unjust deeds.
Find a Suit more capable of my grant,
And your acceptance, it is your own.
Noble Signior, I'll put ye to the test.
Princes letters are c•e•per far then those
Which Scriuen•rs put to sale. If such Pigmyes,
Apes in doublets, procure command of the Camp,
Let the Cranes wage war again. No opposition
Is too weak to ruinate.—Go young Lord,
The Duke is ill accompanied, if on•y
With his own thoughts. Discover more. Perhaps
His discontent concerns not you.
I fear, yet my hopes would fine comfort me,
Farewell.
I would not be unmannerly, but if
She be at leisure, tell her, I am here.
Please your Ladyship to sit, Il'e tell her so.
She's come already.
I saw your entrance. How doe you Sister?
I humbly thank your honour, I am well,
Pray dismiss your woman: I would impart
A privacy.
Watch my Lords coming from the Duke, and bring
Me word, before he is vncoach'd
I shall.
O Madam Time is now grown old, and runs
But slowly, I thought each Hour, a year,
Until I saw your Ladyship.
Why what's the matter? I hope my brother's well
Yes, I thank heaven. But pray come hither.
Who doe you suppose was with me last night,
When my husband was at Court?
How should I tell, without you instruct me.
Why give a guess.
The Lady Benuolia, or the Lady
Vtruvia, who was it?
Nay t'was a Man too.
That's fine i'faith, pray name him to me.
What think you of the best man in Sienna?
How! was the Duke with ye?
Yes, disguised too: he either came, (or else
Pretended so) to meet your husband there.
After some talk, (in which he did express
His love to all our family) he gave
An ample praise of you: and said he saw
Already so much worth in your fair breast
As will add a knot to your Lords Heart,
And his own: nay and make his constant love
A pattern for every royal Master.
Indeed, I daily pray to have it so.
Then he gave me this same Jewel; to you
He recommended the receipt of this.
Trust me wench, they are both full of glory
Rarely cut, and set.
Yours is the better of the twain,
It is.
But truly I mislike the manner of
The gift. Dost thou think his thoughts are honourable?
I prithee tell me?
They are such as I suspected at the first,
Such as made me to refuse these Jewels.
He swore I was a Traitor, if I thought.
He meant amiss Or if I did deny
To bear this same to you, I did but ill
Require his kind request unto my husband.
Then in the close he used such Art, such subtle phrase,
To free his thoughts from the strict jealousy
Of mine; as reconciled me to obey his will.
You know besides how harsh it is to chide
With Majesty, or slight Princes favours.
I'll show to my Lord.
I had thought t'haue shown my husband mine too
But since it is capable of curious
Questioning, I mean to stay awhile.
Thou counsayl'st well. We'll wear 'em both at once.
Mine is the best, I ever was Mistress of.
And mine is not eclipsed much by yours.
Madam, my Lord is near at hand.
Come Sister, we shall here the news at Court.
I'll waite upon your Ladyship.
Sir Knight, believe Forest is the Man▪
That dulls your reputation with the Duke.
And suborns the Count against ye.
Dares he control my purposes?
Ask honest Borachio else.
Nay He'll not believe me: though I should sue•••
You slout him behind his back: and when a man
Sees things plainly; he need not buy spectacles,
Till he grow old.
I'll mince the Villain into sand, to fill
My Howerglasse—
In this Garden he walks continually
After dinner. Here stay, and expect him.
And Signior in this skin of parchment; mark
What pains I take, to perfect your revenge.
In the shape of tree (which takes root in Hell)
You shall discover all his base descent.
On that branch appears a Hangman. Then,
A Iakes-man, then, a Tinker. On's Mothers side
A Bawd professed. then, a Tybb. then a Trypewife.
A Synagogue of Welsh Rabbys; could not
Express more skill in Genealogies,
Then this includes. Sir, show it him, and he
Insaniates strait.
I'll make him wear it on his forehead.
Excellent rage! but not a word of me.
I humbly take my leave.
Not the four winds (met in March) shall cool my spleen
Sir, now we are private, tic a fit time
To be troublesome—
I'll cram Cerberus, with sopps made of the slaves blood—
Concerning those Offices. I'ue thought on'em.
And will have 'em all in spite of Boltens teeth.
Signior Lothario! Boracho too.
Thou art an honest fellow.
I, your worship is wise, to speak no more,
Then what you may well stand too.
Base stem, derived from I soap root,
Our Ancestors were not so familiar.
Behold, &amp; grow more mannerly.
Whats here? My Pedigree? Some saucy knave
Hath counselled him, to this affront. What he,
I must know th'originall proiector.
Lay hold upon those fools.
Lay hold on me?
Take off your hands; or I will toss ye all
Into the clouds, and kick the Mountains after ye.
I pray bid the Gentleman take good heed;
For my Master, can doe all this, and more too
I have seen him.
Be you quiet. You that desire Offices.
If I doe, what then? there be •hose desire
Worse things.
Know ye not Rogues, that I can muzzle up
The testify Unicorn, in a Spinners thread?
Lay all hold on him.
He that cannot run for his Liberty
Hath no courage in his Heals. Let the Gout
Take him, that hath Legs, and w'ont vse'em
No matter, let him go. Convey that fool,
Unto the Porters Lodge.
A Chaos shall succeed this same.
Whither so fast (sweet Lord!)
Forest, I have tan my leave of the Duke.
Must ye away to night.
Now, presently. My followers attend
At door. I only came to kiss thy hands.
The Sun will fail ye, ere ye reach Lucca.
I must through. His grace will have it so.
Why dost thou make thy head, to shake and reel,
Upon thy shoulders thus. Is it overcome
With thoughts, and such as must be hid from me?
Take heed, suspicion is the Favourite
Of Time, and Nature, it takes a sudden grouth:
And gathers in the breast, like Balls of suow,
In snow; until the weight make it deny
To be removed: then melts at leisure too.
He's too moderate, that will at my years,
Be satisfied thus.
Why then consider thus. You go to Lucca,
There to congratulate the sate approach
Of the Popes Legate; He hath bin there a week;
And why he was not visited ere this
Or why upon such strict, and short summons.
Your self must now be sent; quite puzzles me.
Actions rare, and sudden, doe commonly
Proceed from fierce necessity: or else
From some oblique design: which is ashamed,
To show it self in the public Rode.
Forest is this all?
Why me sweet Patron: this is enough
Of danger, since none is merited.
Young thoughts encourage me to sufferance.
Each storm is usher to a gentle calm:
Why toils with speed, gets soonest home to rest.
The plodding Mule shall sleep eternally.
Why should the stricken dear beam•an his death:
His obsequies, were full of noble rites:
Actions Quire, a jolly Requiem gave:
And the Arrow from the bow did sing his dirge.
Thus thy years doe riddle grief away;
Making sorrow swift, because it is mortal.
Let me waite, on your Lordship to your horse,
And at your better leisure read this same.
I'll tell ye as we go, who brought it me.
To wrong my boy, unkind, incestuous heate!
Why is Copulation legal; it gives
Authority to lust, for chastity
Would soon conclude the World. O virtuous
Pre•dice, when error, prevents folly!
Fiends, Devils, that doe live in liquid fire,
Have constitutions not half so hot,
So riotous as mine. But why this?
The beauteous Corsa is not yet defiled.
He that repents ever he commits a fault,
Doth like a thirsty, sinner store his Soul
With mercy, to absolve that sin himself;
Which he may afterwards, more securely
Fall into. Enough this soon Initiates.
The credulous Count her husband, I have sent
To Lucca. And tomorrow he returns.
My plots are limmited too short a time
To become Actions. Nor was it skill
To send the Jewel by her sister. Mark!
My Soul and brain, are perfect Courtiers grown;
In my declention, and my greatest want
They leave me to instruct, and help my self.
These fancies are not old: the whole Court
Observes him strangely altered. But why
Am I sent for? that I must know, by safe,
And cautelous insinuation.
How soon, I'ue profited in discipline
Of Hell I must through What I did mean
Adultery at first; will now I fear
Become a Rape.
Ho! still upon that string? I like it well,
It is musical.
Castrucho! art thou come?
Thou hast bin a Courtier long; but whether
It was want of skill in me to choose a Man,
Or want of luck in thee to be my choice;
Suspense makes neutral. But know; my love
Was tardy, because still void of leisure;
To warrant passion well bestowed; by safe
(Though tedious) trials. Affection
That is slow, is sure: And now, I wear my heart
Not in m•no own breast, but thine.
I have but one life, it is some error
In your Grace, thus t'oblige me to the loss
Of more, in your dear service.
I am not skil'd in words. But I affect
Thy fury. For thou art the bold Satyr,
That whips Forest, and the wanton Count,
In thy tart Verse.
My gracious Lord! I shall conceive much grief,
If my zeal mistake in accusation
Of those Men, which th'vncertaine Tongue of Fame
Delivers to my charge.
Nay, make not thy confession an excuse
Rather then a story: For there needs none.
I hate Forest, and the Count, and would
Devise succinct ways to my revenge.
Heaven forbid: I'd rather far disgrace
The skill of my subject; call accusation
Slander: then that the busy multitude
Should note inconstancy in you,
This is a damned Hypocrite. Chamellons
Changes, are not so intricate to sense.
Castruchio! ease me with nimble apprehension.
I have not leisure, to be modest now.
Speak; hast no acquaintance with any near
Corsa's person; the Counts fair wife?
I humbly beg, your Grace would not mistake
The conditions of my duty.
I beg of thee not to mistake the sense
Of my designs. My words import my heart,
And both, no danger unto thee.
I hope my skill in servitude, will not
Provoke my Prince to tempt my honour.
What prolix love is this; Dost thou indent
With my acceptance, make choice of services!
Your Grace will give me leave; since that I know
I not deserve to share in your high secrets,
To doubt my safety in knowing this.
Death! and horror! thy suspicions are too thin.
Consider why I sent the Count to Lucca?
Upon my life thou art secure: therefore
Reply unto my former question.
My gracious Lord, I have some interest
In her woman.
In Corsa's woman known to thee?
She is. Perhaps—
Discharge thy tongue. May my ears blister
If they digest words to thy prejudice.
Perhaps I knew her, beyond the modest strain.
There's Gold. Castruchio, show some pity
On rebellious blood. Be my Harbinger,
Billet me this night where she doth lye
And thou art made for ever.
Must it be this night?
Strict opportunity will have it so.
Her Lord returns with the next Sun.
I cannot say her self shall porter be
Unto your entrance; but her woman shall.
Enough! here's more Gold. Smmon up thy brain
Thy heart, thy soul, to meet in consulation,
And so contrive my peace, Farewell.
I will instruct your Grace ever long: both when,
And how to make this armorous assault.
My self and my Exchequer are thine own.
There needs no Art to work him into evil;
He is bad enough t'infect the Devil.
Good! they have left the Garden door un∣locked
I'll venture in to help discovery.
Castruchio is graced with rare employment:
The Duke and he doe here consume the Night.
These are hours for Ghosts, Adulterers
And Thieves. The slave is Haggard. At Supper
Being full of gold: his vain Appetite
Fed at Nero's rate; I was discarded
With a frown: shaken like a Bur from his sleeve.
As if my closure heretofore had bin
Impertinent. Ambition lessens all
Beneath it self to nothing: the higher
We doe stand: so much less those men appear
Whom we behold below—Hark! Kind Fortune
Lend me thy Ears—
The night grows aged now. It were fit the Duke
Would hasten his departure. In troth Wench,
Thy service to him exceeds requital.
But what; she took it willingly!
No, but she did not.
Pox 'o these modest Lies! I say she did,
In troth you doe abuse her then; I'm sure
Her shrieks did scare my heart up to my lips.
Then thou could have Kissed heartily.
I wonder, it wakened not the whole house.
First possible! what means did the Duke use
To stifle up this noise?
Nay, I know not. But since she was no more
Pliant; it doth repent me much, Ever
Was instrument to his other actions.
What, repent! I prithee sweet Duarte
Wrong not Divinity so much: waste not
A virtue, that would more profit others:
And to suppose that the Lady was ravished,
Is an heresy, which my Soul must ne'er
Be guilty of. Doe not I know Women
Are a kind of soft wax, that will receive
Any impression?
And doe not I know: there is difference
In workmen as in wax. Hard wax (when cold)
Accepts of no impression. By coldness
I in far chastity: for chastity
Is cold,
But those workmen are harder far
Then that hard wax. And it is hardest of all
To find those workmen: unless by Russia
Where the people freeze, till they spit snow. Come,
Kiss me Chuck. Again, once more—
A precious Satyrist! This surly Dog,
Inueyes against lechery in others, because
He would engross all Women to himself.
Your greatest Thieves, are commonly begot
When Parents doe their lechery by stealth.
Men get Cowards, when frighted in the Act.
And by such vulgar consequence: it is now
A proper time to beget a Pander.
One, that may hereafter doe other men
The same office: which we doe the Duke now.
Come. Shall we, in and try?
You presume much, on an easy nature;
And how extravagant you are abroad;
I am not so unkind to question.
Faith Wench: I've some interest in every Child
That playsi'th' street, The Dukes come down. Go, go,
Give your Lady a Caudle: and let me hear
How she likes her new Bedfellow. I'll meet
His Grace two hours hence: when he hath dismissed
Those thoughts, which still succeed unlawful lust.
O damned villainy: Is this th'imployment
That doth make ye proud? I will haunt ye still,
To strengthen my intelligence.
O silly, weak evasion! being dark,
I creep within my Cloak. To is modesty
In sin to practise every disguise
To hide it from the World. But Creatures free from guilt
Affect the Sun, and hate the dark; because
It hides their innocence. O traitor Lust.
That leads vs with encouragement to fight,
And when we have discharged our Veins for thee,
W'are besieged with thoughts, that more perplex vs
Then the former. For then we did complain
Of strength; but now of weakness more.
Away, •way. It is time that I were gone:
The modest Morn doth blush in the East, as if
Ashamed to see so foul a Ravisher.
So swift of foot! I must overtake ye.
How now! the World is wide enough: wherefore
Dost thou iostle me?
Cry mercy Signior: the day's blear Eie'd yet,
And my own hast made me unmannerly.
Sig•ior Dorido is it you? Tic much
To see you appear before the Sun.
Faith Signior; the Count being out of Town
I though• Forest would have more leisure
To peruse my new Suit. He's early up;
Which cause my vigilance.
Why Signior use a means more absolute;
It is true, Forest does all: but how?
As th'instrument governed in the workman's hand.
Instruct me with convenience of time,
And I will work the Duke in thy behalf.
Then Signior, you will oblige my prayers.
At supper, when you departed from me,
You gave demonstrations of discontent:
Who knows, but whilst the soul's employed within;
The body might neglect some outward form,
Which curiosity preferrs to custom.
Custom to abuse. It was my business
Not disrespect of you, that did deprive
My complement of vanity. I shall
Rejoice when I can show you kindness.
I will be bold to think so.
I'd have thee build thy Mansion on a Rock.
Favourites are served in with those Dishes
The Prince best loves. And meat we most affect
We soonest surfeit on. Instruct thy soul.
The Count is but a glorious trifle.
And to be factious without benefit—
Well, think upon it. I know a way to get
The Dukes best Ear, without Foreste's help.
Farewell.
The Profit of the day be yours. These tricks
Shall make me wear him in my Eyes. The slave
Doth usher out his breath in state; as if
His honours had out grown his own knowledge.
Yet but a tame Pande•. The beauteous Corsa
Is ravished by the Duke. O black horror.
Arise my soul, inspire my industry
With noble purpose. Something I'll doe
That shall proclaim my Spirit.
Hence, hence, like Time; who swiftly flies away,
But evermore returns. Go cruel wench!
Thou hast betrayed thy Mistress, even to
Eternal loss. Th'Angels that live aboue
Have seen it all. They know thee well enough.
In the general Session of the world;
It will not my adultery be called;
But a prodigious Rape derived from thee.
Good Madam, your Conscience is too bold:
It troubles you too much. Dismise't: think,
That other Ladies have offended more.
Out Devil. Wilt thou betray my soul too?
Duarte hence! I am inspired with strength
To make revenge prove masculine.
Fly quickly hence. Why doest thou stay? There's Gold.
I prithee wench in all thy Pilgrimage
Disperse my fault in charitable sense.
Use me nobly with thy Tongue. So farewell.
Or let my sin no mercy find in Heaven,
No pity here on Earth.
Now all the motives of my Lords delight
Exterminate for evermore with me.
My silent Lute's interred in the Case.
My voice now rather frights, then captivates
The sense.
O Sister, dare you visit me?
I am a strumpet grown. Hence, and secure
Your fame.
Alack, what prodigy is this!
I will tell thee all. For I should disgrace
Iniquity to be modest now. The Duke—
Ay me! What in that name can privilege
Offence?
Hear my Luinna, hear. In midst of night,
By my pernicious women's help; He ops
My chamber door: whose faithful Hinges shrieked,
To warn me of his dire approach. His Hand
Employed a Torch, a Torch; whose fancy weak
Aged, and black, had ouergrowen the flame.
And showed (me thought) like unto Tarquins Ghost;
Preaching in fire: as if it counselled him,
To prevent such penance by forsaking
His attempt. This, I told him too. But he
(That came not to consider, but to act)
O'er•u•'d my Hands with his: then made shipwreck
Of my Honour.
O royal Villain!
My joints and sinews dissipated are,
And scattered in a trembling fear. But mark
More sorrows yet. My Husband looking in
My Cabinet, did spy that Jewel there,
Which the Duke last gave me. It was to him
A new, and unknown star: and Commit like,
Employed his thoughts with such Astrology
As made an Optic of his jealousy;
Through which, he would discern the cause, the effect
Of its being there. I told him all the truth:
And Truth's oftner praised, then rewarded
Here on Earth: for he dismissed me straight
With fatal looks.
My Brother is a noble Gentleman.
Go, go, and kneel to him. All jealousy
Must still be strangled in its birth: or Time
Will soon conspire to make it strong enough
To overcome the truth. Shield vs sweet Heaven!
The Sybills dance about my Heart. They lay
Their verges here: infusing a prophetic fear:
Which whispers we shall never meet again,
Lets take a solemn leave—farewell for ever
Farewell! the noblest Lady of the World.
I am glad to see thee well Borachio!
But whore's thy Master? what, in durance still?
Alas Sir, I (Good Gentleman,) the Room
Wherein they have put him, is so little
Hee fills it up to the Roof: and is fine
To leave his Legs Sentinels without door,
To watch the rest of his body. Tic no
Chamber, but a Court. Cupboard.
But they make him amends in his diet.
They cannot Sir, For he's a faint eater,
If he would pray so often as he fasts;
He had bin at liberty long ago.
He'll dine upon a single Pea; and leave Orts.
Doe they no more regard his potent hopes?
Alas Sir, when Fortune's Tippet stands up,
Few men will lend a pin to tack it down,
I, and my linage have sweet loss of him:
I'm sure o'that,
Nay, that's too evident.
O sir! I would not a'giuen this Rush;
T'haue bin assured all th'offices in's gift
But hang such Dukes (I say) that suffer thus
Their Favourites to be imprisoned.
How now Borachio! Dost thou speak treason?
Sir, I have said no more, then what I mean
To unsay again: which is but a kind
Of loosing one'• labour. An• '•is better,
To be ill employed then to be idle.
How the slave sows his Proverbs together.
Are you come? I have stayed until the Clock
Gave your promise the lye.
My time was spent to more advantage.
I have declared my interest in your blood.
If you assist my plots; you needs must share
Success, that hath already warranted
A large requital.
I am resolved: and wish my self more able.
It is well. But now you undertake business:
You must be as serious as a Musle.
That is: wear your Beard, upon your tongue: talk,
Bravely. But of all avoid Dorido
As you would to drink
A violent poison.
Enough, he is a stranger to my thoughts.
There's fresh encouragement—
A little more of this mettle would puzzle
My Geography; Is this Italy
Or the Indies, There Borachio! Weep no more
For thy Master.
Allas I'm apt to weep, though I but see
An Onion stripped naked.
I thought to meet thy Master here. I'm sure
I saw the warrant signed for his release.
The Devil take your worship for me, why,
Do ye bring such good news, on a work'y day?
But thou pray ill, in praying the Devil
To take me.
Why could he ever come to less purpose
Then when he finds you doing well. Though he
Loose his labour once: I dare warrant ye,
He'll come again on the same arrand.
A bitter fool.
Sir, let we friends be true to one another.
There are but few true friends extant. Let them
Be kindly used and kept, if only for breed.
With all my heart, translate thy meaning.
Is my Master at liberty?
I'll defer an answer of this, until
Thy own Eyes be a little elder.
Well, is he still in favour with the Duke?
Why he shall shortly govern all at Court,
And be a very Mote in the Duk's eye.
Enough. It is not wholesome to burst with •oy.
But what then?
I'ue thought with much care on these Offices:
And find my self fitting to be in'em.
I will haue'em all; come Cut, and Long-taile.
For my Wife, will be such a glad woman.
Look! who comes there?
O Sir! give me your blessing—
Weep not Borachio! I have prepared
Such bloody art in my revenge; as makes
Men's wits, more famous then their cruelty,
Let horror propagate. Ell's too little
For my use. But you Sir had the honour,
To release me.
Or else I had bin much dishonoured.
Sir, now he supposes you in durance:
And is himself secure; happily drunk,
Or riding in the stews; you may take some
Advantage on his soul too. Loose no time.
That's my intent.
For it were dull humanity to aim
No farther then his life. I'll pursue him
Even to Hell.
And let me alone so to facilitate
The project, by search of fit time, and means:
As shall declare the act less troublesome,
Then thus to threaten it with words.
You Signior Castruch•o! Signior Coxcomb!
Are you ti•'d with doing well? you have scarce
Brought my poor Lord out of the Prison doors;
But you long to have him in again. Nay,
Ne'er look! For my Sword dwells within a Yard
Of my Tongue, and shall defend what I say
What a p•rnicious Calfe is this?
What harm have my poor Wife, and Children done
To you, or yours; that seeing me within
A hairs breadth, of a hundred offices,
You confound all, by leading my poor Lord
Into new broils.
Bold Miscreant! If I but stir—
Nay Signior! let him alone. Borachio!
Steep thy wrath in cold water: follow,
And be dumb. All shall be well.
Yes, persuade me to dry Ice in an Oven!
But I'll follow your Heals so close: as Isle
Go near to tread upon your Kibes.
Signior, I knew ye a brave Commander
Under the great Petruchio; and since
That time your constant virtues have deserved
More recompense, then Fate will minister
By me. My kindness is no miracle:
Since gratitude is only sick, not dead.
But pray believe what I have said is truth.
O Sir, it is th'error of unskilful love
To be too constant in her charity
To all. But I have grounds more relatiue
To make me jealous of the truth: and I
Believe you with my heart: and yet it is strange.
Doth this Castruchio think his haggard fate
Can triumph over mine? because in lust
The Devil did instruct his industry:
Dares he attempt my life?
I give you real grounds for my suspense.
Reward (sir) may make a Villain bloody
Though it cannot make him valiant. The Duke
Will let him want no Gold.
Nay it is often seen.
Amongst the several Creatures of a Prince,
Such instruments as these most profit reap.
Employments noble doe requite themselves,
And honour pays, the great of heart: who loose
But Time in service which is the Bodies wealth.
Your friend stays. If you please t'appeare with him
From thence, at my summons: I shall discover more.
Noble Signior, I am yours,
What hoe? Luinna! Wife!
My Lord!
Come hither Love. Signify in secret
When was the royal Lecher here disguised?
What did he send thee last? when must ye quench
The Cyprian fire: ho! you may tell me all,
For I'll not blab. Alas, I'm more silent
Then my Grandsire in his Tomb. A subtle Pimp, I,
A Pander learned in the art. Tell me Chuck?
Alas my noble Lord! what doe ye mean?
Why nothing, I: yet tic enough I feel
The wrong, If ignorant, I suffer twice.
And therefore let me know my Enemy.
The little worm, when trod upon; will turn
His Head, to look upon his Murderer.
And hath my Spleen no Eyes: Is the revenge
Of Man less curious then a Worms.—She weeps,
O Luinna, the sacred knot's untied.
Thou hast defiled and stained the vestal Sheets,
Thy Breast shall be no more my Pillow.
O say not so. Let Thunder strike me dead,
If Ever knew the Duke; with knowledge more
Dishonest, then what harbours in the Eyes;
Only by sight.
O new horror! such brazen impudence,
Would make a Negro blush. Come glo•ious who•e,
Acquaint me with your tricks. Who! when, where, how•
For besides the Jewel which he gave thee:
I have proofs, that will even damme my sister;
And convince thee too.
My dear Lord? be not cruel in your Faith;
What I have said is truth.
Still constant in thy perjury. Mercy
Were tamen•sle then. Thou shalt dye
Like an heroyique Whore: a 〈◊〉 Martyr
To thy concealed lover. Appear ho!
Here my she goat! These men are full and fresh;
But if they cannot tire ye out: I will
Procure ye some of larger Thighs; that feed
On the vnctious Lhasis, and the Persian-Crab.
Or bring the riotous Horse, and the Town Bull
To drowned ye in the act. Take her aside,
And agree who shall begin.
Stay, stay, O my Husband, my dearest Lord?
Will you permit such cruelty against
Your own Wife. She, that hath so often slept
Within your Bosom. O speak? doe you want
The natural touch• stay, stay, I will confes't.
Stay, I'm of too easy, too soft a Soul.
My Heartstrings (sure) are made of silk: and it is
A subtle whore, she knows it well enough.
But come, be brief. Charm me not with stories
Of my former love between vs.
I see thee as thou art, and thou appear'st
Like an entire, proportionable Boyle.
Why speak thou not?
Sorrow was ever slow of v•terence,
And I doe tremble still. I knew the time,
My duty hath bin held in more regard
Then now it is. All former interest
Is quit forgot.
Mark, did not I suspect, she would begin
Her Charms again. Away with her.
O stay, now, now, I will reveal all.
Be nimble then: and tell me punctual truth,
For my revenge is honest, and would not
Willingly mistake, when it shall strike.
It is true, your Sster's ravished by the Duke.
Which fatal truth, this morning I received
From her own mouth, But if I ere did break
My Marriage vows, or think unlawfully;
Then may I loose my interest in Heaven.
My duty, and my love remain still yours,
And this constancy deserves some kindness.
Therefore, if it is decreed that I must dye:
Let me dye a modest death. Expose not
Your poor wife, unto the cruelty
Of Ravishers.
What think ye sir?
My thoughts continue in the former sense:
I have a chaste, and virtuous wife; however
You desired assurance from a trial
So unkind as this.
Still me thinks that Jewel which he gave her,
Procured the same requital that my Sister made.
But let it pass. I doe conjure ye both,
(As you've bin Soldiers) to keep your Tongues,
A safe distance from your Ears, Let not words
Disperse what you have heard. It is external
Reputation that keeps some Men from sin.
Our faults once known, we doe neglect to mend:
Since Reputation suffers still: for that
Admits of help, but it is never cured.
And so the fatal ears tweene Man, and Wife,
If secret kept, dissension falls asleep.
But if once known to Fame; Fame talks so loud
She wakes it again. Your silence Signiors,
Shall challenge much from my requital.
Besides our obligations to your worth,
Even both our honours would impose it
As a virtue, not a trouble. We are
Your humble servants.
I will deserve you for my friends. Rise—
You must be cleared by a stricter trial:
'Till when I doe neglect the large Charter
Of Husbands o'er their Wives: and command ye
As a Judge th'offendor. Hence, and become
My Prisoner in your Closet. Take heed,
No curiosity in fear make you,
To pry in my designs.
I doe obey ye cheerfully.
O my heart! shall my industry, and hopes
Find this period? My sufferance is tired.
It is an old inconstancy in Fate,
Soon to erect, and soon to ruinate.
FOREST, No, no, my Stars, it is too much to bear,
Though I were stomached like an Ostrich,
Yet could I not digest such hard dealing.
My Wife defiled, Corsa ravished. The Count
Abused where satisfaction is exempt
By Nature. My self proscribed to suffer
By the cheap valour of obscure Villains.
Would I had trod the humble path, and made
My industry less ambitious. The Shrub
Sccurelie grows. The tallest Tree, stands
Most in the wind. And thus we distinguish
The Noble from the base: the Noble find
Their lives, and deaths still trouble some:
But humility doth sleep, whilst the storm
Grows horse with scolding My Gall o'reflowes my heart:
And drowns propitious Thoughts. I will be just
Yet cruel too. The darkness of the Night
Is thick. I feel as I grope for way—
Stay—That sickly light from her chamber breaks.
Minion l••e begin with you.
Sing gentle youth; who knows if I shall live
Timploy thy voice again.
Boy. Weep no more for what is past
For Time in motion makes such hast
He hath no leisure to descry
Those errors which he passes by.
If we consider Accident,
And how repugnant unto sense,
It pays desert with bad event:
We shall disparedge Providence.
This is your Dirge,
Ho! who is there?
Tic. I. Dismiss that trisle hence, and shut
The door.
Farewell Youth! Get hee to bed.
But whore's the wriggled Hag; the incestuous lump
Of heate? where is she, speak?
Alas Sir, who doe you mean?
Why she that Gossips with the Devils Damme,
The subtle Bawd, your Woman. O Sister! Corsa kneels.
I have heard all.—Nay doe not work distinction thus.
Kneel not to me; you are my Patrons wife.
But yet where obligation is endeared;
There Injury condemns it self. Can you
Surui•e a wrong so eminent: a wrong
Committed' against your Husband, and my Patron?
O Sir! I hope if you have heard the truth:
You will conclude it as a rape in the Duke;
And no adultery in me.
How, a rape! o weak, and immodest shift,
Were Aretine alive; or had I brought
A Crew of Midwives here: whose obscene art
Might warrant the distinction good;
Although the cause did blush, to own th'effect;
Yet thy appeal might stand: but here are none.
If compulsion doth insist, until
Enforcement breed delight, we cannot say,
The female suffers. Acceptance at the last,
Disparageth the not consenting at the first:
Calls her d•niall, her unskilfulness;
And not a virtuous frost in the blood.
Come, sit thee down.—Or if ye mean to pray,
Kneel, and be nimble in devotion.
That art to dye.
My Noble Brother!
Doe not fright my sufferance: use me kindly
With your tongue, and looks: I am already
Reconciled to Heaven; and would perhaps
Consent to your design.
Blessed speech! thou shalt prescribe my gesture
And my Phrase.
It were not unnatural in me, to wish
For life• yet minding what constructions
The world may make of my sinister chance—
I there's the point. The giddy multitude
Have neither skill, nor leisure to c•nuince
Supposition, with Arguments of strength
And charity. Their quick censure, brings such
Eff•ct, as Spectacles, when used in hast;
Which then •o rather aggravate the shape:
Then give• distinction of the form. Who, who,
Would live to be an Argument for them?
Doe ye conclude then, that I must now dye?
Why first not apt, and pregnant to your sense,
It should be so?
Ere I take my last leave of my kind Lord.
Ceremonious form, doth oft, so long
Delay our journey; till it prove too late
To reach our home. It is a long way to Heaven.
We must make hast. Nay, if your courage fail
Before it comes unto the test: I shall
Prepare to be unkind. Grimm, black fancy
Could you endure to see your Lord; defiled,
Polluted as you are? That kind Patron
To all our family; whose constant love
Is warranted by Time; that best can judge
Of constancy. Who took you to his bed;
Upon conditions cheap, and dangerous
To his own estate.
Sir, speak no more: but use me as you please;
I will obey in all.
Come, stretch down your Arm: and permit this Scarf
To fastne it to the Chair. Then veil your Eyes.
We must not trust a Woman's valour so—
Oh, oh, oh.
The torture's past. Thy wrist waynes are cut, Here
In this Basin bleed: till dryness make them curl
Like Lute-strings in the fire—
Commend me to my dearest Lord. I am
His humble sacrifice. He will not be more
Unwilling to grant atonement: then I
Have been to need it. The Fates give others
Expiation: which now they want themselves.
I speak too loud. For who dares chide with them
That may employ Thunder.
Her beauty'gins to wither. She distills
Like to a Rose. O could I separate
The blood defiled from what is pure: I would
Shed that; then restrain the current, know!
(Unskilful Nature) If operation
Should long subsist in such gross mixture: Men,
Would be Devils here they lived in Hell.
I come Celestial Quire!—
Ecstasy! through weakness in expense of blood!
Dear sister! Disturb not your last Minutes.
I must ascend—
How! would you enter Heaven; with fetters on
Your Soul? clogged with these mortal Limbs. Sit down,
Expire in peace.
O my Brother! whilst I am yet humane,
Let me feel some interest in your blood.
What fault of mine deserves impediments
In my last journey? If my Lord were here
He would have seen me used with mercy.
Sweet Soul! these, are but mistakes of weake' ness.
Will not my Lord be merciful; to me,
And to my memory.
Sit still. I bring no negative reply.
Thy worth shall shine in such a Character:
That being dead; he needs must woo thy Ghost.
And will Posterity consent, that I
Abide in List; with those of modest fame?
That Astrologer; who spies thee first
Within a Star: must not find thee billeted
Near to Venus. Such error in his Act;
Would make me wreath his Body into Cords.
And with prolix strength draw the dull Caitiff,
Through his slender Optic.
Oh, oh, oh—
A Convulsion in her Arteries!
Mercy Heaven!
Hark!
As she ascends, the Spheres doe welcome her,
With their own Music.—Her Soul is gone!
Ho? whether is it gone? O vast suspense!
Madness succeeds inquiry. Fools of Nature!
What Ancestor (that died long since) hath brought
Vs news of his abode! or told vs how
They use him in the other world? O this
Wilde mystery so much concerns Man:
That we would willingly dismiss suspense
With Eiesight not with consequence.
For he that sees through Faith, but flatters doubt.
Faith's a Perspective; through whose narrow lane;
Little things (far of) seem so much too great,
Too near: that what was first unknown is more
Estranged from knowledge, then it was before.
Yet by the rules of lawful notion: It
Goes well with her: for she was ever given
To prayer: superstitious in humility:
And even unthrifty in her charity.
She held her Virtues in such high extremes,
That her Divinity was troublesome.
Grew from a Saint, a holy Cynic. Sleep here:
A sacri•ice to thy wronged Lord: Till I
(Thy Pries't) become an Executioner
To him; who was thy cruel Ravisher.
Doth she insist in censure of the act
With such a sterne impatience, and dislike?
Even so (Sir) my intelligence imports.
For since her Woman, was dismissed: she sent
A Messenger unto Lucca; to urge,
Her Lords return: whom (by a laboured consequence)
I doe expect within this Hour. He will choose
To travail in the Night for privacy.
And I have sent to stay him there: until
A new Commission order his return.
Most royal Sir, you then may guess what frights
Such opposition in these messages
Will nourish in his Heart. And being young,
He cannot feed on doubts. He will rather think
His interest in you his privilege to err:
So, slight your Mandate, and come home,
To settle his suspense.
Remorse doth cherish danger! Let me be safe,
Sec•re me in thy wholesome Art. I would
Express my self without a Tongue—
My gracious Lord; my apprehension lies
Not in my Ears but in my Brain. I can
Conceive without the noise of words. It shows
Apparent to my intellect: the Count
Presuming on that free address, he still
Hath had unto your person: will hither bring
Corsa, and Forest to show the shape,
And quality, of his new sufferance.
Be you within your bed, to free you from
The worlds suspicion: whilst I doe place
Behind the Gallery door (which leads unto
Your Closet Chapel) such trusty spirits,
As shall dare to thrust their weapons home.
O quintessence of Soul. I will devote
My actions wholly to thy use. Good night.
May slumber cease upon your toyall Eyes
With gentle closure. Know, poor Forest!
The bag that holds my Gall is so immense,
That when I steep thee in it thou art drowned.
Castruchio; I have better thought upon it.
My gracious Lord.
I would not have thee hurt my Boy: use him
Kindly for my sake.
Shall I not strike him here; between the Ribs?
Not for the world. Thou dost not know his Soul.
He's of so soft, so sweet a property,
That he enchants where he is known. Besides,
I find I am so powerful o'er his youth:
That I shall soon extirpate from his memory
The wrong I did his Wife, and him. As for
Forest: his experience is of growth
Too stubborn, of practise stiff; and will not
Be remoo'd from his revenge, by strength of words.
Therefore, let him no mercy feel: but let;
My Boy be gently used for my sake. Farewell—
This is a silly kind of love!
But let me think—So to contrive this plot:
That Lothario may destroy Forest,
And him to make his silence safe! humh—
No; it must not be—
My royal Lord!
Lucio (my Boy) is not proscribed. Take heed
Castruchio! If thou dost extend thy hand:
In motion, boisterous, and rough to him;
Thou dost infect all thy other kindness:
And I shall see thee as a Cocatrice:
That will enforce my Optick-nerues to shrink,
And pull my Eyes into my skull. Look to it.
Most gracious Sir, were his person bulwark'd
With the Alps: were he hidden in•s own fear;
He could not be more safe, then you have made him.
Once more then good Night.
A plague upon this turdy love. Such thoughts
When first your Blood did make your Veins to swell
(Like Bridges'ore your flesh) had prevented
My employment. Softly, softly.
Fear, and suspicion ever walk on Eggs.
Leave here the Light, and go to Bed.
Break op the door, break op the door.
Ho! who counsels so unlawfully?
O Forest! the fatal Hour is come
Ring out your Bells, until they wake the dead.
Let the Drum murmur in a •able Bag.
Reverse your Muskets, and trail your stubborn Pikes
In slimy-Channels. Let Trumpets groan,
And the shrill Phiph be hoarse. The fatal Hour,
Is come.
Why, what's the matter Sir?
O my wife! by this she did entreat me
Suddenly, (upon some urgent cause)
To haste from Lucca to her: Just now;
I lighted from my Horse, entered her Chamber:
And found her newly murdered in her Chair.
My Servants say that my arrival there,
Did just succeed your departure from her.
Dismiss your Servants, and you shall know all.
Hence, and expect me strait at home.
I pray come hither Sir.—Doe you dislike
That justice which deprived your Wife of breath?
Doest thou call it Justice?
Yes, in the noblest strain: she was defiled.
The royal Goat (the Duke) hath ravished her:
And I (that never could admit excuse
In points of honour) (where ever suspicion
Suffices to condemn) did summon up
My memory: wherein the kind effects,
Of your best love to vs are registered.
And finding you betrayed in your own Fort!
I slit her Wrist-•aynes, and gave perpetual
Liberty, to her polluted Blood.
O Villain! more bloody then the Tiger;
Whose empty Entrails noise, doth (Trumpet like)
Encourage cruelty; Though thou did flight her
As my poor Wife: yet she might well expect
Some mercy, as being thy own sister.
Had she included all propinquity
Of blood; which lawful Marriage keeps known,
Or promiscuous Copulation, makes
Intricate: this bare word (Honour) had bin
Enough, t'haue divorced her from my mercy.
Sweet Lord; doe not mistake your Servant:
Whose kindness thinks his own Sister (when defiled)
Was to base for your use.
A bloody kindness to distinguish so
She was no Adulteress, but enforced. Her thoughts
Were pure: and such a noble sympathy
Indeerd her Soul to mine; that her own Tears,
Might soon have washed away her Bodies stain,
And she again seem clean. Corsa!
O my Wife! my bosom Girl! where art thou?
Speak, no reply? Art thou so much busied
With thy new acquaintance now in Heaven:
That thy poor Lord, may not borrow one word
At parting? Draw, draw ungrateful Monster!
That hast prevented thus our Dialogue.
Sir, cool your spleen! take breath awhile:
And hear me speak.
No false Siren! thou holy Hypocrite!
I know thy tricks too well! Because I am young,
Too soft of heart, and apt to melt
In every flame of my own trivial love;
Therefore thou think to practise on me now
With subtle phrase. Draw, or else thou dy'st.
Come—Let me dye (as she) a sacrifice
To thee my Patron.
A sacrifice to me! O Forest!
Why dost thou multiply thy skill
To thy friends pr•iudice? It is not well,
In troth it is not. Employ thy own heart:
Think upon it thy self. Tic not kindly done:
I should not have used you thus—
O my dear Lord! where did I loose your heart?
I am overcome at these expressions.
I cannot weep much: yet my Eyes are moist.
O my unskilful gratitude! what dire
Mistake, confounds our properties! I killed
A Sister, to secure a Friend. T'was ill,
It was not the right way. A true Roman now,
Would walk aside, and with his own Sword
Dismiss his own Soul: and not permit
Moisture in youthful Eyes, thus to disgrace
The strength of elder love. I cannot weep,
But our divinity supplies vs with
Discreeter ways, to make affection known;
Enough. I will prefix but one short Hour,
To think upon it. Here sir. Sheath your good sword,
Till revenge prove ripe. And I conjure
By all my Sisters love to follow me:
In whose behalf, your instice may employ
It self. Which done, you shall behold my Heart
Without a Perspective.
If it concerns her; by whom thou dost
Conjure my service, I'm bound to follow thee.
What hoe!
My Lord.
Come Minion, come along with vs. You walk
Unto the Barte. If trial find thee false;
Thou shalt be scattered into Atoms▪
O my divining Soul▪ Sure my Sister
Is not safe.
Signior Lothario!
Here! Signior Cossimo!
I am here. Speak low. Cousin Castruchio.
I am here too. Why are we scattered thus?
It is in search of Borachio; who fearing
Danger in this action, commits himself
Very tamely to his Heals.
Let him be damned unthought of. Have you heard,
Or seen a Passenger.
No, yet Lothario gives me notice:
Of a noise far off: but you know the length
Of an Asses ear.
Pastes there (say you) who is it?
He echoes by mistake. No body: but
My Cousin says he'll lug the Asses ear,
Speaking of your Man.
The Butchers dog shall save him a labour.
Well Gentlemen, I have intelligence
(By my Boy) that Forest, and the Count,
Are coming hither. Look to it. But let the Count
Be safe. You know his voice Lothario?
Very distinctly.
Well, any Man (but he) that stirs his Tongue,
Enuites his own ruin Give me your Hands
I'll bring ye to a door: through which, if they
Doe pass, it must be over vs.
Leave Forest to my charge for I am
His impediment.
Softly, softly.
Now set the reflex at liberty:
Here let me beg your tarriance: 'till I
Resolve a doubt that most concerns my Heart.
You shall. But doe not execute revenge,
Upon the Duke; till my assent encourage thee.
My actions are confined: Upon, not in
The Bed? Guilt confounds all order, and makes,
Our rest unnatural. Mistress, stand you there.
Ho! from whence that light! who waits within
is it you? what doe you mean
By this uncivil visitation!
I am not so unthrifty of time
To join replies, unto demands, I must
Deprive you of your Soul.
How? Is this Language lawful, unto me
Thy Sovereign Prince. Did not high-prouidence,
Treble the assurance of my safety:
By Guards invisible, when I was first
Predestinate to this supreme function?
And dare thou tempt the strength of Heaven?
I know to were a profane curiosity
In me, to question the prerogatives
Of a free Prince. For Ignorance, and a dull,
Easy faith; must flatter bondage still.
Or Liberty (th'eldest Child of Nature)
Confounds predominance, by suing for
Equality amongst the Sons of Men:
And so revokes a Chaos.
Which soon returns: unless distinction
Persuade thee fix my Royalty, aboue
Thy reach: that art my natural Subject.
Enough false Sir. Warm not the ayre with words.
Be still, or I conclude ye in a trice,
And now requite the Leisure, I permit
For prayer: by a true reply to what
I shall demand.
I will.
Look on your opposite.
Did you ever make her an Adulteress?
Speak truth, so come your Soul to Heaven.
Never. So come my Soul to Heaven, as I
Speak truth.
O Sir?
Take heed the Periurer hath little hope
On the last day, to hide himself in the Crowd.
He is a sinner much too eminent.
But what meant that Jewel which you gave her;
And which she concealed; till its own lustre
Did betray it?
I gave it to disguise the cause, for which
I sent the other unto Corsa.
That name will prick my fury on: although
I strive to be propitious.
I know Luinna, thou art merciful:
Forgive me gentle Girl. It was the first
Bargain we did make in the Church, to Share
In sufferance.
And it is my duty Sir, to be most prompt
In the observance.
My Lord!
A rude summons, that calls me as a Judge,
To censure on the errors of my Prince.
What, Is he there too? O killing object!
Behold (young Lord) the cruel Ravisher.
Whom Time himself shall never parallel,
Though he survey his old Records, and scratch
His reverend Head to waken memory.
O horror! furnish vs (sweet Heaven) with some
Instinct. Inspire remorse: or we accuse
Thy skilfulnesse to predestine vs a Prince:
Murdering, whom thou did anoint our Sovereign.
My heart swells. I'm full of grief, and danger.
Some Iron Hoops to help my Ribs, or I shall burst.
The cause deserves great alteration.
More then mortality can see, and yet
Be safe. I wonder Heaven takes so little
Notice of it. I am not singed to death
With Lightning Like the Dorr: nor murdered through
The Ear with thunder; like a Batt. O Lucio!
Mind not my former love: but strike, until
I groan my last.
Forest sheath thy sword. It must not be.
He was our Royal Master once, and might
In modesty compare himself; with all
But Princes; whom Fame reserues as Patterns,
For my sake sheath your Sword.
O I shall survive my Royal Charter!
My creature is more beautiful then I:
More wealthy in his love.
For my own part, I will annihilate
My self: for should I live, I should grow mad.
But I am bound to care for you (my Lord)
Take heed! I know the tricks of Majesty.
They think they cannot be secure after
Doing ill; but by doing worse: that is,
By killing quite, whom erst they did but wound.
And that's the surgery, which I desire.
I will endure all. O my Lord, my Lord;
I will not bid Posterity tell tales: nor charge
Historians to insert in Annals;
On such a Night a great Italian. Duke,
Ravished his Creature Lucio's Wife: Sister
To Forest, his active Councellor.
Lucio, composed of such an humble love:
That to secure his Masters feet, would spread.
And scatter all his Limbs, for him to walk upon.
And Forest, whose industry, and care
Outwatch'd Leane-vigilance, 'till she grew mad.
But come, Let's leave him to contrive our deaths.
My Heart so fills my mouth, I cannot speak.
Lucio stay, Forest stay awhile.
Leave me not thus anatomized with breath.
Dissect me really with your good Swords.
Behold my Breast, take out my Heart: and if
You find your figures there, then use my Fame
With Mercy.
Forest come away.
Make hast Luinna.
I am waked out of a strange amazement.
Hide me swelling Hills! rough, and scabbed Rocks,
Ye Quarrles cleave, and suck me in, then join
Again. Would it not make a Patriarch mad?
O who shall bribe the Sun, that in the day
Of general accounts: he may avouch
He never saw me here. Ho! false Memory!
I forgot to tell 'em of Castruchio.
Tic best to o'retake 'em. I cannot guess
Which way they went.
Hell, and the Pillory take such dull Ears.
It cannot be, but they have passed the Cloisters,
And ever this, with help of private Keys,
Entered the Dukes Bedchamber.
Those were Authors of that noise, I spoke of.
The very same. A pox upon demurs.
Will you lead the way, that we may hearken
If they be there, or no.
If I should come too late?—
That's none of the Counts voice. Have at ye sir;
O, O, O, I am surprised in my own snare.
It is Forest sure. Let's make safe work
Kill Lothario, lay him by him, and depart,
A match.
O Villains, O, O, O.
What noise is that?
Another Forest.
My Royal Master bleeding on the Ground:
O murderous Villains:
Murder, murder. Help! oh help?
The Duke my Sovereign• sla•e, and Lucio
Bleeding at his feet. Villain take this thrust
At my own prejudice.
I am foiled by a base hand.
Fly Cosime, fly.
Some comfort yet remains: in that I am,
Proscribed to share in thy fate, though it be bad.
I loose much blood. O trivial fortitude,
False Sinews, doe you begin to shrink?
Lucio, Let my Soul, cary your pardon
With her unto Heaven; and yours Forest.
This strangeme was mine, but the success,
Was much against my will.
Sir, I forgive you all.
Nay let vs join Hands.—We doe forgive
Each other, and the World. The like mercy
May Heaven bestow on vs.
Amen, Amen.
Amen, Amen.
There his heartstrings broke. Lucio (my Patron)
Already Chapf•lne to: that sight deserves a Tear:
Though I should stab my Eyes to warrant it.
Bring the slaves in, their deeds will soon convince
Their faint denial, where did you leave 'em Lady?
Here, here, O my Lord, my Lord.
I have not breath enough to comfort thee.
With words, mercy Heaven.
O my Lord? my Husband He's dead, he's dead.
Hold the Lady there: O dire spectacle.
the Duke, Lucio, Forest, and Lothario
Lye here breathless. I did suspect some black
Conspiracy. Which made me haunt them two
Unto the Palace, but I did loose 'em
By the Chapel stairs; bloody dogs, what Devil
Prompted thee to this action.
I hope, I'ue not so much Blood left, as will preserve
Me for an answer.
I feel my end to near.
Take em away, and close their wounds, though there
Be some mercy shown, by thus deferring
That reward which your black souls shall receive
In Hell. Yet know the Law will here on Earth
Provide such tortures as shall make your deaths
Exemplary to all succeeding times.—
Gentlemen, your silence may be excused.
Where, theres so much cause of admiration.
Some help transfer the dead from hence, others
Call up the Councellors of state.
So intricate is Heavens revenge against lust.
The righteous suffer here, with the unjust.

THis puzzles my belief: the sickly Moon
Hath not yet twice expired her usual 〈◊〉
Since you did mingle Souls, and can 〈◊〉
That she so soon recoils from grac•
Harmonious quiet of your bed?
My Dear
Meruolle she is lost: As well may I
Collect the scattered winds into a bag,
Or from the watery surface scrape the gilt
Reflections of the Sun, as bring her heart
Within the quiet list of wives that will
Obey and love.
Can the Duke (her Uncle)
Give an encouragement to her revolt,
Maintain the females Charter against the male?
Him, and his supreme title she still 〈◊〉
To justify the glory of her birth,
And then recites the Vilages and wealth,
She brought to me for dowre, in parallel
With what I formerly possessed, she doth
Affront my memory with stories of
My lean and niggard fate, and urging then
Her vast supplies, doth challenge leave to call
Her pride and rigour just.
This grief is of
Sad quality!
The heart hangs heavy on
The strings, when it alone contains the cause
And knowledge of its weight: for troubled winds
In their dispersion loose their strength; so griefs,
Whilst they are reueal'd, diminish from themselves.
But the calamities, that doe perplex
The Nuptial bed, are of a property
Recluse, and must be hidden even from friends:
For on such secrets Fame doth feed with fierce,
And meagre appetite▪ and as swift Fame
Doth travail with them, they increase. So much
Commerce I have with humane Arts, that I
Can steep my Gall in my own tears; and make
That salt which she intended bitter; Show
Her crime to spring, not from poisoned malice,
But from the feminine mistakes of wit:
For modern Courts now preach, wit doth reside
In Ladies subtle riots, and their pride.
Behold your brother (sir) whose safe return,
This morn I mentioned to your ear—
Thy growth
Hath so orereach'd my sight, that I'm estranged
To my best blood: and but, thy figure in
My heart I wear (by which my memory's
Informed) I should not know I had thee here—
I reckon this the chief delight I ha•e
Received on Earth. And (sir) your love is of
Such sovereign quality, a little soon
Will overcharge my sense. Give but a part
To me, the rest confer upon my friends—
Who, though in witherd habits, doe deserve,
Society with Kings: for never yet,
Did bolder Soldiers listne to the Drum.
Gentlemen, ye shall enrich my knowledge—
Noble Signior, unprofitable love
Is all our wealth—
But we'll contrive our selves
For your best use.—
I'ue said, consider them
Within; their weeds are overgrown and cheap.
Brother (how ere wise fate may answer it)
Me thinks, these your own robes are not of the right
Tyrian die; nor hath the rich weight of your
Tall Plume the Ostrich robed of both her wings.
Even thus (sir) poor, and with small victory
Am I returned from our cast Troops. Our pay
Rests in Arrears, and Pisa's lost: But you
(I hear) have fond a Jewel, that contains
All price and lustre; and you doe wear it
In your bosom: (a noble wife) whose birth
And beauty, are alike unvalued as
Her dowre. This I encountered on
The Lips of Fame; and I made haste to share
In your success, and put your bounty to
The test.
Florello, I have lost my sleep.
Things differ much from the sincerity
Of their first growth: Alteza hath forgot
Th'allegiance of a wife, she doth practise
How with her riot to impoverish States,
And by her lofty pride, to justify
The immortality of flesh: This Theme
Is sad; but I will give you cause t'expect
The utmost strength and power of my relief.
You teach my feeble wants a confidence.
If you a while obscure your self (for fear
Your poverty increase her scorn) you shall
Perform a rational request. Our young
Fair Sister, is concealed for the same cause.
Your mention doth anticipate my love.
Is our fair Sister well?
She doth enjoy
Rare beauty, and much health.
I hear your wife.
You and your friends, move back, and be not seen.
Try Signior Allidore, Antonio's son:
Vtruuio, or the rich Pirracco.
Gritalin, or old Contarini of
Placentia—
Madam, your husband hath
Protested against your credit, even to these.
Slave, go force an answer more delightful.
I obey you Madam.
Is it come to this?
I'll be a crooked Spinster first, and with
My spittle and my flax procure my bread.
What is the cause my Princess thus delight•
In frowns? Anger sits on her brow like age.
Hence, I see thee, and my eyes shrink into
My skull: the Rauen's not so ominous and black.
Yet urge the cause (my Love) why your
Defiance is so violent and loud?
A Millainois showed me to day for sale,
Bright and spacious Jewels; but in the dark,
Your pusill malice hath betrayed my faith,
With Merchants. You have now my credit wrought
So low, and cheap; I cannot stand deposd
For th'triuiall loan of forty thousand crowns.
I would survey a list of all your wants,
That I may so have power to hasten the
Redress: Doe you dislike your properties
Of house, your Vestments, or service of your
Table; Give but a name unto thy wish?
I would have my Orchard—paved with Aggats.
O, and your garden walls raised high, t'hedge in
Paraquetos, and th'rhetoricall Dawe?
Thou hast a rude heart, and a blistered tongue!
Well, the first day of your conjunction Sir,
I little thought you would have used her thus.
Charintha's become her Sisters Pupil.
And I perceive a masculine itch beneath
Her left eye; she longs to taste man.
Come Love,
Be gentle as thy bridal smiles: for by
Thy self I swear, my speech did purpose nought▪
To tempt thy spleen. Lend me thy melting hand!
There— it is to reach back the heart I gave ye—
You spirits that secure the property
Of humane love, be still official here!
Why should we not for ever thus remain,
Incorporate, and conjoined. Tic sympathy,
And love, that gives the world continuance
And life. Each species Love preserves. Tic love
That makes th'eternall Wisdom thus forbear
The silly crimes of dull humanity:
And suffers vs, like each delighted fly,
To play the trivial wantons in his eye.
You preach of love, but your obedience would
More pleasure me.
This argues thy revolt!
And is a stratagem against nature.
Thou would usurp the Charter of the male,
Tic my confession, that thy dowre was vast
And opulent, and such as may support
Thy titles, and thy birth, with all the pride
And cunning of magnificence. Let my
Sincere phrase instruct thy heart. Resume
The blushes of thy youth; with timorous
Modesty behave thy gesture and thy tongue,
And then, thou shalt stand up exemplary
To all triumphant Courts: the envy of
The Eastern Queens: th'Astrologers mistake,
Who shall direct their Optics unto thee,
As to a new and unknown Star.
Sister!—
The small Musicians of the air (whom Queen•
With mimic falconry doe perch upon
Their fists) shall be thy food. Thy maids shall eat
Young Pelicans, and Squirrels hearts.
Exc'lent!
Thy beuiridge shall be prophetic, and
Divine; for thou shalt drink that sovereign dew,
That hangs upon the frighted Lilies cheek,
And brewed with Sirens tears, such as they shed
In real obsequies.
O bounteous Sir!—
The soft entraile of the Persian worm, th'Ermines
Palefur, shall cloth thy limbs.
More precious still!
Those gums and spices which the Arabian bird,
Collects to make her tragic piles, shall be
Thy winter fuel▪
Pretty Sir, proceed!
Thou shalt have Marmosets, and Dwarfs, the male
And female too, to procreate in thy house;
That thy delights may ever be renewed.
Thy Jewels shall increase, as if the loved
Indies were thy Quarry. Th'Almightie Sun
Shall rise, and see a nobler day break from
Thy Cabinet, then yet the illustrious East
Ere knew.
But how will you perform these hopes?
The miracle, and power, doe both consist,
In my large wealth.
Death on my Tribe! Your wealth?
I, my sweet Love.
Your wealth?
This iteration
Scarce will delight, if it be negative.
Can thou persist in such accursed schism?
Did you not then intend, when you endowed
Me with your wealth, that I should call it mine?
By heaven not I. I forfeited the love
O'th'great Duke (my Uncle) to marry thee;
That were a thing shrunk from thy fate, and lost
Unto the lips and eyes of men; but yet
In most assured hope, that thou would prove,
An humble and obedient husband.
You are more impudent, then the Basilisk,
Who stares in the blessed face of man, until
He kill him with his eyes.
Hear Altamont!
For I will give solemnity unto
A vow, that shall for evermore, divide
Thee from my bed—
Dear Madam hold! Each sense
Of mine doth blush, that can perceive, your wild,
Rebellious wrath. Hath not the Church named him
Your husband, and your Lord?
M'opinions of
The Church, I'll tell to'th Conclave, not to you—
Is this the help, Divinity gave man?
Snuff the Moon, she burns dim. The Spheres are now
Ill tuned, and aged nature backward reels.
Thy anger's vain. Here I doe banish thee
My bed: And we will never more embrace.
Rebellious fiend.
I now divide my house:
This side is mine, with the dimensions that
Dependence have on this square frame: for here
My family and I will rule. That side
You, and your meagre ragged train possess.
Thou may henceforth my neighbour, but no more
My husband be. Charintha, come away—
I must pursue, lest she her anger make
Too loud, so we inuit the public scorn.
Is not thy brothers wife a pure tame hen?
How dost thou like her noise?
Were she but mine,
I'd teach her keep a noise too after death.
How so?
I'd strip her skin o'er her ears and
Make a drum on it.
She was borne in a storm!
And begot sure with the Boeswayns whistle.
Meruolle, you have named Charintha,
As a precious Virgin, of nature most
Remiss, a quiet tongue, and such a heart,
As might become an able sacrifice,
T'expiate the whole world?
This I esteemed
My justice on her merits, but it seems
Her Sisters documents ore rule her now.
Her dowry is of ample rate, and may
Deserve the chief of our Italian youth.
What's Dandalo, that sues to her for love?
Dandalo, the Count of Millaine? A thing
Co•post of spicery and starch! Nature
Contrived him in her sleep. If's ignorance
Might answer for his sins; he would account
Amongst his wealth, the land he has in Heaven.
I heard you say, she never saw him yet.
Never Sir: He woos her by his letters.
She desiring a personal survey
Ere prosecution of the suit, he sent
Her word, he'd mike's address by stealth; but we
Expect him not ere'th'birth of the next Moon.
Will his arrival be so long delayed?—
Brother! — How thrives your patience ore your wife?
Some Philosophic hope remains: the storm
Can't last, because it is still more violent.
Sh'ath tan Caroch for the Palace, and means
Strait to disgrace me to the Duke
By her complaints.
Her veins oreflow with Gall!
Florello, I desire thou'lt not appear
Before her eye, until thy habit's changed.
My present power sums but a thousand crowns,
Which I have brought, and prostrate to thy use—
Sir it is fit your blessings were increased;
And that your wife had read your worth.
My Art betrays my hopes, or I have found
A remedy to cure her pride: your help
Meruolle, I must crave, and with swift speed:
Rossa, Molard, (friends to my Soul and Brain)
Advance your subtle Eyes! The sovereign mine
Behold, that makes the solemn Patriarch dance,
And the anointed King to skip, as doth
His limber Dwarf.
Yellow as foot of Kite!
Shall we be tender natured, and divide?
This is the portion will procure vs all
High dignity and place. Rossa, you must
Find cause to number these— Go, ransom out
Our captive weeds, and the rich habit I
From Pisa brought: whilst you (Mollard) with the
Assistance of these few—procure vs fit
Materials to adorn, and put in bright
Aspect our Corps. Enquire for Pearls: Stones of
The cunningest soil, we will like them, and disburse.
Is there some aged vessel now asleep
In the Dock, that will pay for her calking?
Florello, must we stop the public leaks?
Ere long we shall be great, be able to
Advance with smiles, and with our frowns destroy.
You Rossa, I'll create a Magistrate.
Go practise the austeere Cough. Pale delinquents
Thou shalt learn to ieere, and to sleep ore men
Condemned.
The calling (Sir) I doe vouchsafe.
Thou (my Molard) shalt rule in Villages,
Grow popular, and mistake the Laws. Thou shalt
Delight in the Calendar: the Rubricke days
Thou shalt observe, and then destroy thy beef.
Whilst thy dull earthy Tenants feed until
They smell.
My Launcepresado then shall sop
His Crust in Cider and in wine!
And my
Dread Corporal shall sin no more for Leekes,
His Girdle and his socks he shall vnpawne.
The solitary Hostess shall no more
Boyle the Carrion meat that she must trust,
In her own tears; Nor with a Requiem bring
The service up, as if it were the Haunch
Of her dead Husband.
I am entire flame!
The Geographicke Captain shall no more
Study the Town Map, that's dark walks may be
Contrived through slender Allies and through Lanes,
To scope his hungry Creditors abroad.
Thy Province is Child, thy Father
Was a Rabbi!
And thy Aunt a Sybill!
These are the victories of wit: by wit
We must achieve our hopes; which to refine
And purify, with paces doubled let's
Descend a Marble vault, there taste the rich
Legitimate blood of the mighty Grape.
Tic precious as the milk of Queens; such as
Would teach dull Saturn laugh. It magnifies
The heart, and makes the agile spirits dance,
It drownds all thoughts adulterate and sad;
Inspires the Prophet, makes the Poet glad.
I Have received a mandate from the Duke,
That will (I fear) increase her insolence.
Like an old Tyrant he bestows his threats;
As if his anger did obey his will,
Not justice, nor the Laws.
Does your wife know
This preparation you have made to cure
Her haughtiness?
All is discovered to
Her ear: the news hath taught her boyle her heart
In her own blood. She now weeps vinegar;
Boasts of revenge, as if the Thunder were
Her own.
It were fit your pretty Agent here,
Received instructions how to shape her garb
And port, just as th'imployment doth require.
Her knowledge is already satisfied.
Alteza's threats shall only move her scorn.
I will perform my best in your behalf▪
But I doe fear I am not valiant Sir.
O, you! that call your sins your duty, that
Obey your Ladies riots out o'zeale!—
Signior!—
Her honours spittle you preserve
As a Restorative for your salt itch
I beseech ye—
You third in Bracelets too,
The Pearls that drop from her authentic nose.
What mean you Sir?
To cleave you from the scalp
Unto the twist: to make nine skittles of
Your by•es, and wind your heratstrings about my thumb—
O mercy Sir! So rotten are my Limbs
That when you stretch your Cheeks and blow on me,
I strait am scattered into sand—
Coward!
Creep strait into my Houreglasse then, and there
Eternally distinguish fatal time—
What slave disturbs the quiet of my Ear?
Ne'er look Sir! I serve my Lady; and I
Doe scorn to yield—
Do ye bristle Porcupine?—
Take heed!— I have the malady of France—
Stay Altamont! withdraw thy violence!
If thou disorderst but a hair, that doth
Belong to th'Eyebrow of my meanest Groom,
I will proclaim my superiority
And rule i'th'Streets.
Hell cannot miss thee long!
Insult beneath thy own low Roof! This part
O'th'House doth call me sovereign
Retire!
Is that the Piece you have so magnified,
She you boast of for your pastime Royal?
She clips the grey and shivered wings of Time
to make him slow; that our embraces like
Succeeding minutes then, may add unto
Their length. Let me engender on thy lips—
So our progeny may still be kisses—
A meek and gentle heate, whilst thus we bill
We imitate the sober lust of Doves—
That kiss (Sir) was so powerful and moist,
That you have robbed my Lips of all their wealth!
Take back thy wealth again! —
Are ye so hot? —
Thy Lips are thin and lank (Alteza) as
The Lids that close thine Eyes. Hers gently swell
Like Eastern fruit, and are more soft then is
The fleecy Air that clothes the Infant Morn.
Pray a word! Is there in this Pageantry
Ought like to truth? Discover your intent!
I'll make my anger equal unto thine,
And my revenge aboue them both. This bright
Auspicious Maid shall govern in my bed.
She is my Concubine: the Off spring of
Her womb shall triumph here, maugre thy sight:
Whilst envy does consume thy flesh until
Thy body lighter grow then thy loose mind.
How well my Stars behave their influence?
Meruolle, go! my Mistress guide unto
Those lodgings that oreuiew the Garden mount.
If you retard your presence whilst the Sun
(In's race) fill up one Hour, you'll find before
Your next review, that grief hath made me old,
And I shall look more like a Matron then
A Bride; so much your absence mortifies.
Thou art to every sense I have, a Spell.
Conduct her strait (Meruolle) to some Throne!
Then are the vows, the Ecclesiastic rites
With which the zealous Priest obliged vs to
Peculiar heate, to abstinence from change,
And various love, quite cancelled by your lust?
Accuse thy pride!
Thou art a perjured man!
Go, thou art as light as feathers, or the Air,
were but an Atom individual placed
With thee in balance even, t'would hoes thee up
To th'Cloudes.
Thy breath is fulsome as that steam
Which Toads when they engender vaporate.
Alteza, bath in penitential tears
Thy leprous heart, or when the Elements
Are mixed and the sad day arrives, that dooms
The world unto eternity of joy,
Or pain, thou shalt (like to a glimmering Lamp)
Be hung upon the sooty walls of Hell.
I smile at thee, and thy thin Arts; like to
Some homely Village Levity, thou doest preach
Of terrors strange, to keep dull faith in awe:
I pray stay; I am not angry Sir.
No?
I practiced all this while how t'indanger
your spleen (Sir) not my own▪ which if my powers
Prove just, I shall, perform ere long.
Niente, send the party in—
More wrath!
A slow device (Sir) but o'my own Brain.
Who art thou?
A keen Guest, invited here—
To what?
To taste—your wives Gammons.
Bold slave! be in thy speech more evident.
I am come to get your children for you.
Do ye want a clearer paraphrase? He is
My servant Sir, my stallion if I please.
A Courtly implement, and much in use
Among Ladies of my growth and Title.
O my cold Blood! My patience will be wrought
So low, that I shall learn t'mike a Heifer.
Since I'm so aptly furnished with delight,
Your Concubine may fearless walk about
The house, and share the wholesome Sun in peace.
Thy tongue I doe neglect: but you (sir) shall
Ere long complain of your mortality:
The minutes you must waste on Earth are few.
This I consider Sir, and therefore make
Such haste to mingle with your wife; that the
Kind world may have some issue from my Loins.
If this prove true, let Babes peace out my Eyes—
Hold Altamont, or else I wound thy heart—
If you advance one inch beyond that rush
I'll amble through the Streets, and blow your Dirge
With the great Horn that grows upon your Brow.
If there be Gall in Heaven, the general Bag
Is opned, and it falls in Showers!
S'light Sir;
I come t'ease the labour of your Body;
And you want courtship to return me thanks.
Hang him Ingrate!
But what hereafter I
Perform, shall be for your good Ladies sake,
And not for yours.
Pray (sir) let's interchange
A little breath: withal (if you consent)
We will put our Swords to a more quiet use—
Now Sir, you power sweet Cassia in my Broth.
My Blood affects to skirmish more
With Ladies then with men. What would you speak?
My true opinion sir concerning you.
I know you doe but countrfeit this lust,
This lawless heate. You purpose not t'abuse
the Charter of my Bed,
Who told ye so?
I read it in your noble feature and
Your looks. You have Religion in your shape.
And can it be, you should so soon commit a crime
So much unwholesome to the Angels sight?
Let me now make a forfeiture of Eyes,
If ever I beheld a man that's more obliged
To Nature for his Limbs: A carnal frame
So full of equal strength I never saw.
The better shaped I am (Sir) the more cause
You'll find, to love the Issue I shall get
Upon your wife.
Doe not belie thy own
True merits and comport! Th'adulterate fire
Did ne'er inflame thy sober heart, I know
Thou scornst to do it.
Not I believe it Sir!
Sir I will do it. Is your Lady fruitful?
I would be loath t'loose my labour on her?
Pestilence! and blood!
Fling a danger from
Thy arm, I'll summon strait (with Trumpet and
with Drum) the world to hear thy infamy—
O fie! You an Italian Sir, and thus
Behave the knowledge of disgrace with loud
And popular dislike?
Nay it becomes
You finely, does it not?
You think because
You're cursed, we will allow you short Horns: I'll graft
Upon your head a pair so tall, they shall
Go near to prick the very Planet (Sir)
Thet ruled at your nativity.
He sleeps.
Signior, go! take down a Cushion, and pray▪
You cannot choose but know the frailty of
The times: the surfeits of the womb, and how
Great Ladies doe relieve their Appetites.
Your own confession of my parts commends
Your wife in her sage choice. There be that sin
With feeble ushers and the witherd Dwarf.
He wants a judgment to consider this.
I merit better looks Sir, that must thrash
All night for ye, and without wages Sir!
Dead as a monument! Let vs leave him!—
Had he the Devil for's Physician chose,
He could ne'er have come by the like Cordial.—
You swelling mountains (that oreuiew the Earth)
Fall now, make me eternally unseen!
Philosophy contract thy meek sage brow:
Let Patience be no more thy Saint. As soon
Give med'cines to the dead, teach statues how
To walk, and angry winds to sleep in the North.
As soon bid empty Lions play with Kids;
And to the shaggy Scythian say, Go weep
As Virgins doe, when they their Loves inter:
The blind and shuffled Elements that first
In Chaos strove, were not so opposite
As this Religious frost unto my heate.
Patience, thou art more fond then teeming wives,
Tamer then sseepe! Divinity which calls
Our anger sin, and courage pride, hath sent
This silly Cherubine on Earth, Patience,
(The Cowards sword) which only doth disarm
Dull sleep, that neither can nor would doe harm.
Florence knows me well: I'm called Sciolto,
I needs must sing my ushers praise: he made
A most discreet election of a man.
Your mercy and your kindness (Lady) thus
Advance my shape; your pleasure was I should
despise your husbands frowns, and I behau'd
My self with terror masculine: but now
We are peculiar and reserved, I know
Humility, a soft and quiet garb;
A distance that shall well become the state
So eminent and rich a beauty claims.
Sir, that we doe expect, and then you shall
Ore take our noble Sense, with newer love.
Our husband is a trifle, such as can
No way disturb your peace or safety here.
Madam, store me with arms and weapons to
Resist his personal assault, and I
Shall need no more protection then my self.
Active and bold! Niente thou hast made
A choice out-parallels the world.
Madam,
See his horse veins: they are large as Conduit pipes;
His Sinews are like Cables.
Las! not mine!
Tic true, that if I like my Opposite,
I have a trick te give an easy fall,
And stand to it stiffly too when I ha'done—
I will assure your Ladyship, the Bawds
Give him good report.
Doe they Niente?
He's great with Ladies of all ages, all Degrees.
Excuse me Sir, they are great by me!
As how Sir?
Madam—They are all wi'child!
How Signior? Is your appetite so strong?
Blame the humorous Planets that orerule
The blood. Ere yet this present Month expires;
(Let's see—I,!) Some three and forty Ladies
(Or there about) will quicken with male Twins.
All of your begetting?
So wise Fame sings.
I will make bold to gather my first fruits—
Stay my pregnant Signior! Our love is not
Yet ripe: there is a larger distance too
Belongs unto our Lips.
How dear Lady?
I am too proud to have my favours soon
and easily conferred. Such smiles are cheap.
I mean to procreate by prescription Sir,
Make my lust as physical as my meals.
Death, I'm Suitor unto Gallons widow!
Madam, I know it not becomes the high
Demeanour of your birth to dance (just like
A Kid) to th'musicke of each wind that blows.
Ere you admit of dalliance I should use
Some industry of Tongue, and flexure of
the pliant Joints, to court and woo consent.
And can your rudeness covet then where your
Safe wit and knowledge warns your abstinence?
Only a little t'recreate the Chine—
Keep back, if you'll continue life. When I
Am pleased to be delighted Sir, I can
command the function of your Limbs.
Madam!
Sister, I come. Throw him to his chamber—
Hast no good book, whose comfortable use
may fill th'expence of time?
What would you read?
Any of the Moderns. Rablays in the praise of
Midwives. Aretine on copulation.
Or th'Odes of Theophile unto his whore.
My Usher in my closet can appoint
Your choice of these.
Think on the frailty of
The flesh; and be not long unmerciful—
Sister! Madam!
Away; I come, I come.
The Millaine Count (my Suitor) is arrived.
Signior Dandolo! Why it is yet a month
Ere he should meet your expectation here.
Tic he Madam, and such a he as must
Be only likened to himself.
More rich,
And gaudie then the East. So liberal too,
That you would think he Natures Steward were.
He gives amongst m• slaves, as if unto
Ambassadors he did cast Donatiues.
Milk him (my Charintha) oft I have preached
Unto thine Ear a sou'raigntie ore man.
Take all he gives, it's princely fashion now.
Could but thy acceptance beggar him,
Thy little wit were ever magnified.
You know I am o'th'wits, I have bin sworn
To beggar Suitors, and ieere my husband.
Which is the Lady that I come to woo?
My name's Charintha—
Present me thy Lips!
I say advance —
You are not understood—
My Lord, I scarcely own desert enough
T'intice this Jewel from your Cabinet.
A Stone, a Stone! the thing grows, I'ue enough—
So free? I am Charintha's Sister Sir—
It may be so. A fine house, fine Town too!
Were Florence mine, I would not give it for
The best winter Seat my father left me.
Tic Sir, th'ambition of my love, that you
Would know me for Charintha's Sister!—
I shall. Rossa, remember it!
My Lord!
I must know her for Charintha's Sister.
Is there no trick in ceremony Sir,
To give your memory a better hint?
Kiss none but thee! A device i'th'blood! but
Princes have one toy or other still, t'make
Their descent known. — There, a Diamond that,
And that a Ruby.—
What means your Lordship?
They are none of mine. I have enough, weare'em—
Your Lordship binds my great acknowledgement.
In the leisure of a wink, he'll give away
An Empire.
I'm Charintha's woman Sir—
Who can help it? Mistress, wilt thou not bid
My servants welcome? They are rich Choughs, th'aue store
Of Villages, and ploughed Earth.
Their judgment is
So kind (Sir) as to know they may command
The house.
We thank your Ladyship.
This is my Parasite, and this my Pimp.
I'ue a Fool, a Dwarf too at home. I made
My iaunt too early by a month, or else
My Train had been enlarged.
They are rarely fixed,
If they import as much as you denominate.
I keep my parasite to cure the dull
Melancholy of State. He does admire
My wit and Beard. He says I cannot sin.
Princes would still be sad out for such worms.
But how (Sir) does your Pimp adhere to use?
He is as pertinent to Lords as lust.
My Fool I keep to laugh at me. My Dwarf
Is for my wife. I doe intend she shall
Affect the Court, and then she'll quickly learn.
To make the Toy useful.
My Lord, be pleased
To walk, and use th'aduantage of the Air.
I'ue Instruments distinct, that take a charge
Of the several quarters of my Frame, My Dwarf
Doth dress me up unto the knees, and when
His stature leaves his reach, young Virgins then
(Th'issue of decayed Barons) do begin
And govern to the Navel. Whilst upwards
Barbers, Painters, and Parasites are used.
But will your Lordship walk and see the spring?
We have a Garden where it ever dwells.
And shall we be delighted and entranced?
We will sacrifice the utmost of our wealth
And love, t'expresse your welcome Sir.
Wilt'I faith.
There's a Sapphire Chain: Tie thy Monkey in it—
Take it; for by this hand I am in haste
And cannot offer twice.
If you should chance
(My honoured Lord) to drop those trifles here,
I would be mannerly, and reach'em up.
I will give thee a Bushel of Seed-Pearle
To embroider thy Petticoat.
This way—
Your Lordship hath forgot to leave notice for
Those Princes in diguise that shall by chance
Demand ye at the gate.
Who does he mean?
A leash of Germane Dukes that walk in Rug.
I should consult with'em'bout subversion
Of a State or two; but I'm not yet at
Leisure.
My Lord, they shall be answered so.
Your hypocrisy wants a little Art.
Your bounty will impoverish vs too soon.
Ye both doe lie, I weave my cunning close.
Fortune, redeem the credit of thy Eyes.
Thou wilt (if thou art partial now and kind)
But wink on me, though to the world you are blind.
THis is the truth, therefore consider now
my Fate. Ho! Sciolto!
What makes he there.
Tic Sciolto, the brute Adulterer,
He whom I lately mentioned in my speech.
A slave more salt then is the Baltic ware,
More hot then hell, a Satire or a Goat.
And shall be still so (Sir) unless your wife
Dismiss her pride, and vouchsafe to cool me.
Devils and death, I'm murderd through the Ear—
Take discipline awhile, Know if there be
A boisterous motion used, I have for each
Of you a round Synamon Plumme, and they
Shall enter your nice stomachs the wrong way—
Though thou were hardy as the Lions race;
And armed with all th'Artillery on Earth,
I durst assault thee as I am; but so
I cannot satisfy Revenge.
Sciolto, now my memory begins
To know you better: for your riots bold
And loud demeanour in this City hath
Been long observed. I wonder much y'imploy
Your precious minutes in a course so vile.
What, as to copulate and increase kind?
It has been a vocation ever since
The Sun spied man thus crawling on the Earth—
But what excuse can thou in honour urge,
for wearing such advantageous defence,
Against his just and single violence?
I have an odd humour, not to be killed.
O Alteza, had but my name been hid
Beneath some fold in the voluminous
Dark book of Fate, I might have missed of my
Creation then, so I should ne'er have seen
Thy face.
My curses (Sir) have cause t'assault
Her more then yours: for she has starved me here
With want of natural delight. My free
Large growth and tincture of my hair denote,
My constitution cannot suffer me,
To wear a surplice, or proceed Eunuch.
Though I should bath and swim in Iulips Sir,
I'ue still unruly heate about my Chine.
A Salamander that doth feed and cloth
It self with flame, was thy Progenitor.
Have I not equal reason to complain?
In three Hours not so much as a dry kiss.
Th'old amorous Deacon that embraced his Cow
Was not so destitute.
Fine calumny!
A Negro might be useful now, although
Sh'ad but one eye, and that fixed on her heel.
I'll strew upon thy food the teeth of Snakes,
Signior, presume no more upon a fond
Easy nature. I have been abstinent
Too long. Haste, and with pliant steps present
Your wife; Ot else I'll assure ye you shall seek
Some other man to Cuckold ye for me.
Sciolto, this is barbarous!
I'll shoot
Thy heart with needles, small as splinters of
A hair that thou may die, and yet not know
That thou art kilt.
I thank ye (Signior) but
We Florentines doe sleep like Leuorites,
With our Eyes open: how ere, I could vouchsafe
To shoot you now, and prevent your kindness.—
Sciolto, hold. If either charge doe miss,
He that survives, shall grind thy marble heart,
Between his teeth—
I meant not to give fire.
There is a trick of gravity in the state
Called Law. Besides, you dead, the children which
I chance to get upon your buxom wife,
I should go near to keep at my own charge.
Africa breeds no monster like to thee.
I'll to my chamber now, and fortify
There, I remain (during the pleasure of
Your wife) your Tenant (Signior) in fee tail. —
It is a cunning, and promiscuous slave.
This story of Alteza's abstinence,
He doth but counterfeit, to gull my sight.
Had the Devil himself crep't into flesh,
And undertook this service to your wife,
She had possessed, the weaker Instrument.
He hath in 's Veins, a most intemperate blood
His valour's so renowned, that all the smooth,
The curled, and silken Nobles of the Town,
Doe homage to his Sword; and by such Acts
As these, he glorifies his truant youth.
Thy faith was jealous, I seduced thy ear
To share untruths: but now, thou know too much.
T'was my suspect of Fame, and dispersement
Of your deep wrong, that manacled till now,
Your hands. My temperate Lectures cease. Obey
Revenge, and I will follow it, until
My wealth, and life, are forfeited to Law.
Ho! wilt thou? O my quickened heart (entombed
Before within my breast) wilt thou? This, this
Then is the direful night, wherein I'll give
A strict and cruel justice to Revenge.
This then is the night, wherein my bold love
Shall merit me th'eternall name of friend.
Come swear, swear now (on this victorious sword)
Thou wilt obey th'iniunctions of my wrath,
And yet in personal act, not move, but when
My will appoints a mixture of thy strength.
My choice Religion, &amp; the honours of my blood,
I here doe pawn to ratify the vow —
Now work my iniurd spirits, till you make
Dull sorrow rise in nimble flame. Anger,
Is blood, pow'rd, and perplexed into a froth,
But Malice is, the wisdom of our wrath.
Your Lordships letters were of a prompt stile!
This orient Rope is yours, and you must were it;
I sickne else, and grow a villager
In Elizium!
Your bounty chokes my thanks.
Take it. Afflict me Fame, if ere I knew
His parallel; he woes at Neroe's rate.
Madam, ther's a new Dand•lo, a new
Count, lighted at the Gate, and craves entrance.
That's rare i'faith; have I a shadow walks
Without leave of the Sun?
A conspiracy.
Did not Meruolle say, t'would be a month,
Ere he arrived?
Be bold and meet your chance•
Stand firm, and stiffly on your sinews then,
Avouch me still, for the true Dandolo.
Charintha, it is some stratagem; but if
He Jewels bring, and in a hand as large,
And open as yon'easy snypes, thou hast
Ill luck if thou constrain him not to loss.
I'll smile no longer then these rich sparkles
Shine in my Eyes.
The Lady that is named
Charintha here, must be reueald; for Il'd
Exalt her Lips, and make'em known to mine.
S•light, this is the great Cham. Hark ye, Signior—
My Lord, I pray afford him leave to speak.
What, is that saucy Groom? Does he sell Eggs?
I'll show ye my Trade; A poor sword-man, I—
Sir you destroy the quiet of my Hows:
He shall have safety here, and leave to speak.
I'm called Charintha Sir; proceed to speech.
I'll first doe special grace unto your Lip—
My Pen hath wooed you oft; but now by stealth
Thus single I'm arui'd, a Moon before
The time I did prefix.
I sir, the cause.
T'was Winter when I specified the date
Of my approach, and then my blood was cold;
But now the spring is come, Things would couple.
These (Lady) are very serculare Pearl—
I sir, and in such Toys, she much delights:
Although her modesty be loath, to make
Her fancies known. Would you had brought some few
To mach'em.
Doe you affect'em Lady?
I rejoice in all the works of Nature!
I am instructed then.
As how, dear Sir?
That I did ill, to leave my Pearls behind.
Sister this Hulk, is neither rigged, nor fraught,
I'll have no more of him, he is too costive.
Sir a word. Me thinks you look, like raw Pork.
Has not this house the privilege of peace?
Ladies, this Impostor steals my Titles,
And my name, I ask leave, to punish him.
We'll not protect his crimes, use your justice.
Unless you are an Ostrich, Sir, and can
Digest steel, cool your lungs, and calmly wait
Th'inquiry I shall urge.
Hence, and be dead!
Molard, reveal how long thou hast bin Pimp,
To the family of the Dandolos?
About some thirty years (Sir.) I'ue procured
Both time and place, for your good Fathers game,
Ere since he was capable of woman.
He used the Trade (Sir) in his infancy.
I scare could walk, when I began't: the first
I brought him was my Nurse.
Can point, at ought
He did some two and twenty years ago?
Distinctly Sir. I know that Gentleman,
He was got, on a Tripewife of Lucca.
O th'action of my fathers loins!
My lord?
I'm an old •ew at Genealogies.
This fellows descent I know now, and where
He took 's creation too. By chance thus have
I met forty of my Fathers Bastards.
They are poor, and put me oft to charge. Brother,
Welcome.— Rossa, give him a Quardecus.
Bid Kings wind silk, and Princes measure oats.
Your train of Parasite, Pimp, Fool and Dwarf,
Speak you at first, to be the true young Lord.
Yet the other has some marks, that doe belong
Unto a Count, of the last edition too:
Do you think you're the Count?
I doe, think it, Sir.
Thought's free.
He should be a Venetian,
By the wit, and policy of his courage.
Beauties, were you• hands clean, they should be kill• 〈◊〉.
Bold illegitimate.
Sir, —you shall know,
No man ere got me, but my own Father.
Besognia speak in my behalf; I'll give
Thee a Pearl then, big as a Pompeon.
Which, when your Lordship does, Isle return ye
A pointed Diamond, big as a Steeple.
Y'on thrifty counterfeit, has much perplexed
Your servants wit.
My Lord. Lets in, and ieere.
Slow method fools obey. To the stars advance
His head, who thus resists the power of Chance.
Like to my Genius he doth move about
The house. Our souls are surely near allied—
Calls he her, his concubine? By this hand
There's not a Prince in all the East, has such
Another. This Altamont still gripes'em
In the flank; he knows to choose his cattle.
Be thou pleased, O young and wholesome Lady!
The Garden (Signior) doth contain more walks,
As pensatiue in shade as this. I doe
Beseech you, change your path, and leave me here.
The fumes of spicery? you must not now —
My vows have promised you the ample truth
Of my intelligence. Behold, whom there,
Sciolto keeps in amorous whisper.
Ho, Scoperta! Libid'nous Girl, what makes
She with that Horse?
Shall I disturb their speech?
No, let'em Knit and generate; my words
Shall never penetrate her Ear until
I am revenged for what my Eyes have seen.
There is a general tainture in the Sex.
She is proscribed, I'ue filed her in the List
With those that taste to Night a bitter fate.
Away, away. This object ruins all
My faculties.
I sigh my first salute
Was so intempratly performed. But O!
The justice of my Stars! My love is now
Revenged upon my lust. With pure chaste flame
I Court the Mistress unto Altamont;
One here reserved for sinful use. Stay, stay!—
If I am seen, my life is forfeited—
Hast thou not heard my vows, whose violence
And number well might satisfy suspect
in wayward Kings.
How dare I traffic thus
For love with thee: when thy accounts with Heaven
Are yet not cleared that lust betrayed thee to?
With what advice of modesty can thou
Accuse my blood; when in this Mansion you are
Contained for the like sin?
Were I well known
Unto the quality of thy new love,
I would reveal my self, and take from thy
Belief the false opinion of my guilt.
If ere I practise impious heate again,
Some long armed Fiend that in the Center dwells
Reach at my foot, and pull me into flames.
Bear witness Immortality and Truth
That I'm official here but by pretence,
My Veins are cold and chaste as Northern snow.
Thy name, and then my doubts I will forsake?
Scoperta is my name. I Sister am
To Altamont; not Mistress of his lust.
O dire affinity! my love is now
Allied unto my hate. Yet Altamont
Ne'er merited my wrath. It is the wit
The policy of sin, to hate those men
We have abused. When first I spied the grace
And lustre of thy shape; me thought I loved,
And my sick heart informed me love was good:
And you when I beheld, I said to Heaven,
O make but his immortal part like to
The Garment Nature clothes it in, and h•lle
Remain a Type, from whom shall be derived
The Prophets, and the Kings that rule the Earth.
Her beauties so increase; that they do make
My comprehension poor.
I should have used
More leisure and nice Art, when I did give
My love away.
O stay, until my vows
Afford a larger warrant of my faith—
Our new society must not be seen.
But if thy love be free from carnal Arts,
(Such as the curled Youth of Italy
Doe use) make me thy sudden stealth▪ Early,
(Ere the succeeding Sun arrive i'th'East)
Appear beneath my Casements view, and I
Will follow thee along the spacious World.
Go noble Maid, were thou divided from
My reach, by Sheets of Elemental fire,
By streams of recking blood, by purple mists
(Which Cannons in their acclamation breath)
Or winds (when met to blow each other from
The Earth) yet I would pull thee to my Heart.
False lust, I take of thee eternal leave—
Convey those odors thither, and disperse
The costly smoke, about the room.
I shall.
Place soft and easy fingered Lutes, behind
The Arras; voices feminine and young.
And spread the Couch, with the greene Persian Quilt.
All is prepared.
For what are these designed?
I feel a slothful grudging in my veins,
And therefore mean to solace with a male.
Brush thy Beard, and follow me. —
Now am I
As rascally a sinner, as ever.
Why come thou not?
O Love! A little grace.
Is not thy blood well? Kiss me Sciolto.
Shall we be wrapped in curlings intricate?
We will have our artificial heats, and with our own
Panting cool vs to new, and younger strength.
And shall we 'tweene two shady Poplars hang
In the Indian-Net, whose slippery closures may
Entangle vs so fast, we ne'er shall be
Untied again▪
We will grow as in one skin.
Yes, much! Not an inch.—
I want thy meaning.
And shall my action more. It mightiness
And state, taught me to fast from flesh; and now,
I am well pleased to maked perpetual Lent.
I like this well. My Male is witty grown.
Go, kneel to your husband, and beg from him
Lawful recreation: My self intend
To purchase a few Beads, and turn Vot'ry.
She'll ne'er move hence, 'till I'ue enraged her spleen.
What motive (Sir) persuades ye, use me thus?
Why—ye are not handsome.
Trim prodigy!
Question your Glass! Your Face was carved—out of
A Blew Cabbage; and it is contracted now
To one, oblique Wrinkle.
Villain, thou lie.
Thy aged skull in stead of hair
Oregrowne with Moss, and looks as if it had bin,
A Thousand years entombed.
Adders, and snakes.
Thy solitary Teeth, in distance stand
Like the decayed Arches of a Bridge.
Better, th'adst bin unborn.
Wilt not yet go?
Thy Fingers are all crooked, like the Talons
Of a Griffon. Thou walkst on Cloven-feete.
Hoe! Niente.
Thy Bones are piled across▪
Much like the Sticks on a Conjurers fire.
Are my Grooms dead? what hoe! I'll impound ye.—
It must not be. For with these two (of which
I mean to rob your armoury) there shall
Be passage forced broad enough for a Teem
Of Southern Elephants. Farewell Oyster! —
Where are my Grooms, my slaves? injurious wolf.
Bark at my precious feature, and thus strew
My beauty ore, with infamy and dust?
Strike my greene youth, with Epithets of age?
My Altamont ne'er used me thus. He oft
Compared me to the Stars, m'Eies to Eastern light,
When day smiles at her birth. O! I could curse
The giddy judgment of my blood; that thus
Seduced me to forsake that Saint, and mix
My knowledge with this Devil. He's fled too,
Untouched by my revenge. Niente, hoe!
It is Alteza, I know her sinful voice,—
O Sir, if anguish, or distress, can make,
An humble heart, behold your Lady now;
That shortens thus, her stature, at your feet.—
What may this forced humility portend?
Sciolto (cruel as the winds in March)
Hath struck, my womanhood, with tyranny,
And scorn. Can Fate present so large a test,
Of your true love, (both to your self, and me)
As that you minister revenge upon
His Life. Go, and salute his recreant Heart
With your bright Steel, and then obedience claim
Replete with fond Idolatry, and love.
The Fiends are surely married too; for there's
No torment like a Wife! false Alteza.
So ill I merit charity: that all
My passions argue cunning and pretence.
This is a wise hypocrisy, to hide
Thy lust, or snare me in some guilt, whereby
The Duke may claim my life, and thou receive
More quiet space, t'inioy Sciolto's limbs.
Those angry spirits that reside below,
In flaming Ouens, are not more cruel in
Their envy, then am I in hate to him.
So soon, dost steep him in thy gall, whom thou
Hast washt'i'th warm distilments of thy heart.
If ere I knew him, with more guilt, then what
My wishes and my thoughts contained; let wrath
Then make me her experiment, to try
How much of pain, mortality can hear.
Thy perjured attestations cease; for though
The hours are few, since first you did confer,
Yet you had both the pregnant thrift, to make
The time advantageous to sin.
Express,
Some mercy in your faith, and hear me speak.
Keep thy denial 'tweene thy blistered lips.
I• vtterd' thou art dead.
Love is no more.
Dost weep? I sooner thought t'haue seen the Flin•
Supple as Sponge; th'obdurate Diamond melt
At the Glow-wormes pale eye.
How hath the pride
Of Courts misse-led my youth, that you should think
I'ue lost, all tender complements of grace?
Thou were a Virgin sweet, so precious in
Thy frame, that with the cordage of thy hair
Thou might have fetterd Kings. Thy voice has marred
The beauties of the night. When thou did sing
The quiet stars, would fall asleep and wink.
Thou art all discord now: thy glorie's dark;
Thy thin, and Rosiall blood, i• turned to Ink.
I have outlived the help of penitence,
And benefit of hope.
Oft have I said
Let's leave the false, the buisie world and sleep
Beneath our vines; Nature (not cunning) then,
Augments our wealth; the dew of heaven is cheap,
Nor need we pay for'th Suns warm light, If kind
Divinity allow t'each humane soul
A star; our issue w'ele increase, until
The bright and numerous throng be all employed.
But I am sterile as a wilderness,
My name, is sickness to your memory.
Witness you silent powers, the crime is not
Derived from me. T'explaine my innocence,
Know, she that here I housd, t'affront thy pride,
Was my chaste sister, not my Concubine.
Then you are loyal still, t'oth Marriage vow.
But; she treds the slimy path. Scoperta,
Is now thy R•uall in Sciolto's lust.
All springs from the ambition of my guilt. —
Although thy penitence be rash, it doth
Become thee well, and thou hast queen•e dissolved
The stony corners of my heart. This night
I purposd thee a cruel death, but now
Rise, and continue mortal still—I'll lay
My mercy on thy Lip, and for it take
My last farewell—. I'll never see thee more.
This is a mercy that confounds the will
And strength of all my gratitude. O sad
Decree. You have divorced me from your Eyes.
Two neighboring Lilies whom rude winds disperse
Amongst restless dust, may sooner meet upon
Their stalks again, and kiss each other in
A second growth, then we our loves renew.
Take heed (Sir) how you prophecy! For my
Humility with moist contrition joined,
May hope to wash my leprous staines away.
O no! my jealousy is grown so sick, that my
Suspect informs me, it will ne'er be cured.
I creep thus to my Tomb, indebted for
Your love, till all the drowsy world shall rise
To general Accounts; and then my want
Of earlier gratitude will make my Debt
A sin—
O trivial property of life!
Some doe attend the mighty war, and make
Divinity their yoke; till for the sport
Of Kings th'augment the number of the dead.
Some walk in slipprie paths of Court, and feed
On silent smiles; the gravity of mirth.
Some travail in the search of humane Arts,
But knowledge is reserved: She sits so high
In Clouds, we cannot reach her with our Eye:
Or if with patient steps we to her climb,
Death says we cannot reach her with our time.
For witherd age arrives, when numbering on
Our griefs not years; the tedious space of life
We strait accuse. For life is like the span
Forced from a gouty hand; which, as it gains
Extent, and active length, the more it pains.
MY journey was by stealth, else I had brought
With these, Legions of Dukes to speak my birth.
My Lady'gins t'enquire (Sir) after sleep,
For it grows late.
My corporal method
I will disorder, ere I'll miss her view.
This British Groat is thine; traffic for Pins.
Make the Devil your Factor; Ther's a Stock
To set up with.
No bribes? I am beloved.
Brother, I wish you would avoid my haunts.
Tic not for my credit, nor yet for our
Dead fathers, thus to make your person known,
Being you're illegitimate begot,
By the motion of the evil Spirit.
Go, let that fellow die.
Why, let him Sir.
Were we his heirs, w'had cause to hasten his Decease.
Do ye walk like Neptune in a mask,
Attended on by two of the calm Winds?
They are Nobles of a supreme race. This is
Stocccata called, and that Punto. They both
Are come to warrant my creation good
Upon the Gauntlet of a Giant or a Whale.
Maintain your birth—Were you my fathers Bawds?
Alas, you are young (Sir) you know not vs!
We cannot swell and rant like things that would
Be rather heard then felt: but we can thrust
Our Whineards home, with joy and quiet too.
Sweet heart; you are not read i'th'rudiments
Of wrath. You shall perceive some that are loud
And active with their Lungs; Courage in them
You may suspect: but when you see a cool
And silent anger like to ours, then keep
Your wandering hands at home. Soft Sir, beware!
Stay, woo't thou kill him (Punto) or shall I?
I'ue buisnesse now of a more serious garb.
Dispatch him thy self. Early to morrow
I'll doe as much for thee on the two Zwits.
Do ye make no more o'th'Infants of the Earth?—
Fie Sir. Draw your weapon in a Ladies
Chamber? You still display a courage ill
Brought up, most vainly nurturd (Sir) believe it.
Forbid it Heaven; but you should have free space
T'imploy your best strength in your defence.
But Sir, it is sober patience makes vs safe.
If now on eiders Haunch you did confer
A kick; our secret wisdom would direct
Vs how to bear it for the time, and in
Our own advantage too.
Is it possible?
Hear Sir th'aduice of an old shot. I'ue hit
The mark more then once in my time, and tamed
Many a mad Boy too. If either of's
Vouchsafe to greet ye with a hand or foot,
Take it, and be thankful: le•t by return
Of wrath, worse doe ensue.
Not I believe it.
He's young, Stoccata, carve him gently up! —
They take me for a Capon. What Weapons
Fight ye with, Demiculuering or Drake?
Steel of Toledo is all we manage—
What then remains but Rossa and Molard,
Assault you two, I, my bastard Brother—
Come Sir,—
We will jerk you with our iron Rods—
Keep your sword warm, it belongs to the scabbard—
O Sir, your valour still imports some want
Of a discreet and temperate breeding.
Tumultuous fights the vestments mar.
His bounty ne'er will give me cause t'aduance
My wit: he grows much troublesome.
Lady! behold two Worthies here; Dragons
In fight. They come to preach my birth.
They are known to Fame.
Fame blew'em from her Breech!
I say they are Potentates; and they doe awe—
The Chrysome Babe.
Signior, you still forget
The quiet and the courteous ways of spleen.
I will try your politic patience Sir —
You see we still are calm —
He has but thin
Philosophy that cannot suffer this —
You marmalet Count deserves as much too.
I doe oppugn the motion with my scorn.
Do ye scorn (Sir) to be kicked?
Pardon me Sir!
I say it aloud; The proudest wight on Earth
Shall not kick me, excepting your dear self.
I have privacies (Madam) for your Ear! —
You, and your fierce Champions strait remove;
Craule hence, and be not visible again:
Enhance our pay, we will kill him in the da•ke.
Agreed, Six Duck•ts you shall number more.
The neighbours say, forty Seriants waite his
Departure hence, who give him a new name.
Ho! What doe they call him?
Florello, and
Report him brother unto Altamont.
My Eyes are informed, Two Faces more allied
In all deuotes of view I have not seen.
The younger brother unto Altamont;
Fantastic too as Winds, and sillier then
A silenced Priest. Fate had much preferred me.
Madam, it must be he. I'ue tan a strict
Survey of's Nose; it is so like Altamonts.
He is already so exhaust, that his
Wise bounty can no more be Argument
For wit: And now to have this plea for his
Dismission is aboue my joy. Signior!—
Sweet Love, I have been bold to give away
One or two of thy Farms to these my Foll'wers,
They are kind wretches both, and love thee well.
Indeed?
Yes saith, They bid me rather then
Thou should thus pine for love to marry thee.
Stand off! More distant yet.
Would view my Limbs?—
When you doe make your Christianity
More known, you must be called Florello▪
Ho!
Forty blew Fiends wait to arrest you in
Your passage home.
Madam, I am traduced.
Could your abusiue Arts make choice of none
But me? Be sure this visit is your last.
I must not, dare not, leave ye, till I'ue cleared
The errors in this calumny—
Return,
Or you affront my power, and I shall think
Your love, is, as your person, counterfeit.
The strength of all my Charity affords
You but this Key, which in my Orchard Gate
You may employ, and free you from th'Arrest.
Besognia, I'll to bed. —
A sober truth.
Sums I owed when I embarked for Pisa. —
Now shall I, like a melancholy worm,
Feed on raw Roots.—
Sing Canticles of woe!
I must even go tag points in a Garret. —
This Key, with rescue o'th'young Rapiers of
The Law will bring vs home.
No monies Sir?
Faith we must all disrobe, our Vestments old
Stitch on again, and mortgage these to raise
A Sum that may assist my librrtie.
Creep in our Rags of Tinder, in our thin
And dusty webs again.
I feel a heard
Of small cattle graze on my left shoulder. —
O my forward bounty! There's but sick hope
My Jewels will return; since custom shows;
What Ladies thus from there dull Suitors get
They doe preserve as Tribute to their wit.
The longer moitie of the Night's vnspent.
Since time grew old, he slowly finds his steps
In the dark: by day he swifter moves. Get thee
To bed; The Casements of thine Eyes are shut;
Impris•ning their dear Light.
Madam, good night.
Come my Sciolto, and confirm the virtue of
Thy faith; or I disperse my Soul in Sighs,
And make this Chair my easy monument.
All are departed that to Charintha
Made visit: Your Servants have begun
Their sleep, and Guards are placed upon the Gates.
Are my bold Instruments in ambush laid,
And scattered for the best advantage of
Their concealed action, and their view?
They are.
Expect me then beneath the Garden Mount.
You swelling Clouds choke my afflicted sight▪
The Stars like scattered embers fall. The Tears
Of men doe meet in Seas, and Seas orewhelme
The Earth. The amazed Herds howl to the Sun
For help; whose Beams suck moisture up, till he
Hath made the flood his draught; but vomits all
In Showers again; such as Deucalion saw!
Nature (it seems) is frighted from her health.
Behold my Coral hands, they seem to blush
With guilt of humane sacrifice. Me thinks
I look like to a Memphian Priest, that had
Dissection made of Hecatombs t'appease
Their false Divinity. Alteza's dead.
I want pretence to sooth my faith: Else I
Would hope your hands deprived her not of breath?
Fathers that feed on Sons, and Sons that drink
Their mothers blood, reach not that cruelty
Which her sterne guilt did throw into my Breast.
May some kind Saint, weep o'er your Soul until
With holy dew, he wash this sin away.
Thou doest mis-spend thy vestal charity.
In the solitary age of Night I come,
To find those Angels that have business now
On Earth, in Synod here with thee: hoping
I shall receive reward for my just Act.
The hours that gave her opportunity
To err, were known so few; that my belief
Concludes her guiltless of the actual sin.
Before the hindmost part of her vexed Soul
Forsook her thrilling Lips, she did confess,
Sciolto had performed all circumstance
That doth engender Man. Sciolto too,
Confirmed her attestation as a truth.
Be deaf (sweet heaven) to this. Did Sciolto
Iterate her foul speech?
He did, which I,
Ore heard, and forced a passage to his Heart.
From its warm Throne, I snatched the eking Lump,
And threw it straight unto a hungry Fiend.
Is he dead too? The Genius of the world
Is sick, all Forms must cease.
Dost weep for him?
O Sir, should I restrain the flux, my Eyes
Would drop from their loose Strings instead of Tears.
This obsequy, doth make Compassion sin.
O Sciolto. Art thou so early fled,
To taste eternity, and unknown fate.
Stint thy hoarse Dirge, pernicious Whore. I had
Some hope, the interview that you enjoyed
Might be enforced by his unruly strength:
But now, I find it was with thy consent
Procured. You've struggled in each others lust.
All now is evident as light.
I bring
My innocence, to'th'cleere survey of Heaven.
Though dull, to Men of harsh, strict discipline,
Yet know, I have some cunning in my rage.
I came to fright this secret from thy Heart:
M• Hands I did not bath in humane blood,
Alteza, and Sciolto are alive.
This joy will make my Heart dance in my Breast.—
Sink into th'Earth, where sorrow dwells. Ere yon—
Dim Morn shall add one Hour unto her Age,
Scioltos Soul shall take a doubtful flight:
It only stayed to mingle company
With thine. My anger was so just, I Would
Not prosecute thy life; until my doubts
Were cleared. Go, go, and number o'er thy Beads.
Is there in all your veins, no drop (vnmix'd
With Gaul) that from our Mother is derived,
And so may tempt compassion from your Breast?
Alteza mourns, as if t'expiate
A Nation with her grief. Had thou reueald
Such penitence, it might have softened my
Decree. But thou art sour and sterne of Soul.
No mercy, for our Noble Mothers sake?
M• Mother when she lay, a cold pattern for
The figure on her Tomb, spent her last breath
In praise of thee. Quoth she; For my sake use
Thy Sister well: th'acqaintance that she hath
In Heaven is great. In the blossom of her growth
She shall ore'come the Eyes of men, and in
Her Age, she shall have skill in Prophecy.
But O false lore! Our Mother kind, (whom I
A Sybill held) thou now hast proved a Witch.
I am too weak to force from your belief
Mistakes so strong.
Go pray, the Hours are swift:
I'ue purposd thee a prisoner here till my
Return. — This is a sickly Rheum▪ and not
Compunction in my Eyes. —
The last of all
My merits shall be called obedience to
Your will: If you doe owe a kindness to
Your self; think on Religion and the Laws.
Nature doe thou direct my spleen. The Laws
Are sinfully contrived. Justice should weigh
The present crime, not future inforence
On Deeds. But now they cheapen blood: it is spilt
To punish the example, not the guilt.
Religion too, on our Italian Earth,
Grows like the Cedar big and high; but yields
No fruit. The abject race of men she doth
Confound with hope, and bids them not obey,
T'augment humility, but her own sway.
Your strength does but entangle ye the more.
I'll not be trus'd (Sir) like a Pullet thus—
Leave nothing that can minister defence.
Disarm him of his Pins.
Pare my nails too.—
You shall be angerd strait, till you bestow
The time to bite'm off. Soon as we spied
You scaling ore the Orchard wall; we guessed
The hopes of your visit. There have been snares
Laid for your feet, ere since you left the House. —
There is some danger in this chance, my dull
Heart beats with slow, and ominous leisure. —
Pale Planet shine! It must be he. My Ears
Persuade me they oretooke his voice. Sir, Sir! —
Ho! Scoperta? A cruel destiny
Ha•• murdered all our joy. endeavouring an
Add 〈◊〉 for stealth of thee, I was surprised,
Disa•md; even here 'ith presence of my Stars.
There's not a Star in all the Firmament
Belongs to vs.
O none! Or if there be,
They• influence is so weak that at
This distance Babes may blow'em out. Sure ou•
Creation we have took unknown to Fate.
Our love was of too nimble growth unless
Philosophy give hope, that after death
We may converse; this is the last of all
Our interuiewes.
That fatal Prophecy
Will shake my Soul from out my flesh; and like
Some tame Hermit I shall unwounded die.
The word that's heard abreuiates our discourse
And li•e: the Sand that limits both is fallen
Into the reach of number now: and I
Have spent with thee the hasty time prefixed
For a devout employment of my Beads.
The murderers are within.
Grimm wild horror!
Hast thou no weapons there that I may use
T'anihilate their vigour and their shape?
Unto thy Lips I'd throw a kiss; but with
The strings of my poor solitary Lute
They'•e bound my hands! —
O my hot rage! I could
Spit fire till I enkindle yonder Grove,
Raising a flame that might perplex the Earth,
And make'em think Heaven had dropped a Planet.
And I could weep until I quenched that ••am,
And drew suspicion that a second Flood
Was come to drown mortality again!
This sudden elevation of the Soul▪
Presages death: as if it practised how
To rise, and climb ere she begins her flight.
Whence is that noise?
I'll be as calm as are Arabian winds.
Scoperta, stay; Unheard we will converse. —
They come, they come, dear love, for evermore farewell▪
O for the Giant race, to help me heave
Those Mountains up; that I might bury this
Proud Structure and my self! Yon burly Oak
(Whose Roots reach hell) I'll manage till I pound
And batter all the Marble into Flower.—
You have oreheard, what will your knowledge grieve.
Her Soul is ill prepared▪
I gave command
They should awhile delay her death, lest want
Of leisure might destroy her penitence.
Remain within the summons of my call:
And leave me here. I charge thee by thy Vow,
And our friendships dear use, that thou depart.
Speak what thou art?
Some call me Altamont.
I'ue seen thee walk armed like a Magazine▪
With small Artillery entrenched: but thou
Art fitly now prepared for sufferance.
Not thy tame sacrifice, but victory
I'll be. For naked as I am I will
Resist my death; and since unfurnished to
Revenge, yet I shall trouble thy best strength.—
Sciolto, though, thou merit treachery▪
And opposition that, by darkest stealth,
〈◊◊…〉 of thy luxurious soul,
Yet I will give thee fair and equal Game.
False tyranny!
Stay. This I will perform▪
And it is to know the rigour of thy might,
What wondrous flame and spirits doe possess
Thy spacious Breast.
There's relish of intent!
I'd learn the providence and justice of
My Fate; try if they'll let me fall before
Th'incounter of thy bestial strength; thou that
Augments't thy sins t'orecome the memory
Of Heaven: in silly hope, th'accompts may be
Unwillingly surua•'d, because they are long.
Receive thy Sword. —
Miracle of bounty!
If whilst we struggle in the pride of hope
Thou can so weaken my defence, that I
Become disarmed; thy liberty is gained.
With solemn penitence I could accuse
My crimes against thee: but griefe's akin to fear.
This great demeanu•e of thy spleen divides
Th'intent of Gratitude. I know not which
T'affoord thee most, my envy, or my love.
The moon hath now put on her brightest Robe;
My anger too, doth carry fire enough
To light vs to the charge▪ Guard well thy Heart. —
A little respite give,— Must we needs •ight?
You then would cousin me of my revenge? —
Yet stay! — Know I doe love thy Sister well.
Mark (sweet Heaven) with what exalted triumph
He boasts the foul remembrance of his sin.—
Stiff as a column! —
Th'Arcadian wrestler told
Young Theseus so; but he did yield as if
His sinews had bin made of silk. So fierce?—
I'll work thy strength so low, that Virgins shall
Have power to shakle thee with spinners Thirds—
Thus I will bore thy flesh, till thou become
Transparent as a Sieve—
This closure hath
Entangled vs, let's make another charge?
Even thus divided Billows part, that they
May meet in greater foam—
Wilt thou not bleed?
Not yet?—I skirmish with vnbodied Air.
Thy guillt betrai's thy hand unto mistakes,
And thus my iniurd Spirits greet thy life—
That Wound gapes like to a yawning Giant.
So hot is thy lascivious blood, that as
I sprinkle it, it scaldes my hands—
I reel
Before thy breast, and stumble at a Wart—
Thy Sword's my Captive now. Meruolle, hoe!
• have some courage yet, le•t in my Teeth,
If thou art kind, come nearer with my Throat—
O the Celestial powers are just. See there,
He bleeds like to a Spring, that borders on
The Rubicke Sea, whilst I remain vntuch'd.
Has he not lost the benefit of breath?
Stop all his wounds, and give him time to spend
The rest of's moisture in repentant Tears—
My wounds closed up, what means this courtesy?
That thou might leisure have to pray. Be sure
when's devotions have arrived
Unto a powerful length; you strangle him.
Can thy young honour stoop to such low flight?
Unto resistance equal, I exposd
My strength, to try thy courage and my fate.
This was my just•e to my self: •ustice
I'll give to thee: Thy crimes doe merit death.
O sooth my last ambition then▪ be thou
My Executioner.
Thou art disarmed,
Thy blooming honours now are withered on
Thy Crest. I should deprive my Anger of
Her fame, to be thy active opposite.
Scoperta, stay. My Soul shall hover strait
With thine. Stay for me in the Milky-path.
Let Italy avowch the just demean
Of my revenge. Dull Britains know no wrath.
Th'vnskillfull youth, that equal Duel give
To him that first incensed the blood; but tempt
The courtesy of Fate, such take delight
To stroke abuse, pay Injuries, with right.
This way (Sir) leads unto your Grave. You shall
Have space, to gain some friendship with the Saints —
A sudden frost congeals my Heart; I shrink
Like crooked Age; I am unwieldy on
My joints, as if my veins were empty grown.—
Wounded. His point has stolen into my Breast.
Oh help. I'ue yet some use for life. Th'nice search,
I made to know Heaun's secret justice is
Avenged. (Bold Earth!) I weep into the Sea,
And sigh t'augment the winds. Repentance is
An immaterial Salve, it cures th'vnsound
Diseased Soul, but not the Bodies wound.
A Guard upon my Gates, and have they there
Bin placed ere since the first arrival of
The Night?
Meruolle keeps the Keys, ho•le let
No servant be awake about the house.
The Sun begins to bath i'th'Mornings Tears▪
Hast thou Lucio called, and bid Pytho mix
With him in a sad Song?
I have Madam.
No more (Niente) shalt thou service doe
For me: last night I told thee I had lost
My vanity: that courtly Lady serve
Who finds it first. But least thy wants augment
Thy Sins, my charity affords thee this—
Well I'm resolved to mend, or become worse.
THis Lady, ripe, and calm, and fresh,
As Eastern Summers are;
Must now forsake both Time, and Flesh,
T'adde Light to some small Star.
Whilst yet alive, each Star decayed▪
She may relieve with Light:
But Death leads Beauty to a shade
More cold more dark, then Night.
The saucy faith of man doth blind
His pride, 'till it conduce
To Destine all his abject kind
For some Eternal use.
But ask not Bodies (doomed to die)
To what abode they go;
Since Knowledge is, but sorrows Spy,
It is not safe to know.
Howl, howl, until you wake the inhabitants
Of Graves! till you disquiet all the Spheres;
And put harmonious Nature out of tune,
What means this fatal summon, that doth make
Amazement cold, as is Iberian Ice.
Great Altamont (your Lord) who still was prompt
To curb th'incitements of your wrath; threw wise
Advantage from his reach, and struggled with
The bold Sciolto, in an equal war.
Down holy flame. When Hope doth sicken so,
I would not have the power to prophecy.
The surly Lyon, and the testy Bore,
Did ne'er maintain, resistance with like fierce
And ruinous return of strength: for from
Their Eyes such Lightning flew, that Villagers
(Whose early labours till'd the Earth) did think
Rash Phaeton did scourge the fiery Teem
Again. Sciolto chipp'd▪ gagged with wounds;
Did bleed away his strength. This his false Sword
Your Husband bade me prostrate at your feet—
And it is the last memorial of his love.
Ambiguous History! He conqueror,
Yet this the last memorial of his love!
Wise Heaven did mock your Altamont: for whilst
Ore joyed with victory, he spies in's Breast
A large deep wound, and thence his Soul took flight.
O my poor Lord! how soon hast thou begun
Thy immortality. The hasty Spark
So up•art mounts, and then no more is seen.
I'th'last remainder of his dying speech,
He briefly told his Testament; which doth
Contain employments sad, and such as you
Must actuate strait. To please his Ghost, show now
A little loyalty and love, Rise, and
Be conducted by my slow steps. I will
Inform your knowledge all that he enjoined
Th'obedience which I •canted to his life,
Unto his memory I'll strictly pay.
You have a loss that doth out-speake complai••▪
If sweet and pliant discipline of Courts,
If feats of mighty War, or sober A•ts
Advance th'esteeme of humane qual•ie;
It is fit your Altamont we strive to raise,
Aboue the charity or skill of praise▪
Who did assist your passage to this walk?
Meruolle Sir, with whom we used your name.
Doe you observe the Count, and his two lean
Janissaries?
What in captivity?
Certain stratagems (Sir) have bin leuel'd
Against the Prerogative of your li•e to•all.
Molard. Ere since the h•pe of day▪ they wai•ed your
Descent from the Cloister Bridge: but doubting
Their own courage, and meeting vs disguised,
Thus in our original weeds; they would
Have bribed vs for two Pistolets t'assist
The prosecution of your death. Our Grace
And strength bound them to their good behaviour.
They walk like Caterpillars on a Leaf. —
Yield me the cause why you contrived my death.
Good faith (Sir) for no harm.
Give me a Knife!—
Here is one belonged to Hans van Geulicke.
Take your self solemnly aside and cut
Your Throat! do it strait, and neatly too, you'd best.
The motion I d•slike, it is dangerous.
Have you three throats, can you revive as oft
As you are killed, to take new punishment,
That thus you mutiny against kind reason?
These thousand years 't has b•n observed, th'eldest
Brothers of her house (Sir) could ne'er endure
To cut their Throats.
Tic fit (dear Count) that you
Must die; I'm else unjust unto my self.
With sapi•ned Arts, we will project to save
Th'reputation of your i•stice.
As how?
I will promulgate I am dead, and both,
My Champions here shall sue••r't.
Wele venture one
Commandment to save another sir.
This cannot satisfy. How ere (Sir Count)
If you will patiently accept your death.
I'll furnish ye with Guides, for your last iaunt.
You Punto, and Stoccata too! No more
Of your philosophy. Fix Brow, to Brow,
Knock out, each others Brains, and show your Lord
The way, unto th'Elizian-Field. Doe it
At first encounter too; For I'm in haste—
Slight Sir, I ne'er was in Elizium, I.
Nor should I find the way thither, though Signior
Argos, lent me Nintie Nine of his Eyes.
Then Punto shall be conduct to ye both.
Good Signior, any courtesy but this
You may command. You still doe most presume
Upon the calmest, and th'easie Nature.
They all are forfeittures to th'Law. If you'll
Bestow'em but as prisners unto us,
They shall suffer, or give vs large ransom.
How? a ransom? Th•se Two are poorer then
Carthusian-Monkes: lean as a Romish Lent.
Slaves, who pretend sickness, that they may lie
In Hospitals to steal the Sheets. Achornes
They eat, such as Westphalia-Hoggs doe scorn.
The Count (Sir) will untie his Strings for'em.
Ransom, I'll give: for I doe hate to die.
The ransom must
Be small. Shuffle'em together: and pack
'Em hence. I will not hear a syllable
Of thanks. Rossa, see'em horsed for Millaine.
O dismal change! does your victo••os Sword
Hang now on aged Belt of Bandoleer?
Is your high Plume moulted to a sprig, small,
As if it were made of the wing of a Beetle.
Who can resist the frowns of destiny?
My suffrance gives my merits their reward.
Your speech was wont to be in a more high
Exalted Key: loud as a Gulf! Your heart
Was full of legs, and your feet did wander
Even like Autumns dust.
Affect so much
Humility as may employ your thoughts
With more compassion on my ru'nou• fall.
I threw on you perpetual banishment.
I'm come to manifest the sin of my
Disguise▪ though it proceeded more from hope
T'inioy your person then your wealth. Witness
Each nimble Register of humane Thoughts!
'Has got a sweet and powerful way in speech.
This is my real •hape, in which I doe
Appear, a thin and witherd Soldier borne,
I'th'later age of war: When glorie's sick,
And honour trivial as the spleen of Babes.
He was not wont to use this Dialect.
Grant now (thou beauteous wealth of Italy)
An expiation for my crimes; For know,
I would be clean when I shall dedicate
My future vows to th'absent Altar of
Thy Heart: lest I doe loose the use of my
Idolatry; and make repentance sin.
Doe all harmonious gifts reside within
Such course and humble weeds?
Destroy me not
With scorn: I know you Ladies most delight
I'th'fraile surface of the body, in name,
And gilded pomp, which was the fatal cause
I practised them on you:
Y' endear the worst
Of fashion unto vs, by making it
A custom in your selves. If men did not
Provide such follies for our sight, we knew
Not where to find their use, for they digest
Them first, then they become our nourishment.
Vain men. We alter our creation so
With female shapes, that Heaven scarce knows its stam•
And Nature (that distinction still commands
T'each Sex) forgets the work of her own hands.
I ne'er beheld a feature masculine
Till now: had you but thus appeared unto
My first survey, I might have loved in haste,
And yet excused the rashness of my eyes.
I gin to feel some danger in my stay.
Ere you depart, a small memorial from
Your hands, I crave, to wear upon my crest,
That it may tempt kind fate to look on me,
When I in glorious battle strive; and
I will absent my self for evermore.
I nothing keep for such sad use, as to
Deprive me of so sweet a miracle.
Grant my request, or I'll pursue your steps
If you continue still to beg, I fear
My bounty will prove rash: and I shall give
So much of love, as you can ne'er repay. —
O my auspicious stars! Should I not now
Make use of your good influence, I were
Unworthy of your care. —
The choice you make
Can ne'er deserve your chaste and lawful fire
She is Florello of a heart and strain
Too insolent for nuptial happiness:
Thou hast bin called my friend. But if thy spleen
Continue a dislike of her, I'll blow thee from
My memory, and with my chiefest strength
I'll punish thy missetake —
A des'late grief
Will more become thy breast then this proud rage.
Thy brother's dead, and his decease cause by
Her sisters pride.
My sisters husband dead.
Into my •ares thou hast a horror powered
That hath already stiffened every hair
On my amazed skull into a Reed.
Wilt thou neglect to cherish the swift growth
Of our new loves?
Like to her sister she
But counterfeits a passionate esteem,
That thy fond Nature she might tempt beneath
Her rule. If Altamont be dear unto
Thy thought, leave her, and straight attend his Hearse,
That in the Chapel waits thy obsequy.
The inspired Needle's not more true unto
The North, the Sun to his diurnal race,
Nor Rivers to the Maine; then I to thee.
Sorrow and love, my senses doe divide.
If I remain with thee, then only love
I serve, if with sad fleps, I tread the way
Unto my Brothers Hearse, I both obey.
Thou dost requite the skornes which I did throw
On thy first love. My destiny must needs
Be tragic now: since the contracted scope
Of all my joy, rests in diseased hope.
Behold the Throne, your Lord commanded me
Prepare: and here you must be pleased to sit. —
Can this advancement ought refer to your
Delight, or to my Lords last Testament?
Justice hath laid her sword within your reach:
And you have power to sh•ath it so; that where
You execute, you may a murder doe,
Or sacrifice. Bring the delinquents in.
Sciolto and Scoperta still alive?
Thy spirit Altamont ascended with
The love of all my chiefest orisons.
These two were by your husbands jealousy▪
And hate, ordained for death: but ere that we
Could actuate his will; his noble breast
Received a wound, that bad him strait provide
For 's own eternity. The last of all
His speech, referd them both unto your power.
You may appoint them live or die: and I'm
Obliged by vow, to see performed what you
Command.
O dire, sinister accident!
Your Jewels, and your wealth, I have packed up,
To ease our flight, when we have finished
This usurpation of the Laws. Let them
Enjoy their eyes; that they may know their Judge.
Ho, Sciolto!
Scoperta, O my Girl!
Keep them divided from each others reach▪
I thought thy beauties had been dark and cold,
And th'adst (ere this) begun an easy sleep
Within thy silent Grave.
And I supposed thee fled
A Harbinger to Heaven: with purpose to
Bespeak my Billet near to thine.
Since this sad night, did blind the drowsi• world,
They thus have manacled my strength. They'ue watched
My hardy violence so tame, that now
Each featherd Forester roosts in my Beard.
We cannot (Sir) be mortal long; therefore
Receive a hope our sufferance will cease.
Sciolto, now requite the leisure I
Have given thy penitence, by rendering straight
Unto the world, how far thou did corrupt
These Ladies with thy guilt. For know, I still
Persuaded Altamont thy lust enjoyed
No more, then what concerned wishes or hope.
And I was ushered to'th belief of this,
By knowledge of those secret spies which he
Employed to watch your personal remooues,
About the House: whose labours ever missed
Of finding that success he prophesied.
I doe confess m'imagination once
Did sin against them both: but if it ere
Extended unto act; let me lose Heaven▪
If Altamont were now alive, he would
Permit this utterance clear his faith. Madam,
You hear that he Scoperta vindicates
By oath; though his own crime doth carry an
Import more evident, and black; but yet
When you behold his feature, and his youth,
Your mercy may conceive it were pity that
He should so soon depart from time and flesh.
Sir, you have skill to know my womanhood
Is weak as ignorance, or sleep. Why should
You seat me here, thus to dispose of Law:
That ne'er knew any justice, but revenge.
Your sentence I am bound to execute.
Have I not heard you say, my Husband did
Ordain them both for death? T'would ill become
The duty of my knowledge t'alter his
Decree.
Keep your intent, I will usurp
The office of your tongue. Mutes, strangle them.
If in thy functions, gentle Nature claim
An interest, let vs embrace, and use
Solemnity, before we doe forsake
Each others view.
I grant what you
Request: make your performance short; whilst I
Reveal m'opinions (Lady) to your ear.
O Scoperta! this is the last of all
Our busy dreams; what we possess is but
Imaginary now: Thy shadow I,
Embrace, not thee: for like to it, thou'lt fly
From my enjoyment, and no more be seen!—
So much of various fate, so soon expressed
Two lovers yet ne'er knew; since sympathy
First dwelt on Earth.
Ere long we must be cold,
Cold, cold my Love, and wrapped in stubborn sheets
Of lead: housed in a deep, a gloomy vault;
Where no society will mix with vs,
But what shall quicken from our tainted limbs.
Whilst still ther's noise, and business in the world;
Whilst still the wars grow loud, and battles join;
Whilst Kings their Queens salute in Ivory beds.
But O! how many Ages may succeed
In Heavens dark Calendar; ere we again
Material be, and meet in our warm flesh?
And whether that our souls, when they're preferred
To taste eternity will ever think
Upon the bargains of our humane love,
Is unto me a desolate suspense.
Philosophy doth seem to laugh upon
Our hopes, and wise Divinity belies
Our knowledge, with our Faith: jealous Nature,
Hath locked, her secrets in a Cabinet,
Which Time ne'er saw: and he that in it price
Unto Religion forfeits his bold Eyes.
Our Reason frights our Senses to distrust.
My Lips doe beage from thine a Legacy—
O sad acomp•. How is my bounty now
Exhaust: This is the last I ere shall give—
Blind them again and stay their deaths awhile.
Madam, your knowledge is already taught
Scoperta's innocence. Sciolto's deed
Stands ne'er your punishment; but distant far
From remedy. Mark, his goodly feature.
With what magnificence he's built? Besides
This Morn▪ his Uncle too (the wealthiest of
Our Senators) is dead, and has bine pleased
T'intitle him his Heir.
Should I not chide?
Think how you loved him once. He will (to save
His life) d•scard Scoperta's interest,
And marry you: a happiness complete
For both
Ho?
Slaves. Stretch now your Cordage out,
Pull till my Eyes do• start like Bullets from my Skull,
Murdering where they fly—
Hold. hold. — Did my
dead Lord bid you perform, what I decree?
He did: and I assured it with my Vows.
Hear then without resistan• of my breath,
Sciolto is condemned by Law; as known
The fatal Instrument that did deprive
My Lord, of precious life; so he must die.
It were fit my care affected mercy in
Scoperta's dome; she's Sister to my Lord:
But her sweet innocence doth make her safe.
She must remain among the living still;
And in her rome, I doe condemn my self.
For my sterne pride, was the original cause
Of this black Tragedy. Kind 〈…〉
Esteem your Vows, see my edic• 〈◊〉▪
And give me pri•iledge first to 〈◊〉
its wrath—
This carries wonder in it
I'll not resign these bonds of Death, unless
Sciolto share in the compassion too—
Give me your pardon (gentle Maid). I have
Deprived you of a Brother that deserved
More Pyramids, then all th'Egiptian Kings.
Instead of him, receive my prayers, my wealth.
When o'er his Hersse you raise a Monument,
And fix my Marble-Figure near to his,
Create me weeping.— I shall go, with so
Much sorrow, to my Grave, that being dead,
My Ashes will have power to penetrate
The Stones. Release this pious Lady and
Perform your execution upon me—
Away you dreadful Ministers of death.
The Laurel Sprig, the Myrtle nicely wreathed
In Coronets, my Love deserves; for she
Is grown too good for Earth. —
My Altamont. —
This deceit brings wonder, great as our joy.
They that divide vs now, must use the strength
Of swelling floods, and help of Thunder too —
Put all thy beauties on again, and smile
At the return of our long absent love:
My wound is closed, and will hau• instant cure —
The Earth groaned at my fall, so heavy are
My sins, so much they did increase my weight.
Rise gently like a flame, from incense sprung.
Meruolle, to appease my jealousy
Ordained me this disguises that I might hear
How in your s•ntence you behau'd your love
To me: Had thou continued false, I had
Increased the anger of thy fate: but now
Thou art endeared unto my heart again. —
Sir, I have hope my future loyalty
Will manifest, your mercy well bestowed.—
Scoperta, thou'lt excuse the carriage of
My doubts, I looked on thee with th'eies of love,
And love is still too strict in her survey. —
My memory wou•d sin, should it record
Ought that might nourish my dislike of you:
You made me taste of sorrow, not of wrath.
Tic I, that have most •eedfull use of your
Kind charity: forget my errors past,
And to oblige my future gratitude
Give Hymen leave to know your sister for
My wife. •y Uncles death hath lent me power
Still to maintain her in such quality
As shall become my dear respects to you,
The greatness of her virtue, and her blood.
Take her, and be as tender of her health,
As Heaven hath o'er thy wounds; which in their cure
Express much miracle. — My io•'s so swell
My breast, that I doe find there's danger in
Delight. How blessed Meruolle are thy Arts?
Some Angels care assisted the success.
Not Altamont's return to life, nor yet
Sciolto's and Scoperta's glad reprive
Nor all the joys in reconcilement of
Your loves expressed, can my cold senses please:
Florello is unkind. —
The little God
Hath lately pricked her with his bawdy shaft.
Tell me Charintha, is thy love sincere:
Such as in the simple youth of Nature is
Exchanged by lovers with a harmless plight?
It is sincere, as holy Hermits vows,
And true, as their confession at their death•.
Appear Florello, and receive thy doom.
It was Meruolle's care thus to assure
Thy Mistress real love, and constancy
Ere thou should give too much of thine away.
But now receive her from Alteza's hand. —
Charintha, thy election is so safe
Thou never wilt repent the judgment of
Thy sight. He cannot be so near allied
Unto the blood of Altamont, but he
Must needs participate in virtue too.
We will embrace each other until Age,
Deprive our courteous sinews of extent. —
The gentle Turtle shall direct vs how
T'augment our loves; the Eagle to renew
Our youth, and we will strive to imitate
The crooked Vine in our increase. —
Joy, joy!
The firmament is now unmasked, and each
Of vs, hath found his star.
My Loved Sister,
I have orchear'd the story of your griefs,
And from this noble Signior, I must beg
A faith endeared, the name of Brother too.
You shall be precious to my eyes as day.
The great Dandolo and his Giant whelps
Are mounted on a Mule.
Naked they ride
As scouts of Tartary they're victual'd with
A single egg.
What are these, walking Drums?
They are such your knowledge shall affect: they must
Enjoy what I achieve. Dull men, o'war,
The Trophy of my victory behold,
She's mine: bow, and doe homage to her lip. —
Still thou dost mourn (Alteza) like a Dove.
Hark, hark how the Roman-Organ seems
T'inuoke the Thracian Lire; the Cymbals of
Iudea, call Castilian-Cornets forth,
And German-Viols wake the Tuscan Lute▪
The sacred noise attend, that whilst wee hear,
Our souls may dance into each others ear.

YO' have given him then his answer?
Forced by you,
Heaven knows with my much sorrow. Such a Lover
So in all points deserving of true worth,
And best endowments to make up a Man
That I shall never see—your pardon sir,
Though you pulled back, by violence, my hand,
In which my heart was freely given to him,
It is not in your power or strength of art
To beat a sigh back, or restrain a tear
Which I must offer to his memory.
Such storms soon wast themselves in absent Lovers
When light of Reason, and good Counsel shall
Break forth and shine upon 'em: and for your part
Daughter, I know it shall. And, presently,
I thus begin to dissipate your errors,
You love this Frederick.
Love knows I do.
You say he is deserving in all points.
My love emboldens me to tell you he is.
Charissa, take me with you. Is he not
Deficient in that only absolute point
That must maintain a Lady, an estate?
Love weighs not that.
What can he show you more
To take you with, then a wild head of hair;
A very Limebush to catch Lady-birds?
A Tissue Doublet; and a Rebind shop
Hung in his Hatbands, might set up a Peddler?
Can this maintain a Lady?
You but look
Upon his outside sir.
I trust you have not
Bin over inwardly acquainted with him.
Sir, he has Valour, Wit, and Honour, you well know
Hoe's of a noble Family extracted.
What's that a year? those parts may be acquired
In winning of a strumpet. But what Joincture
Can he propound to you? or, (in case he dyes,
Your Dowry being spent) what personal Estate
First like he will leave you, but his Powder glass,
His Combè and Beard-brush, and perhaps a Trunkfull
Of Elegies, Raptures, Madrigals and Sonnets?
No let him go; discard him: and embrace
The hopes that I have for thee in the hopeful,
Exquisite Cavalier, Courtier and Soldier,
Scholar, (and what not!) brave Sir Ferdinando:
There's a Man rising in the favour Royal,
And may in thee Charissa, make me happy.
Sir you have given me liberty of speech;
And may be pleased to let me tell you now,
You aim at your own fortune, not at mine.
I seek no fortune, but for thy advancement:
All that I shall call mine must be thine own.
I would be plainer yet; beseeching you
I be not thought too lose in my obedience.
Speak freely Girl.
Your aim has bin to raise
You state by Court-suits, begging as some call it,
And for that end you left your Country life,
And Lands too ever since my Mother died,
Who while she lived with best of women's judgement
Which held you from that course of selling fair
Possessions to enable you with money
To purchase wit at Court. You pardon me?
On, on.
And for the Exchange of a fair Mansion-house
Large fruitful Fields, rich Meadows and sweet pastures
Well cropped with corn and stocked as well with Cattle,
A park well stored with Dear too, and Fishponds in it,
And all this for a lodging in the Strand now—
But doe I not offend?
No, no, on still.
Your own fed Beefs and Muttons, Foul and Poultry
Loaded your long boards then; and you had then
Neighbours could boast your hospitality,
And poor, that for the remnants prayed for you,
Now all concludes upon a two-dishd table.
And whereas then you had a numerous Family
Of Servants and Attendants, out of which
For profit or for pleasure you could call
Your Bailiff, Groom, your Falconer, or your Huntsman,
Now sir, a Varlet Coachman, and Footboy
Are all your Retinue; and for the Hounds
You kept, that made you sport and Music, now
None but your project Beagles, that smell out
Where such a forfeiture is to be begged;
Where one would purchase a Reprieve, another
A Pardon or a lease of Life Rope-free
For ready money: Then where Goods or Lands
Are found of men that make away themselves,
And so of fools and madmen; All to set
Your trade of Begging up▪ and still you beg:
But your own want of favour holds you back
From reaching any profit by it, because
You beg by Mediators tongues, which you
Call Favourites, who reap the crop of all,
And leave you but the Gleanings; some small pittance
To keep alive the itch of begging in you—
She speaks home and within me, to the purpose.
Still wasting your own fortunes; till at last
You have no hopeful project life to thrive by
But to put me upon this supposed favourite
To beg for you when it is doubtful yet
Whether he will take me with the Dowry, which
Mine Uncle left me, though you add your projects.
The noble Gallant loves thee, Girl, and holds
Thy Person and thy virtues Dowry enough,
He is a wanton Lover, full of change,
And at this instant singularly devoted
Unto that humorous Lady, the young Widow.
The Lady Strange love?
She is ambitious
To draw all men's affections to her service,
And then abuses all by scorns or slightings,
And this (they say) has made him almost mad.
He mad! believe it not: his reason is
Married to him better then so. How now!
Have you seen the noble Knight from me?
How did he entertain my Message? ha!
Why speak thou not? what answer has he sent?
Hoe's not Sir to be spoken with or seen
To any purpose, but by his Physicians.
So suddenly and dangerously sick,
Where are my hopes?
I cannot say how sick
He is; nor can himself give any account
Of his condition: for he is mad sir.
How! mad?
Stark staring mad; as mad
As you can think a Courtier must be
That is more mad then all the rest.
If this be true I sink, what is supposed
The cause?
That sir has puzzled all the Doctors
In weighing all his several wild affections;
One finds he was ambitious of Court favour,
And guesses he was crossed in some great suite;
Another takes him as he was a Soldier,
And losing cost and travail in the war
Must lose his wits for that. A third collects
He was a Poet that drunk too deep of Helicon,
And turned his brain in climbing of Parnassus:
A fourth considering that he was a Gamester
Long and much favoured, and upraised by fortune
To mountainous heaps of Gold, conjectures, that
Some late unlucky hand or chance at play
Hath with his money swept his wit away.
Fie, these can be no causes to remove,
Or shake his settled judgement or his temper.
Then sir a fifth and youngst head among
The learned men (what call you him for a Doctor?
Hay that affects gay clothes and Flanders Laces,
That trim effeminate Gentleman) he
Has known this noble patient to have been
An extreme Amorist, desperately devoted
Unto the service of some threescore Ladies,
And honoured every one the most in costly presents,
Banquets and Verses; and thinks the disdain
Of one or all of them has turned his brain.
I told you sir, the cause before; and named
That humorous Lady for it, whom in heart
I can no less then thank.
Go, get you up.
And stir not from my Chamber on my blessing
Till my return, nor admit any one
Unto a conference with you.
I obey you.
Some of your project searchers wait without sir,
Laden it seems with new intelligences.
They may come in: but as I fear they bring
Me little comfort, I am sure I shall
Afford them none. Now sirs, your business?
We wait upon your honour my good Lord
To crave the knowledge of what good success
Your honour finds in our late suits my Lord.
Why honour? why my Lord?
We stile you now.
As all must doe hereafter.
Yes, and that
In a short space of time, the world holds no
Proportion else, nor shall it more be said
That money can buy Land; or great Estates
In Lands and Mannor-houses be called Lordships.
Or wealth joined with desert attain to honour.
So now the Game's afoot. They hunt in full cry.
My Lord it is most apparent.
How you torture me!
We'll maked appear most plainly on our lives.
And credits too.
Their Lives and credits, ha, ha, ha.
That in the space of one whole year our projects
Shall bring in fifty thousand pounds to us,
And hundred thousand to your self; and to
The Coffers Royal for full seven years space
64 Thousand 783 l. 7 s. 9 d obe. q. per annum,
Tic here already cast. Which to make good
We'll venture Lives and Goods.
Our Wives and Children.
We can engage no more.
A wondrous strange engagement
Your lives and goods; your wives &amp; children gentlemen!
That's too deep set, and questions the Kings Mercy:
Me thinks it were enough, for non-performance
You would submit your bodies to perpetual
Imprisonment at the Kings charge; and leave
Your wives and children to their several Parishes
You are still faithless sir, in all projects.
But when you shall perceive the wealthy sons
Daily brought in, and be, continually,
Troubled with the Receipts (if you may be trusted
That have so little faith) when you shall soil
And gall your fingers ends with telling money,
Yet find the lickings of 'em sweet, you'll then
Sing other Notes.
Mean time entreat my Lord
To put you to some Tellers Clerk to teach you
Ambo-dexterity in telling money.
Do you hear sir? Can you give me two sixpences
For a shilling—or any single money?
Cry mercy, you wear none in ready coin,
But all in Bullion locked up in your brave-chests,
And there you have the treasure of the Indies;
Of deeper value, could it be dug out,
Then all the Hollanders have waited for
These 7 years out of the Spanish plate fleets.
But put mine eye out (now I dare you to it)
With any single piece of ready money.
My Lord your man abuses us here strangely
With his old misbeliefe. But still we doubt not
Your honourable good opinion of us.
You have pervs'd this weighty paper here.
It weighs not all twelve grains.
No more?
Nay the whole platform of a stately City,
Or a design to conquer a whole Nation,
But doe you note the grounds, the Rules and Reasons,
First for the easiness of the several grants.
Next for performance of our undertakings.
And then the certainty of the propounded profit•
Both to the King and us.
Without all grievance unto the subject.
That's no little marvel.
Take 'em into particulars my Lord,
First this for Perrukes. The Monopoly
Of making all the Perrukes male and female,
Through Court and Kingdom.
There's a capital project.
Note the necessity, that they be well made
Of no diseased or infectious stuff, of dead or living,
No verminous or sluttish locks or combings,
But harmless and sound hair, of innocent,
And wholesome people.
They must then reap none
From Gallowses, nor Hospitals; from whence
They have had great supplies.
You have in that
Said very well; For here's a Reformation
Of that abuse intended in these words
Innocent and wholesome.
How if a man or woman shall desire
To wear a friends hair so departed; as
You his; or your wife yours; may it not be had?
Or if your friend or Mistress dye so, you
Procure the hair and bring it from the Gallows
To the office, and it may be done accordingly.
You have in that said very well Sir too.
Now out of this provision, what an infinite
Profit will rise in the general use of 'em,
And multiplicity that will be worn
By people of all sorts▪ degrees and ages:
The old to hide their natural baldness, and
The young and middle-ag'd their artificial
Or accidental.
By the pox or so.
They shall be brought into that reputation
That none shall be esteemed so sound or wise
As public wearers of them: which to effectuate
Tic requisite that you obtain a Mandate
Unto all Courtiers, that would be thought wise
To wear false hair: because clowns have been noted
To talk like fools or mad men in their own.
No more of that.
What say to this my Lord,
Touching new fashions of apparel; suits,
Hats, Boots, Swords, Belts, Ribands, &amp;c.
For every wearer of his first of the fashion
To pay a great to the King; and every Tradesman
Two pence on every several piece he sells
Of any such new fashion the first year?
And what may this pride money amount unto Per annum, can you guess?
I will not meddle in it.
No my good Lord.
No, nor your Perrukes neither.
What say to this my Lord of the Balconies?
Nor that.
This then for sucking out of corns.
Away with it.
This then: that on the birth of every Girl
The Father pay a great; to hearten men
To live soberly and get Soldiers.
Away.
This makes amends for all then. A new project
For building a new Theatre or Play-house
Upon the Thames on Barges or flat boats
To help the watermen out of the loss
They've suffered by Sedans; under which project
The subject groans, when for the ease of one
Two abler men must suffer; and not the price,
Or pride of Horse-flesh or Coach-hire abated.
This shall bring floods of gain to the watermen
Of which they'll give a fourth of every fare
They shall board at the floating Theatre,
Or set ashore from thence, the Poets and Actors
Half of their first years profits.
Fie away.
This is a weighty one: For massy sums
That may be freely given out of the City,
To have but this assurance, that hereafter
They may engross the getting of their own
Children: by order tan that Cavaliers,
And Courtiers may no more invade,
Or mix with Tradesmen's wives: whereby tic thought
So many City Prodigals have been gotten;
Only the thrifty country Gentlemen
To be excepted: for by them it is guest
So many Citizens grow landed men.
Were not they gotten by Projectors think you?
My Lord your servant jeers us.
To deal plainly
I doe allow't in him—
Heaven has heard my prayers.
And will hear him or any man oppose
All that is put to me by way of project
To put me by all further hopes in 'em:
For (with hearts grief I speak it) he by whom
I only hoped to climb (alas) is fallen.
What out of favour?
No, out of his Reason.
The noble Cavalier sir Ferdinando.
That late stood candidate for the favour royal,
Is he now fallen besides himself?
Even he.
What have you then to doe my Lord
In lieu of all your service but beg him?
His greater and his nearer friends at Court
Will prevent me.
They shall not, never fear it.
Come we will make quick work of this.
My Lord you shall disburse but twenty pieces.
Among us three. 3. And we will instantly
Find his estate. 1. And lay you down a way
So plain that you shall say Ell's yours,
Before you stir a foot.
But when he has travelled
Till he has tired himself, he shall return,
And say Ell's lost, first not so Gentlemen?
I will not part with any money sirs.
Trust me you doe not well to put my Lord
Off of his benefit, by disheartning him
In this small venture. Will you then be pleased
To give us but ten pieces.
Not a penny.
Five you shall my Lord,
And stand no longer thus in your own light.
Or but a piece a Man.
Not a denier.
A dinner then my Lord, but of one piece.
My answers cannot please you. Answer 'em you.
I wonder how you having stretched your throats
With the loud sounds of thousands, hundred thousands
Can, after all, so faintly whisper forth
One piece; and that as much in vain, as all
The massy sums: for all but brings you nothing,
It shows you Gentlemen of resolute patience;
And would take thankfully I warrant you
An od half crown amongst you: and what say you
To every man a kick on the condition?
What say you to one with tother?
This abuse
Shall lose your Master a hundred thousand pound.
Go coin your bullion brains into the money
And come again. My master was
Your Lord even now, as he was Lord of Beggars.
I hope to live to see him beg of us.
Out hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, hundred, thousands, Millions, ten Millions, Millions upon Millions
Away, i'll stamp your buttocks into coin else.
The Devil ride that hind most of 'em, for
A raw boned Jade: Sfoot he has lamed my toes.
I am glad I am so rid of' em, and now
As you are my Servant and my loving Kinseman—
To follow you in all things but in Projects.
Look to my House and Daughter, that she start not;
Nor any entrance be allowed to Fredrick
To re-intangle her in his Love. I know
Thy virtue and thy valour can make good
My trust imposed in thee.
You need not fear sir
But, good sir, no more projects.
I have but one,
On which I'll set my rest. Thoult say tic good.
Except it be the begging of this Madman
It can be nothing.
Tic the very same:
By which I will advance my house and name.
The Beggars best is that he feels no shame:
Sprecious what mean you? Ha'you forgot so soon
Your Fathers strict command, and he scarce gone yet?
Alas he will then meet Fredrick and divert him,
I saw him at the window making this way.
He gets no entrance to you. I must obey
A master though you can neglect a father.
Be not so cruel. Thou may live to love,
And need the pity of a friend.
I pity you,
And will do no more then you know how to ask
For your own good. I understand your cause
And can relieve you if you'll yield to council.
You are my Kinsman; and have bin my friend,
Though you observe my father who, I fear,
Has not a fathers love towards me.
His love is great and certain,
And all his travel is for your advancement:
But he goes blindfold on unprosperous ways
Led by credulity. Projects! pox of projects
The patron of his projects is (it seems)
Peppered with madness. Tic but Justice on him,
And now i'll give you a secret if you'll promise
To be ruled by me.
You shall rule me cousin.
This Ferdinand, your fathers great Court-godling
Ne'er sought you for a wife; but to have whored you:
(That is the English on it) and to appear
A right great man in you have, he would have made
By hopes and promises your credulous Father
The instrument of your prostitution:
Which to effect, (though still he undertook
His hopeful projects) cunning Lawyer-like
He crossed or lost him still in all, on purpose
That poverty at length might urge him to
Give you to his dispose.
This was my fear.
Away: some body comes.
Tic Fredrick. I must see him.
You'll never see him more then. Go to your cham∣ber.
A little patience and he shall be yours.
So dos a heart consume in lingering fire,
When cooling hopes are cast on hot desire.
Poor heart I pity her, and will labour for her.
O Gabriel! I am happy in finding thee,
Thy master absent, whom I saw, in hast
Now passing towards the Court. Whore's my Charissa?
You may not see her.
May not see her sir?
May not! nay must not: shall not see her.
You're very plain with me.
Her own command
Warrants me speak it sir.
A villain speaks it.
I have a sword speaks other language for me.
Can she whose thoughts are truth, and written here,
Here in this breast, giving me ample welcome,
Give thee a countermand to bar me from it?
Would thou make her a double hearted monster?
Or like another woman?
Repent the• of thy trespass yet and live.
Sir, if you think to fight, talk not too much;
Or, if you needs must talk, then hear as well.
What would thou say?
Sir, I have more to say
Then fits this place, since you are apt to quarrel;
And this no ground to bustle on: nor indeed
Where I dare for my honesty and trust
Allow you longer stay. If therefore you
Will walk, I'll wait upon you; and direct you
In a more ready way to find Charissa.
Is she not here in the house?
O sir, a man
May come within his arme-reach of his money
In the Exchequer: but he must walk about
To find due order ever he draw it out.
The fellow's honest, valiant, and discreet,
Full man, in whom those three additions meet.
Sir, dare you trust me?
Yes I dare; and why?
Because if thou dare fight, thou dare not lie.
HEre in this gallery Gentlemen you may▪ at your pleasure,
Until my Lady comes, walk or sit.
Or lie down if you please.
If you so, wrong not my Ladies Couch with your
Spurs I pray▪ take heed you leave not a Rowel there.
If one should, your Lady has no Lord to call her honour to question, whose Knight-hood it belonged unto.
You have a good country wit sir.
My name is Swayne-wit; and for all you twit me with the Country, I am a Gentleman though.
I honour you the more sir, for I am a Country Maid my self.
Thou art a baggage, and a bold one, I am deceived else.
I would be further acquainted with you though.
Have you done now? You will have time enough for
Further and better acquaintance.
Thou art a Jackanapes of the basest tricks that ever I saw, for a halfe-penny. Shoe's your choice, is she? Could not you let be though? I have bin acquainted with thee but two days, and forgi'me for swearing, I have found thee beating ripe a skore of times at least. Take heed I be∣gin not now, and hand sell your Ladies house, that is so much talked on, and your Gentlewoman's presence here with a fist about your ears.
Not for a thousand pound.
That's a great deal of money. I could find i'my heart to do it though.
Slife we are all undone then.
He sets my teeth on edge to look upon him:
He looks so like a wilding crab, good neither for drink nor sauce.
Why would you press him then?
Thou hast a verjuice wit.
For my poor sake forbear sir.
Let him stand further then, and look of to• side.
Well sir, this is no cause nor place to fight in, when—
What says he?
Nothing, you hear he whistles tother way.
Tother way, what backwards?
What new guest have you brought here Mr. Court∣wit, for my Lady to laugh at?
One for that purpose Phil, you have spoke the man, But what company has my Patronise, that she is yet busy.
I that! If she be long busy I will not stay, and she were ten great Ladies, or one as big as twenty, for all she is your Patronise, must we wait out of our wits, because Chalivere ran mad for her?
Have you heard of that sir?
My Cozen Court-wit's question was who's with her?
O sweet Mr. Court-wit, when will you bring the fine civil Gentleman, that maintains himself so gal∣lantly by picture drawing?
Here's a new business! Fare ye well, pray tell your Lady I came not from Pensans to grow here.
Nay sweet sir stay, there is sir with my Lady none but the grave and witty talking Knight. Some call him the metropolitan wit of Court; he that loves Ladies so∣ciety so much, and yet has vowed virginity.
As much as in man lies Phil; Hee is a perpetual vowed bachelor indeed, and as constant to his vow as to his fashion in apparel, which is ever the same, sir Raphael Winter-plum.
That old witherd piece. I know him.
Thou wilt bear up again.
He has licked up a living with his tongue; makes all great tables his own; and eats for his talk: He may be conversant with women: for (they say) he guelt him∣self
beyond Sea for spite one did him; and now preaches chastity to Ladies, and love to their husbands. Hoe's a Lay-gospeller among the married sort, and an especial pedant to the youth of Court.
Fie, thou speak too much.
There's another humour I could beat thee for with all my heart, thou wilt speak outrageously of all men behind their backs, and dare not answer Ba—to the face of a sheep, O I could pommel thee.
This is not yet a cause to fight for, when—
But will not that fine Gentleman Mr. Dainty come, Mr. Court-wit?
I expect him presently.
I'll see if their conference be ended, or break it if I can, and hasten my Lady to you.
This wench has a dainty wit.
She may, living with the prime Lady-wit in town.
But what Dainty is that she talks on so affecti∣onately?
Troth a Gentleman that lives at a good rate; very civil in conversation, keeps good company; yet none of his acquaintance that I am acquainted with knows his beginning, or his present means.
A Gentleman borne.
I know no more but by his port, and fashion, you saw him with me last night.
Forgi' me for swearing, First he?
He was at the Play with us too, doe you not re∣member that?
Yes, that I was at the Play, by sure token and a sad one.
I'll show you somewhat of him. A Gentleman borne did you ask?
Now he bears up again.
Hee cannot be a Gentleman by birth or place. A fine-handed, and a fine headed fellow he is; and pre∣tends great skill and practice too in Picture-drawing, Watch-making, and such like finger-workes; which he says he uses as a Gentleman's exercise, not as a trade to live upon; when either he does live on it; or else hee has some more secret way, as perhaps pimping or pursing for ought I know.
There he is again! Art thou bound in conscience to wrong all men in their absence, till I beat thee into better manners?
Hold, hold, I prithee hold.
Yet still the cause is insufficient, when—
Here comes the Gentleman.
Is hee come? Noble Mr. Dainty—The well∣come in the World. I protest I suffered by your absence.
You do me too much honour Mr. Cit-wit.
Oh sir, your humble servant.
Ha, ha. Forgi' me for swearing, what a Spaniel's this?
Gentlemen you are well found, I was a little stayed by the way upon receipt of monies. Have you seen the Lady yet?
Shoe's yet a little busy. We shall all instantly take the opportunity together.
But Gentlemen; you that have better knowledge of this Lady inform if you please, why are we summoned hither?
Thou speak as if thou had guilt upon thee; fear nothing man.
I that's the thing that I would understand too. And why me of any man? They say indeed she is a hue∣morose Lady, and loves to busy her self. But what are we to her? are there not greater men, and Lords enough
for her to fool away the time with, but we must dance• attendance on her humours?
I protest Mr. Swayn-wit, I admire your inge∣nuity.
You will be meddling still.
Tic to your question sir, which I will answer.
I there's another of your cockscombly tricks, to answer any question, that's asked another man, out with though.
This Lady sir, this humorous witty Lady is a wit∣sponge, that sucks up wit from some, and holds as her own, until she squeeze it out on others. She will make use of ours, or any courser wits; and search 'em out to sift 'em. She will collect from market-folkes; and hold conferences with the poor Trades people that cry their wares about the streets, She will rake wit out of a dunghill Ragwoman.
So there he is again! dare thou abuse a noble Lady, in her own house too? I dare not now but beat thee.
Forbear good cousin.
Still, still, the cause is nought, when—
Odds so the Ladies coming I think.
Gentlemen, my Lady cannot yet be rid of the tedious talking Knight. But she will cast him presently. He is now following her into this room, pray pass into the next; my Ladies Music room. There you shall find a collation of good Tobacco and Sack and one to attend you, you know the fashions of the House Mr. Court∣wit.
Come away Gentlemen.
I could even love and look upon that sweet Mr. Dainty a whole hour methinks.
Go your ways down Maid, and if any ask for Sir Raphael here, say that I hope hee will have done anon.
You would be rid of me: but pardon me Madam, I must hold your glass to you.
That's a poor Chamber-mayds office; and ill becomes your gravity Sir Raphael.
I'll open then the book to you of your errors.
Now you speak scholler-like, and your self: But have we spent all this while in by, and idle talk, and have that volume to be opened yet? Pray read me for the first Lesson for this Mornings Exercise, and my Edification, the last Chapter of my book of errors as you call it.
You are a mocker of instruction, and good counsel.
Begins it so? whom is that spoken to?
I speak to only you; to conjure (if I can) that spirit of scorn out of you; which you have taken in, and long affected for a humour, your singular own humour, till it is grown so familiar, so inherent in you, that you have won the title of the humorous Lady by it; and drawn a scorn upon your self.
Why then ell's paid, and welcome good Sir Raphael.
I am not gone so; nor is all so paid:
For there's a greater reckoning yet of Railings,
Reviling, Curses by the many that
You've scorned and slighted, shot at you in hot volleys.
They hit me not. I am sure I do not feel 'em.
You may in time be sensible of their sufferings,
Whom you have violently, and wilfully abused
With scorn and pride; if you call to mind
The cause, bred merely out of humour; cause you would have it so.
You come too near me sir, cause I would have it so?
Can it be otherwise? Has it not ever bin
Your practise, since your time of widow-hood
To catch all men's affections? Tic indeed
An honour to a Lady to have many suitors;
But to lay bait for 'em only to delude 'em—
Is impiously dishonourable.
Have I done so?
Yes, and have gloried in it for your humour
To lead men into brakes with foolish fire.
If they will follow it, I cannot help it.
You might though have prevented the mishaps
Of many, by a fair and free resistance
In the beginnings of their suits of Courtships,
And not to set your self at gaze to draw them on,
And then allure them with assured hopes
Of love and favour till you have wound their follies
Into the reach of your disdain; and then
To torture 'em, or having ta •e 'em captives
To slave and sell 'em to the worlds derision.
O sir Raphael—
She feels compunction!
I will pursue it to the quick.
On good Sir Raphael.
Consider then good Madam, since I know,
And your own conscience knows, that you have made
A secret vow from your late husbands death
Never to marry, how better and more glorious
It would be for your honour to declare
Your constant purpose to a single life,
Then to fall into the transgression
Of robbing men so of their wits and reason,
And all by wilful humour: as this late
Unhappy accident of madness in
The hopeful Knight Sir Ferdinando cries
Loudly to your disgrace, and the worlds sorrow.
Half the worlds sorrow is mine own
For that sad accident, I would I cooled redeem't
With half my health or life. But let me tell you
(Now you have justly chidden me) that you
Have a fault too.
What first in your construction?
As I concealed my vow of single living,
And gave men leave to court me, by which means
I won them into hopes, and robbed their wits,
You in declaring to the Court and City
Your vow of chastity and single life,
Yet daily, nightly, hourly frequenting
The company of Ladies, with your sweet,
No less then grave discourse and conversation
Have robed (nay I may say deflowered) more Ladies
Of chaste and honourable thoughts, then all
The cavalry of Court.
Who I Madam!
Even you sir Raphael (if unchaste desires
Must be held sinful) I know some of them,
And one (I fear) too well, that have bin subject
Unto the breach of any vow for you,
Yet you to vow a single and chaste life;
And publish your intent!
Tic with intent,
And a religious purpose to decline,
And divert women's fond affections from me.
O, but forbidden things are women's longings! You have read, you have read (sir Raphael) you have read.
And travelled too: yet never could discover Such an example.
Pray sit down by me.
Good thoughts possess you Madam. I must hence.
I'll not be tedious to you. One word I pray sir?
Virtue, be thou my armour. Briefly then
Let me entreat you Madam▪
Pray refuse not
To sit down by me.
Sanctity protect me.
Sir, you are famous, and cried up by all
For your great wisdom, Moral and Divine:
You are the Ipse dixit of the Court
As I have heard you styled by men of learning.
The Court Philosopher—
Madam to the point.
What is our strength, and what is not our frailty?
Where is she wandering now? Bee plainer Madam.
Doe not my blushes (which I hope you pardon)
Deliver you a message from my heart?
Which I want words to ••••r? O these vows!
These rash and ill-made vows! dos not your judgement
Read something on this face? pray look upon me.
I am no good interpreter of looks.
I dare not speak, till you have first removed
A weighty scruple, which doth much perplex me.
You must first speak it Madam.
Whether these vows,
(I mean your own, and mine, for single life)
May safely be dispensed with or absolved,
And we become a lawful pair in Marriage?
Pray sir resolve and bless me in a Match.
Madam I'll pray for you.
You will first kill me
With your disdain, and then you'll pray for me!
Is that your Charity?
I dare not hear you.
Leave me not so.
Who waits upon my Lady here?
I had no other way to shift him, would he would make
An errand now to Rome to quit my scruple;
And rid the Court of an officious fool:
Women some times have sent wise men to school.
Is the Knight gone?
And blessing of himself,
As witch craft were in the house.
But whore's my favourite Court-wit, has he brought his country Kinsman and the rest?
They are all in your wit-office Madam (as you call the Room)
Passing the time among the Pipes and Bottles,
And singing catches. Here you may here 'em Ma∣dam.
Marry, this takes past▪ all sir Raphaels Lectures,
Go call 'em down.
This Madam troubles me, 'would he were right again;
Or I quit of the scandal.
O Gentlemen! you're welcome,
And chiefly you that are the only stranger,
I have been so troubled with an overtalking si•, that he
Has wound me into melancholy—
I wish you mirth Madam. I come not as one of you-fooles to make you any though—Offer to go away.
Be not so brief with me, let me entreat you though.
Forgi'me for swearing doe you mock me though?
Mistake me not sweet sir—
Sweet with a mischief! How sweet am I? I come
not as a suitor to your great Ladyship. I am a Gentleman of two hundred a year though.
Not as a suitor to me sir?
No you are too great for me. Nor to your Mopsey without, though she be snout-faire, and has some wit shoe's too little for me, I understand degree and quality, respect and difference; and am scholar enough to know my unde and my quare.
You ga' me his true character. You are a com∣pleat Gentleman sir (if I mistake not) the Kinsman of my favourite here, who has given me an ample relation of your worth and virtue.
Yes, Patronise, it is he, who though not thoroughly versed, or conversant in the Court or City garb, he under∣stands both Men and Manners.
Prattle for your self sir.
But to the business Gentlemen.
I that I would fine know if it be any.
You have heard I doubt not of a disastrous blot lately cast upon my 〈…〉e, out of my own free∣ness.
Concerning the Mad-courtier Madam, when it is as likely, that his Taylor made him mad as you, for not hitting the fashion right in his last rich suit. But tic most like he fell from a reasonable man, by over-studying him∣self what Lord he should be at the next creation, when∣there of Gleek, or Cribbage;
In and in, or Hazard.
Hark how this shotten headed Cocks-combe prates! And how he, that can endure beating, dares speak any thing, or abuse all men! can not give the Lady leave to speak though?
Since there is an aspersion laid upon my freeness in giving entertainment unto persons of great and noble qua•ity, the world deeming it to be done by me merely
for oct•ntation, to cry my own humour up, by drawing them into Love-knots, and then to slight or scorn them. My resolution is from henceforth, to exclude those great resorts, and friendly and freely be merry within our selfes. I have four thousand a year to spend; and will be huswife good enough to keep in compass. I will not entertain a servant, friend or guest above your rank or fortunes—
Why—(forgi'me for swearing) what do you think of us?
I think you Gentlemen of worth and quality: and therefore welcome, I think you able to maintain your selfes midle-sis'd Gent.
I am Middlesex indeed; borne in the City.
Give the Lady leave to speak though.
I'll give access to none, that the censorious world shall dare to judge a suitor to me,
Or to find favour further then meat and wine.
Yes, faith a little money to; and mike's your Fiddlers.
Pray give the Lady leave to speak though.
Maugre the greatness of my former visitants
I give you my election for the chiefs
Of my familiar society.
I may perhaps call in, (at least admit)
People of meaner garb, without (I hope
Your grudge or envy. But they shall be men
Of Science, Art, and Action.
Of action Madam? who do you mean? the Players?
Why not? I love their quality and them, and mean to have the use of some of 'em shortly: Besides Musiti∣ans (Poets in the first place) and Painters: In which last mentioned art I hear you are excellent, though all this while so silent.
I boast no skill or practise Madam: but I have drawn some pieces that have been worth my pains in my Rewards.
I must commend their ingenuity for whom you took those pains. But (where I left) I must make use of wits, of arts, and actions.
Here in your house Madam, I would be glad to see the Actors, but I saw 'em at their own too lately: for I lost my purse there, no matter let it go. There was 15. pound in it tho!
Sprecious! How now! my Fob has been •ubd to day of six pieces, and a dozen shillings at least. No∣thing but a bowd great left as I hope for my Grannums blessing.
Sure you have been in some ill company.
Pox of ill company I say. My watch is gone out of my Pocket too of the right side.
You rose of the wrong side to day it seems, were you in no crowd or quarrel?
I never was in a〈…〉 quarrel i'my life. I always run from 'em.
I dare swear thou dost.
I only stood to day at the Coranto-shop to read the last great news; and I was hooped in I remember by some that seemed to wonder as much as I.
Then certainly there was a cut-purse amongst 'em.
I'll go to honest Moll about it presently.
But first stay and hear my Lady though.
I Madam you were speaking of the use you would make of Poet, Painter, Music, Actor and the like.
True favourite for a Masque that I intend to have shortly, you shall perform the poetical part, your
servant Citwit the Musical. And by your skill and direct∣once the Painters office for the scenes. Dancers and spea∣cares I have in store.
I must be something too though, must I not Ma∣dam?
Marry and thank you too sir.
Now your News.
Sir Andrew Mendicant desires to see you Madam.
You should have told him I would not be seen by him.
I told him you were busy. But hee says hee is to speak with you upon a weighty business from the Court.
Tic the Court-begger. You know him favourite.
Go not away, I'll bring him in amongst you,
And (as you love me) put some ridiculous projects to him.
What's that sir An•••w Mendicant? doe you know him well?
Thou ask still a question like a guilty person, with a look resembling fear upon thy face.
My countenance is too blame then; not my con∣science.
I'll tell you what he is.
Still answering others questions?
He is a Knight that hanckers about the Court, ambitious to make himself a Lord by begging. His brain is all Projects, and his soul nothing but Court-suits. He has begun more knavish suits at Court, then ever the Kings Taylor honestly finished, but never thrived by any: so that now hoe's almost fallen from a Palace B•gger to a spittle one. His business to my Lady now can be no∣thing but to borrow money to buy a pair of wheels
to set some Project a going to Court for a Mo∣nopoly.
Thou were in hast e•no now to look after the money; but and thy Life lay on it thou must stay to abuse a man •ehinde his back, who is a noble Gentleman thou know, and I have heard, yet (speak in thy conscience) would thou not be beaten now?
Forbear, they come.
Sir, since it is requested by those great ones
Whose power cannot command me in this case
(For tic my charity and not my duty)
I am content that the mad Ferdinand
Shall so journe in my house for his recovery.
Tic thought you were the ground-work of his frenzy
The Doctors therefore moved their honours to it
For that your frequent presence may be helpful
Towards his care.
He shall have it th••
Towards the expiation of the crime
They charge me with. But in case sir Andrew
He should be cured by this means, I should then
Cross you in fortune and your future hopes
Of his estate; which you have begged you say
If he recover not.
I must leave that to fortune Madam.
Will you be pleased sir to take notice of
These Gentlemen my friends. They may be useful
For they have all projective brains I tell you.
Pray of what nature are your Projects Gentlemen?
Sir my affection leanes much to Poetry, especially the Drammatick.
Writing of strange Plays?
I am glad I speak sir, to your understanding.
And my project is that no Plays may be admitted to the Stage, but of their making who Profess or indea∣four to live by the quality: That no Courtiers, Divines, Students at Law, Lawyers-clearks, Tradesmen or Prone∣tises be allowed to write 'em, nor the Works of any lay-Poet whatsoever to be received to the Stage, though freely given unto the Actors, nay though any such Poet should give a sum of money with his Play, as with an Apprentice, unless the Author doe also become bound that it shall doe true and faithful service for a whole Term.
Here's a trim business towards, and as idle as the Players going to Law with their Poets.
I have another sir, to procure a Patent for my self to have the only privilege to give instructions to all the actors in the City, (especially the younger sort) the better to enable them to speak their parts emphatically and to the life.
You were best take heed in time then that you well preserve your own voice, for fear you doe a spoil among 'em in teaching 'em to utter in unsavoury tunes. Doe I come hither to be mocked?
Will you hear mine though? I am a Country Gentleman, young, healthful and lusty. I hear com∣plaints of barrenness in the City; and of men that can∣not get their wives with child; Get me but a Patent for it I'll undertake by my self and deputies (provided that the woman be sound and handsome) to make them mule∣tiply, and upon reasonable conditions: we will deal with the rich for money, and the poor for cha∣rity.
This is foolisher then tother. Doe you abuse me Gentlemen?
Is that a wise man's question? you cannot tell th'o.
We have our projects too Sir.
I would have yours first, you seem a civil and substantial Gentleman.
In more private if you please Sir.
I like well his reservedness.
Sir I am a Picture-drawer Limner, or Painter (if you please) and would gladly purchase authority, by my self and deputies, for the painting of all the Kings, and Queenes-head signs for Taverns, Innes, Ale houses, and all Houses and Shops of Trade throughout the King∣dome upon this ground that they draw and hang up their t•yall Images for signs in so hideous manner that men bless themselves to see it.
I marry this hangs upon some ground. But are you an exquisite workman in that art si•?
I am an Artist in that mystery sir, and have drawn some of his Majesties Pictures (by copy only but) so to the life, that Gentlemen have kneeled to '•m for suites, and knight-hoods.
Indeed sir!
Yes sir, and great Lords I have pictured so power∣fully, their own followers suddenly rushing into the room have started back, and solemnly stood bare to 'em as they hung of the walls.
First possible!
I drew a sterne Judge, and a civil Lawyer so to the life, that after their corps were in the Grave, a man durst not look upon their pictures without a bribe, or double fee in's hand.
I do admire you!
I have drawn Ladies too, with that alluring beau∣tie, that men have loved their dead pictures, for their pain∣ted looks, more then their living persons for all their virtues.
Thou boy! in truth you abuse me most merrily Gentlemen.
An excellent fellow: I like him for that fancy more then all the rest.
Pray hear my project too sir?
Yes good sir Andrew, you shall not part so ab∣ruptly.
Mine is a good common welds business, against the common Plague, that reigns in the City of Pick∣pockets, and Cut-purses▪ I my self have bin robbed to day, and am going to a good member that deals in private for the recoveries of such goods: One that shall under∣take if you'll but get a Patent, for a Cutpurse-hall, or Office, to help all men to their own again, allowing but the Tithes of their Losses, and freeing the offending parties.
Fie, fie. Here's tithing indeed.
Provided that notice be brought to the Office within four and twenty hours after any such loss.
Enough, enough.
Wee may by the same course secure the Coun∣ties too, and make the hangman hang himself.
Let every man be wise enough to look to his purse, and there will be no Cut-purses, nor need of your patent.
As wise a man as you may lose his purse though, as I have done my self in a crowed.
He puts me in mind of a crowd I was in once to day of company I liked not—ha—. For hey∣ven it is gone: And I dare not discover it for being laughed at.
It seems none of your Projects will pass with you sir Andrew.
Come sir, they are but (as you said) merry with you.
Be you merry with them good Madam, you know the serious work I came about. In which
I suddenly shall presume to give you a re-visite.
Pray do sir Andrew, bring your Mad-man. My garden Lodgings shall be his bedlam. Come gentlemen tic Dinner-time.
We are your waiters Madam.
THese are the Lodgings, that my Lady appointed
For your distracted patient.
Like you 'em Doctor.
Exceeding well. Excuse me Gentlewoman
That now entreat your absence.
Willingly. I am not taken with the sight you bring:
For I see mad-folkes enough every day.
Here set him down. Unbind him, and unblind him.
Am I then taken prisoner in the North?
Wounded, disarmed and bound? I shall be ransomed
To which of your rebelliously usurped
Castles have you brought me? you sir Presbiter,
That better can pugnare then orare,
And so abjure all duty and allegiance—
Hee takes you for a Northern Pastor Mr. Doctor.
No matter what, let him run out his fancy.
You were best to use me well; and like a soldier
Order will else be tan (though you know none.)
You shall have all best usage sir.
And use my horse well too, and let my horse and armour
Be decently preserved and seen forth-comming
At my redemption.
With all best care sir.
For I shall soon be sent for, or fetched off
With ruin of your country about your ears.
You shall have all content the country yields sir.
I shall have Oat-bread, Ale, and Bag-pipes, shall I?
If you'll be merry sir.
Merry! why not? come let's have cards; and you and I to cribbage
For an od hundred pound, I mean not Scotch,
But sterling English pieces, whore's your money?
All gone in Ammunition, and charge Military.
I'll find you money enough.
O here's a third man, let's then to Gleek.
Crown Gleek sir, if you please.
Crown Gleek! no more?
You seem to be a thrifty Covenanter
To play but at crown Gleek, whole piece Gleek or nothing.
High as you please sir, we'll find money enough,
And pay us but our buyings.
Sir, you must ba•e me Aces. You will play Tib and Tom.
All in the Cards sir.
Away with cards. Bring dice, set all at hazard,
And though I lose all, I have yet a project
That at the end of the war, and the great sitting
Shall fetch all in again. But O my Muse!
How dare I so neglect thy inspirations?
Give me Pen, Ink and Paper.
Ell's ready.
Now will I write, nor will I emulate
Ovids smooth vain, or Petraks buskind stile.
Nor Laura, nor Corinna did deserve
To have their prayers written •n such Verse
As i'll bestow on her that I adore.
Listen to me you blessed Intelligences,
And, Phebus, stay thy course to hear me sing
Her praises, for whose love th'inamor'd Gods
Would leave their proper seats, and in stoine shapes,
Converse with mortals, your soule-ravishing spheres
Send forth your sweetest harmony whilst I sing—
But O she is disdainful; and her scorn
Hath blotted all the glory of her praise,
Away, away with all.
Now sir, doe you observe the root of his Disease?
I guess at it, know you the remedy?
Disease! what's that? who is diseased? who wants a Remedy?
Are you sir a Physician?
This Gentleman is, and brings you remedy, be you patient.
O you will move him.
You are a brace of Quacks,
That tie your knowledge unto days and hours
Marked out for good or ill in the Almanac.
Your best Receipts are candy for a cold;
And Carduns Benedictus for an ague,
Could you give life as Aesculapius
Did to unjustly slain Hippolitus,
You could prescribe no remedy for me.
Go study Gallon, and Hippocrates,
And when your rare simplicities have found
Simples to cure the Lunacy of Love,
Compose a potion, and administer't
Unto the Family at Amsterdam.
I'll Physic you to morrow and allay
The heate of this strong fit, or Leach it out.
I have ventured to this house again, assured
That now the humorous Lady is from home
Forgetting not her Love-trick put upon me
Which she already boasts to my disgrace
For which I may require her Ladyship,
How dos your patient? a sleep! That's well.
No hoe's but silent sir, and it is well
That he is so, so long.
The Lords in honourable regard unto
His health directed me to visit him.
Who's that?
Do you not know me sir?
You are (I tak't) the Ghost of Dionisius
The great tyrannical Court-schole-master.
Your Friends at Court commend them to you Sir.
What hither, unto hell? Extend their loves
So far, to find me out? Pray let 'em know
That here's a troubled world in want of Statesmen.
But tell the youths and beauties there, they never
Shall find a happier opportunity
To raise a new Plantation. They'll drive all
Before 'em here. For pride is at a stand;
Fashions are all worn out, and no invention
For new here to be found: all beauty's lost;
Nor have the greatest Ladies here the act
To make so much as their poor Chamberm•yds:
Let 'em come down, as many of the Gallants
As are made weary of their Wives or Mistresses;
And, of those Wives and Mistresses, as many
As can their husbands, or their servants spare:
And what a year of Holy-dayes, a Jubilee
Shall we have in hell then? Have old Lad!
What a wilde fancie's this!
Cross it not good sir.
Pray give me leave to touch it though, a little.
But above all, find out the Lady Strangelove
That humorous Madam, and tell her from me,
The many Lovers she has sent before her
Into these shades (where we can find no torments
Like those that she inflicted) have prevailed
With the great Queen Proserpina, that she
Shall be in place next to her royal person.
The Lady Strangelove! you are in her house sir,
Where doe you think you are? or who you are?
Pray call your self to mind sir, are not you
The noble Cavalier and hopeful Courtier
The most accomplished Knight sir Ferdinando?
Forbear sir, you will move him strongly else.
I have authority for what I do sir,
Can you forget your self sir, or neglect
The bounteous fortunes, that the Court and Kingdom
Have in store for you, both for past Achievements,
And for the large endowments of court-vertue
Are found still growing in you, studied and practised
So to the life, as if you were built up
Virtues own Mansion, on her four firm pillars?—
I hope he cannot flatter him into's wits
When it is the way to fool men out of 'em.
The Wisdom, Justice, Magnanimity,
And temperance of court you are exactly
Framed and composed of, and endued with all
The excelencies that may adorn a man
By Nature, Fortune, Art and Industry!
And all this glorious light to be eclipsed;
And such Divine perfections seem to sleep?
Pray sir your ear.
Sir, most attentively.
What do you think of Salsbury steeple sir,
For a fit hunting spear to encounter with
The whore of Babilion? might I not firk her think you?
Your Doctrine dos not edify sir Raphael.
Is Orator Demostines grown dumb
Of the sudden? what! no answer? give me a Knife
He is but tongue-tied.
Guard me Divinity.
I told you what you would doe.
Patience good sir.
Patience in tortures?
Help here suddenly!
Do you sally forth in troupes? Have I no troupe?
Give me my horse and arms, and come a hundred.
We'll arm and horse you, since you're so unruly,
Away with him into his Bed-chamber.
O doe you make me then your Knight of the shir• A tun of Wine for that. Shoulder your Knight, advance your Knight, bear him out.
A Ferdinand, a Ferdinand, &amp;c.
This now to me is Music, Golden chimes
That rings all in with an assured advantage,
How now Sir Raphael! Frighted?
In all my disputations all my travails,
And all conspiracies that have bin had
Aagainst me, never met I an encounter
By man, or spirit that I feared so much,
Yet here's another fury.
By what oppression or tyranny (for Law
I'm sure could never do it) is my house here
Confiscated or usurped, and I become your slave?
How Madam?
Your slave, lay your commands on me, what drudgery doe you appoint me to?
Shoe's mad too.
Did not your Ladyship give way?
To make my house a hell?
The noise of Bedlam is soft Music to 't.
Could your Projectorship find no house else
To make a mad-man madder in but mine?
And me as mad as he too with the trouble.
I was no principle in it good Madam.
Was it your plot then sir Philosophaster,
That so you might under pretext of reading
Philosophy to him, to cure his madness
Make your address to me to prosequte
Your Love-suite when I thought I had answered you,
But if you must proceed, overcome me if you can,
Yet let me warn you to take heed withal
You pull not a disease unto you, that may
By your ungoverned hast post into
Your grave: for I shall prove a torment to you,
Though you'll take no denial, take yet a warning.
I take it to forsake your house; and never
More to resort where madness reigns. Did I
Make love to you?
Pardon me virtuous sir, it is my love to you that tortures me into this wild distraction. O sir Raphael.
Now virtue guide me. I will shun this place
More then I would the Spanish Inquisition.
I shall in time be rid of all such Guests,
And have the liberty of mine own house
With mine own company, and to mine own ends
Where are you Phil? I were but dead if I had not this
wench to fool withal sometimes.
Madam.
I must be a little serious with you, shut the door.
Now am I called into correction,
When she is vexed and wants the company
She likes, then come I into question,
It is common among Ladies with their women.
Why that down look, as if you meant to fetch
An answer, or excuse out of your Apron-strings
Before you are charged or questioned? what new foul•
Has past of late?
Doe you read any Madam
Upon my face or looks? I never was in love
Much with my face, nor ever hated it. But if I thought
It had upon it, or in it, any trespass
Against your Ladyship (my heart being clear)
These Nails should claw it out.
Nay be not passionate Phil. I know you cannot
Forget the care I have had of you; nor should you
Distrust me in the promises I have made you,
Bearing your self according to your covenant Phil,
Of which one Article is to laugh with me.
Go, you are such a Lady, ha, ha, ha.
Now thou come to me wench: had forgot?
You said you would be serious.
Dost not thou know my seriousness is to laugh in private,
And that thou art bound to stir that humour in me?
There's but two things more conditioned in thy service;
To do what I bid thee, and tell me the truth
In all things that I ask thee.
I Madam, you had never known that same else▪
Of the clap thou had in the Country ever I took thee,
But hast thou faithfully kept thine own ever since?
Yes most severely Madam on your promise—
Well we will have a husband then to solder up the old crack,
I have already made my choice for you:
Your sweete-heart Cit-wit makes most suite to you,
And has a good Estate, and wit enough
Too for a husband, and a handsome person.
I find no fault in all that. But he is
So base a coward, that he may be soon
Beaten out of his wit and money.
But if he should prove valiant!
If he were valiant now I could say something,
But to wait for growing to it were such a loss of time.
What say to Swayn-wit?
Hoe's the others extreme. I might fear him but never love him.
What think you of my special favourite Mr. Court∣wit?
As of a Courtier Madam, that has tasted
So much of all waters, that when he has a fountain of his own
He will be too jealous of it.
And feared that every man will drink of's cup
When perhaps none dares touch it, were I it.
What say to Dainty then the curious Limner?
I am bound from lying. Madam hoe's the man.
Well i'll take thy cause in hand wench: But yet we are not merry. I am inclined most jovially to mirth me thinks. Pray Jove some good be towards. Laugh or i'll pinch you, till you doe.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, Madam, ha, ha, ha. O the picture drawer! ha, ha, ha.
I, come, the Picture drawer.
O, I love drawing and painting, as no Lady bet∣la,
who for the most part are of their occupation that profess it. And shall I tell all Madam?
By all means Phil.—now shoe's entered.
I hope I am handsome enough too. For I have heard that Limners or Picture-drawers, doe covet to have th• fairest and best featured wives, (or if not wives, Mistresses) that they can possibly purchase, to draw naked Pictures by, as of Diana, Venus, Andromeda, Leda, or the like, either virtuous or lascivious; whom they make to sit or stand naked in all the several postures, and to lie as many ways to help their art in drawing, who knows how I may set his fancy a work? and with mo∣desty enough. We were all naked once, and must be so again. I could sit for the naked Shepherdess, with one Leg over the tother Knee, picking the Thorne out of her Foot most neatly, to make the Satire peep under.
Well thou shalt have him.
Mistress Philomel.
Let in the Boy. Now sir your news?
The mad Knights Doctor Madam entreats to speak with you.
Now seeks he may assistance in his cure.
And Mr. Court wit, and the other Gentlemen are below.
Go you and entertain the Gentlemen, while I consult with the Doctor, let him enter.
Now Mr. Doctor! you come to ask my counsel I know for your impatient Patient. But let me tell you first, the most learned Authors, that I can turn over; as Dioscorides, Avicen, Galen, and Hyppocrates are much discrepant in their opinions concerning the remedies for his disease.
Madam—
Therefore I trust you'll pardon my weakness, if my opinion jumps not altogether with your judgement.
Madam, my purpose was not—
My purpose is to advise you though, that, if his Frenzy proceed from love as you conjecture, that you administer of the roots of Hellebore, destilled together with Salt peter, and the flowers of blind Nettles, I'll give you the proportions, and the quantity is to take.
Mistake not me good Madam—
But if his Malady grow out of ambition, and his over weaning hopes of greatness (as I conjecture) then he may take a top of Cedar, or an Oake-apple is very sovereign with the spirit of Hempseed.
Madam, I seek no counsel in this case, my cun∣ning is—
To let me know, that that part of my house which I allow you is too little for you.
Shoe's surely mad.
But you must claim possession of the rest, You are come to warn me out on it; are you not?
Mistake not so good Madam.
Or do you call my attendance on his person, by way of a Nurse-keeper? I can do little service.
For my part Madam I am sorry we are made the trouble of your house, and rather wish me out on it then your favour. But if your Ladyship will bee pleased to entertain with patience the little I have to say.
Come to it quickly then.
First, let me tell you Madam, as it is manifest
You were the cause of his distraction,
You're bound in charity to yield such means
(With safety of your honour and estate)
As you may render for his restoration
Which of all the earthly means depends on you
If I know any thing in my profession.
Come to the point, you'd have me visit him.
True Madam: for a sight of you, shall more
Allure his reason to him, then all medicine
Can be prescribed.
By your favour sir, you say
Saving my honour and estate I am bound,
But may I with the safety of my Life,
And limbs and a whole skin dare venture.
My life of that.
You might more safely lay
Lives of a hundred Patients.
Now hoe's calm,
Now shall he see you, but at most secure
And modest distance.
Come for once i'll trust you.
Come out into the Garden here; and let them talk within, I say he shall talk with her; and his belly full, and doe with her too, her belly full, for all thou: an honest discreet Gentleman, and thou a coward and a cockscomb. Besides he has an art and quality to live upon, and maintain her Lady-like, when all thy money may be gone. And yet thou prat'st o'thy two thousand pound at use, when thou and thy money too are but an ass and's load though.
Well, you may speak your pleasure. This is no cause to fight for.
I'll make thee fight, or promise to fight with me, or somebody else before we part, or cut thee into pieces.
But tell me seriously dost thou love my Ladies woman so well as to marry her, and suffer the Picture∣drawer now to court her privately, and perhaps to draw and carry her from thee?
Why he here will have it so you see, and pulled me out.
It is to doe a cure upon thee, coward.
Coward! pish! a common Name to men in buff and feather. I scorn to answer to it.
Why dost thou wear a Sword? only to hurt men's feet that kick thee?
Nay you are too severe.
Pray hold your peace. I'll jowle your heads to∣gether, and so beat ton with tother else. Why dost thou were a Sword I say?
To fight when I see cause.
Now he says something, yet, and may be curable.
What is a cause to fight for?
I am not to tell you that sir, It must be found out and given me before I ought to take notice.
You may safely say for Religion, King or Country.
Dare thou fight for Religion? say.
Who that has any Religion will fight I say?
I say thou hast none. Speak, hast thou any?
Truly, in this wavering world I know not how to answer.
La you. He will say he has no King neither, rather then fight.
Why if he will not fight for him he is no Subject, and no Subject no King.
I thank you sir, I would have said so.
O thou would make a special Soldier now!
Well sir, all are not choice dogs that run, some are taken in to make up the cry.
And for thy Country, I dare swear thou would rather run it then fight for it.
Run my Country I cannot, for I was borne in the City. I am no clown to run my Country.
Dare thou tell me of clowns thou cockney chick∣en-hearted whelp thou?
Forbear good sir, there are country Gentlemen as well as clowns, and for the rank I honour you.
Sirrah you lie, strike me for that now; or I will beat thee abominably.
Up to him man: wilt thou suffer all?
I would—but—
You lie I say again.
I think I doe, I think I doe, and why should I maintain an evil cause?
The wench thou love and doatest on is a whore.
Sir, if she be it is not my fault, nor hers: somebody else made her so then I warrant you. But should another man tell me so!
What then?
I would say as much to him as to you. Nor in∣deed is any mans report of that a sufficient cause to pro∣folk me unless she her self confessed it, and then it were no cause at all.
Here's a true City wit now.
I should have wit sir, and am acounted a wit within the walls. I am sure my Father was Master of his company, and of the wisest company too in the city.
What company's that?
The Salters sir. For sal sapit omnia you know.
Your Father was a cuckold though, and you the Son of a whore.
Fight now or you'll die infamous, was your Mo∣there a whore?
Deny it and dare, say, was she not?
Comparatively she might be in respect of some holy woman, the Lady Ramsay, Mistress Katherine Stubs and such, ha, ha. Is that a cause?
What! not to say your Mother was a whore?
He may say his pleasure, It hurts her not: she is dead and gone. Besides, at the best she was but a wo∣man, and at the worst she might have her frailty• like other women. And is that a cause for me to fight for the dead, when wee are forbidden to pray for 'em?
But were your Mother living now, what would you say or doe?
Why, I would civilly ask her if she were a whore? If she confessed it, then he were in the right, and I ought not to fight against him: for my cause were nought. If she denied it, then he were in an error, and his cause were nought, and I would not fight, it were better he should live to repent his error.
Nay, now if I do not kill thee let me be hanged for idleness.
Hold I am unprepared.
I care not—unless thou swear presently, and without all equivocation upon this sword—
Scabbard and all I pray sir, The cover of the book is allowed in courts to swear upon.
Well sir, now you shall swear to challenge the next that wrongs you.
Yes, if the wrong give me sufficient cause.
Cause again! suppose that fellow within should take your wench from you? which very likely he has done already: for I left 'em close on a couch together Kissing and—
Give me the book, i'll have her from him, or him from her if he be without her belly, or Kill him if he be within her.
Tic well a cause may be found at last though.
I like a man, whom neither Lie, Kick, Baton, scandal, Friends, or Parents, the wrongs of Country, King or Religion can move, that will, yet, fight for his
wench. Thou wilt be one of the stiff blades of the time I see.
A wench is a moving cause:
Help, help, here help—ha—
Why dost not draw and run in upon 'em?
After you I will sir.
A pox upon thee art thou down again?
No sir, I am drawn you see.
Help, help, a rape, a rape, murder, help!
Cou. Tic time to fly then.
I come my Philomel.
What's the matter Phil?
What cry was that?
Was it not you that cause it sir?
Was it not here?
Was it not you that cried?
Is there help, help, help?
O tic my Lady in the Madmans chamber. Is her mirth come to this?
Where, which way?
Here, here the dore's made fast.
I'll break it open.
Help here, help the Lady; help the Lady.
We are a coming, you shall have help enough
I warrant, what's the matter? you shall not lack for help—
Away Medusa. Hence, thou hast transformed me. Stone, stone, I am all stone. Bring mortar and make a bulwark of me.
O that's the Mad-man! How madly he talks!
Hold me not down.
Stones to make a bulwark quoth a! If he had
but to make a brace of Demy-culvering bullets, they were thumpers I think.
Hold me not down, but rear me up, and make me my own statue.
Was ever such a practice?
A mere accident of madness.
I say it was a practise in the Doctor.
Yet he called out for help.
You had broke up the door first. That was but to colour his treachery.
A new way, and a very learned one I promise you; to cure madness with a plaster of warm Lady∣guts.
He would have had a mad bout with my Lady it seems. He would have vented his madness into her. And she could have drawn better then the Leaches.
If you believe this Madam, though sir Ferdinand be by his madness excusable in the attempt, you ought to be revenged upon the Doctor.
Let's cut him into pieces Madam.
I'll think upon some way to make him a dread∣full example to all the Pandarean Doctors in the Town. Come in Gentlemen, and help me with your ad∣vices.
You shall want no advise Madam. No strength, Let's go sir.
What mean you Mr. Cit-wit?
I have sworn. Therefore I say no more, but I have sworn▪
THou art so honest, that I am ashamed
The vice of Anger blinded so my Reason,
As not to see through thy transparent breast
A true and noble heart; such as becomes
A Kinsman and a friend to her I love;
I can see now, and read thy integrity,
And, by the light of that the inhumane false-hood
Of that Court-monster, that compacted piece
Of Rapine, pride and Lust.
Yet this is he
That did aspire to be a glorious Courtier.
Courtier? A mere vain glorious imposture;
Pretending favour, having nothing less.
Witness his want of Merit. Merit only
It is that smoothes the brow of Majesty,
And takes the comfort of those precious beauties
Which shine from grace Divine: and hoe's a Traitor
(No way to stand a courtier) that to feed
His Lusts, and Riots, works out of his Subjects
The means, by forging grants of the Kings favour.
What my master has suffered by his forgeries
I know to be the Shipwreck even of all
Except his Daughter, and what his aim at her
Was I think appears to you; And what she might
Have suffered by it we both may guess: only we hope
Her virtue would have bin a guard to her beauty.
Tic plain he never loved her virtuously
That is fallen mad for another.
That madness is his fate; which renders him into my masters hands to restore all again. I, note the Justice of it.
But as his fortune by the others ruin
Shall be advanced, I shall be more rejected.
That foul mistrust much misbecomes a Love
Rejected sir? by whom? Charissa's constant to you,
And time will clear his frowns: and put you on
Now, the same confidence you had before;
His wanting fortune raised a storm against you,
Your noble friend Sir Raphael has already
By learned reasons and court-oratory
Prevailed for you to visit her: and now
You're come within the verge of the 'house, do you shrink?
See, a good Omen, they issue forth to meet you.
I'll hear no more on it sir, and am much sorry
That so much Lip-labour is spent already
Upon so vain a Subject.
Give me leave then
To wonder at your light inconstancy,
Your want of resolution: yea of judgement.
He is flown off again.
Did you not give me leave to send for him;
Who, now is come to tender his affection
Unto your Daughter?
Did not you first promise
To give assurance of fit joincture for her,
Proportionable to her dowry, which
You now are started from?
I understood not
Nor can yet understand more of her dowry
Then a thousand pound which her Uncle left her,
And answerably to that I will make good her joincture.
O you are short sir,
I mean to make her worth ten thousand more
Out of my estate in the mad Ferdinand.
Another ten thousand to redeem my Land,
Ten thousand more, i'll keep in bank for purchase.
A judgement's fallen upon him: Hoe's mad too;
Struck lunatic with his o're-weening hopes
Sprung from the others misery.
And so sir, as you came you may depart:
For 'lesse you bring a thousand pound per annum
T'assure upon her, shoe's no wife for you.
O sir, you had better left me in that peace
I lately slept in, without any hope
Of seeing her again, then by your summons
To startle me back from a quiet death
To Kill me thus with Tantalising tortures.
Thank then your learned friend, who failed me in
His undertaking for you, and for her
If walls and locks can hold her, she no more
Shall tantalise you.
Wherein have I failed sir?
Sir, in assuring joincture to her Dowry.
Sir to no possible dowry you can give her,
But you propound the estate you have in the Moon;
When shall you take possession, think you, of your
Lordship of Lunacy in the Cynthian Orb?
I shall climb thither sir without the help
Of your Heaven-scaling ladder of Philosophy.
Nay then sir hear me.
What in private sir?
Remember, sweet, your vow.
Most constantly. And let me conjure you by this.
And this—
That you forget not yours.
Quick, quick! i'll stand before you.
And time at length will point us out a means
After a short long-seeming separation
To meet and reunite our vows and faiths
With greater strength and fervour.
Ha! i'll part you.
Was it for that you whispered, politic sir?
And could thou stand their screen? thou treacher ou•
varlet out of my doors.
For what offence?
Dare thou expostulate?
Thou death deserving Villain.
And Huswife get you in: you may depart sirs
Has your love blinded you? i'll lead you then.
Madness at height.
Will you along!
O sir you are unkind.
Love then a wilful father is less blind.
Friend, has he hurt thee?
I am sure I bleed for it.
Why how now Frederick? despair not man.
He has vexed me; and out of my vexation
Shall spring thy comfort. I will labour for thee,
I'll study nothing more then to beguile
This watchful fury; this Hisperian Dragon.
Say to thy self and boldly shoe's thine own,
And for thy means, (Basta) let me alone.
You are my noble Patron.
Turned away:
As I was his serving-man, I am rewarded;
Tic common with us creatures to served so:
But, as I am no more his servant, I
Am free to vindicate my •el•e out of
The wrong done to my blood (which is the same
With his,) by him rejected and despised.
Sir Andrew Mendicant at home?
Not to be spoken with at this time sir.
Pray let him know that the Lady Strangelove
Requires him suddenly to remove his Madman
Out of her house; or she must take a course
Much to his disadvantage.
In good time sir.
This is a surly fellow, and though I have sworn
The humour of fighting is scarce warm in me yet,
And she advises him to find a better Doctor for him,
For this has taken a wrong course.
Say you so sir?
I'll tell't you as a secret. The Physician thought to have cured his patient, (who has bin a notable Game∣ster at In and In) between my Ladies legs. If I and two or three more (but chiefly my self indeed) had not rescued her, the Doctor had held the Lady-cow to the Mad-bull.
May I believe this?
He thinks I lie now. And should he give me the lie, the virtue of my Oath were questionable.
Is this upon your knowledge sir?
True upon my life. So farewell honest friend.
This may prove sport and business too.
We will do something suddenly.
What if you take me into that something too?
I guess it is some stratagem to beguile
The cautious father of his injured daughter.
This fellow will betray us.
I will venture
All that I have, my fortune in Charissa
On his fidelity, sir his thoughts are mine.
Cupped and Mercury favour our design.
YOur judgement (by your favour) Mr. Doctor
Much failed you in that case.
Your reason yet may plead
Mine innocence, that drew her but to visit him.
But that drew on his fury; and though reason
May argue much for you, she can hear none,
Nor any understand: The swift affrightment
Upon her strength of passion, struck so deep
A sense into her, that is has deprived her
Of all her proper senses. She is even mad sir.
Not past my cure; and by a present means
Pray, win her hither to see a madder object
Then is her self, and see how that will work.
I'll gladly ad my pains unto your skill.
Come forth into the air. Conduct him gently.
Into the air! Set me upon Mount Lathmos,
Where I may see, and contemplate the beauty
Of my adored Diana; or carry me
Up to Him•ttus top, Cytheron, Othris or Pindus
Where she affects to walk and take the ayre;
Or tarry, stay, perhaps she hunts to day
In the woods of Marathon, or Erymanthus.
That's a long journey sir.
You're a long bearded fool.
I thought I had been a Physician. But sir
You shall not need to expose your self to travel,
Your Goddess will descend into this Garden,
Pass but time here a while and she'll come to you.
We will have jovial pastime. Shall we run
At base, or leap frog, or dance naked
To entertain her, or what do you think
Of downright drink and singing?
That's best of all.
Let's have a mad catch then.
Here Madam may you see the Madmans Revels.
And after that the Doctors Tragicomedy.
Are not your wind pipes tuned yet? Sing
So now a Dance, I am all ayre—Ahaigh—Ahaigh
I thank thee Mercury that hast lent thy wings
Unto my feet. Play me my Country Dance,
Stand all you by. These Lasses and these Swains
Are for my Company.
He Dances a conceited Country Dance, first doing his honours, then as leading forth his Lass. He dances both man and women's actions, as if the Dance consisted of two or three couple•s, at last as offering to Kiss his Lass, hee fancies that they are all vanished, and espies Strangelove.
How now! all vanished, ha!
It is no marvel that the lesser lights
Become obscured when Cynthia appears,
Let me with Adoration fall before
Thy Deity great Goddess.
Keep him from me.
You must approach no nearer sir. The Goddess
Is not so confident in her Divinity
As to trust you in reach of her.
Keep back sir.
What Hydras, Gorgons, and Chymaeras are you;
Centaurs and Harpies that dare interpose
Between my hopes, and my felicity!
Doctor, away with him.
Carry him to his Chamber,
And hold him down. His raging fit is on him
Was Night made to surprise men at Noon-day?
Or shall the charms of Heccate take force
To damn Apolle's brightness? So't must be,
When Gods themselves give way to Destine.
They are enough to hold, and bind him too.
Come you before the Lady.
What's her pleasure?
Tic to do Justice upon thee O Doctor
Stir, or cry out, or give the least resistance,
And I will cut thy head off before judgement.
What outrage doe you intend?
Outrage! Can you think of an outrage above the horror you offered to this Lady, To violate her cha∣steady? her honour?
You cannot say so.
Tic said, and you are guilty. Proceed to judge∣meant Madam.
I first would hear your censures.
And mine among the rest good Madam. I have taken care that a new Doctor shall be brought. Therefore in the first place my censure is, that this be presently hanged out of the way.
That's too high strained. What think you Ma∣dam, if to rectify his judgement, wee picked all the errors of his brain; First, opening the Pericranion, then take out the cerebrum; wash it in Albo vino, till it be throughy cleansed; and then—
Pox of your Albo vino, and his cerebrum taking out, that were a way to kill him. Wee must not be guily of the death of a Dogleach, but have him purged a safer way.
How? Proceed.
We will fill his belly full of Whey, or Butter∣milk, put him naked ••to a Hogs-head, then put into
the same an hundred broken Urinals, then close up the Vessel and roll your Garden with it.
I trust they cannot mean any such mischief.
Hark ye Gentlemen. Do you hear?
Yes Madam, tic a Sowgelder.
Fetch in that Minister of Justice.
Who Madam? the Sowgelder?
We'll make a Doctor guilder of him though, and my Lady be so minded.
That will be sport indeed.
But will you see the execution Madam?
Why not as well as other women have
Seen the dissections of Anotamies,
And executed men rip'd up and quartered?
This spectacle will be comical to those.
They dare not doe the thing they would have me fear.
Now Doctor you look heavily methinks,
You shall be lighter by two stone presently.
You will not murder me?
Stir not; nor make least noise
As you hope ever to be heard again.
I would I could pray now to any purpose.
I have brought him. The rarest fellow Madam,
And doe you thank your fortune in him Doctor,
For he can sing a charm (he says) shall make
You feel no pain in your libbing or after it:
No Tooth-drawer, or Corne-cutter did ever work
With so little feeling to a Patient.
Sing then, he shall not suffer without a Song.
What must he be stripped now; or will letting down his breeches be enough?
You dare not use this violence upon me
More rude then rage of Prentices.
Doctor it is decreed.
You cannot answer it.
Better by Law then you can the intent
Of Rape upon the Lady.
That was not to have been my act, nor was it done.
When this is done we'll talk w' ye, come lay him cross this Table. Hold each of you a Leg of him, and hold you your peace Dodipoll. And for his arms let me alone, do you work Guilder.
Hold, I have a secret to deliver to my Lady.
You shall be delivered of your secrets presently.
If I tell her not that shall give her pardon
Then let me suffer. Hear me sweet Madam.
Forbear him, let him down.
Sweet say? Thou art not i'll be sworn.
Well sir your weighty secret now to save your trifles.
In private I beseech you Madam: for I dare but whisper't.
You shall allow me so much wariness as to have one at least to be my Guard, and witness.
This Gentleman then Madam.
We are shut out of council.
No matter. I list not be no nearer him: no more would my cozen had he my nose. But whore's Mr. Dainty and your finical Mistress Phil all this while though?
No matter, but I have sworn you know. Therefore I say no more, but I have sworn.
What a strange tale is this! I can't believe it.
I doe, and did before suspect it: and framed this counterfeit plot upon you, Doctor, to work out the
discovery: would I have seen you guelt dee think? That would have rendered me more brutish then the women Barbers. Look sir this is no Guilder, but one of my house Music. (Go, your part is done—
And for the affright you gave me, Doctor, I am even w' ye.
The Devil fright him next for a spurging, skitter∣brooke. It were good you would call to burn some perfumes Madam.
But for the secret you have told me i'll keep it secret yet, I will keep you so too; and from your Patient.
There's a new Doctor come already Madam to the madman.
From sir Andrew Mendicant?
His servant brought him.
I pray what Doctor is it?
Engage your self with no desire to know,
But, for the good you find, fit thanks to owe;
So come with me, and come you Gentlemen.
Heap yet more Mountains, Mountains upon
Mountains, Pindus on Ossa, Atlas on Olympus,
I'll carry that which carries Heaven, do you
But lay it upon me!
Forbear you'll stifle him,
Take off the needless weight of your rude bodies;
Unbind him and stand off, to give him ayre.
Sir though you are a Physician, I am no fool.
Take heed what you doe. Hoe's more then six of us hold when his hot fit's upon him. He would now tear you to pieces should you let him loose.
The danger then be mine. Let him sit up. Is not he civil now?
I, for how long? do you note that Hercules eye there?
I charge you quit the room.
Tic but to come again when we are called.
Be not within the hearing of a call,
Or if you chance to hear me, though I cry
Murder, I charge you come not at me.
Tic but a Doctor out of the way; and that's no loss while there are so many, the best cannot live by the worst.
Keep the door fast. You are much mist abroad sir,
And chiefly by the Ladies, who now want
The Court-ships, Banquets, and the costly presents
In which you wonted to abound to 'em.
Ha—
Nay, nay, sit still sir. They say you're mad;
Mad with conceit of being a favourite
Before your time, that is, before you had merit
More then a tumour of vaine-glory in you,
And in especial care for your recovery
I am sent to administer unto you: but first
To let you blood.
Ho! Murder, Murder, Murder.
Are you so sensible already? do not stir
Nor cry too loud. Dos the mere apprehension
Of blood-letting affright your madness? Then
Reason may come again.
The Battle of Musteborough Field was a brave one.
O do you fly out again?
Sings part of the old Song, and acts it madly.
This is pretty: but back from the purpose.
Will you come to the point sir?
We but lose time in this sir: Though it be good testimony of your memory in an old Song. But do you know me?
Not know my Sovereign Lord? Cursed be those
Knees, and hearts that fall not prostrate at his Feet.
This wild submission no way mitigates
My wrongs, or alters resolution in me
To Cure or Kill you quickly. Do you know me now sir?
Or have you known Charissa? do you start sir?
There's sign of reason in you then: But be it
By reason or by chance, that you awake
Out of your frantic slumber, to perceive me,
My cause and my Revenge is still the same,
Which I will prosecute according to
My certain wrong, and not your doubtful reason,
Since reasonless you laid those wrongs upon me
When you were counted wise, great, valiant, and what not
That cries a Courtier up, and gives him power
To trample on his betters.
Who talks this mortal to? I am a spirit.
Sure I shall find you flesh, and penetrable.
I would but live to subdue the Pisidians,
And so to bring the Lydians under tribute—
You would but live t'abuse more credulous fathers
With courtly promises, and golden hopes
For your own lustful ends upon their Daughters.
Think (if you can think now) upon Charissa.
Charissa who was mine, in faith and honour
Till you ignobly (which is damnably)
By a false promise with intent to whore her
Diverted her weak Father from the Match
To my eternal loss. Now whether you
Have wit or no wit to deny it, or stand to it,
Or whether you have one, or ten men's strength,
Or all, or none at all i'll fight or Kill you
Yet like a Gentleman, i'll call upon you
Give me the Swords. They are of equal length
Take you free choice.
Pish.
I cast that to you then. Hand it, or die a Madman.
O, ho, ho, ho.—
All this sir to a Madam.
I have a cause to be more mad then he,
And in that cause i'll fight.
He knows not what you tell him.
I tell't the Devil in him then to divulge it
When I have dispossessed him. I have further
Reason to kill him yet, to cross your Master,
Who has begged his Estate. Now fight or die a Mad∣man.
Hold Frederick hold. Thou hast indeed awaked
Me to see thee and my self.
Hoe's not so mad to fight yet I see that.
I'm glad you are your self sir, I shall fight
Now upon honourable terms, and could
Suppose before your madness counterfeit.
Yet hold. Has Mendicant begged me?
During your madness. What should hinder him?
Put up thy Sword.
Upon no terms, and you alive.
Not to obtain Charissa?
As you Guest sir.
It shall be by means if gold can win
Her Fathers grant.
That's most unquestionable.
Not that I dare not fight, doe I urge this,
But that the other is your safer way.
Your gold's too light. I will accept of nothing
From you while you dare tell me you dare fight,
Perhaps you doubt of odds, go forth. Nay I
Will lock him out.
You may: For I dare trust you while I go call the Lady.
Now are you pleased, or dare you now to fight sir?
I neither will nor dare fight in this cause:
This is a daring Courtier!
How durst you wind your self in so much danger?
And why take madness in you, to be bound,
And grappled with so rudely?
Keep my council,
And take Charissa.
Tic a fair condition.
First for the wrong I did thee, noble youth
In my design against Charissa's honour,
It is confessed, repented; and her self
For satisfaction to be given to thee,
I'll fall upon thy Sword else, or be posted,
And Ballated with all disgrace.
Well yet.
And for my show of madness; it was put on
For my revenge on this impetuous Lady
To cool these flames (as much of anger as
D•sire) with her disdain, and tempting malice
Had raised within me.
You would have ravished her.
I rather thought, she like a cunning Lady
Would have consented to a Madman, who
She might presume could not impeach her honour
By least detection: Monkeys, Fools, and Madmen,
That cannot blab, or must not be believed
Receive strange favours.
And on that presumption
You feigned your madness.
True.
But rather then to fail,
With your bawd Doctors help you would have forced her:
And that's the council you would have me keep
On your assurance of Charissa to me▪
That your proceeding in your madness here,
May yet find means and opportunity
To exercise your violence.
Suppose so.
Thou art not worth my Killing now.
Justice will mark thee for the Hangmans Office:
Nor, were Charissa in thy gift, were she,
In that, worth mine or any good acceptance,
And for your council, had within there Madam.
Frederick—
The Lady of the house! where are you?
Will you be pleased to hear a secret Madam?
Strangely discovered?
I doe not slight your act in the discovery,
But your imposture sir, and beastly practise
Was before whispered to me by your Doctor
To save his Epididamies.
O your pardon.
I am disgraced, undone.
Tic in my power
To make you the perpetual shame of Court;
And will assuredly do it, if you comply not
With me to make this injured Gentleman's fortune
In his beloved Charissa.
Madam most readily, I have offered it.
I have forecast the way and means already:
Which we must prosecute with art and speed.
Good ends oft times doe bad intents succeed.
I'll be directed by you.
Noblest Lady.
COme Sir, must I take you in hand again?
My Lady will convery her Madman to sir Andrew Mendicants it seems.
Tell me that I know not; and answer my questions.
She and the Doctor, and the tother Doctor's gone with him too.
Leave you by flim flames, and speak to the pur∣pose.
You know I have sworn. Doe you not know I have sworn?
To live and die a beaten Ass; a coward hast thou not?
Prithee forbear him: Hoe's not worth thy anger.
Anger! Is every Schoolmaster angry that gives Discipline with correction?
Would he were at Pensans again.
Did not thou tell my Lady that I was a coward in my own Country, and Kicked out of Cornwall?
Comparatively I think I did in respect of Corine∣es, that wrestled and threw Giant after Giant over the cliffs into the Sea.
Pox of your comparative lies; And did not thou say that he here was peppered so full of the what∣s•• callums, that his spittle would poison a Dog or a Rat?
That was comparatively too in respect of a pure Virgin; a chrisome child or so.
He never shall move me, I forgive him.
Merely comparatively I speak it.
Forgi' me for swearing i'll make thee speak• positively, or beat thee superlatively before I have done with thee.
Gentlemen, my Lady—
Hold a little. Did thou not say this child here was a Pickpocket? and that he picked thine of thy money, and thy watch, when he was singing between thy Legs to day?
Who I a Pick-pocket?
Forbear good Lady it was comparatively.
A pick pocket?
Forbear and hear him Hercules.
Lend me a sword i'll kill him, and hear him af∣terwards.
Nay I must hold you then. How was hee comparatively your Pick-pocket?
That is as much as any man I know; That is I accuse nobody; that is all are as innocent as the child, and hee as the innocent unborn. And let that satisfy you.
Live. I am satisfied. Now Gentlemen my Lady prays you to follow her to sir Andrew Mendi∣cants.
I know the business, It is about our Revels.
Suffer a child to beat thee!
His cause was bad you know.
Incorrigible coward! Say now; art not thou thy self a pick-pocket, and a cut-purse? say.
Comparatively it may be said, I am to a Church∣warden, a Collector for the poor or such.
The conclusion is, that if ever I hear thou men∣tionst my name again in any sense whatsoever, i'll beat thee out of reason.
In my good wishes, and prayers I may: Heaven forbid else.
Not in your prayers sir, shall you mention me, you were better never pray.
Heaven forbid I should then!
And make thine Oath good on that fly fellow that has taine away thy wench, or—
He has not tan her yet.
You have not seen her or him these two hours; has not my Lady called too, and she not to be found?
True, true: and if I be not revenged.
Do it then now, while thou art hot. She comes, here take, and keep her while thou art hot and hast her.
Is she at your dispose sir?
Your Lady gave you me.
Or am in her gift?
You are in my possession, nor shall Lucifer dis∣possess me of her.
So valiant on a sudden!
Have I not cause?
You'll have me with all faults?
Yes, and a match forever.
How means she by all faults?
A word she always uses in waggery.
By all means take her from him. What! afraid of a coward?
You must do it or take the share, hee should have had a down-right beating. Forgi' me for swearing, hoe's a verier coward then tother.
Hee will serve the betrer to flesh him. And do but note his tiranicall rage that is the vanquisher.
You will on.
Sir she is mine by promise.
Shoe's mine by act and deed sir according to the flesh, let her deny it and she can.
That shall be tried by Law.
By Law of arms and hands it shall, take that, and let her go.
Bear witness Gentlemen he struck me.
O pitiful Picture-drawer!
Will you not draw? I will then.
What would you have sir? If she be yours take her.
That's not enough, I will make thee fight, what blindness have I lived in! I would not but be valiant to be Caesar.
O brave Cit, O brave Cit.
Why dost not draw thou fellow thou?
Shoe's his he says; and she denies it not, shall I fight against him for his own?
I'll make thee fight, or cut thee into pieces.
He turns your words over to him.
Why dost thou wear a sword? only to hurt men's feet that Kick thee?
Doe you observe? Nay thou art too severe.
Pray hold your peace, i'll jowle your heads together and so beat •on with tother else.
Forgi' me for swearing. He will beat's all anon.
Why dost thou wear a Sword I say?
Some other time sir, and in fitter place.
Sirrah you lie, strike me for that, or I will beat thee abominably.
You see this Gentlemen.
And I see it too, was ever poor wench so couzend in a man?
The wench thou love and doat'st on is a whore.
How's that?
No, no, That was not right, your father was a cuckold though, and you the son of a whore.
Good, I shall love this fellow.
I can take all this upon account.
You count all this is true then. Incorrigible cow∣art! what was the last vile name you called me Mr. Swain-wit? O I remember, sirrah thou art a Pick∣pocket and a Cut-purse; And give me my money again, and him his or I will cut thy throat.
I am discovered.
Doe you answer nothing, doe you de•ur• upon it?
Hold sir I pray; Gentlemen so you will grant me pardon, and forbear the Law i'll answer you.
Agreed, agreed.
It is confessed: I am a Cut-purse.
Comparatively or positively doe you speak?
Speak positively, or I will beat thee superlatively.
Forgi' me for swearing a brave Boy.
Here is your Watch, and Money; And here is yours. Now as you are Gentlemen use no extremity.
Beyond all expectation!
All thought.
Miraculous! O the effects of valour!
Was ever woman so mistaken of both sides?
But dost thou think thou art valiant for all this though?
You were best try; or you, or both, or come all three.
I swear thou shalt have it to keep up while thou art up.
Is this your picture-drawing? are you the Kings Picture-drawer? A neat denomination for a Cut-purse, that draws the Kings Pictures out of men Pockets.
Come sir, come in with us.
Pray use me Kindly Gentlemen.
Yes, wee will use you in your kind sir.
THis is the day of my felicity,
And is the same with that the Poet Sings
Is better then an Age. Come forth Charissa,
Now you appear my comfort; and I can
No less then thank thy sweet obedience
That hast complied with my directions,
Bride-like and glorious to meet a fortune,
So great as shall beget the present envy
Of all the Virgin Ladies of the Court,
And a posterity, that through all ages,
Shall praise and magnify thy act.
Your acceptance of my duty sir
Is all that I can glory in.
How are we bound unto this noble Lady▪
That sent us our instructions.
Sure I am. If this be a true Copy.
Let Music in her soft but sweetest notes
Usher their welcome, whilst unto my thoughts
The loudest harmony resounds my triumph.
Madam most welcome.
In fewest and the softest words sir Andrew.
(He sleeps) and let him gently be conveyed
Only with those about him to his Chamber.
Charissa, go: be you his conduct, softly, softly.
I see you've brought a Priest Madam.
By all best reason,
For when we found he used Charissa's Name,
When he was calm and gentle, calling still
Charissa! whore's Charissa? a good space
Before he slept, and being then demanded
What would he with Charissa? He most readily
Replied, Fetch me Charissa and a Priest.
The Doctors in their judgements (unto which
My full opinion assented) might
Foresee, that in removing him, where she
Might be his immediate object, when he wakes,
That fresher flames to instant marriage
Would then arise.
Incomparably judicious Madam.
Yet not without your leave would I attempt it:
Without your leave, knowing your watchful care
Over your Daughter.
And that care of mine
Was (Madam) by your favour
Principal motive to this great effect.
Take all unto your self, I am content.
I'd fine steal in and watch the event of things.
But have you heard sir Andrew the mischance
Of the unfortunate Lover, distracted Frederick?
How! what of him?
H'has made himself away.
First possible?
(Hee has by this time, or the Priest is tongue∣tied▪)
He has left no estate worth begging, that's the worst of'•.
My joys come flowing no me—yet I would see.
And hear me good Sir Andrew, for the Love
I bring to ad unto your joys: for I
Foreseeing the event of this nights happiness
Have warned some friends to follow me with Revels
To celebrate the Marriage of your fortunes.
See they are come. Pray entertain 'em sir.
The Gallants that were to day so merry with me.
The same: but very harmless.
All but one sir. Did you not lose your purse to day?
What's the meaning?
Sue. We'll tell you Madam.
My purse? (I mist it at my Lady Strangeloves.)
This Picture-drawer drew it, and has drawn more of the Kings-pictures then all the Limners in the Town. Restore it sirrah.
I will not take it, it was my nelect that lost it, not he that stole it. This is my day of fortune; it comes home to me; more then I dare receive. O my joys, let me be able to contain you.
Have you another purse to lose?
I have a purse; which if I lose, i'll blame my self, none else.
Let him but come so near you as to ask forgive∣ness for the last, and if he doe not take the next, though it be six fathom deep in your pocket i'll hang for him when his time comes.
I'll watch his fingers for that.
Observe good Madam.
Sir at your feet I beg your pardon.
It needs not, prithee rise.
Never, till you pronounce that happy word
I pardon thee: or let me have some token
Of sweet assurance that I am forgiven
Which I beseech you—I beseech you grant.
In sooth thou hast it. Heaven pardon thee as I doe.
I have it sir indeed, and as your gift i'll keep it, promising before all these witnesses, i'll never venture for another.
Fore me an expert fellow; Pity he should be hanged before we have more of his breed.
Did not I tell you sir? And these are but his short arms; i'll undertake, when he makes a long arm, he shall take a purse twelve skore off.
I doe not like Thieves handsel though, This may presage some greater loss at hand.
Now Gentlemen you know your task, be expedite∣os in it.
I have cast the design for it already Madam. My inventions are all flame and spirit. But you can expect no great matter to be done extempore or in six minutes.
What matter first so wee skip up and down? our friend Jack Dainty here, Mr. Cut-purse dances daintily though.
And Mr. Cit-wit, you have worthily won my woman sir.
I have her Madam, she is mine.
I'll make her worth a thousand pound to you, besides all she has of her own.
Her faults and all Madam, we are agreed of that.
Suppose this Boy be mine.
I would he were else, that I might have him under lawful correction, and the cause of my side: for he beat me not long since.
And you be my father, and do not make much of me and give me fine things, i'll beat you again so I will; and my mother shall help me.
Agreed Billy, agreed Philly. Never was man so suddenly, so rich; Nay never look Gentlemen, she is mine, and hoe's mine own, I am sure I have got him now; And all faults are salved.
Her word in waggery is made good in earnest now though.
To your business Gentlemen; if you have a short speech or two, the boy's a pretty Actor; and his mother can play▪ her part; women-Actors now grow in request. Sir Andrew! melancholy?
I was thinking on the omen of my purse.
Fear no further mishap sir; tic ominous to fear.
Pray let's go in and see how things proceed.
Pray give me leave to make the first discovery;
Walk down into the Garden, i'll come to you;
And here are some would speak with you.
1. Into the Garden, good, let's follow him.
2. Tic not the repulse he gave us in the morning shall quit him of us.
1. No now his superintendent's turned away, we'll once more fill his head with millions.
I'll make the Dance, and give you all the footing.
Stand further off of my Pocket though.
No matter if we lose any thing, and he within ten miles of us i'll make him answer't.
I want a fifth man, I would have an od.
The Marriage is performed. The Priest has done his office—
Doctor can you dance?
And sing too, I have forgot much else.
I'll speak the Speech: Have not I forgot my Actors tone trow? I shall remember't, I could have acted'em all ore.
I can speak a Speech too Mother, must I call you Mother now?
I my Boy, now I dare vouch thee.
What think you of this tune sir for your dance? Tay dee▪ dee, &amp;c.
I'll borrow a Viol and take it of you instantly.
Pray sir, is sir Andrew Mendicant in the house.
Umh—
Is he within sir, can you tell? He's too busy it seems.
Can you tell me sir I pray, if sir Andrew be within?
Very strange! among what Nati∣on am I arrived?
Here's one in civil habit sure will answer me,
Sir may I be informed by you? saw you sir Andrew?
Te precor domino Doctor.
They are no Christians sure.
Sir may I be informed by you?
Bless me; the people are bewitched.
Do you belong to the house sir?
I hope for courtesy here Lady will
you be pleased—
O by no means, we must speak Charon fair,
O• he will not waft us o'er the Stigian Flood,
Then must we have a sop for Cerberus
To stop his yawning Chaps; Let me alone
To be your Convoy to Elizium.
This is most heathenish of all.
I'll pass that snarling triple-headed Cur
Which keeps the pallace-gate of Pluto's Court,
And guide you safe through pitchy Acheron.
What Woman Monster's this? Sweet young Gentleman, let me ask you a question.
Grim death, why rather did thou not approach
My younger days; before I knew thy fears?
Thy pains are multiplied by our years.
All Lunatic? or Gentlemen, do you want leisure O• civility to answer me?
Have you done the speeches Mr. Court wit?
I have already from the forked top
Of high Parnassus fetched 'em.
And shall my wife and Billi boy speak 'em?
As i'll instruct you.
You write admirably I confess; But you have a• ill tone to instruct in; I'll read to 'em my self, you give your words no grace.
You have the tune right, will you instruct the Music men?
And you all in the Dance immediately.
But shall we have no silken things, no whim wham• To Dance in though.
Perhaps the Bride can furnish us.
With some of her old Petticotes, can she?
No, no my Lady has tan care for all.
Come, come away to practise, and be ready.
Never was I in such a Wilderness.
But my revenge upon Sir Mendicant
Shall answer all my patience, in the Jeer
I mean to put upon him.
I will possess him with a braine-trick, now,
A mere invention of mine own (wherein
Heaven pardon me for lying) shall so nettle him.
Go back and be not seen till I come to you.
Hoe's come. Have you heard the news sir Andrew?
What sir Raphael?
That Ferdinand's restored to's wits.
I am glad on'•.
Do you take the loss of his estate so mildly
Which might have bin your own?
I hope you think me a Christian sir, but how should he arrive at such a sudden knowledge of it, if it be so? I will pretend tic true, yes sir, he is in's wits.
I thought I had lied when I did prophecy:
But sir my Nephew Fredrick—
Has made himself away, I heard of that too.
(I hope not so) yet there's another accident
Of which you have not heard, may touch you nearer,
And that indeed's my business, you sir, furiously
Wounded your Man to day.
Not dangerously I hope.
Flatter not so your self; Hoe's on the point of dying.
How!
Nor be too much dejected,
His life you may get off for (as it was done
In heat of blood) marry sir your estate
(You'll pardon me) is begged; my self has don't,
And therein, begged the Beggar.
Ha!
Take not too deep a sense of it: For if you'll yield
That Frederick yet shall have it with your Daughter,
I will remit the Estate.
O is it so?
Do you move this for a dead man?
No, he lives.
Do you practise on me? Madam where are
Here sir, and am become your Usher to such guests you?
As you must bid most welcome.
She here! i'm then again confounded.
Nay sir Raphael, I potest we will be friends notwithstanding I have outstripped you in your plot of matching your Nephew Frederick, here to his love Charissa.
But is it so?—
It is, in which I hope sir you are not offended,
Who gave me leave by any opportunity
To take her, I broke no locks nor walls for her.
I beg your pardon, and your blessing sir.
And is it so with you sir Ferdinand?
It is, and sir in testimony of my recovery, I make demand of my estate: of which you thought your self possessed.
What hopes am I fallen from? and what misery fallen into; when the little I have is begged for Man∣slaughter!
I quit you of that sir.
How could thou deal so with me?
To show my gratitude.
You overpaid me for all my former services,
For which I justly thought I ought you this.
Nor think your Daughter undervalued sir,
Three thousand pound I give him to augment
Her fortune in him.
Dreams, dreams, All these are waking Dreams.
All real truth sir, whither fly you from us?
Am I of all defeated; and by all
Abused and mocked? More room there: let me• go.
You mistake strangely.
Hark! the Revellers.
That come to celebrate your joys, which wilfully
You will not apprehend.
Tic all but show, Let go, and I will do
Something shall ad to your delight immediately.
Let him go and wear ou• his fit by him∣self.
Venus and Cupped, my Mother and I—
Help me.—I have it now.
Venus and Cupped; my Mother and I
Help me again▪ No, no, no.
Venus and Cupped; my Mother and I,
Let me alone.
Venus and Cupped my Mother and I.
There's an Actor now!
How doubtful of himself; and yet how perfect he was!
A self mistrust is a sure step to Knowledge.
Sententious sir Raphel.
Quarrels are ended Madam.
Come hither Cupped.
From my Italian Mount I did espy
(For what is hidden from a Deity?)
How faintly Hymen did his Office here
Joining two Lovers with the hand of fear;
Putting his Torch out for obscurity;
And made the Chamber (which belongs to me)
His Temple. But from hence let fear remove.
See here, the Champions for the Queen of Love.
 Courage, sent from Mars; The  Muses kill.
From wise Apollo. And the God, which still
Inspires with subtlety, sly Mercury
Sends this his  Agent. Here's  Activity
From  Jupiter himself; And from her store
Of Spies, the Moon sends This to keep the door.
With Art of Action, now, make good the place,
In right of Love to give the Nuptials Grace.
Lay by your Jollity, forbear your Sport,
And hear a story shall enforce your pity.
What black Tragedian's this?
Some Nuntius sent from Hell.
One of my Masters Minions, a Projector.
You had a Master: But to all I speak.
Your practises have sunk him from the Comforts
Of all his hopes in fortune, to the Gulf
Of deep despair; from whence he rose inflamed
With wild distraction and fantastic fury.
Hoe's mad; is he?
Mad, and has hanged himself—
Alas my Father.
How! hanged himself?
All over sir, with draughts of Projects, Suits,
Petitions, Grants, and Patents, such as were
The Studies and the Labours of his Life,
And so attired he thinks himself well armed
T'incounter all your scorns.
Room here: a Hall for a Monopolist,
You, Commonwealths informers lead me on.
Bring me before the great Assembly. See,
Fathers Conscript, I present all I have
For you to cancel.
Here's a brave show, and out-shines our de∣vise.
This is a Patent for the taking of poor John and Barrell-cod alive, and so to preserve 'em in salt-water for the benefit of the Fishmongers.
There's salt in this.
I this has some savour in'•.
This is a fresh one sir, For the catching, preser∣vation, and transportation of Butter-flies: whereby they may become a native commodity.
That's a subtle one.
This is for profits out of all the Common-Cryes in the City, As of—Oysters—Codlings—wood to cleave, Kitchen stuff, and the thousand more, even to the Matches for your Tinder-box, and all Foreigners to pay double; And a Fee out of the Link-boyes profits. But no cries to escape. Tic for a peace.
What if some should cry Murder, murder?
Or Thieves, thieves?
Or Fire, fire?
Or women cry out five Loves a penny?
All all should pay. But I submit
My self to your most honourable censure.
What dos he take us for?
Powers, Powers; A lower house at least.
And all my patents to be concealed.
Our Projects would not take with you, we'll take yours though.
He shall dance out of 'em: Music! Play out our Dance, we will dis•obe you presently.
Yes, and dismantle his Projectors too.
An excellent Moral! The Projects are all can∣cel'd, and the Projectors turned out of doors.
True Gallants, and now I am my self again,
I saw th'event of all with good esteem.
And would as well as you a Madman seem,
And now my blessings on your Son and Daughter.
This Bride, Dame Venus here, cools all this while though.
By Mr: Bridegrooms leave, i'll stir her blood a little for the good meaning she had towards me.
You may doe so. He dare's not pick her pocket,
And for her Maidenhead I dare trust him though he should
Dance quite out of sight with her.
It is well: And all are friends.
You have my potestation: and in that,
Madam, my faith before these noble friends.
Upon those honourable terms sir Ferdinando I will be yours.
Sheel' have him, it seems at last.
Shoe's a wise widow by'•: for sure enough, she saw something in his mad naked fit, when hee put her to it, to choose a husband by, wo' not out of her thought yet.
What is there more to say now Madam?
You question well.
But to Supper and to bed?
You consider well.
We have had other pastime enough.
You reason well, Would all were pleased as well
To absolve that doubt, to those we must appeal.
Ladies, your suffrages I chiefly crave
For th'humble Poet. Tic in you to save
Him, from the rigorous censure of the rest▪
May you give grace as you're with Beauty blessed.
True: Hoe's no dandling on a Courtly lap,
Yet may obtain a smile, if not a clap.
I'm at the Cavaliers. Heroic spirits,
That know both to reward, and achieve merits,
Do, like the Sun-beames, virtuously dispense
Ʋpon the lowest growths their influence,
As well as on the lofty: our Poet so
By your Phebean favours hopes to grow.
And now you generous spirits of the City
That are no less in money then brain witty,
My self, my Bride, and pretty Bride boy too,
Our Poet for a Boun prefers to you.
And though you taste of no such Bride-ale Cup,
He hopes y' allow the Match to be clapped up.
And, if this Play be nought (yes so he said)
That I should give ye my Mother for a Maid.
And why you now? or you? or you? I'll speak enough for you all, you now would tell the Audients they should not fear to throng hither the next day: for you will secure their Purses cut-free, and their pockts pick-free. Tic much for you to do though. And you would say that all
your projects are put down, and you'll take up no new: but what shall be (spectators) to please you. And you Poetic part induces you, t'appologize now for the Poet too, as they have done already, you to the Ladies, you to the Cavaliers and Gentry; you to the City friend, and all for the Poet, Poet, Poet, when alls but begging tho. I'll speak to 'em all, and to my Country folks too if here be any o'em: and yet not beg for the Poet though, why should we? has not he money for his doings? and the best price too? because we would have the best: And if it be not, why so? The Poet has showed his wit and we our man∣ners. But to stand beg, beg for reputation for one that has no countenance to carry it, and must have money is such a Pastime!—If it were for one of the great and curious Poets that give these Plays as the Prologue said, and mo∣ney too, to have 'em acted; For them, indeed, we are bound to ply for an applause. Because they look for no∣thing else, and scorn to beg for themselves. But then you'll say those Plays are not given to you; you pay as much for your seats at them as at these, though you sit ne'er the merrier, nor rise the wiser, they are so above common understanding; and though you see for your love you will judge for your money, why so for that too, you may. But take heed you displease not the Ladies though who are their partial judges, being bribed by flattering verses to commend their Plays; for whose fair cause, and by their powerful voices to be cried up wits of Court, the right worshipful Poets boast to have made those enter∣lutes, when for ought you know they bought 'em of Un∣varsity Scholars though, and only show their own wits in owning other men's; and that but as they are like neither. As thus, do you like that Song? yes▪ I made it. Is that Scene or that Jest good? Yes, It was mine; and then if all be good it was all mine. There's wit in that now. But this small Poet vents none but his own, and his by whose care
and directions this Stage is governed, who has for many years both in his fathers days, and since directed Poets to write &amp; Players to speak, till he trained up these youths here to what they are now. I some of 'em from before they were able to say a grace of two lines long to have more parts in their pates then would fill so many Dry∣fats. And to be serious with you, if after all this, by the venomous practise of some, who study nothing more then his destruction, he should fail us, both Poets and Players would be at loss in Reputation. But this is from our Poet again, who tells you plainly all the helps he has or desires; And let me tell you he has made pretty merry Jigges that have pleased a many. As (le'me see) the Anti∣pods, and (oh I shall never forget) Tom Hoyden of Tanton Deans. He will bring him hither very shortly in a new Motion, and in a new pair of slops and new nether stocks as brisk as a Body-lowse in a new Pasture.
Mean while, if you like this, or not, why so?
You may be pleas' to clap at parting though.

