BEgin, thou royal Muse, Envy ne'er uses,
•o dwell in gentle Courts, or sacred Muses:
To beg of them that common curtsy
Must grant; were to condemn both them, and thee:
Thy Came assures thee, they will all agree,
Gently to bear their Actors infancy;
Infants oft please; the choicest Poet song,
Breeds less delight then the infants prattling tongue.
Then let me here entreat your minds to see,
In this our England, fruitful Sicely,
Their two twin Isles; so like in soil and frame,
That as two twins they are but another same.
But this they beg, which you may grant with ease:
That all these pains to pleasure you, may please.
CVma! bear home our spoils, and con∣quering weapons,
And truss them on a wreath as our just trophy:
And when Can•ron returns, return to me.
Thus: if but thus: yet thus my state is better,
While lesser cares do laugh and mock the greater;
This change is best when changing I frequent,
Even now that moist, now this dry element,
When with this sceptre, setting on the Land,
The scaly footlesse people I command:
When riding on my wooden horse, I see
The Earth that never moos, remove from me.
A•d why my friend doth not this guise beseem me?
In this I• am not wretchlesse as you deem me•
Not that I censure, but demand the cause,
Why being borne, and bred, in shepherds laws;
You have our Hills, and Downs, and Gro•es forsaken,
And to these Sands, and Waives your self betaken.
Sh•pheard or fisher, I am still the same,
I am a sea guest not for gain, but game.
A gamesome life? thus with unarmed arms
To fight against winds, and winters sharpe alarms,
And paddle in chill Neptuns Icy lap?
But if in fishing any pleasure be,
In Shepherds life there is much more say we.
Yet Fishers life with me doth most consort,
This sporting serves to moralise my sport:
Viewing the storms, and troublesome waives; I find
Some thing in nature rest-lesse as my mind:
Each captive fish tells met that in deaths snare,
My heart is not the only prisoner.
Walk along the shore—
Oft there he walks
Oft there with me or with the waives hee talks.
There in the tide I see fleet fortunes changing,
And state of man, weak state: that's never standing:
But rises still, or false all as the maine,
That abc to flow, or flows to ebb again.
Yet fortune I accuse thee not for raging,
Let others plain, I never felt the changing,
Bud wast thou at the first, and so art still,
Before I knew what's good I knew the ill:
And since of all my goods thou first bereau'st me,
I near expected good, thou near deceiud'st me;
Therefore although Oracle from whence
I late arrived, would feed vain confidence;
Yet since so sure assurance thou doest give me,
Still of the two fortune I must believe thee.
Vain fear when the Oracle doth promise good;
The heavens decrees by chance weere near withstood.
You fear without a cause, oft cause-lesse fright,
Is the only cause that makes that on vs light
Which most wee fear, ever a jealous eye
Makes enemies by fearing enmity.
What fearful tempest doe the waives foretell,
When seas without a storm to mountains swell.
Ill is invited when it is suspected
And grief already come where he's expected.
The greatest evils oft are where thee show not.
I fear the more, because my fear I know not.
Music! how sad it sounds; my damped heart
Tells me in these sad strains I bear a part:
I wrong thee fate, or else thou now doest strain thee
Which some unused weleomet' entertain me.
Go go thy countries joy and jewel,
The seas and rocks were ever cruel;
Men then may pity thee in vain,
But not help nor ease thy payne.
Take then these tnares they la•est due,
For ever now alas adieu.
Glaucus; to thee I frendlesse maid,
In these last gifts my vows have paid:
These once Olindas, now are thine,
This net, and hook, this rod, and line:
Thou know, why here my sports I give thee,
Hence came my joys, and here they leave me.
Olinda, if that smiles were proofs of sorrow,
Sure I should think thee full of woe, and sadness,
but in so heaped grief, when every eye
Yields tribute to so great a misery.
Thou only smilst, why every tear thou see, is paid to thee—
The less I need to pay:
Gladucilla I cannot morn, when I am married.
Married? now heaven defend me, if this be marriage•
So to be gript in paws of such a monster,
And bedded in his bowels—
Olinda I should weep,
And spend the short'nd breath that fate affords me,
In cursing fate which makes my breath so short.
Peace peace my Cosma, thou would
Have me mad with reason!
No: reason is never senseless.
Think thou me sense less friend?
Dost not thou prove it?
Why my Glaucilla I see thy drowned eyes,
I feel thy kind embraces, and which thou see not,
Nor feelst, I feel and see, more mirth and joy
Spring in my heart; then if I now were leading
To the best bed that Sicely affords me.
Glaucilla if there were but fit occasion
That I might show thee this tormented heart•
It would affright thee friend to hear me tell
How many deaths live in so narrow Hell.
We stay too long; go on these idle tears
Quench not her grief, but add new kindled fears.
Decaeus; no fear within this breast is lying.
Who living dies, fears not to live by dying.
Saw you the troop which past along here?
Yes.
Who is it led with such a mournful show?
My sister.
Who the fair Olinda?
Yes:
And doe you know the end and purpose?
No:
Nothing but no and yes? fie fie Perindus
Your too much passion, shows you want affection;
Your sister in such sort conveyed, and you
So careless of her grief? it much misseemes you
Why learn you not the cause?
Thou counsailst well,
Grief weary of it self, all sense depriving.
Felt neither sense, nor grief, by ouergrieuing:
But see my Atyches: what different passions
Strive in his doubtful face, pity would weep,
And danger fine would rock high thoughts a sleep,
Whiles resolution chides the daring fear,
And courage makes poor fear afrade to fear.
Thou God that rulst the suns bright flaming cart
If thou my grand-sire art, as sure thou art
For in my breast I feel thy powers divine,
Firing my soul, which tells me I am thine:
Direct my hand and guide this pointed dart,
That it may pierce, and rive the monsters heart.
Atyches.
Ah Perindus this luckless hour
Bids thee unwelcome, fly and never more,
Never approach to view this deadly shore.
Why whats the news?
Thy sister the fair Olinda must die.
So must we all.
But none of all as she.
Can tell the cause and manner?
yes; and till the sun
Twixt noon and night his middle race shall run,
The rites will not be finished; it is briefly thus.
Thou know by Neptunes temple close their grows
A sacred garden, where every flowers blow•
Here blushing roses, there the Lilies white,
He•e Hya•inth, and there Narcissus bright•
And underneath, the creeping violets show:
That sweetness o•t delights to dwell below:
Vaulted aboue with thousand fragrant trees,
And under pa'ud with shamefaced Strawberries,
Which creeping lowe doe sweetly blushing tell,
That fairest pleasantst fruits, doe humblest dwell.
Briefly a little Heaven on Earth it seems:
where every sweet and pleasure fully streams.
Fisher thou now describ'st some paradise,
Can any ill from so much good arise?
Henbane and roses in our garden grow,
Ah that from fruits so sweet, such gall should flow!
Here fair Olinda, with her Mymphs arrives,
And time away, time to fast posting drives,
While Nago that deformed enchanter, ranging
Along these trees, his shape and habit changing
Seemed then Glaucilla, such his statelike eyes,
Such hair, such lips, such cheeks, such rosie dies,
So like Glaucillas self that had she spied him,
More would she doubt her self, the more she eyd him
Can art forge nature with so true a lie?
The falsest coin is fairest to the eye,
Singling thy sister forth, they chance to see,
The sacred graft of that Herperian tree,
Whose golden apples much the eye delighting,
Would tempt the hands: the longing taste inviting:
And now the subtle witch spies fit occasion,
And with fit speech and oaths, and soft perswation,
So words hee mind; that she (ha little guessing,
What monster lay under that faind dressing,
Pulls of the unhappy fruit straight down she falls,
And thrice a thundering voice Dieaeus calls;
The priest knew what the fearful voice portended,
And fair Olinda half dead apprehended:
And to the temple bears her, there reserving
Till the third day with death pays her deserving
So Neptune, bids, that who shall touch the tree.
With hands profane, shall by Malorcha die;
Malorcha bread in seas, yet seas do dread him,
As much more monstrous then the seas that bred him
Ah my Olinda who can pity thee
That would not pity the excellent Thalander.
It is just ye seas well doth impartial fate
With monstrous death pnni•h thy monstrous hate.
And whither art thou now thus armed going.
Down to the fatal rock I go to see
And act a part in this foul Tragedy.
Why can thou hope such losses to repair?
Who nothing hopes yet nothing ought despair.
What it is impossible? ah cease to prove?
What ever was impossib•e to love?
It is certain thou adst thy death to hers
Unworthy love that life for love prefers
What good can do when thou can not restore her.
to live with her or else to die before her.
It is fate that in this monster bids engrave her.
And it is my fate to die with her or save her.
In vain to fight against all conquering Jove:
But in my hand shall fight Jove conquering love.
Atych•s why should thou thus betray thy self?
She was my sister, and as dear to me
As ever was a sister to a brother:
Had fate felt any hope, my willing hand
Should be as Pressed to give her aid as any.
Were not the fight against heaven I might adventure,
But here I needs must leave her, though a brother
She never loved me.
I loved her ever.
More shouldest thou hate her now:
Can Seas or Rivers stand can Rocks remove?
Could they? yet could I never cease to love:
Perindus, if now I see thee last, farewell:
Within thy breast all joys and quiet dwell.
Adieu: Olinda now to thee I fly
For thee I lived, for thee i'll gladly die,
Go choicest spirit: the heavenly love regard thee,
And for thy love, with life, and love reward thee.
Perindus thou know how late was my arrival,
And short abode in this your Sicely,
And how delighted with these accidents
So strange and rare, I have decreed to make
Some longer stay, but since I saw this Atyches
His love more strong then death, a resolution
Beyond humanity I much desired
To know him, what he is, and what his country
That breeds such minds: let me entreat you then
At large to give me all this story
Somewhat t'will east your grief, just are his pains
That sorrow with more sorrow entertains.
It will be tedious, and my heavy mind
Fit words for such a tale can never find:
Yet I'll unfold it all, that you may see
How beauteous love shows in inconstancy:
Who hath not heard of Glaucus love? haplesse
Whilst fairest Seylla baths him, love inspires
At once herself she cools and him she fires.
A sea god burnt in flames, and flames most please him
Glaucus finds neither waives nor herbs to ease him
Cold were his eyes more cold her coy disdain:
Yet none of boeth could quench loves schorching flame:
Till Circa whom scorned love to madness moves
Quenches at once her beauty and his loves.
There stands she now a proof of jealous spite
As full of horror now as then delight:
The fruit of jealousy is ever cursed,
But when tic grafted in a crab tic worst.
Bad in a man, but monstrous in a woman,
And which the greater monster hard to know
Then jealous Circa, or loathed Scylla now
After when time had easd his grief for Scylla,
Circa with charms, and prayers and gifts had won him
Her lou• she reaped in that high rocky frame,
Which ever since hath borne fair Circes name:
The Moon her fainting light 10 times had fed,
And 10 times more her globe had emptied:
When two fair twins she brought, whose beauteous shine,
Did plainly prove their parents were divine.
The male Thalander, the female called Glaucilla,
And now to youth arrived so fair they are
That with them but themselves who may compare,
All else excelling; each as fair as other
Thus best compared the sister with the brother.
So lively to the ear thy speeches show them,
That I must half affect before I know them.
Vain words that think to blase so great perfection,
Their perfectness more proves words imperfection.
But if these words some little sparkle move,
How would their sight inflame thy soul with love?
Scarce did his hair betray his blooming years,
When with his budding youth his love appears,
My self and sister equally he loves,
And as on those two poles heaven ever moves
So on vs two his soul still fixed, still loving
Was ever constant, by his constant moving:
Yet never knew wee which was most respected,
Both equally and both he most affected.
In me his worthy love with just reflection,
Kindled an equal and a like affection,
But she my sister most ungrateful maid,
With hate, ah hateful vice, his love repaid•
Cea'st he not then to love? this sure wee hold
That love not back reflected soon grows cold.
No though all spite within her bosom swelled,
Spite of her spite his love her hate exceld;
At length to show how much he was neglected,
His rival ugly rival she affected:
Such rival could I wish whose foul distortion,
Would make seem excellent a mean proportion,
For Mago, thus his hated riuall's named)
All black and foul, most strange and ugly framed
Begot by Saturn, on a sea-borne witch,
Resembling both, his hairs like threads of pitch
Distorted feet, and eyes sunk in his head:
His face dead pale, and seemed but mooing lead
Yet worse within, for in his heart to dwell
His mothers furies have their darkest hell.
Yet when Thalander wooed her, she neglects him,
And when this monster flatterd she respects him.
In•t possible. troth Sir but that I fear me,
If I should speak some women should ore: hear me•:
Meet thinks I now could rail on all their kinds,
But who can sound the depth of women's minds?
Shortly to come to'th' height of all their wrong,
So could this Mago fill his smooth•t tongue,
That she •halander banished from her sight,
Never to see her more his sole delight:
And he to none his hidden grief in parted,
But full of loving duty straight departed
Leaving our groves in woods he grows a ranger
To all but beasts and senseless trees a stranger.
Thus in a desert like his love forsaken
Wh•n no•hinge but cold death his flames could slacken
Atyches spied him• but so grief had pined him.
That when he saw him plain, he could not find him.
And so had sorrow all his graces re•t
That in him, of him no•hinge now was left
Only his love; with which his latest brea•h
H• powered into his ears, so slept i• death.
The rest when better leisu•e time affo•ds
This •uk•ess• day asks rather tears •hen words.
Who near saw death, may death commend,
Call it •oyes Prologue troubles end:
The pleasing s•up that quiet rocks him,
Where neither care; nor fancy mocks him.
But who in nearer space doth eye him
Next to hell, as he•l defy him:
No state• no age, no sex can move him,
No beggars prey, no Kings reprove him•
In midst of mirth, and loves alarms,
He pulls the Bride from Bride grooms arms
The beauteous Virgin he contemn•s,
The guilty with the just condemns.
All wear his cloth and no•e denies.
Dressed in fresh coloured liveries.
Kings lieu as beggars lie in graves,
Nobles as base, the free as slaves,
Blessed who on virtues life relying,
Dies to vice, thus lives by dying.
But fond that making life thy treasure,
Surfetst in joy, art drunk in pleasure.
Sweets do make the sower more tart.
And pleasure sharp's deaths keenest dart.
Deaths thought is death to those that live,
In living joys, and never grieve.
Happelesse that happy art and know no tears
Who ever lives in pleasure, lives in fears
I Have been studying, what bold hardy fool
Invented fishers art, th•t tired with safety,
Would needs go play with waives, winds, death and hell,
The sum of fishers life is quickly found,
To sweat, freeze, watch, fast toil be starved or drowned•
Well had my Mistress found no better trade,
I would ere this have left these dabbling deities,
But she while other fishers fish on the seas,
Sends me a fishing on the Land for flesh:
No, game arriue's amiss unto her net,
For shees not borne among the cliffs, and rocks
But from Messena comes to sport herself
And fish for fools along these craggy shores,
I took her for a Nymph, but shees a woman
A very woman loves all she sees,
This for his sprightly wit, and that for Music,
Him cause hoe's fair, another for his blackness
Some for their bashfulness, more for their boldness,
The wiseman for his silence, the fool for his bible babble;
And now she longs in haste for another fat cods-head,
A good fat sow, and I must snare one for her
She has (let me see I have the tallie)
Some hundred lovers, yet still desires another
The first that passes all the rest in love
Is called Pas: Ho know you your cue so well?
He is a malum collum, alas poor fool;
He would engross my Mistress to himself
He would have her all alone, let her alone for that
And for that it will not be, he raves and swears
And chides and fights, but what need I describe him
He will do it himself, come, begin begin.
Who sows •he seas, or plowes the easy shore?
Yet I, fond I more fond, and senseless more:
Who strives in nets to prison in the wind?
Yet I in love a woman thought to bind:
Fond, too fond thoughts, that thought in love to tie,
One more inconstant then inconstancy:
Look as it is with some true April day,
The sun his glorious beams doth fair display,
And straight a cloud breaks into fluent showers,
Then shines and rains, and clears and straight it lours:
And twenty changinges in one hour do prove,
So, and more changing is a women's love.
Fond then my thoughts, that thought a thing so vain,
Fond love, to love what could not love again.
Fond hopes, that ancho• on so false a ground,
Fond thoughts that fired with love, in hope thus drowned:
Fond thoughts, fond hope, fond heart, but fondest I,
To grasp the wind, and love inconstancy.
Ah Cosma, Cosma.
Ah Pas, ass passing ass; ho, ha, he:
Fond thoughts, fond hope, fond heart, but fondest I,
To grasp the wind, and love inconstancy; ha, ha, he,
This fool would have I know not what, the sea
To stand still like a pond, the Moon never to change,
A woman true to one hee knows not what:
She that to one all her af•actions brings
Cages herself and pinions Cupids wings.
Le•'s see whose the second; O the second
Is an old dotard who though now four•score
Yet nature having left him some few hot embers
Rack't up in cold ashes, thinks himself a•l fire and flame
And the•before like the dwarfs
Who though near so old, •et still consort with boys
So he among the freshest, you•h in dancing
In songs and sporting spends his fadish time.
When• snow on's head, shows in his eye
With winter looks gives summer words the lye
His name is Fredocaldo; he knows his name
No sooner called but comes• what i'st he reads?
Upon my life some sonnet, Isle stand and hear.
I, I am silver white so is thy check
Yet who for whiteness will co•damn it?
If wrinkled, of thy forehead is not flecke
Yet who for frowning dare contemn it.
Boys full of folly youth of rage
Both but a journey to old age
I am not yet fair Nymph to old to love
And yet women love old lovers
Nor yet to waving light, as false to prou•
youth a foul in•id fairly co•ers.
Yet when my light is in the wane
Thy suns renew my spring again.
Pretty very pretty, why yet I see
My brain is still as fresh as in my youth.
And quick invention springs as currently
As in the greenest head: this little disti•ke
I made this morn, to •end unto my lou•.
See, here's a leg how full, how little waining,
My limbs are s•il accompanied
With their kind fellow heate, no shaking palsy
Nor cramp has tan possession, my swift blood streams
Runs quick and speedy, through their burning channels
Pi'sh I am young, he is not ancient
That hath a •iluer b•dge of hoary hairs
But he that in sweet love is dead and cold
So old men oft are young, and young men old
I'll take my farewell of this pretty verse
It is a pretty verse, I'll read it again
If I am silver white and. O ho my spectacles.
Ah naughty boy alas my spectacles
Ha ha he your eyes Fredocaldo take up your eyes ho, ha, he.
Ah naughty boy alas my spectacles
Whether is he gone? O if I find him
Find me without eyes? ho, ha, he.
O my ve•ses my verses,
A very pretty verse: how fresh a brain that made it
If I am silver white and. nay if you'll try your limbs come on.
Farewell f•oct: how? Perind••? oh how fitly
After warm winter comes a chill could summer
This youth in all things is that old mans contrary
This a cold May, that a hot January
All my art cannot blow up one sparkle
If I should stay he would blast me, adieu sol in Pises
Farewell good Caldofredo, I must after Fredocaldo
Blessed is that fisher swane that sank in the flood
Hoe's food for them whom he would make his food.
But I most wretched, who so many years
Live safe in waters to be drowned in fears.
In fire and sorrow like Titius is my life
A covered table furnished still for grief.
Hell love your pains, for all poor souls can p•ove
Is felt and spoke but thus careless I love.
Phoebus write thou this glorious victory
And grave it on thy shining axel-tree
That all may see a fisher hath done more
Then any age hereafter or before.
Alcippus what news? me thinks I plain descry
Joy mixed with wonder in thy doubtful eye.
Perindus most happy have I found thee here
Is'st good ah tell me, yet my grounded fear
Pleads hope impossible.
Were you away
To the Ecco I had told it, as grief, so joy
Pressed down is burdensome, for now I see
Joy is no joy i• bard from company
Olinda by the Priests enchained-fast
Unto the fatal rock down to the wast
Was naked left, which thus was better drea•t
Beauty when most unclothed is clothed best:
And now the Priest all rites had finished
And those last words and hidden verses said
Then thus he loud proclaims, who dare adventure
Against this monstrous beast, now let him enter
And if he conquer by his bold •ndeauour
This goodly maid shall bee his prize forever
Straight was the monster loosed, whose ugly sight
Struck every trembling heart with cold affright
Some sweat, some freeze, some shriek, some silent wear
The eye durst neither wink nor see for fear:
Heaven hid his light, the fearful sun did shrow'd
His glorious eye under a jet•y cloud.
Saw thou the Orke?
Yes, and my panting heart
To think I saw it in my breast doth start.
Can'•t thou describe it?
Never tongue can tell
What to it self no thought can portray well.
More big then monstrous Python, whom men fine
By Phoebus first was bred, by Phoebus slain.
His teeth thick ranked in many a double band
Like to an armed battle ready stand
His eyes sunk in's head, more fearful stood
Like bloody flame or like to flaming blood
Not any ear upon his head appears,
No plaint nor prayer, no threat nor charm he fears•
In sea and land he lives and takes from both
Each monsters part which most we fear and loath,
Soon as he felt him loose, he shakes his crest
And hungry posts to his ready feast
And as through seas his oars a passage tear
The thronging waives fly fast, and roar for fear.
Me thinks I see him and the unhappy lover
Struck through with fright.
In all their shrieks he smiles
Stretching his arms, to fight himself composes
And nothing feared his body interposes
Shaking a dart the monster he defies
Who scorning such a foe to's banquet flies
But he with certain aim his Javelin drives
Which as the sender bad it's eye arrives.
And fixed in's hollow sight, deep drenched stood
Quenching the bloody fire with fiery blood
The wounded monster loudly gins to yell
If Hell doe speak such is the voice of Hell,
And to revenge his hurt he flies apace
The other dart met him in the middle race
And as along he blindly fast doth post
His way and t'ther eye together lost
Thus blind he quickly dies, and being dead
Leaves to his foe his spoils, his paws his head.
Hercules thy twelve works with this one conferd
This one before thy twelve might be preferred.
Perindus then might thou have seen how love
Is not more bold then fearful, he that strove
And conquered such a monster with a dart
To her fair eyes yields up his heart
Ah had thou seen how fearful modesty
Joined with chaste love did chide the hungry eye
Which having long abstaind and long time fasted
Some of those dainties now would fine have •acted
Ah hast thou seen which such fit time he got
How love to much remembering love forgot
How the eye which such a monster did outface
Durst not look up upon her eye to gaze
How the hand which such a bold fight undertook
When her it touched as with a palsy shook.
As all that saw it thou would soon have said
That never lived so fortunate a maid.
Most happy such a danger to recover
More happy far by having such a lover.
And hark the Fishers home the victor bringing
Chant loud his conquest, his due praises singing.
Olinda if thou yield not now
The Orke less monstrous wa• the• thou
No monster to the eye more hateful
Then beauty to desert ungrateful
Yield then thy heart and hand
And sing along this sand
Love rule heaven, sea, and land.
Atyches how forest thou? O let these arms inlace thee
Me thinks I hold half heaven when I embrace thee.
Will Perindu• go with vs to the temple?
Most willingly and when thou once art there
Then it is a temple • may justly swear.
Yet more larbooad! hole up against that wave now star∣board!
I thin•e we are upon the shallow
Hold in Cancrone I •mell the shore
Nay by your leave it was I that smelt it, for I am sure my nose kissed it.
Take hold of the stretcher, and then fasten the rope.
A rope stretch al• such by•tle-head botemen, had it been
my lot to have been Master at sea as it is yours, wee had near taken such a journey in •uch a fly-boate, such a sows-eare, such an egge-shell.
Come help to lave her.
Its a true she• boot I warrant she leaks brackish all the year long.
Will you come Sir you are yet in my jurisdiction on the water.
Will you scale the fish sir, will you bring forth the nets sir, will you spread them upon the rocks sir you are at my demand Sir upon the land, we'll be known in our place (Scrocca drinks) is that your lauing.
Ah ha this is something fresher then Neptuns salt potion, see not what a pickle I amin, but O those Scyllaes ban∣dogs (bough wough) our boat bepist her self for fear.
I and thou thy self for company; faith wee were almost in Thetis powdering tub, but now Scrocca• lets off with our liquor: Sirrah half to this blew-beard Neptune, but he gets not one drop on it.
I and withal remember the roaring boy B•reas (puff puff) hold: you bear your poop too high Cancrone, y'ad need go pump.
So me thinks my brain is somewhat warmer now my wirt gear's on.
Let Neptune rage and roar and some
For now Concrone's safe at home.
How now Cancrone! what? poefied?
Why Scrocca is it such a matter for a waterman to be a poet now a days?
I but I wonder that in all thy Poems thou never midst an Epitaph for thy grandsire that was eaten up by the Cy∣clops.
Ah Scrocca I prithee doe not ming my grand-sire, thou'lt spoil my poetry presently; those hungry side slops; they eat him up crust and crum, and then kilt him too and
that which grieves me most: hee never sent me word who it was that bit of's head, yet faith, one draught more and have at him.
Nay if one draught will serve, he shall never starve for an Epitaph.
So: it's coming I have it Scrocca.
Here lies Cancrones grandsire, who sans boat.
Sands wind, sans seas sailed down the Cyclops throat.
Here lies? Why will you grave an Epitaph on the Cyclops belly?
I•me sure hee lies yonder.
Mass thou say true, but all our late writers be∣gin so.
Well sir will you walk home and warm your poet∣call vain at the kitchen fire.
Yes I care not if I doe, for I shall ne'er be well till I have got the chimney corner over my head.
Farewell ye rocks and seas, I think yee'l sh•w it
That Sicelie affords a water-Poet
Ho, ha, he; I have laughed my self weary: i'st possible?
That fire and frost should thus keep house together,
Sure age did much mistake him, when it set
His snowy badge on his blew rivaled chin.
Were not his faces furrows filled with snow
His hams vnstrung his head so straightly bound
His eyes so rainy, and his skin so dry
He were a pretty youth.
What old acqaintance? lie by Mistress a little
I'll fish a while, I may chance to catch
A Cods-head; Isle stand and hear them.
Did not I tell you we were wrong? sir.
Me thought, we were at land vile soon.
I prithee on which hand was the cape of Peloro,
When wee left Sillies bandogs.
That did belong to thy water o•fice to mark,
But sure it stood straight before a little of the on side,
Right upon the left, and then it left, the right,
And turned west by East, and then stood still North, North, By South.
Well bold woodcock
Wi•hout a bias.
Come look about you to your land office.
I'll hold a ped of oysters the rock stands on yonder side;
Look this way: I prithee is not this Circe's •ocke,
I like thy reasons wondrous well it is her rock and her distaff too.
In•e spin• some thread out of this distaff.
Then I swear by Circes juggling box wee come in of the wrong side.
Look into my poll, can thou not perceive by the co∣lore of my brains that I have vnlac't her knave•y? thou know Ci•ces is a plague wi•ch.
I she did translate a good father of mine into an hog.
She with her •hisking white wand, has given this rock a box ō the ear•, &amp; set it one the other side of the country
I care not where Circes dwells, but I am sure we dwell on this side, and wee have pushed in the clean contrary way, and wat you what, wee have leapt through Hell-mouth: O
strange how—
O the Orke the huge hunt, puntie.
Up cancrone I tell thee wee have escaped him.
I tell thee Sirocco wee have not escaped him, he has eat vs up
These fi•hers are new returned from fishing, and know not that Atyches has slain the Orke, I'll Orke them.
Ah Sirocco I would this O•rke were in Neptunes belly, that will suffer such a worm to live in his dominions, I am a very macherell if the very name be not worse to me then, three nights cold fishing.
Me thinks I am colder too then I was before.
Let me strike then before the iron be key cold
What hardy fishers dare approach this shore
Vntrod by men this twenty years and mo•e.
Good now Conchyli• doe not the Norke
Wee did eat the go•den apples; wee.
What old Cancr•no? I am •orrie for your chance The best that I advise you is •hat you r•turn round about the Cape presently before the O•ke smell you (if he were within twelve score he might wind them) foh.
Nay I shall be deuourd.
P•ucke out a good heart man.
If I could doe so I might save the Orke a labour, that Will be done to my hand I know I shall be deuourd.
Why man.
Why my grandsire was deflourd, and they say deflouring goes in a blood.
If I rid you both of this fear will you worship m•e.
O wo•shipfull water-wight.
O Neptunes father.
O Glaucus Mother.
Why then thus; my deities oracle gives you answer thus
When 2 famous fishers fall upon this sand
Let them for fear of m•ghtie Orke, leave seas sail home by land
I have not pinched •hem for measure
I have given them Oracle up to •he elbows.
Sail ther's your office Scrocca, you must go:
By land, there's your office go you.
What can you not expound.
Drag up your boat and home-ward cr•••e this shore
W•e are all made, I vnde•stood you sir, but I did not know your meaning.
Pull you the b•te at nose •'le lift at the arse.
Manners lack this is a land voyage, I am master.
Ho; roh; droh;, Horka, Cork, Suga ponto; the monster coms down under the boat turn it over Isle help:
Retire thou sacred monster (cre•pe on)
These sweet souls a•e no f••d foe• thee (on on)
It is time these souls were spent they begin
To stink, retire thou great god Neptunes sc•urge•
Retire I say while this twin tortoise passes
And dare not on•e to touch these fi•h flesh asses.
Ho, ha, he, farewell good tortoise, what good foutch? Haddock •are and C•d? you shall walk with me Isle be your O•ke: yet isle carry the Cod to my mistress Cosma. I know she loves it well: let Conchilio be turned into an Oyster if hee would not play the O•ke every day for such sport, it shall go hard but •le with my friend •ancr•no yet once a∣gain.
Happy happy Fishers swain
If that ye knew your happiness
Your sport tastes sweeter by your pai•es,
Sure hope your labour relishes
Your net your living, when you eat
Labour finds appetite and meat.
When the seas and tempest roar
You either sleep or pipe or play
And dance along the golden shore
Thus you spend the night an• day
Shrill winds a pipe, hoarse seas a taber
To fit your sports or ease your labour.
First ah first the holy Muse
Raped my souls most happy eyes
Who in those holy groves d•e use
A•d learn those sacred mysteries
The years and months, old age and birth
The palsies of the trembling earth.
The flowing of the sea and Moon
And ebb of both, •nd how the tides
Sink in themselves and backward run.
How palled Cynthia closely slides
Stealing her brother from our sight
So robs herself and him of light.
But if cold natures frozen parts
My dull slow heart and cloudy brain•
Cannot reach those heavenly nets
Next happy is the fishers pain
Whose love roofs peace doe safely •id
And shut out fortune, want and pride.
There shall I quiet fearless reign
My boys my subjects taught submission
About my court my sons my train
Nets my pu•naiors of provision,
The steer my septer, pip• musician
Labour my Physic, no Physician.
So shall I laugh the angry seas and sky
Thus singing may I li•e, and singing di•.
when Attyches with better sight I eye,
Some power me thinks beyond humanity,
Some heavenly power within his bosom lies
And plainly looks through the windows of his eyes.
Thalander, if that souls departed rest
In other men, thou lives in his breast,
He is more then he seems, or else— but see.
My love, my hate, my joy, my misery.
Perindu•, whither turnst t••u? if thy wandering love
My love eschew, yet nothing can thou see
Why thou should fly me, I am no monster, friend,
That seeks thy spoil, look on me, I am she
To whom the hast vowed all faith and loyalty,
Whom thou with vows and prayers and oaths hast plied
And praying wept• and weeping been denied,
And died in the denial, I am she
Whom by my brothers importunity
Thalanders means thou want, who still persevere,
Though thou art changed, I loving love for ever.
Tell me am I altered in mind or bodies frame?
What then I was am I not still the same?
Yes, yes, thou art the same both then and now
As fair, more fair then heavens clearest brow.
What have I now deserved?
In heaven to dwell:
The purest star deserves not heaven so well.
Perindus, I am the same, ah I am she
I was at first, but thou, thou art not hee
Which once thou wast.
True, ah too true:
Then was I happy being so distressed,
And now most miserable by being blessed.
Tell me what thus hath changed thy former love,
Which once thou sworst nor heaven nor hell could move:
How hath this scorn and hate stolen in thy heart
And on a Commick stage, hast learnt the art
To play a tyrant, and a foul deceiver?
To promise mercy, and perform it never?
To look more sweet, maskt in thy looks disguise,
Then mercies self, or pities gracious eyes.
Fa, la, la, fa, la, la, lah.
Ah me most miserable.
Ah me most miserable
Wretched Glaucilla, where hast thou set thy love!
Thy plaints his joy, thy tears his laughter move,
Senseless of these he sings at thy lamenting,
And laughs at thy h•arts tormenting.
Wretched Glaucilla.
More wretched Perindus,
Where by refusing life, thou die, for whom
Thou lives, in whom thou drowsed thy joy and breath,
And to accept, thy life is more then death.
Perindus.
Fa, la, la, fa, la, la, lah.
Haplesse and fond, too fond and haplesse maid,
Whose hate with love, whose love with hate is paid.
Or learn to hate where thou hast hatred proved,
Or learn to love again, where thou art loved,
Thy love gets scorn: doe not so dearly earn it,
At least learn by forgetting to vnlearne it.
Ah fond and haplesse maid, but much more fond
Can thou vnlearne the lesson thou has cond?
Since then thy fixed love will leave thee never
He hates thy love, leave thou his hate forever,
And though his ice might quench thy loves desiring
Live in his love and die in his admiring•
Olinda so late abroad?
The sun is now at rest, heavens winking eyes
All drowsy seem, love only rest denies:
But thou art free as air, what is the reason?
What glass is this?
Prithee Glaucilla
Doe not thus search my souls deep ranckling wound
Which thou can never help when thou hast found.
Thy soul was wont to lodge within mine ear
And ever, was it safely harboured there
My ear is not acquainted with my tongue
That either tongue or ear• should doe thee wrong
Yet doe not tell me, I'll thee• I spy
Thy burning fever is thy teltale eye.
Thou loust deny it not, thou loust Olinda
In vain a chest to lo•ke up flames we seek
Which now with purple fires thy blushing cheeks
You are such a mistress in thy loving art
That all in vain I hide my •ove sick heart
And yet as vain to open it now tic hid.
Why so loves hee another?
I would he did.
Strange wi•h in love, much rather had I die,
Is he then perished?
Yes and with him I.
I prithee tell me all doe not conceal it,
Isle morn with thee if that I cannot heal it.
Hear then and who so ere maiyst be a bride•
Learn this of me to hate thy maiden pride.
Atyches tho• know?
Thy champion?
The same
Almost a year since he came to this town
When finding me fishing along the shore
Silent he angles by me, till at length
Seeing me take a sty•fish, and fling't away
He straight demands why I refused that pray
The cause I said was hate, he thus replied
Alas poor fish how wretch'ed is your fate
When you are kilt for love saved but for hate;
Yet then that fish much worse the fisher swain
Who for his love by hate is causeles slain,
Yet happier he that's slain by loves defying
Then she in fate that lives yet ever dying
But soon as love he named, I straight was parting•
He holding me thus speaks; stay Nymph and hear
I bring thee news which well deserves thine ear
He which most loves thee and thou hottest most
Thalander (at his name my guilty heart
Ashamed of it self did in me start)
He thus went on: Thalander's dead and dying
By oath and all his love swo•e me to see thee
With these few words: Thalander quite forsaken
Would send to thee what thou from him hast taken
All life and health, and ne'er his love re•oouing
Wishes thee a friend more happy and as loving
And with this prayer these legacies he sends thee
This pipe his mother Cir•es gift, to bind
With this soft whistle the loud whistling wind
And with this pipe he left this precious ring
Whose virtues cuers a venomous tooth or sting
Thalander were wee nothing like the other
Only thy love would prove thou art my brother.
Did not this move thee.
Glaucilla why should I lie
I took them as spoils from a slain enemio,
And •or these gifts (says he) his last demand
Was thy•, that I might kiss thy hand:
The last, the only gift thou can impart
To such, so loving, and now dying heart•
I grant; be gone, upon the Ring • spy
A Ruby cut most artificially,
Wherein was framed a youth in fire consuming,
And •and within it as the Ring I turn,
I found these words, Alive or dead, I burn.
These words well fit his heart, so you, so I
Thalander living loves, and loving dies.
But oh those fained flames, such strange desires,
Such true, such lasting, neuer-quenched fires
Have kindled in my breast, that all the Art
Of Triphons self cannot allay my smart:
Ah Glaucilla, tha scornful proud Olinda;
Which at so sweet a love a mockery made,
Who scorned the true Thalander, loves his shade,
Whose thousand graces living could not turn me,
His ashes now hoe's dead to ashes, burn me.
If thus you love him, how can•t thou allow
Thy love to Atyches! late did thou vow
In Neptunes temple to be his for ever.
My hand he married there, my heart ah never.
Glaucilla, I love him for his love to me,
For such his venture, for such his victory,
But most, because in love he is my rival,
Because hoe's like and love, my Love Thalander.
Ah, if my life will please him, let him take it,
He gave it me and I would fine forsake it.
Had it been mine to give, my wretched heart,
Not worth his dangerous fight, I would impart
But that is thine, Thalander thine for ever
With me tic buried and arise shall never.
And wherefore serves this glass?
This is a dessamour Cosma lately gave me.
Olinda, know not yet the treachery
Of Cosma, she thy greatest enemy?
Prithee let me see it: should thou this liquor prove,
I tell thee, friend, twill quench thy life and love.
But so Isle temper't, it shall better please thee,
And after few spent hours shall ever ease thee.
Tic beyond art, who there can give relief.
Where patients hate the cure, more then the grief?
Yes, by my art, before you are 12 hours older,
Isle ease thy heart, though never make it colder.
Glaucilla and Olinda? I marle what mettle•
What leaden earth and water nature put
Into these Nymphs, as cold, as dull, as frozen
As the hard rocks they dwell on! But my Mistress
Shoe's all quicksiluer, never still, still moving,
Now is she with some shepherd or some fisher,
And here she sets me to entertain all comers:
This is the hour her Lovers use to muster.
But who should this be? first you, old boy?
Old ten in the hundred, are you the captain? boh,
Beshrew your heart, you are a very naughty boy,
I shake every joint of me.
No shaking palsy, nor cr•mp has tan possession
Of your nimble limbs• ha, ha, he.
Boy, whore's thy Mistress?
Where she would bee.
Whore's that?
Where you would bee,
What, in her bed?
Ah old goat• doe I smell you? yet in her bed?
May not I speak a word or two with her
what a fool tic? thou hast spoken twice a already
I But I would speak them in her ear.
I know your errand but I prithee tell me Fredocaldoe
How first possible that all the bellows in loves fathers shop
Should kindle any fire in •uch a frost?
•thou know not what is love, I tell thee boy
I love fair Cosma more then a•l her lovers.
N•w in my conscience he says true, this old wood
Makes a b•ighter fire then the greenest ever:
Conchylio you are deceiud, hast not seen
That of the May the lust of all the year
Nipped with the hoary f•oct grows cold and chare?
And oft October tho•gh the years declining
With many dainty flowers is fairly shining
For as the flaming sun puts out the fire
So may the heate of love quench loves desires.
Cou•d this dotard doe as well as speak, he might—
I •ell thee boy, when I was young—
That was at the siege of Troy
Now shall wee hau•, more tales then ever poets made
But w•at will you give me Fredocaldoe
If I help thee in the rocky cave, near to the myrtle grove
To sp•ache with Cosma all alone.
If thou'l doe it, Isle give thee as fair an otter tamd for fishing as ever was i• Sicely.
Your hand on •hat: Ah old Saturn cold and dry we will Isle do it
But when Conchylio when?
Within this hour expect •er.
Wilt thou besure.
Why did I ever deceive you?
never never:
b•eleeue me Fredocaldoe I say believe me then.
Farewell; I'll keep my promise.
Fail not within this hour:
I know not what this old man's like, unless
O•r hill of Sicely the flaming AEtna:
Whose parches bowels still in fire consuming
Fills all the valley with flame and pitchy fuming.
Yet on his top congealed snow doth lye
As if there were not fire nor Phoebus no.
Why should we count this strange? when even so
This old mans heart's all fire, his head all snow?
But what fresh soldier's this?
My pretty wag?
Sure you doe mistake me, sir, I am another.
Thou dost mistake me, boy, I know well whose tho• art.
I doubt you doe not.
You are fair Cosmos boy.
My mother told me so.
You are a very wag, take thy•, my boy.
True sir, now I am yours indeed; what! yellow? yours to command: what would you with me?
See thou!
Yes I see very well.
Thou art too: quick I prithee let me see thy Mistress.
Troth, sir, you cannot, shoe's taken up with other busi∣nes, or rather taken down, yet i'll try sir.
Oft have I maruaild how the erring eye,
Which of his proper object cannot lye,
In other subject, fails so in his duty
When hoe's to judge of's chiefest object beauty.
None takes the night for day, the day for night.
The Lilies seem alike to every sight:
Yet when we partial judge of beauties graces,
Which are but colours plac'• in women's faces,,
The eye seems never sure the selfsame show
And face, this thinks a swan, and that a crow.
But sure our minds with strong affections tainted,
Look through our eyes as through a glass that's painted.
So when we view our loves, we never see
What they are, but what we fine would have them be.
Thus Atyches. Perindus thus affecting
These Nymphs, make them seem worthiest their respecting,
And thus to loo their beauties never move them:
But therefore beauteous seem because they love them.
Me thinks this Cosma far them both excels,
In whose high forehead love commanding dwells.
I like not this same too much modesty,
Commend the Senate for their gravity.
The wanton Nymph doth more delight me far,
The modest Nymphs doe more seem chaste then are,
Women are all alike, the difference this,
That seems and is not, that both seems and is.
Or if some are not, as they call it, ill,
They want the power and means, but not the will.
My Mistress as yet is so overlaid with sport or business, she cannot speak with you: may not I know your errand?
My errand boy is love.
Love (um) tic light enough, I shall carry it away: it is so short I shall remember it; but troth sir, another golden star this starless night dropped in my hand, may chance to give light to make my Mistress shine in your arms.
Hold thee boy, hold thee: will that content thee?
Sir doe you know the myrtle grove?
Yes well.
Your star will conduct you thither straight, within this hour she'll meet you there.
How can thou assure it?
Trust me I'll procure it;
Else never more let me see golden stars.
I'll try thee boy, it is but one mis-spent hour,
If thou perform thy promise good Conchylio,
Many such glittering nights shall shine on thee.
If? make no question sir.
Farewell.
Adieu.
This strange new bird, this goose with golden eggs
Must with some grain of hope bee cherished,
And yet not fed too fat; now for my Crab,
Here's his twin, if heavens signs are right.
Next to the crab, the twin must come in sight,
I'll out and seek him.
Sail home by land quoth? well, I'll have that saddle boat hung up for a monument in the temple of Odoxcom, hard by the everlasting shoes, and now to see the ill luck on it never mo•e need of •each, a bouncing feast toward, vmber of guests, not a whiting, not a haddock, not a cod-mop in the house: and in stead of catching fish, wee must go fish for our nets, Cancrone, come along, along, along: the Orke's dead and buried, the Orke's dead and buried.
I but does not his ghost walk thereabout?
On afo•e, I'll follow hintly fintly, by the hobnails of Neptune• horse-shooes—
Nay if you swear, we shall catch no fish, what Can•ron, sneak you still? whoop, we shall fish fairly if your searmore be off:
How now, what all in white?
See not I am busified? doest thou think a man can but∣ton his coat and talk all at once?
My pretty sea-cob, why I prithee why in thy white?
Ino triumph I Ino triumph • tell thee this is my triumphing suit, did not wee vanquish the Orke?
I hope so: •oo but all our fellow fishers say t'was Aty∣•hes.
Thus Atyches kilt him alive, and wee kilt him dead.
I prithee on with thy gabardine again.
My old s•aly slimy gabardine? why, if I should fish in that, every finn would smell me.
Well, our nets are not aboue ground, what shall wee doe?
Why then Sir, you must go seek them under ground.
Well Sir, you'll follow.
Muddy Scrocca, can thou not perceive Cancrones inside by his new out-side? my old Orke apparel, my pitch patch poledauies had no good perfume for a sweet lover, as I now must be: but why a lover? because I mean to kill the next Orke hand to hand; for my masters sisters sweetheart Attaches, because a lover, therefore an Orkekiller.
What? old crab tortoise? has the Orke made you cast your shell?
Fish me no fishing: I'm all for flesh.
Thy lob hath learnt that fishers keep no lent.
Therefore thou blue-beard Neptune, and thou trumphing Triton, and thou watchet jacket Gl•ucus, Dau•us, Maucus, and all the rest of the salt fish gods, I denounce you all, and for your formable farewell, I doe here reach forth to your dropping drivelling deities my love warm hand to kiss.
So, have you done? Fie flapmouth.
Triton, thou beslauerest me.
O dout loves! here is more game for my mistresses net, or rather for mine.
Nothing but Venus smock or Cupids wing shall wipe it dry; surmount thy wagging wanton wing to me, god Cupped.
Are you there? I Orkt you once, and now Isle fit you for a Cupped.
Me thinks I am grown very eloquent already; thanks sweet love; O now for my master Perindus, he has a fine cross cut wed's arms, and yet that Orke-catcher Attaches has a pesslence carriage on's pate: the Nymphs bolero him partly: so, so, so.
Now Cupped doe I come to thee,
To thee, upon my bare-head knee:
Knee never bare-head yet before,
Before it begged at thy door.
What? devout Cancrone knocking at Cupids door?
Ah Scrocca, thou hast corrupted the goodest verse! I was making my supplantation to Trusty Triton for good luck, and see if he have not heard me: our nets are returned.
He might well hear thee for this once: for thou doest not trouble him often. But if I had not looked to them better then he had, wee might have gone whistle for them: come Cancrone, will you go?
Yes I warrant you, I'll peradventure my person in a Cocke-boate.
Why then we'll take the galley foist.
Go foist if you will, the burnt child dreads the water, and good men are scanty, make much of one, Cancrone.
Well, if you come, you shall have vs at the red roche.
Yes, I'll fish on land for mermaids.
This dog-fish had almost put me out of my l•ue-lesson.
Now to thee again, courteous Cupped.
All sunk and soust i• soppy love,
Cupped for thy mothers dove
Help.
All hail, Cancrone, according to thy wish I here am pre∣sent great King of hearts, Duke of desires, Lord of love, whom mortals gentle Cupped doe ycleape.
Be thou Cupped? thou art vile like our Conchylio.
True, Cancrone, and lest the beams of my bright deity should with their lustre wound those infant eyes, I have vo•ch∣saf't in this form to appear, lo, thy Conchylio and thy Cupped here, what would thou with me?
I have a suite to your godship.
So it be not your Orke-suite I embrace it: say on, my darling.
I am in love as they say, but I cannot tell whom to be in love withal.
Here are Nymphs enough, Urine, Olinda, Lilla, Glaucilla, Bobadilla,
Me thinks that Boberdil sounds like a fine play-fellow for me.
No, I'll tell thee one, her name shall make thy mouth water.
Make water in my mouth? thats Urine, I'll none of her, shoe's too high coloured.
No, tic Cosma, the fishers flame, the shepherds hope, whose beauty Pas admires.
I, but will you throw forth a good word for me?
I tell thee I'll make her all to belove thee, she shall not rest till• •hee meet thee here; but first I must arm thee with some magic charms.
What be they? my chops would fine be champing them.
First you must anagramatize her name, then sympathize your own.
It is, zize, thize. I shall ne'er hit that.
For an anagram I'll fit you: Cosma a smock.
Pretty.
For the sympathy of your own name but thus, your name Cancrone bids you counterfeit the counter-creeping crab; and go backward to her.
Doe I look like a crab? I had rather go forward to a Nymph.
Thirdly, because every fisher is borne under Pisces, there∣fore the sign is in the foot with you: you must come there∣fore with one foot bare.
I but shall I not catch cold and cough and spoil my part?
It mu•t be the right foot: and then see•t thou this myrtle tree? all my arrows are made of the wood of it, thou must in her sight get up and gather the highest bough of it.
I but what shall I doe with the bough?
O the bough? why, setting thus • pretty while, you must wrap a cockle garland about it, and then when the poor lass melts and consumes with thy love—
Then I'll throw it at her, &amp; come down to her, shall I not•
Excellent well, I see thou art inspired.
Nay I •an take it, if you put it to me.
But the just nick when thou must throw it is, when she says I die, I cry, I lie.
I die, I cry, I lye. I would have her lie, but not die, but will you make her come indeed?
I and in her best clothes too.
Nay it is no such matter for clothes, but what must I say? I had almost forgot it.
Nothing but a short charm, which I'll teach you as we go on before, I'll follow you.
Let me see: backward?
Blockhead.
Barelegge?
Beetlepate.
Cockleshell?
Coxcomb.
Boughs?
Buzzard.
The towne's ours. I no triumph• I no triumph•
I'll cool my hot lover, he shall sit on a perch for a stale, now must I be vncupidate, &amp; shortly appear here Cosmafied, it shall be hard but with the same limetwig I'll catch a big∣ger bird then this.
First I will serve my self, my mistress after;
My bait is seeming love, my prey true laughter.
What art, strength, wit can tame a fish or fly?
The least of creatures used to liberty,
With loss of life shake off base captive chains,
And with restraint all life disdains.
But I, ah fool, yield up my self a slave,
And what they shun, by death doe basely crave:
My grief more then my folly, who deplore
That which all others use to wish before:
My love loves too too much too many,
For while she likes all, she loves not any.
Love, let my prayers yet thus far only move thee,
Let me her falsely, or •he truly love me.
See where she comes; and that so bright a sun
Should have no sphere, no certain race to run:
I'll stand and ouer-heare her.
I can but smile to think how foolish wise
Those women are, that choose their loves for wisdom.
Wisdom in men's a golden chain to tie
Poor women in a glorious slavery.
Hark Heavens! O monstrous! hark. O women, women.
Fond men, that blame the love that ever ranges
To foul and sluttish love, that never changes.
The Muses love by course, to change their meeter,
Love is like linen often changed, the sweeter.
Thus these neat creatures, dead with love and all,
By shunning beastliness, make it bestial.
Our beauty is our good, the cause of love:
Fond that their good to the best will not improve;
What Husbandman neglects his time of sowing?
What fisher loses winds, now fairly blowing?
Beauty our good: ah good, ah short and bri•tle,
A little little good, for time as little,
How easy doest thou slide, and pass away?
Unborn, full grown, and buried in a day.
Thy spring is short, and if thou now refuse it,
Tic gone, when fine thou would, thou shalt not use it.
The time and every minute daily spends thee.
Spend thou the time, while time fit leisure lends thee.
Does she not blush? hark, women, here is your preacher,
Maids, you want a Mistress; here is a teacher.
Now since Conchylio spake of this Armillus,
My new found lover, I half long to try him:
Too cruel she that makes her hearts contenting,
To see a heart languish in loves tormenting.
What though i't•' night we live most wantonly?
In the morn with clothes we put on modesty.
Thus though we sport, and wanton all the night
Next su•no isle act a part of fear and fright.
Modesty? marry guipp: these are your modest creatures.
Long have I hated Olinda, and Glaucilla,
And one of them by this hath drunk her la••,
The next shall follow ere the next day's past.
The gin is laid, and if it hit aright,
This is her last, this her eternal night.
Perindu• long I have long loved, who ever scorned me,
Because he loves Glaucilla; I know he will grieve:
But when the tempest once is overblown,
Hoist up all sails; the prize is sure mine own.
Ill for a woman is that woman placed,
Who like old Ianus, is not double faced.
Now to Armillus who sure expects me.
How dark the night? more fit for Lovers play.
The darkest night is lovers brightest day.
Well M•stress Iana with your double face,
I think I shall outface you by and by.
Isle fit you for a face i'fayth, I could be mad now.
Well, since you are sportive, i'll make one in the play;
You have a fool already, i'll act a Devil;
And since you needs must to a new consort,
Isle bear a part, and make or mar the sport.
Atyches?
No: Pas.
If thou see Atyches, send him hither friend;
Of all the plagues that torture souls in h•ll,
Tant•le, thy punishment doth most excel.
For present goods, thy evil most express,
Making thee unhappy in thy happiness.
Such are my pains: my blessedness torments me,
I see, and may enjoy what more torments me.
My life then love, I rather would forsake,
Yet for my life, my love I dare not take.
Glaucilla, could thou see this wretched breast,
What torments in it never resting rest,
Whom now thou think the cause of all thy grieving,
Then thou would judge the wretchedest creature living.
She's here.
Perindus, whither goosed thou? the day's enough
To show thy scorn, the night was made for rest.
For shame if not for love, let night relieve me:
Take not that from me, which thou wilt not give me.
Know thou this place? even here thou first did vow,
Which I believe, and still me thinks even now
Cannot vnbeleeu't, that when thy constant heart,
From his first only vowed love should start,
These waving seas should stand, whose rocks remove•
Fa, la, la, fa, la, la, lah.
O dancing levity, you steady rocks,
Still stand you still? his faith he lightly mocks.
Ye •looting waives, why doe you never stand?
His words, his love, his oaths, are writ in sand.
In rocks and seas I find more sense and loving,
The rock less hard then he, the sea less moving.
Did never see the rocks in sailing move?
Not move, but so• me to mou•.
My picture right.
What says Perindus?
Ha, ha, he, how scurvily grief laughs!
Perindus, by all the vows I here conjure thee•
The vow that on thy soul thou did assure me,
Tell me why thus my love thou false refuse?
Why me thy faith thy self thou thus deceive?
Ay me.
How fares my love?
Ah Glaucilla.
I know thou can•t not hate me.
I cannot hate, but laugh, and dance and sport,
This is not hate, Glaucilla, it is not hate.
Can thou Perindus thus delude me?
I'ue lived enough, farewell: thou laft hast viewed me.
Glaucilla?
How can thou speak that hated name?
Stay:
To be mocked?
Stay, i'll tell thee all.
Me thinks this forced mirth does not beseem thee:
Sure it is not thine, it comes not from thy heart.
Glaucilla, call back thy wish, seek not to know
Thine or my death, thou winced thine overthrow.
Thy grief is common, I have my part in thine:
Take not that from me which is justly mine.
if I had any joy, it were thine own,
But grant me to be wretched all alone.
Now all thy grief is mine, but it vnhiding,
Half thou wilt take away, by half dividing.
Thou seekst my love, it is my love to hide it,
And I shall show more hate, when I divide it.
Thy love thus hid, to me much hatred proves,
Vnhide thy hate, this hate will show it loves:
Glaucilla, while my griefs untouched rest,
My better part seems quiet in thy breast.
So thou art well, but still my better part,
Perindus, sinks all laden with his smart:
So thou my finger cut, and woundst my heart.
Since then thou wilt not give me leave to hide it,
Briefly it is thus: when thou thy love had vowed me
Most sure, but yet no certain time allowed me;
My marriage day as all my good desiring,
To Prote•s Cell I went, the time enquiring,
There heard these words, the cause of all my sadness,
The ca•se of all my seeming hate and gladness.
Thus went the Oracle.
The day, that thou with grief so long forbearest,
Shall bring thee what thou wish most and fairest.
Thy sisters grave shall bee her marriage bed,
In one self day twice dying, and once dead.
Thy friend, whom thou did ever dearest choose,
In loosing thou shalt find, in finding loose.
And briefly to conclude the worst at last,
Thou, or thy Love shall from a rock be cast.
Glaucilla, had thy love but with my life been prized,
My life t'enioy thy love I had despised.
But since it may be thine, thy life destroying,
Shall ne'er bee given for my loves enjoying:
Much rather, let me live in fires tormenting,
Then with such purchase buy my hearts contenting.
Then loue's the cause of all thy seeming hate,
What hast thou seen in me, that I should seem,
My life more then thy love, or mine esteem?
Perindus thy hat• hath cost me often dying,
So hast th•u given me death, by death denying:
For the Oracle, with death I am contented,
And will not fear, what cannot be prevented.
Yet though such mischief Proteus did divine,
Much better sped I at my fathers shrine:
Coming to Delphos, where the Pythian maid
Told me my wis•es should be fully paid
And that within few• days I should arrive
Through many bitter storms, into the hive.
Why doubt thou then? ad•ew love till to morrow,
Next rising sun shall to thee ease thy sorrow.
Moist thou prove true, or if heaven bad decree
The good be thine, light all the bad on me.
Farewell.
Thou gives Glaucilla what thou wish good rest.
This victory my mind hath whole possessed,
And from my eyes shuts out all sleep and rest:
If I but slumber, straight my fancy d•eames,
This Atyches is much more then he seems:
Coming to his couch, I found his empty bed
As yet untouched, himself from sleep is fled.
But soft, whom have wee here?
The Ox now feels no yoke, all labour sleeps,
The soul unbent, this as her play-time keeps,
And sports it self in fancies winding streams,
Bathing his thoughts in thousand winged dreams.
The fisher tired with labour, snorted fast,
And never thinks of pains to come or past,
Only love waking rest and sleep despises,
Sets later then the sun, and sooner rises.
With him the day as night, the night as day,
All car•, no rest, all work, no holy-day•
How different from love is lovers guise!
He never ops, they never shut their eyes.
Ha: this is he, I'll stand and overhear him.
So: I am alone, ther's none but I,
My grief, my love, my wonted comp•y,
And which best fits a grieved lovers sprite,
The silent stars and solitary night.
Tell me heavens sentinels that compass round
This ball of earth, on earth was never found
A love like mine, •o long, so truly ser•'d,
Whose wage is hate, have all my pains deserved
Contempt? mine and her; for she dear affected:
The more I loved, the more I was neglected.
Since thou can love where thou hast hatred proved,
Olinda, how can thou hate where thou art loved?
Thy body is mine by conquest, but I find,
Thy body is not always with thy mind.
Give both o• none, or if but one, o'th'two
Give me thy mind, and let thy body go.
If this without thy mind I only have•
What giu'st thou more to me then to thy grave?
Prove me, my dear, what can thou hate in me?
Unless my love, my love still bent on thee?
My name's Thalander, perhaps it doth displease thee,
I will refuse my name, if that may ease thee.
Thalander to exile we'll still confine,
And •'le be Atyches, so I bee thine.
Thalander? i'st possible? I oft suspected
How he is altered! not himself! i'st possible?
Yet what thou hat'st, thy brother loves as well.
Tell me, my dearest love, what have I done?
What has Thalander done? ah tell me.
More
Then thousand such as she can ne'er re•tore,
Thalander; start not; how have my eyes deceived me?
Ah, let me bless my arms with thy embraces.
My dear, Thalander, my only life, my heart,
My soul, O of my soul the better part.
First thee I hold; I scarce dare trust mine eyes,
Which thus deceived me by their former lies.
Thou welcomst misery while thine arms enfold me•
I am the blessedest man that lives to hold thee.
My heart doth dance to find thee.
Ah Perindus,
When least thou think, thou art deceived most,
My self, my love, my labour I have lost,
When I have lost my self, to find my love.
In losing of thy fame, you have found
She loves thee friend most dearly,
And though she thought thy love would be her death•
Yet for and in thy love, she would lose her breath,
And nothing else should grieve her in the end
She had one life for such a love to spend.
Doe not deceive me.
Why should thou mistrust me?
Perindus, my joy, by too much joy enjoying,
I feel not half my joy, by ouer-ioying.
Her self •hall speak it. Come, let's go.
It is night!
She'll think it day, when thou art in her sight.
Lead me, for yet my mind, too much affected
To have it so, makes truth it self suspected.
Love is the fire, damme, nurse, and seed
Of all that air, earth, waters breed.
All these earth, water, air, fire,
Though contraries, in love conspire.
Fond painters: love is not a lad,
With b•w, and hafts, and feathers clad;
As he is faucied in the brain
Of some loose loving idle swain,
Much sooner is he felt then seen,
His substance subtle, slight and thin,
Oft leaps hee from the glancing eyes,
Oft in some smooth mount he lies,
Soonest he wins, the fastest flies:
Oft lurks h• twixt the ruddy lips,
Thence while the heart his Nectar sips,
Down to the soul the poison slips,
Oft in a voice creeps down the ear,
Oft hides his darts in golden hair,
Oft blushing cheeks do light his fire,
Oft in a smooth soft kin retires,
Often in smiles, often in tears;
His flaming heate in water bears,
When nothing else kindles desire,
Eu•n v•rtues self shall blow the fire:
Love with thousand darts abounds,
Surest and deepest virtue wounds,
Oft himself becomes a dart,
And love with love, doth love impart.
Thou painful pleasure, pleasing pain,
Thou gainful life, thou losing gain:
Thou bitter sweet, easing disease,
How doest thou by displeasing please?
How doest thou thus bewitch the heart?
To love in hate, to joy in smart.
To think it self most bound, when free,
And freest in his slavery.
Every creature is thy debtor,
None but loves, some worse, some better:
Only in lou•, they happy prove,
Who love what most deserves their love.
BE patient.
Yes, I am patient,
And suffer all, while all heavens ills are spent.
You give your self to grief•
Senseless and mad.
Who in much grief, is not extremely sad?
Alas sir, she was mortal, and must die.
True, true, and could the fates no time •spy
But this? to me she never lived till now,
And now Perindus? now! oh—
She was my sister!
Alas, thy sister!
She was my life, my soul, she was my love,
She was—words know not what she was to me:
She was—thou most accursed word of was•
Be comforted.
Perindus, the very name of comfort, is most comfortless
Comfort, joy, hope, lived in her cheerful smiling,
And now must die, or live in far ex••ing.
Comfort, joy, hope, for ever I deny you,
And would not name you now but to defy you.
Sir, with more patience you have often borne
Far greater evils.
Perindus, doe not say so,
If thou yet love me, prithee doe not say so:
Was ever ill as this? hells breniary•
All torment in this narrow space is laid,
The wo•st of all, in these two words are said:
Olinda dead? dead! whither doest thou lead me?
Why, I can go alone, alone can find
The way I seek, I see it best when blind.
I prithee leave me.
Thalander, I'll not leave thee,
Should heaven with thunder strike these arms that clasp thee,
My dying hands should but more firmly grasp thee.
Thou violat'st thy love in thy mistaking,
And clean forsak'st thy friend, in not forsaking
Olinda: I cannot come, they here enc•aine me.
But neither can, nor shall they here detain me.
In the mean time, all the honour I can give thee,
Is but a grave, that sacred rock, the place
Of my conception, and my burial:
Since Hymen will not, death shall make thee mine,
If not my marriage, my death-bed shall be thine.
Farewell ye mountains, and thou burning AEt•a,
If yet I doe not bear thee in my breast,
And am my self, a living walking AEtna,
The Nymphs that on you dwell, are too coy,
Too coy and proud, more fierce then robbed tiger
More deaf then seas, and more inflexible
Then a grown Orke, false, flattering, cruel, crafty,
And which most grieves me, when I would embrace them,
Swifter then c•ased Dear, or dogs that chase them,
You heavens, what have we poor men deserved,
That you should frame a woman, I and make her
So comely and so needful? why should you cloth them
With so fine a shape? why should you place
Gold in their hair, allurement in their face?
And that which most may vex vs, you impart
Fire into their burning eyes, y•e to their heart.
Why sweeten you their tongues with sugared charms
And force men love, and need their greatest harms?
And most of all, why doe you make them fleet?
Minds as the winds, and wings upon their feet?
Of hundred women that I know,
But one deserves to be a woman:
Whom better heavens have not made more fair,
Then courteous, loving, kind, and debonair:
She, when she used our Mountains, oft would stay,
And hear me speak, and vow, and swear, and pray.
Here I have learnt, she haunts along these shores:
Within these rocky clefts i'll hide my self,
Till fit occasion, if she have changed her mind,
Then safely may I curse all women. kind.
Love, without thee, all life is tedious,
Without thee, there's no sweet, no joy, no life;
Thou first gau'st life, and still with new succession,
Continue what thou gau'st, with sweet enticements,
Taming the strongst rebellion, thy weapons women,
Whom thou so fram'st, that proudest men are glad,
Beaten with them, gently to kiss the rod.
Either my weighty passions pull too fast
The wheel of time, or else the hour is past:
But this is she, or I mistake it.
Women that to one man their passions bind,
As this man alters, so alters still their mind:
Thus ever change they, as those changing fairs,
And with their lovers still their love impairs:
But I, when once my lovers change their graces,
Affect the same, though now in other faces:
Thus now my mind is firm, and constant proved,
Seeing I ever love, what first I loved.
Who blames the speedy heaven, for ever ranging?
Loue's fiery, winged, light, and therefore changing.
True, fairest Nymph, Love is a fire still burning,
And if not slak't, the heart to ashes turning.
If I could scold, sir you might be chidden,
For coming to my thoughts before you're bidden.
Blame me not (Sweet) thy words do fan thy fires,
And cool the flames which thy fair eye inspires.
The fire so lately applied, so lately framed?
Me thinks, greene wood should not be yet inflamed.
Loves flame is not like earths, but heavens fire,
Like lightning, with a flash it lights desire.
I love not lightning: lightning love that flashes
Before't be all on fire, will be all ashes.
Gather the fruit then while it is yet vnblas•ed.
First worth the gathering? is it pleasing tasted?
Take say •f this.
Monster?
Help ho.
The Doe was almost struck, it was time I came,
For once I'll be a keeper of the game.
I see it is Owle-light, Mineruaes waggoner,
My old rival, who this twenty years
Saw nothing but what shined through gla•se windows,
What comes he for? I'll stay a while and watch him.
Most happy age that shall be crowned with love
Of thy love, Cosma: I am not as I seem,
Farewell old age, I now am young again
And feel not ages, but a lovers pain,
In love I dare adventure with the best,
Old beaten soldiers are the worthiest:
If all my rivals heard I could dare them,
If •uries should out-front me, I'd out-stare them.
How well my Mistress Cosmos clothes do fit me?
What pity it was, I was not made a woman?
I think • should have made a pretty Nymph: ha?
I could have been a pitiful creature,
And yet perhaps, a good unhappy wench.
Cosma by this hath met with her Armillus•
And sports her self: could I meet Fredocaldo,
I should have sport enough:
What Fredocaldo dead? cou•age, man.
I had a fearful dream and scarce am waken.
Come shake off dreams, sleep is not fit for lovers,
We'll to the rocky cave.
My sun? my fire?
But Fredocaldo, can you think that fire
Can love cold water, the sun can frost desire?
I tell thee fairest Cosma, those fair eyes
Bring back my spring:
Wrong not thy self, dear love, so fair a day
Cannot but make mid-winter turn to May.
Cold rhewms I feel not, no frost's locked in this chest•
Thy love begets a summer in my breast.
Fie Fredocaldo:
Not in the open air.
When• furies haunt this grove? is not this Cosma?
Yes: here again she comes• most blessed heavens,
I see that ye are more gracious then Hell's spiteful.
Cosma?
Armillus.
My love.
Sure thou hast done some cruel murder,
And the vnexplate ghost thus haunts thee.
I never thought it, Cosma: rather some power of these woods,
Too envious of my good hap, and iea•os of thy favour,
Thus crosses our desires• but if again
He chance to interpose his horrid face,
I'll rather dye, then leave thy wished embrace.
All hell and furies haunt vs.
Well overtaken, Nymph, start not, you are sure,
S•e I am your familiar.
Beshrew your heart for thus affrighting me.
Doe you not blush to cast your love upon a man,
Whose love is as himself an alien? to thine own
Thou make thee strange, familiar to unknown.
P•sh, thou art foolish, did I ever bind thee to me
Only? why should thou then confine me
To thy sole passion? so oft before
You men have changed, that you can change no more:
From bad to worse, from worse, to worst of all:
There lie you now, and can no lower fall:
And as you wished that we should never rove,
We pray as fast, that you at length could move.
Cease then for shame to rail at women's ranging:
When men begin, women will leave their changing.
Farewell.
Nay soft, I am dog well bitten,
And will not part so easily with my prey,
I have not tasted venison many a day.
I cannot well deny thee, it is thy right:
Thou well hast purchased it, this be thy right.
Ha, ha, he: this old dry stubble, how it cracks in the bur∣ning! alas poor sapless oak: it is time it were down, I stayed till he was ready, all unready, but when he 'gan to put on his spectacles, away slipped I: he will doe my mistress little hurt. Spectacles! ho, ha, he! now for my loving Lobster, this is his time; and if the Cyclops too doe keep his promise, O what rare compound of mirth• I'll make, while the one with sha'me, the other with fear I'll take!
The fish comes already to the net.
To all I speak, but I tell no man,
Whether I love Nymph or woman.
Tell not me, but tell the rocks,
Not words must disciple you but knocks.
I am out of your debt for a rime.
I think she knew my cue,
The charm begins to work already.
I know not how this fishers hook hath caught me,
I ever for his rudeness love him: it is the badge of innocence.
Somewhat rude if you will, but innocent in your face.
O those glearing eyes that dart the beams,
The beams that drowned my heart with fiery streams.
Now to Cupids arrow tree, and she sinks downright condoling; Cosma, I have pity on thee, but it beseems a man of my confession, to have a negligent care of his good repara∣tion abroad in the world and else-where; I would be loath to be seen in my loue-worke, i'll mount the tree and scry the coast.
Stay not, but come again thy self, sweet heart, to re∣ceiue me.
O ho, here's bundance of people, bundance a lookers on, I dare not love thee before them all, we'll into the myrtle grove present.
Quickly return, my love, return Cancrone my dearest.
Stand forth Cosma, and say on till thou come to that, I cry, I dye, I lye.
I spy him now approaching,
What though he be all rags in his limbs? what though his gesture taste of violence? we Nymphs, they say, like not such wooers worst.
Thou speak of thy Rimbombo, that myrtle groves which love the winding shores, deserve to bee to Venus con∣secrate, as faster friend• to lovers, then the woods and caves of all the Mounts of Sicily, whose Nymph• do coyly shun and mock our troops,
you come somewhat before your time, Rimbombo,
And Yet in love prevention is no crime:
Lovers may come before, not out of time.
And truly I wish, you'd come a little sooner.
•uen now a mong•ell crabbed fisher swain
Laid siege to this unconquered fort.
What wight of bravest blood by sea and land dares share with me in Cosmos love? by Polypheme my sea-bred fire I vow, the sand on which he treads, is not so small, as shall this pestell make his pounded bones.
Nay now he treads not upon these sands, but is fled up to the hills, and shortly thence will of himself come tumbling down to me.
I would he durst: I never yet but once did taste of fishers blood, tic jolly sweet: come fisher, this way or that way I am for you at both weapons, club or teeth: let's to the grove, see, every myrtle tree bids war to fishers peace, and joy to me. Why weeps my Cosma? Sweet, fear not that which thou desire.
Sweet Cyclops, meanst thou to ravish me?
O heavens thine own appointed time and place, thine, own sweet Cyclops, and can ravishment?—
Why this know; wee Nymphs that long live chaste, and wear our girdle of virginity — but lo, Diana stops my tongue, she bends her deadly bow, I dare not.
Speak on, here's none but trees, and thy true•tie true Rimbombo.
By that bright flame which like one only sun gives day to'th sphere of thy majestic face, I thee adiure, that thou disclose to none this sacred mystery.
Not: to my mother: no not in my dream: say on
Wee neither yield, nor take in love delight,
Until our girdle fi•st be once vnplight
By lovers hands, and then about his wast,
By our own hands the same be tied fast.
Now all is out.
A pretty piece of work, my hands do their office nimbly
I have vnfettered thee, come put this sweet yoke on me.
Nay turn about, it must be tied contrary to other girdles, just behind. Stand nearer to me, yet near.
As close as thou wilt, Cosma; I would your filthy fisher saw vs now, 't would make his teeth water.
Hang him stinking Lobster, he da•res not look upon any of thy kin: his haddock eyes would start out of his head, if he should see but one hair of Rimbomboes head.
How long wilt thou be tying me?
The more knots I tie, the faster will my love be to you: but you'll be prating of this secret, when you come home among yo•r mounting Nymphs.
If I doe, then ge•d me: hast thou done?
I have but three knots to tie: they are all true knots.
When thou hast done, prithee come kiss me, Cosma,
I see thou art a pure virgin, thou never did this office before, thou art no quicker at it. What Cosma? what? no Cosma! what a wooden wench? here's a true love knot with a witness. O faithless Cosma! O witless Rimbombo! O Nymph! O fishers! O shepherds! O Satyrs! O Cyclops!
Ha, ha ha: O love! O wit! O tree! O girdle! O platterface!
O oyster eyes!
Thou bitch, thou witch, thou spawn of a mermaid.
Thou AEtna, thou Chaos, thou Hell: nay tug and tug, my virginity is tough and strong enough: O for, some Nymphs fishers or shepherds to bait this Orke. I'll out and call in some bandog: so ho, so ho, ho, ho.
The knots are so many, the girdle so strong, and the tree stands so fast. O anger! O shame! here she'll bring in all the country to laugh me to death, hide yet thy face with some of these lower boughs.
So ho, so ho: O dogged fortune! not one Nymph to be found not one feat fisher! not one: but that feating fisher that
is ready to wing his sea token net on the Cyclops blockhead.
Away thou monstrous woman, oh, oh•
Away thou monstrous mans ah ha hey.
How now! what's that? what, have I another witness of my folly? what gobbet of mans flesh grows• upon this tree?
Isle have a graft of this mi•tle tree, it bears fine love worms, on the s•ocke, a maggot would up in a Cobweb, on the bough a barnacle, which ere long will fall and turn to a goose: now Cupids gosling, now on your bare-head knee, go beg at Cupids door.
Ah cursed Cupped• i'll no more of thy service, I had ra∣there fight with nine Orkes, ha, hei, au.
Come down thou fished bit; my mouth shall catch thee. Gentle C•sma, i'll forgive thee all, &amp; love thee yet, if thou wilt help to reach my walking stick; i'll make my young Orke-ketcher believe he shall bee his grandsires heir.
Your staff? marry and shalt, it's a pretty pole to bang those boughs withal, and when thou doest it, doe but gape, and that rotten plumme will fall into thy mouth.
Nay, I know of old I should be devoured.
Thy staff, Rimbombo, is not for a weak Nymph to lift.
Yet a little more to this hand: Oh oh, my shoulder's thunderstrook! O coward Jove, to strike me on the back, bu• wast our fisher lubber? is he escaped our hands?
Why Cancrone, rise, i'll help thee.
Good Charon carry me over gently, my bones are sore, and your boat side so hard.
Give me thy hand, i'll waft thee.
I tell thee Charon, I have nothing to give thee for ferri∣age, i'll help to row, I have been a poor fisher while I lived•
I would I were there too, but that I should sink Charons boat with a tree at my back.
Why valorous Cancron•, view thy self and me thy captive Cosma, we are conquerors, behold our enemies in fetters fast bound.
Am I alive indeed? me thought this leg hung out
of Charons boat in the water, did I tie the Ork• there; Cancro•• Come captain, let's go triumphing to the temple.
Nay, the Ork's dead and buried, this is the second fatal for the Cyclops.
Is he safe? i'll make side-slops on him. I lay studying how to deal with him upon equal terms: come if thou da∣rest, thou sea-bred brat of Polyphemes sine, you that would like your lips at sweet fishers blood! sweet fishers blood! mark that Cosma: I hope you think so too.
Sweet fisher, I will turn thy net maker if thou wilt undo me.
No, it shall ne'er be said that I was the undoing of any man by net-making, and besides, I have forsworn the mud•e trade.
Cancrone• wher's thy spirit? this is that pocketed up thy grandsire in his wide entrails.
Me thought, when I was on the tree• his breath smell• of fish, my stomach even foamed at him. Now then, sir Bompelo, as that Orke mouth of thine did crumb thy pore•edge with my grandsires brains, and then gave him his deaths wound too, so will I first mince out thy scald-pate bones, and give thy flesh to a fishers boy for haddocks meat, &amp; then, O th•n I will ge•d thee, that thou never shalt run rutting after the Nymphs. How lik'st thou this•
Shame and scorn make me silent.
Nay, I will tell thee fitter vengeance•, use him, as sage Vlysses did his father Polypheme.
That same Fool•shes had • pole-cat• head, I ••eane to mitigate him: he was something, as it wa•e about branding a huge stone in a cave, in a goat skin with Polypheme• when the fire-brand was asleep.
I, I, in the cave •e br•ded ou• Polyph•mes eye, when he was asleep, and you must imitate him •here 〈◊〉 his own staff, and make it an ex••guisher foe• that 〈◊〉 la•pe.
This sport I like worst of all: help, gods of the woods.
I'll blow the coal while you take your 〈◊〉, but will your farginity hold him fast?
I warrant you it has been tried, come be thou my rest, i'll tilt on thy shoulders.
Rant tara, rant taunt: &amp;
I shall make you stumble, let me Come hindmost.
O your Whineyeard, the enemy hath seazd on it.
It is no matter, he will hardly make it fly out of the Eel•∣skin, it hath seen no sun this five quarters of a year I am sure.
I hope the salt breath of the sea hath sealed it up.
O Cosma, it is out, let vs out too.
O Cancrone, lo thy Cosma, Cupped, and Co•chilio. Cyclops, blame not this my supposed sex, no Nymph, but lad hath caught thee in this snare.
The greater shame, and fouler scorn to me.
Up to the hill, Rimbombo fly this shore,
And never deal with fisher-Nymph-lad more.
This his wives quick •ate lamenting,
Orp•hus sate his soul tormenting:
While the speedy wood came running,
And rivers stood to hear his cunning•
The hares ran with the dogs along,
Not from the dogs, but to his song:
But when all his verses turning,
Only framed his poor hearts burning:
Of the higher powers complaining,
Down he went to hell disdaining:
There his silver Lute-strings hitting,
And his potent verses fitting:
All the sweets that ere •e took
From his sacred mothers brooke:
What his double sorrow gives him•
And love that doubly double grieves him:
There he spends to move deaf hell,
Ch•rming Devils with his spell:
And •ith sweetest asking leau•
Does the Lord of ghosts deceive.
Caron amazed his boat foreslowes,
While the boat, the sculler rows,
And of it self to'th' shore d•th float,
••ipping on the dancing moat.
The t•reeheaded Porter preast to hear,
Pricked up his thrice double •are,
The Furies, plague• for Guilt vp-heaping,
Now as guilty, fell a weeping:
Ixion, though his wheel stood still,
Still was wrapped with Musickes skill.
Tantale might have eaten now,
The fruit as still as was the bough,
But he fool no longer fearing,
Starved his taste to feed his hearing.
Thus since love hath won the field,
Heaven and Hell, to Earth must yield,
Blessed soul that die in loves sweet sound,
That l•st in love in love art found.
If but a true-loues joy thou once doe prove,
Thou wilt not love to live, unless thou live to lou•.
TEll me, Al•ipp••, is it day or night?
The light you bear, shows you there is no light.
This is none• light was light in her eyes,
In them it lived, put out with them it dies.
The sun is quenched.
Yet soon will shine again.
Not possible! heavens light will ever plain.
When her two living stars can sink and die,
How can the sun dream immortality?
Sir, if your to me, or mine to you, might give me pri∣uiledge, I fine would tell you, that this too fixed love seems ra•her do•ing.
Alcippus, did thou ever love?
I think sir never.
I think so too, nor can know what love is.
Yet this I know, love still is of the fairest,
Fond then the love, that loves the withered,
But madness seems to dote upon the dead.
True, true, Alcippus, love is of the fairest,
And therefore never tied unto the body:
Which if compared unto the minds fair graces,
Seems like the block that Lunaes face defaces.
But grounded on the mind, whose virtuous parts.
And living beauties are loves surest darts,
Which makes me now as freely love as ever•
Her virtue and my love decays never.
See thou this rock, Alcippus? tic a temple,
Olindaes temple! it is a sacred shrine,
Where virtue, beauty, and what ere divine,
Are to be worshipped, prithee friend now leave me,
Here is an Altar, I must sacrifice.
If you will leave your grief.
I will, I will:
Indeed I will; leave me: griefs ebb grows lowe,
When private heart• the eye-bankes overflow.
I will retire, not leave him: well, I fear,
When two such flood-streams meet, love and despair.
Thou blessed Altar, take these worthless offering•,
The corral's once more drowned in brine of sorrow,
These pearly shells, which daily shall bee filled
With my hearts water, through my eyes distild.
You corals, whose fresh beauti•s are a shadow
O• her sweet blushes, •ell her living graces,
Though now as you plucked from their native places,
Are yet as you from your first seat removed,
He•e fresher shining then when first I loved.
Thou rock, that in thy blessed arms doest enfold her,
Witness my heart as firm as you do hold her.
And now goodnight thou set sun beauties, never,
Never more to be seen, goodnight for ever,
Thou silver forehead and thou golden hair,
My best, my only treasure when you were,
You snowy plains, and you fair modest dies,
You living stars, but now two quenched lights,
Whose fall, heavens stars with feared ruin frights.
You eyebrows, which like Rainbows two appear;
A miracle, Rainebowes on sky so clear.
And all you unseen beauties sof•lie rest,
Sleep, quiet sleep you in this stony chest,
I cannot long; I will not long be from you,
Shortly i'll come and in this rocky bed
Slumber with my Olinda, with Olinda
I'll sleep my fill••mean time as near as may be,
Here rest mine eyes, rest close by your Olinda.
Hark, hark; Orion, thou choice Musician,
Sing me a note that may awake pale death,
Such as may move deaf Hell• and Stygian Io•e,
Such as once Orpheus —O I am idle, idle:
Sleep, sleep, mine eyes, this short releasement take you,
Sleep, sleep for ever; never more awake you.
Her face your object never more shall be,
Sleep then, vain eyes, why should you wish to see?
Thou worthy•t daughter of the greatest light,
Most powerful Circa, and thou honoured Glaucus,
What duty a poor fisher maid may give you,
In thanks, and vows, and holy offerings,
Shall still be ready at your sacred altars.
Thalander, now to thee, what sacrifice?
What offerings may appease thy wronged love?
What have I but my self? ah worthless prize
Of such, so tried, and so vnmou'd a faith.
Ah, could I spend my body, wear my soul,
And then resume another soul and body,
And then consume that soul and body for thee,
All would not pay the use of half my debt.
How pale he looks, how strangely altered!
Is he not dead? no, no, his pulse is quick,
His heart is strong, and rising, in his heate,
Threatens with strokes, my churlish hand to beat:
Nature, how could in one so firmly tie
Perpetual motion to fixed constancy?
How can this wonder fall in Notion,
A heart vnmou'd, yet still in motion!
Alas he weeps, I hope his grief and fears
Swim fast away in those sad streaming tears.
You have mourned enough, more justly may I weep,
Leave me thy tears, rest thou and sweetly sleep.
Morpheus, one more such dream shall buy me.
Where, where art, Olinda? whither, whither fliest thou?
Nay whither flies Thalander? here's Olinda:
Tell me why waked the substance thou eschewest•
Whose shadow in a dream thou gladly view.
Thou fairest shadow of a Nymph more fair,
•eath yet I see cannot thy light impair.
Thou dream still Thalander!
Ah too too true;
For such a sight wake shall I never view.
I live.
Would I were dead on that condition.
So would not I: believe me friend, I live.
Could I believe it, I were happy.
If me thou wilt not, trust thy sense, thy eyes.
They saw thee dead, how shall I trust my eye,
Which either now or then did vouch a lie?
Credit thy touch.
Then like a dream thou'lt fly,
Thou fliest, thou art the shadow love not I:
Thalander, take this, tic thine for ever,
Nothing but death, nor death this knot shall sever.
How is this! have you learnt, have you learnt your mother Circes art to raise the dead? wonder? think she lives.
What says Thalander? does he yet believe me?
If thou art dead, fair hand, how doest revive me?
Thalander, heart and hand had now been cold but for, Glaucilla, she preventing Cosma, tempered the poisonous vial, changing death for sleep, so gave me life, thee love.
Alcippus, art thou there? thou art my friend I prithee tell me true, true Alcippus! doest thou not see Olinda?
I see her in your hand.
Art sure tic she? tell me, are wee alive?
Art sure we wake? are we not both mistaken?
If now I sleep, O let me never waken.
If you would surely know, try if she breathe,
Thy hand lives: doe thy lips live too Olinda!
Alcippus, she lives and breathes, Al•ippus:
And with that sugared bread my heart both fired,
And life and love with thousand joys inspired.
Ah my Olinda.
My dear, my dear Thalander.
First possible thou liu'st? first sure I hold thee?
These happy arms shall never more unfold thee.
Tell me, my love, can thou such wrongs forgive me?
My joy, my soul.
I never more will grieve you.
Can thou forget my hate, my former blindness?
If not, boldly revenge my rash unkindness.
Pierce this vile heart my souls ungrateful center,
Pierce with thy dart where loves dart could not enter.
For thy defence my hand shall still attend thee,
My hand and heart, but never to offend thee:
The only penance that I enjoin thee ever,
Is that wee live and love and joy together.
Think not my hand will sacrilege commit,
To break this temple where all Graces sit.
True, true my love, tic vowed a temple now,
Where ever shall be worshipped love and thou.
You happy pair, since Cosma's spight's defeated,
And Magoe's charms• and death by love is cheated,
Why stand you here? tic time from hence to move:
This was the bed of death, and not of love.
Death hath his part of night, love challenges
The rest, love claims the night as well as death.
What says my love?
What my Thalander, ever
With thee to life or death, but from thee never.
This half persuades me to become a lover.
Where better could her love then here have nested?
Or he his thoughts more daintily have feasted?
Know thou Perindus sister, or Olinda?
I know them both sir.
Live they yet and breathe?
They live and now most happy.
Thou make me happy, in thy happy news.
All thanks ye heavenly powers, when I forget
Your goodness in my childrens life and safety,
Let heaven forget both me and mine for ever.
Gryphus, back to our ship, and fetch me thence
The vestments vowed to Neptune, and the chest,
Wherein I locked my other offerings.
This rock my heart prefers before a palace.
Fond men that have enough yet seek for more,
I thought by traffic to increase my store,
And striving to augment this careful pelf,
I lost my goods, my liberty, my self:
Taken by Persians on the Grecian seas,
So I my captain and the King did please,
Soon was I loosed from my slavish band,
And straight preferred to have a large command,
There have I now consumed these thrice •iue summers,
There might I have lived long in wealth and honour,
But ah thou little home, how in thy want
The world so spacious, yet seems too too scant•
At my departure hence I left two infants,
Perindus and Olinda, the boy some eight,
The girl but two years old, t•eir mother dead,
Who giving life to'th'girle, so took her death,
And left her own, to give h•• in•ant b••ath.
Great Jove and Neptune, I will keep my vows,
Seeing my Children live, two chosen bulls,
With myrtle crowned, and Oak leaves laid with gold,
Shall fall upon your altars.
You sacred virtues, truth and spotless faith,
Where will you live, if not in such a Nymph?
Whose breast will you now seek? what mansion?
My trembling heart doth some great ill divine,
And tells me, every grief and fear is mine.
Where now can unsuspected friendship rest?
If treachery possess so fair a breast.
Fishers what news?
Sir, little as concerns you.
Pray heavens it doe not.
Your habit speaks a stranger,
And yet me thinks, I somewhat else have •even,
Some lineaments of that face: are you Tyrinthus?
The same.
O cruel heavens I could you find
No other time, to give him back his country?
If thus you give, happy whom you deny,
The greater good, the greater injury:
Thy only daughter
Is dead.
I should have said so. Alas, he falls.
Tyrinthus, what, one blow thus strike thee under fortunes feet?
How loath his life returns!
How well I had forgot my grief,
And found my rest, with loss of restless life!
Thou much hast wronged me, fisher, it is no love,
Death from his just possession to remove:
Heavens, ye have thanks for both, yet one you slue,
Give back half of thy thanks, take but your due:
I owe you nothing for Olinda, nothing.
Ah poor Olinda• I shall never more,
Never more see thee: thy father must lament thee,
Thy father, wh• in death should long prevent thee,
How long since died she?
With the last sun she fell.
Sure heavens, ye mock me: alas, what victo•y?
What triumph in an old mans misery?
When you have won, what conquest, that you slue
A wretch that hated his life as much as you?
Sir, you forget your self: to war with heaven,
Is no less fond, then dangerous•
Tell me fisher, have you a child?
No sir.
No marvel then
Thou blam'st my grief, of which thou hast no •ence:
First lose a child, then blame my patience.
If thou be grieved, this is no way to ease it,
Sooner we anger heaven, then thus appease it.
But when the heart such weight of sorrow bears,
It speaks from what it feels, and what it fears.
Died she by a natural, or by violent means?
Nature refuses an office so unnatural.
Hard fate, most fitly were you women made:
Since fate unmerciful, vnmoued stands,
Well was lifes distaff put in women's hands.
Kilt by a man?
No man was so unnatural.
A woman!
Yes.
Fit instrument of women: what was the weapon?
The cowards weapon, poison.
Can tell the murderers name?
Her name Glaucilla:
A Nymph thought absolute, though now infected,
That heaven it self might sooner bee suspected.
Tell me the circumstance.
Twill but more grieve you.
True, but it is pity in vnhelpt distress,
Condemned souls with all the weight to press.
Olinda this last night complained to Cosma,
(A Nymph which lately came from fair Messena)
That this Glaucillaes powerful charms had fired her,
And with Thalanders love now dead, inspired her
With such a feeling grief, her grief lamenting,
That she, to help so desperate love consenting,
Gave her a water which she oft did prove,
Wo•lt either quench or ease the pains of love,
Which Cosma swore, the other ne'er denied.
Glaucilla changed, Olinda drank a•d dyed.
Dicaeus hearing this —
Lives then Dicaeus?
As well and just as ever.
His life doth somewhat mend
My child's sad death, after a child, a friend.
Dicaeus by this evidence condemns her
By the law, from that high rock to fall, and she
With smiling welcomed death, and quietly
Steeled to the rock from whence she must be cast.
Wonder so heavy guilt should fly so fast!
She led her leaders to that deep descending,
The guilty draws the guiltless to their ending:
And thus I left them, and with her just Dicaeus,
To see her execution, who goes not from her,
Till from the rock, in seas she leave her breath,
Die must she as she kilt, water her crime and death.
Ah my poor Olinda! had I seen thee yet
And closed thine eyes, alas my poor Olinda!
This grief is vain and can no more revive her, you lose your tears.
When that I hold most dear is ever lost, poor loss to lose a tear.
Your son strives, the good which heaven bereaves you,
You quickly see, but see not what it leaves you.
Art sure he lives?
Two hours since, sad I left him,
But safe.
What chances happen in an hour?
By this he may be dead and buried.
But yet Perindus, if thou living be,
My half joy lives, my half joy dies in thee.
Ah Scrocca, thou hast often heard me say, it would be my luck to be devoured; and to tell thee true, I ever feared those Cyclops most; I never had any mind to them.
Why Cancrone, this is the slavery on it, had wee been Master fishers, we should never have been troubled to climb up these Mountains, wee should never have been cast to our old acquaintance the fish.
Fisher, know thou these men?
I know the men, but not their meaning.
That would never have angered me, thou know wee have fed upon fish this many year, and for vs to have made them one merry meal, had been but the sign of a thankful na•ur, but ah those C•clops, clops, clops. Scro•ca, I cannot digest them.
I fear they will •gest vs well enough.
And yet I care not much if I were sure to bee eaten up by that Cyclops that ate up my grandsire, for then I might have some hope to see the good old man once again before I die.
I care not whose hands I fall into, I'm sure hee shall have no sweet bit of me now; nothing grieves me, but that having done but one good deed in all my life, I must die for that.
Thou foolish fisher, think it good to stop
The course of justice, and break her sword, the Law?
By Law thou li•'st: hee justly death deserves,
Who that destroys, which him and his preserves.
Are not these my old men, Scrocca and Cancrone?
Well sir, you may say what you will, but if wee live by the Law, how comes it to pass, that we must die by the Law?
Me thinks I see how busy Rimronce will bee about me: he surely will be upon my back, for my being upon his, a while a go.
Nay Cancrone, thou die for saving thy master too.
Ay me, my son?
I have no mind to climb these Mountains, I begin to bee short-winded already, I shall never hold out; had I thought it would have come to this, I would have been vilely tempted to ha let my Master drown quickly.
What, man? thou coldest never have done thy Master better service then to dye for him, nay, if Perindus live, I care not.
Perindus? I can hold no longer, friend, who is thy Ma∣ster? why art thou manacled?
Mantled hither! marry this Priest hath mantled vs for saving our Master Perindus.
Ay me, my son.
Vds fish, old Master, where have you been this 20 years and more;
Tyrinthus! at such a time! sir, your arrival is either •ery happy, or else most haplesse, either to see, or else prevent a danger.
Priest, how is my Perindus?
Doomed to die.
What is the cause?
His will.
Who could persuade him?
She who most strove to hinder and dissuade him.
What had he done?
That which deserves all li•e and love.
How fine the heavens powers can sorrow• frame!
The fates will play, and make my woe their g•me.
Where is he?
Safe enough I warrant you, get's leave of the Priest, master, and we'll go fetch him.
We caught him out of the water.
O, he had supped a bundance of •ait pore•ge!
And brought him to the ship where the mariners keep him.
Why stand I idle here! O to the shore i'll fly,
And either with him live, or for him die.
Master, master, master.
Isle follow him: nature can doe no less
Then either help, or pity such distress.
Nay if you go too, then farewell all,
Farewell ye rocks, farewell to thee O love,
You lovely rocks, you hard and rocky love.
Nay I shall turn swain presently and sing my final song.
I marvel what it is that stays Dicaus.
Marry let him stay till I send for him, the Cyclops shall want their breakfast this month.
Here I must stay for him.
Fine would I know how my gin•e thrives and pros∣pers. Whole•nda is fast, and by my disamour hath quenched her love with death: if now Glaucilla bee taken in that snare, then am I cunning: well may I prove a fisher, who have took too maids so soon with one self bait and hook. Is not that Nomicus? I shall learn of him. Nomicus?
Who Cosm•?
Why are these fishers bound?
For you.
For me?
I for you, had not you cussed Glaucilla, she had not been condemned: if she had not been condemned, Perindus would not have died for her: if he would not have died for her, he had not fallen from the rock: had he not fallen from the rock, we had not saved him: if wee had not saved him, wee had not been bound: were wee not bound, wee would show a fair pair of heals,
What talks this fool? Perindus fallen from the rock!
Hast thou not heard then of Perindus faith and fall•?
No, not a word; but fine would hear.
And shalt: my tongue is as ready as thy ear; Mean while lead these away, soon as Dicaeus returns, I'll overtake you.
I prithee Mr Priest, let me crave one favour; that I may ha•e an Epitaph for me in Neptunes church porch, Isle never go farther.
Here is no time for Epitaphs, away.
Nay, tic soon done, Isle trouble never a poet of them all,
I have it already.
Cancrone valorous and kind, where art thou?
Cancrone too kind and valorous to live,
Engulfed in Cyclops guts. Readers, why start you?
His life for his master he did freely give.
Ungrateful Sicelie that want his bones,
Instead of members keeping his memory in stones.
Short and sweet, Mr Priest.
Cancrone, this is a land voyage, you must lead the way.
But when wee sail down the Cyclops throat, Isle give• you the preeminence.
After that haplesse Nymph had heard her doom,
As she was led to'th' rock, in the middle way,
Perindus flying fast, calls out, Stay:
And for he thought his feet too slowly bore him,
Before he came, he sent his voice before.
Stay, stay, Dicaeus, you are a man, I see,
And well may err heavens not more pure then she.
Yet since the doom i• past i'll, pawn my breath,
And make your fact ••sse hanious by my death:
I'll lose he• life in me, and she shall spend
My life in her, so both shall better •nd.
This was no ill news to the Nymph.
Yes, yes: then first she thought her self condemned,
Death in him she feared and in her •elf contemnd.
That law it self (says she) should suffer death,
Which one condemns, another punishes.
True, says Perindus, my life, my ell's in thee,
When thou offendst, why should thou punish me?
But brief to give their words in short contracted,
Was never part of love more lovely acted:
Both loath to live, and both contend to die,
Where only death strove for the victory.
Mean time I could but weep, nor I alone,
That two such loves should die, not live in one.
Their spotless faith's a crystal, where I see
Too late my cankered ha•es deformity.
At length the law it self decides the strife,
That he with loss of his might buy her life.
Then and but then •he, wept, and to prevent him,
Down fell she with a deadly look and eye,
Acting the prologue of his tragedy,
And waked again, she 'gan to chide and rave,
And vows to live no further then his grave;
While he with cheerful steps the rocks ass•ding:
Fearless beholds his death, that steep descending,
And boldly standing on the utmost b•owe,
Thus sp•ke:
Poor life, I never knew thy worth till now,
How thou art ove• valued to pay
Her life with thine, gold with base alcumy.
Just, just, you heavens, I have set a gin
For them, and now my self the first am in.
Then turning to his love, thus spake his last:
Farewell Glaucilla, live and in thy breast
As in a heaven my love and life shall rest:
Seek not by death thy self from grief to free,
Remember now Perindus lives in thee.
Cherish my hear•, which in thy heart doth lye,
For whilst thou liu'st, Perindus cannot dye:
So leapt he lightly from the cloudy rock.
Is hee then dead?
No: for the guilty •ea
With soft embraces wrapped his limbs;
It seems the waives moved with Sympathy,
Would teach vnhumane men humanity.
Though they could not prevent, would ease his fall;
And not consenting to his pious death,
Restored him up again to air and breath:
Briefly, those two his servants not regarding,
Dicaeus threatening voice, and just awarding,
With him took up his guilt, and to a ship
That rides in the haven safe conveyed him, there
They left him now revived, themselves were taken
And as the law commands, were doomed to suffer
The death of sla•es: both to be strongly bound,
And in those hills left to the greedy Cyclops:
And now the stay is only in Dicaeus,
At whose return they suffer, just they dye,
Who love their master more then equity.
O lawless love! this soul offence,
Which when it prosperd, pleased my ravished sense:
With what a dry aspect, what horrid sight,
Now done, •t fills my •whole with guilty fright,
Who ere thou art, if in t•y spotless breast,
Thy undefiled thoughts doe quiet rest:
Wake them not, and let no blood-hound with thee dwell,
These murdering thoughts are like the mouth of hell,
Into whose yawning it is more easy never
To fall, then fallen, to cease from falling ever.
Nomicus, thou now may let thy prisoners free,
Thalander to Olinda now revived,
Perindus to Glaucilla are to be married,
And all are brought along with singing,
Hymen the shores, Hymen the echoes ringing.
Nomicus, see thou this Nymph? ah could thou think
That treason, envy, murder, spite and hell,
All hell it self in such a heaven could dwell?
This is the knot of all these sorrows; Cosma,
If not for shame, why yet for spite or fashion,
For women's fashion let some tears bee spilt:
A sea of weeping will not wash thy guilt.
Great nature, that hast made a stone descry
Twixt mean•r natures, checking baser metals,
Which proudly counterfeit the purer gold,
Why hast thou left the soul of man no touch-stone,
To judge dissemblance, and descry proud vice,
Which with false colours seems more virtuous
Then virtues self? like to some cunning workman,
Who frames a shape in such a form of stature,
That oft he excels by imitating nature.
He that should look upon this Nymphs sweet ey••
Would vow't a temple sworn to purity.
If murder rest in such a lovely grace,
Here do I vow never to trust a face.
Shall I call back your Prisoners?
Prithee doe•
Our nets, boats, oars, and hooks shall now go play,
For heaven hath sworn to make this holy day.
Hymen, Hymen, come safe on, Hymen.
That I love for ever constant stands,
Where hearts are tied before the hands,
Where fair virtue marries beauty,
And affection pleads for duty:
Hymen, Hymen, come safe on Hymen.
You honoured pair of fishers, see where your love,
So full of constant trial now hath brought you,
Se•, blessed souls, through so many tears,
Turnings, despairs, impossibilities,
Your love is now most safe arrived: Thalander,
Is this the Nymph, whom heaven and angry hell,
Her cold desires, and colder death it self
Would have devoured from thy deserving love?
Thalander, these hands are thine, that heavenly face,
Those starry eyes, those roses and that grace,
Those corrall lips, and that unknown breast,
And all the hidden riches of the rest:
They all are thine, thine is the fair Olinda.
Yet thou, as thou wast wont, all sad and heavy•
Blame me not, friend: for yet I seem forsaken
And doubt I sleep, and fear still to be waken.
Now is the time of pardon. Ye happy maids,
Your love in spite of all tempestuous seas,
Is safe arrived, and harbors in his ease,
And all those storms have got but this at last,
To sweeten present joys with sorrows past.
Blessed Olinda, thou hast got a love
Equal to heaven, and next to highest Jove.
Glaucilla, thy loss thou now dost full recover.
Ah you have found (too seldom found) a lover.
Then doe not her too rigorously reprove,
For loving those whom you yet better love.
For vs, we judge not of your hard intent,
But reckon your joys fatal instrument.
Yet this her penance: Cosma, mark thy censure,
Whom most tho• shouldest love, thou shalt love never
Dote thou on dotards, they shall hold thee ever:
The best and wisest never shall respect thee,
Thou only fools, fools only shall affect thee.
Loose now those prisoners; so forward to the temple.
Ha brave Judge, now Mistress mine, I must confess.
This charm begins to work already,
I love this fool, and dote upon him more,
Then ever upon any man before:
Well, I must be content thus to be cursed
And yet of lovers, fools are not the worst.
For howsoever boys doe hoot and flout them,
The best and wisest oft have fools about them.
I and many a fools babble too, I warrant the•.
Sweet heart, shall we go to bed?
What, in the morning?
Morning? tic night.
Thou art a fool indeed, see not the sun?
Why that's a candle or the moon, I prithee let's go to bed•
Content; no time unfit for play,
Love knows no difference twixt night and day.
Nay, all the ploy's done, gentles, you may go•
I have another play within to doe.
Riddle me, Riddle me, what's that?
My play is work enough; my w•rke is play,
I see to work in the night, and rest in the day:
Since then my play and work is all but one,
Well may my play begin, now yours is done.
AS in a Feast, so in a Comedy,
Two se•ces must be pleased in both the eye,
In feasts, the eye and taste must be invited,
In Comedies, the ey• and •are delighted:
And he that only seeks to please but either,
While both he doth not please, he pleases neither.
What ever feast could every guest content,
When a• t'ea•h man each taste is different?
But less a Scene, where nought but as it is newer,
Can please, where guests are more, and dishes fewer:
Yet in this thought, this thought the Author easd,
Who once made all, all rules, all never pleased.
Fain• would we please the best, if not the many,
And sooner will the best be pleased then any:
Our rest we set in pleasing of the best,
So wi•h we you, what you may give vs: Rest.

WHen puts my Lord to Sea?
When the winde's fair.
R•…olve me I entreat, can you not guess
The purpose of this voyage?
Most men think
The Fleet's bound for the Lands.
Nay, tic like.
The great success at Cales under the conduct
Of such a Noble General, hath put heart
Into the English: They are all on fire
To purchase from the Spaniard. If their Carracks
Come deeply laden, wee shall tug with them
For golden spoil.
O, were it come to that!
How Plimouth swells with Gallants▪ how the streets
Glister with gold! You cannot meet a man
But tricked in skarffe and feather, that it seems
As if the pride of Englands Gallantry
Were harbourd here. It doth appear (me thinks)
A very Court of Soldiers.
It doth so.
Where shall we dine to day?
At the next Tavern by; there's the best wine,
And the best wench, Bess Bridges, she's the flower
Of Plimouth held: the Castle needs no bush,
Her beauty draws to them more gallant Customers
Then all the signs in the town else.
A sweet Lass,
If I have any judgement.
Now in troth
I think shoe's honest.
Honest, and live there?
What, in a public Tavern, whore's such confluence
Of lusty and brave Gallants? Honest said you?
I vow she is for me.
For all, I think. I'm sure she's wondrous modest.
But withal
Exceeding affable.
An argument that shoe's not proud.
No, were she proud, she'd fall.
Well, shoe's a most attractive Adamant,
Her very beauty hath upheld that house,
And gained her master much.
That Adamant
Shall for this time draw me to, we'll dine there.
No better motion: Come to the Castle then.
What, to the old house still?
Can blame me, Captain,
Believe me, I was never surprised till now,
Or catch•… upon the sudden.
Pray resolve me,
Why being a Gentleman of fortunes, means,
And well revenude, will you adventure thus
A doubtful voyage, when only such as I
Borne to no other fortunes then my sword
Should seek abroad for pillage.
Pillage, Captain?
No, tic for honour; And the brave society
Of all these shining Gallants that attend
The great L. General, drew me hither first:
No hope of gain or spoil.
I, but what draws you to this house so oft?
As if thou knew it not.
What, Bess?
Even she.
Come, I must tell you, you forget your self,
One of your birth and breeding, thus to dote
Upon a Tanners daughter: why, her father
Sold hydes in Somersetshire, and being trade-falne,
Sent her to service.
Prithee speak no more,
Thou telst me that which I would fine forget,
Or wish I had not known. If thou wilt humour me
Tell me shoe's fair and honest.
Yes, and loves you.
To forget that, were to exclude the rest:
All saving that, were nothing. Come let's enter.
You are welcome Gentlemen. Show them into the next room there.
Look out a Towel, and some Rolls, a Salt and Trenchers.
No sir, we will not din•….
I am sure ye would if ye had my stomach.
What wine drink ye, Sack or Claret?
Wheres Bess?
Marry above with three or four Gentlemen.
Go call her.
Isle draw you a cup of the neatest wine in Plimouth
Isle taste none of your drawing. Go call Bess.
Theres nothing in the mouths of these Gal∣lants, but Bess, Bess.
What sa'y Sir?
Nothing sir, but Isle go call her presently.
Tell her who's here.
The devil rid her out of the house for me.
Sa'y sir?
Nothing but anon anon sir.
See she's come.
Sweet Mr Spencer, you're a stranger grown,
Where have you been these three days?
The last night
If ate up late, at game: here take this bag,
And lay it up till I call for it.
Sir I shall.
Bring me some wine.
I know your taste,
And I shall please your palate.
Troth tic a pretty soul.
To thee I will unbosom all my thoughts,
Were her low birth but equal with her beauty
Here would I fix my thoughts.
You are not mad sir?
You say you love her.
Never question that.
Then put her to it, win Opportunity,
Shees the best bawd: If (as you say) she loves you,
She can deny you no•…hinge.
I have proved her
Unto the utmost test. Examined her.
Even to a modest force: but all in vain:
She'll laugh, confer, keep company, discourse,
And something more, kiss: but bay•…nd that compass
She no way can be drawn.
Tic a virtue,
But seldom found in taverns.
Tic of the best Graves wine sir.
Gramercy Girl, come sit.
Pray pardon sir, I dare not.
Isle ha'it so.
My fellows love me not, and will complain
Of such a saucy boldness.
Pox on your fellows,
Isle try whether their pottle pots or heads
Be harder, if I doe but hear them grumble.
Sit: now Bess drink to me.
To your good voyage.
Did you call sir?
Yes sir, to have your absence. Captain, this health.
Let it come sir.
Must you be set, and we wait, with a—
What say you sir?
Anon, anon, I come there.
What will you venture Bess to sea with me?
What I love best, my heart: for I could wish
I had been borne to equal you in fortune,
Or you so low, to have been ranked with me,
I could have then presumed boldly to say,
I love none but my Spencer.
Bess I thank thee.
Keep•… still that hundred pound till my return
From th'Islands with my Lord: if never, wench
Take it, it is thine own.
You bind me to you.
Bess, you mu•…t fill some wine into the Port∣cullis, the Gentlemen there will drink none but of your drawing.
She shall not rise sir, go, let your Master snick-up.
And that should be cousin-german to the hick-up.
Bess, you must needs come, the gentlemen fling pots, pottles, drawers, and all down•… stairs. The whole house is in an uproar.
Pray pardon sir, I needs must be gone.
The Gentlemen swear if she come not up to thē
They will come down to her.
If they come in peace,
Like civil Gentlemen, they may be welcome:
If otherwise, let them usurp their pleasures.
We stand prepared for both.
Save you gallants, we are somewhat bold to press
Into your company. It may be held scarce manners,
Therefore fit that we should crave your pardon.
Sir, you are welcome, so are your friends.
Some wine.
Pray give me leave to fill it.
You shall not stir. So please you we'll join cōpany. Drawer, more stools.
I tak't that's a she drawer. Are you of the house?
I am sir.
In what place?
I draw.
Beer, doe you not? You are some tapstresse.
Sir, the worst character you can bestow
Upon the maid is to draw wine.
She wo•… draw none to us,
Perhaps she keeps a Runlet for your taste,
Which none but you must pierce.
I pray •…e civil.
I know no•…, Gentlemen, what your intents be,
Nor doe I fear or care. This is my 〈◊〉,
And if you bear you, as you seem in show,
Like Gentlemen, sit and be sociable.
We will. Min•…, by your leave: Remove I say.
She shall not stir.
How sir?
No sir: could you out-face the devil,
We doe not fear your roaring.
Though you may be companion with a drudge,
It is not fit she should have place by us.
About your business, huswife.
She is worthy
The place as the best here, and she shall keep•….
You lie.
The Gentleman's slain, away.
Oh heaven, what have you done?
Undone thy self and m•… too. Come away▪
Oh sad misfortune, I shall lose him ever.
What, are you men or milk sops? Stand you still
Senseless as stones, and see your friend in danger
To expire his last?
Tush, all our help's in vain.
This is the fruit of whoores.
This mischief came through thee▪
It grew first from your incivility.
Lend me a hand to lift his body hence.
It was a fatal business.
One call my Master, another fetch the constable,
Here's a man kilt in the room.
How, a man killed say thou. Is all paid?
How fell they out, can thou tell?
Sure about this bold Beatrice: tic not so much for the death of the man, but how shall we come by our rec∣koning?
What shall become of me! Of all lost creatures
The most unfortunate. My innocence
Hath been the cause of blood, and I am now
Purpled with murder, though not within compass
Of the Laws severe censure: but which most
Adds unto my affliction, I by this
Have lost so worthy and approved a friend,
Whom to redeem from exile, I would give
All that's without and in me.
Your name's Bess Bridges?
An unfortunate Maid.
Known by that name too well in Plimouth here.
Your business, sir, with me?
Know you this Ring?
I doe: it is my Sponsors.
I know withal you are his trusty friend,
To whom he would commit it. Speak, how fares he?
Is hee in freedom, know ye?
Hoe's in health
Of body, though in mind somewhat perplexed
For this late mischief happened.
Is he fled, and freed from danger?
Neither. By this token
He lovingly commends him to you Bess,
And prays you when tic dark meet him of the Hoe
Near to the new-made Fort, where he will attend you,
Before he flies, to take a kind farewell.
Theres only Goodlack in his company,
He entreats you not to fail him.
Tell him from me, Isle •…ome, Isle run, Isle fly,
Stand Death before me: were I sure to die.
You are too full of passion.
Can thou blame me,
To have the guilt of murder burden me,
And next, my life in haz•…td to a death
So ignominious: last, to lose a Love
So sweet, so fair, so amorous, and so chaste,
And all these at an instant? Art thou sure
Carol is dead?
I can believe no less.
You hit him in the very speeding place.
Oh but the last of these sits nearest my heart.
Sir be advised by me.
Try her before you trust her. She perchance
May take th'advantage of your hopeful fortunes:
But when she finds you subject to distress
And casualty, her flattering love may die:
Your deceased hopes.
Thou counselst well.
Isle put her to the test and utmost trial
Before I trust her further. Here she comes.
I have done my message sir.
Fear not sweet Spencer, we are now alone,
And thou art sanctuar'd in these mine arms.
While these confer we'll sentinel their safety.
This place Isle guard.
I this.
Are you not hurt?
Or your skin raced with his offensive steel?
How is it with you?
Bess, all my afflictions
Are that I must leave thee: thou know withal
My extreme necessity, and that the fear
Of a most scandalous death doth force me hence.
I am not near my Country, and to stay
From new supply from thence, might deeply engage me•…
To desperate hazard.
Is it coin you want?
Here is the hundred pound you gave me late,
Use that, beside what I have stored and saved
Which makes it fifty more: were it ten thousand
Nay, a whole million, Spencer, all were thine.
No, what thou hast keep still, tic all thine own.
Here be my keys, my trunks take to thy charge:
Such gold fit for transportage as I have,
Isle bear along: the rest are freely thine,
Money, apparel, and what else thou findst,
Perhaps worth my bequest and thy receiving,
I make thee mistress of.
Before I doted,
But now you strive to have me extaside.
What would you have me doe, in which to express
My zeal to you?
Which in my chamber hangs,
My picture, I enjoin thee to keep ever,
For when thou partst with that, thou 〈◊〉 me.
My soul may from my body be divorced,
But never that from me.
I have a house in Foy, a tavern called
The Winde-mill, that I freely give thee too,
And thither if I live Isle •…end to thee.
So soon as I have cast my reckonings up,
And made even with my Master, Isle not fail
To visit Foy in Cornwall. Is there else
Ought that you will enjoin me?
Thou art fair,
Join to thy beauty virtue. Many suitors
I know will tempt thee: beauty's a shrewd bait,
But unto that if thou add chastity,
Thou shalt ore-come all scandal. Time calls hence,
We now must part.
Oh that I had the power to make Time lame,
To stay the stars, or make the Moon stand still,
That future day might never haste thy flight.
I could dwell here for ever in thine arms.
And wish it always night.
We trifle hours. Farewell.
First take this Ring:
It was the first token of my constant love
That past betwixt us. When I see this next,
And not my Spencer, I shall think thee dead:
For till death part thy body from thy soul
I know thou will•… not part with it.
Swear for me Bess: for thou moist safely do•….
Once more sarewell: at Foy thou shalt hear from me.
Theres not a word that hath a parting sound
Which through mine ears shrills not immediate death.
I shall not live to lose thee.
Best be gone, for hark I hear some tread.
A thousand farewells are in one contracted. Captain away.
Oh, I shall dye.
What mean you Bess, will you betray your friend,
Or call my name in question? Sweet, look up.
Ho, is my Spencer gone?
With speed towards Foy,
There to take ship for Fiall.
Let me recollect my self,
And what he left in charge. Virtue and Chastity.
Next, with all sudden expedition
Prepare for Foy: all these will I conserve,
And keep them strictly, as I would my life.
Plimouth farewell: in •…ornwall I will prove
A second fortune, and for ever morn,
Until I see my Sponsors safe return.
Tic well yet w•… have gotten all the money due to my Master. It is the commonest thing that can bee for these Captains to score and to score: but when the scores are to be paid, Non est inventus.
Tic ordinary amongst Gallants now a days, who had rather swear forty oaths, then only this one oath, God let me never be trusted.
But if the Captains would follow the noble mind of the General, before night there would not bee one score owing in Plimouth.
Little knows Bess•… that my Master hath got in these desperate debts: but she hath c•…st up her account▪ and is gone.
Whither can thou tell?
They say to keep a Tavern in Foy, and that M. Spencer hath given her a stock to set up for her self. Well, howsoever, I am glad, though he kilt the man wee have got our money.
IN your time have you seen a sue•…la creature?
Some week or thereabouts.
And in that small time she hath almost undone all the other Taverns. The Gallants make no rendezvous now but at the Wind-mill.
Spite of them Isle have her. It shall cost me the setting on but Isle have her.
Why, doe you think she is so easily won?
Easily or not, Isle bid as fair and far as any man within twenty miles of my head, but I will put her to the squeak.
They say there are Knights sons already come as suitors to her.
Tic like enough, some younger brothers, and so I intend to make them.
If these doings hold, she will grow rich in short time.
There shall bee doings that shall make this Wind-mill my grand seat, my mansion, my palace, and my Constantinople.
Here she comes: observe how modestly she bears her self.
I must know of what burden this vessel is, I shall not bear with her till she bear with me, and till then, I cannot report her for a woman of good carriage.
Your old Master that dwelt here before my coming, hath turned over your years to me.
Right forsooth: before he was a Vintner, hee was a shoo-maker, and left two or three turne-overs more besides my self.
How long hast thou to serve.
But eleven years next grass, and then I am in hope of my freedom. For by that time I shall be at full age.
How old art thou now?
Forsooth newly come into my Teens. I have scraped trenchers this two years, and the next Vintage I hope to be Barre-boy.
What's thy name?
My name is Clem, my father was a Baker, and by the report of his neighbours, as honest a man as ever lived by bread.
And where dwelt he?
Below here in the next crooked street, at the sign of the Leg. Hee was nothing so tall as I, but a little wee-man, and somewhat huckt-backt.
He was once Constable?
Hee was indeed, and in that one year of his reign, I have heard them say, hee bolted and sifted out more business, then others in that office in many years before him.
How long first since he dyed?
Marry the last dear year. For when corn grew to be at an high rate, my father never dowed after.
I think I have heard of him.
Then I am sure you have heard he was an honest neighbor, and one that never loved to be meale-mouth'd.
Well sirrah, prove an honest servant, and you shall find me your good Mistress. What company is in the Mermaid?
There be four Sea captains. I bele•…ve they be little better then spirits, they are so flush of their rudocks.
No matter, we•… will take no note of them.
Here they vent many brave commodities,
By which some gain accrews. They are my good customers,
And still return me profit.
Wot you what Mistress, how the two Sailors would have served me, that called for the pound and half of Cheese?
How was it Clem?
When I brought them a reckoning, they would have had me to have scored it up. They took me for a simon∣ple gull indeed, that would have had me to have taken Chalk for Cheese:
Well, go waite upon the Captains, see them want no wine.
Nor reckoning neither, take my word Mistress.
Shoe's now at leisure, Isle to her.
Lady, what Gentlemen are those above?
Sir they are such as please to be my guests,
And they are kindly welcome.
Give me their names.
You may go search the Church-booke where they were christened.
There you perhaps may learn them.
Minion, how?
Fie, fie, you are too rude with this fair creature,
That no way seeks t'offend you.
Pray hands off.
I tell thee maid, wife, or what ever thou be,
No man shall enter here but by my leave.
Come, let's be more familiar.
Alas good-man.
Why know thou whō thou sleightft. I am Roughman,
The only approved gallant of these parts,
A man of whom the Roarers stand in awe,
And must not be put off.
I never yet heard man so praise himself,
But proved in'th end a coward.
Coward, Bess?
You will offend me, raise in me that fury
Your beauty cannot calm. Go to, no more,
Your language is too harsh and peremptory.
Pray let me hear no more on'•…. I tell thee
That quiet day scarce past me these seven years
I have not cracked a weapon in some fray,
And will you move my spleen?
What, threat a woman?
Sir, if you thus persist to wrong my house,
Disturb my guests, and nightly domineer,
To put my friends from patience, Isle complain,
And right my self before the Magi•…trate.
Can we not live in compass of the Law,
But must be swaggerd out on it?
Go too, wench,
I wish thee well, think on it, theres good for thee
Stored in my breast, and when I come in place
I must have no man to offend mine eye:
My love can brooke no rivals. For this time
I am content your Captains shall have peace,
But must not be used to it.
Sir if you come like other free &amp; civil Gentlemen
You're welcome, otherwise my doors are barred you.
That's my good Girl,
I have fortunes laid up for thee: what I have
Command it as thine own. Go too, be wise.
Well, I shall study for it.
Consider on it. Farewell.
My mind suggests me that this prating fellow
Is some notorious Coward. If he persist
I have a trick, to try what metal's in him.
What news with you?
I am now going to carry the Captains a reckoning.
And what's the •…umme?
Let me see, eight shillings and six pence.
How can you make that good? write them a bill.
Isle watch them for that, tic no time of night to use our bills, the Gentlemen are no dwarfs, and with one word of my mouth, I can tell them what is to be-tall.
How comes it to so much?
Imprimis, six quarts of wine at seven pence the quart, seven sixpences.
Why dost thoureckon it so?
Because as they came in by hob nab, so I will bring them in a reckoning at six and at sevens.
Well, wine—3 s, 6 d.
And what wants that often groats?
Tic two pence over.
Then put six pence more to it, and make it 4 s, wine, though you bate it them in their meat.
Why so I prithee?
Because of the old proverb, What they want in meat, let them take out in drink. Then for twelve penny∣worth of Anchovies, 18 d.
How can that be?
Marry very well Mistress, 12 d. Anchovies, and 6 d. oil and vinegar. Nay they shall have a saucy recko∣ning
And what for the other half crown?
Bread, beer, salt, napkins, trenchers, one thing with another, so the sum totalis is—8 s, 6 d.
Well, take the reckoning from the bar.
What needs that forsooth? The Gentlemen seem to be high flown already, send them in but another pottle of Sack, and they will cast up the reckoning of them∣selves. Yes, Isle about it.
Were I not with so my suitors pesterd,
And might I enjoy my Spencer, what a sweet
Contented life were this? For money flows
And my gaine's great. But to my▪ Roughman next:
I have a trick to try what spirit's in him,
It shall be my next business: in this passion
For my dear Spencer, I propose me this,
Amongst many sorrows some mirth's not amiss,
What were you thinking sir?
Troth of the world, what any man should see in it
To be in love with it.
The reason of your meditation.
To imagine that in the same in•…ned that one for∣fets all his estate, another enters upon a rich possession: as one goes to the Church to be married, another is hurry∣ed to the gallows to be hanged, the last having no feeling of the first mans joy, nor the first of the last mans misery. At the same time that one lies tortured upon the Rack, another lies tumbling with his Mistress over head and ears in down and feathers. This when I truly consider, I cannot but wonder why any fortune should make a man ectasied.
You give your self too much to melancholy.
These are my Maxims, and were they as faith∣fully practised by others, as truly apprehended by me, we should have less oppression, and more charity.
Make good thy words.
I say thou hast injured me.
Tell me wherein.
When we a•…altered Fiall,
And I had by the Generals command
The onset, and with danger of my person
Enforced the Spaniard to a swift retreat,
And beat them from their Fort, thou when thou saw
All fear and danger past, made up with me
To share that honour which was sole mine own,
And never ventured shot for it, or ere came
Where bullet grazed.
See Captain a fray towards,
Let's if we can atone this difference.
Content.
Isle prove it with my sword,
That though thou had the foremost place in field,
And I the second, yet my Company
Was equal in the entry of the Fort.
My sword was that day drawn as soon as thine,
And that poor honour which I won that day
Was but my merit.
Wrong me palpably
And justify the same?
You shall not fight.
Why sir, who made you first a Justicer,
And taught you that word shall? you are no General,
Or if you be, pray show us your Commission.
Sir you have no commission but my counsel,
And that Isle show you freely.
Tic some Chaplain,
I doe not like his text.
Let's beat their weapons down.
Isle aim at him that offers to divide us!
Pox of these part-frayes, see I am wounded
By beating down my weapon.
How fares my friend?
You sought for blood, and Gentlemen you have it,
Let mine appease you, I am hurt to death.
My rage converts to pity, that this Gentleman
Shall suffer for his goodness.
Noble friend,
I will revenge thy death.
He is no friend
That murmurs such a thought. Oh Gentlemen.
I killed a man in Plimouth, and by you
Am•…in in Fiall, Carol fell by me,
And I fall by a Spencer. Heaven is just,
And will not suffer murder unrevenged,
Heaven pardon me, as I forgive you both,
Shift for your selves: away.
We saw him die,
But grieve you should so perish.
Note Heavens justice,
And henceforth make that use on•…. I shall faint.
Short Farewells now must serve. If thou survive
Live to thine honour: but if thou expi•…st
Heaven take thy soul to mercy. Exeunt.
I bleed much,
I must go seek a Surgeon.
Sir how cheer you?
Like one thats bound upon a new adventure
To the other world: yet thus much worthy friend
Let me entreat you, since I understand
The Fleet is bound for England, take your occasion
To ship your self, and when you come to Foy
Kindly commend me to my dearest Bess,
Thou shalt receive a Will, i•… which I have
Possessed her of five hundred pounds a year.
A noble Legacy.
The rest I have bestowed amongst my friends,
Only reserving a bare h•…ndred pounds
To see me honestly and well intert'd.
I shall perform your trust as carefully
As to my father, breathed he.
M•…rke me Captain:
Her Legacy I give with this proviso,
If at thy arrival where my Bess remains,
Thou findst her well reported, free from scandal,
My Will stands firm: but if thou hear her branded
For loose behaviour, or immodest life,
What she should have, I here bestow on thee,
It is thine own: but as thou love thy soul
Deal faithfully betwixt my Bess and me.
Else let me dye a prodigy.
This Ring was hers, that, be she loose or chaste,
Being her own, restore her, she will know it,
And doubtless she deserves it. Oh my memory,
What had I quite forgot? She hath my picture,
And what of that?
If she be ranked amongst the loose and lewd,
Take it away, I hold it much indecent,
A whore should have it in keeping: but if constant
Let her enjoy it: this my Will perform
As thou art just and honest.
Sense else forsake me.
Now lead me to my Chamber, ell's mads even,
My peace with earth, and my atone with heaven.
But that I know my mother to be chaste,
I'd swear some Soldier got me.
It may be many a Soldiers Buff Jerkin came out of your fathers Tanne-fat.
Me thinks I have a manly spirit in me
In this mans habit.
Now am not I of many men's minds, for if you should doe me wrong, I should not kill you, though I took you pissing against a wall.
Me thinks I could be valiant on the sudden:
And meet a man •…h field.
I could doe all that I have heard discoursed
Of Mary Ambree or Westminsters Long-Meg.
What Mary Ambree was I cannot tell, but un∣less you were taller you will come short of Long Meg▪
Of all thy fellows thee I oily trust,
And charge thee to be secret.
I am bound in my Indentures to keep my Ma∣sters secrets, and should I find a man in bed with you, I would not tell.
Be gone sir, but no words as you esteem my favour.
But Mistress, I could wish you to look to your long seames, fights are dangerous. But am not I in a sweet taking think you?
I prithee why?
Why, if you should swagger and kill any body, I being a Vintner should be called to the Bar.
Let none condemn me of •…odesty,
Because I •…rye the courage of a man
Who on my solo's a Coward: beats my servants,
Cuffs them, and as they pass by him kicks my maids,
Nay domineers over me, making himself
Lord ore my house and household. Yesternight
I heard him make appointment on some business
To pass alone this way. Isle venture fair,
But I will try what's in him.
Sir, I can now no further, weighty business
Calls me away.
Why at your pleasure then,
Yet I could wish that ere I past this field,
That I could meet some Hector, so your eyes
Might witness what my self have oft repeated,
Namely that I am valiant.
Sir no doubt. But now I am in haste. Farewell,
How many times brave words bear out a man?
For if he can but make a noise, hoe's feared.
To talk of frays, although he ne'er had heart
To face a man in field, that's a brave fellow,
I have been valiant I must needs confess,
In street and Tavern, where there have been men
Ready to part the fray: but for the fields
They are too cold to fight in.
You are a villain, a Coward, and you lie.
You wrong me I protest. Sweet courteous Gentlemā
I never did you wrong.
Wilt tell me that?
Draw forth thy coward sword, and suddenly,
Or as I am a man Isle run thee through,
And leave thee dead ith field.
Hold as you are a Gentleman. I have tan an oath
I will not fight to day.
You have took a blow already and the lie,
Will not both these enrage thee?
No, would you give the bastinado too,
I will not break mine oath.
Oh, your name's Roughman.
No day doth pass you but you hurt or kill.
Is this out of your calender?
I, you are deceived,
I ne'er drew sword in anger I protest,
Unless it were upon some poor weak fellow
That ne'er wore steel about him.
Throw your Sword.
Here sweet young sir, but as you are a gentleman,
Doe not impair mine honour.
Tie that shoe.
I shall sir.
Untruss that point.
Any thing this day to save mine oath.
Enough: yet not enough, lie down
Till I stride ore thee.
Sweet sir any thing.
Rise, thou hast leave. Now Roughman thou art blessed
This day thy life is saved, look to the rest.
Take back thy sword.
Oh you are g•…rous: honour me so much
As let me know to whom Iowe'my life.
I am Bess Bridges. brother,
Still me thought that you were something like her.
And I have heard,
You domineer and revel in her house,
Control her servants, and abuse her guests,
Which if I ever shall hereafter hear,
Thou art but a dead man.
She never told me of a brother living,
But you have power to sway me.
But for I see you are a Gentleman,
I am content this on•…o let you pass,
But if I find you fall into relapse,
The second's far more dangerous.
I shall fear it. Sir will you take the wine?
I am for London.
And for these two terms cannot make return▪
But if you see my sister, you may say
I was in health.
Too well, the devil take you.
Pray use her well, and at my coming back
Isle ask for your acquaintance. Now farewell.
None saw'•…hoe's gone for London: I am unhurt,
Then who shall publish this disgrace abroad?
One man's no slander, should he speak his worst,
My tongue's as loud as his, but in this coun•…y
Both of more fame and credit. Should we contest
I can out-face the proudest. This is then
My comfort: Roughman, thou 〈◊〉 still the same,
For a disgrace not seent, is held no shame.
Aboard, aboard, the wind stands fair for England,
The ships have all weighed anchor.
A stiff gale blows from the shore.
The Sailors call aboard, and I am forced
To leave my friend now at the point of death,
And cannot close his eyes. Here is the Will,
Now may I find yon Tann•…rs daughter turned
Unchaste or wanton, I shall gain by it
Five hundred pounds a year: here is good evidence.
Sir will you take the long boat and aboard?
With all my heart.
What are you ready Mates?
We staid for you. Thou can not tel who's dead?
The great bell rung out now.
They say it was for one Spencer, who this night
Died of a mortal wound.
My worthy friend.
Unhappy man that cannot stay behind•…
To doe him his last rights. Was his name Spencer?
Yes sir, a Gentleman of good account
And well known in the navy.
This is the end of all mortality:
It will be news unpleasing to his Bess.
I cannot fair amiss, but long to see
Whether these Lands belong to her or me.
Nay fear not sir, now you have escaped this dressing
My life for yours.
I thank thee honest Friend.
Sir I can tell you news.
What first I prithee?
There is a Gentleman one of your name,
That did within this hour.
My name? what was he, of what sickness did he?
No sickness, but a slight hurt in the body,
Which showed at first no danger, but being searched,
He died at the third dressing.
At my third search I am in hope of life.
The heavens are merciful.
Sir doubt not your recovery.
That hundred pound I had prepared t'expend
Upon mine own expected Funeral
I for name sake will now bestow on his.
A noble resolution.
What ships are bound for England, I would gladly
Venture to sea, though weak.
All bound that way are under sail already.
Here's no security,
For when the beaten Spaniards shall return,
They'll spoil whom they can find.
We have a ship,
Of which I am Surgeon, that belongs unto
A London merchant, now bound for Mamorah
A town in Barberry, please you to use that,
You shall command free passage: ten months hence
We hope to visit England.
Friend I thank thee.
Isle bring you to the Master, who I know
Will entertain you gladly.
When I have seen the funeral rights performed
To the dead body of my Country man
And kinsman, I will take your courteous offer.
England no doubt will hear news of my death,
How Bess will take it is to me unknown:
On her behaviour I will build my fa•…e,
There raise my love, or thence erect my hate.
OH you're well met, j•…st as I propheside
So it fell out.
As how I pray?
Had you but staid the crossing of one field,
You had beheld a Hector, the bold•…st 〈◊〉
That ever Roughman met with.
Pray what was he?
You talk of Little Davy, Cutting Dick,
And divers such, but tush, this hath no fellow.
Of what stature and years was he?
Indeed I must confess he was no giant,
Nor above fifty, but he did bestir him,
Was here and there, and every where at once,
That I was ne'er so put to it since the Midwife
First wrapped my head in linen. Let's to Bess.
Isle tell her the whole project.
Here is the house, we'll enter if you please.
Where be these Drawers, Rascals I should say?
That will give no attendance.
Anon, •…non sir, please you see a room. What you here again? Now we shall have such roaring.
You sirrah call your Mistress.
Yes sir, I know it is my duty to call her Mistress.
See and the slave will stir.
Yes I doe stir.
Shall we have humours, sauce box, you have •…ares
Isle teach you prick-song.
But you have now a wrong Sow by the ear. I will call her,
Doe sir, you had best.
If you were twenty Roughmans, if you lug me by the ears again, Isle draw.
Ha, what will you draw?
The best wine in the house for your worship: and I would call her, but I can assure you she is either not stir∣ring, or else not in cafe.
How not in case?
I think she hath not her smock on, for I think I saw it lye at her beds head.
What, Drawers grow capritious?
Help, help.
What uprore's this? shall we be never rid
From these disturbances?
Why how now Bess? Is this your housewifery?
When you are mine Isle have you rise as early as the La•…ke,
Look to the Bar your self: these lazy rascals
Will bring your sty•…e behind hand.
You lye sir?
How? lye?
Yes sir at the Raven in the high-street, I was at your lodging •…his morning for a pottle pot.
You will about your business, must you hear
Stand gaping and idle?
You wrong me sir,
And tyrannise too much over my servants.
I will have no man touch them but my self.
If I doe not put Rats-bane into his wine in stead of Sugar, say I am no true Baker.
What, rise at noon?
A man may fight a tall fray in a morning,
And one of your best friends too be hacked and mangled,
And almost cut to pieces, and you fast
Close in your bed, ne'er dream on it.
Fought you this day?
And ne'er was better put too't in my days.
I pray, how was it?
Thus: as I past yon fields:
I pray forsooth, what shall I reckon for the Jolly of Ling in the Portcullis.
A pox upon your Iolles, you kitchen stuff,
Go scour your skillets, pots, and dripping-pans,
And interrupt not us.
The Devil take your Oxe-heeles, you foul
Cods-head, must you be kicking?
Minion dare you scold?
Yes sir, and lay my ladle over your coxcomb.
I doe not think that thou dare strike a man,
That swaggerst thus ore women.
How now Bess?
Shall we be never quiet?
You are too rude.
Now I profess all patience.
Then proceed.
Rising up early, Minion whilst you slept,
To cross you field, I had but newly parted
With this my friend, but that I soon espied
A gallant fellow, and most strongly armed.
In the mid-field we met, and both being resolute,
We justled for the wall.
Why, did there stand a wall in the mid-field?
I meant strove for the way.
Two such brave spirits meeting, straight both drew.
The Maid forsooth sent me to know whether you would have the shoulder of mutton roasted or sod.
A mischief on your shoulders.
That's the way to make me never prove good porter
You still heap wrongs on wrongs.
I was in fury
To think upon the violence of that fight,
And could not stay my rage.
Once more proceed.
Oh had you seen two tilting meteors justly
In the mid Region, with like fear and fury
We two encountered. Not Briarius
Could with his hundred hands have struck more thick.
Blows came about my head, I took them still.
Thrusts by my sides twixt body and my arms,
Yet still I put them by.
When they were past he put them by. Go on.
But in this fury what became of him?
I think I paid him home, hoe's soundly mauled,
I bosomed him at every second thrust.
•…caped he with life?
〈◊〉, thats my fear: if he recover this,
I•…e never trust my sword more.
Why fly you not if he be in such danger?
Because a witch once told me
I n•…r should dye •…or murder.
I believe thee,
But tell me pray, was not this gallant fellow,
A pretty fair young youth about my years?
Even thereabout.
He was not fifty then.
Much of my stature?
Much about your pitch.
He was no giant then.
And wore a suit like this?
I half suspect.
That gallant •…allow,
So wounded and so mangled, was my self,
You base white-lyver'd slave, it was this shoe
That thou stooped to untie: untrust those points:
And like a beastly coward lay along,
Till I stridd over thee. Speak, was it not so?
It cannot be denied.
Hare hearted fellow, Milk-sop, dost not blush?
Give me that Rapier: I will make thee swear,
Thou shalt redeem thy•… scorn thou hast incurred,
Or in this woman shape Isle cudgel thee,
And bea•…e thee through the streets. As I am Bess, I'll do it.
Hold, hold; I swear.
Dare not to enter at my door till then.
Shame confounds me quite.
That shame redeem: perhaps we•… doe thee gre•…
I love the valiant, but despise the base.
Will you be 〈◊〉 sir?
She hath wakend me,
And kindled that dead fire of courage in me,
Which all this while hath slept: To spare my fl•…sh
And wound my fame, what is it? I will not rest
Till by some valiant deed I have made good
All my disgraces past. Isle cross the st•…eete,
And strike the next brave fellow that I meet.
I am bound to see the end on it.
Are you sir?
Believe me sir, she bears her self so well,
No man can justly blame her: and I wonder
Being a single woman as she is,
And living in an house of such resort,
She is no more did•…ted.
The best Gentlemen
The Country yields, become her daily guests.
Sure sir I think shoe's rich.
Thus much I know, would I could buy her state
VVere't for a brace of thousands.
•… was said a ship is now put into harbour,
Know whence she is.
Isle bring news from the key.
To tell you true sir, I could wish a match
Betwixt her and mine own and only son,
And stretch my purse too upon that condition.
Please you Isle motion it.
One of the ships is new come from the Islands,
The greatest man of note's one Captain Goodlack.
It is but a small Vessel.
Isle meet you straight at the VVind-mill.
Not one word of my name.
We understand you.
Sir tic told us you came late from th'Islands▪
I did so:
Pray sir the n•…was from thence.
The best is, that the General is in health,
And Fiall won from the Spaniards: but the Fl•…ct
By reason of so many dangerous tempests
Extremely weatherbeaten. You sir I take it,
Are Mayor of the town.
I am the Kings Lief•…nant.
I have some Letters of import from one
A Gentleman of very good account,
That did late in the Islands, to a Maid
That keeps a Tavern here.
Her name Bess Bridges?
The same. I was desired to make inquiry
What fame she bears, and what report shoe's of.
Now you sir being here •…hiefe Magistr•…,
Can best resolve me.
To our understanding,
Shoe's without stain or blemish well reputed,
And by her modesty and fair demeanour,
Hath won the love of all.
The worse for me.
I can assure you many narrow eyes
Have looked on her and her condition,
But those that with most envy have endeavoured
To entrap her, have returned won by her virtues.
So all that I inquire of make report.
I am glad to heare't. Sir I have now some business,
And I of force must leave you.
I entreat you to sup with me to night.
Sir I may trouble you.
Five hundred pound a year out of my way.
Is there no flaw that I can tax her with,
To forfeit this revenue? Is she such a Saint,
None can missay her? why then I my self
Will undertake it. If in her demeanour
I can but find one blemish, stain or spot,
It is five hundred pound a year well got.
But did he fight it bravely?
I assure you mistress most dissolutely: hee hath run this Sailor three times through the body, and yet never touched his skin.
How can that be?
Through the body of his doublet I meant.
How shame, base imputation, and disgrace
Can make a coward valiant: Sirrah you
Look to the bar.
Isle hold up my hand there presently.
I understand, you came now from the Islands,
We did so.
If you can tell me tidings of one Gentleman
I shall requite you largely.
Of what name?
One Spencer.
We both saw and knew the man.
Only for that call for what wine you please.
Pray tell me where you left him.
In Fiall.
Was he in health? how did he fare?
Why well.
For that good news, spend, revel, and carouse,
Your reckning's paid before-hand. I'm extaside,
And my delights unbounded.
Did you love him?
Next to my hopes in heaven.
Then change your mirth.
Why, as I take it, you told me he was well,
And shall I not rejoice?
Hoe's well in heaven, For Mistress, he is dead,
Ho, dead! was it so you said? You have givē me, friend
But one wound yet, speak but that word again,
And kill me out-right.
He lives not.
And shall I? Wilt thou not break heart?
Are these my ribs wrought out of brass or steel,
Thou can not craze their bars?
Mistress use patience, which conquers all despair.
You advise well:
I did but jest with sorrow: you may see
I am now in gentle temper.
True, we see it.
Pray take the best room in the liouse, and there
Call for what wine best tastes you: at my leisure
Isle visit you my self.
Isle use your kindness.
That it should be my fate. Poor poor sweet-ha•…
I doe but think how thou becomst thy grave,
In which would I lay by thee: what's my wealth
To injoy't without my Spencer. I will now
Study to die, that I may live with him.
The further I inquire, the more I hear
To my discomfort. If my discontinuance
And change at Sea disgusse me from her knowledge
I shall have scope enough to prove her fully.
This sadness argues she hath heard some news
Of my Friends death.
It cannot sure be true
That he is dead, Death could not be so envious
To snatch him in his prime. I study to forget
That ere was such a man.
If not impeach her,
My purpose is to seek to marry her.
If she deny me, Isle conceal the Will,
Or at the least make her compound for half.
Save you fair Gentlewoman.
You are welcome sir.
I hear say there's a whore here that draws wine,
I am sharp se•…, and newly come from sea,
And I would see the •…rash.
Sure you mistake sir.
If you desire attendance and some wine
I can command you both. Where be these boys?
Are you the Mistress?
I command the house.
Of what birth are you, pra'y?
A Tanners daughter.
Where borne?
In Somersetshire.
A trade-falne Tanners daughter go so brave:
Oh you have tricks to compass these gay clothes.
None sir, but what are honest.
VVhat's your name?
Bess Bridges most men call me.
Y•…are a whore.
Sir, I will fetch you wine to wash your mouth,
It is so foul, I feare't may fester else.
There may be danger in it.
Not all this move her patience.
Good sir, at this time I am scarce my self
By reason of a great and weighty loss
That troubles me: but I should know that Ring.
How, this, you baggage? It was never made
To grace a strumpets finger.
Pardon sir, I both must and will leave you.
Did not this well▪ This will stick in my stomach
I could repent my wrongs done to this maid:
But Isle not leave her thus: if she still love him.
Isle break her heart-strings with some false report
Of his unkindness.
You are welcome Gentleman: what wine will you drink? Claret, Metheglin, or Muskadine, Cider or Pyrrey, to make you merry, Arag•…, or Peter-see-mee▪ Canary or Charnico? But by your nose sir you should love a cup of Malmsey: you shall have a cup of the best in Corn∣wail.
Here's a brave draw •…r will quarrel with his wine.
But if you prefer the Frenchman before the Spaniard, you shall have either here of the deep red grape or the pallid white. You are a pretty tall Gentleman, you should love High-Country wine: none bu•… Clarks and Sextons love Graves wine. Or are you a •…ied man, Isle
furnish you with bastard, white or browne, according to the complexion of your bed-fellow.
You rogue, how many years of your prentiship
Have you spent in studying this set sp•…h?
The first line of my part was, Anon anon, sir: and the first question I answered to, was logger-head, or block∣head, I know not whether.
Speak, wheres your Mistress?
Gone up to her chamber.
Set a pottle of Sack in th'fire, and carry it into the next room.
Score a pottle of Sack in the Crown, and see at the bar for some rotten eggs to burn it: we must have one trick or other to vent away our bad commodities.
To dye, and not vouchsafe some few commends
Before his death, was most unkindly done.
This Picture is more courteous: twill not shrink
For twenty thousand kisses: no nor blush:
Then thou shalt be my husband, and I vow
Never to marry other.
Wheres this harlot?
You are immodest sir to press thus rudely
Into my private chamber.
Pox of modesty
When punks must have it mincing in their mouths.
And have I found thee? then shalt hence with me.
Rob me not of the chiefest wealth I have:
Search all my trunks, take the best Jewels there:
Deprive me not that treasure, Isle redeem it
With plate, and all the little coin I have,
So I make keep that still.
Think thou that bribes
Can make me leave my friends Will unperform'd?
What was that Friend?
One Spencer, dead •…h Islands,
Whose very last words uttered athis death
Were these, If ever thou shalt come to Foy,
Take thence my picture, and deface it quite:
For let it not be said, my portraiture
Shall grace a strumpets chamber.
It was not so:
You lye, you are a villain: it was not so.
Tic more then sin thus to belly the dead:
Hee knew if ever I would have transgressed,
'Thad been with him: he du•…st have sworn me chaste,
And died in that belief.
Are you so brief?
Nay, •…e not trouble you: God b'oy you.
Yet leave me still that Picture, and Isle swear
You are a Gentleman, and cannot lie.
I am inexorable.
Are you a Christian, have you any name
That ever good man gave you?
It was no Saint you were called after. Whats thy na•…e?
My name is Captain T•…as Good—
I can see no good in thee▪ Race that syllable
Out of thy name.
Goodlacke's my name.
I cry you mercy sir: I now remember you,
You were my Sponsors friend, and I am sorry,
Because he loved you, I have been so ha•…h:
For whose sake, I entreat ere you take it he•…ce,
I may but take my leave on it.
You'll return it?
As I am chaste I'will.
For once Isle trust you.
Oh thou the perfect semblance of my Love,
And all that's left of him, take one sweet kiss,
As my la•… farewell. Thou resembles him
For whose sweet safety I was every morning
Down on my knees, and with the Larks sweet tunes
I did begin my prayers: and when sad sleep
Had charmed all eyes, when none save the bright stars▪
Were up and waking, I remembered thee,
But all, all to no purpose.
Sure, most sure, this cannot be dissembled.
To thee I have been constant in thine absence,
And when I looked upon this painted piece
Remembered thy last rules and principles:
For thee I have given alms, visited prisons,
To Gentlemen and passengers lent coin,
That if they ever had ability
They might repay't to Spencer: yet for this,
All this, and more, I cannot have so much
As this poor table.
I should question truth, if I should wrong this creature.
I am resolved.
See sir, this Picture I restore you back,
Which since it was his will you should take hence,
I will not wrong the dead.
God be w'you.
One word more.
Spencer you say was so unkind in death:
I tell you true.
I doe entreat you even for goodness sake
Since you were one that he entirely loved,
If you some few days hence here me expired,
You will amongst other good men, and poor people
That happily may miss Bess, grace me so much
As follow me to the grave. This if you promise,
You shall not be the least of all my friends
Remembered in my will. Now fare you well.
Had I a heart of flint or adamant
It would relent at this. My Mistress Bess,
I have better tidings for you.
You will restore my Picture? will you?
Yes, and more then that,
This Ring from my friends finger sent to you,
With infinite commends.
You change my blood.
These writings are the evidence of Lands▪
Five hundred pound ay era's bequeathed to you,
Of which I here possess you: all is yours.
This surplussage of love, hath made my loss•…
That was but great before: now infinite.
It may be compassed: there's in this my purpose
No impossibility.
What study you?
Four thousand pound besides this Legacy,
In •…ewels, gold, and silver I can make,
And every man discharged. I am resolved
To be a pattern to all Maids hereafter
Of constancy in love.
Sweet Mistress Bess, will you command my service,
If to succeed your Spencer in his Love,
I would expose me wholly to your wishes.
Alas my love sleeps with him in his grave,
And cannot thence be wakend: yet for his sake
I will impart a secret to your trust,
Which, saving you, no mortal should partake.
Both for his love and yours, command my service▪
There's a prise
Brought into Famouth Road, a good tight Vessel,
The Bottom will but cost eight hundred pound,
You shall have money: buy it.
To what end?
That you shall know hereafter. Furnish her
With all provision needful: spare no cost:
And join with you a ging of lusty lads,
Such as will bravely man her: all the charge
I will commit to you: and when sh•… •…d,
Captain she is thine own.
I sound it not.
Spare me the rest. This voyage I intend,
Though some may blame, all Lovers will▪ commend.
FOr Fialls loss, and spoil by th'English done,
We are in part revenged. There's not a Vessel
That bears upon her top S. Georges Cross,
But for that act shall suffer.
Insult not Spaniard,
Nor be too proud, that thou by odds of ship•…,
Provision, m•…, and powder made us yield.
Had you come one to one, or mad•… 〈◊〉
With reasonable advantage; w•…e by 〈◊〉
Had made the carcass of your ship your graves,
Low sunk to the Seas bottom.
Englishman, thy ship shall yield us pillage,
Th•… prisoners we wi•… keep in •…gest Hold,
To pay no other •…ome then •…ir lives▪
Degenerate Spaniard, there's no nobles in thee
To threaten men unarmed and miserable,
Thou might as well •…ad •…e a field o•… •…aughter,
And kill them ore, that are already sla•…e,
And brag thy manhood.
Sirrah, what are you?
Thy equal as I am a prisoner,
But once to stay a better man then thou,
A Gentleman in my Country.
Were thou not so, we h•…ve st•…appadoe, bolts,
And engines to the Maine-mast-•…tened,
Can m•…ke you gentle.
Spa•…iard doe thy worst, thou •…nst not act
More tor•…uric then my courage is able to endure.
These Englishmen
Nothing can daunt them: Even in misery
They'll not regard their masters.
Masters! Insulting bragging Thrasoes.
His sauciness wee'•… punish 'bove the rest.
About their censures we will next devise,
And now towards Spain with our brave English prise.
A Table and some stools.
I shall give you occasion •…o case your tails presently.
Will'•… please you sit?
Wi•… all our hearts, and thank you.
Fetch me that parchment in my Closet window.
The three 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 with the wrong side outward
That with the 〈◊〉.
I hope it is my Indenture, and now she 〈◊〉 to give me my time.
And now you are aloe•…, fair Mistress Else•…beth
I think it good to •…ste you with a motion.
That no way can displease you.
Pray speak on.
'T hath pleased here Master Mayor •…o far to look
Into your fair 〈◊〉 that he thinks you
A fit match for his Son.
Here's the parchment, but if it bee the lease of your house, I can assure you it is out.
The years are not expired.
No, but it is out of your Closet.
About your business.
Here's even Suzanne bewixt the two wicked elders.
What think you Mistress Elzabeth?
Sir I thank you.
And how much I esteem this goodness from you
The trust I shall commit unto your charge
Will truly witness. Marry, gentle Sir!
Alas I have sadder business now in hand,
Then sprightly marriage, witness these my tears.
Pray read there.
The last Will and Testament of Elzabeth Bridges to be committed to the trust of the Mayor and Aldermen of Foy, and their Suss•…ors for ever.
To set up young beginners in their trade, a thousand pound
To relieve such as have had loss by Se•…, 500 pound.
To every Maid that's married o•…t of Foy,
Whose name's Elzabeth ten pound.
To relieve maimed Soldiers, by the year ten pound.
To Captain Goodlacke, if hee shall perform
The business hoe's employed in, five hundred pound.
The Legacies for Spencer thus to stand,
To number all the poorest of his kin,
And to bestow on them. Item to—
Enough: you see sir I am now too poor
To bring a dow•…y with me fit for your son.
You want a president, you so abound
In charity and goodne•…e.
All my servants
I leave at your disc•…once to dispose
Not one but I have left some Leg•…cie.
What shall become of me, or what I purpose
Spare further to enquire.
We'll take our leaves.
And move to you 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
In this bequest.
Let never such despair,
As dying rich, shall make the poor their h•…ire.
Why what is all the wealth the world contains.
Without my Spencer?
Wl•…res my sweet Bess•…?
Shall I become a welcome suitor now?
That I have changed my Copy?
I joy to hear it.
Isle find employment for you.
A gallant ship, and wondrous proudly trimmed,
Well calk•…, well tackled, every way prepared.
Here 〈◊〉 our •…rning for a •…son end.
Bess, shall I strike that Captain? say the word,
Isle have him by the ear•…s.
Not for the world.
What saith that fellow?
He 〈◊〉 your lov•…, good, 〈◊〉 •…et him ha•…t.
Then change a hand.
Resolve me all. I am bound •…pone a voyage,
Will you in this adventure take such part,
As I my 〈◊〉 shall doe?
With my 〈◊〉 Bess, to the worlds end.
Then Captain and 〈◊〉 both, join•… hands,
Such are your places now.
Wee two are friends.
I next must swear•… you •…wo, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 yo•…r ging
True to some articles you must observe,
Reserving to my 〈◊〉 a prime co•… •…d,
Whilst I enjoin nothing unreason•….
All this is gran•…ed.
Then first, you 〈◊〉 your •…ip 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Isle have her pitched all ore, no spot of white,
No colour to be •…even, no Sail but black,
No Flag but sable.
T will be ominous, and bode disaster fortune.
Isle ha'it so.
Why then she shall be pitched black as the devil,
She sh•…ll be called The Negro, when you know
M•… conc•…, Captain, you will thank for'•….
But 〈◊〉 are we bound?
Pardon me that.
When wee are out at sea Isle t•…ll you all.
For mine own wearing I have rich apparel,
For man or woman as occasion serves.
But M•…stress, if you be going to sea, what shall become of me a land.
Isle give thee thy full time.
And shall I 〈◊〉 time, when time is, and let my Mistress slip away. No, it shall be seen that my teeth are as strong to grind biscuit as the best sail or of them all, and my stomac•… as able to digest po•…derd b•…es and Poor∣john. Shall I st•…y here to see •…re a pudding in the Hal•…∣moon, and •…ee my 〈◊〉 esse at the 〈◊〉 yard with her sails up, and spread. No it shall be seen that I who have been brought up to draw wine, will see what wa•…r the ship draws, or Isle beray the Voyage.
If thou ha•… so much co•…rage, the Captain shall accept th•….
If I have so much courage? When did you see a bla•…ke beard with a white lyvor, or a little fellow with∣out a tall stomach. I doubt not but to prove an honour to-all the Drawers in Cornwall.
What now 〈◊〉?
To make my 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 in this bold enterpr•….
〈◊〉 gladly sir.
And now our number's full, what's to be done.
First, at my charge Isle fea•… the 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 •…oy,
Then set the Cellars op, that these my Mates
May quaff unto the health of our boon voyage,
Our needful things being •…ce convay'd aboard,
Th•… casting up our caps in sign of joy.
Our purpose is to bid farewell to Foy.
Out of these bloody and intestine broils
Wee have at length attained •… •…ort na•…e peace,
And now at last established in the Throne
Of our great Ancestors, and reign King
Of Fesse and great Morocco.
Mighty Mullisheg,
Pride of our age, and glory of the Moors,
By whose victorious hand all Barberry
Is conquered, awed, and swayed: behold thy vassalls
With loud applauses greet thy victory.
Upon the slaughtered bodies of our foes,
We mount our high Tribunal, and being sole
Without competitor, we now have leisure
To stablish laws fi•…st 〈◊〉 our Kingdoms safety,
The enriching of our public Treasury,
And last our state and pleasure: then give order
That all such Christian Merchants as have traffic
And freedom in our Country, that conceal
The least part of our Custom me due to us,
Shall forfeit ship and goods.
There are appointed
Unto that purpose careful officers.
Those forfeitures must help to furnish up
Th'exhausted treasure that our wars consumed,
Part of such profits as 〈◊〉 that way
We have already taste•…d.
Tic most fit,
Those Christians that reap profit▪ by our Land
Should con•…rebut unto so great a loss.
Alcad•…, They sh•…ll. But what's the style of King,
Without his pleasure? Find us concubines,
The fairest Christian Damsels you can hire,
O•… buy for gold: the loveliest of the Moors
We can command, and Negroes every where▪
Italians, French, and Dutch, choice Turkish Girls
M•…st fill our Alkedavy, the great Palace,
Where Mullisheg now deigns to keep his Court.
Who else are worthy to be Libertines,
Butsuch as bear the Sword?
Ioffer, Thou please us.
If Kings on earth be termed Demi-gods.
Why should we not make here terrestrial heaven?
We can, wee will, ou•… God shall be our pleasure,
For so our Mecan Prophes warrants as.
And now the music of the Drums surcease,
We'll learn to dance to the soft tunes of peace.
Good morrow Captain. Oh this last Sea-sight
Was gallantly performed. It did me good
To see the Spanish Carveile veil her top
Unto my Maiden Flag. Where ride we now?
Among the Islands.
What coast is this wee now disc•…y from 〈◊〉.
Yon Fort's called Fiall.
Is that the place where Spenc•…rs body lies?
Yes, in yon Church hoe's buried.
Then know, to this placo was my voyage bound
To fetch the body of my Spenc•…r thence.
In his own Count•…y to erect a tomb▪
And lasting monum•…t, where when I die
In the same bed of 〈◊〉 my 〈◊〉 may 〈◊〉
Then all that love me▪ arm and make for shore,
Yours be the spoil, he mine, I •…rave no more.
May 〈◊〉 man dye derided and accursed
That will not follow 〈◊〉 a woman leads.
Roughwan, you are too rash, and counsel ill,
Have not the 〈◊〉 •…ortifide the town?
In all our Ging wee are but sixty five.
Come, Isle make one.
Attend me good Lieutenant.
And sweet Bess, liften what I have devised,
With ten tall Fellows I have•… manned our Boat,
To see what straggling 〈◊〉 they c•…n take.
And see where 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 prisoners.
These Spania•…ds we by 〈◊〉 of day surprised,
As they were ready to take 〈◊〉 for 〈◊〉.
Spaniards, upon your lives resolve us truly
How strong's the Town and Fort.
Since English Rawleigh wan and spoiled it first,
The Towne's 〈◊〉 and 〈◊〉 new 〈◊〉,
And four Field-peeces in th•… 〈◊〉 house lye
To keep the Harbours mouth.
And what's one ship to these▪
Was there not in the time of their 〈◊〉
A Gentleman called Sponsor buried there
Within the Church, whom some report was 〈◊〉,
Or perished by a wound?
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 was,
And ore him raised a goodly 〈◊〉,
But when the English Navy were failed thence,
And that the Spaniands did possess the Town.
Because they held him for 〈◊〉 Heretike,
They straight removed his body from th•… Church.
And would the tyrants be so uneharitable
To wrong the dead? where did they then bestow him?
They buried him ith fields.
Oh still more cruel.
The man that ought th•… field, doubtful his corn
Would never prosper whilst an heretics body
Lay there, hee made petition to the Church
To ha'it digd up and burnt, and so it was.
What's he that loves me would persuade me live.
Not rather leap ore hatches into th'Sea:
Yet ere I die I hope to be revenged
Upon some Spaniards for my Sponsors wrong.
Let's first begin with these.
Alas these poor slaves! besides their pardond lives
One give them money. And Spaniards where you come,
Pray for Bess Bridges, and speak well of the English.
We shall.
Our mourning wee will turn into revenge,
And since the Church hath censured so my Spencer,
Bestow upon the Church some few cast Pieces,
Command the Gunner do it.
And if he can to batter it to the earth.
A Sail, a Sail.
From whence?
A pox upon yon Gunner, could he not give war∣ning before he had shot?
Why I prithee?
Why? I was sent to the top-mast to watch, and there I fell fast asleep. Bounce quoth the guns, down tumbles Clem, and if by chance my feet had not hung in the tackles, you must have sent to England for a bone∣setter, for my neck had been in a pitiful taking,
Thou toldst us of a Sail.
Arm Gentlemen, a gallant ship of war
Makes with her full sails this way: who it seems
Hath took a Ba•…ke •…f England.
Which we'll r•…cue.
Or perish in th'adventure. You have sworn
That howsoever we conquer or miscarry
Not to reveal my sex.
Wee have.
Then for your Countries honour, my revenge,
For your own fame, and hope of golden spoil,
Stand bravely to•…. The manage of the fight
We leave to you.
Then now up with your fights, &amp; let your ensigns
Blessed with S. Georges Cross, play with the winds.
Fair Bess, keep you your cabin.
Captain you wrong me, I will face the •…light,
And where the bullets sing loudst about mine ears,
There shall you find me cheering up my men.
This wench would of a coward make an Hercules.
Trumpets a charge, and with your whistles shrill
Sound boatswains an alarm to your mates.
With music cheer up their aston•… souls,
The whilst the thundering Ordnance bear the Base.
To fight against the Spaniards we desire▪
Alarm Trumpets.
Gunners straight give fire.
I am shot and can no longer man the Deck,
Yet let not my wound daunt your courage mat•….
For every drop of blood that thou hast shed,
Isle have a Spaniards life. Advance your Targets,
And now cry all, Board, board, amain for England.
How is it with the Captain?
Nothing dangerous,
But being shot ith'thigh hee keeps his Cabin▪
And cannot rise to greet your victory.
He stood it brave•…lie out whilst he could stand.
But •…or these Spaniards, now you Don Diegoes,
You that made Pa•…les to stink.
Before we further censure them, let's know
What English prisoners they have here aboard.
You may command them all. We that were now
Lords over them, Fortune hath made your slaves,
Release our prisoners.
Had my captain did
Not one proud Spaniard had escaped with life,
Your ship is forfeit to us, and your goods.
So live. Give him his long Boat: him and his
Set safe ashore; and pray for English Bess.
I know not whom you mean, but be•… your Queen
Famous Elizabeth, I shall report
She and her subjects both are merciful.
Whence are you sir? and whither were you bound?
I am a London bound for Barberry,
But by this Spanish Man-of-warre surprised,
Pillaged and captived.
We much pity you,
What lo•…e you have sustained, this Spanish prey
Shall make good to you to the utmost farthing▪
Our lives, and all our fortunes whatsoever
Are wholly at your service.
These Gentlemen have been dejected long,
Let me peruse them all, and give them mon•…y
To drink our health, and pray forget not Sirs,
To pray for—Hold, support me, or I faint▪
What sudden unexpected ecstasy
Disturbs your conquest.
Interrupt me not,
But give me way for Heavens sake.
I have seen a face ere now like that young Gen∣tleman,
But not remember where.
But he was slain,
Lay buried in yon Church, and thence removed,
Denied all Christian rights, and like an Infidel
Confined unto the fields, and thence digd up,
His body after death had mar•…yrdome:
All these assure me tic his shadow dogs me,
For some most just revenge▪thus far to Sea.
Is it because the Spaniards escaped with life,
That were to thee so cruel after death
Thou hauntst me thus? Sweet ghost thy rage forbear,
I will revenge thee on the next we se•…ze.
I am amazed, this sight Isle not endure.
Sleep, sleep, fair ghost, for thy revenge is sure.
Forced, convey the owner to his cabin.
I pray sir what young Gentleman is that?
Hoe's both the owner of the ship and goods,
That for some reasons hath his name concealed.
Me think he looks like Bess, for in his eyes
Lives the first▪love that did my heart surprise.
Come Gentlemen, first make your losses good
Out of this Spanish prize. Let's then divide
Both several ways, and heavens be our guide.
We towards Mamorrah.
We where the Fates do•… please,
Till we have tract a wilderness of Seas.
Our Stage so lamely can express a Sea,
That we are forced by Chorus to discourse
What should have been in action. Now imagine
Her passion ore, and Goodlacke well recovered,
Who had he not been wounded and seen Spencer,
Had sure descried him. Much prise they have tan,
The French and Dutch she spares, only makes spoil
Of the rich Spaniard, and the barbarous Turk.
And now her fame grows great in all these seas.
Suppose her rich, and forced for want of water
To put into Mamorrah in Barb•…y,
Where wearied with the habit of a man,
She was discovered by the Moors aboard,
Which told it to the amorous King of Fesse,
That ne'er before had English Lady seen.
He sends for her on shore, how he receives her,
How she and Spencer meet, must next succeed.
Sit patient then, when these are fully told,
Some may hap say, I, there's a Girl worth gold.
But was she of such presence?
To decribe her were to make eloquence dumb
Well habitat?
I ne'er beheld a beauty more complete.
Thou hast inflamed our spirits. In England borne?
The Captain so reported.
How her ship?
I never saw a braver Was•…ll sail,
And she is called The Negro.
Ominous
Perhaps to our good fate, She in a Negro
Hath sailed thus far to bosom with a Moore.
But for the motion made to come ashore,
How dis she relish that?
I promised to the Captain large reward
To win him to it, and this day he'hath promised
To bring me her free answer.
When he comes
Give him the entertainment of a Prince.
The news with thee?
The Captain of The Negro craves admittance
Unto your Highness presence.
A Guard attend him, and our noblest Pashas
Conduct him safe where we will parley him.
Long live the high and mighty King of Fesse.
If thou bring her then dost thou bring me life.
Say, will she come?
She will my Lord, but yet conditionally
She may be fr•… from violence.
Now by the mighty Prophet we adore,
She shall live Lady of her free desires,
Tic love, not force, must quench our amorous fires.
We will conduct her to your presence straight.
We will have banquets, revels▪ and what not
To entertain this stranger.
A goodly presence! why's that beauty veiled?
Long live the King of Fesse.
I am amazed,
This is no mortal creature I behold,
But some bright Angel that is dropped from heaven,
Sent by our prophet. Captain, let me thus
Embrace thee in my arms. Load him with gold
For this great favour.
Captain, touch it not.
Know King of Fesse my followers want no gold,
I only came to see thee for my pleasure,
And show thee, what these say thou never saw,
A woman borne in England.
That English earth may well be termed a heaven,
That breeds such divine beauties. Make me sure
That thou art mortal, by one friendly touch.
Keep off: for till thou swearst to my demands
I will have no commerce with Mullisheg,
But leave thee as I came.
Were it half my Kingdom,
That, beauteous English Virgin, thou shalt have.
Captain read.
First, liberty for her and hers to leave the Land at her pleasure.
Next, safe conduct to and from her ship at her own discretion.
Thirdly, to be free from all violence, either by the King or any of his people.
Fourthly, to allow her mariners fresh victuals aboard.
Fiftly, to offer no further violence to her person, then what hee seeks by kingly usage, and free entreaty.
To these I vow and seal.
These being assured
Your courtship's free, and henceforth we secured.
Say Gentlemen of England, what's your fashion
And garb of entertainment?
Our first greeting
B•…gins still on the lips.
Fair creature, shall I be immortalised
With that high favour?
Tic no immodest thing
You ask, nor shame, for Bess to ki•…e a King.
This kiss hath all my vitals extaside.
Captain this king is mightily in love. Well let her
Doe as she list, Isle make use of his bounty.
We should be mad men else.
Grace me so much as take your seat by me.
Isle be so far commanded.
Sweet, your age?
Not fully yet seventeen.
But how your birth? how came you to this wealth,
To have such Gentlemen at your command?
And what your cause of travel?
Mighty Prince,
If you desire to see me beat my breast,
Pour forth a river of increasing tears,
Then you may urge me to that sad discourse.
Not for Memo•…ohs wealth, nor all the gold
Coined in rich Barberry. Nay sweet arise,
And ask of me be'it half this kingdoms treasure,
And thou art Lady on it.
If I shall ask, 'tmust be, you will not give.
Our country breeds no beggars, for our hearts
Are of more noble temper.
Sweet, your name?
Elizabeth.
There's virtue in that name.
The Virgin Queen so famous through the world,
The mighty Empress of the maiden-Ile,
Whose predecessors have ore-runne great France,
Whose powerful hand doth still support the Dutch,
And keeps the potent King of Spain in awe,
Is not she titled so?
She is.
Hath she her self a face so fair as yours
When she appears for wonder.
Mighty Fess•…,
You cast a blush upon my maiden cheek,
To pattern me with her. Why Englands Queen
She is the only Phoenix of her age,
The pride and glory of the Western Isles:
Had I a thousand tongues they all would tyre
And fail me in her true description.
Grant me this,
To morrow we supply our Iudgement-seate,
And sentence causes, sit with us in state,
And let your presence beautify our Throne.
In that I am your servant.
And we thine.
Set on in state, attendants, and full train:
But find to ask, we vow thou shalt obtain.
It is not now as when Andrea lived,
Or rather Andrew our elder Journeyman: what, Drawers
become Courtiers? Now may I speak with the old ghost
in Ieronimo;
When this eternal substance of my soul
Did live imprisoned in this wanton flesh,
I was a Courtier in the Court of Fesse.
Oh well done Clem. It is your Mistress pleasure
None come a shore that's not well habitat.
Nay for mine own part, I hold my self as good a Christian in these clothes, as the proudest Infidel of them all.
Sir, by your leave, you're of the English train?
I am so thou great Monarch of the Mauritanians.
Thē tic the Kings cōmand we give you al attendance
Great Seignior of the Saracens I thank thee.
Will you walk in to banquet?
I will make bold to march in towards your ban∣quet, and there comfit my self, and cast all caraways down my throat, the best way I have to conserve my self in health: and for your countries sake which is called Barbery, I will love all Barbers and Barberries the better: And for you Moors, thus much I mean to say, Isle see if Moore I eat the Moore I may.
I pray sir are you of the English train?
Why what art thou my friend?
Sir, a French merchant run into relapse,
And forfeit of the Law: here is for you sir
Forty good Barbery pieces to deliver
Your Lady this petition, who I hear
Can all things with the King.
Your gold doth bind me to you: you may see what it is to be a sudden Courtier. I no sooner put my nose into the Court, but my hand itches for a bribe already. What's your business my friend?
Some me of my men for a little outrage done
Are sentenced to the Galleys.
To the Gallows?
No, to the Galleys: now could your Lady purchase
Their pardon from the King, here is twenty angels?
What are you sir?
A Florentine Merchant.
Then you are, as they say, a Christian?
Heaven forbid else.
I should not have the faith to take your gold else.
Attend on me, Isle speak in your behalf.
Where be my Pashas? usher us in state, Flourish.
And when we fit to banquet see you waite.
This day the king ascends his royal throne,
The honest Merchant in whose ship I came,
Hath by a cunning quiddit in the Law
Both ship and goods made forfeit to the king,
To whom I will petition. But no more,
Hoe's now upon his entrance.
Here seat thee Maid of England like a Queen,
The style we'll give thee, wilt thou deign us love.
Bless me you holy Angels.
What first offends you Sweet?
I am amazed, and know not what to think on it.
Captain, dost not see? Is not that Sponsors ghost?
I see, and like you I am extaside.
If mine eyes mistake nor,
That should be Captain Goodlacke, and that Bess.
But oh, I cannot be so happy.
Tic he, and Isle salute him.
Captain stay,
You shall be swayed by me.
Him I well know, but how should she come hither
What first that troubles you?
Most mighty king,
Spare me no longer time, but to bestow
My Captain on a message.
Thou shalt command my silence, and his ear.
Go wind about, and when you see least eyes
Are fixed on you, single him out and see
If we mistake not. If he be the man,
Give me some private note.
This.
Enough. What said you highness?
Hark what I profer thee, Continue here,
And grant me full fruition of thy love.
Good.
Thou shalt have all my Peers to honour thee
Next our great prophet.
Well.
And when you are weary of our Sun-burnt clime,
Thy Negro shall be ballast home with gold.
I am eternized ever.
Now all you sad disasters dare your worst,
I neither care nor fear: my Spencer lives.
You mind me not sweet Virgin.
You talk of love.
My Lord, Isle tell you more of that hereafter.
But now to your State-businesse: bid him do•… thus
No more, and not be seen till then.
Enough: come sir, you must along with me.
Now stood a thousand deaths before my face,
I would not change my cheer, since Sponsor's safe.
By your leave my Masters: room for Generosity.
Pray sir remember me.
Good sir, my suit.
I am perfect in both your parts without prompting. Mistress, here are two christen friends of mine have for∣seiter ships and men to the black a Morrian king. Now one sweet word from your lips might get their release. I have had a feeling of the business already.
For dealing in commodities forbid
You're fined a thousand ducats.
Cast off the burden of your heavy doom,
A follower of my train petitions for him.
One of thy train, sweet Bess?
And no worse man then my self sir.
Well sirrah, for your Ladies sake,
His ship and goods shall be restored again.
Long live the King of Fess•….
Moist thou never want sweet water to wash thy black face in, most mighty Monarch of Morocco. Mistress, another friend, I, and paid before hand.
Sirrah, your men for outrage and contempt
Are doomed unto the Galleys.
A censure too severe for Christians.
Great King, Isle pay their ransom.
Thou my Bess?
Thy word shall be their ransom, they are discharged.
What grave old man is that?
A Christian Preacher, one that would convert
Your Moors, and turn them to a new belief.
Then he shall die, as wee are king of Fesse.
For these I only spake, for him I kneel,
If I have any grace with mighty Fesse.
We can deny thee nothing beauteous maid,
A kiss shall be his pardon.
Thus I pay't.
Must your black face be smooching my Mistresses white lips with a moorian. I would you had kissed her a—
Ha, how is that sir?
I know what I say sir, I would he had kissed her a—
A- what?
A thousand times to have done him a pleasure.
That kiss was worth the ransom of a King.
What's he of that brave presence?
A Gentleman of England, and my friend,
Do•… him some grace for my sake.
For thy sake what would not I perform?
Hee shall have grace and honour. Ioffer, go
And see him gelded to attend on us,
He shall be our chief Eunuch.
Not for ten worlds. Behold great king I stand
Betwixt him and all danger. Have I found thee?
Cease what I have, take both my ship and goods,
Leave nought that's mine unrifled: spare me him.
And have I found my Spencer!
Please your Majesty, I see all men are not capable of honour, what he he refuses, may it please you to bestow on me.
With all my heart. Go bear him hence Alcade,
Into our Alkedavy, honour him,
And let him taste the razor.
There's honour for me.
Come follow.
No sir, Isle go before you for mine honour.
Oh show your self renowned king the same
Fame blazons you: bestow this Maid on me,
Tic such a gift as kingdoms cannot buy:
She is a president of all true love,
And shall be registered to after times,
That ne'er shall pattern her.
Heard you the story of their constant love.
It would move in you compassion.
Let not intemperate love sway you bove pity,
That foreign nation that ne'er heard your name,
May chronicle your virtues.
You have wakend in me an heroic spirit:
Lust shall not conquer virtue. Till this h•…were
We graced thee for thy beauty English woman,
But now we wonder at thy constancy.
Oh were you of our faith, Id swear great Mullisheg
To be a god on earth. And lives my Spencer?
In troth I thought thee dead.
In hope of thee
I lived to gain both life and liberty.
No more of your honour if you love me. Is this your Moorish preferment to rob a man of his best jewels?
Hast thou seen our Alkedavy?
Davy doe you call him? he may be called shavee
I am sure he hath tickled my currant commodity,
No more your cutting honour if you love me.
All your strange fortunes we will hear discoursed
And after that your fair espousals grace,
If you can find a man of your belief
To doe that grateful office.
None more fit
Then this religious and grave Gentleman
Late rescued from deaths sentence.
None more proud
To doe you that poor service.
Noble Englishman,
I cannot fasten bounty to my will,
Worthy thy merit, move some suite to us.
To make you more renowned great king, and us
The more indebted, theres an Englishman
Hath forfeited his ship for goods uncustom'd.
Thy suite is granted ere it be half begged,
Dispose them at thy pleasure.
Mighty king
We are your Highness servants,
Come beauteous Maid, we'll see thee crowned a bride,
At all our pompous banquets these shall waite.
Thy followers and thy servants press with gold,
And not the mean that to thy train belongs,
But shall approve our bounty. Lead in state,
And wheresoever thy fame shall be enrolled,
The world report thou art a Girl worth gold.

IT must not, may not, shall not be endured:
Left we for this our Country? to be made
A mere neglected Lady here in Fesse,
A slave to others, but a scorn to all?
Can womanish ambition, heat of blood,
Or height of birth brooke this, and not revenge?
Revenge? on whom? on mighty Mullisheg?
We are not safe then; On the English stranger?
And why on her, when theirs no apprehension
That can in thought pollute her innocence?
Yet something I must doe. What? nothing yet?
Nor must we live neglected; I should doubt
I were a perfect woman, but degenerate
From mine own sex if I should suffer this:
I have a thousand projects in my brain,
But can bring none to purpose.
Called your Majesty?
No, yet I think I did, be gone, yet stay.
Will not this mishapped Embrion grow to form?
Not yet? nor yet?
I attend your highness pleasure.
It is perfect, and Iha'te,
I am ambitious but to think upon it,
And if it prove as I have fashiond it,
I shall be trophide ever.
I wait still.
The King no way in peril, she secure,
None harmed, all pleased, I sweetly satisfied,
And yet revenged at full. Brain, I for this
Will wreathe thee in a glorious arch of gold,
stuck full of Indian gems. But Tota, whom
Wilt thou employ in this? the Moors are treacherous,
And them we dare not trust.
You need not me.
Say, wher's the King?
In the Presence.
How?
Distempered late, and strangely humorous,
The cause none can conjecture.
Send in his sweet heart,
And were his own heart double rib'd with brass,
Yet she would search the inmost of his thoughts.
No, it is not her on whom I build my project.
Is the King upon his entrance?
It is thought he is,
If so, this sudden strange distemperature
Hath not his purpose altered.
You have now leave
To leave us and attend the King,
I shall.
If any of the English Ladies train
Come in your way, you may request them hither,
Say, we would question some things of their country.
Madam, I shall.
Then on to your attendance, what we must,
Weal work by th'English, these we dare not trust.
It is the Queens pleasure you attend her.
The Queen speak with me? Can you tell the business? A murren of these barbers of Barberie, they have given me a receipt, that scope the colic as well as I can, I shall be sure never to be troubled with the stone.
Yonder she walks. I leave ye.
Now sir, you are of England?
And I think you are a witch.
How sirrah?
A foolish proverb we use in our country, which to give you in other words, is as much as to say, You have hit the nail on the head.
And servant to the English Elizabeth,
So great in Court by mighty Mullisheg,
You follow her?
I must confess I am not her Gentleman usher to go before her, for that way as the case stands with me now, I can doe her but small pleasure, I doe follow her.
You have seen both nations, England and our Fesse, how doe our people differ?
Our countrymen eat and drink as yours doe for all the world, open their eyes when they would see, and shut them again when they would sleep: when they go they set one leg before another, and gape when their mouths open, as yours eat when they have sto∣makes,
scratch when it itches: only I hold our nation to be the cleanlier.
Cleanlier, wherein?
Because they never sit down to meat with such foul hands and faces.
But how your Ladies and choice Gentlewomen?
You shall meet some of them sometimes as fresh as flowers in May, and as fair as my Mistress, and within an hour the same Gentlewoman as black as your self, or any of your Morians.
Can they change faces so? not possible: show me some reason for it.
When they put on their masks.
Miskes, what are they?
Please you to put off yours, and Isle tell you.
We wear none but that which nature hath be∣•…owed on us, and o•…r births-give us freely.
And our Ladies wear none but what the shops yield, and they buy for their money.
Can thou be secret to me Englishman?
Yes, and chaste too, I have tan a medioine for it.
Be fixed to me in what I shall employ thee,
Constant and private unto my designs,
More grace and honour I will do to thee,
Then ere thou did receive from Mullisheg.
Grace and honour? his grace and honour was to take away some part, and she would honour me to take away all: Isle see you damned as deep as the black father of your generation the devil first.
Mistake me no•….
Nay if you were with child with a young princely devil, and had a mind to any thing that's here, Id make you lo•…e your longing.
Sure this fellow is some sot.
Grace and honour, quoth.
How now Clem, whither in such post hast?
There, if you will have any grace and honour, you may pay fort as dear as I have done; 'sfoot I have little enough left, I would fine carry home something in∣to my own country.
Why, what's the matter? I prithee stay.
No, Lieutenant you shall pardon me, not I, the room is too hot for me: Isle be gone, do you stay at your own peril: Isle be no longer a prodigal, Isle keep what I have.
This should have better sense, Isle next prove him.
Excuse me mighty Princess, that my boldness
Hath pressed thus far into your privacies.
You no way have offended; nay, come near,
We love to grace a stranger.
'T was my ignorance,
And no pretended boldness.
I have observed you
To be of some command amongst the English,
Nor make I question but that you may be
Of fair revenues.
A poor Gentleman.
Weel make thee rich; spend that.
Your graces bounty
Exceeds what merit can make good in me:
I am your highness servant.
Let that jewel be worn as our high favour.
'Sfoot I think
This Queen's in love with me. Madam, I shall.
If any favour I can do in Court
Can make you further gracious, speak it freely;
What power we have is yours.
Doubtless it is so, and I am made for ever.
Nay wee shall •…ache it ill
To give our selves so amply to your knowledge,
And you not use us.
Use us, now upon my life shoe's caught:
What, courted by a Queen? a royal Princess;
Where were your eyes Bess, that you could not see
These hidden parts and mysteries, which this Queen
Hath in my shape observed? it is but a fortune
That I was borne to, and I thank heaven fort.
May I trust you?
With your life, with your honour.
Isle be as private to you as your heart
Within your bosom, close as your own thoughts.
Isle brag of this in England, that I once
Was •…avourite to a Queen, my royall-mistris.
If what you have already promised you'll made good,
Isle prove so.
Madam, let this,
What?
This kiss.
This fool, this ass, this insolent gull.
Why, did not your grace mean plainly?
In what, sir?
Did you not court me?
How, that face?
Think thou I could love a Monkey, a Babone?
Know, were I mounted in the height of lust,
And a mere prostitute, rather then thee
Id embrace, one, name but that creature
That th•… dost think most odious.
Pardon me Lady,
I humbly take my leave.
Have I given you your description I pray, sir,
Be secret in'•….
I shall be loath to tell it,
Or publish it to any.
Yet you are not gone:
Know then you have incurred
The Kings wrath first, our high displeasure next,
The least of which is death; yet will you grow
More near to us, and prove loyal unto my present pur∣poses.
I will not only pardon you what's past.
But multiply my bounties.
I am your prisoner.
Be free, th•…s nothing can be called offence,
But that in thee we pardon.
I am fast.
And yet a free man: I am injured highly,
And thou must aide me in my just revenge.
Were it to combat the most valiantst Moore,
That ever Fesse, Morocko, or Argiers bred,
I for your sake would doe it.
We seek nor blood,
Nor to expose thee to the least of danger:
I am modest, and what I dare not trust my own tongue with,
Or thoughts, Isle boldly give unto thine ears,
List: Do you shake your head, say, Is it done already?
Wrong my friend?
Doe you cast doubts or dangers? Is not our l•…fe.
Our honour all in your hand, and will you lavish us.
Or scant that bounty should crown you with excess.
Isle pause upon it.
Is not your life ours by your insolence? have not we power to take it?
Say no more, Isle doe it.
But may I hope,
I have cast all doubts, and know how it may be comp•….
Ther's more gold, your secrecy that's all I crave.
To prove my self in this just cause I have,
An honest man, or a pernicious knave.
Take the advantage of this night.
I shall expect fair end,
All doubts are cast.
So make a Queen thy friend.
All musick's harsh, command these discords cease,
For we have war within us.
Mighty King,
What is it offends your highness?
Nothing Bess:
Yet all things do: Oh, what did I bestow,
When I gave her away.
The Queen attends you.
Let her attend.
I, King, neglected still,
My just revenge shall wound, although not kill.
I was a traitor to my own desires,
To part with her so slightly: what, no means
To alter these proceedings?
Strange disturbances.
What might the project be?
May it please your Highness, shall the Mask go forward,
That was intended to grace this jovial night?
We'll have none,
Let it be treason held
To any man that shall but name our pleasure,
Or that vain word, delight: The more I gaze,
The more I surfeit; and the more I strive
To free me from these fires, I am deeper wrapped:
In flames I burn.
Your discontent, great Prince, takes from us all
The edge of mirth: these nuptial joys that should
Have swelled our souls with all the sweet varieties
Of apprehensive wishes, with your sadness
Grows dull and leaden: they have lost their taste
In this your discontent all pleasures lose their sweetness.
Mighty Fesse,
Hath any ignorant neglect in us
Bred these disturbances?
Offence and you
Are like the warring elements, opposed.
And Fesse, why a king, and not command thy pleasure?
Is she not within our kingdom? nay, within our palace,
And therefore in our power: is she alone
That happiness that I desire on earth?
Which since the heavens have given up to mine hands,
Shall I despise their bounty? and not rather
Run through a thousand dangers, to enjoy
Their prodigal favours? dangers? tush, ther's none:
We are here amidst our people, walled with subjects round,
And danger is our slave: besides, our war
Is with weak woman. Oh, but I have sworn
And sealed to her safe conduct; What of that?
Can a king swear against his own desires,
Whose welfare is the sinews of his Realm?
I should commit high treason against my self,
Not to do that might give my soul content,
And satisfy my appetite with fullness. Alcade.
My lord.
Rides the English Negro still within the harbour?
Some league from land.
Lest that these English should attempt escape,
Now they are laden fully with our bounties,
Cast thou a watchful eye upon these two.
I shall.
I know their loves so fervent and entire,
They will not part asunder, she leave him,
Or he without her make escape to sea.
Then while the one's in sight our hopes are safe.
Be that thy charge.
Isle be an Argus o'er them.
Unless the King be still in love with Bess,
Repenting him of their late marriage,
It is beyond wonder to calculate these storms.
How goes the hour?
About some four.{us}
We rose too soon Bess from your nuptial feasts,
Something we tasted made us stomach sick,
But now we find a more contentfull change.
Your sunshine is our day.
Dispose your selves
All to your free d•…sires; to dancing some,
Others to mount our stately Barberie horse,
So famous through the world for swift carer,
Stomach, and fiery pace.
Those that love arms,
Mount for the tilt: this day is yours, to you tic consecrate.
He commits treason in the highest degree,
Whose cloudy brow dares the least tempest show
To cross what we intend: pleasure shall spring
From us to flow on you.
Long live the King:
To your free pastimes; leave us.
Captain, stay Captain, I read a fortune in thy brow,
More then the slight presage of a•…guire,
Which tells me thou, and only thou art marked
To make me earthly blessed.
That I can do it?
It lies in thee to raise thy ruined fortunes
As high as is a Viceroy's, wreathe thy front
Within a eircled piramis of gold,
And to command in all our territories,
Next to our person.
Golden promises.
Our words are acts, our promises are deeds,
We do not feed with ayre: it lies in thee,
We two may grapple souls, be friends and brothers.
Teach me how.
I do not find thee coming: in thy looks
I cannot spy that fresh alacrity,
Which with a glad and sprightful forwardness,
Should meet our love half way.
You wonder me.
No, thou art dull, or fearful, fare thee well,
Thou had a fate lade up to make thee chronicled
In thy own Country, but thou wilt basely lose it,
Even by thine own neglect.
Forespeak me not,
The Sun ne'er met the summer with more joy
Then I'd embrace my fortunes; but to you,
Great king, to whom I am so greatly bound,
I'd purchased with a danger should fright earth,
Astonish heaven, and make all hell to tremble;
I am of no shrinking temper.
Prove but as wise as thou art bold and valiant,
And gain me wholly to thee, half thou hast already
Purchased by this bold answer; but perform
The rest, and we are all and only thine.
Show me the way to gain this royal purchase,
If I do it not, divide me from your presence,
From your grace, and all those glorious hopes you have proposed
Turn into scorns and scandals.
I am dull,
And drowsy on the sudden: whilst I sleep,
Captain, read there.
To make Bess mine some secret means devise,
To thy own height and heart Isle make thee rise.
Is not this ink the blood of Basilisks,
That kills me in the eyes, and blinds me so,
That I can read no further: it was composed
Of Dragons poison, and the gall of Aspes,
Of Serpents venom, or of Vipers stings,
It could not read so harsh else: Oh my fate;
No•…hinge but this? this? Had a parliament
Of fiends and furies in a synod sat,
And devised, plotted, parleyed, and contrived,
They scarce could second this; This? it is unparalleled:
To strumpet a chaste Lady, injure him
That rates her honour dearer then his life.
T'imploy a friend in treasons against his friend,
And put that friend to do it: t'impose on me
The hateful stile and blot of panderism,
That am a Gentleman: nay, worse then this,
Make me in this a traitor to my country,
In giving up their h•…nurse: Who but a Moor,
Of all that bears mans shape, likest a devil,
Could have devised this horror? Possible
That he should mark out me? What does my face
Prognosticate, that he should find writ there
An index of such treasons? But beware,
It was his own plot, I, and his cunning too:
Isle add that to his project: but a Viceroy,
And a kings Minion, titles that will shadow
Ills the most base and branded. Not to do it
May purchase his displeasure, which can be
No less then death or bondage: heir's proposed
Honour and peril. But what writes he further;
We are impatient of delays, this night
Let it be done.
I am doubtful of my purpose,
And can resolve of nothing.
If he fail,
Isle have his flesh cut small as winters snow
O•… summers atoms.
Ha, was that by us?
Where was I? Oh, I dream't upon the sudden,
How fast was I.
A fair warning it was, have you the cunning
To speak your thoughts in dreams?
Who's in the next room?
My lord.
My Captain, was it thou?
Sleep did surprise my senses, worthy friend,
And in my dreams I did remember thee.
How, me my lord?
Me thought I had employed thee in a business,
In which thou were or fearful, or else false,
At which I was so overcome with rage,
That from my dreams I started.
Seamen say,
When Halcions sing, look for a storm that day
Ther's death in my denial.
Did you read,
That scroll we gave you Captain ther's wrapped up
A thousand honours for thee, and more gold
Then should thou live a double Nestors age,
Thou could find ways to lavish.
Add to your work a business of more danger,
That I may think me worthy, otherwise
This slight employment will but prize me low
And of desertlesse merit.
Think thou Captain
It may be easily compassed?
Dare you trust me?
I dare.
Then know, besides to dare and can,
I will, though work beyond the power of man,
Isle set my brains in action.
Noble friend,
Above thy thoughts our honours shall extend.
I am not to be shaken.
Where be our Eunuchs?
We'll crown our hopes and wishes with more pomp
And sumptuous cost, then Priam did his sons,
That night he bosomed Helen; shoe's as fair,
And we'll command our pomp to be as rare.
Wee will have torches shall exceed the stars
In number and in brightness: we will have
Rare change of music shrill and high,
That shall exceed the spheres in harmony.
The jewels of her habit shall reflect,
To daze all eyes that shall behold her state.
Our treasure shall like to a torrent rush
Streams of rewards, richer then Tagus sands,
To make these English strangers swim in gold.
In wilde Moriskoes we will lead the bride:
And when with full satieties of pleasures
We are dull and satiate, at her radiant eyes
Kindle fresh appetite, since they aspire,
T'exceed in brightness the high orbs of fire.
Make this Night mine, as we are King of Fesse,
You are Viceroy, Captain.
Make my estate much less,
And my attempts more honourable: honour and virtue,
To me seem things in opposition:
Nor can we with small danger catch at one,
But we must lose the other. Oh my brain,
In what a labyrinth art thou? Say I could
Be false, as he would make me; what device?
What plot? what train have I to compass it?
Or with what face can I solicit her,
In treason towards my friend?
I am to solicit Spencer
To lie with the Moors Queen; a business, Bess
Will hardly thank me for: but howsoever
I have undertone it.
Impossibilities all; the more I wade,
The more I drown in weakness.
Captain.
Oh Lieutenant,
Never was man perplexed thus.
What, as you?
Had you but my disturbance in your brain,
It would tax a Stoics wit, or Oedipus.
Why Captain, a whole school of Sophisters
Could not unriddle me.
I would we might change business.
I would give boot so to be rid of mine.
Shall we be free and open breasted?
How?
As thus;
Tell me thy grievances, and unto thee
I will unveil my bosom: both disclosed
Isle beg in mine thy counsel and assistance,
Thy cause shall mine command.
A heart, a hand.
I am to woo fair Bess to lie with Mullisheg.
And I woo Spencer to embrace the Queen.
Is it possible?
It is more then possible, it is absolutely past.
Ther's not a hair to chose, can counsel me?
Can you advise me?
I am past my wits.
And I beyond all sense.
Would thou do it, here lay the way plain before thee.
What, for gold
Betray my friend and country, would you Captain?
What and wear a sword
To guard my honour and a Christians faith,
I'd flesh it here fi•…st.
Nobly resolved.
We are not safe Lieutenant, Moors are treacherous.
Nay come, thy counsel,
Fesse hath proffered me
The honour of a Viceroy; and withal,
If I should fail performance, cunningly
Hath threatened me with death.
You still propose
The danger, but you show no way to clear them.
Brain, let me waken thee, 'sfoot hast thou no project? dost thou partake my dullness?
The more I strive, the more I am entangled.
And I too. Not yet?
Nor yet, nor ever.
It was coming here, &amp; now again it is vanished.
Call it back again for heavens sake.
Again.
Thanks heaven.
And now again it is gone.
Can you not catch fast hold on it?
Give me way,
Let's walk Lieutenant: Could a man propose
A stratagem to gull this lustful Moor,
To supply him, and then to satiate her?
Good.
Next, out of all these dangers secure us,
And keep our treasure safe.
It were excellent.
But how shall this be done?
Why Captain, know not you?
Think thou it in the power of man to work it?
Yet come, Isle try, I owe my fate a death,
Be swayed by me in all things.
Noble Captain, I do not wish to outlive thee.
THe King was wondrous pleasant: Oh my Bess,
How much am I indebted to his highness,
Only for gracing thee.
Could my Spencer
Think that a barbarous Moor could be so trained
In human virtues?
Fie upon it: I am so tired with dancing with these same black shee-chimney-sweepers, that I can scarce set the best leg forward, they have so tired me with their Morisc•…es, and I have so tickled them with our Country dances, Sellengers round, and Tom Tiler: we have so fid∣led it.
Sirrah, what news will you tell to your friends when you return into England.
Brave news, which though I can neither write nor read, yet I have committed them to my tables and the rest of my memory.
Let's hear some of your novelties.
First and foremost I have observed the wisdom of these Moors, for some two days since being invited to one of the chief Bashaws to dinner, after meat, sitting by a huge fire, and feeling his shins to burn, I requested him to pull back his chair, but he very understandingly sent for three or four Masons and removed the chimney:
the same Mo•…ian entreated me to lie with him, and I ac∣cording to the state of my travels, willing to have a can∣dl burning by, but he by no means would grant it; I asked him why? No, says he, we'll put out the light that the fleas may not know where to find us.
No storm at sea could be so tyrannous,
Nor half the•…right bear in his forehead bare,
As I spy in that look.
Let not your looks pre•…ge more terrors then▪
Your tongues can speak; out with it at once Lieutenant.
Captain speak.
W'are all lost.
All shipwrak't.
Are we ashore, and shall wee be cast away?
Great Mullisheg is royal.
False to you.
Gracious and kind.
Disloy all to us all.
Wrap me not in these wonders worthy friend,
The very doubt of what the danger is,
Is more then danger can be.
Be it death,
So we may dye together: heir's a heart
Fear never could affright.
The king still loves your Bess.
Ha?
The Queen your Spencer.
How?
This night he must enjoy her.
And she him.
A thousand deaths are in that word contrived.
Isle make my passage through the blood of kings,
Rather then suffer this.
I through hell,
Or were there place more dangerous.
Else all die.
Die, 'sfoot this is worse then being made an Eunuch as I was.
We have yet life, and therefore cherish hope.
All hopes are banished in the deep abyss
Of our perplexed thoughts.
All things run retrograde.
Why Captain? why Lieutenant? had you the skill
To bring my ship thus far, to wrack her here?
Past you the Ocean, to perish in the harbour?
Thou, Tom Goodlack
Were ever true and just to my designs,
And can thou fail me now?
I study for you.
Hast thou brought me but to see my Sponsors sha∣dow,
And not enjoy the substance: for what more
Have I yet had from him, then from his picture,
That once hung in my Chamber. Gentlemen, amongst you all
Rescue an innocent maid from violence:
Or do but say it cannot be prevented:
I begin, he that best loves me follow.
What means Bess?
If it could be fashioned to my thoughts,
And have success, it were brave.
What, noble friend?
To thrive but as we purpose.
Have you way?
It is bu•… a desperate course; and if it fail
The worst can be but death: and I, even I,
That laid the plot, will teach them how to dye.
Isle lead them on.
If thou hast any project.
Joy or comfort.
And if not comfort, counsel.
Say it thrive?
What Captain? what?
You'll rip it from the womb
Ere it be fully hatched now:
If it prosper but to my desire
And wishes, it were admirable.
No longer hold us in suspense, good Captain.
But free us from these fears.
You noble friend,
This night cast gracious eyes upon the Queen:
And prove to me disloyal?
Still you cross me,
And make the birth abortive. You fair Bess,
With amorous favours entertain the King.
And yield her self to his intemperate lust?
You still prevent me; either give me way
To show you light unto your liberties,
Or still remain in darkness.
Hear him out.
You sooth the Queen,
Isle flatter with the King,
Let's promise fair on both sides: say, it is done
All to their own desires.
The event of this?
A happy freedom, with a safe escape
Unto our ship this night.
Oh, could this be.
Fortune assists the valiant and the bold,
We'll bid fare for it. I had forgot my self,
Wher's Clem?
Noble C•…ptain.
Post to the ship, bid Forced man the long By•…
With ten good Musketeers, and at a watchword,
If we can free our passage, take us in.
Nay make haste, one minutes stay is death.
I am gone in a twinkling.
To compass the Kings signet; then to command
Our passage, scope the gates and watches too:
For that I have brain. The King's upon his entrance;
Hours wast, revels come on, a thousand projects
Of death, hopes, and fears, are warring
In my bosom, and at once.
Eye you the Queen, and humour you the King;
Let no distaft nor discontented brow
Appear in you: their lust Isle make the ground,
To set all free, or keep your honour sound.
Disperse, the King's on coming.
We consecrate this evening, beauteous Bride,
To'ch honour of your nuptials.—Is all done?
Done.
Is he ours?
Yours.
And wee ever thine.
I, and so cast, that she shall grasp you freely;
And think she hugs her Spencer.
And when he bosoms you, thinks he enfolds
His lovely Bess.
Thou make a Queen thy servant.
Your highness Signet to command our passage from chamber to chamber.
It is there.
The word.
It is Mullisheg.
This must bring us safe aboard.
We keep the Bride
Too long from rest now, she is free for bed.
Please her to accept it,
In honour of her beauty, this night Isle do her any service.
Mighty princess,
Excuse my breeding from such arrogance,
And overbold presumption, you nor yours
Can owe me any duty: '•…is besides
The fashion of our country, not to trust
The secrets of a nuptial night like this,
To the eyes of any stranger.
At your pleasure,
With our first nights unlacing, mighty Queen,
We dare not trust our husbands, it is a modesty
Our English maids profess.
Keep your own customs as you shall think best,
So for this night we leave you to your rest.
Remember.
It is writ here.
Captain,
I am fast,
Now is my task in labour, and is plunged
In thousand throes of childebirth, dangerous it is
To deal where kings affairs are questioned,
Or may be parled. But what's he so base,
That would not all his utmost powers extend,
For freedom of his country and his friend.
When all the Court is silent, sunk in dreams,
Then must my spirits awake. By this the King
He has tan his leave of bride and bridegroom too:
And the•…morose Queen longs for some happy news
From Ruffman, as great Fesse expects from us.
My friend and Bess wrapped in a thousand fears,
To find my plot in action: and it now
Must take new life: auspicious fate thy aide,
To guard the honour of this English maid.
Tread soft, good Madam.
Is this the Chamber.
Isle bring him instantly.
He thinks this bed provided for his Bess,
And that she lodges here, while she poor soul
Embraces nought but ayre.
Thou make a Queen thy servant.
Beware, be not too loud lest that your tongue
Betrays you.
Mute as night,
As silent and as secret. Wrongs should be
Paid with wrongs, for so indeed it is meet,
My just revenge, though secret yet it is sweet.
Haste time, and hast our bounty.
Queen I shall.
So now were we all safe and in our Negro shipped,
Might thou lie there till dooms day, lustful Queen.
My lord the custom is in England still
For maids to go to bed before their husbands,
It saves their cheek from many a modest blush.
And in the dark.
We use it for the most part.
Soft may their bones lie in their beds of ashes
That brought this custom into England first.
This the place where Bess expects her Spencer▪
Thou Viceroy of Argiers, for Captain, that
Is now thy title: thou hast won a King,
To be thy breast companion.
Not too loud.
Why enters not your highness? you are safe.
With as much joy as to our prophets rest.
But what thinks Spencer of this?
I have shifted in her place
A certain Moor, whom I have hired for money,
Which (poor soul) he entertains for Bess.
My excellent friend.
Beware of conference, lest your tongue reveals
What this safe darkness hides.
I am all silent.
Oh, thou contentfull night, into thy arms,
Of all that ere I tasted, sweetest and best,
I throw me, more for pleasure then for rest.
One fury clasp another, and there beget
Young devils between you: so fair Bess be safe.
I have here the kings signet, this will yield us
Way through the court and city, Bess being masked,
How can she be discride, when none suspect,
Our flight this day not dream't on: now to execute
What was before purposed, which if it speed,
Isle say the heavens have in our fates agreed.
How goes the night?
Tic some two hours from day.
Yet no news from the Captain.
I have done a Midwives part, I have brought the Queen to bed, I could do no more.
The Captain is come.
Thy news.
All safe, faith wench, I have put them to it for a single combat, I have left them at it.
King and Queen.
The same.
Now for us.
I, ther's all the danger, ther's one Bashaw
Whose eyes is fixed on Spencer, and he now
Walks even before our lodging.
Then what's past,
Is all yet to no purpose.
He and I
May freely pass the Court: and you fair Bess,
I would disguise: but •…hen for Spencer?
Why that's the main of all▪ all without his free∣dome
That we can aim it's, nothing.
It shall be thus, which alter none that loves me.
With this signet you three shall pass to•…h ship
Whilst I'm in sight she will not be suspected:
My escape, leave to my own fair fortunes.
How that?
Through twenty Bashaws I will hew my way,
But I will see thee ever morning.
Think thou Spencer
That I will leave thee? think thou that I can?
Thou moist as well part body from the soul,
As part us now: It is our wedding night,
Would now divide us?
Yield to times necessities, and to our strict disa∣sters.
Words are vain,
We now must cleave to action: our stay's death,
And if we be not quick in expedition,
We all perish.
Bess, be swayed.
To go to sea without thee,
And leave thee subject unto a tyrants cruelty?
Isle dye a thousand deaths first.
First save one,
And by degrees the rest. When thou hast past
The perils of this night, I am half safe,
But whilst thou art still invirond, more then better
Half of my part's endangered.
Talk your selves
To your deaths, do: will you venture forth?
Leave me to the Bashaw.
Or me. Isle buffet with him for my passage.
Neither, in what I purpose I am constant.
Conduct her safe; th'advantage of the night
Isle take for my escape: and my sweet Beffe,
If in the morning I behold thee not
Safe within my Negro, be assured
I am dead. Nay, now delays are vain.
Sir, did you love
Me, you would not stay behind me.
Isle have it so.
Gentlemen, be chary of this jewel
That throws her self into the arms of night,
Under your conduct. If I live, my Bess,
To morrow Isle not fail thee.
And if thou die to morrow, be assured
To morrow Isle be with thee.
Shall thy love
Betray us all to death.
Well, I will go,
But if thou dost miscarry, think the Ocean
To be my Bride-bed.
Heaven for us,
That power that hath preserved us hitherto,
Will not let's sink now. And, brave gentlemen,
Of the Moors bounty bear not any thing
Unto our ship, lest they report of us,
We fled by night and robed them.
Nobly resolved.
Now embrace and part; and my sweet Bess,
This be thy comfort against all future fears,
To meet in mirth that now divide in tears:
Farewell Bess, Isle back into my chamber.
Can I part with life
In more distracted horror?
You spoil all
That we before have plotted.
Will you mask your self, and to the Porter first.
Ho, Porter.
Who calls?
One from the King.
How shall I know that?
This token be your warned, behold his signet.
That's not enough, the Word.
Mullisheg.
Pass freely: some weighty buisinesse is in hand
That the kings signet is abroad so late;
But no matter, this is my discharge, Isle to my rest▪
I much suspect,
These English amongst themselves are treacherous:
I have observed, the king had conference with the Cap∣tain: many whisperings and passages I have observed, but that which makes me most suspect is, because the king hath removed his lodging, and it may be to prostitute the English Maid: Ha, suspect said I; nay, examine things exactly, and 'tmust needs be so, the king is wondrous bountiful, and what i'st gold cannot. Troth I could even pity the poor •…orlorn Englishman, who this night must be forced lie alone, and have the king taste to him.
Sure this Moore hath been made private to the Kings intents, which if I find, Isle make him the instru∣meant for me to pass the Court gates. This man, whose office was to keep me, shall be the only means to free me.
On his marriage night, and up at this hour? nay, if I once suspect, it is as firm as if it were confirmed by Alkaron, or 〈◊〉 himself had sworn it: Isle sport my self with his distaste and sorrow.
Thus abused.
What up so late and on your bridal night
When you should lie lul'd in the fast embrace
Of your fair Mistress. I hope I have given't him soundly.
s'possible,
To lodge my brid•… in one place, and dispose me
To a wrong chamber: she not once send to me,
That I might know to find her.
Excel•….
Nay, if I once suspect, it never fails.
Isle not tak'•…
At th'hands of an Empress, much less at hers.
Why, what's the business, Sir? Oh, I guess the cause of your grief.
And Sir, you may, but Isle be revenged.
Troth and I would.
Isle bosom some body,
Be it the commonest Cur•…zan in Fesse,
If not for love, to vex her.
Can you do less?
To leave me the first night.
Oh, it was a sign she never dearly loved you.
I perceive B•…shaw Alcade you understand my wrongs.
In part, though not in whole.
Your word is warrant, pass me the court gate,
Isle to some loose Burdello, and tell her when I have done.
Were it my cause, Id do this, and more.
Make me wait thus!
Oh Sir, 'cis insufferable.
Troth I dally my revenge too long, what ho, Porter.
How now, who calls?
Her's Bashaw Alcade, turn the key.
His name commands my gate, pass freely.
Sir, I am bound to you,
To take this wrong I should be held no man.
Now to the watch, scope there as I can.
Ha, ha, so long as she sleeps in the arms of Fesse, let him pack where he pleases: Porter, now hoe's without, let him command his entrance no more, neither for re∣ward nor entreaty, till day breaks.
Sir, he shall not.
It is well we are so rid of him: Mule•… will give me great thanks for this.
Isle to his chamber, there attend without,
Till he shall waken from his drowsy rest,
And then acquaint him with this fortunate jest.
Sir, though we wonder at your noble deeds,
Yet I must do the office of a subject,
And take you prisoner? by that noble blood
That runs in these my veins, when I behold
The slaughter you have made, which wonders me,
I wish you had escaped, and not been made captive
To him, who though he may admire and love you,
Yet cannot help you.
Your stile is like your birth, for you are Ioffer,
Chief Bashaw to the king, and him I know
Lord of most noble thoughts. Speak, what's my danger?
Know Sir, a double forfeit of your life:
Your outrage first is death, being in the night,
And against the watch; but those that you have slain
In this fierce conflict, brings'•… without all bounds
Of pardon.
I was born too•…, and I embrace my fortune.
Sir, now I know you
To be that brave and worthy Englishman,
So highly graced in court, which more amazes me
That you should thus requite him with the slaughter
Of his loved subjects.
I entreat you Sir,
As you are noble question me no further,
I have many private thoughts that trouble me,
And not the fear of death.
We know your name, and now have proved your courage,
Both these moves us to give you as easy bondage as our loyalty
To the king can suffer, you are free
From irons.
When this news shall come to her,
Lieutenant, lead the watch some distance of,
Bid them remove these bodies lately slain,
I must have private conference with this prisoner,
Leave him to my charge.
Sir think me though a Moore,
A nation strange unto you Christians,
Yet that I can be noble: but in you
I have observed strange contrarieties,
Which I would b•… resolved in.
Speak your thoughts.
When I con•…'d the nobleness of your blood,
With this your pres•…ned passion, I much m•…,
Why either such a small effuse of blood,
These your sl•…light wounds, or the pale fear of death,
Should have the power to force a tea•… from such
A noble eye.
Why think thou Bashaw
That wounds, blood, or death
Could force a tear from me, thou noblest of thy nation,
Do not so far mis•…se me: I tell the•… Bashaw,
The rack, strapado, or the scalding oil,
The burning pincers, or the boiling l•…d,
The stakes, the pikes, the cauldron, or the wheel,
Were all these to•… to befelt an once,
Could not draw w•…r hence.
Whence •…es it then?
From that whose pains as far surmount•… all those
As whips of furies do the Ladies fans,
Made of the plumes of the Ostrich: this like the Sun,
Extracts the de•… •…om my declining soul,
And sue•…s mine eyes in moist eff•…ie.
O Bess•…, Bess•…, Bess•…, Bess•….
Dead pity you have wakened in my bosom,
And made me with you like compassionate.
Freely relate your sorrows.
Sir, I shall:
If you have ever loved, or such a maid,
So fair, so constant, and so chaste as mine,
And should fortune to lamentable fortune,
Betray her to a black abortive fate,
How would it wring you? Or if you had a heart,
Made of that mettle that we white men have,
How would it melt in you?
Sir, you confound me.
I will be brief; the travels of my Bess,
To find me out, you have partook at full,
In presence of the King, these I omit.
Now when we came to sum up all our joy,
And this night were entering to our hoped bliss,
The king, Oh most unworthy of that name,
He quite fell off from goodness.
Who Mulish•…g?
His lust out-waid his honour: and as if his soul
Were blacker then his face, he laid plots
To take this sweet night from me: but prevented,
I have conveyed my beauteous bride aboard,
My Captain and Lieutenant.
Are they escaped?
Safe to my Negro. Thus far fortune led me
Through many dangers till I past this bridge,
The last of all your watches. And muse not
Bashaw, that I thus single durst oppose my self,
I wore my Mistress here, and she, not I,
Made me midway a conqueror.
She being at sea,
And safe, why should your own fates trouble you?
Renowned Moor, there is your greatest error;
When we parted, I swore by the honour of a Gentleman,
And as I ever was her constant friend,
If I survived, to visit her aboard
By such an hour: but if I fail, that she
Should think me dead: now, if I break one minute,
She leaps into the sea: it is this, great Bashaw,
That from a soul•…ers eyes draws pear•…y tears:
For my own 〈◊〉 •… de•…pise all •…ars.
You have deep•…y touch 〈◊〉▪ and to let you know
All more•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 not •…olely grounded
In th'hearts 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, go and 〈◊〉;
Keep your appointed hour, preserve her life:
I will conduct you past all danger: but withal
Rememb•… my 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 to answer it.
Is ho•…our 〈◊〉 from Ch•…ians unto Moors,
That I may say in Birbarie •…and
This rare black Swan.
And when you are a•… sea,
The wind no 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉; your 〈◊〉
They are soon waid, and you 〈◊〉 •…ea •…oome •…ree
To pass unto your country: it is but my life,
And I shall think it nobly spent to •…ave you,
Her, and your train from many •…ad di•…ters.
Sir, •… thank you,
Appoint me a 〈◊〉 •…over, if •… •…turn not,
May I be held a scorn to Chri•…tendome,
And recreant to my country.
By three •…o morrow.
Bin•… me by 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
Only your hand and word.
Which if I break.
What my heart thinks, my tongue forbears to speak.
Isle bear you pa•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉,
THrough satia•… with the pleasures of this night.
The morning 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 from the sweet embraces▪
Of the fair English Damsel.
The English stranger
Is •…toln from forth mine arms. I am at full revenged:
Were I again to match, I de marry one
Of this brave nation, if a Gentleman,
Before the greatest Monarch of the world,
They are such sweet and loving bedfellows.
Now to my chamber, darkness guide my way,
Lest what none yet suspect, the night betray.
Let all like me wronged in their nuptial bed,
Not aim at th'heart, but rather strike at th'head.
Venetian Ladies, nor the Persian Girls,
The French, the Spanish, nor the Turkish Dames,
Ethiope nor Greece can kiss with half that art
These English can, nor entertain their friends
With 'tenth part of that ample willingness
Within their arms.
Your highness called?
To tell thee that none shall partake but thou.
Oh, I have had the sweetest nights content
That ever king enjoyed.
With the fair English bride.
Nor envy if I raise the Captain for it,
For he shall mount.
And he deserves it: but to me you owe
Part of that honour, I had a hand in it too,
Although perhaps you thought me ignorant
In what is past.
Had thou no more
Then half a finger in this nights content,
It shall not be forgot, but thou as he
Shalt be raised one step higher.
Observing what had past, I spied the bridegr•…
As still mine eyes were fixed on him, up and late,
Then by a trick, a pretty slight, a fine fetch of mine own,
I past him forth the gates, and gave command,
He should not have his entr•…ce back again,
Neither for reward nor entreaties, till day broke.
Your •…im in t•…t?
For fear lest he by some suspicious jealous•…
Should have disturbed your rest.
Thy providence
Shall not die unrewarded: 〈◊〉 him hence,
And with his will toe, this •…aches thee
Of our counsel.
It is an honour
My wisdom haih long aimed at, and I hope
Now shall receive his •…rit.
Pardon great king that I thus rudely press
Into your private bed-chamber.
Speak, thy n•…ws.
The English Captain, with the lovely Bride,
With her Lieutenant hath •…ecretly this night,
With your highness signet and the word past the Court∣gates, past all the watches, and got aboard their Negro, and I was sent to know your highness pleasure.
Ha, this night? Aloe•…de, seek, search,
I left her sleeping in our royal bed.
I shall my lord, I half suspect.
But was not Spencer with them?
Only they three: and we, by virtue of your highness signet, past them the court-gates without trouble.
We are amazed:
Alcade, whom find thou there?
Nothing, my lord, but empty sheets,
A bed new tossed; but neither English Lady, nor any Lady else.
We stand astonished,
Not knowing what to answer.
Pardon great king if I relate the news
That will offend you highly.
That the English Captain, Lady, and Lieuté∣nant are escaped.
But that's not all.
Can there be worse behind?
Yes, if the loss of your dear subjects lives
Be worse then their escape: Spencer, without
The signet or the word, being left behind.
You called the porter up
And let him after.
Pardon great King.
Was this your trick, your slight, your stratagem?
As we are king of Fesse, thy life shall pay
The forfet, thine own tongue shall sentence thee.
But to the rest.
Then past he to the bridge,
Where stood armed men, in number forty:
Maugre all their strength, with his good sword
He would have made through all:
And in this fierce conflict, six, to the maze
Of all the rest, were slain: nor would he yield,
Till suddenly we raised a loud alarm,
At which the Captain of the watch came down,
And so there surprised him.
Is he prisoner then?
In custody of the great Bashaw Ioffer,
With whom we left him.
Comm•…nd our Bashaw
To bring him clogged in irons. These English Pirates
Have robed us of much treasure: and for that
His traitorous life shall answer. But for thee, traitor,
That had a hand in his escape,
Thou shalt be sure to pay for it.
Alas, my lord,
What I did was merely ignorance.
Nay bribes,
And I shall find it so: bear him to guard.
What dissolute strumpet did that traitrous Captain
Send to our sheets; but all our injuries,
Upon that English prisoner we'll revenge,
As we in state and fortune hope to rise,
A never heard of death that traitor dies.
No news from Forced yet that waits for Spencer,
The long boat's not returned?
Not yet?
Clem. to the main top Clem, and give •…s notice if thou see any (like them) make from the shore; the day is broke already.
With all my heart, so you will give me warning before the Gunner shoots, left I tumble down again, and put my neck a second time in danger.
Prithee be gon, let's have no jesting now.
Then Isle to the main top in earnest.
How fares it with you Bess?
Like a hartlesse creature, a body without motion.
How can I chose when I am come to sea,
And left my heart ashore? What, no news yet?
None.
I prithee Ruffman step into my Cabin, and bring me here my hour glass.
That I shall.
To what end would you use it?
Shall I tell thee Captain,
I would know how long I have to live:
That glass once turned, the sandy hour quite run,
I know my Sponsor's dead, and my life's donne.
Your glass.
Gramercy good Lieutenant:
It is better then a gaudy looking glass,
To deck our faces in; that shows our pride,
But this our ends those glasses seek to hide.
Have you been all at prayers?
We have.
I thank you
Gentlemen, never more need: and you would say
As I do, did you but know how near our ends some are.
Dost thou not think, Captain, my Sponsor's slain?
Yet hope the best.
This is the hour he promised: Captain, look,
For I have not the heart, and truly tell me
How far it is spent
Some fifteen minutes.
Alas, no more; I prithee tak't away,
Even just so many have I left to pray,
And then to break my heart strings: None that loves me
Speak one word to me of him, or any thing:
If in your secret cabins you'll bestow
Of him and me some tears and hearty prayers,
We, if we live shall thank you. Good Gentlemen
Engage me so far to you.
News, news, news.
Ha, good or bad.
Excellent, most excellent, nay, super excellent, Forced and all his companions are rowing hither like mad men; and there is one that sits in the stern and does not row at all, and that is, let me see who is it? I am sure it is he, noble Spencer.
Spencer?
Heart, let me keep thee; thou wast up to heaven
Half way in rapture. Art thou sure?
I think you'll make a man swear his heart out.
Teach me but how
I shall receive him when he comes aboard;
How shall I bear me, Captain, that my joy
Do not transcend my •…out out of this earth,
Into the air with passionate ex•…:
Now farewell Barbary, king M•…llisheg,
We have sea room, and wind at will, not ten
Of thy best Galleys armed with Moors,
Can fetch us back.
For England Gentlemen.
Oh, wher's the Gunner:
See all the ordnance be straight discharged
For joy my Spencer lives; let's mist our selves
In a thick cloud of smoke, and speak our joys
Unto the highest heavens in fire▪ and thunder.
To make the Queen vex and torment▪ her self.
To make the King tear his contorted locks,
Curled like the knots of furies: Oh this music
Doth please me better then the•…minate strings,
Tuned to their wilde Moriskoes: dance my •…whole,
And caper in my bosom, joyful heart,
That I have here my Spencer.
Come, weigh Anchor,
Hoist sail, we have a fair and gentle gale
To bear us to our country.
Captain, stay.
I did not hear my Spencer speak till now,
Nor would my sudden joy give me that judgement
To spy that sadness in thee I now see;
Good, what's the cause, can thou conceal't from me?
What, from thy Bess? Whence came that sigh?
You will not tell me; no, do not:
I am not worthy to partake your thoughts.
Do you repent you that you see us safe
Imbar'kt for England to enjoy me there:
Is there some other whom you better love?
Let me but know her, and for your sweet sake
Isle serve her too: come, I will know the cause.
Know all in one:
Now I have seen you, I must leave you Bess.
Leave me? Oh, fatal.
Speak, my Bess, it is thy Spencer tells thee.
That he will leave me: if the same tongue
That wounded me, gives me no present cure,
It will again entrance me.
Arm your self,
It must be spoke again, for I must leave you.
My honour, faith, and coun•…y are engaged,
The reputation of a Christian's pawned;
And all that wear that sacred livery,
Shall in my breach be scandal'd. Moors will say,
We boast of faith, none does good works but they.
I am nor sleep nor waking, but my senses
All in a confused slumber.
Sir, resolve us;
You wrap us in a Labyrinth of doubts,
From which I pray unloose us.
I shall;
I made my way through slaughter; but at length
The watch came down and took me prisoner
Unto a noble Bashaw: for my valour,
It pleased him to admire me: but when sorrow
To disappoint my Bess, stroke me in passion,
He urged me freely to relate my griefs,
Which took in him such deep impression,
That on my word and promise to return
By such an hour, he left himself in hostage,
To give me my desires.
It was nobly done.
But what's the lives of twenty thousand Moors,
To one that is a Christian?
We have liberty, and free way to our country,
Shall not we take the advantage that the heavens
Have lent us: but now, as if we scorned
Their gracious bounty, give up our selves
To voluntary bondage.
Prize you my love no better, then to rate i•…
Beneath the friendship of a barbarous Moor?
Can you, to save him, leave me to my death? Is this
The just reward of all my travels?
I prize my honour, and a Christians faith,
Above what earth can yield: shall Fesse report,
Unto our countries shame, and to the scandal
Of our religion, that a barbarous Moor
Can exceed us in nobleness? no, Isle die
A hundred thousand deaths first.
Oh, my fate, was ever maid thus crossed,
That have so oft been brought to see my bliss,
And never taste it? to meet my Spencer living after death,
To join with him in marriage, not enjoy him?
To have him here free from the barbarous Moors,
And now to lose him? being so o•…'d
Unto the height of all felicity
To make my ruin greater. If you needs
Will hazard your own person, make me partner
In this thy present danger; take me with thee.
Not for the world, no living soul shall bleed
One drop for me.
Can thou be so unkind? then false man know,
That thou hast taught me harshness. I without
Thee came to Momarah, and to my country back,
I will return without thee: I am here
In mine own vessel, mine own train about me:
And since thou w•…t forsake me, to embrace
The Queen of Moors: though coining strange excuse.
Even at▪thy pleasure be i•…, my wa•…e's into my coun•…rey▪
Farewell, Isle not shed one tear more.
My partings death,
But honour wakens me, the hour draws nigh,
And if I fail one minute, he must die.
The long boat now. Farewell Bess.
Why, farewell
Spencer, I always loved thee but too well,
Captain, thine •…are,
This I have vowed, and this you all shall swear.
Produce your prisoner, Bashaw.
Mighty King,
Had you beheld his prowess, and withal,
But seen his passions, you would then like me,
Have pitied his diasters.
We know no pity for an injury
Of that high nature, more then our revenge,
We have vowed his death, and he shall therefore di•…▪
Go, bring him forth.
Spare me, my lord, but some few hours, I shall.
The least delay is death.
Then know, my lord, he was my prisoner.
How, was? and is not?
By promise.
Not in gives.
Hoe's gived to me by faith, but else at liberty.
I pray unriddle us, and teach us that
Which we desire to know, where is the English prisoner?
I presumed, my lord,
Such noble valour could not be lodged alone,
Without some other virtues, faith and honour,
Therefore I gave him freedom to his ship,
Only upon his promise to return;
Now if there be such nobleness in a Christian,
Which being a Moor, I have expressed to him,
He will not see me perish.
Foolish Bashaw
To jest away •…hy •…ad: you 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ours
Against our person: and you all shall 〈◊〉.
Why? can•… thou think a 〈◊〉 so re•…ote,
Both in country and religion, being •…'t
At sea, and under sail, •…ee •…om o•… bands
In the arms of his fair bride,
His Captain and his sail•… all oboe•…,
Sea room and wind at will, and will return
To expose all the•… t•… volun•…ary da•…,
For a bare verbal pro•…?
If he comes no•…,
Be this mine honour, King, th•… •…ough I bl•…d,
A Moor a Chris•… •…hus 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
The hour is past,
The Christian hath br•…e faith.
Off with his head.
Yet come at last.
•…t possible?
Can England so far di•…ant harbour such noble ver•…s?
I beshrow yo•…, Sir,
You come unto your death, and you 〈◊〉 〈◊〉
Much honour from me, and engrossed it all
To your own fame; it would have li•… •…g by •…e,
Then any monument 〈◊〉 〈◊〉, to ha•… lo•…
My life for such a nob•… 〈◊〉,
Whose virtue even in this la•… a•… •…rs,
I wish this blood, which now a•… •…ndly •…s.
You are come unto yo•…r death.
Why, it was my purpose;
And by that death, to make my h•…nor shine.
Great Mullisheg, cheri•… this noble Moor,
Whom all thy co•…nes cannot para•…ell
For virtue and true nobleness. •…e my ship
Should with such black dishonour bear me sa•…
Into my country by thy Bashaws death,
I would have bent my ordnance gain•… her kee•…,
And sunk her in the harbour.
Thou hast slain
Six of our subjects.
Oh, had you seen
But with what eminent valour.
Nought that's ill
Can be well done: then Bashaw, speak no more,
His life is merely forf•…it, and h•… shall pay it.
I am proud, Fesse, that I now owe thee nothing▪
But have in me ability to pay.
If it be forfeit, take it, lay all on me,
Isle pay the debt, then set the Bashaw free▪
Besides, misprising all our gracious favours,
To violate our laws, infringe our peace,
Distu•…be our watch by night, and now perhaps
Having robed us of much treasure, ▪stolen to sea.
In that thou art not royal, Mullisheg.
Of all thy gold and jewels lately given us,
Ther's not a do it imbark't,
For finding •…ee dishonourably unkind,
Scorning thy gold, we left it all behind.
If private men be •…ords of such brave spirits,
How royal should their •…incise be!
Englishman,
Ther's but one way for thee to save thy life,
From eminent death.
Well, propose it.
Instantly
Send to thy Negro, and surrend•…r up
Thy Captain and thy fair Bride; otherwise,
By all the holy rights of our great Prophet,
Thou shalt not live an hour.
Alas, good King,
I pity and despise thy tyranny:
Not live an hour? And when my head is off,
What can thou do then? Calls't thou that revenge,
To ease me of a thousand turbulent griefs,
And throw my soul in glory for my honour.
Why, thou striv'st to make me happy but for her;
Were thou the King of all the kings on earth,
Could thou lay all their scepters, robes, and crowns,
Here at my feet, and had power to install me
Emperor of the universal Empery,
Rather then yield my basest ship-boy up,
To become thy stave; much less betray my Bride
To thee and to thy brutish lust, know king
Of Fesse, I'd die a hundred thousand deaths first.
Isle try your patience: Off with his head.
Her's more work, stay.
What make you here?
You wrong me above injury.
If you love blood,
That river spare, and for him take a flood,
Be but so gracious as save him alone,
And great King see I bring thee three for one:
Spare him, thou shalt have more,
The lives of all my train, what says thou to it?
And with their lives my ship and all to boot.
I could be angry with you above measure,
In your four deaths I die, that had before
Tasted but one.
Captain, art thou there? how ever these fare,
Thou shalt be sure to pay for it.
It is my least care,
What's done is mine, I here confes't,
Then seize my life in ransom of the rest.
Lieutenant, you are a base villainy,
What groom betrayed you to our sheets?
Please keep your tongue, I did you no dishonour.
Whom did you bring to our free •…mbraces?
It was the King, conceal what's past.
How ever my mind, then yet my bodie's chaste.
Make use on it.
Dismiss, great King, these to their ship again,
My life is solely forfeit, take but that,
I shall report thee merciful.
It were no justice, King, to forfeit his,
And to spare mine, I am as deep as he,
Since what my Spencer did was all for me.
Great King, if any faulted, then it was I,
I led them on, and therefore first should die.
I am as deep as any.
Oh, had my head
Excused all these, I had been nobly dead.
Why pause you king? Is it by our noble v•…rtes,
That you have lost the use of speech? or can you think
That Spencer dead, you might inherit me.
No, first with Roman Portia I'd eat fire,
Or with Lucretia character thy lust
Twixt these two breasts. Stood I engaged to death.
I'd scorn for life to bend a servile knee:
But it is for thee, my Spencer, what was his fault?
It was but to save his own, rescue his dear Bride
From adulterate sheets, and must he die for this?
Shall lust in me have chief predominance?
And virtuous deeds, for which in Fesse
I have been long renowned, be quite exiled?
Shall Christians have the honour
To be sole heirs of goodness, and we Moors,
Barbarous and bloody. Captain, resolve me,
What common Courtesan did thou convey
Into our royal bed.
I can excuse him, pardon me great King,
I having private notice of your plots,
Wrought him unto my purpose, and it was I
lodged in your arms that night.
These English are in all things honourable,
Nor can we tax their ways in any thing,
Unless we blame their virtues. English maid,
We give thee once more back unto thy husband,
Whom likewise freely we receive to grace:
And as amends for our pretended wrongs,
With her we'll tender such an ample dower,
As shall renown our bounty: but we fear
We cannot recompense the injurious loss,
Of your last nights expectations.
It is full amends,
Where but the least part of your grace extends.
Captain, we prize thy virtues to thy friends,
Thy faith to us, and zeal unto our Queen.
And Bashaw, for thy nobleness to a Gentleman
Of such approved valour and renown,
We here create thee Viceroy of Argiers,
And do esteem thee next our Queen in grace.
You've quenched in me all lust, by which shall grow,
Virtues which Fesse, and all the world shall know.
We shall report your bounties, and your royalties
Shall fly through all the parts of Christendom.
Whilst Bess has gold, which is the meed of bays,
She'll make our English Poets tune thy praise.
And now my Spencer, after all our troubles,
Crosses and threatenings of the seas rough brow,
Ine're could say thou were mine own till now.
Call this your harbour, and your haven of joy,
For so we'll strive to make it, noble strangers,
Those virtues you have taught us by your deeds,
We futurely will strive to imitate.
And for the wrongs done to the hoped delights
Of your last nights divorce, double the magazine
With which our larges should have swelled your ship.
A golden Girl the art called,
And wench, be bold,
Thy lading back shall be with pearl and gold.
I Magine Bess and Spencer under sail:
But the intelligence of their great wealth,
Being bruited amongst the Merchants, comes to'th ears
Of a French Pirate, who with two ships wellrig'd,
Way lays them in their voyage: long they fought,
And many slain on both sides; but the Fr•…chmen,
Proud of their hopeful conquest, boarding twice,
Are twice blown up, which add•…s courage to the English;
But to the Frenchmen fear: just as they buckeld,
Spencer and Goodlack, with two proof Targets armed,
Into the French ship leap, and on the •…atches,
There make a bloody slaughter: but at that instant,
The billows swel'd, the winds grew high, and loud,
And as th•… soul and body use to part,
With no less force these lovers are divided,
He wafts to her, and she makes signs to him:
He calls, and she replies:—they both grow hoarse,
With shrieking out their last farewell.—now she swounds
And sinks beneath the arms of Ruffman. Spencer,
Upon a Chest gets hold and safe arrives
In the Marquis of Farara's country: the like adventure
Chanced Goodlack, upon a Mast he pierces Italy,
Where these two Dukes were then at odds. Spencer is cho∣sen
Farara's Champion: Mantua makes Goodlack his.
What happened them if you desire to know,
To cut off words, we'll act it in dumb show.
The Dukes by them atoned, they graced and preferred,
Take their next way tow̄ards Florence. What of Bess,
Ruffman, and Clem becomes, must next succeed.
The seas to them like cruel proves, and wrecks
Their Negro on the coast of Florence, where
They wander up and down amongst the Bandetties,
More of their fortunes we will next pursue,
In which we mean to be as brief as true.
ALl is lost.
Save these our selves.
For my part I have not so much left as a •…lean Shirt.
And Spencer too, had the seas left me him,
I should have thought them kind, but in his fate,
All wishes, fortunes, hopes of better days
Expire.
Spinier may live.
I, that he may, if it be but in a sea-water green suit, as I was, among the haddocks.
How many bitter plunges have I past.
Ere I could win my Spencer? who no sooner
Married, but quite divorced, possessed for some few days,
Then rent asunder, as soon a widow as I was a Bride:
This day the mistress of many thousands,
And a beggar now, not worth the clothes I wear.
At th•… lowest ebb
The tides still flow, besides, b•…ing on the ground,
Lower we cannot fall.
Yes, into the ground, the grave.
Ruffman, would I were there; till then I never
Shall have true rest: I fain would know
What greater misery heaven can inflict, I have not y•…t
Endured: if there be such, I dare it, let it come.
Cease, and surprise the prisoners: thou art mine.
Villain, hands off, know thou whom thou of∣fendest?
Bind her fast, and after captive him.
I will rather die
Then suffer her sustain least injury.
VVhat's thy purpose?
In all my travels, and my quest of blood,
I ne'er encountered such a beauteous prize:
Heavens, if I thought you would accept his thanks
That trades in deeds of hell, I would acknowledge
My self in debt to you.
VVhat's thy intent,
Bold villein, that thou make this preparation?
I intend to ravish thee.
All goodness pardon me, and you blessed heavens,
Whom I too boldly challenged for a misery
Beyond my Sponsors loss. What, rape intended?
I had not thought there had been such a mischief,
Devised for wretched woman: ravish me?
It is beyond shipwreck, poverty, or death:
It is a word invented first in hell,
And by the devils first spewed upon earth:
Man could not have invented to have given
Such letters sound.
I trifle hours too long,
And now to my black purpose. Envious day,
Gaze with thy open eyes on this nights work,
For thus the Prologue to my lust begins.
Help, murder, rape, murder.
Isle stop yo•… mo•…h from bawling.
This way the cry came: resoue for the Lady,
Hold thy desperate fury, and arm thy 〈◊〉
For my encounter.
Hell prevented.
Unbind that beautio•…s Lady, and pursue
The Ruffin; he that can bring his head shall have
A thousand crowns propo•…'d for his reward:
He should be Captain of those bloody theevs,
That haunts our mountains, and of our dear subjects
Hath oft made outrage. Go, 〈◊〉 this proclaimed.
Ever I, the happy wish•… of my soul,
My orisons to heaven, or make free •…nder
Of a most bounden duty, grace my mi•…rye,
To let me know, unto what worthy person,
Of what degree or state, I owe the service
Of a most wretched life, lest i•… my ignorance,
I prove an heretic to all good manners,
And harshly so off•…nd.
Fairest of thy sex, I need not question thine,
Because I read a 〈◊〉 in thy 〈◊〉,
But to resolve thee, know, I am 〈◊〉, The Duke
Of Florenco, and of this country•…y Prince.
Then from my 〈◊〉 I 〈◊〉 •…at on my face,
In bound obeisance.
Rise,
That earth's too base for s•…eh pure lips to ki•….
They should rather join with a Princes, as at first
Made for such use: nay, we will have it so.
That Lady; if my memory be faithful
Unto my judgement, I should have seen ever now,
But where, what place, or in what 〈◊〉, now
I cannot call to mind.
Where were you bred?
In England, royal Sir.
In England?
By what strange adventure then
Happened you on these coasts?
By shipwreck.
Then churlish were the waves t'expose you 〈◊〉
Such danger. Whence disimbark't you last?
From Barberie.
From Barberie? our Merchant, you came lately thence.
It is she, I now remember her,
She did me a great courtesy, and I am proud,
Fortune, how ever enemy to her,
Has given me opportunity to make
A just requital.
What occasion
Fair Lady, being of such state and beauty,
Drew you from your own country, to expose you
To so long travel.
Mighty Sovereign,
Pardon my interruption, if I make bold
To put your grace in mind of an English Virgin,
So highly graced by mighty Mullisheg.
A legend, worthy to be writ in gold,
Whose strangeness seemed at first to exceed belief;
And had not thy approved honesty
Commanded our attention, we should have doubted
That thou therein had much hyperboliz'd.
What would your grace give,
To see that miracle of constancy,
She who relieved so many Christian captives,
Redeemed so many of the M•…rchants goods,
•…aged of the king so many for•…tures,
Kept from the Galleys some, and some from slaughter,
She whom the king of Fesse never denied,
But she denied him love; whose chastity
Conquered his lust, and maugre his incontinence,
Made him admire his virtues.
The report
Strikes us with wonder and amazement too:
But to behold the creature were a project,
Worthy a theatre of Emperors;
Nay, gods themselves to be spectators.
Behold that wonder. Lady, know you▪ me?
Not I, I can assure you, Sir.
Isle give you instance then;
I was that Florentine:
Who being in Fesse; for a strange outrage there,
Six of my men were to the Galleys doomed:
But at your intercession to the king,
Freely releast: for which, in this dejection,
I pray accept these thousand crowns, to raise
Your ruined fortunes.
You are grateful, Sir, beyond my merit
I cannot blame great Fesse
To become enamoured on so fair a creature.
You had a friend much graced by that same Moor,
Whom, as our Merchant told us, you were espoused to
In the Court of Fesse, when•… he?
I cannot speak it without •…ears.
Why, is he dead?
I cannot say he lives.
How were you severed?
It asks a sad relation.
We'll find a fitter time to hear't. But now,
Augment your griefs no further: on what coast
Pray, were you shipwrecked?
Upon these neighbouring 〈◊〉; where all the wealth
I had from B•…rbarie is perished in the sea.
I that this morn commanded half a million,
Have nothing now but this good merchants bounty.
You are richer
In our high favour, then all the royalty,
Fesse could have crowned your pearlesse beauty with:
He gave you gold; but we your almost forfeit chastity.
A gift above the wealth of Barbary.
Conduct this Lady to the City straight,
And bear this our signet to our treasurer,
Command for her ten thousand crowns immediately.
Next to our wardrobe, and what choife of habit
Best likes her, it is her own;
Only for all this grace, deign beauteous Lady;
That I may call you servant.
Pardon me, Sir,
You are a Prince, and I am here your vassal.
Merchant,
As you respect our favour see this done.
What must my next fall be? I that this morning
Was rich in wealth and servants, and ever noon
Commanded neither: and next doomed to death;
Not death alone, but death with infamy.
But what's all this unto my Sponsors loss?
You to the City, we'll pursue the chase.
Madam, be comforted, we'll send, or see you;
All your fortunes are not extinct in shipwreck,
The land affords you better if you'll be swayed by us.
As first you find us, we'll be still the same:
Oft have I chac't ne'er found so fair a game.
Where are my Bashaw's now? Let me see, what shall I do? I have left my Mistress, where shall I have my wages? shoe's peper'd by this: but if the Captain of the Bandetties had had but that grace and honour that I had when I was in Barbary, he would not have been so lusty. She escaped drowning, which is the way of all fish, and by this is gone the way of all flesh. My Lieutenant hoe's sure •…ut to pieces among the Bandetties, and so had I been,
had not my Bakers legs stepped a little aside. My noble Ca∣ptain and Sp•…ncer, they are either drowned in the tempest, or murdered by the Pirates, and none is left alive but I Clem, poor Clem: but poor Clem, how wilt thou do now? what trick have you to sati•… Colon, here in a strange Country? It is not now with me as when Andrea lived. Now I bethink me, I have a trade, and that, they say, will stick by a man when his friends fail •…m: the City is hard by, and Isle see and I can be entertained to my old trade of drawing •…no: if it be but an under skinker, I care not, better do so then like a prodigal feed upon husks and acorns.
Well, if I chance to lead my life under some happy •…gne▪
To my Countrymen still Isle fill the best wine.
Wounded, but escaped with life: but Besses loss, that's it that gre•… me in•…d: rav•…, perhaps, and murdered. Oh, if Spencer and Goodlack sir•…, how would they blame my cow•…? a thread 〈◊〉, may be untwined, but things in nature done, undone can never be. Shoe's lost, they are perished, they are happy in their deaths, and I surviving 〈◊〉 to •…he •…arth mo•… miserable. No means to raise my self? I 〈◊〉 a P•… even now, pro∣claiming to the man could bring the head of the Bandet∣ties Captain, for his reward a thousand crowns: If not for gain of gold, yet for he injured Bess, that shall be my next task: What though I die?
Be this my comfort, that it chance▪t me well,
To perish by his hand by whom she •…ll.
Our Merchant, have you 〈◊〉 •…h English Lady
As we commanded, did she take the gold?
After many complements, circumstances,
Modest re•…alls, sometimes with repu•…,
I forced on her your bounty: Had you seen
What a bewitching art she strived to use,
Betwixt denial, and disdain; contempt and thankfulness,
You would have said, that out of a mere scorn
T'accept your gift, she expressed such gratitude,
As would demand a double donative.
And it has don't, it shall be doubled straight,
Arising thence unto an infinite,
If she'll but grant us love. How for her habit?
With an enforced will, wilful constraint,
And a mere kind of glad necessity,
She put it on but to lament the death
Of her lost husband.
Why, is he lost?
By all conjectures never to be found.
The les•…e her hope is to recover him,
The more our hopes remains to conquer her:
Bear her from us this jewel, and withal
Provide a banquet, bid her leave all mourning,
This night in person we will visit her.
I shall.
Withal more gold.
And if thou can by way of conference,
Get from her how she stands affected towards us:
It shall not be the furthest way about
To thy preferment and our special favour.
The two bold Dukes of Mantua and 〈◊〉, after many bloody garboils have entered league: and with∣in these two days mean to visit Florence, to make your Court a witness of their late concluded amity.
We'll receive them,
As Princes that in this would honour us.
These letters will speak further.
Bear them straight
Unto our Secretary, and withal, give order,
That all our Court may shine in gold and pearl,
They never could have come in a happier season,
Then when the great and high magnificence,
Without suspect we would have shown to her,
Will be accounted honour done to them.
In fates despite,
we will not lose the honour of this night.
Farara was exceeding bountiful.
So was the Duke of Mantua. Had we staid
Within their confines, we might even till death
Have lived in their high favour.
Oh, but Captain,
What would their Dukedoms gain me without Bess,
Or all the world t'injoy it without her:
Each passage of content or pleasing fortune,
When I record she has no part in it,
Seems rather as an augmentation
Of a more great disease.
This be your comfort, that by this
Shoe's best part of her way for England, whither
She is richly bound, then where she is most hopeless
Of this your safety,
With your survival to receive us gladly
With an abundant treasure.
But for that,
I had sunk ever this beneath the weight of war.
And chose an obscure death, before the glory
Of a renowned soldier. But we are now
As far as Florence onward of our way,
Were it best that we made tender of our service
To the grand Duke?
It is the greatest benefits of all our travels, to see foreign Courts, and to discourse their fashions: let
us by no means neglect that duty.
Where were we best to lodge?
Hard by is a Tavern, let's first drink there, and after make inquir•…e who's the best host for strangers.
Come ho, where be these Drawers?
Gentlemen, I draw none my self, but Isle send some.
Welcome Gentlemen. Score a quart.
Ha?
How?
No, no, I am an ass, a very animal, it cannot be.
Why dost thou bear the wine back, the slave thinks belike we have no money?
What dost thou think us to be such cashiered sol∣diers that we have no cash. Tush, it cannot be he.
How should he come here, set down the wine.
I will, I will, sir. Score a quart of—Tricks, mere fantasmes. Shall I draw wine to shadows? so I might run of the score, and find no substance to pay for it.
Left we not him a shipboard on his voyage to∣wards England with my
With Bess, true, Sir, set down the wine.
Some Italian Mountebanks, upon my life, me•… juggling.
Upon my life it is Cl•…m.
Ca, Ca, Cap. Captain? Moister Spencer?
Clem?
I am Clem.
And I am Spencer.
And I Goodlack, but cannot think thee Clem.
Yes, I am Clem of Foy, the Bashaw of Barbary, who from a Courtier of Fesse, am turned a Drawer in Floe∣rinse: but let me clear my eyes better; now I know you to be the same whose throats the Pirates would have cut, and have spoiled your drinkings.
Oh, tell us, and be brief in thy relation,
What happened you, after the sudden tempest
Severed our ships? or what's become of Bess?
Where did our Negro touch?
Isle give you a touch, take it as you will: The Negro and all that was in her was wrack't on the coast of of Florence, her, and all the wealth that was in her, all drowned in the bottom of the sea.
No matter for the riches, wher's she, worth More then ship or goods?
Wher's Ruffman? for thou we see art safe.
Nay speak, wher's Bess?
How my heart quails within me?
She, Ruffman, and I were all cast ashore safe, like so many drowned Rats, where we were no sooner landed, but we were set upon by the Bandetties; where she was bound to a tree, and ready to be ravished by the Captain of the Out-laws.
Oh, worse then shipwreck could be.
I see Ruffman half cut in pieces with rescuing her, but whether the other half be alive or no, I cannot tell. For my one part, I made shift for one, my heels doing me better service then my hands: and coming to the City, having no other means to live by, got me to my old trade to draw wine, where I have the best wine in Floe∣rinse for you Gentlemen.
Ra•…h't.
And Ruffman slain.
Oh, hard news:
It frets all my blood, and strikes me stiff with
Horror and amazement.
It strikes me
Into a marble statue, for with such
I have like sense and feeling.
Tell me Captain,
Wilt thou give me leave at length to despair
And kill my self: I will disclaim all further
Friendship with thee, if thou perswad'st me live.
Ravished!
Perhaps attempted but prevented,
Will you before you know the utmost certainty,
Destroy your self?
What is this world? what's man? are we created
Out of flint or iron, that we are made to bear this?
Comfort, Sir.
Your only way is to drink wine if you be in grief, for that's the only way, the old proverb says, to comfort the heart.
Hark where we lie, and I prithee Clem lets hear from thee, but now leave us.
I will make bold inquire you out, and if you want money (as many travellers may) as long as I have ei∣there credit, wages, or any coin in the world, you shall not want, as I am a true Eunuch.
Let's stand aside and suffer these Gallants pass, that with their state take a whole street before them.
Our Coach, stay, we'll back some half hour hence,
Only conduct this Lady to her lodging.
Ha, started you, Sweet, whence fetched
You that sigh. Our train lead on,
W'have other business now to think upon.
Sure this was some great Lady.
But observed you not this jewel that she cast me? it is a rich one.
Believe me, worthy your wearing.
What might she be to whom I am thus bound?
I'm here a stranger, never till this day
Beheld I Florence, nor acquaintance, friend
Especially of Ladies.
By th•…ir train,
The man that did support her by the arm
Was of some special note; and she a Lady
Nobly de•…cended. Why should she throw you this,
Being a mere stranger?
The•…'s some mystery in'•…,
If we could find the depth on'•…, sure there is.
Perhaps some newly fallen in love▪with you,
Now at first sight, and hurled that as a favour.
Yet neither of us had or the wit or sense to enquire her name:
Isle wear it openly and see if any
Will challenge it: the way to know her best.
And I would so.
Isle truce a while with sorrow for my Bess,
Till I find th'event.
And at best leisure
Tender our service to the Duke,
Whom fame reports to be a bounteous prince,
And liberal to all strangers.
It is decreed-
But howso•…'re his favours he impart,
My Besses loss will still sit near my heart.
This honour you have done me, worthy Princes,
In leaving of your Courts to visit me,
We reckon as a trophy of your loves,
And shall remain a future monument,
Of a more firm and perfect amity.
To you, as to the greatest, most honoured,
And most esteemed Prince of Italy▪
After a tedious opposition,
And much effuse of blood, this Prince and I,
Late reconciled▪ make a most happy tender▪
Of our united league.
Selecting you
A royal witness of this union,
Which to express, we come to feast with you,
To sport and revel, and in full largess,
To spread our royal bounty through your Court.
What neither letters nor Ambassadors,
Soliciting by factions, or by friends,
Heavens hand hath done by your more calmer temper.
All resistalls,
Quarrels, and ripping up of injuries,
Are smothered in the ashes of our wrath,
Whose fire is now extinct.
Which who so kindles,
Let him be held a new H•…rostratus,
Who was so hated throughout Ephesus,
They held it death to name him.
Nobly spoke.
And now confederate Princes, you shall find,
By our rich entertainment, how w'esteem
Your friendship. Speak, have we no Ladies here
To entertain these princes?
Me thinks I spy one beauty in this place▪
Worth all the sights that I have seen before.
I think, survey the spa•…ious world abroad,
You scarce can find her equal.
Had not wonder,
And deep amazement curbed my speech in,
I had forestalled this Prince in approbation
Of her comparelesse beauty.
Taste her Princes.
This surfeits me, and ads unto my love,
That they should thus admire her.
Beauteous Lady,
I•… is not my least honour to be first
In this most wished solicit▪
I stand a statue,
And cannot move but by another will,
And as I am commanded.
I should have wrestled for priority,
But that I hold it as a ble•…ing,
To take off that kiss which he so late laid on.
Now tell me Princes,
How do you like my judgement in the choice Of a fair mistress?
You shall choose for me.
More happy in this beauty, I account you,
Then in your rech•… treasure.
W•…'t not cloud•…d o'er
With such a melancholy sadness, I'd
Not change it for the wealth of Italy.
Sweet, cheer this brow whereon no frown can sit,
But it will ill become you.
Sir, I bleed.
Ha, bleed?
I would not have a sad and ominous fate
Hang o'er thee for a million:
Perhaps it is custom with you.
I have observed
Even from my childhood, never fell from h•…nce
One crimson drop, but either my greatest enemy,
Or my dearest friend was near.
Why, we are here,
Fixed to thy side thy dearest friend on earth.
If that be all, fear nothing.
Pardon, Sir,
Both modesty and manners pleads for me
And I must needs retire.
Our train attend her,
Let her have all observance. By my royalty,
I would not have her taste the least disaster
For more then we can promise.
You have only showed us a rich Jewel, Sir,
And put it in a casket.
Of what country,
Fortune, or birth doth she proclaim her self?
For by her garb and language we may guess•…▪
She was not bred in Florence.
Seat you Princes, Isle tell you a strange project.
I have walked the streets, but find not any that will make challenge of this jewel. Captain, now we'll try the Court.
Beware of these Italians,
They are by nature jealous and revengeful,
Not sparing the most basest opportunity,
That may procure your danger.
Innocence
Is bold and cannot fear. But see the Duke▪
We'll tender him the solemnst reverence
Of travellers and strangers. Peace, prosperity,
And all good fates attend your royalty.
Behold, w'are two poor English Gentlemen•…,
Whom travel hath enforc'•… through your Dukedom,
As next way to our country, prostrate you
Our lives and service: ▪tic not for reward,
Or hope of gain we make this tender to you,
But our free loves.
That which so freely comes,
How can we scorn? what are you Gentlemen?
Isle speak for this.
And I for him,
Well met renowned Englishman
Here in the Court of Florence: this was he,
Great Duke, whom fame hath for his valour bla•…on it;
Not only through Mantua▪
But through the spacious bounds of Italy,
Where it was shown.
Hath fame been so injurious to thy merit,
That this great Court is not already filed
With rumour of their matchless chivalry.
If these be they, as by their outward semblance,
They promise not much less: same hath been harbinger
To speak their praise before hand. Noble Gentlemen,
You have much graced our Court; we thank you for it:
And though no way according to your merits,
Yet will we strive to cherish such brave spirits.
Th'acceptance of our smallest service, Sir,
Is bounty above gold: w'are poor Gentlemen,
And though we cannot, gladly would deserve.
'Tas pleased these princes to bestow on us
Too great a character: and gild our praises
Far above our deserts.
That's but your modesty.
English Gentlemen, let fame speak for you.
Gentlemen of England, we pardon you all duty,
We accept you as our friends and our companions:
Such you are, and such we do esteem you.
Mighty Prince,
Such boldness wants excuse.
Come we'll have•… so.
Amazement, can it be? Sure it is the self same jewel
I gave the English Lady: more I view it,
More it confirms my knowledge: now is no time
To question it, once more renowned Englishmen,
Welcome to us and to these Princes.
Can any man show me the great Duke of Florence?
Behold the Prince.
Deign, thou renowned Duke, to cast thy ▪eyes
Upon a poor dejected Gentleman,
Whom fortune hath dejected even to nothing.
I have nor meat nor money; these rags are all my riches;
Only necessity compels me claim
A debt owing by you.
By us?
Let's know the sum, and how the debt acrues.
You have proclaimed to him could bring the head
Of the Bandetties Captain, for his reward,
A thousand crowns. Now I being a Gentleman,
A traveller, and in want, made this my way
To raise my ruined hope: I singled him,
Fought with him hand to hand, and from his bloody shoulders
Lopped this head.
Boldly and bravely done: what ever thou be
Thou shalt receive it from our treasury.
You show your self as fame reports you,
A bounteous Prince, and liberal to all strangers.
From what country
Do you claim your birth?
From England, royal Sir▪
These bold Englishmen,
I think are all composed of spirit and fire,
The element of earth hath no part in them.
If, as you say, from England, we retain
Some of your Countrymen; know you these Gentlemen?
Let me no longer live in ecstasy,
This wonder will confound me: Noble friends,
Bootless it were to ask you why, because
I find you here. Illustrious Duke, you owe
Me nothing now, to show me these, is reward
Beyond what you proclaimed: the rest I pardon.
What these are we know,
And what thou art we need not question much,
That head though mute can speak it.
Princes, once more receive our royal welcome.
Oh, but the jewel: but of that at leisure
Now we cannot stay. Our train, lead on.
Oh, that we three so happily should meet,
And want the fourth.
I left her in the hands of rape and murder,
Whence, except some deity,
It was not in the power of man to rescue her;
How ever, a good office I have done her,
Which even in death her soul will thank me for,
Revenged her on that villain.
It hath expressed the nobleness of thy Spirit.
For it we still shall owe thee.
But what adventure hath preferred you
And brought you thus in grace?
You shall hereafter
〈◊〉 of that at large. But leaving this discourse,
With our joint persuasions let's strive to comfort him,
That's nothing but discomfort.
Would I had brought him news of that rare ver∣rue.
Yet you have never heard of our late shipwreck.
Clem reported it.
How Clem, wher's he?
He has got a service hard by, and draws wine.
His master may well trust him with his maids,
For since the Beshaws gelded him, he has learned
To run exceeding nimbly.
Sir, it is to you, I take it,
My message is directed.
The Duke would, have some conference with you, but it must be in private.
I am his servant, still at his command.
Where shall's meet anon.
At Clems.
Content.
Where we'll make a due relation of all our desperate fortunes.
It is concluded.
I Cannot rest till I am fully resolved
About this jewel. Sir, we sent to stay you,
And wean you some small season from your friends:
And you above the rest, because your presence
Doth promise good discourse.
Sir, I am all yours.
How long hath been your sojourn here in Floe∣rinse?
Two days, no more.
Have you since your arrival
Retained no beauteous Mistress? Pardon me,
Sir, that I am come thus near you.
On my soul
Not any, royal Sir.
Think it my love that I presume thus far
To question you. Have you observed no Lady
Of special note, courted or discoursed with any
Within these two days.
Upon my honour, none.
You are a soldier and a Gentleman,
And should speak all truth.
If otherwise, I should disclaim my gentry.
I believe you, Sir. You have a rich jewel here,
Worthy a Princes wearing: it were not modesty
To ask how you came by it, or from whom.
Nor can I, Sir, resolve you, if you did:
But it was cast me by a Lady, of whom
As then I took small notice of, my mind
Being troubled.
It is even so.
Perhaps your grace by knowing of this jewel,
May know the beauteous •…inger, and so
You might engage me deeply to acquaint me with her,
To prove her grateful debtor.
No such thing,
You know none in this City?
Worse then scorn,
Or foul disgrace befall me if I know
Any you can call woman.
Be not moved,
I spoke but this in sport. Sure this strange Lady,
Casting her eye upon this Gentleman,
Grew straight •…f him enamoured, which makes her
Keep off from my embraces: but Isle sound all,
Yet my own wrongs prevent. Sir, I staid you,
But to another purpose, to commit
A weighty secret to you.
Were it of millions,
Id prove your faithful steward.
I have a Mistress that Ptender dearer
Then mine own eyes. Observe me, dearer Sir,
Whom neither courtship moves, favours can work,
Nor no preferment tempt.
How rich were he
Could call himself lord of such a jewel.
My entreaties, friends, persuasions, importunities
Of my chaste Ladies cannot prevail at all.
Now would I chose a stranger, selecting thee,
To bear to her these few lines which contain
The substance of my mind.
And Sir, I shall.
In thy aspect
I read a fortune that should destine me
To strange felicities. Wilt thou be faithful?
As to my •…whole▪
But thou shalt swear before thou undertak'stie,
(Though I suspect not falsehood in thy visage)
Not once to cast on her an amorous look,
Speak to her no familiar sylla•…,
Not to embrace her, nor to kiss her hand,
Nor her free lip by no means.
Well, I swear.
But that's not all,
Swear by thy faith and thy religion▪
Not to taste the least small favour for thy self,
Touch or come near her bosom; for, fair stranger,
I love her above measure, and that love
Makes me thus jealous.
By my honesty,
Faith, and religion, without free release
From your own lips, all this will I perform.
And so return the richest Englishman,
That ever pierced our Dukedom. Instantly
Thou shalt about thy task.
You have tired our ears with your long disco•…
Leave us to rest.
Dream on your best desires.
If at some half hour hence you visit us,
We shall be free for language.
Soft rest with you.
If my soft sleeps presents me any shadov
Oh, let it be my Sponsors, him whom waking
I cannot see, I may in dreams perhaps
Converse with, my sudden bleeding and my drowsiness,
Should not presage me good: pray heaven the Duke
Prove loyal to mine honour: howsoever
Death will end all: and I presume on this
It is way to Spencer, and my haven of bliss.
What beauty should this be, on whom the Duke
Is grown so jealous: sure it is some rare piece;
He told me she was fairer th•… I could either
Judge, Or yet imagine.
Would Bess were here to wager beauties with her,
For all my hopes in England. This is the Chamber:
Ha, thus far off she seems to promise well,
Isle take a nearer and more free survey,
This taper shall assist me: fail my eyes?
Or meet I nothing else but prodigies?
Oh heavens, it is my Bess; Oh, sudden rapture!
Let me retire to more considerate thoughts.
What should I think, but presently to wake her?
And being mine, to seize her where I find her.
Oh, but mine oath, that I should never, never
Lie with her being my wife, nor kiss her, touch her,
Speak to her one familiar syllable.
Can oaths bind thus? My honesty, faith, and
Religion are all engaged, ther's no dispense for them.
And yet in all this con•…ict to remember
How the Duke praised her virtue, chastity,
And constancy, whom nothing could corrupt,
Ads to my joys. But on the neck of this,
It lays a double 〈◊〉 on my life.
First to forswear, then leave so fair a wife.
I am all distraction. In my sleep•…
I saw him, could I but behold him waking.
That were a heaven. Ha, do I dream still?
Or was I born to •…ee
Nothing but strange illusions. Spencer: Love.
I am neither.
Thou hast his shape, his gate, his face, his lan∣gauge:
Only these words of thine and strange behaviour,
Never came from him. Let me embrace thee.
No.
Then kiss me.
No.
Yet speak me fair.
I cannot.
Look on me.
I must not, I will not, fare thee well:
Yet first read that.
I have read too much already within thy change•… of looks.
Oh me my oath;
Id chop off this right hand to cancel it.
But if not now, when then?
Never.
Not kiss me?
No.
Not fold me in thine arms?
Not.
Nor cast a gracious look upon thy Bess?
I dare not.
Never.
No never.
Oh, I shall die.
She faints, and yet I dare not for my oath
Once to support her. Dies before mi•…ies.
And yet I must not call her back to life.
Where is the Duke? some help, no Ladies nigh?
Are you all, all asleep or dead,
Ther's no more noise in Court?
Ha, what's the buisinesse, noble 〈◊〉, what 〈◊〉?
How speed you with my Mistress?
You may see there on the ground, half
In the grave already. So 〈◊〉 you well,
What grief mine is, those that love best can tell.
Support her. Speak love, look up divinest Mi∣st•…isse.
You said you would not speak, nor look, nor touch your Bess.
Who I?
By all my hopes I ne'er had such a thought.
Oh, I mistook.
Why do you look so ghastly about the room?
Whom do's your eyes enquire for?
Nothing, nay, no body.
Why do you we•…p?
Hath some new love possessed him, and excluded
Me from his bosom? can it be possible?
All leave the chamber.
But Isle be so revenged as never woman was:
Isle be a president to all wives hereafter,
How to pay home their proud neglectful husbands;
It is in my way, I've power, and Isle do it.
What is it offends you?
It is you have don't.
Wee?
If you be the Prince:
Ther's but one man I hate above all the world.
And you have sent him to torment me h•….
What satisfaction shall I make thee for it?
This, and this only; If you have any interest
In him, or power above him: if you be a Prince
In your own country, have command and rule
In your own do•…once, fre•…lie resign his person
And his state solely to my disposure.
But whence grows
The ground of such inveterate hate?
All circumstance to omit,
He, and only he ravished me from my country,
He was the cause of all my afflictions,
Tempests, shipwreck, fears. I never had just cause
Of care and grief but he was author of it.
Speak, is he mine?
What interest I can claim, either by oath
Or promise, thou art Commandress of.
Then I am yours;
And to morrow in the public view of all
The stranger Princes, Courtiers, and Ladies,
I will express my self. This night I entreat
I may repo•…e my self in my own lodging
For private meditations.
What we have promised,
Is in our purpose most irrevocable,
And so we hope is yours.
You may presume, my lord.
Conduct this Lady to her chamber,
Let her have all observance: we will lay
Our strict command on him, lest he should leave
Our City before our summons, it is to morrow, then,
Shall happy thee, make us most blessed of men.
Now shall I quite him home,
Th'ingrate shall know,
It is above patience to be injured so.
Will you walk Lady, or take your coach?
That we the streets more freely may survey,
We'll walk along.
Let me see, three quarts, two pottles, one gallon and a pin•…e, one pint, two quarts more, then I have my load: thus are we that are under▪journeymen put too't. Oh the fortune of the seas; never did any man that mar∣ries a whore, so cast himself away, as I had been like in the last tempest: yet nothing vexes me so much, that after all
my travels, no man that meets me but may say, a•…d say very truly, I am now no better then a pot companion.
That should be Clem my man, give me some gold,
Here, Sir, drink this to the health
Of thy old Mistress. Usher on,
We have more serious things to think upon.
Mistress Bess, Mi•…s Eli•…, it is 〈◊〉: 〈◊〉, gold: hence pewter pots, Isle be a 〈◊〉 porter no longer: my Mistress turned Gallant, and shall I do nothing but run up stares and down•… 〈◊〉, 〈◊〉, anon, Sir? 〈◊〉, I have gold, and anon will be as gall•… as the proudest of them. Shall I stand at the Bar to bar any mans ca•…ing that drinks hard? no, Isle send these pots home by some pore∣la or other, put my self into a better habit, and say▪ The case is altered; then will I go home to the bush where I drew wine, and buy out my time, and take up my Cham∣ber, be served in pomp by my fellow 〈◊〉:
I will presently thither,
Where I will flaunt it in my Cap and my •…her.
You tell us of the strangest 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 ever'came within the compass of my knowledge.
I tell you but what's true▪
It ca•…not 〈◊〉 example. Did you leave 〈◊〉 those extremities of passion?
I think dying, or the next way to death.
To cheer you,
The Dukes own witness of 〈◊〉 •…once,
And virtue, armed against all •…tions,
Part of your griefs should le•….
Rather friend,
Augment my passions, to be forced to lo•…,
And quite 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 sweet a 〈◊〉.
Oh, it breeds more distraction.
VVer't my cause,
I'd to the Duke and claim her, beg for justice,
And through the populous court clamour my wrongs,
If he detain her from you.
But my oath
Ties me from that, I have quite abjured her,
I have renounced her freely, cast her off,
Disclaimed her quite: I can no more
Interest claim in her, then Goodlack
Thou, or Ruffman thou.
It is most strange, let's examine all our brains
How this may be avoided.
How now Clem, you loiter here, the house is full of guests, and you are extremely called for.
You are deceived my Lieutenant▪ Isle assure you, you speak to as good a man as my self: Do you want any money?
Can thou l•…nd me any?
Look, I am the lord of these mines, of these Indies.
How came thou by them?
A delicate sweet Lady, meeting me in the street, like an Ass groaning under my heavy burden, and be∣ing enamoured of my good parts, gave me this gold: if you think I lie, examine all these pots, whose mouths, if they could 〈◊〉, would say as much in my behalf. But if you want any money, speak in time, for if I once turn Courtier again, I will •…orn my poor friends, look scurvily upon my acquaintance, borrow of all men, be beholding to any man, and acknowledge no man: and my Motto shall be, 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 the man 〈◊〉 〈◊〉.
But 〈◊〉, how came thou by this gold?
News, news, though not the lost sheep, yet the lost shrew is found, 〈◊〉 Mistress, Mi•… Elizabeth, it is she, she meeting me 'ith street, seeing I had a pot or two too
much, gave me ten pounds in a purse to pay for it, Ass signum.
The Duke hath summoned your appearance, Gentlemen,
And lays his power of love, not o•… command,
To visit him in Court.
I am put into the number too, if he b•… a tall man, tell him we will attend his high•….
Fellow, my langu•…ge was not aimed at you.
But Sir, Isle make bold to come at first bidding.
Sir, your reward stays for you at Court,
For bringing of the ou•… lawed Cap•… head,
Ther's order tan•… foe•… from the treasuri•….
The Duke is just and royal▪ VVee'll attend you.
And Isle go furnish my self with some be•…r ac∣coutriments, and •…le b•… with you to bring pr•…sently.
There is not in your looks renowned Flor•…▪
That summers calm, and sweet alac•…ie
That was wont there to shine, a winters storm
Sits threatening on your discontented brow.
May we desire the cause.
Which you shall know.
Princes, the fierce and bloody moors, have late
Committed outrage on our seas, especially,
One mighty Bashaw, ▪against whom w'have sent
Petro Deventuro, one of our best Sea Captains,
And, till we hear of his success, •…'are bard
Of much content.
My lord, good new•…, •…trow De•… is returned
With happy victory, and many noble prisoners,
And humbly lays his conquest at your feet.
Petro, welcome.
This thy service shall not di•… unrewarded. Freely relate
The manner of thy Sea fight.
Then thus, great Duke.
This noble Bashaw: noble I must call him,
For he deserves that worthy attribute,
Did lord o'er these▪ our seas, appointed well;
Laden with many a rich and golden spoil,
Not weak to us in number; being in ken,
We had him and his Galleys straight in chase:
He ne'er set sail or fled: afar our ordnan•… plaid;
Coming more near, our muskets and our small shot,
Like showers of hail begun the slaughter;
There this Bashaw then perceiving straight
That he must either yield or die: his Scimitar
He pointed to his breast, thinking thereon
To perish, had not my coming staid him.
Nor think, bold Christian,
That I can commend, or thank thee for it,
For who that's noble will not prize brave death
Before a slavish bondage: had I died
By mine own hand, 'th•…d been a s•…ldiers pride.
Although a prisoner captive and a Moor,
Yet use him like the noblest of his nation.
And now withdraw with him, till wee
Determine of his ransom.
Way there for the Dukes Mistress.
Ha, the Dukes Mistress, said he:
It was harsh.
Keep off, we would have no such rubs as these,
Trouble our way? but have them swept aside,
A company of base companions, to do no reverence
To a Princes Mistress.
Hear you t•…?
Give back, you trouble the pr•…ce.
This cannot •…e •…sse, but some Fury hath stolen her shape.
It seems strange.
But unto me most horrid.
Great Duk, I come to keep my promise with you, if you keep your word with me.
These kind regreets are unto me more welcome
Then my late victory 〈◊〉 at Sea:
Will•… please you take your seat?
Is not yo•… Spencer, and that the Captain of the Negro?
What shall w•… next behold?
Yet are you mine▪
From all the world, great Fl•…ence, witness this,
You ne'er had yet a vo•…ary kiss.
'Sfoot I could tear my hair off.
Second your kindness, l•… these Princes see
Your tempting lips solely •…longs to me.
Ther's one again, i•… 〈◊〉 〈◊〉 'bove measure,
To be a Princes dar•…, and •…oice •…ur.
Hold me Goodlack, or I shall break out,
Into some dangerous outrage.
Show in this your wisdom, and quite suppress your fury.
Princes, I fear you have mistook your selves
In these two •…gers, for I have little hope
To find them wort•… your gr•… •…racter.
There must be great presumption that must force belief to tha•….
Nay mo•… th•… pre•…ptions, proofs,
Or they will win small credit.
You had from us Lady, a costly jewel,
It cost ten thousand crowns, speak, can you show it?
I kept it chary
As mine own heart, because it came from you;
But hurrying through the street, some cheating fellow,
Snatched it from my arm, therefore my suit is
With whomsoe're the jewel may be found,
The slave may die.
His sentence thine, we never will revoke i•….
Our Merchant, search all our Courtiers and such
Strangers as are within our Court.
Her's one of no mean lustre that this Gentle∣man wears in his hat.
Reach it the Lady.
This cannot be Bess Bridges, but some Medus•…,
Changed into her lively portraiture.
Princes, the thief is found: what ever he be
That's guilty of this felony, I beg
That I may be his •…cer.
Thou shalt.
If you have any interest in his blood▪
His oaths or vows, freely resign them, him,
And all at my dispose.
Have 〈◊〉 not don't?
Who can with the least honour speak for him,
The theft being so app•…
Now if she should challenge me with the purse she gave me, and hang m•… up for my labour, I should curse the time that ever I was a courtier.
Let me descend, and •…'re I judge the Fello•…,
Survey him first. It is pity, for it seems
He hath an honest face. T•… 〈◊〉 was never.
What Bess•…, forget your self?
An indifferent pro•… m•…, and take these cour∣ses. You said you would not speak, nor look upon, nor touch your Bess.
I could be a new Si•… and b•…ray
A second Troy, rather then suffer this.
Good outward parts, but in a foreign clime
Shame your own country. Never think of that.
I fear my heart will break,
It doth so struggle for eruption forth.
When do you speak his sentence, Lady?
You'll confirm't what ever it be.
As! we are Prince we will.
Set forth the prisoner.
Stand forward Englishman.
Then hear thy doom, I give thee back thy life,
And in thy arms throw a most constant wife;
If Thou hast rashly sworn, thy oaths are free,
You are mine by gift, I give my self to thee.
Lady, we understand not this.
Shall I make it plain?
This is, great Duke, my husband,
Whose virtues even the barbarous Moors admired.
This the man for whom a thousand dangers l've endured,
Of whom the best approved Croniclers,
Might write a golden legend.
My lord, I know that Gentleman
For Spencer, and her husband, for mine eyes
Saw them espoused in Fesse; that Gentleman,
As I take it, was Captain of the Negro,
The other his Lieutenant.
And do not you know me?
Not I, Sir.
I am Ba•…haw of Barbary, by the same token I sold certain precious stones to purchase the place.
Lady, you told us he •…as the author
Of all your troubles, cares, and fears.
I told true, his love was cause of all,
It drew me from my Country in his quest,
When I despaired: and finding him in Fesse,
Oh do but think great Duke if ever you loved,
What might have bought him from you.
Had my Spencer been an Euridice,
I would have plaid the Orpheus,
And found him out in hell.
We now perceive,
The cause of all these errors his unkindness,
Grounded on his rash oath, which we release;
And all those virtues, honours, and renowns,
Which even the barbarous Moors seemed to admire,
We'll dignify and raise their suffrage higher,
Florin•…e is honourable.
Bring in the Bashaw, call Venturo forth.
Duke, I am prisoner,
Put me to ransom or to death: But to death rather;
For me thinks, a Soldier should not outlive bondage.
Bashaw Ioffer?
Leave my embraces, Bess, for I of force am cast
Into his arms. My noble friend?
I know you not, and I could wish you did not know me, now I am a prisoner, a wretch, a captive, and such a one as I would not have my friends to know. I pray stand off.
Because you are in durance,
Should I not know you? no:
For then the noblest minds should friends best know.
Have you forgot me, Sir?
No; were I in freedom and my princely honours,
I should then be proud to call you Spencer,
And my friend, but now
An English virtue thou shalt try,
That for my life once did not fear to die.
That for his noble office done to me,
Embrace him Bess, dear Goodlack, and the rest,
Whilst to this Prince I kneel. This was the Bashaw,
King Mullisheg made him great Viceroy of Argiers,
I know not, Prince, how he is fallen so low,
But if my self, my friends, and all my fortunes
M•…y redeem him home, unto my naked skin
Isle sell my self: and if my wealth
Will not amount so much, Isle leave my self in hostage.
It is the part
Of a most noble friend.
And in these times worthy admiration
I wonder not the Moors so graced this nation,
If all the English equal their virtues.
For this brave Stranger so endeared to thee,
Pass to thy country ransomless and free.
Royal in all things is the duke of Florence.
Such honour is not found in Barbary.
The virtue in these Christians hath converted me,
Which to the world I can no longer smother,
Accept me then a Christian and a brother.
Princes,
These unexpected novelties,
Shall ad unto the high solemnity
Of your best welcome. Worthy Englishman,
And you, the mirror of your sex and nation,
Fair English Elizabeth, as well for virtue
As admired beauty, we'll give you cause, ere
You depart our Court, to say great Fesse
Was either poor, or else not bountiful.
Bashaw, we'll honour your conversion,
With all due rites. But for you beauteous Lady,
Thus much in your behalf we do proclaim,
The fairest Maid ner•… patterned in her life,
So fair a Virgin, and so chaste a wife.

THe King, and Queens Majesty, having given their command for the Invention of a new argument, with the whole change of the Scene, wherein her Majesty, with the like number of her Ladies, purposed a presentation to the King. It was agreed, it should be the celebration of some Rites, done to the Goddess Chloris, who in a general counsel of of the Gods, was proclaimed Goddess of the flowers, according to that of Ouid, in the Fasti.
Arbitrium tu Dea floris habe.
And was to bee stellified on Earth, by an ab∣solved decree from Iupiter, who would have the Earth to be adorned with stars, as well as the Heaven.
Upon this hinge, the whole Invention moved.
The ornament, which went about the Scene, was composed of Foliage, or leaves heightened with gold, and enterwouen with all sorts of flowers; and naked children, playing, and climbing among the branches; and in the midst, a great garland of flowers, in which was writ∣ten, CHLORIDIA.
The Curtain being drawn up, the Scene is discovered, consisting of pleasant hills, planted with young trees, and all the lower banks a∣dorned with flowers. And from some hollow parts of those hills, Fountains come gliding down, which, in the farre-of Land-shape, seemed all to be converted to a river.
Over all, a serene sky, with transparent clouds, giving a great lustre to the whole work, which did imitate the pleasant Spring.
When the Spectators had enough fed their eyes, with the delights of the Scene, in a part of the ayre, a bright cloud begins to break forth; and in it, is sitting a plump Boy, in a change∣ble garment, richly adorned, representing the mild Zephyrus. On the other side of the Scene, in a purplish cloud, appears the Spring, a beau∣tifull Maid, her upper garment greene, under it, a white robe wrought with flowers; A gar∣land on her head.
Here Zephyrus begins his dialogue, calling her forth, and making narration of the Gods decree at large, which she obeys, pretending, it is come to Earth already: and there begun to bee
executed, by the Kings favour, who assists with all bounties, that may bee either urged, as causes, or reasons of the Spring.
Come forth, come forth, the gentle Spring,
And carry the glad news, I bring,
To Earth, our common mother:
It is decreed, by all the Gods
The Heaven, of Earth shall have no odds,
But one shall love another:
Their glories they shall mutual make,
Earth look on Heaven, for Heavens sake;
Their honour's shall bee even:
All emulation cease, and jars;
Jove will have Earth to have her stars
And lights, no less then Heaven.
It is already done, in flowers
As fresh and new as are the hours,
By warmth of yonder Sun.
But will be multiplied on vs,
If from the breath of ZEPHYRVS
Like favour we have won.
Give all to him: His is the dew,
The heate, the humour,
Beloved of the Spring!
The Sun, the Wind, the Verdure!
That wisest Nature cause can call
Of quick'ning any thing.
At which, Zephyrus passes away through the ayre, and the Spring descends to the Earth: and is received by the Naiads, or Nape; who are the Nymph's, Fountains, and Servants of the season—
Fair Maid, but are you come to dwell,
And tarry with is here?
Fresh Fountains, I am come to tell
A tale in yond'soft ear,
Whereof the murmur will do well:
If you your parts will bear.
Our purlings wait upon the Spring.
Go up with me, then: help to sing
The story to the King.
Here the Spring goes up, singing the argument to the King; and the Fountains follow with the close.
Cupped hath taken offence of late
At all the Gods, that of the State,
And in their Council, he was so deserted,
Not to be called into their Guild
But slightly passed by, as a child.
Wherein hee thinks his honour was perverted.
And though his Mother seek to season,
And rectify his rage with reason,
By showing he lives yet under her command,
Rebellious he, doth disobey,
And she hath forced his arms away.
To make him feel the Justice of her hand.
Whereat the Boy, in fury fell,
With all his speed, is gone to hell,
There to excite, and stir up lealousy,
To make a party against the Gods,
And set Heaven, Earth, and Hell at odds.
And raise a chaos of calamity.
The Song ended, the Nymphs fall into a dance, to their voices, and instruments, and so return into the Scene.
A part of the under ground opening, out of it enters a Dwarfe-Post from Hell, riding on a Cur∣tall, with cloven feet, and two Lackeys: These dance, &amp; make the first entry of the Antimasque. Hee alights, and speaks.
Hold my stirrup, my one Lackey; and look to my Curtal, the other: walk him well, Sirrah, while I ex∣patient
my self here in the report of my office! oh the Furies! how I am joyed with the title of it! Postil∣lion of Hell! yet no Mercury. But a mere Cacodae∣mon, sent hither with a packet of news! news! never was Hell so furnished of the commodity of news! Love hath bin lately there, and so entertained by Pluto, and Proserpine, and all the Grandees of the place as, it is there perpetual Holy-day: and a cessation of torment granted, and proclaimed for ever! Halfe-famish'd Tantalus is fallen to his fruit, with that appetite, as it threaten's to undo the whole company of Costard∣mungers, and he's ariuer before him, running excellent wine lxion is loosed from his wheel, and turned Dancer, does nothing but cut capreols, fetch friskals, and leads Laualtos, with the Lamiae! Sisyphus he's left rolling the stone, and is grown a Mr. bowler; challenges all the prime gamesters, Parsons in hell, and gives them odds: upon Tityus his breast, that (for fix of the nine aeres) is counted the subtlest bowling-ground in all Tartary. All the Furies are at a game called nine pins, or keels, made of old usurers bones, and their souls looking on with delight, and betting on the game. Never was there such freedom of sport. Danaus daughters have broke their bottomelesse tubs, and made bonfires of them. All is turned triumph there. Had hell gates bin kept with half that strictness as the entry here he's bin to night,
Pluto would have had but a cola Court, &amp; Proserpine a thin presence, though both have a vast territory We had such a stir to get in, I and my Curtal, and my two Lackeys all ventured through the eye of a Spanish needle, we had never come in else, &amp; that was by the fa∣uour of one of the guard who was a womans-tayler, and held op the passage. Cupped by commission hath carried Iealoufie from Hell, Disdain, Fear, and Dissimula∣tion, with other Goblins, to trouble the Gods. And I am sent after post, to raise Tempest, Winds, Lightnings, Thunder, Rain, and Snow, for some new exploit they have against the Earth, and the Goddess Chloris, Queen of the flowers, and Mistress of the Spring. For joy of which I will return to my self, mount my Bidet, in a dance; and corvette upon my Curtal.
The speech ended, the Postilion mounts his Curtal, and with his Lackeys, dances forth as hee came in.
Cupped, Jealousy, Disdain, Fear, and Dissimula∣tion, dance together.
The Queens Dwarf, richly apparelled, as
a Prince of Hell, attended by 6 infernal Spirits; He first dances alone, and then the Spirits: all ex∣pressing their joy, for Cupids coming among them.
Here the Scene changes, into a horrid storm. Out of which enters the Nymph Tempest, with four Winds. they dance.
Lightnings, 3 in number, their habits gliste ring, expressing that effect, in their motion.
Thunder alone dancing the tunes to a noise, mixed, and imitating thunder.
Rain, presented by 5 persons all swollen, and clouded over, their hair flagging, as if they were wet, and in their hands, balls full of sweet water, which, as they dance, sprinkle all the room.
Seven with rugged white heads, and beards,
〈1 letter duplicate〉
〈1 letter duplicate〉
to express Snow, with flakes on their garments, mixed wi•h hail. These having danced, return into the stormy Scene, whence they came.
Here, by the providence of Iuno, the tempest on an instant cease: And the Scene is changed into a delicious place, figuring the bower of Chloris. Where, in an arbour fayn'd of Gold-smiths work, the ornament of which was borne up with Terms of Satyrs, beautified with Festones, garlands, and all sorts of fragrant flowers. Beyond all this, in the sky a far of appeared a Rainbow, In the most eminent place of the Bower, sate the Goddess Chloris, accompanied with fourteen Nymphs, their apparel white, embroidered, with silver, trimmed at the shoulders with great leaves of greene, embroidered with gold, falling one under the o∣there. And of the same work were their bases, their head-'tires of flowers, mixed with silver, and gold, with some sprigs of Aegrets among, and from the top of their dressing, a thin veil han∣ging down.
All which beheld,
Run out, all the Floods, in joy with your silver feet;
And hast to meet, the enamoured Spring;
For whom the warbling Fountains sing:
The story of the flowers; preserved by the Hours;
At Iuno's soft command, and Iris showers;
Sent to quench jealousy, and all those powers
Of Loves rebellious war:
Whilst Chloris sits a shining star
To crown, and grace our jolly song, made long,
To the notes, that we bring, to glad the Spring.
Which ended, the Goddess, and her Nymphs de∣scend the degrees, into the room, and dance the entry of the grand-masque.
Tell a truth, gay Spring, let vs know
What feet they were, that so
Impres't the Earth, and made such various flowers to grow!
She that led, a Queen was at least,
Or a Goddess, above the rest:
And all their graces, in her self expressed!
O'it were a fame, to know her name!
Whether she were the root;
Or they did take th'impression, from her foot.
Which done,
The farther Prospect of the Scene changes into ayre, with a low Land-shape, in part covered with clouds: And in that instant, the Heaven opening, Iuno, and Iris are seen, and aboue them many aerie spirits, sitting in the clouds.
Now Iuno, and the Ayre shall know
The truth of what is done below,
From our discolourd bow. Iris, what news?
The ayre is clear, your bow can tell,
Chloris renowned, Spite fled to Hell;
The business all is well. And Cupped sues-
For pardon. Do's hee?
Hee sheds tears
More then your Birds have eyes.
The Gods have ears.
Offences, made against the Deities,
Are soon forgot
If who offends, be wife.
Here, out of the Earth, arises a Hill, and on the top of it, a globe, on which Fame is seen standing with her trumpet, in her hand; and on the Hill, are seated four Persons, presenting, Poesy, History, Architecture, and Sculpture: who together with the Nymphs, Floods, and Fountains, make a full Quire, at which, Fame begins to mount, and moo∣uing her wings, flies, singing up to Heaven:
Rise golden Fame, and give thy name a birth
From great and generous actions, done on Earth.
The life of Fame is action.
Understood
That action must be virtuous, great, and good!
Virtue it self by Fame is of't protected,
And dies despised—
Where the Fems neglected
Who hath not heard of Chloris, and her bower
Fair Iris act, employed by Iuno's power
To guard the Spring, and prosper every flower,
Whom Jealousy and Hell thought to devour?
Great actions of't obscured by time, may lye,
Or envy—
But they last to memory.
Wee that sustain thee, Learned Poesy
And I, her sister, severe History.
With Architecture, who will raise thee high,
And Sculpture, that can keep thee from to dye.
All help lift thee to eternity.
And Iuno, through the ayre, doth make thy way,
By her serenest Messenger of Day.
Thus Fame ascend's, by all degrees, to Heaven:
And leaves a light, here, brighter, then the seven.
Let all applaud the sight.
Ayre first, that gave the bright
Reflections, Day or Night!
With these supports of Fame,
That keep alive her name!
The beauties of the Spring.
Fount's, Rivers, every thing:
From the height of all,
To the Waters fall-
Resound, and sing
The honour's of his Chloris, to the King.
Chloris, the Queen of Flowers;
The sweetness of all Showers;
The ornament of Bowers;
The top of Par-amours!
Fame, being hidden in the clouds, the hill sinks: and the Heaven closes.

WHereas all Repraesentations, especially those of this nature in court, public Spectacles, either have been, or ought to be the mirrors of mans life, whose ends, for the excellence of their exhibitors (as being the dona∣tiues, of great Princes, to their people) ought al∣ways to carry a mixture of profit, with them, no less then delight; Wee, the Inuentors, being com∣manded from the King, to think on some thing worthy of his Majesties putting in act, with a sele∣cted company of his Lords, and Gentlemen, cal∣led to the assistance: For the honour of his Court, and the dignity of that heroic love, and regal respect borne by him to his unmatchable Lady, and Spouse, the Queens Majesty, after some de∣bate of cogitation with our selves, resolved on this following argument.
First, that a Person, bone ominis, of a good cha∣racter, as Euphemus, sent down from Heaven to Callipolis, which is understood the City of Beauty
or Goodness, should come in; and, finding her Ma∣iesty there enthroned, declare unto her, that Love who was wont to be respected as a special Deity in Court, and Tutelar God of the place, had of late received an advertisement, that in the suburbs, or skirts of Callipolis, were crept in certain Sectaries, or deprau'd Lovers, who neither knew the name, or nature of love rightly, yet boasted themselves his followers, when they were fitter to be called his Furies: their whole life being a con∣tinew'd vertigo, or rather a torture on the wheel of Love, then any motion either of order or mea∣sure. When suddenly they leap forth below, a Mistress leading them, and with antique gesticu∣lotion, and action, after the manner of the old Pantomime, they dance over a distracted comoedy of Love, expressing their confused affections, in the Scenical persons, and habits, of the four prime European Nations.
A glorious boasting Lover.
A whining balloting Lover.
An adventurous Romance Lover.
A fantastic vmbrageous Lover.
A bribing corrupt Lover.
A froward jealous Lover.
A sordid illiberal Lover.
A proud skorne-full Lover.
An angry quarrelling Lover.
A melancholic despairing Lover.
An envious unquiet Lover.
A sensual brute Lover.
Joy, joy to mortals, the rejoicing fires
Of gladness, smile in your dilated hearts!
Whilst Love presents a world of chaste defers,
Which may produce a harmony of parts!
Love is the right affection of the mind,
The noble appetite of what is best:
Desire of union with the thing designed,
But in fruition of it cannot rest.
The Father plenty is, the Mother want, 
Plenty the beauty, which it wants, draws;
Want yields it self: affording what is scant.
So, both affections are the vnion's cause.
But, rest not here. For Love hath larger scopes,
New joys, new pleasures, of as fresh a date
As are his minutes: and, in him no hopes
Are pure, but those hee can perpetuate.
To you that are by excellence a Queen!
The top of beauty! but, of such an ayre,
As, only by the minds eye, may bee seen
Your enter-wouen lines of good, and fair!
Vouchsafe to grace Loves triumph here, to night,
Through all the streets of your Callipolis;
Which by the splendour of your rays made bright
The seat, and region of all beauty is.
Love, in perfection, longs to appear
But prays, of favour, he be not called on,
Till all the suburbs, and the skirts bee clear
Of perturbations, and th'infection gon.
Then will he flow forth, like a rich perfume
Into your nostrils! or some sweeter sound
Of melting musique, that shall not consume
Within the ear, but run the mazes round.
Mean time, wee make lustration of the place,
And with our solemn fires, and waters prove
T'haue frighted, hence, the weak diseased race
Of those were tortured on the wheel of love.
1The glorious,2 whining,3 the adventurous fool,
4Phantastique,5 bribing, and the6 jealous ass
1The sordid,2 scornful,3 and the angry mule
4The melancholic,5 dull, and envious mass,
With all the rest, that in the sensual school
Of lust, for their degree of brute may pass.
All which are vapor'd hence.
No loves, but slaves to sense:
Mere cattle, and not men.
Sound, sound, and treble all our joys again,
Who had the power, and vertueto remove
Such monsters from the labyrinth of love.
1. The provident.
 
2. The judicious.
3. The secret.
 
4. The valiant.
5. The witty.
 
6. The jovial.
7. The secure.
15. The Heroical,
8. The substantial.
9. The modest.
 
10. The candid.
11. The courteous.
 
12. The elegant.
13. The rational.
 
14. The magnificent.
Here, stay a while: This! this
The Temple of all Beauty is!
Here, perfect Lovers, you must pay
First-fruits; and on these altars lay
(The Ladies breast's) your ample vows,
Such, as Love brings, and Beauty best allows!
For Love, without his object, soon is gone:
Love must have answering love, to look upon.
To you, best Judge then, of perfection!
The Queen, of what is wonder, in the place!
Pure object, of Heroic Love, alone!
The center of proportion—!
Sweetness.
Grace.?
Deign to receive all lines of love in one.
And by reflecting of them fill this space.
Till it a circle of those glories prove,
Fit to be sought in Beauty, found by Love.
Where Love is mutual, still
All things in order move,
The circle of the will
Is the true sphere of Love.
Advance, you gentler Cupids, then advance,
And show your just perfections in your dance.
The Cupids dance their dance.
And the Masquers their-entry.
So love, emergent out of Chaos brought the world to light!
And gently moving on the waters, wrought all form to fight!
Loves appetite
Did beauty first excite:
And left imprinted in the ayre,
Those signatures of good, and fair,
Which since have flowed, flowed forth upon the sense,
To wonder first, and then to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!
And Neptune too
Shows what his waives can doe:
To call the Muses all to play,
And sing the birth of Venus day,
Which from the Sea flowed, forth upon the sense
To wonder first, and next to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!
Hast daughter Venus hast, and come away:
All powers, that govern marriage, pray That you will lend your light
Unto the constellation of this night.
Hymen.
And Iuno.
And the Genius call,
Your father Iupiter,
And all
That bless, or honour holy nuptial.
Here, here I present am
Both in my g•rdle, and my flame:
Wherein are woven all the powers
The Graces gave me, or the Hours
(My nources once) with all the arts
Of gaining, and of holding hearts:
And these with I descend.
But, to your influences, first commend
The vow, I go to take
On earth, for perfect love and beauties sake!
Beauty and Love, whose story is mysteriall,
In yonder Palme-tree, and the Crown imperial,
Doe from the Rose, and Lily so delicious,
Promise a shade, shall ever be propitious
To both the Kingdoms. But to Britains Genius
The snaky rod, and serpents of Cyllenius
Bring not more peace, then these, who so united be
By Love, as with it Earth and Heaven delighted be.
And who this King, and Queen would well historify,
Need only speak their names: Those them will glorify.
MARY, and CHARLES, CHARLES, with his MARY, na∣med are
And all the rest of Loves, or Princes famed are.

CAndid spectators, you that are invited
Tô see the Lily and the Rose united;
Consider that this Comedy of ours,
A Nosegay is composed of sundry flowers.
Which we selected with some small expense
Of time, to please each one that hath a sense:
But if this glorious Cynic crown contains
A head that wants a competence of brains,
We could desire his absence, and be glad
That one more wise his seat or standing had.
Because experience shows that such as he,
The greatest enemies to science be:
For what the Noddy cannot understand,
He will seek to disparage underhand,
Branding eternal lines with black disgrace,
Because they doe his numbers smooth surpass.
For this bold Critic would have the world know it,
That he no small fool is, though a small Poet.
But with Icarean wings, why strives he thus,
To mount Parnassus tops with Pegasus?
When it is most meet that he with Asses meek,
His pasture at the Mountains feet should seek,
On thistles wilde, and brakes there let him knabble,
While Pegasus does make the skies his stable.
But you (judicious friends) that well descry
The strength and worth of noble Poesy;
That can discreetly judge of what is done,
We crave your favour and attention,
And shall applaud the fortune of our Muse,
If ought worth your acceptance we produce.
TS the worlds eye not yet asleep?
Hath love not yet put on his starry night-cap?
No; nor Iuno her spangled smock?
What, hath Hesperus forgot tolight heavens tapers up?
Or be the Charret wheels of Night o'er laden with the leaden weights of sleep,
That she delays to throw her misty veyle upon the face of things?
Blind Ignorance that grop'st in Cymerian darkness,
That lie enveloped in the shads of everlasting night,
That want those glorious spectacles of Nature,
Those Crystalline spheres that should illumine
Thy Microcosmus,
Why dost thou thus malign the guiltless light,
She being the fairest Creature that Nature ever made?
I hate her because she is light: I say she is
The Mistress of disquiet and unrest, and breeds
More troubles in the world then one of my young
Hungry Lawyers doth in a Common-wealth,
Or a schismatical selfeconceited Coxcomb in an ancient Corporation.
Oh that I could Vlysses-like burn out the eye
Of that Celestial Polypheme;
Or raise dull Chaos from Demogorgons Cell
To quench the worlds unnecessary luminaries.
Bold Ignorance, thou Idol of these times
That o'er a woollen wit, oft wear a satin Cap:
And sometimes at our Bacchanalian feasts
Appear'st as brave as a Canonical Saint
In a Calendar: I hug thy resolution, stupid devil,
That dost with generous malice amply supply
What is defective in thy intellect:
But if thou'lt give my faithful Counsel leave
For to divert the torrent of thy wrath,
Then lend a facile ear to my advice:
Bend not thy bootless hate against that Orb of light,
Whose mighty flames will scorch the impious wings
Of those Nocturnal birds, that shall attempt
With talons most profane, to injure his bright beauty.
A meaner object than this, shall satisfy
Thy wrath, and my displeasure.
This is the day whereon the new society of
Florists, have determined to keep their annual festivals:
Whose pompous Celebration hath wont to eclipse
All feasts besides: th'Olympian games,
And Isthmian plays, with all those Ludicrous
And Ludibrious Combats, are but mere Puppet plays
To this grand feast, for Art and nature both have tried
To make this Feast surpass all feasts beside.
Unite thy force with mine, then ten to one
We shall disturb their mirth, ever we have done.
Then mischief lend me all thy guilty nerves:
Let flames of boundless fury quite dispel
Lethaean dullness from my Clouded brain.
Assist our great design, ye subterraneous powers,
That utterly abhor to view the glaring light:
Let not the weakness of my Crazed intellectuals,
Nor yet this loathed deficiency of my sense,
Be prejudicial to the bent of our design:
Poneria, act thy part, for I am thine.
(RHodon) my honoured, soule-united friend,
Cast oft that dusky melancholy veyle.
Too vile a robe for thy majestic brow,
Blast not the pride of Hyblas happiness
With thy offensive passion.
Nay, good Acanthus, did love ere offend any?
And art not thou the map of loves calamity?
Witness those crystal bowls of thy bright eyne,
Which I have seen swelled up with brinish tears,
Prepared for sorrows bitter beverage:
Witness those frequent tempests of thy sighs,
Which made thy breast a fiery fea of dolor:
Witn esse those palled cheeks, whose glorious hue
Aurora late envied, and quite despairing
To reach thy beauties height, with Cupped treated,
And him suborned to wound thy generous heart,
(Which no base passion ever durst assault)
That now like pale Narcissus on the brink
Of the beguilding stream, thou lie a dying.
I tell thee (brazen Colossi) marble statue,
Whose heart loves darts could never penetrate;
Love is the Prince of all affections,
And like the element of fire transcends
His brothers in activity and splendour.
It is a fire indeed, that doth consume
All virtuous actions; that feeds upon men's souls
Like the fiend Eurynomus upon dead carcasses;
That makes the microcosmus a mere Chaos.
It is the Remora of all noble enterprises,
And the Lernaean fen which breeds a Hydra,
Crested with a thousand inconveniences.
Let me ne'er inherit more then my Fathers hempland,
Or ne'er be owner of more wit then some elder brothers,
If I think not Cupped the most pernicious deity
Among all the Olympian Senators.
Oh that I had but Stentors lungs,
To thunder out the vanity of that idol.
Now I hope you have railed your self out of breath,
And therefore I may now have time to speak:
Thus it is, dear friend Acanthus, I confess
That once I loved the Lady Eglantine,
Whose rare endowments both of art and nature,
Well corresponding with high birth and fortune,
Did moderately attract my sincere love,
Which love conspiring with a strong desire,
To see the Customs of some foreign Nations,
And know the manners of people far remote,
Made me to greet the Princely Dame
With a personal visitation.
Then my indulgent stars did me advise,
For to suspend my suit: whose Counsel I obeyed.
But trust me, friend, thou were too much mistaken,
To think that love had scorched or singed so much
The wings of reason; that I must needs fall,
And perish in the fornace of despair.
Thou art a bad constructor of my thoughts,
If that thou think it is love which makes me sad:
Yea, thou, oft-times, dost take thy marks amiss,
To think me sad; perhaps, when as my mind
(Upraised above the sphere of terrene things)
Is ravished with Celestial Contemplation;
For earthly passion hath no power at all
To work upon an elevated soul.
Passions are stars to lower orbs confined;
Scorching an earthly, not a heavenly mind.
Yet am I not so much a Stoic, or a Stock,
To plume the pinions of th'immortall soul,
Who while she's Cloistered in this Cell of Clay,
Moves with the wings of the affections:
But lest she, like to heedless Icarus,
Should soar too high a pitch; or like young Phaeton,
Should shape her Course too low, Jove hath appointed
Wise Virtue for to regulate her flight.
Of these affections, love the Empress is;
Who, while she stands submiss to reasons lore,
Doth keep the Fabric of the little world in frame.
Love is the genial goddess, the Lucina
Which doth produce each honourable achievement,
Which this true axiom evidently proves,
Nobilitas sub amore iacet.
Had not the spriteful flames of love, egged on
That Thehan Kilcrow mighty Hercules,
To brave adventures; he, perhaps, had died
As much inglorious as did base Thersites.
Had not the fair Andromache beheld,
From Trojan Towers, Hectors valiant acts
Among the Greeks, amid the Phrygian fields;
The gallant Dames of Troy then might, perchance,
Most justly have preferred Achilles far before him.
Tic this heroical passion that incends
The sparks of honour in each noble mind;
Making dull sluggards study industry;
And animating each unlearned head
To toil in Arts and liberal Sciences,
Even to the high degree of rare proficiency.
Then cease Acanthus with thy lawless tongue,
True loves Condition to malign or wrong.
Thou zealous patron of the winged Boy,
Well hast thou pleaded thy blind Archers Case;
Pray Jove thou moist deserve a lusty fee
For this Herculean labour of thy tongue.
Surcease these malapert invectives, friend,
Cupped is armed with fire and arrows keen,
To be evinced on those that shall him spleen.
When Sol shall make the Eastern Seas his bed,
When Wolves and Sheep shall be together fed;
When Stars shall fall, and planets cease to wander,
When Iuno proves a Bawd, and Iupiter a Pander;
When Venus shalturn Chaste, and Bacchus become sober,
When fruit in April's ripe, that blossomed in October;
When Prodigals shall money lend on use,
And Usurers prove lavish and profuse;
When Art shall be esteemed, and golden pelf laid down,
When Fame shall tel all truth, &amp; Fortune cease to frown,
To Cupids yoke then I my neck will bow;
Till then, I will not fear loves fatal blow.
Were thou a mere spirit, then I confess,
And think, this resolution might endure;
But so long as thy soul wears robes of earth,
Laced all with veins, that o'er a Crimson deep,
Set forth an Azure bright; needs must thy heart
Yield to the force of Cupids golden dart.
OH impotent desires, allay the sad consort
Of a sublime Fortune, whose most ambitious flames
Disdain to burn in simple Cottages,
Loathing a hard unpolished bed;
But Coveting to shine beneath a Canopy
Of rich Sydonian purple; all embroidered
With purest gold, and oriental Pearls;
In tesselated pavements, and gilded roofs,
Supported by proud artificial Columns,
Of polished Ivory and Marble; doth love delight
There; doth he, like a mighty Tyrant, rage,
Subverting the whole edifice of reason
With his impetuous conflagration:
That this is true, the gentle Shepherdess
Fair Eglantine doth evidently show:
For she, a sister to the great Cynosbatus,
Was Courted lately by the Shepherd Rhodon:
Whose suit she entertained with due respect,
Requiting love with love: but Fate (it seems)
Not condescending that great Hymen should
Accomplish their desires; forbade the Banes,
And Rhodon hath relinquished his suit;
And is returned to Hybla sweet; whose flowery vales
Began to droop, and wither in his absence.
But Eglantine remains disconsolate;
Like to a Turtle that hath lost her mate.
See where she comes, expressing in her face
A perfect Map of melancholy:
I will retire, because I well desery,
Shoe's out of love with all society.
Address thy self sweet warbling Instrument,
My sorrows sad Companion; to tune forth
Thy melancholy notes; somewhat to slake
Those furious flames that scorch my tender heart.
Upon the black Rock of despair
My youthful joys are perished quite,
My hopes are vanished into ayre,
My day is turned to gloomy night:
For since my Rhodon dear is gone,
Hope, light, nor comfort, have I none.
A Cell, where grief the Landlord is,
Shall be my palace of delight;
Where I will woo with votes and sighs,
Sweet death to end my sorrows quite;
Since I have lost my Rhodon dear,
Deaths fleshless arms why should I fear?
What time shall end thy sorrows, sweetest Eglantine?
Such grief as mine cannot be cured by time.
But when the gentle fates shall disembogue
My weary soul, and that Celestial substance free
From irksome manacles of clay; then may I find,
If not a sweet repose in blessed Elysium,
Yet some refrigeration in those shades,
Where Dido and Hypsiphile do wander.
Thou gentle goddess of the woods &amp; mountains,
That in the woods and mountains art adored,
The Maiden patronise of chaste desires,
Who art for chastity renowned most,
Tresgrand Diana, who hast power to cure
The rankling wounds of Cupids golden arrows;
Thy precious balsam deign thou to apply,
Unto the heart of woeful Eglantine;
Then we thy gracious favour will requite
With a young Kid, than new fallen snow more white.
MY honoured friend, most noble Martagon,
Who meanwhile did with thy imperial power
Command the mountains proud, and humble plains
Of happy Thessaly: who hath eclipsed
The splendour of thy light, and clipped those wings
That did ore-shade these fields from East to West.
Each Shepherd that was wont to feed his flocks
Upon these fertile meads, was wont whilere
To pay the tribute of his primest lambs.
But now as one couped in an angle up,
Thou art compelled to satisfy thy self,
With a small portion of that sovereignty
Which thou did erst enjoy.
Dear friend Cynosbatus, if that the world
Had bin composed in a cubicke form
And not orbicular; or if this globe
Were destined to be ought else then fortunes ball,
By alterations racket banded to and fro;
Then justly might thou wonder to behold
My present state, so short of my precedent height.
Nor doth this monster, Change, bear sway alone,
Ore elements, men, beasts, and plants,
But those celestial bodies that are framed
Of purer constitutions, are compelled
To be obedient to her awful doom.
Rear up thy eyes unto the spangled cope,
And there behold Ioves starre-enchased belt,
The glittering Zodiac wonderfully changed
In a few thousand years:
For those fixed stars, which like a Diamond clear,
Adorn the baudricke of the Thunderer,
Have wandered from their former stations.
Witness the golden Ram who now is gone astray,
And shouldered hath the Creation Bull; and he
Those twins of Jove so sore hath butted,
That they have crushed the Crab, and thrust him quite
Into the den of the Nemaean Lyon.
Thus by the change of these superior bodies,
Strange alterations in the world are wrought,
Great Empires maimed, &amp; Kingdoms brought to nought.
And that auspicious lamp, who freely lends
His light to lesser fires, the prince of generation,
Even Sol himself, is five degrees declined,
Since learned Ptolome did take his height.
But if Egyptian wizards we may trust,
Who in Astrology wont to excel;
By them tic told, that four times they have seen
That glorious Charioteer flit from his place:
Twice hath he rose (they say) where now he sets,
And twice declined where he now doth rise.
If these Celestial powers, whose influence
Commands terrestrial substances,
Be object to mutation, then needs must
Sublunar things, submit themselves to change.
Then wonder not good friend Cynosbatus,
To see my state and power diminished thus.
Tic true dear Martagon, experience shows
That alteration every day brings forth
A new birth of effects.
But I prethe friend, satisfy me in one thing.
My bosome's yours, take from that Cabinet
The choicest secret that can pleasure you:
Tell me in what your will's to be resolved.
There is a rumour spread through Thessaly,
That your fair sister, Madame Eglantine,
Shall be espoused to the Shepherd Rhodon,
The prince of all the Swains that dwell on Hybla.
From no ill grounds this rumour sprang, thou••
The Fates did cross what was by us intended.
Then there's no expectation of my Nuptial rite
No; ell's dissolved.
I thank my Stars for that.
Your reason, Noble friend.
A kin he is to that male spirited Dame,
That stout Virago, that proud Shepherdess
Called Violetta: who complains of wrongs
Late suffered at my hands:
And hoe's the man by whom she hopes
To be avenged on me, for this pretended injury;
And had he matched your sister, sweet Eglantine,
Then might I have had cause for to suspect
Your love not to be sound, since you accepted
So great a so of mine, for your near friend.
Then I am glad the Fates would not agree
That I should lose so true a friend as thee.
Never till now, did my Hymettus flourish:
More blessed effects hath thy sweet presence wrought,
(Honoured Rhodon) then could have been produced
By moist-wing'd Zephyrus, or Favonius,
Who fanns our flowers with his gentle breath.
Thanks, good Anthophotus:
Nor doth our sister Iris hold her self
Meanly engaged to you, for this your gracious visit.
To be the meanest servant of so sweet a saint,
Is the full height and scope of my ambition.
Fair Sr. I wish you would be pleased t'imploy
Your service on an object of more worth.
Dissemble not, admired Shepherdess;
For thou art she, that art as far beyond
That light piece of beauty, Helen of Greece,
In outward perfections; as she was short of thee in inward graces.
Yea, had those fifty Kings that did for her
Engage themselves in a long tedious war,
Seen but the Model of thy rare beauty,
Drawn by the hand of but a rude painter,
Doubtless, they had their honours forfeited,
And broke that sacred oath which they had tan.
Their work in hand they had relinquished quite,
And left the walls of wretched Troy untouched;
For each attracted with thy beauties splendour,
No Seas nor perils would have left unpast,
To find thee in the furthest angle of the world.
Could my perfections, valued at the highest rate,
But countervail a dram of your great worth,
Then should I think my self borne under stars
Most happy and auspicious.
Surcease your Complements, dear Rhodon,
Let empty Casks, and hollow Cymbals speak
That airy language, which unworthy is
Of your realities.
Pardon me, gentle Sir: this radiant star,
My judgements feeble eyes did dazzle so,
That I was forced to speak what passion did inform me.
Which is the Shepherd Rhodon?
I am the man.
Then you are he whom Violetta greets.
How fares my sister?
This letter shall relate what I can never utter.
Pray Jove we have good news, me thinks I saw
A pallid horror settled in the face
Of the sad Messenger: be it good or ill,
We are resolved to see it, come what will.
I Violetta much distressed
By Martagon my mortal foe,
Your succour humbly doe request,
To set me free frrm servile woe.
Our flowers he hath trampled on,
Our Gardens turned to thickets wilde;
Our fields and Meads he hath ore-run,
That we are forced to live exiled.
We therefore doe your aide implore,
Vs to our freedom to restore.
It was for no good, that the late shag haired Comet
With his erected staring looks, did over-looke
Our frighted flocks, who all amazed poor wretches
At such a horrid unexpected sight,
Ere Hesperus began from the west to peep,
Half empty, did retire unto their folds again:
Nor were those idle fires which late we saw,
Hang like a flaming canopy above us,
When we did walk the round about our folds,
To keep the warwolfe from our Lambs by night.
But is it possible that man should be so savage,
To vent his rage upon a silly woman?
It is no wonder gentle sir at all:
For when Prometheus formed his man of clay,
Tic said that he did to his stomach add,
The raging fury of a Lyon fierce.
Tic true: but histories report that a Lyon did,
The suppliant Getulian virgin spare;
Scorning to make so innocent a creature
His pray or quarry.
Foul shame and infamy it is, god wot,
That manly might should women weak oppose,
Whom they by right for life ought to defend.
(Rhodon) doe thou but say Amen: and I will in
An instant raise our spriteful youth,
And lead them on with such a vigorous force
Against the most unhumane Martagon;
That we will pull the Craven from his nest,
Disrobing him of all his borrowed plumes,
And repossessing Violetta of her own.
In actions of such consequence as this,
We must not be too precipicious,
Mature deliberation must conclude
What shall be done in such a maine design:
The stately Steed that with a full career
Attempts to mount the brow of the steep hill,
Oft breaks his wind, ere he can reach the height.
But the slow snail without or harm, or peril,
In time ascends unto the mountains top,
For that true love we owe to Thessaly,
In which affection all we are engaged;
We by a friendly treaty will endeavour
To bring the usurper to a restitution.
But if the Olive branch will doe no good,
Then let the scourge of war it self disclose;
They that our friendship scorn, must be our foes.
And if my right hand fail to second thee,
Then for a Peasant let me counted be.
Nay, stay fair Nymph, I would request
A private Conference with you.
If that I could with my affairs dispense,
I gladly should embrace your Conference:
But my occasions bid me hast away;
Sweet Sr, adieu; I can no longer stay.
I that of late was made of Scythian snow,
And Hyperborean ice, am now quite thawed
In the incessant flames of hot desire.
A new Vesuvius burns within my breast,
But shall I overturn those noble trophies
Which I most firmly have on virtue sounded;
Or shall I singe the wings of reason so,
In the outrageous flames of passion;
That I must needs fall down and perish quite
In the black hideous gulf of deep despair,
No: no: I will not,
Of this I am resolved whatso're befall,
Or not to love too much, or not at all.
BOld foolish wickedness is that
Which walks by day, exposed to the world's eye.
Sin is the daughter of the darkest night,
And therefore doth abhor to come to light.
Give me that cole black sin that can lye hid.
Under the candid robes of seeing sanctity;
Which dares put out the perspicacious eyes
Of those that shall attempt to find her out.
Come dull Agnostus, let us disguise our selves
And be prepared to act some stratagem
To eclipse the glory of these festivals.
This robe of virtue doth belong to me;
This goodly veil shall hide my black intents.
Thus personated, I durst undertake
To rend a well woven state in factious pieces;
To win the ears of mighty Potentates;
And hood-winke Kings, that they should neither see
To doe what's just, nor hear the piteous cries
Of those that are oppressed.
But that thou, Agnostus, moist second my designs,
It is very fit thou should be thus accoutred.
My dear Poneria, I am yours.
Then first unto thy chin we must apply
This Philosophical beesome.
Now is the old proverb really performed,
More hair than wit.
How like a Senator he looks?
What a world of gravity's harboured in that beard?
Surely the world can take him for no other
Than the third Cato that should fall from heaven.
But here's the Ensign of learning,
The badge of the seven Liberal Sciences,
Operculum ingenij, the silken Case of wit,
The Cap of knowledge; Clap this upon thy
Empty hog shed, put this on, and then thy head
Will become a Helicon, and thy brain a Pyrene.
It fits me exceeding well.
Dost not perceive thy head begin to ache
With mere abundance of knowledge?
Now, me thinks, I could confute a College of Divines
A Synod of Doctors, a Lycaeum of Philosophers;
Yet me thinks my brains are not right,
And somewhat too weak to maintain a paradox.
Away fond idiot, doe not conceit
That this Cap can infuse any thing real into thy pate,
That is incapable of all art and science.
Under the protection of this Cap, thou moist be bold
To traduce thy betters, to censure the best,
To decide controversies without discretion,
To torment all companies with thy discourse,
And weary ears of iron with thy impertinences;
Doe but wear this head-peece over the Coif of
Selfe-conceit (always provided) that thou forget
Not to leave off a brazen face; and I dare
Undertake it, thou in a short time, shalt gain
More respect (especially among Plebeian Coxcombs)
Then ever Pythagoras, had of his auditors.
I am thy slave, divine Poneria:
Oh admirable rare Artist that I am!
But yet, me thinks, there's somewhat else to doe
To make thee more accomplished and complete.
Slight, the political gown; I had as clean forgot it▪
As the time since I lost my maiden▪ head.
Here it is: dispatch. and put it on,
And then be reputed both grave,—
Learned, and wise.
Doubtless it will become thee exceeding well.
Now looks he not like a maine stud of a Corporation?
How heavy is the burden of authority?
It is true, authority is heavy, I confess,
But not so heavy but an Ass may beare't.
Since now, Agnostus, that we are well fitted
With habits meet, to act what we intend;
Thou seeming like a grave and learned Sire;
Though thou indeed then that be nothing less,
And I like to a virtuous maiden dight,
Though I all virtue deeply doe abhor;
We thus disguised, will all the world delude,
And set the flowers at odds among themselves,
That they in civil enmities embroiled,
Shall of their pride and glories be despoiled.
TO hinder the conjunction of those stars,
We must try all our skill, Cynosbatus.
I jealous am of their malign aspect,
And therefore hold it best to take away
That cause which may produce such bad effects;
For I shall never cease t'applaud his skill,
That in the shell, the Cockatrice doth kill.
The Serpent will be hatched, I shrewdly fear,
Ever we the mischief can prevent, if thus
We should delay to act our purposes:
For late, a ccrtaine rumour, through my ear,
Did strike me to the heart; when it was reported
That Rhodon on Hymettus hill was seen;
Where by Anthophotus, and his sister Iris,
He was with such solemnity received,
That all surmise there is a match intended
Between the Shepherd Rhodon and fair Iris.
If once they be conjoined in Hymens rites,
Then all our toyle's ridiculous and vain;
For Hymens obligations are (we see)
Seldom by any cancelled, but by death.
Then let us set some Stratagem abroach,
The Cords of their new amity to break.
The tender twig may easily be broke,
But who's so strong to bow the sturdy Ok.
Our friends will say (if we procrastinate)
That, like the Troians, we were wise too late.
SInce that the gods will not my woe redress,
Since men are altogether pitiless,
Ye silent ghosts unto my plaints give ear;
Give ear (I say, ye ghosts) if ghosts can hear:
And listen to my plaints that doe excel
The dol'rous tune of ravished Philomel.
Now let Ixions wheel stand still a while,
Let Danaus daughters now surcease their toil:
Let Sisyphus rest on his restless stone,
Let not the Apples fly from Plotas son;
And let the full gorged Vulture cease to tear
The growing liver of the ravisher;
Let these behold my sorrows, and confess
Their pains doe far come short of my distress.
Were I but Lady of more wealthy store
Then ever the Sun beheld; or had I more
Then Midas ever desired; I would (in brief)
Give all to be delivered from this grief.
Rocks of rich Indian pearl, shores paved with gems,
Mountains of gold, and Empires Diadems,
These would I give, yea, and my self to boot,
My self and these prostrating at his foot,
To enjoy him whom I so dearly love.
Aye me, fond love, that art a sweet sower evil,
A pleasant torture, a well-favour'd devil.
But why doe I, weak wretch, prolong my grief?
Why doe I live, since death affords relief?
Doe thou (sweet poniard) all my sorrows ease,
That art a medicine for all grievances,
Assist my hand, thou goddess of revenge,
That on my self, I may my self avenge.
Hold, hold thy hand, fair Shepherdess,
Attempt not to commit a fact so horrid.
What Fury sent you hither, Caitiffes vile,
Thus to prolong my sorrow, and my toil.
No Fury, but your happy Genius
Brought us to these uncomfortable shades,
For to prevent your mischievous intent.
Death is a plaster for all ills (they say)
What mischief then can be in death, I pray.
It is true; death is a mortal wound that cures all wounds
Of body, and of mind: it is the souls potion
That purges her from corporal pollution.
But you must not your own Physician prove,
Not be the Doctor, and the Patient too:
For if thy soul be sickly, and grow weary
Of this unwholesome earthly habitation,
Because this airs spissitude suits not
With her Celestial Constitution,
She must not like a bankrupt Tenant prove,
That flies by night from an unprofitable Farm,
Before the term of his Lease be expired:
But stay till heaven shall give her egress free
Unto the haven of rest and happiness.
Were I not plunged in a grievous plight,
Perhaps I would not think thy counsel light.
Art not thou the sister of Cynosbatus,
Lord of the silver mines, and golden mountains.
And art not thou as fair a Shepherdess
As trips upon the plains of Thessaly?
For being great, I am maligned by Fate,
For being fair, I am unfortunate.
I know thy sorrows, sweetest Eglantine;
Thy Rhodons absence hath wrought all thy woe,
Who now, they say, doth beauteous Iris court.
But if thov wilt make me thy instrument,
I'll undertake to break the match,
If not, renew the love which erst he bare to thee.
Doe this, and I will live (Poneria)
To give thy merit ample satisfaction.
I will adore thy skill, and thee adorn
With what may make thee famous through all Thessaly.
Then banish all these melancholy thoughts,
And deck thy self in thy most sumptuous weeds.
Make hast unto the Fane of gentle Venus,
A pair of Turtles of a snowy hue,
Upon her altars offer thou to her,
And her beseech to intercede for thee
Unto her angry boy: Then shalt thou find
The god and goddess to true lovers kind.
My dear Poneria, I am truly thine.
But tell me, I prethe, what grave Sr. is this
That looks like one of Greases Sages;
His reverent Countenance makes me surmise
That he's a man of sublime qualities.
He is but what he seems, fair Shepherdess:
His head's the officine of art; his tongue
The oracle of truth; he is the man
Whom only Nature hath vouchsas'd to make
Her privy Counsellour.
Those abstruse secrets which no mortal eye
Did ever view, he plainly can descry;
He is the man that's destined to find out
That grand mysterious secret, in whose discovery
So many bold adventurous wits have perished:
I mean the Elixir, the Philosophers precious stone.
Heis the man who by strange policies
Can break the strong Confederacies of Kings,
And overthrow more Empires by his plots,
Then mighty Alexander ever did by strength:
Agnostus is his name, renowned no less
For honesty, than skill in Sciences.
His silence argues something extraordinary.
Belphegor, Zazel, Astragoth, Golguth,
Machon Malortor.
Aye me, Poneria.
Agnostus, not a word more for thy life.
Stay, stay, sweet Eglaentine, and dread no harm,
This is the language which the Persian Magi used
When they with their familiars did converse,
To which he is so frequently accustomed,
That oft he speaks it ever he be aware.
(Agnostus) vouchsafe to use your native language,
That Eglantine may know what you are.
I hope you know your lesson,
Twice twenty times and ten, &amp;c.
Twice twenty times and ten, hath Titan run
Quite through the Zodiac, since I begun
To converse with wise fiends, that I might get
The golden key of Natures Cabinet.
By industry I got immortal same,
For ignorance begets contempt and shame:
So perfect in the Magic Arts I grew,
That natures secrets most abstruse I knew;
The spirits of ayre and earth did me dread,
And did at my venite come with speed;
The silly ghosts from graves I did forth call.
The earth I make to bellow, stars to fall.
The world at my great awful charms did quake,
Nature her self for very fear did shake:
To change midday to midnight, or to cause
Estiuall snows, or break the vipers jaws,
Or to drive rivers back to their spring heads,
And make seas stand unmoved, or to strike dead
The vernal blossom, or the harvest ear:
A man would think these strange conclusions were,
But I account them of small weight: I know
The use of herbs, and whatsoever grow;
The cause to the effect I can apply,
And work strange things by hidden sympathies.
I doe exactly know the compositions
Of unctious Philters, and loves potions:
Figures, suspensions, and legations,
Characters and suffumigations.
For I the virtues of all simples know
From whence; effects that seem impossible I show.
The gall of shriek Owls, &amp; harsh night Ravens tongus
Guts of Panthers, and Chameleons lungs,
A black Bulls eyes, a speckled •oats dried head,
Frankincense, camphor, and white poppie-seed;
Poisonous Melanthion, and a white Cocks blood,
Sweet Myrrh, Bay-berries, precious balsam wood,
A Harts marrow that hath devoured a snake,
And scalps which from a wilde beasts jaws we take,
The bone that lies in the left side of a Frog,
A stone that is bitten with a mad dog.
The Mandrake root, the blood of a black Cat,
A Turtles liver, the brains of a Batt,
Hyaenas heart, the Cockatrices blood,
That are against so many evils good:
The hair of a thief that hangs on a tree;
The nails of ships that wrecked be,
The blood of a wretched man that was slain,
The eyes of a Dragon and Weasels brains.
These precious simples, and a thousand more
I could produce; I have them all in store:
And though they seem to men mere trifling things,
Each one (I vow) ore'weighes ransoms of Kings.
The blindness of these times cannot descry
The virtues rare that in these simples lye.
Enough Agnostus: Now fair Shepherdess,
I hope you have a fair expression
Of this learned mans sublime desert, and art?
I doe admire his skill, and see (by hap)
Good stuff may be beneath a fatten Cap.
KNow Martagon, that as no dynasties can stand,
No Empires long subsist, unless they be
Supported by the Columns of true equity:
So shall that government of thine decay,
Since thy oppression makes the weak a pray.
Tic no oppression for to punish those,
That have transgressed the Laws, as I suppose.
The laws (Colossus) proud, unjust tyrant,
That dost observe nor equity nor law,
But by the torrent of ambition hurried,
Dost act what lawless passion prompts thee to:
What Laws have I transgressed? it is thy might,
That into seeming wrong hath changed our right:
Had Fortune been as just as was our cause,
We that are censured now for breach of Laws,
Maugre thy viprous hate, had now bin free,
And for thy foul injustice censured thee.
And is your pride Virago still so high?
That it doth over-top your misery.
Cannot sorrow strike thee dumb, can no disaster,
The liberty of thy tongue over-master.
Nay, be assured (proud man) not any smart,
Can cure the courage of a valiant heart:
No force a heart of adamant can break;
And losers must, and shall have leave to speak.
No more Acanthus: hear me Martagon:
Wilt thou give Violetta what's her own?
Wilt thou restore her right and due possessions?
And make a recompense for all oppressions,
That happy peace with joy and plenty crowned,
May in the fields of Thessaly be found?
This will I doe,
When seas shall be drunk dry by Phoebus beams,
And when the lesser stars shall drink the streams.
This will I doe,
When of my life and freedom I am weary,
Non minor est virtus quam quae rear parta tueri.
Before this guiltless woman shall endure
Such shameful injuries: thy self assure
Isle empty all these azure rivulets
Of their vermilion streams; and quite discharge
This contemned bulk of mine, of living ayre;
And stretched upon the gelid bed of death,
Isle to the world this Epitaph bequeath,
Here lies a Swain that spent his dearest blood,
To kill a Tyrant for a Virgins good.
Bold hero doe thy worst, what I have won
I ne'er will part withal till life be done.
Tenacious Tyrant, in whose flinty heart
Nor equity, nor justice ere had part:
Assure thy self thy guilty soul shall feel
Revenges hand, armed with a scourge of steel.
well, if I were but once rid of her service,
If I ever served love-sicke mistress again,
I would feed all my life time on Agnus Cactus,
And give all the world leave to let me dye a maid:
I even spoiled a good mother wit
With beating my head about these knick knacks,
Which my mistress, Madam Eglantine
Hath enjoined me to procure her,
For now seduced by the old bawd Poneria,
She thinks to recover her old sweet-heart Rhodon.
Here is a Catalogue as tedious as a Taylors bill,
Of all the devices which I am commanded to provide, videlicet:
Chains, coronets, pendans, bracelets and eare-rings,
Pins, girdles, spangles, embroideries, rings,
Shadows, rebatos, ribbons, ruffs, cuffs and false:
Scarfs, feathers, fans, masks, muffs, laces and calls;
Thin tiffanies. copweb-lawne and fardingals,
Sweet-bals, veils, wimples, glasses, crisping-pins;
Pots, ointments, combs, with poking-sticks &amp; bodkins;
Coifs, gorgets, fringes, rolls, fillets and haire-laces;
Silks, damasks, velvet, tinsels, cloth of gold,
And tissue, with colours of a hundredth fold.
But in her tyres so new fangl'd is she,
That which doth with her humour now agree,
To morrow she dislikes, now doth she swear,
That a loose body is the neatest wear;
But ere an hour be gone, she will protest
A strait gown graces her proportion best:
Now calls she for a boisterous fardingall,
Then to her hips shele have her garments fall:
Now doth she praise a sleeve that's long and wide,
Yet by and by that fashion doth deride:
Sometimes sh'applauds a pavement-sweeping train,
And presently dispraiseth it again.
Now she commends a shallow band so small,
That it may seem scarce any band at all;
But soon to a new fancy doth she reel,
And calls for one as big as a coach-wheele:
She'll wear a flowery coronet to day,
The symbol of her beauties sad decay,
To morrow she a waving plume will try,
The emblem of all female lenity,
Now in her hat, then in her hair she's dressed,
For of all fashions she thinks change the best.
Good fellow servant, honest Clematis,
Let me conclude thy tedious tale with this;
I say the rest less sea and flitting wind,
Are constant in respect of women kind.
Nor in her weeds alone is she so nice,
But rich perfumes she buys at any price.
Storax and Spiknard she burns in her Chamber,
And daubes her self with Civit, Musk and Amber.
With limbecks, viols, pots, her Closet's filled,
Full of strange liquors by rare art distilled:
She hath Vermilion and Antimony,
Cerusse and sublimated Mercury.
Waters she hath to make her face to shine;
Confections eke to clarify her skin;
Lipsalues, and clothes of a pure scarlet dye
She hath, which to her cheeks she doth apply:
Ointments wherewith she pargets ore her face,
And lustrifies her beauties dying grace.
She waters for the Morphewes doth compose,
And many other things, as strange as those;
Some made of Daffodils, some of lees,
Of scarwolfe some, and some of rinds of trees,
With Centory, sower Grapes, and Tarragon,
She makes many a strange lotion:
Her skin she can both supple and refine,
With juice of Lemons and with Turpentine:
The marrow of the Hernshaw and the Dear,
She takes likewise to make her skin look clear:
Sweet waters she distils, which she composes
Of flowers of Oranges, Woodbine or Roses:
The virtue of Iesmine and three-leav'd grass,
She doth imprison in a brittle glass,
With Civet, Musk, and odours far more rare,
These liquors sweet incorporated are:
Lees she can make which turn a hair that's old
Or coloured ill, into a hue of gold.
Of horses, bears, cats, camels, cones, snakes,
Whales, Herons, bettors, strange oils she makes,
With which dame natures errors she corrects,
Using arts help to supply all defects.
She in the milk of Asses bathes her skin,
As did the beautiful Poppy, when
She tempted Narrow to forsake the bed
Of great Octavia, and her self to wed.
If there be any Gentlewoman here,
That will with gracious acceptance use
The service of a tattling Chambermaid,
I would advise her to make choice of this Frisketta,
That is as chaste as Helen, or Corinthian Lais,
As chary of betraying secrets as was Echo:
Oh she would prove a rare Privy Councellor
In some great Ladies privy Chamber.
The perpetual motion for which Artists have so laboured
Is discovered no where so plainly as in her tongue,
Which scarce finds any leisure to rest,
No not when she is asleep:
But of her courtesy she is so charitable,
And so heroically magnificent,
That she will both vouchsafe to commiserate
The lowe estate of an humble groom of the stable,
And also satisfy the desire
Of a high and mighty Gentleman-usher
In a kiss or any other amorous encounter:
Gentlemen believe me in few, she is a pearl,
Whose worth the age cannot value.
If there be any Gentleman here
That will bestow a small pension upon her,
With a kiss or two once a fortnight,
To make her his intelligencer of state
In his wives common-wealth;
I will undertake he shall be able to make good
A faction against his wife,
Had she an Amazons stomach, a Zenobia's,
Or a Xanthippes tongue.
Out you prattling Parachito,
Come you hither to abuse me.
Take this for your pains.
Now thank thy stars, that with a female signature
Did stamp thy sex, audacious strumpet,
Shall I draw? no, now I think ont I will not;
For reason and experience shows, that no man
Ere gained repute by drawing against a woman.
Stripling, dost think I fear a naked blade;
Isle meet thee where thou dare, and whip thee too
For thy unruly tongue, thy sauciness.
Well minion, remember this,
If I doe not cry you quit for this abuse,
Then let me ne'er be trusted:
Your Mistress shall know how you have used me,
So she shall.
Skippiake tell what you can, I weigh't not this,
Isle make you know that you have done amiss.
FOrget you not the powder for your breath,
I took a dram of it this morning,
According to your appointment.
Your pallid cheek requires, in mine opinion,
A deeper tincture of vermilion.
And I am of the same mind:
But it was my Maids fault.
I think she goes about utterly to undo me:
She is as good a servant as ere was
Married to the whipping. post.
I tell you true I would not for twenty crowns
That Rhodon had seen you with this face.
That Ceruse on your brow is extremely dull,
There is no lustre, no resplendence in it.
S'light I have seen often times a stained cloth
Over a smokey chimney in an Alehouse
Present me with a better face.
Nay, I could not for my heart persuade
The wicked pertinacious harlot,
To lay more colour on then pleased her fancy;
Bat if I live I will cashier the queen.
If you doe not, you are no friend to your self.
How lik'st thou the colour of my hair.
Oh that is exceedingly well died.
Me thinks the hue is not high enough.
Nay, pardon me Madam: tic passing well.
The browne hue is the most incomparable colour
For a hair of all other.
Those golden wires that on fair Hero's sholders dangl•
And those fair flaxen threads that made Jove
Dote upon fair Nonacrine,
May not be compared with the lovely browne.
Discreet Poneria, thy wise approbation
Doth give my fancy ample satisfaction.
But hear me Poneria, will you undertake
That I shall meet with the Shepherd Rhodon,
As you oft have promised me.
Fair shepherdess I will.
But it is a thing impossible I fear.
Why so good Eglantine?
Because I hear he deeply is engaged
To Iris, that proud Damsel of Hymettus.
I grant he is: and since things are thus,
I will so act my part, that his new love
Shall be the means to renew that good will
That hath bin heretofore twixt him and you.
Nor Circes drugs, nor all Vlysses wits,
I tell thee Beldam, can accomplish this.
Good daughter undervalue not my skill,
For it is contrived how it shall be effected,
And to satisfy thy curiosity,
I will declare how I have laid the plot.
I prethe bless my ears with this relation.
I will a message bear in Iris name,
Unto the Shepherd Rhodon, which shall show,
That she desires an amorous interview
With him, in such a privacy
That day must not be guilty of it:
A solitary glade shall be the place,
Where you protected by the veil of conscious night,
Instead of Iris shall present your self
Unto the Shepherd Rhodon,
Whom you shall entertain with sweet discourse,
And so comport your self, that he shall think,
You are his dearest Iris.
But to assure him yours, I have provided
A precious Philter of rare efficacy,
Composed according to the rudiments of art.
This shall you cause him to carouse
As water of inestimable worth.
Which done, he is your own;
And Iris then shall be forgotten clean,
As one whom he had ne'er scarce known or seen.
Tic bravely plotted sweet Poneria:
But what hour wilt thou allot for this design.
Provide your self to meet him in the myrtle grove
Upon eleven at night.
Very good.
Now Isle to Rhodon go, and him invite,
To meet you at the appointed place this night.
Now most auspicious be thy stars and mine,
Let all good luck attend our great design.
BUt is the angry swain (sai'st thou) so hot,
Is Rhodon grown so zealous in his sisters cause?
If that his actions with his words agree,
I must expect a sudden storm.
I am resolved to take part in thy fortunes,
Be they the worst that ere to any fell.
Thanks noble friend, then here lets join our hand
In sign of most inseparable bands.
But there's Acanthus a jolly swain,
He frets (they say) like a furious Mirmidon.
In braving language he exceeded so,
That Martagon ne'er saw so bold a foe,
Surcharged with swelling passion, he did vow
To take a full revenge on me and you.
And is the youth so filled with valrous heate?
Who would have thought the frozen mountains could
Have bred so brave a hot-spurre.
These raging Lyons must, Cynosbatus,
Be undermined by some egregious slight;
We must pitch some strong toil for these fierce Beasts,
Where we may take them captive at our pleasure:
For if we should assail them openly,
Much peril then we might incur thereby.
What thy high judgment shall conclude to doe,
I am resolved to condescend unto.
Then hear what I propound. Cynosbatus,
Within a place nigh hand, resides
A Beldam much renowned for sacred skill
In magic mysteries.
She with her awful Charms wonts to call forth
All sorts of noisome Creatures that are bred
In Sandy Lybia, or cold Scythia,
From whom she takes her choice of poison strong.
The Herbs which grow on precipitious Erix,
She with her bloody Sickle crops:
And whatsoever poisonous weed springs on
The craggy top of snowy Caucasus,
That's sprinkled with the blood of wise Prometheus,
She carefully selects;
Those venomes which the warlike Medians, and
The nimble Parthians, or Arabians rich,
Use to anoint their deadly shafts withal.
She doth by Moone-light gather;
Each Herb that in this fertle vernal season
Puts forth its head from Opses pregnant bosom
She searches for; whether the same be bred
In the cold Forest of Hercynea,
Or in the deserts of parched Africa,
What flower so ever doth in his seed or root
Strange causes of great mischief nourish,
She never fails to find out:
Whether the same on banks of Tigris grows,
Or on the sun-burnt brink of warm Hydaspes,
Whose golden channels paved with precious stones;
Some of these herbs she doth by twilight gather,
At midnight some, and some at break of day.
Nor is she ignorant how to apply
The panting heart of the dull melancholy Owl,
Or the breathing entrails cut from a living Cat.
The proudest Swain that lives in Thessaly
Is glad to be obsequious to her will;
For in her power it is to cure or kill.
Unto this reverent Sybill let us go,
And her advice request in this design;
By her instructions let us our actions regulate,
Providing for our own security:
She can divine of all events, and tell
Whether things shall succeed or ill or well.
What thy sound judgement thinks fit to be done,
I condescend to, noble Martagon.
SInce that the proud usurper Martagon
Will not restore what he hath tan away
By force and injury from Violetta,
We are resolved to put on lawful arms,
To swag the pride of that great Termagant;
That of his prowess doth so vainly vaunt.
Therefore dear friends address your selves to show
Your true and faithful fortitudes, for know
An ignominious peace may not compare,
With any just and honourable war.
Out upon this Fabian valour,
These tedious cunctations: I tell thee Rhodon,
I must needs chide thee for our loss of time,
My troops are all in perfect readiness,
And long to meet their foes in open field;
If we deliberate a day longer
The edge of their valour (I fear) will be quite taken off.
Now fie upon that valour which depends
On circumstance of time or place,
Tic relative virtue, that like glass is brittle,
Whose force soon dyes and perfects very little,
Now recollect thy spirits Rhodon,
Let Spartan resolution spread it self
Into each angle of thy noble heart.
For now our hostile forces are assembled,
Covering the fields from Ossa to Olympus.
Their painted banners with the winds are playing:
Their pampered coursers thunder on the plains:
The splendour of their glistering arms repels
The bashful sun-beames back unto the clouds.
Their bellowing drums and trumpets shrill,
Doe many sad corrantos sound,
Which danger grimand sprawling death must dance.
Now therefore Rhodon, doe reflect thy eye
Upon the glories of thy ancestors,
And strive by emulation to transcend
Those trophies which were yet ne'er paralleled.
Surcease this needless talk, let us to action,
The loss of time consists in protraction.
Your noble courages, endeared friends,
A good event to our designs portends.
within the precincts of this grove Poneria dwells,
Here nightly she hath coventicles
With her wise spirits; see how the trees are carved
With Magical mysterious characters,
See how the fiery fiends with their frequent resort have
Scorched the leaves, and changed the
Merry livery of the spring into a mournful hue.
Behold the grass died with the swarthy gore
Of some great sacrifice, that late was offered up
To the infernal powers.
The black aspect of this strange uncouth place
Doth make my heart to quake.
Within a vault hewn from the stony bowels,
Of you high precipicious rock she dwells.
Cheer up (Cynosbatus) and come away,
Let's to her Cell, and Isle show thee the way.
CVrst was the wight that did in murder first
Imbrue his guilty hands: cursed was that hand
Which first was taught by damned hellish art
To forge the killing blade in Vulcans flames:
What raging fury reigns in mortal breasts,
That man should man pursue with deadly hate;
Oh what maglignant power hath defaced,
That specious image of the gods above?
Who hath inspired man with that bestial quality
Of murderous revenge?
The Lybian Lyons seldom are at odds,
The Tigers of Hyrcania doe agree,
But man to man's become a very devil:
That Thracian god which is delighted most
With humane sacrifices, is now adored;
Blood-thirsty Mars now bears the only sway,
Who direful devastations doth affect,
Peace hath forsook the earth, and fell debate
Shaking his battered arms, now stalks every where.
I hoped for nuptials sweet, of late, but now
I may have cause to fear a funeral.
Hymen affrighted with the confused noise
Of brutish war, is fled I know not whither.
My dearest Rhodon must depart from me,
And in the field engage his tender Corps
To all extremities of death, of wounds, of danger,
Of sickness and unrest:
Strike not the ayre with this vain language, Iris,
Wound not thy soul with these unseemly plaints,
But be content to wait the will of Jove,
Who will crown our designs with blessed success.
For in a cause that's honest, just, and right,
The gods themselves will take up arms and fight.
Then oh ye powers, that are the grand protectors
Of Hyblas happiness and welfare;
Whether ye doe delight in our flower-crown'd mountains,
Our od'rous vales, or in our Crystal fountains,
Your gracious favour I implore, besceching you
To guard the person of my dearest Rhodon;
Fond woman, how forgetful have I bin?
Here is a gem whose price doth far transcend
All estimation: my faithful Panace
Deliver't thou unto my gentle Shepherd,
And pray him wear it for my sake.
Madam, I will.
It from the bowels of a Cock was tan,
And whosoever wears the same (as wise men say)
Shall ever be victorious in war.
Commend me to my brother, gentle nymph,
And bear this token of my love to him:
It is the precious herb called Lattice,
Which whosoever wears shall never want
Sufficient sustenance both for himself and his;
Besides, it frustrates quite the devilish force
Of strongest poisons or enchantments.
Now Iris, let us haste to Floras fane,
With our devotions let's importune her,
These horrid stirs and troublous broils to cease,
That we again may live in happy peace.
DIvinest Matron; god-inspired Sybill
Doe this, and be what thou can desire.
Doubt not great Martagon but I will effect it.
Now dear Cynosbatus let us prepare
To resist th'impression of our foes:
Since that our powerful forces ready stand,
To be obedient to our great command.
With thee I am resolved to spend my breath,
Indifferent in the choice of life or death.
Agnostus come forth: black cloud of ignorance,
Advance thy leaden pate▪ dull Camel.
I cannot brooke this thin and piercing ayre.
Thou son of sleep; that hat'st the lightsome day,
Clap on thy spectacles of judgment, and behold
How I have plaid my part.
Thou flow'st with gall (Agnostus) I confess,
But thou hast a brain intolerably dry,
As empty of wit, as the world is of conscience.
What hast plucked up the flowers by the roots,
Or is all Thessaly in a combustion?
Surcharged with deep despite and viprous hate,
Their forces they against each other bend.
Then I hope their painted pride shall quickly be abated.
But I have a plot, old plumbeous dotard,
To crop the proudest flower that grows
In Hybla or Hymettus.
Poneria, I adore thy art and wisdom.
This glass contains a rare confectign:
Tic vipers blood mixed with the juice of Aconite:
This is the Philter, the sweet love-potion
Which Eglnatine poor love-sick fool,
Must commend to the Shepherd Rhodon,
Who this night by my appointment,
Is to meet her in the myrtle grove, under the
Name of Iris: now Isle to Eglantine,
And bless her longing ears with these glad tidings.
Oh great profound Poneria: never yet
Was any that could parallel thy wit.
what hour of night is it friend Acanthus?
Th'eleventh at least: for see Orion hath
Advanced very high his starry locks in our horizon.
Me thinks the stars look very ruddy,
As if they did portend tempestuous weather.
They doe but blush to see what crimes are acted
By mortal under covert of the night.
Saw thou yon star that Northward fell.
I saw the blazing meteor stoup,
And bend his course toward the humble Center.
This seemed a glorious, and resplendent star,
Yet was it but a gross ill tempered meteor.
This meteor seemed as if it had bin fixed
In an orb for a perpetuity,
Yet in a moment is it fallen, thou see,
And who regards this foolish and ignoble fire,
Or looks upon the place from whence it fell.
He that by honourable means is raised,
And hath his seat established on the square
Of never sliding virtue, cannot fall.
But if young Phaeton shall undertake
To guide the Charret of the great Apollo,
And in that action shall miscarry, so
That the whole universe shall be engaged
To utter ruin and destruction,
Then ought great Jove to have a special care
For to preserve and keep the common good.
And if he shall dismount the Charioteer,
And with a deadly blow lay him along,
The world then for his justice shall thank Jove,
And Phaetons foole-hardinesse reprove.
Who dares contest with Jove, or question what
His Sovereign highness shall doe or determine.
Tic altogether wicked &amp; unjust: (Acanthus) retire.
For now me thinks I see a glimpse of Iris,
Who promised to meet me here this night.
Lo how the lustre of her beauty penetrates
The en vyous clouds of these nocturnal shades.
See yonder the beguiled lover walks
In vain, expecting the coming of his dear Iris,
Now, Eglantine remember my instructions,
Have a care that your tongue betray you not.
Be not too talkative in any case.
Forget not the posture I so oft told you of,
Under pretence that these cold nightly dews are
Offensive, you may knit your veil more close,
And conceal your feature.
Poneria, retire: I will address my self unto him.
But be sure you persuade him to take the
Potion before he sleeps;
You'll remember those virtues which I told you it contains.
Forget not to declare them amply.
Make no doubt on it: thou hast armed me
For all assays.
Thou brightest star that shin'st this night,
Auspicious be thy influence to thy Rhodon.
My dearest Iris, I am surcharged with joy
To meet thee here.
(Dear Rhodon) who, like the vernal Sun,
Dost lend refreshing heats to my affections.
Tak't not amiss, that I have chose this hour
And unfreqrented place t'enioy thy company.
Sweet Iris know that I esteem this hour of night,
Since I enjoy thy sweet society,
'Bove all the days that I ever hitherto beheld.
But from a maidens modesty (fair Sir)
It may seem much to derogate,
To be abroad so late at night.
Since no immodest act is here intended,
The time cannot be prejudicial
To thy unstained modesty.
Great pity tic indeed, Sir, that true love
Should be disparaged, because it is so true.
I tell thee, I till now was never happy:
All those delights which I ere saw before,
Were but mere transitory dreams,
Compared with that felicity which now I find.
The sudden news of this late kindled war,
Wherein I hear (to my great grief) you are engaged,
Made me transgress the bounds of modesty so far,
That I desired once more to see your face,
Ere your departure to the field of danger.
Since my good fortune and thy constant love
Have joyed me once again with thy sweet presence,
I bless my lot, and to the field will hasten,
As ready to out-face danger, as scorn death;
And if I there find fortunate success,
Of all my good Isle count thee patronise.
And here on you I doe bestow this vial,
Which such a precious dosis doth contain,
That it doth far exceed the height of value.
It is a potion made by wondrous art,
Nectar is no more comparable to it,
Then Bonniclabar is to Husquobath;
And Aurum potabile is as far short of it,
As poor Metheglin is of rich Canary:
All the confections even from the lowest degree
Of Sage-ale, to the height of Aqua-Celestis,
Are no more like it then the beer of the Low-countries
Is to the High-country wine:
A dram of it taken before you go to bed
Cheers the heart, prevents the Incubus
And all frightful dreams; cheers the blood,
Comforts the stomach, dispels all collickes,
Cures all aches, repairs the liver, helps
The lungs, rectifies the brain, quenches
All the senses, strengthens the memory, refreshes
The spirits.
Taken fasting it breaks the stone in bladder
Or kidneys, cures the gout, expels a quartain ague:
Outwardly applied it kills the gangrene,
And destroys the wolf, heales all sorts of wounds,
Bruses, boils, and sores.
And not to use more multiplicity of words,
I tell you gentle Rhodon you shall find,
It cures all griefs of body and of mind.
(Fair one) verbal expression cannot show
What I to thee for this great gift doe owe:
But till for all I full requital make,
My constant love thou for a pledge shalt take.
But (gentle Sir) although your constitution
So well attempered seems, that no disease
Can either hurt or over-throw your health,
Yet if my counsel might prevail with you,
I should persuade you to make trial of this
Rare water this night before you sleep.
Since thou vouchsaf'st to be my kind Physician,
For this time I will act a patients part,
And ere that sleep shall with his leaden keys
Locke up the portals of my drowsy eyes,
Isle taste of this most precious liquor:
But lest the gealed moisture of the night
Should prejudice thy health, (sweet Iris)
Let me conduct thee homeward.
Since these nocturnal distillations
May be offensive to your health (sweet Rhodon)
I will be well contented to be gone,
Though wondrous loath from you to part so soon.
But in my absence be assured of this,
That Rhodons heart in thy possession is.
Upon this shady bank with laurels crowned,
The gentle Shepherd Rhodon dwells:
His Cottage seated is upon a Crystal River,
The sweetest stream that ever in valley crept.
Two precious presents I to him must bear:
The one from his true love, the beaut'ous Iris,
And that's a gem of admirable virtue;
The bounty of the Eastern mines could ne'er bestow
A Jewel of such worth as this,
Which from the entrails of a Cock was ripped;
For whosoever shall possess the same,
Shall be invincible in fight.
But his dear Sister, lovely Violetta,
Commends to him this admirable plant,
The noblest herb that ever in garden grew.
For, setting many precious properties aside,
It is the best and strongest antidote
That Art or Nature ever made.
No deadly poison can withstand its power,
But is expulst by it with great facility.
These noble gifts beseeming well
Both the receivers and the givers qualities,
I will deliver to the honoured Swain.
SAge Dame, how fares thy grand design?
Dost think thy plot will take?
Nay, if you doubt it, I wish it ne'er might take.
Have I made hell a party in the action,
And laid such snares, that more then humane force
Cannot withstand my well knit stratagem;
Yet will you still torment me with these doubts?
Nay gentle mother, be not so impatient.
You tempt my patience, while you thus mistrust
My skill and my ability.
We doe adore thy matchless skill and wisdom,
Thou grace and wonder of thy sex.
Me thinks I see the merry Post at hand,
That brings us joyful news of Rhodons death:
And not behind him much me thinks I see
Another Post, who comes with better news,
That Rhodons army is discouraged and discarded,
Yea quite disbanded and dispersed.
Oh happy news (divine Poneria)
Yet ye account me a mere silly Dame,
Yea as silly as some simple simpering Citizen.
That hath but manners enough to take
The upper end of a Table at a feast,
And to carve a Capons leg to a Coxcomb.
The en Sybils were no more comparable to thee,
Than an old Gentlewoman is to a young Chambermaid.
Sweet Poneria, I am even in love with thee:
Yea, I durst almost swear I should kiss thee,
If thou had but three rotten teeth in thy head.
Well, my Masters, I hope you'll thank me
When you hear that I have made proud Rhodon
A Legier Ambassador in Don Pluto's Court.
Thy thanks, Poneria, shall be duly paid
In eye bewitching talents;
We'll rip the metric of our grandam earth
To see the place where riches are conceived;
And from her pregnant womb we'll draw
A golden age for thee to live in (Dear Poneria)
Who would leave any villainy undone,
To be thy slave, most noble Martagon.
Now Martagon let us go put on arms,
And toward Hybla march in strong array.
Let us deface the glory of their flowers,
If Rhodon be but dead, the day is ours.
THou speak of things beyond belief, Acanthus,
Too true it is, I shrewdly fear,
For every circumstance makes it appear
That Rhodon in the myrtle grove, last night,
Had private conference with Iris,
From whom (it seems) he took the venomed potion,
For now he doth, in his extremest fits,
Exclaim on the untruth of woman kind,
Bewailing the unlucky hour that did present
Your sister Iris to his sight.
Anthophotus and Acanthus, you're well met.
Nay, never worse, thou would say, gentle Panace,
If thou knew all.
What dire disastre hath befallen you, honoured friends?
How fares the noble Shepherd Rhodon?
Rhodon's mishap's the cause of all our sorrow:
Rhodon's betrayed, poisoned, and lies at point of death.
Cursed be the hand that did attempt
A villainy so impious and foul.
But if you love your selves, and Rhodons health,
Conduct me to him immediately:
I have an antidote that shall cure him,
If any breath be left within his bulk.
Oh happy comfort! come sweet Panace,
To our sick friend, we'll thy Conductors be.
A happy morn be this to thee (friend Martagon,)
Nay, it is the happiest morn. that ever we two beheld
Rhodon is dead;
And is by this time, served up in a wooden dish,
To feast the worms upon an earthen table;
The purple bosomed rose whose glorious pride
Disdained the beauties of all other flowers, is cropped,
Yea the ambitious bramble is quite withered,
And now is laid in the contemned dust:
Ponerias wit hath done this noble act.
This is good news, I must confess, yet could I wish
That noble Rhodon had not so ignobly died.
Thou art too ceremonious for a politician,
And too superstitious: our duties it is to judge
Of the effect as it concerns the state of our affairs,
And not to look back on the means by which it was wrought.
He is unfit to rule a Civil state
That knows not how in some respects to favour
Murder, or treason, or any other sin,
Which that subtle animal, called man,
Doth openly protest against, for this end,
That he may more freely act it in private,
As his occasions shall invite him to it.
But it is no disputing now; the deed is done,
We are in a fair way to victory,
Conquest, triumph, and renown;
We have a fair bginning, and what's well begun,
(If that the proverb speaks truth) is half done.
NOw Agnostus, since by the death of Rhodon
We have endeared our selves to Martagon,
It is meet we provide for a back winter,
That we purchase some eminence of place,
To make us glorious in the worlds ill-sighted eye,
That being great we may the greater mischief doe:
And since a war is newly set abroach,
I will a suitor be to General Martagon;
To place thee in some military office
Of high regard and special consequence,
Where by thy ignorant conduct and base carriage,
Thou mai'st a thousand heroic souls send packing
Unto the Stygian shore.
Nay good Poneria, I find my self unfitting for the wars.
What neither hart nor brains; out inglorious Iozel,
Thou most unwieldy burden of the earth:
I could find in my heart to kick thy soul out
Of thy carcass: art all composed of earth and water?
Hast not a spark of ayre or fire in that bulk?
Nay sweet Poneria, I am thy slave.
I tell thee I will procure thee a Captains place.
But I am altogether ignorant in the words of com∣mand,
And know not one posture neither of Musket or Pike.
Hast wit enough to swallow the dead pays,
And to patch up thy Company in a Mustering day:
Hast valour enough to wear a Buffe-jerken
With three gold laces.
Hast strength enough to support a Dutch felt
With a flaunting Feather?
Can thy side endure to be wedded to a Rapire
Hatched with gold, with hilt and hangers of the new fashion?
Can drink, drab, and dice:
Can damn thy self into debt among
Believing Tradesmen;
Hast manners enough to give thy Lieutenant,
Ancient or Sergeant leave to go before thee
Upon any piece of danger?
Hast wit enough, in thy anger, not to draw a sword?
These are the chief properties that pertain
To our modern Captains; and if thou
Coldest but be taught these military rudiments,
I doubt not but thou might prove a very
Excellent new soldier.
If this be all, I hope, in time, to be as famous
As ever was Caesar, or great Pompey.
Agnostus, come along, thy self prepare
To be a servant to the god of war.
THis strange imposture hath amazed me so,
That I am almost to a statue struck,
Not knowing what to speak, or what to think.
Assure your self it was a strange Collusion:
For this, on my fidelity, believe,
That it was not Iris whom you met last night.
Then it was some hellish hag, that, in her shape,
Gave me the venomous confection
Which had undone me quite, if thou in time
Had not applied thy precious antidote.
But yet, me thinks, that heaven should not permit
The subt'lest hellish power to counterfeit
The feature of so beautiful an angel.
Doubtless it was the false Ponerias plot,
Whom Martagon hath lately entertained,
With her companion; old Agnostus;
For, know the malice of your foes is such,
That if by open force they can't destroy you,
By hidden plots they'll seek your overthrow.
Then I must pardon crave of gentle Iris,
To whom I did ascribe this treacherous fact.
If she were guilty of so black a deed,
These hands should chain her to a fatal stake,
And sacrifice her Corps in hideous flames,
Unto the awful goddess of revenge;
(Which done) I'd throw her hateful ashes up
Against the furious gusts of boisterous winds,
That being so dispersed, there might remain
Not the least relic of so vile a wretch.
My Iris is as clear as innocence it self;
And since my treacherous foes have gone about,
By wicked slights, to wrong so sweet a saint,
And bring me also to a shameful end,
I here enjoin ye (honourable friends)
Upon my sword to take a solemn oath,
Ne'er to lay down your just and lawful arms,
Until we be avenged to the full,
For such unkindly and disloyal wrongs:
True honour, that with dearest blood is sought,
Is like a precious gem that's cheaply bought.
Ill is a life bestowed upon that wight
That dares not loose it to maintain the right:
Him I account a base inglorious sot,
That dares not honour pull from dangers throat.
LAdy Poneria, upon your commendation,
We bestow a regiment upon this Gentleman.
Thanks (worthy Martagon) believe it Sir,
Those good respects which I to your affairs owe,
Urged me t'importune you for his employment,
Because I know him to be a tried soldier,
Of great experience, worth and merit:
How say you, Colonel Agnostus,
I hope your actions shall make good my words hereafter.
I am at your service, Madam Poneria:
I am a man of action, I confess.
Trust me sir, although he wants verbal expression,
He is a Gentleman of singular abilities.
And I think no less, for they are not good words
That makes deserving soldiers, but good swords.
He looks as if he had bin bred, borne,
And brought up in a Leaguer all his life time.
Noble General; the beaut'ous Eglantine
Wishes all happiness to your designs,
Desiring that this paper may kiss your hands for her.
Tic about a place, Isle pawn my life on it:
Hear me Monsieur, I understand the business:
Her request is granted.
She when she please, may at my hands command
A greater courtesy then this.
Thanks honoured Sir.
On you I bestow a Captains place.
Now I perceive that the readi'st way to attain
Preferment in the Court of Mars,
Is to creep into the favour of Venus.
I understand you are a man of real worth,
And very sufficient for such an office.
Imperious Martagon, that art no less
Known for thy power, then thy wickedness:
In Rhodons name I doe defy thee here,
Who challenged the Combat at thy hands,
To be avenged on thee for thy foul wrongs:
But if thou dare not in a single fight,
Give satisfaction to the noble Shepherd;
Then thee and all thy troops he doth invite,
To a bloody breakfast to morrow morn.
Attended by a vigorous army he
Stands in the confines of his own dominions,
Swearing that he will prove it in the field,
That thou a tyrant and a traitor art.
Bold friend, I prethe speak ingeniously,
Doth this defiance come from Rhodons mouth.
Upon my life, &amp; by the honour of a soldier it doth.
Then tell him, I'm resolved to be a guest,
More bold then welcome at his bloody feast.
I will great Martagon; and misdoubt not,
But that your cheer shall be exceeding hot.
Dissembling witch: how hast thou beguiled us?
What adverse power hath crossed our plot?
Did not thou with thy deep protestatiōs force us
To give strong credence to thy false relations,
When thou affirm'dst that thou had poisoned Rhodon.
The opposition of the cursed fates
Hath brought us to deserved confusion.
Avaunt you hag, abominable sorceress,
Here I doe thee on pain of death enjoin,
With that Impostor thy companion,
Immediately to depart out of my Dominions.
Now I accursed wretch have seen too well,
That heaven will not be overruled by hell.
How suddenly by one contrary gust,
Is all our honour tumbled into dust.
Since that our braving foe is now at hand,
(Cynosbatus) we must not think of a retreat.
What your discretion holds fit to be done,
I condescend to noble Martagon.
Then let us meet our proud foe face to face,
And with our swords and spears that right maintain,
Which lately we by sword and spear did gain.
DEserving friends and fellow soldiers,
Now arm your selves with Roman fortitude:
First call to mind the justice of our cause,
And then let each remember that true honour,
Which must be valued above health and life:
Consider also that we must contend,
Against a tyrant and a mere usurper;
A person guilty of no mean offences,
Which must be justly punished by our swords.
Thrice noble Rhodon, in whose noble breast
True pity dwells, vouchsafe a pardon
To us distressed Caitives.
I neither know what your offencesare, nor yet yourselves.
I am the unfortunate Poneria,
That was suborned by unjust Martagon
To work thy utter ruin:
I did conduct the love-sicke Eglantine
Unto thy presence instead of Iris:
I cause her to give thee a poisonous drink,
Under the pretence that it was a love-potion.
I have deserved to dye, and crave life at your hands.
And are you the grand incendiary
That have so many mischiefs wrought in Thessaly?
Now I remember I have seen your elvish countenance,
Nor have I altogether forgot your reverent mate,
Who with his personated gravity deludes the world,
Being accounted a man of profound art.
Acanthus, see them committed to safe custody,
See you make them sure for starting.
Nay worthy sir.
You must away, for no entreaties can prevail.
The apprehension of these wretches doth presage
Auspicious fortunes to our actions;
List, list, Anthophotus, our enemies are at hand,
Their thundering drums warn us of their approach.
We'll bid them nobly welcome then: this day will I
Victorious be (I vow) or bravely dye.
Thy honoured resolution I commend,
And take it for a sign of good success.
Arm, arm: the hostile forces are in sight,
And thus come marching on in proud array:
The battaile's led by Martagon himself,
Wherein are marshaled near five thousand Bill men,
All clad in coats of red:
A furious Amazon called Tulipa,
Brings on three thousand burly Swissers,
Arrayed in gorgeous Coats of red and yellow;
And these make up the vanne:
To which are added for a forlorn hope,
Two hundred melancholy Gentlemen.
The fierce Cynosbatus brings up the Rear,
Wherein about two thousand soldiers be
Clad all in greene, and armed with pikes of steel.
Narcissus with a thousand Daffodils,
Clad in deep yellow coats doth flank
The right side of the battle.
The left wing is by Hyacinthus led,
Wherein a thousand Soldiers march,
Arraid in purple coats.
What fury tempted thee unhappy Rhodon,
In hostile manner thus to invade my confines.
For Violettas sake I took up arms,
Whom thou unjustly hast oppressed.
What I have done my sword shall justify.
Whence comes this most harmonious melody.
Put up those murdering blades on pain of my dis∣pleasure,
Confine them to perpetual prison in the scabbard,
That they may ne'er come forth to manage civil broils.
We must obey, and will, Oh awful goddess.
While in my flowery bowers I took repose,
I heard the noise of these tumultuous broils,
Which struck me with a wonderful amazement.
Then hastily I left my banks of pleasure,
And hither came to end these mortal jars;
Therefore I charge you both on that •llegance
And respect which you doe owe to me,
Quite to dismiss your armed bands.
And you Martagon, who have fair Violetta wronged,
To her shall make an ample restitution,
Of what you've tan from her;
And entertain a friendly league with Rhodon,
Which you Cynosbatus must also condescend to:
But as for you fond Madam Eglantine,
Since you have broke the sacred laws of love,
And by unlawful means sought to accomplish
Your designs, and make the Shepherd Rhodon
Enamoured on you:
You to a vestal Temple shall be confined,
Where with ten years penance
You shall expiate your folly.
But where be those two intruders
Poneria and Agnostus.
These that have crept in among us, and with false slights
Sought to ore-throw our state.
We banish them quite
Out of Thessaly for ever.
What I have decreed you must assent unto.
We doe, because we must.
Rhodon, I here bestow on thee this noble shepherdess.
Thanks for your precious gift, renowned Queen.
And now since all things are reduced to joyful peace,
Let us betake our selves to sweet delights,
And solemnise with mirth your nuptial rites.
SInce Ignorance and Envy now are banished;
Since discord from among the flowers is vanished;
Since Rhodon is espoused to Iris bright;
Since war hath happy Thessaly left quite,
Let every one that loves his Countries peace,
His height of gladness with his hands express.

BUT that imperious custom warrants it,
Our Author with much willingness would omit
This Preface to his new work. Hee hath found
(And suffered for it) many are apt to wound
His credit in this kind: and whether hee,
Express himself fearful, or peremptory,
Hee cannot scope their censures who delight
To misapply what ever hee shall write.
Tic his hard fate. And though hee will not sue,
Or basely beg such suffrages, yet to you
Free, and ingenious spirits, hee doth now,
In me present his service, with his vow
Hee hath done his best, and though hee cannot glory
In his invention, (this work being a story,
Of reverend Antiquity) hee doth hope
In the proportion of it, and the scope,
You may observe some pieces drawn like one
Of a steadfast hand, and with the whiter stone
To bee marked in your fair censures. More then this
I am forbid to promise, and it is
With the most 'till you confirm it: since wee know
What ere the shaft bee, Archer, or the bow,
From which it is sent, it cannot hit the white
Unless your approbation guide it right.
AS ever (Sir) you lent a gracious ear
To oppressed innocence, now vouchsafe to hear
A short petition, At your feet in me
The Poet kneels, and to your Majesty
Appeals for justice. What wee now present,
When first conceived, in his vote and intent,
Was sacred to your pleasure; in each part
With his best of fancy, judgment, language, art,
Fashiond, and formed so, as might well, and may
Deserve a welcome, and no vulgar way.
Hee durst not (Sir) at such a solemn feast
Lard his grave matter with one scurrilous jest,
But laboured that no passage might appear,
But what the Queen without a blush might hear.
And yet this poor work suffered by the rage,
And envy of some Catos of the stage:
Yet still hee hopes, this Play which then was seen
With sore eyes, and condemned out of their spleen,
May bee by you, The supreme judge, set free,
And raised aboue the reach of calumny.
IN your six years travail, friend, no doubt you have met with
Many, and rare adventures, and obe∣served
The wonders of each climate, vary∣ing in
The manners, and the men, and so return,
For the future service of your prince and country,
In your understanding bettered.
Sir, I have made oft
The best use in my power, and hope my gleanings,
After the full crop others reaped before me,
Shall not when I am called on, altogether
Appear unprofitable: yet I left
The miracle of miracles in our age
At home behind me; every where abroad
Fame with a true, though prodigal voice, delivered
Such wonders of Pulcheria the Princess,
To the amazement, nay astonishment rather
Of such as heard it, that I found not one
In all the States and Kingdoms that I passed through,
Worthy to be her second.
She indeed is
A perfect Phoenix, and disdains a rival.
Her infant years, as you know, promised much
But grown to ripeness she transcends, and makes
Credulity her debtor. I will tell you
In my blunt way, to entertain the time,
Until you have the happiness to see her,
How in your absence she hath borne her self,
And with all possible brevity, though the subject
Is such a spacious field, as would require
An abstract of the purest eloquence
(Derived from the most famous Orators
The nurse of learning, Athens, showed the world)
In that man, that should undertake to bee
Her true Historian.
In this you shall doe me
A special favour.
Since Arcadius death,
Our late great Master, the protection of
The Prince his Son, the second Theodosius,
By a general vote and suffrage of the people;
Was to her charge assigned, with the disposure
Of his so many Kingdoms. For his person
She hath so trained him up in all those arts
That are both great and good, and to be wished
In an Imperial Monarch, that the Mother
Of the Gracchi, grave Cornelia (Rome still boasts of)
The wise Pulcheria but named, must be
No more remembered. She by her example
Hath made the court a kind of Academy,
In which true honour is both learned, and practiced,
Her private lodging's a chaste Nunnery,
In which her sisters as probationers hear
From her their sovereign Abbess, all the precepts
Read in the school of virtue.
You amaze me.
I shall ere I conclude. For here the wonder
Begins, not ends Her soul is so immense,
And her strong faculties so apprehensive,
To search into the depth of deep designs,
And of all natures, that the burden which
To many men were insupportable,
To her is but a gentle exercise,
Made by the frequent use familiar to her.
With your good favour let me interrupt you.
Being as she is in every part so perfect,
Me thinks that all kings of our Eastern world
Should become rivals for her.
So they have,
But to no purpose. She that knows her strength
To rule, and govern Monarchs, scorns to wear
On her free neck the servile yoke of marriage.
And for one loose desire, envy it self
Dares not presume to taint her. Venus son
Is blind indeed, when he but gazes on her.
Her chastity being a rock of Diamonds,
With which encountered his shafts fly in splinters,
His flaming torches in the living spring
Of her perfections, quenched: and to crown all;
Shoe's so impartial when she sits upon
The high tribunal, neither swayed with piety,
Nor old by fear beyond her equal scale,
That it is not superstition to believe
Astrea once more lives upon the earth,
Pulcheriaes breast her temple.
You have given her
An admirable character.
She deserves it,
And such is the commanding power of virtue,
That from her vi•ious enemies it compels
Paeans of praise as a due tribute to her. Solemno loud music:
What means this solemn music?
It ushers
The Emperors morning meditation,
In which Pulcheria is more then assistant.
Tic worth your observation, and you may
Collect from her expense of time this day,
How her hours for many years have been disposed of.
I am all eyes and ears.
Your patience Sir.
Let those corrupted ministers of the court,
Which you complain of, our devotions ended,
Be cited to appear. For the Ambassadors
Who are importunate to have audience,
From me you may assure them, that to morrow
They shall in public kiss the Emperors robe,
And we in private with our soonest leisure
Will give 'em hearing. Have you especial care too
That free access be granted unto all
Petitioners. The morning wears, Pray you on Sir;
Time lost is ne'er recovered.
Did you note
The majesty she appears in?
Yes my good Lord,
I was ravished with it.
And then with what speed
She orders his dispatches, not one daring
To interpose; the Emperor himself
Without reply putting in act what ever
She pleased to impose upon him.
Yet there were some
That in their sullen looks rather confessed
A forced constraint to serve her, then a will
To bee at her devotion, what are they?
Eunuchs of the Emperors chamber, that rapine,
The globe and awful sceptre should give place
Unto the distaff, for as such they whisper
A women's government, but dare not yet
Express themselves.
From whence are the Ambassadors
To whom she promised audience?
They ate
Employed by divers Princes, who desire
Alliance with our Emperor, whose years now
As you see, write him man. One would advance
A daughter to the honour of his bed,
A second, his fair sister: to instruct you
In the particulars would ask longer time
Then my own designs give way to. I have letters
From special friends of mine, that to my care
Commend a stranger virgin, whom this morning
I purpose to present before the Princess,
If you please, you may accompany me.
Isle wait on you,
Why should you droop, or hang your working heads?
No danger is meant to you, pray bear up,
For ought I know you are cited to receive
Preferment due to your merits.
Very likely,
In all the proiects I have read and practiced
I never found one man compelled to come
Before the seat of justice under guard
To receive honour.
No; it may be you are
The first example. Men of qualities,
As I have delivered you to the protectress,
Who knows how to advance them, cannot conceive
A fitter place to have their virtues published,
Then in open Court: could you hope that the Princess
Knowing your precious merits, will reward 'em
In a private corner? no, you know not yet
How you may be exalted.
To the gallows.
Fie,
Nor yet depressde to the Galleys; in your names
You carry no such crimes: your specious titles
Cannot but take her: President of the Proiectors!
What a noise it makes? The master of the habit,
How proud would some one country be that I know
To be your first pupil? Minion of the suburbs,
And now and then admitted to the Court,
And honoured with the stile of Squire of Dames,
What hurt is in it? One thing I must tell you,
As I am the State scout, you may think me an informer.
They are Synonima.
Conceal nothing from her
Of your good parts, twill be the better for you,
Or if you should, it matters not, she can conjure,
And I am her ubiquitary spirit,
Bound to obey her, you have my instructions,
Stand by, hears better company.
Can I hope. Sir,
Oppressed innocence shall find protection,
And justice among strangers, when my brothers,
Brothers of one womb, by one Sire begotten,
Trample on my afflictions?
Forget them,
Remembering those may help you.
They have robbed me
Of all means to prefer my just complaint
With any promising hope to gain a hearing,
Much less redress: petitions not sweetened
With gold, are but unsavoury, oft refused,
Or if received, are pocketed, not read.
A suitors swelling tears by the glowing beam•
Of Choleric authority are dri'd up,
Before they fall, or if seen never pittled.
What will become of a forsaken maid?
My flattering hopes are too weak to encounter
With my strong enemy, despair, and it is
In vain to oppose her.
Cheer her up, she faints, Sir.
This argues weakness, though your brothers were
Cruel beyond expression, and the judges
That sentenced you, corrupt, you shall find here
One of your own fine sex to doe you right,
Whose beams of justice like the Sun extend
Their light, and heate to strangers, and are not
Municipal, or confined.
Pray you doe not feed me
With aerie hopes, unless you can assure me
The great Pulcheria will descend to hear
My miserable story, it were better
I died without her trouble.
She is bound to it
By the surest chain, her natural inclination
To help the afflicted, nor shall long delays
(More terrible to miserable suitors
Then quick denials) grieve you; Dry your fair eyes,
This room will instantly bee sanctified
With her blessed presence; to her ready hand
Present your grievances, and rest assured
You shall depart contented.
You breath in me
A second life.
Will your Lordship please to hear
Your servant a few words?
Away you rascal,
Did I ever keep such servants?
If your honesty
Would give you leave, it would bee for your profit.
To make use of an Informer? tell me in what
Can you advantage me?
In the first tender
Of a fresh suite never begged yet,
Whats your suite Sir?
It is feasible, here are three arrant knaves
Discovered by my Art:
And thou the arch-knaue,
The great devour the less.
And with good reason,
I must eat one a month, I cannot live else.
A notable cannibal? but should I hear thee,
In what doe your knaves concern me?
In the begging
Of their estates.
Before they are condemned?
Ye• or arraigned, your Lordship may speak too late •ls•
They are your own, and I will bee content
With the fife• part of a share.
Hence Rogue,
Such Rogues
In this kind will be heard, and cherished too.
Fool that I was to offer such a bargain,
To a spiced conscience chapman, but I care not
What hee disdains to taste others will swallow.
They are returned from the Temple.
See, she appears,
What think you now?
A cunning Painter thus
Her veil tan off and awful sword and balance
Laid by would picture justice.
When you please,
You may intend those royal exercises
Suiting your birth, and greatenesse: I will bear
The burden of your cares, and having purged
The body of your empire of ill humours,
Upon my knees surrender it.
Will you ever
Bee awde thus like a Boy?
And kiss•e the rod
Of a proud Mistress?
Bee what you were borne Sir.
Obedience and Majesty never lodged
In the same Inn.
No more; hee never learned
The right way to command, that stopped his ears
To wise directions.
Read ore the Papers
I left upon my cabinet, two hours hence
I will examine you.
Wee spend our time well.
Nothing but praying, and poring on a book,
It ill agrees with my constitution, sister.
Would I had been borne some masquing La∣dies woman,
Only to see strange sights, rather then live thus.
We are gone forsooth, there is no remedy, sister:
What hath his eye found out•
It is fixed upon
That stranger Lady.
I am glad yet, that
Hee dares look on a Woman.
Philanax,
What is that comely stranger?
A Petitioner.
Will you hear her case, and dispatch her in your Chamber?
Isle undertake to bring her.
Bring me to
Some place where I may look on her demeanour
It is a lovely creature?
Ther's some hope in this yet.
No you have done your parts:
Now opportunity courts you,
Prefer your suite,
As low as misery
Can fall, for proof of my humility,
A poor distressed Virgin bows her head,
And lays hold on your goodness, the last alto•
Calamity can fly to for protection.
Great minds erect their never falling trophies
On the firm base of mercy; but to triumph
Over a suppliant by proud fortune captive•d,
Argue• a Bastard conquest: it is to you
I speak, to you the fair, and just Pulcheria,
The wonder of the age, your sexes honour,
And as such deign to hear me. As you have
A soul moulded from heaven, and doe desire
To have it made a star there, make the means
Of your ascent to that celestial height
Virtue winged with brave action: they draw near
The nature, and the essence of the Gods,
Who imi•ate their goodness.
If you were
A subject of the Empire, which your habit
In every part denies.
O fly not to
Such an evasion; what ere I am,
Being a Woman, in humanity
You are bound to right me, though the difference
Of my religion may seem to exclude me
From your defence (which you would have confined)
The moral virtue, which is general,
Must know no limits; by these blessed feet
That pace the paths of equity, and tread boldly
On the stiff• neck of tyrannous oppression,
By these tears by which I bath 'em, I conjure you
With pity to look on me.
Pray you rise.
And as you rise receive thy• comfort from me.
Beauty set off with such sweet language never
Can want an Advocate, and you must bring
More then a guilty cause if you pr•uaile not.
Some business long since thought upon dispatched•
You shall have hearing, and as far as justice
Will warrant me, my best aids.
I doe desire,
No stronger guard, my equity needs no favour.
Are these the men?
Wee were, an't like your highness,
The men, the men of eminence, and mark,
And may continue so, if it please your grace.
This speech was well proiected.
Does your conscience
(I will begin with you) whisper unto you
What here you st•nd accused of? are you named
The President of Proiectors?
Justify it man.
And tell her in what thou art useful.
That is apparent,
And if you please, ask some about the court,
And •hey will tell you too my rare inventions,
They owe their bravery, perhaps means to purchase,
And cannot live wi•hout me. I alas
Lend out my labouring brains to use, and sometimes
For a drachma in the pound, the more the pity.
I am all patience, and endure the curse•
Of many, for the profit of one patron.
I do conceive the rest. What is the second?
The minion of the suburbs.
What hath he
To doe in Constantinople?
I steal in now and then,
As I am thought useful, marry there I am called
The Squire of Dames, or servant of the sex,
And by the allowance of some sportful Ladies
Honoured with that ti•le.
Spare your Character,
You are here deciphered; stand by with your compare.
What is the third? a creature I ne'er heard of;
The master of the manners, and the habit,
You have a double office.
In my actions
I make both good, for by my theorems
Which your polite, and terser gallants practise,
I rerefine the court, and ciuilize
Their barbarous natures: I have in a table
With curious punctuality set down
To a hairs breadth, how low a new stamped courtie•
May veil to a country Gentleman, and by
Gradation, to his merchant, mercer, draper,
His linen man, and •aylor.
Pray you discover
This hidden mystery.
If the foresaid courtier
(As it may chance sometimes) find not his name
Writ in the Citizens books, with a State hum
He may salute 'em after three days waiting:
But if he owe them money, that he may
Preserve his credit, let him, in policy, never
Appoint a day of payment, so they may hope still:
But if he be to take up more, his page
May attend 'em at the gate, and usher 'em
Into his Cellar, and when they are warmed with wine,
Conduct 'em to his bedchamber, and though then
He be under his Barbers hands, as soon as seen,
He must start up to embrace 'em, veil thus low,
Nay though he call '•m cousins, it is the better,
His Dignity no way wronged in it.
Here's a fine knave.
Does this rule hold without exception sir•h a
For Cou••iers in general?
No, dea•e madam,
For one of the last edi•ion, and for him
I have c•mposde a Dictionary, in which
He is instructed, how, when, and to whom
To be proud or humble; at what times of the year
He may do a good deed for it self, and that is
Writ in Dominicall let•ers, all days else
Are his own, and of those days the sever•ll hours
Marked out, and to what use.
Show vs your method,
I am strangely taken with it.
Twill deserve
A pension, I hope. First a strong cullise
In his bed to h•ighten appetite: Shu•tle-cock
To keep him in breath when he rises; Tenni• Courts
Are chargeable, and the riding of great horses
Too boisterous for my young Courtier, let the old ones
I think not of, use it; next his meditation
How to court his Mis•re••e, and that he may seem wi•tie,
Let him be •urnish'd with con•iterate jests
Between him and his f•iend, that on occasion
They may ventem mutually: what his pace, and garb
Must be in the presence, then the length of his sword,
The fashion of the hilt, what the blade is
It matters not, it were barbarism to use it,
Unless to show his strength upon an and iron,
So the sooner broke, the better.
How I abuse
This precious time! Proiector, I treat first
Of you and your disciples; you roar out,
All is the Kings, his will aboue his laws:
And that fit tributes are too gentle yokes
For his poor subjects; whispering in his ear,
If he would have them fear, no man should dare
To bring a salad from his country garden,
Without the paying gubell; kill a hen,
Without excise: and that if he desire
To have his children, or his servants wear
Their heads upon their shoulders, you affirm,
In policy, tic fit the owner should
Pay for 'em by the pole; or if the Prince want
A present sum, he may command a city
Impossibilities, and for non-performance
Compel it to submit to any fine
His Officers shall impose: is this the way
To make our Emperor happy? can the groans
Of his subjects yield him music? must his thresholds
Be washed with widows and wronged orphans tears,
Or his power grow contemptible?
I begin
To feel my self a rogue again.
But you are
The Squire of Dames, devoted to the service
Of gamesome Ladies, the hidden mystery
Discovered, their close bawd; thy slavish breath
Fanning the fires of lust, the Goe-between
This female, and that wanton Sir, your art
Can blind a jealous husband, and disguised
Like a Millainer or Shoemaker, convey
A letter in a pantophle or glove
Without suspicion, nay at his table
In a case of picketoothes; you instruct'em how
To parley with their eyes, and make the temple
A mart of looseness: to discover all
The subtle brokages, were to teach in public,
Those private practises which are, in justice,
Severely to bee punished.
I am cast,
A jury of my patronises cannot quit me.
You are master of the manners, and the habit,
Rather the •corn of such as would live men,
And not like Apes with servile imitation,
Study prodigiou• fashions. You keep
Intelligence abroad that may instruct,
Our giddy youth at home what new found fashion
Is now in use, swearing hes most comp•••te
That first turns monster. Know villains, I can thrust
This arm into your hearts, strip off the flesh
That covers your deformities, and show you
In your own nakedness. Now though the law
Call not your follies death, you are for ever
Banished my brothers court. Away with 'em.
I will hear no reply.
What think you now?
That I am in a dream, or that I see
A second Pallas.
These removed, to you
I clear my brow, speak without care sweet maid,
Since with a mild aspect and ready ear,
I sit prepared to hear you.
Know great Princess,
My father, though a Pagan, was admired
For his d•epe search into those hidden studies,
Whose knowledge is denied to common men:
The motion, with the divers operations
Of the superior bodies, by his long
And careful observation were made
Familiar to him, all the secret virtues
Of plants, and simples, and in what degree
They were useful to mankind, hee could discourse of.
In a word conceive him as a Prophet honoured
In his own country. But being borne a man,
It lay not in him to defer the hour
Of his approaching death, though long foretold:
In this so fatal hour hee called before him
His two sons, and my self, the dearest pledges
Lent him by nature, and with his right hand
Blessing our several heads, hee thus began;
Mark his attention.
Give me leave to mark too.
If I could leave my understanding to you,
It were superfluous to make division
Of whatsoever else I can bequeath you,
But to avoid contention, I allot
An equal portion of my possessions
To you my sons: but unto thee my daughter,
My joy, my darling (pardon me though I
Repeat his words) if my prophetic soul
Ready to take her flight, can truly guess at
Thy future fate, I leave the strange assurance
Of the greatenesse thou art borne to, unto which
Thy brothers shall be proud to pay their service,
And all men else that honour beauty
Nymph.
Yet to prepare thee for that certain fortune,
And that I may from present wants defend thee,
I leave ten thousand crowns, which said, being called
To the fellowship of our Deities, he expird,
And with him all remembrance of the charge
Concerning me, left by him to my brothers.
Did they detain your legacy?
And still do.
His ashes were scarce quiet in his urn,
When in derision of my future greatness,
They thrust me out of doors, denying me
One short nights harbour.
Weep not.
I desire
By your persuasion, or commanding power,
The restitution of mine own, or that
To keep my frailty from temptation,
In your compassion of me, you would please
I as a handmaid may be entertained
To do the meanest offices to all such
As are honoured in your service.
Thou art welcome. What is thy name?
The forlorn Athenais.
The sweetness of thy innocence strangely takes me•
Forget thy brothers wrongs, for I will be
In my care a mother, in my love a sister to thee;
And were it possible thou coldest be wooned
To be of our belief.
May it please your excellence,
That is an easy task•, I• though no scholar,
Dare undertake it; clear truth cannot want
Rhetorical persuasions.
Tic a work,
My Lord, will well become you; break up the Court,
May your endeavours prosper.
Come my fai•e one,
I hope my convert.
Never, I will die
As I was borne.
Better you ne'er had been.
What does your majesty think of? the maid's gone.
She'• wondrous fair, and in her speech appeared
Pieces of scholarship.
Make use of her learning
And beauty together, on my life she will be proud
To be so converted.
From foul lust heaven guard me.
We only talk when we should do•
Isle second you,
Begin, and when you please.
Be constant in it.
That resolution which grows cold to day,
Will freeze to morrow.
Slight, I think sheele keep him
Her ward for ever, to her self engrossing
The disposition of all the favours
And bounties of the Empire.
Wee that by
The nearness of our service to his person,
Should raise this man, or pull down that, without
Her licence hardly dare prefer a suit,
Or if wee doe, it is crossed.
You are troubled for
Your proper ends, my aims are high and honest
The wrong that's done to M•iesty I rapine at:
I• love the Emperor, and it is my ambition
To have him know himself, and to that purpose
Isle run the hazard of a check.
And I•
The loss of my place•
I will not come behind,
Fall what can fall.
Let vs put on sad aspects
To draw him on; charge home, weal fetch you off,
Or lie dead by you.
How's this? clouds in the chamber•
And the ayre clear abroad.
When you our Sun
Obscure your glorious beams, poor we that borrow
Our little light from you, cannot but suffer
A general Eclipse.
Great Sir, it is true,
For 'till you please to know, and be your self,
And freely dare dispose of what's your own
Without a warrant; we are falling meteors;
And not fixed flares.
The pale faced Moon that should
Govern the night, usurp the rule of day,
And still is at the full in spite of nature,
And will not know a change.
Speak you in riddles?
I am no Oedipus, but your Emperor,
And as such would be instructed.
Your command
Shall be obeyed, till now I never heard you
Speak like your self; and may that power by which
You are so, strike me dead, if what I shall
Deliver, as a faithful subject to you,
Hath root, or growth from malice, or base envy
Of your Sisters greatness; I could honour in her
A power subordinate to yours, but not
As it is predominant.
It it fit that she,
In her birth your vassal, should command the kn•es
Of such as should not bow but to your self?
She with security walks upon the heads
Of the nobility, the multitude
As to a Deity offer•ng sacrifice,
For her grace, and favour.
Her proud fe•te even wearied
With the kisses of petitioners.
While you,
To whom alone such reverence is proper,
Pass unregarded by her,
You have not yet
Been Master of one hour of your whole life,
Your will and •aculties kept in more awe,
Then she can doe •er own
And as a bondsman,
O let my zeal find grace, and pardon from you,
That I descend so low, you are designed
To this or that employment, suiting well
A private man I grant, but not a Prince,
To bee a perfect horseman, or to know
The words of the chase, or a fair man of arms,
Or to bee able to pierce to the depth,
Or write a comment on the obscurest Poets,
I grant are ornaments, but your maine scope
Should bee to govern men to guard your own,
If not enlarge your empire.
You are built up
By the curious hand of nature to revive
The memo•ie of Alexander, or by
A prosperous success in your brave actions
To rival Caesar.
Rouse your self, and let not
Your pleasure bee a copy of her will
Your pupil age is passed, and manly actions
Are now expected from you•
Doe not loose
Your subjects hearts,
What is it to have the means
To bee magnificent, and not exercise
The boundless virtue?
You confine your sell•e
To that which strict Philosophy allows of,
As if you were a private man.
No pomp,
Or glorious shows of royalty, rendering it
Both loved, and terrible.
Slight you live, as it
Begets some doubt, whether you have or not
Th'abilities of a man.
The Firmament
Hath not more stars then there are several beauty•
Ambitious at the height to impart their dear,
And sweetest favours to you.
Yet you have not
Made choice of one, of all the •ex, to serve you,
In a Physical way of courtship.
But that I would not
Begin the expression of my being a man,
In blood, or stain the first white robe I wear
Of absolute power, with a s•r•isle imitation
Of any tyrannous habit, my just anger
Prompts me to make you in your sufferings feel,
And not in words to instruct you, that the licence
Of the loose, and saucy language you now practised,
Hath forfeited your heads.
How's this?
I know not
What the play may prove, but I assure you that
I doe not like the prologue.
O the miserable
Condition of a Prince! who though hee vary
More shapes then Proteus in his mind, and manners,
Hee cannot win an universal suffrage,
From the many-headed monster, Multitude.
Like AEsops foolish Frogs they trample on him,
As a senseless block, if his government bee easy.
And if hee prove a Stork, they croak, and rail
Against him as a tyranne. Isle put off
That majesty, of which you think I have
Nor use, nor feeling, and in arguing with you,
Convince you with strong proofs of common reason,
And not with absolute power, against which, wretches,
You are not to dispute. Dare you that are
My creatures, by my prodigal favours fashioned,
Presuming on the nearness of your service,
Set off with my familiar acceptance,
Condemn my obsequiousness to the wise direction•
Of an incomparable Sister, whom all parts
Of our world, that are made happy in knowledge
Of her perfection•, with wonder gaze on?
And yet you that were only borne to eat
The blessing• of our mother earth, that are
Distant but one degree from beasts (since slaves
Can claim no larger privilege) that know
No farther then your sensual appetites,
Or wanton lust have taught you, undertake
To give your sovereign laws to follow that
Your ignorance marks out to him?
How were wee
Abused in our opinion of his temper?
Wee had forgot it is found in holy writ,
That Kings hearts are inscrutable.
I ne'er read it,
My study lies not that way.
By his looks
The tempest still increases.
Am I grown
So stupid in your judgments, that you dare
With such security offer violence
To sacred majesty? will you not know
The Lyon is a Lyon, though he show not
His rending paws? or fill th'affrighted ayre
With the thunder of his rorings? you blessed Saints,
How am I trenched on? is that temperance
So famou• in your cited Alexander,
Or Roman Scipio a crime in me?
Cannot I bee an Emperor, unless
Your wives, and daughters bow to my proud lusts?
And cause I ravish not their fairest buildings
And fruitful vineyards, or what is dearest,
From such as are my vassalls, must you conclude
I doe not know the awful power, and strength
Of my prerogative? am I close handed
Because I scatter not among you that
I must not call mine own. Know you court leeches,
A Prince is never so magnificent,
As when hoe's sparing to enrich a few
With th'iniuries of many; could your hopes
So grossly flatter you, as to believe
I was born and trained up as an Emperor, only
In my indulgence to give s•nctuarie,
In their unjust proceedings, to the rapine
And aua•ice of my groom•?
In the true mirror
Of your perfections, at length wee see
Our own deformities.
And not once dating
To look upon that majesty wee now slighted,
With our faces thus glewd to the earth, wee beg
Your gracious pardon.
Offering our necks
To bee trod on, as a punishment for our late
Presumption, and a willing testimony
Of our subjection.
Deserve our mercy
In your better life hereafter, you shall find,
Though in my Fathers life I held it madness,
To usurp his power, •nd in my youth disdained not
To learn from the instructions o• my sister,
Isle make it good to all the world, I am
An Emperor; and even this instant grasp
The Sceptre, my rich stock of majesty
Entire, no scruple wasted.
If these tears
I drop, proceed not from my joy to hear this.
May my eye-bals follow 'em.
I will show my sell•e
By your sudden metamorphosis transformed
From what I was.
And ne'er presume to a•ke
What fits not you to give.
Move in that sphere,
And my light with full beams shall shine upon you.
Forbear this slavish courtship, it is to me
In a kind idolatrous.
Your gracious sister.
Has he converted her?
And, as such, will
Present her when you please.
I am glad of it.
Command my Dresser to adorn her with
The robes that I gave order for.
I shall.
And let those precious Jewels I took la••
Out of my Cabinet, if it be possible,
Give lustre to her beauties, and that done,
Command her to be near vs.
Tic a province
I willingly embrace,
O my dear Sir•
You have forgot your morning task, and therefore
With a mothers love I come to reprehend you,
But it shall bee gently.
'T will become you, though,
You •aid with reverend duty. Know hereafter,
If my mother lived in you, how ere her son,
Like you she were my subject.
How?
Put off
Amazement, you will find it. Yet Isle hear you
At distance, as a sister, but no longer
As a governess, I assure you.
This is put home,
Beyond our hopes
She stands as if his words
Had powerful magic in 'em.
Will you have me
Your pupil ever? the down on my chin
Confirms I am a man, a man of men,
The Emperor, that knows his strength.
Heaven grant
You know it not too soon.
Let it suffice
My wardships out. If your design concerns vs
As a man, and not a boy, with our allowance
You may deliver it.
A strange alteration!
But I will not contend. Bee, as you wish, Sir,
Your own disposer, vncompeld I cancel
All bonds of my authority.
You in this
Pay your due homage, which performed, I thus
Embrace you as a Sister. No way doubting
Your vigilance for my sa•etie as my honour,
And what you now come to impart, I rest
Most confident, points at one of them!
At both,
And not alone the present, but the future
Tranquillity of your mind: since in the choice
Of her, you are to heate with holy fires,
And make the consort of your royal bed,
The certain means of glorious succession,
With the true happiness of our humane being,
Are wholly comprehended.
How? a wife?
Shall I become a votary to Hymen,
Before my youth hath sacrificed to Venus?
It is something with the soonest, yet to show
In things in different, I am not averse
To your wise counsels, let me first survey
Those beauties, that in being a Prince I know
Are rivals for me. You will •ot confine me
To your election, I must see dear sis•er•
With mine own eyes.
It is fit Sir, yet in this
You may please to consider, absolute Princes
Have, or should have, in Policy, less free, will
Then such as are their vassals. For, you must,
As you are an Emperor, in this high business
Weigh with due providence, with whom alliance
May bee most useful for the preservation
Or your increase of Empire.
I approve not
Such compositions for our moral ends,
In what is in it self divine, nay more
Decreed in heaven. Yet if our neighbour Princes,
Ambitious of such nearness, shall present
Their dearest pledges to me (ever reserving
The caution of mi•e own content) Isle not
Contemn their courteous offers.
Bring in the pictures:
Must I then judge the substances by the shadows?
The Painters are most envious, if they want
Good colours for preferment• virtuous Ladies
Love this way to bee fla•terd, and accuse
The workman of detraction, if he add not
Some grace they cannot truly call their own.
Is it not •o Gratianus? you may challenge
Some interest in the science.
A pretender
To the art I truly honour, and subscribe
To your majesties opinion.
Let me see,
Cleanthe, daughter to the King of Epirus,
AEtatis sua, the fourteenth: ripe enough,
And forward too, I assure you. Let me examine
The Symmetries. If Statuaries could
By the foot of Hercules set down punctually
His whole dimensions, and the countenance be
The index of the mind, this may instruct me,
With the aids of that I have read touching this subject,
What she is inward: the colour of her hair,
If it be, as this does promise, pale, and faint,
And not a glistening white; Her brow, so so;
The circles of her sight, too much contracted;
Inno's fair cow eyes by old Homer are
Commended to their merit, hears a sharpe frost,
In the tip of her nose, which by the length assures me
Of storms at midnight, if I fail to pay her
The tribute she expects. I like her not:
What is the other.
How hath hee commenced
Doctor in this so sweet and secret art,
Without our knowledge?
Some of his forward pages
Have robed vs of the honour.
No such matter,
Hee has the theory only, not the practick.
Amasia, Sister to the Duke of Athens,
Her age eighteen, descended lineally
From Theseus, as by her pedigree
Will be made apparent: Of his lusty kindred?
And loose so much time! it is strange! as I live, she hath
A Philosophical aspect, there is
More wit then beauty in her face, and when
I court her, it must be in tropes, and figures,
Or she will cry absurd. She will have her elencha
To cut off any fallacy I can hope
To put upon her, and expect I should
Ever conclude in Syllog•smes, and those true ones
In part &amp; toto, or sheele tire me with
Her tedious Elocutions in the praise
Of the increase of generation, for which
Alone the sport in her morality
Is good and lawful, and to bee often practised
For fear of missing. Fie on it, let the race
Of Theseus be matched with Aristotles,
Isle none of her.
You are curious in your choice, Sir,
And hard to please, yet if that your consent
May give authority to it, Isle present you
With one, that if her birth, and fortunes answer
The rarities of her body, and her mind',
Detraction durst not tax her.
Let me see her,
Though wanting those additions, which we can
Supply from our own store: it is in vs
To make men rich, and noble, but to give
Legitimate shapes and virtues, does belong
To the great creator of'em, to whose bounties
Alone it is proper, and in this disdains
An Emperor for his rival.
I applaud
This fit acknowledgement, since Princes then
Grow less then common men, when they contend
With him, by whom they are so.
I confess• it.
Not to hold you in suspense, Behold the virgin
Rich in her natural beauties, no way borrowing
Th'adulterate aids of art. Peruse her better,
She is worth your serious view.
I am amazed too.
I never saw her equal.
How his eye
Is fixed upon her!
And as she were a fort,
He would suddenly surprise, Hee measures her
From the bases to the battlements.
Ha! now I view her better,
I know her; it is the maid that not long since
Was a petitioner; her bravery
So alters her, I had forgot her face.
So has the Emperor.
She holds out yet,
And yields not to th'assault.
She is strongly guarded•
In her virgin blushes.
When you know, fair creature,
It is the Emperor that honours you
With such a strict survey of your sweet parts,
In thankfulness you cannot but return
Due reverence for the favour.
I was lost
In my astonishment at the glorious object,
And yet rest doubtful whether he expect•
Being more then man, my adoration,
(Since sure there is divinity about him,)
Or will rest satisfied if my humble knees
In duty thus bow to him.
Ha! it speaks.
She is no statue Sir.
Suppose her one,
And that she had nor organs, voice, nor heat,
Most willingly I would resign my Empire
So it might be to after-time• recorded
That I was her Pigmalion, though, like him,
• doted on my workmanship, without hope too
Of having Cytherea so propitious
To my vows, or sacrifice, in her compassion
To give it life or motion.
Pray you be not raped so,
Nor borrow from imaginary fiction
Impossible aids; she's flesh and blood, I assure you,
And if you please to ho•or her in the trial,
And be your own security, as you'll find
I fable not, she comes in a noble way
To be at your devotion.
It is the maid
I offered to your highness, her changed shape
Concealed her from you:
At the first I knew her,
And a second firebrand Cupped brings to kindle
My flames almost put out: I am too cold,
And play with opportunity.
May I taste then
The nectar of her lip? I do not give it
The praise it merits: antiquity is too poor
To help me with a simile to express her.
Let me drink often from this living spring,
To nourish new invention.
Do not surfeit
In ouer-greedily devouring that
Which may without satiety feast you often.
From the moderation in receiving them,
The choicest viands do continue pleasing
To the most curious palate; if you think her
Worth your embraces, and the sovereign title
Of the Grecian Empress,
If? how much you sin,
Only to doubt it; the possession of her
Makes all that was before most precious to me,
Common, and cheap: in this you have shown your self
A provident Protectress. I already
Grow weary of the absolute command
Of my so numerous subjects, and desire
No sovereignty but here, and write down gladly,
A period to my wishes.
Yet before
It be too late, consider her condition,
Her father was a Pagan, she her self
A new converted Christian.
Let me know
The man to whose religious means I ow
So great a debt.
You are advanced too high Sir,
To acknowledge a beholdingness, it is discharged,
And I, beyond my hopes, rewarded, if
My service please your Majesty.
Take this pledge
Of our assured love. Are there none here
Have suits to prefer? on such a day as this
My bounty's without limit. O my dearest,
I will not hear thee speak; what ever in
Thy thoughts is apprehended, I grant freely:
Thou would plead thy unworthiness, by thy self
The magazine of felicity, in thy lowness
Our Eastern Queens at their full height bow to thee,
And are in their best trim thy foils and shadows.
Excuse the violence of my love, which cannot
Admit the least delay. Command the Patriarch
With speed to do his holy office for vs,
That when we are made one.
You must forbear Sir,
She is not yet baptised.
In the same hour
In which she is confirmed in our faith,
We mutually will give away each other,
And both be gainers; weal hear no reply
That may divert vs on.
••u may hereafter
Please to remember to whose furtherance
You ow this height of h•ppinesse.
As I was
Your creature when I first petitioned you,
I will continue so, and you shall find me,
Though an Empress, still your servant.
Here's a marriage
Made up on the sudden!
I rapine not at
The fair maids fortune, though I fear the Princess
Had some peculiar end in it.
Who• so simple
Only to doubt it?
It is too apparent,
She hath preferred a creature of her own,
By whose means she may still keep to her self
The government of the Empire.
Where as if
The Emperor had espoused some neighbour Queen,
Pulcheria with all her wisdom could not
Keep her pre-eminence.
Be it as it will,
It is not now to be altered, heaven I say
Turn all to the best.
Are we come to praying again•
Leave thy profaneness
Would it would leave me.
I am sure I thrive not by it.
Come to the Temple.
Even where you will, I know not what to think on•t,
Nor this, nor the age before vs ever looked o•
The like solemnity.
A sudden fever
Kept me at home. Pray you my Lord acquaint me
With the particular•.
You may presume
No pomp, nor ceremony could be w•nting,
Where there was Privilege to command, and means
To cherish rare inventions.
I believe it;
But the sum of all in brief.
Pray you so take it;
Fair Athenais not lunge since a Suitor,
And almost in her hopes forsaken, first
W•• Christened, and the Emperors mothers name
Eudoxia, as hee willed, imposed upon her:
Pulcheria the ever matchless Princess,
Assisted by her reverend Aunt Maria,
Her God-mothers.
And who the masculine witness?
At the new empress suite I had the honour.
For which I must ever serve her.
it was a grace,
With justice you may boast of.
The marriage followed,
And as it is said, the Emperor made bold
To turn the day to night, for, to bed they went
As soon a• they had dined, and there are w•gers
Laid by •ome merry Lord's, hee hath already•
Begot a boy upon her.
That is yet
To be determined of; but I am certain,
A Prince so soon in his disposition altered,
Was never heard nor read of.
But of late,
Frugal and •paring, now nor bounds, nor limits
To his magnificent bounties. Hee affirmed,
Having received more blessings by his empress
Then hee could hope, in thankfulness to heaven
He cannot be to prodigal to others.
What ever s'off•red to his royal hand
Hee signs without perusing it.
I am here
Enjoined to •ree all such as lye for debt,
The creditor• to bee paid out of his coffers.
And I all malefactors that are not
Convicted, or for treason or foul murder,
Such only are excepted;
It is a rare clemency!
Which wee must not dispute, but put in practise.
SIR by your own rules of Philosophy
You know thing• violent last not, royal bounty•
Are great, and gracious while they are dispensed
With moderation, but when their excess
In giving gyant-bulkes to others, take from
The Princes just proportion, they loose
The names of virtues, and, their natures changed•
Grow the most dangerous vices
In this, sister,
Your wisdom is not circular; they that sow
In narrow bounds, cannot expect in reason
A crop beyond their ventures, what I doe
Disperse, I lend, and will with usury
Return unto my heap: I only then
Am rich, and happy, (though my coffers sound
With emptiness) when my glad subject• feel,
Their plenty and felicity is my gift;
And they will find, when they with cheerfulness
Supply not my defects, I being the stomach
To the politic body of the State, the limbs
Grow suddenly faint, and feeble; I could urge
Proofs of more fineness in their shape and language,
But none of greater strength: dissuade me not,
What wee will, we will doe; yet to assure you,
Your care does not offend vs, for an hour,
Bee happy in the converse of my best
And dearest comfort; may you please to licence
My privacy some few minutes?
Licence Sir,
I have no will, but is derived from yours,
And that still waits upon you, nor can I
Bee left with such security with any,
As with the gre•ious Princess•, who receive•
Addition, though she bee all excellence,
In being stilt your sister.
O sweet creature!
Let me bee censured fond, and too indulgent,
Nay though they s•y vxorious, I care not,
Her love, and sweet humility exact
A tribute far beyond my power, to pay
Her matchless goodness. Forward.
Now you find
Your dying fathers prophecy that foretold
Your present greatness, to the full accomplished.
For the poor aides, and furtherance I lent you,
I willingly forget:
Even that binds me
To a more strict remembrance of the favour,
Nor shall you from my soul ingratitude,
In •ny circumstance ever find cause
T'upbraid me with your benefit.
I believe so.
Pray you give• vs leave: what now I must deliver
Under the deepest seal of secrecy,
Though it b• for you good, will give assurance
Of what is looked for, if you not alone
Hear, but obey my counsels.
They must be
Of a strange nature, if with zealous speed
I put 'em not in practice.
It were impertinence
To dwell on circumstances, since the wound
Requires a sudden cure, especially
Since you that are the happy instrument
Elected to it, though young in your judgment
Write far aboue your years, and may instruct
Such as are more experienced.
Good madam,
In this I must oppose you, I am well
Acquainted with my weakness, and it will not
Become your wisdom, by which I am raised
To this titulary height, that should correct
The pride, and overweening of my fortune,
To play the parasite to it, in ascribing
That merit to me, unto which I can
Pretend no interest; pray you excuse
My bold simplicity, and to my weight
Design me where you please, and you shall find•
In my obedience, I am still your creature.
'Ti• nobly answered, and I glory in
The building I have raised; go on, sweet Lady,
In this your v•rtuous progress• but to the point,
You know, nor do I envy it, you have
Acquired that power, which, not long since, was mine,
In governing the Emperor, and must use
The strength you hold in the heart of his affections,
For his private, as the public preservation,
To which there is no greater enemy,
Then hi• exorbitant prodigality,
How ere his sycophants, and flatterers call it•
Royal magnificence, and though you may
Urge what's done for your honour, must not be
Curbed, or be controlled by you, you cannot in
Your wisdom but conceive, if that the torrent
Of his violent bounties be not stopped, or lessened,
It will prove most pernicious. Therefore, Madam,
Since it is your duty, as you are his wife,
To give him saving counsels, and in being
Almost his idol, may command him to
Take any shape you please, with a powerful hand,
To stop him in his precipice to ruin.
Avert it heaven.
Heaven is most gracious to you, madam,
In choosing you to be the instrument
Of such a pious work. You see he signs
What suit soever is pre•erred, not once
Inquiring what it is, yielding himself
A prey to all; I would therefore have you, Lady,
As I know you will to advise him, or command him,
As he would reap the plenty of your favours,
To use more moderation in his bounties,
And that before he gives, he would consider,
The what, to whom, and wherefore.
Do yo think
Such arrogance, or usurpation, rather,
Of what is proper, and peculiar
To every private husband, and much more
To him an Emperor, can rank with th'obedience
And duty of a wife? are we appointed
In out creation (let me reason with you)
To rule, or to obey? or because he loves me
With a kind impotence, must I tyrannise
Over his weakness? or abuse the strength
With which he arms me to his wrong? or, like
A prostituted creature, merchandise
Our mutual delight for hire? or to
Serve mine own sordid ends? in vulgar nuptials
Priority is exploded, though there be
A difference in the parties, and shall I,
His vassal from obscurity raised by him
To this so eminent light, presume to appoint him
To do, or not to do this, or that: when wives
Are well aocommodated by their husbands
With all things both •or use, and ornament,
Let them fix there, and never dare to question
Their wills or actions. For my self, I vow,
Though now my Lord would rashly give away
His Sceptre, and imperial Diadem,
Or if there could be any thing more precious,
I would not cross it; but I know this is
But a trial of my temper, and as such
I do receive it, or if it be otherwise,
You are so subtle in your arguments,
I dare not stay to hear them.
Is it even so?
I have power ore these yet, and comm•nd •heir stay,
To hearken nearer •o me.
We are charged
By the Emperor, our brother, to attend
The Empress service.
You are too mortified •ester,
(With reverence I speak it) for young Ladies
To keep you company. I am so tired
With your tedious exhortations, doctrines, uses,
Of your religious morality,
That for my health sake, I must take the freedom
To enjoy a little of those pretty pleasures
That I was borne to:
When I come to your years,
Isle do as you do, but till then, with your pardon,
Isle lose no more time. I have not learned to dance yet•
Nor sing, but holy hymns, and those to vile tunes too;
Nor to discourse, but of Schoolemens opinion•.
How shall I answer my suitors? since, I hope,
Ere long I shall have many, without practice
To write, and speak something that's not derived
From the fathers of Philosophy.
We shall shame
Our breeding Sister, if we should go on th•s.
It is for your credit, that we study
How to converse with men; women with women
Yields but a harren argument.
She frowns,
But you'll protect vs Madam?
Yes, and love
Your sweet simplicity.
All young girls are so,
Till they know the way of't.
But when we are entered,
We shall on a good round pace,
Isle leave you Madam.
And we our duties with you.
On all hands
Thu• slighted? no way left• am I grown stupid
In my invention? can I make no use
Of the Emperors bounties? now it is thought: within there•
Madam.
It shall be so; nearer; your ear
Draw a petition to this end.
Besides
The danger to prefer it, I believe
Twill ne'er be granted.
How's this? are you grown,
From a servant, my director? let me hear
No more of this. Dispatch, Isle master him
At his own weapon.
Let me understand it,
If yet there be ought wanting that may perfect
A general happiness.
The peoples joy
In seas of acclamations flow in
To wait on yours.
Their love with bounty levied,
Is a sure guard. Obedience forced from fear,
Paper fortification, which in danger
Will yield to the impression of a reed,
Or of it self fall off.
True, Philanax.
And by that certain compass we resolve
To steer our Bark of government.
'Ti• well.
My dearest, and my all-des•ruing Sister,
As a petitioner kneel? it must not bee,
Pray you, rise, although your suite were half my Empire,
It is freely granted.
Your alacrity
To give hath made a beggar; yet before
My suite is by your sacred hand and se•le
Confirmed, it is necessary you peruse
The sum of my request.
Wee will not wrong
Your judgment, in conceiving what it is fit
For you to ask, and vs to grant, so much,
As to proceed with caution, give me my signet,
With confidence I sign it, and here vow•
By my fathers soul, but with your free consent
It is irrevocable.
What if she now
Calling to memory, how often wee
Have crossed her government, in revenge hath made
Petition for our heads?
They must even off then,
No ransone can redeem v•.
Let those jewel•
So highly rated by the Persian merchants
Bee bought, and as a sacrifice from vs
Presented to Eudox•. She being only
Worthy to wear 'em, I am angry with
The unresistable necessity
Of my occasions, and important care•
That so long keep me from her.
Go to the Empress,
And tell her on the sudden, I am sick,
And doe desire, the comfort of a visit,
If she please to vouchsafe it. From me use
Your humblest language: But when once I have her
In my possession, I will rise, and speak
In• higher strain, say it raise storms, no matter.
Fools judge by the event, my ends are honest.
WHat is become of her? can she that carries
Such glorious excellence, of light about her•
Be any where concealed?
Wee have sought her lodgings,
And all we can learn from the servants is,
She by your majesties sisters waited on,
(The attendance of her other officers
By her express command denied,)
Forbear
Impertinent circumstances, whither went she? speak.
As they guess, to the laurel grove•
So slightly guarded •
What an earth-quake I feel in me• and but that
Religion assures the contrary,
The Poets dreams of lustful Fawns, and Satyrs,
Would make me fear, I know not what.
I have sound her,
And it please your Majesty.
Yes, it doth please me•
But why returned without her?
As she made
Her speediest approach• to your presence,
A servant of the Prince•sses Pulcheria
Encountered her; what it was, he whispered to her
I am ignorant, but hearing it, she started,
And willed me to excuse her absence from you,
The third part of an hour.
In this she takes
So much of my life from me; yet Isle bear it
With what patience I may; since it is her pleasure•
Go back, my good Paulinus, and entreat her•
Not to exceed a minute.
Here's strange fondness!
You are certain she will come?
She is already
Entered your outward lodging•.
No train with her?
Your excellence sisters only.
It is the better;
See the doors strongly guarded, and deny
Access to all, but with our special licence.
Why dost thou stay? show your obedience,
Your wisdom now is useless.
She is sick sure,
Or, in fit reverence to your Majesty,
She had waited you at the door.
It would hardly be
Excused, in civil manners, to her equal,
But with more difficulty to you, that are
So far aboue her.
Not in her opinion;
She hath been too long accustomed to command
T•acknowledge a superior.
There she walks.
If she be not sick of the sullens, I see not
The least infirm•y in her.
This is s•range!
Open your eyes; the Empress.
Reach that chair:
Now sitting thus at distance, Isle vouchsafe
To look upon her.
How! sister: pray you awake,
Are you in your wits?
Grant heaven, your too much learning
Does not conclude in madness.
You entreated
A visit from me.
True, my servant used
Such language, but now as a mistress I
Command your service.
Service!
She's stark mad, sure.
You'll find I can dispose of what's mine own
Without a guardian.
Follow me. I will see you
When your frantic fit is ore. I do begin
To be of your belief.
It will deceive you.
Thou shalt not str from hence, thus as mine own
I seize upon thee.
Help, help, violence
Offered to the Empress person.
It is in vain:
She was an Empress once, but, by my gift,
Which, being abused, I do recall my grant.
You are read in story; call to remembrance,
What the great Hectors mother Hecuba
Was to Vlysses, Ilium sacked•
A slave.
To me thou art so:
Wonder and amazement
Quite overwhelm me: how am I transformed?
How have I lost my liberty?
Thou shall know
Too soon, no doubt. Who's that with such rudeness
Beats at the door?
The Prince Paulinus, madam,
Sent from the Emperor to attend upon
The gracious Empress.
And who is your slave now?
Sister, repent in time, and beg pardon
For your presumption.
It is resolved:
From me return this answer to Paulinus;
She shall not come; she's mine; the Emperor hath
No interest in her.
Whatsoere I am,
You take not from your power ore me, to yield
A reason for this usage.
Though my will is
Sufficient to ad to thy affliction,
Know wretched thing, it is not thy fate, but folly
Hath made thee what thou art: it is some delight
To urge my merits to one so ungrateful;
Therefore with horror hear it. When thou were
Thrust as a stranger from thy fathers house,
Exposed to all calamities that want
Could throw upon thee, thine own brothers scorn,
And in thy hopes, as by the world forsaken,
My pity, the last altar that was left thee,
I heard thy Siren charms, with feeling heard them,
And my compassion made mine eyes vi tears
With thine, dissembling Crocodile; and when Queen•
Were emulous for thy imperial bed,
The garments of thy sorrows east aside,
I put thee in a shape as would have forced
Envy from Cleopatra, had she seen thee;
Then, when I knew my brothers blood was warmed
With youthful fire•, I brought thee to his presence,
And how my deep designs, for thy good plotted,
Succeeded to my wishes, is apparent,
And needs no repetition.
I am conscious
Of your so many, and unequalled favours,
But find not how I may accuse my self
For any facts committed, that with justice•
Can raise your anger to this height against me.
Pride and forget•ulnesse would not let thee see that,
Against which now thou can not close thine eyes.
What injury could be equal to thy late
Contempt of my good counsel, when I urged
The Emperors prodigal bounties, and entreated
That you would use your power to give 'em limits,
Or, at the least, a due consideration
Of such as sued, and for what, ere he signed it?
In opposition you brought against m•
Th'obedience of a wife, that Ladies were not,
Being well accommodated by their Lords,
To question, but much less to cross their pleasures;
Nor would you, though the Emperor were resolved
To give away his Sceptre, hinder it,
Since it was done for your honour, covering with
False colours of humility your ambition.
And is this my offence?
As wicked counsel
Is still most hurtful unto those that give it;
Such as deny to follow what is good,
In reason, are the first that must repent it.
When I please you shall hear more, in the mean time
Thank your own wilful folly that hath changed you
From an Empress to a bondewoman.
Force the doors,
Kill those that dare resist.
Dear Sir redeem me.
O suffer not, for your own honours sake,
The Empress you so late loved to bee made
A prisoner in the court.
Leap to his lips,
You 'll find them the best sanctuary.
And try then,
What interest my reverend Sister hath
To force you from 'em.
What strange may-game's this?
Though done in sport, how ill this levity
Becomes your wisdom?
I am serious Sir,
And have done nothing but what you in honour,
And as you are your self an Emperor,
Stand bound to justify.
Take heed, put not these
Strange trials on my patience.
Doe not you Sir,
Deny your own act; as you are a man,
And stand on your own bottoms, twill appear
A childish weakness to make void a grant,
Signed by your sacred hand, and seal, and strengthend
With a religious oath, but with my licence,
Never to be recalled. For some few minutes,
Let reason rule your passion, and in this, delivers the deed.
Bee pleased to read my interest; you will find there
What you in me call violence, is justice,
And that I may make use of what's mine own,
According to my will. it is your own gift Sir,
And what an Emperor gives, should stand as firm
As the celestial poles upon the shoulders
Of Atlas, or his successor in that office
The great Alcides.
Miseries of more weight,
Then it is faind they supported, fall upon me,
What hath my rashness•e done? in this transaction
Drawn, in express•e and formal terms I have
Given and consigned into your hands, to use
And observe, as you please, my dear Eudoxa.
It is my deed, I doe confess it is,
And as I am my self, not to bee cancelled:
But yet you may show mercy, and you will,
When you consider that there is no beauty,
So perfect in a creature, but is soiled
With some unbeseeming blemish; you have laboured
To build me up a complete Prince, it is granted,
Yet as I am a man, like other Monarchs,
I have defects and frayleties, my facility,
To send petitioners with pleased looks from me,
Is all I can be charged with, and it will•
Become your wisdom, (since it is in your power)
In charity to provide, I fall no further
Or in my oath, or honour.
Royal Sir,
This was the mark I aimed at, and I glory
At the length, you so conceive it. it was a weakness
To measure by your own integrity
The purposes of others. I have shown you
In a true mirror what frui•e grows upon
The tree of hudwinckt bounty, and what dangers
Precipitation in the managing
Your great affairs produces.
I embrace it
As a grave advertisement, and vow hereafter
Never to sign petitions at this rate.
For mine, see Sir. it is canceled, on my knees
I redeliver what I now begged from you.
She is my second gift.
Which if I part from
Till death divorce vs.
So Sir,
Nay sweet chide not
I am punished in thy looks, defer the rest,
Till we are more private.
I ask pardon too
If in my personated passion I
Appeared to harsh, and rough.
It was gentle language, what I was then considerd
O dear Madame,
It was decorum in the Scane•
This trial,
When I was Athenais, might have passed,
But as I am the Empress.
Nay no anger,
Since all good was intended.
Building on,
That certain base, I fear not what can follow,
These are strange devices Philanax.
True my Lord,
May all turn to the best.
The Emperors looks
Promised a calm.
But the vexed Empress frowns
Presaged a second storm.
I am sure I feel one,
In my leg already.
Your old friend, the gout?
My forced companion, Philanax.
To your rest:
Rest and forbearing wine, with a temperate diet,
Though many Montebancks pretend the cure of't,
I have found my best Physicians,
Ease to your Lordship.
MAke me her property?
Your majesty
Hath just cause of distaste, and your resentment
Of the affront in the point of honour cannot
But meet a fair construction.
I have only
The title of an Empress, but the power
Is, by her, ravished from me• she surveys
My actions as a governess, and calls
My not observing all that she directs
Folly, and disobedience.
Under correction,
With grief I have long observed it, and if you
Stand pleased to sign my warrant Isle deliver
In my vnfainde ze•le, and desire to serve you,
(Howere I run the hazard of my head fort
Should it arrive at the knowledge of the Princess,)
Not alone, the reasons why things are thus carried,
But give into your hands the power to clip
The wings of her command.
Your service this way
Cannot offend me.
Bee you pleased to know then
But still with pardon, if I am too bold,
Your too much sufferance imps the broken feather•
Which carry her to this proud height, in which
She with security, soars, and still towers ore you,
But if you would employ the strengths you hold
In the Emperors affections, and remember
The orb you move in should admit no star else,
You never would confess the managing
Of state affairs to her alone are proper,
And you sit by a looker on,
I would not,
If it were possible I could attempt,
Her diminution, without a taint
Of foul ingratitude in my self.
In this
The sweetness of your temper does abuse you,
And you call that a benefit to your self
Which she for her own ends conferred upon you.
It is yielded she gave way to your advancement:
But for what cause? that she might still continue
Her absolute sway, and swing ore the whole state,
And that she might to her admirers vaunt,
The Empress was her creature, and the giver
To bee preferred before the gift.
It may bee.
Nay it is most certain: whereas would you please
In a true glass to look upon your self,
And view without detraction your own merits
Which all men wonder at; you would find that fate,
Without a second cause, appointed you
To the supremest honour. For the Princess•
She hath reigned long enough, and her remove
Will make your entrance free to the possession
Of what you were borne to, &amp; but once resolve
To build upon her ruins, leave the engines
Tha• must bee used to undermine her greatenes
To my provision.
I thank your care,
But a design of such weight must not be
Rashly determined of, it will exact
A long and serious consultation from me.
In the mean time Chrysapius •est assured
I live your thankful Mistress.
Is this all?
Will the Physic that I ministered work no further?
I have played the fool, and leaving a calm po•t
Embarked my self on a rough sea of danger.
In her silence lies my safety, which how can I
Hope from a woman? but the die is thrown,
And I must stand the hazard.
Is Paulinus
So tortured with his gowte?
Most miserably,
And it ads much to his affliction, that
The payne denies him power to waite upon
Your Majesty.
I pity him: hee is
A wondrous honest man, and what he suffers,
I know will grieve my Empress.
Hee indeed is
Much bound to her gracious favour.
Hee deserves it,
She cannot find a subject upon whom
She better may confer it: is the stag
Safe lodged?
Yes Sir, and the hounds and huntsmen ready.
Hee will make you royal sport. Hee is a dear
Of ten at the least.
Whither will this clown?
Stand back.
I would see the Emperor, why should you Courtiers•
Scorn a poor Countryman• wee zweat at the Plough
To will your mouths, you and you curs might starve el•.
Wee prune the orchards, and you cranch •he fruit;
Yet still you are snarling at vs.
What's the matter?
I would look on thy sweet face.
Unmannerly swain.
Zwaine, though I am a zwaine, I have a heart yet,
As ready to doe service for my liege,
As any Princox Peacock of you all.
Zookers had I one of you single with this twig,
I would so veeze you.
Will your Majesty
Hear his rude language?
Yes, and hold it as
An ornament, not a blendish. O Timantus!
Since that dread power by whom we are, disdains not
With an open ear to hear petitions from vs,
Easy access in vs his deputies,
To the meanest of our subi•cts, is a debt,
Which we stand bound to pay.
By my granams ghost
It is a wholesome saying, our vicar could not mend it
In the pulpit on a Sunday.
What's they suite friend?
Zu•e? I would laugh at that. Let the court beg from thee.
What the poor country gives: I bring a present
To thy good grace, which I can call mine own,
And look not like these gay folk for a return,
Of what they venture. Have I giuent you? ha,
A perilous knave.
See here a dainty Apple,
Of mine own grafting, zweete, and zownde I assure thee.
It is the fairest fruit I ever saw.
Those golden apples in the Hesperian orchards
So strangely guarded by the watchful Dragon,
As they requi•'d great Hercules to get 'em,
Nor those with which Hippomenes deceived,
Swift footed Atalanta, when I look
On this, deserve no wonder. You behold
The pooreman, and his present with contempt
I to their value prize both; he that could
So aid weak nature, by his care, and labour,
As to compel a crabtree stock to bear
A precious fruit of this large size, and beauty,
Would by his industry change a petty village
Into a populous City, and from that
Erect a flourishing Kingdom. Give the fellow
For an encouragement to his future labours,
Ten Attic talents.
I will weary heaven
With my prayers for your Majesty.
From me present this rarity to the rarest
And best of women, when I th•nk upon
The boundless happiness that from her flow to me
In my imagination I am raped
Beyond my self; but I forget our hunting,
To the forres• for the exercise of my body,
But for my mind, it is wholly taken up,
In the contemplation of her matchless virtues.
YOU shall know ther's a difference between vs.
There was I am certain not long since, when you
Kneeled a petitioner to me, then you were happy
To bee near my feet, and doe you hold it now
As a disparagement that I side you Lady.
Since you respect me only as I was,
What I am shall be remembered.
Does the means,
I practised to give good, and saving counsail's
To the Emperor, and your new stamped majesty
Still stick in your stomach?
It is not yet digested,
In troth it is not, why good governess,
Though you are held •or a grand Madam, and your self,
The first that overprise it, I ne'er took
Your words for Delphian oracles, nor your actions
For such wonders as you make 'em, there is one
When she shall see her time, as fit and able
To be made partner of the Emperors cares,
As your wise self, and may with justice challenge
A nearer interest. You have done your visit,
So when you please, you may leave me.
Isle not bandy
Words with your mightiness, proved one, only this,
You ca•rye to much sail for your small bark,
And that when you least think upon it may sink you.
I am glad she is gone.
I feared she would have read
A tedious lecture to vs.
From the Emperor,
This rare fruit to the rarest.
How my Lord?
I use his language Madame, and that trust,
Which hee imposed on me, discharged, his pleasure
Commands my present service.
Have you seen
So fair an Apple?
Never.
If the taste
Answer the beauty.
Prettily begged, you should have it,
But that you eat too much cold fruit, and that
Changes the fresh red in your cheeks to paleness.
I have other d•nights for you; you come from
Paulinus, how is it with that truly noble,
And hon•st Lord? my witness at the fount;
In a word the man to whose blessed charity
I owe my greatenesse. How is it with him?
Spiritely,
In his mind, but by the raging of his gout
In his body much distempered, that you pleased
To inquire his health, took off much from his pain,
His glad looks did confirm it•
Doe his Doctors
Give him no hope?
Little, they rather fear,
By his continual burning, that hee stands
In danger of a fever.
To him again,
And tell him that I heartily wish it lay
In me to ease him, and from me deliver
This choice fruit to him, you may say to that,
I hope it will pr•ue Physical.
The good Lord
Will be oreioyde with the favour.
Hee deseru's more,
I Have done as much as art can doe, to stop
The violent course of your fit, and I hope you feel it,
How does your honour?
At some ease, I thank you,
I would you could assure continuance of it,
For the moiety of my fortune.
If I could cure•
The gout my Lord, without the Philosophers stone
I should soon purchase, it being a disease,
In poor men very rare, and in the rich
The cure impossible, your many bounties;
Bid me prepare you for a certain truth,
And to flatter you were di•honest.
Your plain dealing
Deserves a fee. Would there were many more such
Of your profession. Happy are pooremen,
If sick with the excess of heate or cold,
Cause by necessitous labour, not loose surfeits
They, when spare diet, or kind nature fail,
To perfect their recovery, soon arrive at
Their rest in death, but on the contrary
The great, and noble are exposed as preys
To the rapine of Physicians, and they
In lingering out what is remediless,
Aim at their profit, not the patients health;
A thousand trials and experiments
Have been put upon me, and I forced to pay dear
For my vexation, but I am re•olu'd,
(I thank your honest freedom) to be made
A property no more for knaves to work on.
What have you there?
The triumphs of an artsman
O'er all infirmities, made authentical
With the names of Princes, Kings and Emperors
That were his patients.
Some Empiric.
It may be so, but he swear• within three days
He will grub up your gout by the roots, and make you able
To march ten leagues a day in complete armour,
Impossible,
Or if you like not him
Hear him, my Lord, for your mirth; I will take order,
They shall not wrong you.
Usher in your monster.
He is at hand, march up: now speak for your self?
I come not (right honourable) to your presence, with any base and •ordid end of reward; the immortality of my fame is the white I shoot at, the charge of my most curi∣os, and costly ingredients afraid, amounting to some sea∣venteene thousand crowns, a trifle in respect of health, writing your noble name in my Catalogue, I shall acknow∣ledge my self amply satisfied.
I believe so.
For your own sake I most heartily wish, that you had now all the diseases, maladies and infirmities upon you, that were ever remembered by old Galen, Hippocrates, or the later, and more admired Paracelsus.
For your good wish, I thank you.
Take me with you, I beseech your good Lord∣ship, I urged it that your joy in being certainly: and sudden¦lie freed from them, may be the greater, and my not to bee paralleled skill the more remarkable: the cure of the gout a toy, without boast bee it said, my cradle practise, the comer, the Fistula, the Dropsy, consumption of Lunges, and Kid∣nyes, hurts in the brain, heart, or liver, are things worthy my opposition, but in the recovery of my patients I ever overcome them, but to your gout.
I marry Sir, that cured I shall be apter
To give credit to the rest
Suppose it done Sir,
And the means, you use I beseech you.
I will doe it in the plainest language, and discover my ingredients. First my boteni Terebinthina, of Cypress, my Manna, ros coelo, coagulated with vetulos ouorum, vulgarly yolks of Eggs, with a little Cyath, or quantity of my po∣table Elixir, with some few scruples of sassafras and Gua∣cum, so taken every morning and evening, in the space of three days, purges, cleanses, and dissipateth the inward cau∣ses of the virulent tumor.
Why doe you smile?
When hee hath done I will resolve you.
For my exterior applications I have these balsum∣unguentulums extracted from herbs plants, roots, seeds, gummes, and a million of other vegetables, the principal of which are Vlissipona, or Serpentaria, Sophia, or Herb con∣solidarum, Parthenium or commanilla Roman, Mumia transmarina, mixed with my plumbum Philosophorum, and matter metallorum, cum ossa paraleli, est universal• medicamen∣tum in podagra.
A conjuring balsamum,
This applied warm upon the pained place, with a feather of S•ruth•o comely, or a bird of Paradise which is every where to bee had, shall expulse this tartarus, v•seous, ana∣theos, and malignant dolor.
An excellent receipt, but does your Lordship
Know what it is good for?
I would be instructed,
For the gonorrhea, or if you will hear it
In a plainer phrase, the pox.
If it cure his Lordship
Of that by the way, I hope Sir it is the better;
My medicine serves for all things, and the pox Sir,
Though falsely named the Sciatica, or gout,
Is the more Catholic sickness.
Hence with the rascal.
Yet hurt him not, he makes me smile, and that
Frees him from punishment.
Such slaves as this
Render our art contemptible,
My good Lord,
So soon returned?
And with this present from
Your great, and gracious Mistress, with her wishes
It may prove Physical to you.
In my heart
I kneel, and thank her bounty. dear friend Cleon
Give him the cupboard of Plate in the next room.
For a reward.
Most glorious fruit, but made
More precious by her grace, and love that sent it.
To touch it only coming from her hand
Makes me forget all pain. A Diamond
Of this large size, though it would buy a Kingdom,
Hewed from the rock, and laid down at my feet,
Nay though a Monarchs gift, will hold no value,
Compared with this, and yet ere I presume
To •ast it, though san• question it i•
Some heavenly restorative, I in duty
Stand bound to weigh my own unworthiness:
Ambrosi• is food only for the Gods;
And not by humane lips to be profaned:
I may adore it as some holy Relic,
Derived from thence, but impious to keep it,
In my possession; the Emperor only,
Is worthy to enjoy it go good Cleon,
(And cease this admiration at this object;)
From me present this to my royal master,
I know it will amaze him, and excuse me
That I am not my self the bearer of it.
That I should bee lame now, when with wings of duty
I should fly to the service of this Empress,
Nay no delay• good Cleon.
I am gone Sir.
ARE you not tired Sir?
Tired? I must not say so
However, though I rode hard; to a huntsman,
His toil is his delight, and to complain
Of weariness, would show as poorly in him,
As if a General should grieve for a wound,
Received upon his forehead, or his breast,
After a glorious victory, lay by
These accoutrements for the chase.
You are well returned Sir,
From your Princely exercise.
Sister, to you
I owe the freedom, and the use of all
The pleasures I enjoy; your care provides
For my security, and the burden which
I should alone sustain, you undergo,
And by your pain•ull watchings, yield my sleeps
Both sound, and sure. How happy am I in
Your knowledge of the art of government!
And 〈◊〉 me, I glory to behold you
Dispose of great designs, as if you were
A partner, and no subject of my Empire.
My vigilance, since it hath well succeeded.
I am confident, you allow of, yet it is not
Approved by all.
Who dares rapine at that,
Which hath our suffrage?
One that too well knows,
The strength of her abilities can better
My weak endeavours.
In this you reflect
Upon my Empress•
True, for as she is
The consort of your bed, it is fit she sh•re in
Your cares, and absolute power.
You touch a string
That sowndes but harshely to me, and I must
In a brothers love advise you that hereafter
You would forbear to move it. Since she is
In her pure self a harmony of such sweetness,
Composed of duty, chaste desires, her beauty
(Though it might tempt a Hermit from his beads)
The least of her endowment•. I am sorry
Her holding the first place, since that the second
Is proper to your self, calls on your envy.
She err? it is impossible in a thought,
And much more speak, or doe what may offend me.
In other things, I would believe you sister:
But though the tongues of Saints, and Angels taxed her
Of any imperfection, I should be
Incredulous.
She is yet a woman Sir•
The abstract of what's excellent in the sex:
But to their mulct•, and frayleties a mere stranger;
Isle dye in this belief.
Your humble•t servant,
The Lord Paulinus, as a wi•ness of
His zeal, and duty to your Majesty,
Presents you with this jewel.
Ha!
It is
Preferred by him.
Aboue his honour?
No Sir,
I would have said his patrimony,
It is the same.
And he entreats, since lameness may excuse
His not presenting it himself, from me
(Though far unworthy to supply his place)
You would vouchsafe to accept it.
Farther off,
You have told your tale. Stay you for a reward?
Take that.
How's this?
I never saw him moved thus.
Wee must not part so Sir, a guard upon him.
May I not vent my sorrows in the air,
Without discovery? forbear the room,
Yet be within call, what an earth-quake I feel in me?
And on the sudden my whole fabric totters.
My blood within me turns, and through my veins
Parting with natural redness I discern it,
Changed to a fatal yellow: what an army
Of hellish few•ies in the horrid shapes
Of doubts, and fears, charge on me! rise to my rescue,
Thou stout maintainer of a chaste wi•es honour,
The confidence of her virtue••; •ee not shaken
With the wind of vain surmises, much less suffer
The devil jealousy to whisper to me
My curious observation of that
I must no more remember. Will it not bee?
Thou vninuited guest, ill mannerd monster,
I charge thee leave me, wilt thou force me to
Give fuel to that fire I would put out?
The goodness of my memory proves my mischief•,
And I would sell my Empire, could it purchase
The dull art of forgetfulness. Who waits there?
Most sacred Sir.
Sacred, as it is accursed
Is proper to me. Sir, upon your life,
Without a word concerning this, command
Eudoxia to come to me; would I had
Ne'er known her by that name, my mothers name,
Or that for her own sake she had continued
Poor Athenais still— No intermission?
Wilt thou so soon torment me? must I read
Writ in the table of my memory,
To warrant my suspicion, how Paulinus
(Though ever thought a man averse to women)
First gave her entertainment? made her way
For audience to my sister; then I did
My self observe how hee was ravished with
The gracious delivery of her story,
(Which was I grant the bait that first took me too)
Sh•e was his convert, what the rhetoric was
Hee used I know not, and since she was mine,
In private, as in public, what a mass
Of grace and favours hath she heaped upon him!
And but to day this fatal fruit, Shoe's come.
Can she bee guilty?
You seem troubled Sir,
My innoc•nce makes me bold to ask the cause
That I may ease you of it, no salute
After four long hours absence?
Prithee forgive me.
Me thanks I find Paulinus on her lips,
And the fresh Nectar that I drew from thence
Is on the sudden pal'd, how have you spent
Your hours since I last saw you?
In the converse,
Of your sweet sisters.
Did not Philanax
From me deliver you an apple?
Yes Sir;
Heaven! how you frown! pray you talk of something else,
Think not of such a trifle.
How! a trifle?
Does any toy from me presented to you,
Deserve to be so slighted? doe you value
What's sent, and not the sender? from a peasant
It had deserved your thanks.
And meets from you Sir
All possible respect.
I prized it Lady
At a higher rate then you believe, and would not
Have parted with it, but to one I did
Prefer before my self.
It was indeed
The fairest that I ever saw.
It was?
And it had virtues in it, my Eudoxia
Not visible to the eye.
It may be so Sir,
What did you with it, tell me punctually;
I look for a strict account.
What shall I answer?
Doe you stagger? ha?
No Sir, I have eaten it.
It had the pleasantest taste. I wonder that
You found it not in my breath.
I saith I did not,
And it was wondrous strange.
Pray you try again.
I find no scent of't here. You play with me
You have it still?
By your sacred life, and fortune,
An oath I dare not break, I have eaten it.
Doe you know how this oath binds?
Too well, to break it.
That ever man to please his brutish sense
Should slave his understanding to his passions,
And taken with soon fading white and red
Deliver up his credulous ears to hear
The magic of a Siren, and from these
Believe there ever was, is, or can bee
More then a seeming honesty in bad woman
This is strange language Sir.
Who waits? come all.
Nay sister not so near, being of the sex,
I fear you are infected to.
What mean you?
To show you a miracle, a prodigy
Which Africa never: equalled can you think
This master piece of heaven, this precious vellum,
Of such a purity, and virgin whiteness,
Could be designed to have perjury, and whoredom
In capital letters writ upon it?
Dear Sir,
Nay add to this •n impudence beyond
All prostituted boldness. Art not dead yet?
Will not the tempests in thy conscience rend thee
As small as Atoms• that there may no sign
Be left, thou ever were• so! wilt thou live
Till thou art blasted with the dreadful lightning
Of pregnant, and vnanswerable proofs,
Of thy adulterous twines? dye yet that I
With my honour may conceal it.
Would long since,
The Gorgon of your rage had turned me marble,
Or if I have offended?
If! good Angels!
But I am tame: look on this dombe accuser.
O I am lost!
Did ever cormorant
Swollow his pray and then digest it whole
As she hath done this apple? Philanax,
As'tis, from me presented it. The good Lady
Swore she had ea•en it; yet I know not how
It came entire unto Paulinu• hands,
And I from him received it, sent in scorn
Upon my life to give me a close touch,
That he was weary of thee. Was there nothing
Left thee to see him, to give satisfaction
To thy insatiate lust, but what was sent
As a decrefauour from me? how have I •end
In my do•age on this creature? but to her
I have lived, as I was borne, a perfect virgin.
Nay more I thought it not enough to be
True to her bed, but that I must feed high,
To strengthen my abilities to cloy
Her ravenous appetite, little suspecting
She would desire a change.
I never did Sir.
Be dumb, I will not waste my breath in taxing
Thy base ingratitude. How I have raised thee,
Will by the world be to thy shame spoke often.
But for that ribawd, who held in my Empire
The next place to my self, so bound unto me
By all the ties of duty, and allegiance
Hee shall pay dear for it, and feel what it is
In a wrong of such high consequence to pull down,
His Lords slow anger on him. Philanax,
Hoe's troubled with the gout, let him be cured
With a violent death, and in the other world,
Thank his Physician.
His cause unheard Sir?
Take heed of rashness.
Is what I command,
To bee disputed?
Your will shall bee done Sir:
But that I am the instrument —
Doe you murmur?
What could thou say if that my licence should,
Give liberty to this tongue? thou would dye? I am not
So to bee reconciled, See me no more.
The sting of conscience ever gnawing on thee,
A long life bee thy punishment.
O sweet Lady
How I could weep for her!
Speak dear Madam, speak.
Your tongue as you are a Woman, while you live,
Should bee ever moving, at the least the last part
That stirs about you.
Though I should sad Lady
In policy rejoice, you as a rival
Of my greatenesse are removed, compassion,
Since I believe you innocent, commands me
To morn your fortune, credit me I will urge
All arguments I can allege that may
Appease the Emperors fury.
I will grow too,
Upon my knees, unless hee bid me rise,
And swear hee will forgive you.
And repent too
All •his pother for an apple•
Hope dear Madam,
And yield not to despair, I am still your servant,
And never will forsake you; though a while
You leave the court, and city, and give way
To the violent passions of the Emperor.
Repentance in his want of you will soon find him.
In the m•an time Isle dispose of you, and omit
No oppor•unity that may inuit him
To see his error.
Oh!
Forbear for heavens sake:
Thy• is most barbarous! how have you lost
All feeling of humanity, as honour;
In your consent alone to have me used thus?
But to bee as you are a looker on,
Nay more a principal actor in it (the softness
Of your former life considered) almost turns me
Into a senseless statue.
Would long since
Death by some other means had made you one,
That you might bee less sensible of what
You have, or are to suffer.
Am to suffer?
Let such, whose happiness, and heaven depend
Upon their present being fear to part with
A fort they cannot long hold, mine to me is
A charge that I am weary of, all defences
By pain, and sickness bettered; Yet take heed,
Take heed Lord Philanax, that for private spleen
Or any false conceived grudge against me,
(Since in one thought of wrong to you, I am
Sincerely innocent) you doe not that
My oyall Master must in justice punish,
If you pass to your own heart thorough mine
The murder as it will come out discovered.
I murder you my Lord? heaven witness for me
With the restoring of your health, I wish you
Long life, and happiness: for my self I am
Compelled to put in execution that
Which I would fly from, it is the Emperor,
The high incensed Emperors will commands
What I must see performed.
The Emperor!
Goodness, and innocence guard me! wheels, nor racks
Can force into my memory, the remembrance
Of the least shadow of offence, with which
I ever did provoke him, though beloved
(And yet the peoples love is short, and fatal)
I never courted popular applause;
Feasted the men of action, or laboured
By prodigal gifts to draw the needy soldier,
The tribunes, or centurious to a faction,
Of which I would rise up the head against him.
I hold no place of s•rength, fortress, or castle
In my command, that can give sanctuary
To malcontents, or countenance rebellion.
I have built no palaces to face the court,
Nor doe my followers bravery shame his train•
And though I cannot blame my fate for want,
My competent means of life deserves no envy.
In what then am I dangerous?
His displeasure
Reflects on none of those particulars,
Which you have mentioned, though some jealous Princes
In a subject cannot brooke 'em.
None of these?
In what then am I worthy his suspicion?
But it may, nay it must bee, some informer
To whom my innocence appear•d a crime,
Hath poison•d his late good opinion of me.
Tic not to dye, but in the censure of
'So good a Master guilty, that afflicts me.
There is no remedy.
No, I have a friend yet,
Could •he strictness of your warrant give way to it,
To whom the s•ate I stand in now delivered,
That by fair intercession for me would
So far prevail, that my defence unheard
I should not innocent, or guilty suffer,
Without a fi• distinction.
These false hopes
My Lord abuse you. What man, when condemned,
Did ever find a •riend? or who dares lend
An eye of pity to that starcros'd subject
On whom his sovereign frowns.
She that dares plead
For innocence without a fee, the Empress,
My great, and gracious Mistress!
There's your error.
Her many favours which you hoped should make you,
Prove your undoing. She poor Lady is
Banished for ever from the Emperors presence,
And his confirmed suspicion, to his wrong,
That you have been over familiar with her,
Dooms you to death. I know you understand me.
Over familiar?
In sharing with him;
Those sweet and secret pleasures of his bed,
Which can admit no partner.
And is that
The crime for which I am to dye? Of all
My numerous sins, was there not one of weight
Enough to sink me, if he borrowed not
The colour of a guilt I never saw,
To paint my innocence, in a deformed
And mo•strous shape? but that it were profane
To argue heaven of ignorance, or injustice,
I now should tax it. Had the stars that reigned
At my nativity such cursed influence,
As not alone to make •ee miserable,
But in the neighbourhood of her goodness to me
To force contagion upon a Lady,
Whose purer flames were not inferior,
To theirs, when they shine brightest? to dye for her
Co•par'd with what she suffers is a trifle.
By her example warned, let all great women
Hereof•er throw pride, and contempt on such
As truly serve 'em, since a retribution
In lawful courtesies, is now styled lust,
And to be thankful to a servants merits
Is grown a vice, no virtue.
These complaints
Are to no purpose: think on the long flight,
Your better part must make.
She is prepared
Nor can the freeing of an innocent
From the Emperors furious jealousy hinder her.
It shall out, it is resolved, but to bee whispered
To you alone. What a sol•mne preparation
Is made here to put forth an inch of taper
In it self almost extinguished? mortal poison?
The hangmans sword, the halter?
Tic left to you,
To make choice of which you please.
Any will serve,
To take away my gout, and life together.
I would not have the Emperor imitate
Romes Monster, Narrow, in that cruel mercy
Ilee showed to Seneca; when you have discharged
What you are trusted with, and I have given you
Reasons beyond all doubt, or disputation,
Of the Empresses and my innocence, when I am dead,
Since it is my Masters pleasure, and high treason
In you not to obey it, I conjure you,
By the hopes you have of happiness hereafter,
Since mine in this world are now parting from me,
That you would win the young man to repentance
Of the wrong done to his chaste wise Eudoxia,
And if perchance hee shed a tear for what
In his rashenesse hee imposed on his true servant,
So it cure him of future jealousy,
•Twill prove a precious balsamum, and find me
When I am in my grave. Now when you please,
For I am ready.
His words work strangely on me,
And I would doe, but I know not what to think on•t.
STill in his sullen moo•d? no intermission
Of his melancholy fit?
It rather Madam
Increases, then grows less.
In the next room
To his bed-chamber, wee watched, for hee by signs
Gave vs to understand, hee would admit
Nor company, nor conference.
Did hee take
No rest as you could guess?
Not any Madam;
Like a Numidian Lyon, by the cunning
Of the desperate huntsman taken in a toil,
And forced into a spacious cage, hee walks
About his chamber, wee might hear him gnash
His teeth in rage, which opend, hollow groan•
And murmurs issued from his lips, like winds
Imprisoned in the caverns of the earth
Striving for liberty; and sometimes throwing
His body on his bed, then on the ground,
And with such violence, that wee more then feared
And still doe, if the tempest of his passions
By your wisdom bee not laid, hee will commit
Some outrage on himself.
His better Angel,
I hope will stay him from so foul a mischief,
Nor shall my care bee wanting.
Twice I heard him,
Say false Eudoxia, how much art thou
Unworthy of these tears? then sighed, and straight
Rores out Paulinus, was his gouty age
To bee preferred before my strength and youth?
Then groaned again, so many ways expressing
Th'afflictions of a tortured soul, that wee
Who wept in vain, •or what wee could not help,
Were sharers in his sufferings.
Though your sorrow
Is not to bee condemned, it takes not from
The burden of his miseries; wee must practise
With some fresh object to divert his thoughts
From that they are wholly fixed on.
Could I gain
The freedom of access, I would present him
With this petition. Will your highness please,
To look upon it. You will soon find there
What my intents, and hopes are.
Hal it is hee.
Stand close,
And give way to his passions, it is not safe
To stop them in their violent course, before
They have spent themselves.
I play the fool, and am
Unequal to my self, delinquents are
To suffer, not the innocent. I have done
Nothing, which will not hold weight in the scale
Of my impartial justice: neither feel
The worm of conscience, upbraiding me
For one black deed of tyranny; wherefore then
Should I torment my self? great Iulius would not
Rest satisfied that his wife was free from fact,
But only for suspicion of a crime
S'ud a divorce, no• was this Roman rigour
Censured as cruel, and still the wise Italian,
That knows the honour of his family,
Depends upon the purity of his bed
For a kiss, nay wanton look, will plough up mischief,
And sow the seeds of his revenge in blood.
And shall I to whose power the law's a servant,
That stand accountable to none, for what
My will c•lls an offence, being compelled,
And on such grounds to raise an Altar to
My anger, though I grant it is cemented
With a loose strumpets and adulterers gore,
Repent the justice of my fury• no.
I should not: yet still my excess of love
Fed high in the remembrance of her choice
And sweet embraces, would persuade me that
Conniuence, or remission of her fault,
Made warrantable by her true submission
For her offence, might bee excusable,
Did not the cruelty of my wounded honour
With an open mouth deny it.
I approve of
Your good intention, and I hope twill prosper.
Hee now seems calm. Let vs upon our knees
Encompass him. Most royal Sir,
Sweet brother.
As you are our Sovereign, by the ties of nature
You are bound to bee a Father in your care
To vs poor Orphans.
Show compassion Sir,
Unto your self.
The mays•ie of your fortune
Should fly aboue the reach of grief.
And it is
Impaired, if you yield to it.
Wherefore pay you
This adoration to a sinful creature?
I am flesh, and blood as you are, sensible
Of heat, and cold, as much a slave unto
The tyranny of my passions, as the meanest
Of my poor subjects the proud attributes
(By oiled tongued flattery imposed upon vs)
As sacred, glorious, high, invincible,
The deputy of heaven, and in that
Omnipotent, with all false titles else
Kind to abuse our frailetie, though compounded,
And by the breath of Sycophants applied,
Cure not the least fit of an ague in vs.
Wee may give poor men riches; confer honours
On vndeseruers; raise• or ruin such
As are beneath vs, and with this puffed up,
Ambition would persuade vs to forget
That wee are men: but hee that sits aboue vs,
And to whom, at our utmost rate, wee are
But pageant properties, derides our weakness.
In me to whom you kneel, it is most apparent.
Can I call back yesterday, with all their aides
That bow unto my sceptre? or restore
My mind to that tranquillity, and peace
It then enjoyed? can it make Eudoxia chaste?
Or vile Paulinus honest?
If I might
Without offence, deliver my opinion,
What would you say?
That on my soul the Empress
I• innocent.
The good Paulinus guiltless.
And this should yield you comfort.
In being guilty
Of an offence far, far transcending that
They stand condemned for. Call you this a comfort?
Suppose it could bee true? a corrosive rather,
Not to eat out dead flesh, but putrefy
What yet is sown'd. was murder ever held
A cure for jealousy? or the crying blood
Of innocence, a balm to take away
Her festring anguish? as you doe desire
I should not doe a justice on my self,
Add to the proofs by which Paulinus fell,
And not •ache from 'em, in your charity
Sooner believe that they were false, then I
Unrighteous in my judgment? subjects lives
Are not their Princes tennisballs to bee banded
In sport away, all that I can endure
For them, if they were guilty, is an atom
To the mountain of affliction, I pulled on me,
Should they prove innocent.
For your Majesties peace
I more then hope they were not; the false oath
Took by the Empress, and for which she can
Plead no excuse, convicted her, and yield•
A sure defence for your suspicion of her.
And yet to be resolved, since strong doubts are
More grievous for the most part, then to know
A certain loss.
It is true Chrysapius,
Were there a possible means.
It is offered to you,
If you please to embrace it. Some few minutes
Make truce with passion, and but read, and follow
What's there proiected, you shall find a key,
Will make your entrance easy to discover
Her secret thoughts, and then, as in your wisdom
You shall think fit, you may determine of her,
And rest confirmed, whether Paulinus died
A villain or a Martyr.
It may doe,
Nay sure it must, yet howsoever it fall,
I am most wretched which way in my wishes,
I should fashion the event, I am so distracted
I cannot yet resolve of •ollow me;
Though in my name, all names are comprehended.
I must have witness•, in what degree
I have done wrong, or suffered,
Hope the best Sir.
WHY art thou slow, thou rest of trouble, Death,
To stop a wretches breath?
That calls on thee, and offers her sad heart
A prey unto thy dart.
I am nor young, nor fair, bee therefore bold,
Sorrow hath mad• me old,
Deformed, and wrinkled, all that I can crave,
Is quiet in my grave.
Such as live happy, hold long life a Jewel,
But to me thou art cruel:
If thou end not my tedi•u• misery,
And I soon cease to bee.
Strike, and strike home then, pit•y un•o me
In one short hours delay is tyranny.
Thus like a dying Swan, to a sad tune
I sing my own dirge, would a requiem follow
Which in my penitence, I despair not of,
This brittle glass of life, already broken
With misery, the long and quiet sleep
Of death would bee most welcome, yet before
Wee end our pilgrimage, it is fit that wee
Should leave corruption, and foul sins behind vs.
But with washed feet, and hands, the Heathens dare not
Enter their profane temples; and for me•
To hope my passage to eternity
Can bee made easy 'till I have shook of
The burden of my sins in free confession,
Aided with sorrow, and repentance for 'em,
Is against reason. It is not laying by
My royal ornaments, or putting on
This garment of humility, and contrition.
The throwing dust, and ashes on my head;
Long fasts to tame my proud flesh, that can make
Atonement for my soul, that must be humbled,
All outward signs of penitence, else are useless.
Chrysapius did assure me, hee would bring me
A holy man, from whom (having disco•'d
My secret crying sins) I might receive
Full absolution, and hee keeps his word.
Welcome most reverend Sir, upon my knees
I enter•aine you.
Noble Sir forbear,
The place, the ••cred o•fice that I come for,
Commands all privacy. My penitent daughter,
Bee careful, as you wish remission from me,
That in confession of your sins, you hide not
One crime, whose ponderous weight, when you would make
Your flights aboue the firmament, that may sink you.
A foolish modesty in concealing ought
Is now far worse then impudence to profess,
And justify your guilte, bee therefore free
So may the gates of mercy open to you.
First th•n, I ask a pardon, for my being
Ungrateful to heavens bounty.
A good entrance.
Gre•enesse comes from aboue, and I raised to it
From a low condition, sinfully forgot
From whence it came, and looking on my self
In the •alse glass of fl•tterie, I received it
As a debt due to my beauty, not a gift
Or favour from the Emperor.
It was n•t well.
Pride waited on unthankfulness, and no more
Remembering the compassion of the Princess,
And the means sh•e used to make me what I was,
Contested with her, and with sore eyes seeing
Her greater light, as it dimmed mine, I practised
To have it quite put out.
A great offence,
But on repentance not unpardonable.
Forward•
O Father, what I now must utter,
I fear in the delivery will destroy me,
Before you have absolved me.
Heaven is gracious.
Out with it.
Heaven commands vs to tell truth.
Yet I most sinful wretch, forswore my self.
On what occasion?
Quite forgetting that
An innocent truth can never ••and in need
Of a guilty l•e, being on the sudden asked
By the Emperor my husband, for an Apple
Presented by him, I swore I had eaten it,
When my grieved conscience too well knows, I sent it
To comfort sick Paulinus, being a man,
I truly loved and favoured.
A cold sweat,
Like the juice of Hemlock bathes me.
And •rome this
A furious jealousy getting possession
Of the good Emperors heart, in his rage hee doomed
The innocent Lord to dye, my perjury
The fatal cause of murder.
Take heed daughter,
You niggle not with your conscience, and religion,
In stiling him an innocent from your fear,
And shame to accuse your self. The Emperor
Had many spies upon you, saw such graces,
Which virtue could not warrant, showered upon him;
Glances in public, and more liberal favours
In your private chamber meetings, making way
For foul adultery; nor could hee bee
But sensible of the compact passed between you,
To the ruin of his honour.
Hear me Father,
I looked for comfort, but in this you come
To add to my afflictions.
Cause not you
Your own damnation, in concealing that
Which may in your discovery find forgiveness•
Open your eyes, set heaven, or hell before you.
In the revealing of the truth, you shall
Prepare a palace for your soul to dwell in,
Stored with celestial blessings; whereas if
You palliate your crime, and dare beyond
Playing with lightning, in concealing it,
Expect a dreadful dungeon, filled with horror,
And neuer-ending torments.
May they fall
Eternally upon me, and increase,
When that which wee call time hath lost its name;
May lightning cl•aue the centre of the earth,
And I sink quick, before you have absolved me,
Into the bottomless Abyss, I fever
In one unchaste desire, nay in a thought
I wronged the honour of the Emperors bed.
I doe deserve, I grant, more then I suffer
In that my fervor, and desire to please him,
In my holy meditations pressed upon me,
And would not bee kept out, now to dissemble
(When I shall sudd•inely bee insensible,
Of what the world speaks of me) were mere madness:
And though you are incredulous, I presume,
If as I kneel now, my eyes swollen with tears,
My hands heaud up thus, my stretched heartstrings ready
To break a sunder, my incensed Lord
(His storm of jealousy blown ore) should hear me,
Hee would believe I lied not.
Rise, and see him,
On his knees with joy affirm it.
Can this bee?
My sisters, and the rest there, all bear witness.
In freeing this incomparable Lady
From the suspicion of guilt, I doe
Accuse my self, and willingly submit
To any penance, she in justice shall
Please to impose upon me.
Royal Sir, your ill opinion of me 's soon forgiven.
But how you can make satisfaction to
The poor Paulinus, hee being dead, in reason
You must conclude impossible.
And in that
I am most miserable; the Ocean
Of joy, which in your innocence flowed high to me,
Ebb's in the thought of my unjust command,
By which hee died. O Philanax (as thy name
Interpreted speaks thee) thou hast ever been
A lover of the King, and thy whole life
Can witness thy obedience to my will,
In putting that in execution, which
Was trusted to thee, say but yet this once
Thou hast not done what rashly I commanded•
And that Paulinus lives, and thy reward
For not performing that which I inioin'd thee,
Shall centuple what ever yet thy duty,
Or merit challenged from me.
It is too late Sir.
Hoe's dead, and when you know hee was unable
To wrong you, in the way that you suspected,
You'll wish it had been otherwise.
Unable?
I am sure hee was an Eunuch, and might safely
Lye by a Virgins side, at four years made one,
Though to hold grace with Ladies hee concealed it.
The circumstances, and the manner how
You may hear at better leisure.
How! an Eunuch?
The more the proofs are, that are brought to clear thee,
My best Eudoxia, the more my sorrows.
That I am innocent?
That I am guilty
Of mur•her, my Eudoxia. I will build
A glorious monument to his memory,
And for my punishment live, and dye upon it,
And never more converse with men.
Live long Sir,
May I doe so to serve you• and if that
I live does not displease you, you owe for it
To this good Lord.
My self, and all that's mine.
Your p•rdon is a payment.
I am raped
With joy beyond my self. Now my Eudoxia
My jealousy puffed away thus, in this breath
I scent the natural sweetness.
Sacred Sir,
I am happy to behold this, and presume,
Now you are pleased, to move a suit, in which
My sister is joined with me.
Prithee speak it,
For I have vowed to hear before I grant,
I thank your good instructions.
It is but this Sir,
Wee have observed the falling out, •nd in,
Between the husband and the wise shows rarely,
Their jars, and reconcilements strangely take vs.
Anger and jealousy that conclude in kisses
Is a sweet war in sooth.
Wee therefore, brother
Most humbly beg you would provide vs husbands
That wee may taste the pleasure of't.
And with speed Sir,
For so your •auour's doubled.
Take my word,
I will with all convenience; and not blush
Hereafter to bee guided by your counsels.
I will deserve your pardon. Philanax
Shall bee remembered, and magnificent bounties
Fall on Chrysapius. My grace on all.
Let Cleon bee delivered and rewarded,
My grace on all, which as I len'd to you,
Return your vows to heaven, that it may please
(As it is gracious) to quench in me
All future sparks of burning jealousy.
WEE have reason to be doubtful, whether hee
On whom (forced to it by necessity)
The maker did confer his Emperors part
Hath given you satisfaction, in his art
Of action an• delivery; it is sure truth
The burden was too heavy for his youth
To undergo: but in his will wee know
Hee was not wanting, and shall ever owe
With, his, our service, if your favours deign
To give him strength, he•reafter to sustain
A greater weight. It is your grace that ca•
In your allowance of this write him man
Before his time, which if you please to doe
You make the Player, and the Poet too.

MY Lady desires to speak with you.
Your Lady? who's your Lady?
The Lady Honour.
Let Honour come to Riches, it will not
Disparage her, my friend.
She is not well.
Honour is seldom sound, what ails her Ladyship?
She had a fall lately.
A fall?
And spraind
Her foot.
Teach her to clime; shoe's so ambitious.
Please you to do her the favour, she will waite
Upon your Ladyship another time.
I cannot come
Good Madam.
I ha the you•e
You may command a Coach.
Riches I know
May command any thing but I doe not use
To come to every one desires my company
Beside, my servants are abroad, and it
Becomes me not to go so unattended.
I shall be fortunate, if you accept
My service.
Is that state enough for me?
Although it be in fashion with your Lord,
To amble with his foot man and Page,
I use to have more followers.
Great Ladies
Have no such train, many are held supers•uous,
The Gentleman Usher now a days is thought
Sufficient for a Countess, nay, for two
Take him by turns, &amp; yet he may be courteous
To the waiting Gentlewoman.
You assume, me thinks,
Much liberty in talking, wha'ts your name▪
They which know me, call me Ingenuity.
Ingenuity?
Out upon! thee I suspect,
Your are a Scholar.
I have studied Arts.
Defend me from his witchcraft had thy Mistress:
None but a Scholar to employ upon
Her complements to me, one whose profession
I hate, whose memory is my disease,
And conversation death? how rank he smells
Of Aristotle, and the musty Tribe
Of worme-eaten Philosophers? get from me,
I will endure the Bears, and their provision,
Lie in an Hospital, or French-footmen, feed
With prisoners, or be racked at Westminster,
Nay, die, &amp; make poor orphants my Executors,
Ere be confined to hear thy learned nonsense.
Why should you be such enemy to Scholars?
They waste Miner•aes precious dew, their sweat,
To gain your favour, and would think themselves
Blessed, when your golden beams but shine upon'em.
Tic not your flattery can win upon me.
Go, and declaim against me, good Diogenes,
Admire a virtuous poverty, and nakedness,
Call Fortune whore, and write whole volumes in
The praise of hunger and your lousy wardrobe,
Yes, teach the world, Riches is grown a monster,
And that she dotes on ignorance: these are
Your vulgar doctrines, and I pray pursue'em,
My most immortal beggar, and get •am
With some twice sodden pamphle•, till you make
Submission to my fool, in hope of the
Reversion of his Grooms bare livery:
Your Theses, and your Syllogisms, will
No doubt convert the Beadle, and the dog-whip.
Be pleased to hear me speak—
What impudence
Does this appear, you should desire that favour?
Have I not given testimony to the world
Sufficiently, I doe not love a Scholar?
Endure me for my Mistress Lady Honour.
I wonder what she meant to entertain thee!
Away, dispute no further, if you move me
To more impatience, Riches will find ways
To curb your infolence •s not your pretence
To Honours service, can protect you from
My anger, I have kindred, and acquaintance
Shall with their breath blow thee beyond the Sea;
Or if I should be merciful, and let thee
Enjoy thy Country, never hope to arrive at
Above a pension, that will find you woollen
A Pedant, or a Vicaridge pre•amened,
Gelded sufficiently by the improper Parson,
Is all your wit must hope for; and take heed
That you be modest then, no coat, nor Cass•cke
Can charm you▪ if I offer to complain,
I shall put your Divinity to silence.
I despi•e
Thy womanish threats, and shall account my self
Happy without thy favour. O Philosophy,
Assist thy poor admirer, and infuse
A noble fortitude to scorn her malice:
I have no thought, but has a triumph'ore
Thy base conspiracy. Welcome my dear Books,
And contemplation, that shall feed my soul
To immortality: let Pup•s dote
Upon thy gifts, and sell their privilege,
For gaudy clothes and Epicurean•urfets,
Lust, and a Catalogue of Rich men's sins,
That shall like plummets hang upon their heart:
When wings are most required, keep thy resolve,
And be attenemy to Learning still,
That when we find a Scholar, by thee favord,
We may suspect him counterfeit and a dunce
Honour will be my Mistress, who•e least smile
I value above all thy pride, or treasures,
And she will scorn thee too. Farewell, gay Madam,
A painted tomb! though glorious to the eye.
Corruption dwells within thee.
Foul mouth Satire,
But tic some punishment to let him waste
His spirits with his railing, let him fret,
It may consume him without more diseases,
Let him die any way, men of his quality
Are living but unprofitable burdens
To the earth, as they were borne to consume fruits,
And talk of needless Sciences. Who are these?
My ancient suitors, Clod the Country-man,
And Gettings the rich Citizen?
She's here.
Good morrow to the star of my delight,
Whose beams more glorious doe eclipse the Sun,
And cast a richer warm'th about the world.
How? turned Poet?
Fear me not, Lady,
I am none of those were borne too't, I had rather
Be a Jew then christened in Parnassus Pomp,
I have nothing but the knuckles and the rumps
Of Poetry.
Take heed in time, lest you become infected
With wit, I doe not love poetic fancies,
Nor any thing that trenches on the Muses,
They were baggages, and Phoebus their protector,
Deserved the whipping post.
I have-read, he was
A common Piper, and those Nine were Gipsies,
That lived by cheating Palmistry.
I like it,
When you doe rail at Learning, I allow you
To read a Ballad, and ridiculous Pamphlets,
Writ on the strength of Beer, or some dull liquor:
But if you smell profane Sack in a Poem,
Come not within a league of understanding,
As you respect my favour.
I am instructed.
But why does Clod stand all this while so
mute?
Either I am John a Noakes, or I am not John
a Noakes.
Hoe's dreaming of his horses.
Gee, sweet Lady, I am all to be mired in
your beauty, the horses of my imagination are foun∣dred
in the high-way of your perfections, for I am
deep in love with your Lady-ship, though I doe not
wear such fine clothes as Master Gettings here, and
so much out of fashion: for if I commend my dou∣blet,
I must speak suction, yet my heart is cut and
flashed, and I defy any man that has a better stomach
to youi•n the way of Matrimony.
No comparison, Master Clod.
Let him be odious, that names comparison,
for my part, I soorne 'em all and the degrees.
You're very positive.
Dost thou positive me? And my Mistress
were not here, thou shouldest find Clod is made of an
other guess mold, then to endure thy affronts.
And you quarrel, I am gone.
Nay, nay, sweet Lady we shall be friends again.
I hope it wonot stretch to a duel.
Duel? You wonot provoke me, Clod,
Will you? if you doe, Clod.
I will provoke any man living in the way
of love.
How?
He that shall go a wooing to my Mistress,
I will provoke him, and he were my father.
You're a dirty fellow, Clod, and if I had met
thee that year I was Scavenger, I would have had
thee carted.
Me carted, Cart thy Bawds, there bee
enough within the walls, dost tell me of a Scaven∣ger?
a fart for thy office, I am a better man in the coun∣try
then the Constable himself, and doe tell thee to
thy face, though I am plain Clod, I care not a bean∣stalk
for the best What lack you on you all, no not
the next day after Simon and Jude; when you go a
seasting to Westminster with you G•lly•oist and
your pot-guns, to the very terror of the Papet-whales,
when you land in shoal, and make the understan∣ders
in Cheapside, wonder to see ships swim
upon men's shoulders, when the Fencers flourish,
and make the Kings liege people fall down and
Worship the Devil and Saint Du•stan, when your
whifflers are hanged in chains, and Hercules Club
spit• fire about the Pagean•s, though the poor i will∣drone
catch cold▪ that show like painted cloth, and are
only kept alive with sugar plummes, with whom,
when the word is given, you march to Guild-hall,
with every man his spoon in his pocket, where you
look upon the Giants, and feed like Saracens, till you
have no stomach to Pals in the afternoon: I
have seen your Processions, and heard your Lions
and Camels make speeches, in stead of Grace before
and after dinner: I have heard songs too, or some∣thing
like i'm: but the Porters have had the burden,
who were kept sober at the City charge, two days
before, to keep time and tune with their feet, for
brag what you will of your charge, all your pomp
lies upon their back.
So, so.
Must this days pride so blow you up, that a
Country-mans tale may not be heard?
That days pride?
Or what first make you Gambol so?
Why, anger he's made you witty Country-man.
Thou lie, and I am none of thy Country-man,
I was borne out of the sound of your Pancake∣bell,
I cannot abide to see a proud fellow: and it were
not for us in the Country, you would have but a
lean City, wee maintain your Charter, and your
Chamber too, you would ha but ill markets, and
we should forswear to furnish i'm, where were
your hides, horns and plenty of other provision?
your, wives could not doe as they doe, with your
short yard and your false light, and the Country
should not come in upon them. Come, you can∣not
live without us, you may be called a body Po∣liticke,
but the Country is the soul, and therefore
subscribe and give way to me.
The high-way, but not the wall in London,
doe you know where you are, and what you have
talked all this while? an Informer would squeeze
your trunk hose for this, and teach you to know
your Terms and your Artornies.
Isle have as good Law for my money, as the
best on you, I know what belongs to it, I have al∣most
broke the Parson of the Parish already, about
his Tithe-egges.
Why, thou lump of ignorance, leather and
husbandry ill compounded, thou that hast been so
long a dung-hill, till the weeds have overgrown
thee, and a far off hast consent a horse, thou that
dost whistle out thy prayers, and wo-not change
thy dirty soil, for so many acres in Paradise, nor
leave thy share of the plough, for Saint Peters patri∣money,
thou that were begot upon a hay-mow,
bred in thy fathers stable, and out-dung'd his Cat∣tell,
thou, that at one and twenty, were only able
to write a sheeps mark in Tar, and read thy own
capital letter, like a gallous upon a cowes buttock;
you that allow no Scripture Canonical, but an Al∣manacke,
which makes you weather-wise, and puts
you in hope of a dear year: let the Country starve,
and the poor grind provender, so the market rise:
let your soul fall to the Devil among the Corn∣cutters,
I am ashamed to hold discourse any longer
with thee; only one word, I would advise you to
let your action of love fall, and be content to marry
with Malkin, in the Country, she can churme
well, and humble her self behind a hedge, for this
Lady is no lattice for your lips, go go, meddle with
your jades, and exercise a whip, among your bread
and cheese eaters.
Sir Cit, I doe challenge thee.
What weapon?
The next 〈◊〉 shall furnish us both if thou
hast any moral, let us try before we part who is the
better man.
If thou hast any ambition to be beaten to
dust, Clod, thank your self.
I will flash •hy skin like a Summer dou∣blet,
come thy ways.
Look this way, Lady, and in me behold
Your truest servant.
Tic but 〈◊〉 Court-ship
That he professes, look upon the Lady
That can be active in your service.
Tic
The Courtier and the 〈◊〉 pleading their
Affection to my mistress Lady donor,
I wo'not interrupt them yet, I cannot
Find by 〈…〉 that she inclines to either
Bless me but with one smile if you did know
With what devotion my soul looks on you,
How next to my religion I have placede,
If not above 〈…〉
How long since I first vowed my self your 〈◊〉,
That eye would 〈…〉
I have
No stock of soft and melting words to 〈◊〉 you,
Such silken language we are strangers to,
We are used to other Dialect, and imitate the Drum,
Bold Artillery: can you love me?
When I have marched upon the dreadful Cannon,
My heart was fixed on Honour nor could death
In all her shapes of horror temp• one thought
To base retire, when no voice could be heard,
But thunder, and no object seen but lightning,
Which seemed to have bin struck frō the first Ch•o•,
So great a darkness had eclipsed the S•nne,
Yet then I thought on Honour, and 〈◊〉
Their lives that 〈◊〉 about me, every body
I trod upon, (for now the dead had 〈◊〉
The earth) gave me addition 〈◊〉
Where, in my imagination I saw
Thee charioted, and dropping down a G••land.
No more there are but compl••••• of wars,
Perhaps some studied speech 〈…〉
But am not taught with these Hyperbole••
Honor's not won with words 〈…〉
No paint of often 〈…〉
That has the greatest 〈…〉 not
The greatest danger.
She has 〈◊〉 his Culvering,
And now he's swearing out some prayers▪
Shoe's mine.
Thus looked the moon, when with her virgin fires
She went in progress to the mountain Latmos,
To visit her Endimion, yet I injure
Your beauty, to compare it to her orb
Of silver light, the Sun from which, she borrows
That makes her up the nightly Lamp of heaven,
Has in his stock of beams not half your luster,
Enrich the earth still with your sacred presence,
Upon each object throw a glorious star,
Created by your sight, that when the learned
Astronomer comes forth to examine heaven,
He may find two, and be himself divided,
Which he should first contemplate.
You both love me.
But I the best.
How sir, the best?
Ere since I knew the Court,
I had no other study but to advance
My self to Honour, all my suites have been
Directed to this one, that Honour would
Fix me among those other Constellations
That shine about the King, tic in thy love
To plant a Coronet here: and then I dare
Jostle the proudest Hero and be inscribed
A demi god, frown dead the humble mortal,
And with my breath call back their souls again.
What cannot Honour doe?
Not that you boast.
True Honour makes not proud, not takes delight
In the ruin of poor virtue.
Sir, you said you loved her best.
And will maintain it.
You cannot, dare not.
Dare not?
So peremptory, Honour may in time
Find ways to tame the insolent Lady Riches,
But leave her to her pride.
The Courtier, and
The Soldier look as they would quarrel.
Let 'em.
You see how they pursue me still, but Honour
Is not so easily obtained.
They are
Gay creatures, and conspicuous in the world.
But no such miracles: Gentlement, you promise
Some spirit in you, ther's no way to make
Me confident of your worth but by your action:
In brief, if you be ambitious of Honour,
You must fight for me, and as fame shall give me
Your character, I shall distinguish you,
And cherish worth: mean time I take my leave.
Come, 〈◊〉, you and I must have
Some private conference, I dare trust your bosom
With some thing of more weight.
I am then happy,
When you command me service.
And I keep
A Register of all, and though delayed,
Forget not the reward.
Hark, Master Cringe,
How do ye like her sentence? If you mean
To have Honour you must fight for 〈◊〉 speeches,
Nor crinckling in the hams will carry her,
You have worn a sword thus long, to show the h•lt,
Now let the blade appear.
Good Captain Voice,
It shall, and reach you manners, I have yet
No Ague, I can look upon your buff,
And punto beard, and call for no strong waters,
I am no Tavern gull, that wants protection,
Whom you with oaths doe use to mortify,
And swear into the paiments of all reckonings,
Upon whose credit you wear belt and feather,
Top and top gallant, and can make him seal
At mid-night to your Taylor, go invite
Young Gentlemen to dinner, and then pawn 'em,
Or valiantly with some of your own file,
Conspire a Sconce, or to a bawdy house
March with your Regiment, and kick the Leverets,
Make cullice of the Bawds, yet be made friends,
Before the Constable be sent for, and
Run to'the ticket for the pox, these services,
I doe presume, you are acquainted with.
Musk-Cat.
Or were thou what thou seem, a Soldier,
For so much good I wish thee for my honour,
When I have killed thee.
Sir Civet-box.
Let me ask your Soldier ship but one cold
question,
If Lady Honour, whom you have presumed
Without good manners to affect, should possibly
Descend to marry thee, prithee what jointure
Could thou make her?
Jointure?
Isle admit for arguments sake,
Thou art a Soldier, perhaps
You will give her a Catalogue of Towns,
Or Leaguers, the names of bridges broken down,
Your nose in time may make another, you will tel her
Of onslaughts, Bulwarks, Barricade, Forts,
Of Cannon, Culvering, Sacres, and a rabble
Of your Artillery, which you have cond by heart,
A role of Captains names, perhaps you have
In ready wounds, some twenty idle, admit it,
And in diseases can assure her forty,
This wo'not doe, she cannot eat a Snapsacke,
Nor carry baggage, lie in your foul Hut,
And roast your pullen, for whose precious theft,
You and the Gibbet fear to bee acquainted,
If you return into your wholesome Country,
Upon your honourable wooden legs.
The houses of correction are no Palaces,
And Passes must be had, or else the Beadles
Will not be satisfied, the Treasurers name
And twelve-pence for your service in the Low countries,
And spending of your blood for doughty Dutchman,
That would have hāg'd you there, but in their charity
You were reserved for begggery at home,
Is no inheritance I take it sir.
Have you done yet?
I have not much more to say.
It does appear by all this prattle then,
You doe not know me, and have ta 'ne too much
On trust to talk of Soldier, a name
Tha'st not deserved to mention, because
Some fellows here, have bragged, and perhaps beaten
You, and some other of your satin Tribe,
Into belief that they have seen the wars,
That perhaps mustered at Mile-end,
Or Finesbury. Must the true sons of courage,
Be thus dishonoured, and their character
Defaced by such prodigious breath? must we,
We that for Honour and your safeties suffer,
What in the repetition would fright
Your pale souls from you, when perhaps you foot
A jig at home, and revel with your Lady,
Be thus rewarded! Happy they that dyed
Their Country sacrifice, to prevent the shame
Of living with such popular drones, but I
Should wrong our glorious profession
By any Arguments, to make thee sensible
Of what we are: it shall suffice to publish
What is not now in ignorant supposition.
But truth, of your gay quality and virtues,
You are a Courtier.
Very good.
Not so.
If such there be, I talk not to them now,
But to thee Phantasm, of whom men doe doubt
Whether thou hast a soul, thou that dost think it
The better and more grateful part of thy
Religion, to we are good clothes, and suffer
More pains at buttoning of thy gaudy doublet,
Then thou durst take for heaven, thou hast divided
Thy flattery into several articles,
And hast so often called your great men goods,
That tic become thy Creed, and thou dost now
Believe no other, thou w'ot take a bribe,
To undo a Nation, and sell thy Country-men
To as many persecutions as the
Devil: thou art beholding to thy pride, it has
Made thee thy own selfe-lover, for without it,
None else affecting thee I doe now see,
What else could keep thee from despair &amp; drowning?
Thy wantonness has made thy body poor,
But not in show, for though thy back have paid for it,
It wears rich trappings; Art may help your legs,
But cannot cure your dancing: that and pepper,
Avoid with like discretion, one betrays you
At dinner, and the other between meals.
Go purchase lands and a fair house, which must
When thou livest in it be an Hospital,
And owe no other body for diseases.
Pray come, and take a chamber.
Thou hastignorance
And impudence enough for twenty Alchemists.
Isle hear no more.
A little, Isle entreat you,
You shall be beaten afterword, ne'er fear it.
Dare thou blaspheme the Court?
I honour it,
And all the Noble ornaments of State,
That like Pomegranates in old Aarons coat,
Adorn the Prince that wears 'em, but such Courtiers
That cousin us like Glow-wormes in the night,
Or rotten wood, I hate, and in their number
For this time be content I list your worship.
How do you know what I am, or what title
Perhaps I wear?
I know thee by the wrong
To Soldiers.
I speak of such as thou were, and I dare
Maintain, and write as much in thy own blood.
Dost thou not see, Honesty?
Honesty? what hast thou to do with Honesty?
I never could endure her, she appears
More terrible then a ghost, I ha no stomach
To fight, my blood is frozen in my veins,
She is a thousand punishments at once:
Now would I give my Office to be at peace
With mine own conscience, ha, she do's pursue me?
These are idle imaginations, collect
Your self, good Courtier, and remember what
Wee are to doe, or I shall, ha.
Whats the matter, more terror?
I am cold too.
Another apparition.
You may know him by a jaw-faln, tic No-pay.
And what a comfort No-pay's to a Soldier,
I appeal to a Council of war, the Devil is not
So full of horror, No-pay? Isle not fight
A stroke, though I were sure to clear the Empire.
Our weapons length are even, but you'll find
There is such odds betwixt us, nought but death
Can reconcile our difference.
Deny your major. I think I heard a School∣ler
use that word against Bellarmine. I, Isle stand too't:
for if nought but death, can reconcile our difference,
we must be both kilt: no, prepare thy self, I hope to
send thee to heaven, and be far enough off ere Sun∣set:
if thou hast made thy Will, let them prove it
when thou art dead, and bury thee accordingly, thy
wife will have cause to thank me, it will be a good
hearing to the poor of the Parish: happy man by his
dole, besides, the Blue-coates can but comfort thy
kindred with singing and rejoicing at thy Funeral.
Come on thy ways.
You're very round, Clod, I doe not think you
have practised Fencing of late, this is a weapon you
are not used to, a Pitch-forke were more convenient
for you to manage.
A Pitch-forke? Thou shalt know thy destiny
by this, though it have but one point I know where
thy heart lies, I desire no more, and less would sa∣tisfie
me, unless thou wilt eat thy words, and con∣fesse
thou hast wronged me, out it shall, I have a sto∣macke
to cut thee up, and my sword has a pretty
edge of it self, and my greatest grief is, that I owe
thee nothing, to discharge all together, but tic no
matter, I can but kill thee.
You cannot, sure: for ought I see in your coun∣tenance,
you are not long-lyv'd your self, you have
but a tallow complexion, doe you know what
ground you stand upon, Clod?
Ground?
You may tread upon your grave now, for
all this blustering.
Thou least, there's more to provoke thee: no,
I came not hither to dye, and I 〈◊〉 be buried at
any mans discretion, my father was buried 〈◊〉
Country, and my grand-father, and his father before
him, and if I live Isle bee buried there my self: but
what doe we lose time? look to thy head, for I will
make an even reckoning with thy shoulders pre∣sently.
Ha, hold, alas, I wo'not fight, I ha no heart to lift
up a weapon.
You were fi•e and tow but 'een now.
But here's water Dost not see? I shall be un∣done.
Who is this?
Why, tic Foule-Weather-in-Harvest, all
spoiled, I wo'not have thy heart now, and thou
would gee'tme.
Tic well, something will cool you, after so
much thunder, but it wo'not quench the fire of my
anger. I doe not use to put up these things, when I
am drawn too't, your Foul weather is nothing to
the business in hand, therefore submit thy neck to
my execution, or—
Kill me: Isle forgive thee, I shall have no Har∣vest
to year.
And thou had as many heads as Hydra—Ha,
Isle not hurt a Hare, I am frighted this is my
heart, you had not so wet, but we are like to have
as dry a time on it, I stood upon te•••es before, this
is Long-Vacation.
Long-Vacation?
I dreamed of a dry Summer, he will con∣sum
me, it will be a thousand years till Michael∣mass.
Prithee let's be friends, for my part I have no
hope of Riches.
And I but little, and this weather hold.
Here she comes.
Where be these friends of mine? Alas, what
Mean you? I am faint with seeking you to stay your
fury:
For I was told your bloody resolutions.
You should be a man of government, are these
The ensigns of the City? will you give
Without the Herald in your Arms, a Sword
To the old City Dagger? you wear a Gown
Emblem of peace, will you defile your gravity
With Basket-hilt and Bilbo? And you bold Yeoman,
That like a Reek of hay, hath stood the shock
Of Winter, and grew white with snow of age,
Is this an instrument for you?
But I am confident that you will say, tic love
Of me hath brought you to the field, and therefore
To prevent future mischief, I determine
Here to declare my self: but first conjoin
Your loving hands, and vow a constant friendship,
Then one of you Isle choose my husband.
By our seven gates that doe let in
Every day no little sin,
By the sword which we advance,
And the Cap of Maintenance:
By the Shrieves post, and the hall
Yelped Guild, and London wall,
By our Royal Change which yields
Gentile ware, and by More-fields,
By our thrice burnt famous Steeple,
That doth over-looke the people,
Cheapside Cross, and loud Bow-bell,
And by all that wish it well:
I am friends with him till he dies,
And love him like my liberties:
So help me Riches, what I speak:
The Citizen will never break.
What say you?
By my Cart, and by my Plough,
My dun Mare, and best red Cow,
By my Barn, and fattest Weather,
My grounds, and all my state together,
In thy love I over-take thee,
Else my whistling quite forsake me,
And let me ever lye, which worse is,
At rack and manger with the horses.
Then Master Clod.—
Ha, ha, with all my heart, am I the man?
The man. I must entreat to have some patience.
I doe imagine you affect me dearly,
And would make much of Riches.
There's no Lady
That shall out-shine my Darling: tic no matter, though
I be in Russet all the week, Riches shall live like a La∣die,
have perfumed linen, costly Gowns, and Pe∣ticoats
worth taking up, and as the fashion is; I will
put thee into a bag.
This wo'not, sir, agree with your condition,
To keep me brave: the Country Cut must be
Observed.
Hang Country Cuts! Doe but marry me.—
But this is not my exception; there is more
That interdicts our marriage: for though you
Are willing to conceal it, Master Clod,
Yet you and I are kindred, at least cousins.
Why, is not your name Riches?
Though my name
Be Riches, yet my mother was a Clod,
She married rich earth of America,
Where I was borne, a dirty family,
But many matches have refined us now,
And we are called Riches.
If you were borne in America, wee are but
kindred a far off.
Let us not confound our Genealogies.
I would be loath to marry an Infidel borne,
and yet I like your complexion so well, that—
No, I am reserved for thee,
And here I plant my best affection.
Welcome to my heart.
How I doe love thee, Riches! O my soul,
We will marry straight.
And thus much for your comfort.
Nay, droop not, Clod, though I be wife to him,
Yet if I bury Gettings, Isle be thine,
And carry London with us into the Country.
After this rate you are my wife in Law.
Well: give you joy.
Me thinks I fumble my gold chain already.
But who are these?
No Honour to be found.
Let us inquire
Of these. Did any see the Lady Honour?
What care we for Honour, so we have Riches?
Ha? I have been acquainted with this Lady.
I was at Court the last week, sir.
I remember.
I ha seen her some-where too.
I ha been a Traveller.
Were you never taken by the Hollander?
I was in the Plate-fleete.
Baser los manos Signiory.
I have almost forgot my Spanish, but after
a little practice I may recover it.
I know not Honour if I see her, I have heard
of such a Lady: ten to one, but Riches can direct you
to her.
I apprehend your desires, sir, &amp; will direct you.
I am your servant, Lady.
But first, Mr. Gettings, know these Gentlemen.
They are in my books already, pray Gentlemen,
Know my Commodities, when I ha married Riches,
I shall be better able to furnish you
We wish you joy.
And shall remain your debtors.
I make no doubt.
But here's the Lady whom we enquire for.
She has music to attend her.
Ha! the Scholar?
The case is altered. Is not that Ingenuity?
How familiar they are! I hope they are not married.
Is this Madam Honour?
So, Lady.
Gentlemen,
I come to reconcile your difference,
I did foresee you desperate in love,
And prompted, I confess your swelling valours
To fight for me, but upon second thoughts.
I concealed that opinion, and devised
A way to settle all things without danger
This Gentleman late my servant, Ingenuity,
Hath removed all occasion of your further
Courtship, and now won me for his Bride.
Married the Scholar? despised.
Affronted.
You are passionate.
You could not both possess me, yet in him
Your excellencies meet, and I enjoy i'm.
He can be Courtier and a Soldier
When the occasion presents it self.
He that hath learned to obey well, can command.
Nay, be not sad, if you loved me, express it
In your Congratulations. Here I fix
My self, and vow my best affection.
If in the number of my friends, I may
Write you, be confident you sha'not lose
By your respect to Honour. Lady Riches,
I hope there is no Antipathy in your nature,
But you may smile upon a Scholar now
Married to Honour.
Since you have so advanced him,
He shall not want my favour.
Now I am confident.
We must obey our destiny. Since Fate
Meant me not so much happiness, to be
The husband, let me still be humble servant
To Honour.
My desires have the same ambition.
Joys crown your marriage
Now you both denied me.
But in this Empire I can brooke no Rival.
Be all my honoured guests, and with one feast
And revels celebrate our double marriage.
And here our love unites. Pardon what language
My passion threw upon thee• acknowledge
A Soldiers worth above the reach of malice.
My heart shall spread to embrace the noble
Courtier.
Here's nothing but complement. you should
bring up a fashion to kiss one another.
Tic such a dry Clod!
Correct your passions, sir, I am informed
You have been guilty this day of abuse,
Against the noble Citizens, and traduced
Their yearly Triumph.
It was his ignorance,
But we are friends again.
Then I ha done. Now Gentlemen and Ladies,
In the assurance all are pleased, l••us
Join in dance. Such mirth becomes a wedding.
Strike up some nimble air.
Thus all have •even how Providence imparts
Wealth to the City, Honour to the Arts.

REmember where you are,
That ever man
Should be so dull of soul to love a woman.
What in the name of fury hath made you
An enemy to that sex, upon what Lady
False beyond Cressida, did thou loose thy patience?
Find it again for shame, thou were not borne
A woman hater.
No, I thank heaven
My mothers dead, and all my sisters, I
Had a contention in my nature, when
They were alive, but tie of blood prevailed
Against my disposition, I confess
I never wished them dead.
How had thou been
Alive, but for thy mother?
Thats one reason
Should make our love the less to i'm, they doe
But bring's acquainted with the world, which at
Our birth we are afraid of, and grow old
But to repent we are not embrois still,
Or things lost in conception.
We may
As well condemn our fathers, and declaim
Against them for our begetting, come Orseollo,
Desist to be a Satire, I hope you wot not
The Duchess should hear this; collect your self
You are ith presence, put on a smooth face
And speak Court language, let me counsel you
To softness; what a Courtier and so rugged?
Princes they say have many cares, and tic
not less then treason, in a women's court
To be so violent against i'm, these
Hangings may eveldrop us.
Let em, let em,
May be it would move the Duchess to exempt me
From my attendance; and she knew my mind
She would allow me a writ of ease, least I
Infect her Court with railing against her sex:
I'd rather hear a mandrake, then let in
The noise of women; heaven that I might never
Converse with any.
Thou wilt never marry.
Marry? Isle first engender with a Viper,
Were there but one woman alive, and but
By knowing her, no hope to stock the world
Again, Id geld my self.
Pity thou should
Marry, to get a son that should bē like thee;
Take heed least women for this bitterness
Make thee not first an Eunuch, but we ha lost
Our first discourse, thy passion like a storm
Hath quite transported us, from the Duke Foscari,
That hath now left us, let's
A cold suit with the Duchess.
If I stay
I shall talk treason, a cold suit? for ever
Ice dwell within their marrowes can affect em,
He was too worthy on her.
He deserved,
I know not what to think out, tic the third
Prince, that our duties have commended,
In hope to be made happy with her issue:
Nay, nay, have truce a little with thy spleen,
And lets talk wisely, we shall be observed;
I wonder.
So doe I.
At what?
At nothing,
At a woman, how tic possible a man
Should court and love em so, but now I think one,
I doe not wonder.
How is this?
They are
All Circes, and do steal away our souls;
They juggle us into shapes and puppets lovers.
They ha not juggled you me thinks.
Volterre and Orseollo, morrow to ye,
You hear the news.
Foscari is departed.
In a mist, is he not? here's but we three,
The Duchess is a strange woman.
Contarini hast any other faith,
Are they not all so Volterre?
Thou hast been a travailer, and conversed
with the Antipodes, almost put a girdle
about the world, taken dimensions
Of every nature, tasted all aires, and can
Distinguish em to an atom, tell me Seignior
And be not partial to the Sex, did ever
Upon thy honour meet with such a creature,
We here call virtuous woman, are not all
The stock of em inconstant?
Nay let's ha
No morē invēctives Seignior Orseollo
Traduce not all for some, it must be granted.
They are an excellent creation, though
Some few decline from virtue, I've a wife,
I'm but new married neither, yet I dare
Boast my opinion.
Doe not, the Moon
Is yet but in the first quarter Contarini,
I would endear my thoughts to thee, and thou
Were not married, boast thy opinion.
Go sacrifice to sleep, why these are womēn
Will cousin a strong faith, cuckold their husbands,
Yet taken in the act persuade em into
A belief they doe but dream so.
Seignior
You're pleasant.
Pleasant
As his gall will suffer him,
He has been casting out up this half hourē,
Yet there is some behind still, if you name
A woman, he takes fire like touchwood, but
To the Duke Foscari.
I have it,
What?
Ye talk
We doe.
I ha the cause hē went away so soon.
Prithee enrich our knowledge, why?
I honour him.
So we doe all.
He is a brave Duke, a man,
And in that, more then all his titles make him,
Some easy natures would ha languished for her,
And ha been paler then ye mean, with watching
Distilled their brain, tyred, yea some to seem
Commit Idolatry, given her their souls,
And changed em to her motion; in each window
Bescratching with some Diamond her name,
And warm it so with kisses till it thaw
The very glass, which weeps it self away
In pity of the dotage, been content
To ha worn their youth away in expectation;
This Prince was wiser, he left Parma to
Behold a creaturē was cried up, the miracle
Of nature, a new star like Cassiopeia
That drew the eyes of Italy, and left em
Fixed in the admiration, but he needing
No Iacobs staff to take the height, and looking
With a true eye upon this wounder, found
She was a woman, nothing but a woman,
His wisdom quickly taught him to return
A shamed of his credulity.
He's mad,
What a wild passion like a torrent, bears him
Against the women, it is well your hate
Points at the gēnerall, one women's anger
Would check your forward—else
Contarini.
I darē not hēare him talk morē, wē shall be
Held cherishers of his railing humour, in, in,
Prithee lets leave him.
Why Seignior, are you so transported
You have not power enough to seem calm,
What dost at Court?
Not cringe as you, and adore the nods
Of painted Ladies, weary my hams to answer
Madams half curses, I near come to Court
But to defend me from it.
Ha?
The truth is,
I would be fine discharged, tic a hell to me,
There are so many wormed in it: would the Duchess
Would banish me into some Wilderness,
I should endure the beasts though they devoured mē,
I hate no monsters but the Harpies.
Why?
Harpies have women's faces Contarini,
Yet now I think Volterre I have heard
There's another feminine murderer
Called the Hiena, that invites men forth
To be devourd; you've heard how the Egyptian
Crocodile weeps, when death it self lies bathing
Within her tears, think but upon women
And tell me which I should avoide-first.
I seē a merit nigh, and I hope
You will deserve the favour, we are not
Wont to admit of servants near their person,
Without more caution.
It makes my bond
Of duty and observance greater.
My Lord Comachio.
Let me employ some of your carē upon
My Nephew, something you may add
To improve him, you shall till no barren ground,
Though he reward you not with fruitefulnesse,
I shall have power to make you think your studies
Well placed.
Your compass I shall sail by.
Contarini hows the day?
Not early.
Signior Orseollo, I know what cloud
Muffles your thoughts.
He is constant to his humour.
Not the Duchess, come faith yēt Orseollo,
We shall entreat you join with us to the Duchess.
Yes, hey!—
So, so, he would but trouble us.
My Lords, we must be circumspect,
We are not to negotiate a design
That looks but at the profit of one man:
The Duchy calls to own it, all our cares
You know have met, that we might move the Duchess
To exchange her dull Virginity for Marriage;
Foscari whom our ambition pointed at, is lost
And he in some disgust gone hence.
I fear so.
His violent departure gives us more
Then jealousy, we must solicit her,
But so as shall become our duties, and
Express our knowledge of her great soulē
And pregnant wit.
She enters signior Comachia, tic referred
To your delivery.
Comachio! we have no knowledge of thy agē,
But what thy wisdom and experience doth
Discover, i'st not troublesome, t'attend
A young Court?
Your grace so desires my duty, that I
Delight in service.
Contarini in the mornings eyē, reveals
More youth, then he did by Hymens tapers;
Looks younger then when we call him Bridegroom.
Censure him Laura.
Your Highness knows he hath a young wife.
All my use of time, is but to perfect
My obedience to your excellence.
We cherish both your loves, and you Volterre
Are great too within our memory.
I shall endeavour new merits.
The cause of your attendance now, is known
Ere you deliver it. The departure
Of the young Duke (our Lover) from our Court
In so obscure a way, without your notice;
Our consent published gives you just cause
Of wonder: yet so much you're skil'd both in
Our soul and nature, that no immediate
Motive of his anger shall be laid to
Our charge; but what you think, makes our person
Safe, and great.
We come with humble modesty t'require
So much, as shall concern our care, both
Of your gracious self, and our good Country.
Foscari, Duke of Parma is a great Prince;
Feature; a Lady, like your excellence,
His youth and strength may promise issue even
To a matron.
We know he merits all his praise. Proceed
To what you call your business.
His Catholic Majesty did lately by
His Li•ger, urge a title to this Duchy,
And desire your Counsel, he might be named
Your Highness next, and lawful heir, unless
From your own person, were derived a Prince
To intercept his hopes, with ease, you may
Consider, how unkind our fate will be,
Beyond his own natural soil, doth make
Obedience bondage.
You have yet hope, tic in my power
To prevent what you suspect.
We have, but Time (the enemy to lie,
And to increase) may scorn, destroy that hope.
If not for propitious love to us;
Yet for your own sake, your glory, hasten
The cure of these our fears: Time is the moth
Of nature, devouers all beauty, when those
Bright eyes, that govern now with Phoebus-like
Predominance, shall yield no light unto
That darkened sky (your face) some aged mother
Pround of her fertile womb, will show you then
Her off-spring. Behold (quoth she) I need no
Marble house for my fame to dwell in, these
Are my living monuments, but your sullaine
Chastity, will not permit your fame to outlive
Your breath.
No more Comachio! these are my own thoughts:
Shortly you shall see I am art, prevention
Of all danger.
You are my gracious Mistress.
Yea you shall much divulge your clemency
If to stifle public noise you reveal
The reason; why Foscari was not made
Your choice.
Foscari is a foreigner: borne in
A climate not so temperate as ours,
And I am yet to know, whether his mind
Be different from such as please me here
At home: foreign alliance is an old
Disguise for Sunices hatred: It charms the
Peaceful into a dull security;
Until the furious find best advantage
To make his anger known: then both are more
Engaged t'inflame, what erst the one did kindle.
I should sin my good Lords, if I did think
My humility disgraced my honour,
When I supposed my own Court able to
Breed a man, fit to mingle blood, even with
A Princess; should I say with mine: what amazed,
Why does it want example, I should not
Think my choice would much accuse my eyes, if
I elect a Lover here: unless some
Are more desert-lesse then I am guilty of, Laura!
Join to us Oedipus, yet we shall want
Help t'expound this Riddle—
A Lover here from her own Court, sure it
Must be from this number, Seignior Volterre!
My very good Lord.
You are the man, the stars dance to. The spheres
Doe practise music, only to make you
Merry, you are he seignior.
Who, I my Lord?
Doe not conceal your hopes: they'll be worthy
Your acknowledgement; you would be installed
In the dark, steal titles, without the notice
Of the Heralds, but noise attends honour.
I need a Comment to your words.
Come, you young men are all temptation;
You have the purple veins (seignior) that swell
With wanton pride, and Ladies judgements are
Much governed by their eyes; what grace, what favour,
Did the Duchess lately show you, the more
T'indeere your duty? ho?
I want a soul (seignior) if she ever
Honoured me with any phrase; but what is
Usual in her Complement t'other Lords.
First possible—
He has discovered somewhat that concerns
My joy. Nature needs no excuse why a
Duchess should affect a travailed Lord;
You are great too, within our memory.
These were her words. hum!—
Seignior Contarini.
My Lord.
You observed the Duchess language?
Am I not thinking on it? heart, why doe ye
Interupt me?—
How's this my Lord Volterre?
Your pleasure seignior!
You have a fortunate skill in translation
Of mysterious language: I pray lend me
Your censure upon the last words the Duchess
Uttered.
Ho seignior? they concern not me, I am
Forgotten by my stars, I, Volterre
Is lost to all Eyesight, but his own.
Doe our brains melt this hot weather. These men
Were heretofore discreet, and now they talk
A if they had no Eyelids, like things that
Never slept. I find the cause.
Quoth she, he looks younger, then when he stood
By Hymens tapers, good, very good, I have
O were I single now; my wife, my wife;
She ruins all this hope.—
Since I have travelled, brought from France, the nice
Amorous cringe, that so enchants Ladies:
Tic fit I use it often, the tongue is
Powerful too, and I enrich in languages,
It shall be known—
Seignior Volterre.
To bring Revel▪ in the Court, that's the way,
I have my self an able chine, and I
Can frisk like a Goat: which females call
A lucky symptom—Seignior Contarini,
Your lop. must excuse me, I'm a little
Serious.
O for a sight of Iupiters wardrobe
That I might imitate the shape, in which
He courted Diana!
Seignior Volterre.
I my Lord that's my name, Isle go write
It down, least this business make me forget it.
Rebellious blood! must I neëds marry? had
I but delayed my lust a month, I might
Have wasted then my strength and nature, to
A nobler purpose: beget Princes, now
I am in bondage to my marriage vow.
MY Wife must do it and then I may effect
My hope with the great Duchess as soon as he
Most proud of demerits. Dandalo
Wheres your Lady.
Your Lordship may hear both her voice and Lute,
Shees in the garden with Reollo your
Musician.
Hear, does she so much despair of long life,
That she need flatter her soul to tarry here
With soft Airs, and wanton Music.
My Lord.
Conduct her hither.
I saw your entrance, you bring news from Court,
Let me share in it.
I must work her to it with art and leisure.
What does your lop say?
Sweet lend me thy ear in private—can I
Demand a thing from her that slumbered in
My bosom, and she be so unkind
To give my suit a hard repulse.
My Lord I am not guilty of a cause
That can warrant your suspect either of
My love or duty.
I believe thee (dear Carintha) but this
Injunction is so severe and strange, twill
Puzzle thy consent at first.
Sir make it known, I cannot be so slow
In any performance of your will, as you
Are to reveal it.
Thy breath is sweeter then the smoke ascending
From the Phoenix funeral pile, I could
Kiss thee, even engender on thy lips.
You were not wont to be thus pleased, show me
Which way I may requite your passion, speak
The suit you talk on.
Now I know the strength of thy affection,
I slight my suit the grave will prove to easy.
What is it.
Isle have thee only kill thy self, crush, thou
Shat doe it, ho—
Sir I suspect your health, you were not wont
To show your speech so much estranged from reason.
Is this your love, your forward kindness?
Scarce has the Moon expired a change since you
Received me in your bed a cold Virgin;
Are you so soon tyred with sacred marriage,
Desirous to motive my eternal
Absence and by a means so cruel sir,
How have I deserved your hatred, or please
But to reveal the profit which by death
Can bring you.
I have not leisure to reply to your
Demands, will you do it.
You fright my soul.
Orseollo happy you, whose frozen nature
Will not permit a closure with a woman.
The sex doe quite degenerate from those
Great patterns which the former age produced.
Portia swallowed fire to please her husbands ghost,
Who enticed him to Elisium; Lucresse,
To purchase life unto her memory,
Noise at her funeral such as might cleave
Her fame, priced her dear heart, and dyed
We have a certain faith, a faith
That can assure reward, or punishment
For deeds, we know our dwelling after death,
Which Roman souls unlawfully did seek,
And found too soon, we are prescribed those act
That makes us Angels.
She has bin gossipping with the holy
Sisters, zeal, and purity.
It were safer for my soul; if your self
Would be my Executioner.
I thank you Lop. I am exposed
To the justice of the law, he whose rich
And his Prince become his heir cannot live long;
Besides my hopes to enjoy the Duchess,
Are then quite frustrate.
What said your Lop.
I did not think Carintha thou had been
So sterne of nature, t'hast a stubborn heart;
Deny my first request.
Should I kill my self.
Why must we not all dye, it is a thrifty
Conscience that persuades the soul to hasten
Her departure hence to avoid future guilt.
You counsel strangely, I have deserved more
Kindness from your tongue.
If thou suspect'st thou hast not fortitude
Enough, t'attempt thy death by violence:
Expire with leisure: refrain from meat, till
The orifice of thy stomach close, and grow
Together; or when thou feedst, eat Arsnicke,
Dye any way, so the law call not me
Thy murderer.
Heaven secure me, have you the use of all
Your senses, ye speak thus?
But if you'll choose an easier way, each morning
Fetch a tedious sigh or two, twill make your
Heart to cleave, Isle give you cause enough to do it.
You have a bloody mind.
Or as some Country Virgins doe scratch mortar
From an aged wall and eat it up in
Private, so die on the greene disease, but now
I think upon it thats to perplex away,
Unto the Grave.
I dare not hate the thought you've tempted me,
Beyond mortal patience, oh unkind
Destiny.
Doe, fret, gall thy heart strings till they break,
Iv the engine of a babe, any man
That had arrived at half my years, would soon
Invent a safe way to shift that trifle
From him. Hum, who shall I get to do it.
Happy fancy, it is mature I will
Above it strait.
I sent you a Letter Madam.
My Lord I received it.
How did you taste it?
Excellently.
I have twenty as good as that lying by me, have I not
Oh my good Lord. (Crispino
They shall be all at your service.
Yare too much a Courtier, I must chide you
Seignior, I never did deserve the Epithets
Your paper throws upon me.
Epithets I beseech you Madam to impute
That to the fretfulness of my brain,
If any thing have slipped my pen whereby I may incur
Your Ladyships indignation Isle recant
It publicly.
I enjoin no such penance,
But tic an injury easily remitted,
Tic the glory they say of Lovers to Hiperbolise.
Hiperbolize, whats that? I ha not that word
Yet in my Alphabet, I hope Madam you
Hold a better opinion of me then to imagine
I would hiperbolize with your Lady-ship;
That were immodest.
Not so Seignior.
By my faith Madam but it is, de think
I know not what hiperbolizing is,
That were simplicity, if any thing
Within my Letter may be drawn within
Construction of hiperbolizing, condemn
Not me for it, by service Madam, I
Had no intention to stretch so far
To your dishonour, it shall teach me wit
To write my Letters hereafter.
A hair in your honours locke is disordered,
Tic rectified,
Seignior,
You doe me much too much satisfaction,
Your error being a small one.
Tic your favour,
Yet when I commit a peccadillo
Against your brightness, I deserve to be
Extinguished your presence for it, I did love
You Madam, as I remember when I was an Infant,
How.
We are Infants you will grant
When we cannot speak, and I loved full eight months
And a half ere I had power to tell you on it
Ime certain.
I was not worth so much.
Nay for that Madam
Isle show my self deserving, were you worthy
It were the less act of mine to love you,
That were a poor thing, I doe not stand on worth.
Madam I would not have you think so ignobly of me,
That I affect you for your worth, Id rather
Upon my honour have you in your smock,
Than all the Ladies in the world stark naked.
Now your language is course.
You shall pardon me for that.
Your Lordships feather waves to much toward the
Tic now in true point. (East,
My love is pure and like the Sun transparent.
Now you Complement, I know
You're excellent at it.
Troth not I Lady,
I cannot Complement, I doe but
Refulgent your beauty, whose mellifluous voice
Pierces the ear—faith Madam credit me
I ne'er could complement in my life: Most fair,
Whom young Apollo courted for her hair.
There are poetical furies in the City,
But I converse not with em.
Were ever cheeks of roses, locks of amber
Ordained to be imprisoned in a chamber,
Laura I doe but piddle, a pretender,
I know not how to Complement.
You now doe.
Alas not I, I cannot make verses neither;
Thy dainty seal of Virgin wax,
That nothing but impression lacks.
Your Lordships cloak discovers not sufficiently the riches of the inside.
An excellent Poet.
Isle tell you Madam a strange thing, you see
These trifles; before I was in love, I could
Not ha made an Acrosticke in a day,
Sometimes two.
Now you can make Chronograms.
I think I can, and Anagrams for a need.
Seignior you are wonderful improved,
Love has inspired you richly. I perceive
Cupped is a mute too.
Oh now I cannot sleep for the multitude,
Of Verses that are capering in my skull.
I wonder you are not mad.
You may.
A hair in your honours locke is disordered.
But I've a gift to help it, I allow
My self set times to vent em, they would blow
Me up else.
As how pray.
Why thus in the morning
When I have said my prayers in Verse, which fall
From me, and I ne'er think on em, next my heart
I scrible out an ode, after my breakfast
I fall upon a Satire, when I've railed
My self into a fresh stomach, I dine,
Which done, because it is not good to study
Upon repletion or full stomach, you
Understand me; for a matter of two hours
I dream as it comports with our Italian
To sleep, then I say, I dream familiarly
An Heroic Poem.
Dream.
Madam while you live,
Your dreaming Poets are the best, and have
Distilled raptures, spirits that converse with em,
And teach em what to write; this I set down
Before I eat again, after I walk
Upon the strength of Supper into the park,
And ruminate an Elegy at return,
I doe discourse of Epigrams, and an Epitaph
Upon some one or other of my kindred.
I ha made a rare one on my Uncle, and
He would dye shortly to deserve it.
Whats that?
If you so methodise your study Seignior
I shall but sin against your muse, tic now
Your hour by course, for your heroic Poem:
It were best you sleep my Lord, Isle take my leave.
Nay Madam, tic not every day I study
So hard, on some I whet my muse
Your Lordships weapon hangs to much a fore.
Thou hast my bosom, treasure up my secrets
Faithfully, and deserve I should be thine;
Giotto, the first opportunity
Commends thee to the Duchess, then's the time,
To show thy gratitude, if she still look on me
With lucky eyes.
My Lord you've made
Your self the creditor of what I am;
If I return you not the interrest
Of all my service, I should justly forfeit
To be unmade again.
Sweet Laura, world confounding beauty.
Again Hyperbolizing, then you Lordship
Must pardon me.
What's the signification of this word? hum.
I have heard some say, to hyperbolize
Is to lye, and it may be she would not have
Your Lordship lye with her.
Seignior de patri, what part of your discourse
Concerned my death, I heard with Madam Laura
You name your Uncles dying.
It was with grief then,
I had no cause to name you else my Lord.
Apply your self Nephew to this Gentleman,
And make him precious to you.
I shall study his honours service.
Giotto.
My Lord.
You are a Scholar.
I have lost time in Padua.
Isle tell you a j•st a Gentleman ith Court
Writing a Letter to his Mistress could not
Contain himself from hyperbolizing with her.
Is your Lordship serious?
True upon my honour, what a gull it was
To make himself ridiculous, I laughed at him,
Then he asked me what that word meant, Giotto
What doe you think on it?
I my Lord,
Your honour needs no comment to inform you,
Much less my translation.
Yes I knew, but what says your Dictionary.
Your Lordship shall pardon me, for that hyperbolizing
It is some bawdy word, he is so modest,
Wherein did I hyperbolize with her Ladyship:
My Lord Volterre.
Seignior de Pass Comesta.
I am transported to see your Lordship well.
Io soy il uvestra servadore.
Whats this?
Between Goth and Vaundell, Spanish.
And Giotto were not here now, I would ask him
What were hyperbolizing by your Lordships favour.
Women are taken with the presence of
A man, the garb, and ornaments of state
Endear him to their senses, I would fine
Appear in glorious habit can you dance?
I were no Lord else, I was a French mans Scholar,
For twenty crowns a month, you may guess by that
My abilities.
Tic the best fooling, and the safest for
The body, your French glide away like Rivers,
Without a noise, and turning with Meanders,
Out move ye, your lofty tricks, are tude,
And doe to much examine.
May we not rise,
I ha known good dancers rise at Court, what say you to
A cosse caper.
Ride the Cannon, and you ha
No care to preserve your bonds, but I forget,
Adtos seignior, I must attend the Duchess.
Doe not hyperbolize with her my Lord.
Pardonate Signior mio.
Tic so, tic bawdy, that shrug tells me so, Giotto.
Your honours servant.
Were you never a Courtier before.
I only hitherto have spent my eyesight.
In observation, now I grow proud to write
My self dependant.
Seignior Comachio my Uncle, lends you.
But Ime not to learn
To adore the rising Sun, I look on him
As in his West, but I've ambition
To merit your grace.
I see then thou wot be a Courtier.
Comachio, show me your Nephew!
You're welcome to Court my Lord.
It is your highness pleasure I should presume so,
And I am confident I may.
He has not only profited in growth
Of person, but in's judgement too: talks well,
Our Court wants such Comachio, your Nephews
Contemplation ends here. Padua must
Loose him, he shall be our servant.
She jeers him, and I gain no credit by 't.
Keep your tongue quiet, cease your abortive
Language, or Isle cut your throat.
This is the trick of all Courtiers,
They would engross Princes even to
Themselves, I must not speak to her.
This is the Gentleman, your grace was pleased
T'accept from my commends.
You are a Florentine.
I am proud to own my Country.
We have heard so much of your demerits,
That it were injustice not to cherish you,
Be confident, to gain our best favour.
I've often prayed for this blessed hour, and thought
I did not sin in my ambition.
It is a virtue to covet honour
From your excellence: which I shall ever
Study to deserve.
Laura begin your trial.
This is a rude kind of duty, speak your
Intention.
Twice have I kneeled to gain your kindness in
My suit, now grant it, or isle turn Traitor.
Make your suit known.
I have been bred in rugged wars,
A women's government is soft and fit
For Babes to bow to, dismiss straight your Court.
Orseollo, did not your offence breed mirth,
You should perceiv't more difficult to find
A pardon fort.
Send me straight to Sea, if but t'incounter
A fleet of fiends rigged by witches, or with
A colony to settle a Plantation
In the deserts of Barberry, Isle choose
Any employment rather then to hear a
Lady utter perfumed breath, or see her
Advance in her masculine garb, in her
New mimic posture.
Leave us▪ but so, that in an hours space
We may command your presence here, to move
Our laughter, when leisure will permit it,
Or you shall never live to wear gray hairs.
Isle conspire with a constable, that commits
Justice in's sleep, ere Isle want treachery
To revenge this constraint of service.
Your grace will beget charity in
Other Ladies, if you pardon this his
Bold behaviour, for he offends all women.
How Comachio.
Does not your excellence know, he is called
The woman hater.
Deserves he that Epithet?
Isle show your highness the real cause, why
He hates all women; he was ever bred
In the camp, where there are no females, but
Sutlers wives: fit drudges, to make fierce
In the devils kitchen, whose very looks
Disparage the complexion of all their sex;
He ne'er conversed with an Italian
Bone Koba, a plump Lady, that fills
Her grown, or with a French Bruvette,
A Spanish Muser umbrada, or a
Germane Yefrow, the Dutch.—
Or with a Welsh—
Parrot! will ye be prating?
What should a man doe withs tongue, an ye
Won't let him talk.
My Lord Volterre, is a copious linguist.
I still desire to be enabled for
Your graces service.
Are all the sluices stopped, that we may see
Your Cormorants dive for their prey?
We only want your highness presence there,
And the sport begins.
Comachio—
Seignior? these are your Cormorants, you still
Provide the Duchess new game, and pleasure:
She did you public grace, this morning too
Before the French leiger; but you ha travaild Sir.
My Lord, the French conceive things with justice
Ime but an isorit du moude, and as
The Spaniard says, Altar, estrabajo
Del hombre, but Iv observed her grace names
Contarini often, looks on you with
A smooth brow.
On me my Lord?
Lead forward to the River.
My hopes doe still increase, fate smiles on me.
Seignior De Patri, be you near us.
You've heard her graces will, this is the first
Employment. She knows you Florentines
Insinuate with great subtlety in
Humane natures.
She shall receive each man in's just character,
Sir I congratulate your new fortune,
You'll find her excellence a noble mistress.
You are a gentle Lady, and add much
Credit to her Court.
We shall lose the sport unless we hasten
To the River.
You have use of my attendance, and I am
Happy in it.
YOu now shall stay at Court Carintha, see
Her very lips look black. Saturnes issue.
Were not so dull and sullen.
Madam sh'as great motives unto sadness
Which I've been earnest with her to reveal,
But she conceals em as the usurer doth
His treasure: striving to beguile noise,
And lessen the number of his bags with
His report.
Lady, too soon you will deprive the world
Of your dear presence, if thus early you
Consume your hours in pensive thoughts!
Carintha, have I not power to increase
Your grief; if you conceal the cause of it
From me?
I am not sad, my faculties preserve
Their wonted harmony: your excellence
Will not enforce me to belie my passion.
There's my Lord Volterre, first your gracēs
Pleasure to retire till we have ended
Our discovery.
Is he come? Carintha, follow me!
She gave the game high applause, and begged two
Of my Cormorants: I must invent new
Sports to delight her fancy.
The day afford your Lop much profit.
If your Lop be in good health, ye owe
Some thanks unto my prayers.
Laura, the Duchess great favourite
Giotto, is eminent in Court too.
If these afford me such respect Iv cause
To think my stars faithful? Madam I would
Kiss your left hand—
I beseech your l•p enforce me not
To be unmannerly you are now above
My conversation.
How bright Laura. Signior Giotto.
Pray clear this mystery.
My Lord, be more particular, for my
Own part I know my distance, but you greet
Your Fortunes with too much humility,
You want state to converse with me.
I me all wonder and amazement Seignior,
Pray give your meaning more perspicuous
Utterance.
Will you forget to be reserved, know your
Station, you make me bold against my own
Desire.
Howes this?
I implore your Lordship leave I may be
Covered, it would much assist my health.
Why, dost keep thy head bare in reverence
To me? Madam, shall I entreat?—
Tic in your power to command, in my
Duty to obey.
Your duty—
It seems he hath not yet; how much thē
Duchess favours him—Volterre listens.
I conjecture so for e's differs much
From that which he must practise when he's Dukē
I hear ye—
How my Lord?
Laura, faith be publiquē! Giotto, why
Dost thou conceal the means to make thee
Happy?—
My Lord I know little, only those that
Waite near the Duchess, hear her often praise
Your nimble tongue, your skill in languages.
Phse questo mionto, what would you say,
There me interpret the inorticulate
Voices of birds, and beasts, that skill deserved
A fame.
Your Lordship might then (with great ease) been
Interpreter to the builders of Babel.
Something I've heard her grace speak too, in praise
Of your French gesture, your sublime frisk, and
Odd conveyance of your body.
Tic when your Lordship wreathes your hams in thus.
Ta da rum, ta da rum, te re re, ra da rum.
These are the postures that enchant your sex.
Lady—
I cannot blame the Duchess to be fond.
But does not your lop grow weary with
Continuance of this motion?
It is my vulgar exercise ta da rum, ta da rum.
Enough, enough, my good Lord, sure your swim
Within your doublet.
Giotto, now I am fit for a race,
Never tired. It has been thought by some (skilled
In the ability of my person) that
Ime mortal.
Indeed sir tic not fit you should ēxpect
Much in heaven, having such joy on earth.
You are more than happy, this Lady knows it.
Dost in faith Laura—
Sir, I hope when you shall sit invested
With Royal ornaments, you'll not disdain
Laura for your humble servant.
And Giotto knows that your Religion
Will not permit you slight industry.
I took part of my breeding in the French Court▪
And there I learnt to be familiar
With my Nobles.
Did not I say he would govērne gently,
Now can't my tongue be quiet, I must tell him all.
Nay Madam—
Giotto, dost concern you to hinder
This her kindness? speak dear Lady.
My Lord I affect truth and brevity,
I am commanded by her grace to make
Your visits private to her.
Ho, forward dear Laura.
Why sir, it is her highness will that you
Conceal these visits.
And let no encouragement neither from
Her eyes nor speech imboldne ye to think
Unlawful, her favours you must take
With silent observation.
Here comes my Lord Comachio. Away seignior
He must not see you.
Yo soy mug juoderose.
My noble Patron.—
I greet thee as my best genius, you are now
Mixed in the number with such as wear my title,
Thou climb'st apace, yet safely too; they strive
At Court, who first shall be the flatterer:
What female wast that left thee now? I saw
Part of her gown.
The Lady Laura.
Thou art most happy, skilful in thy choice
Of conversation: why she governs
Her highness heart. Did question her
About my business?
I know all, she cannot hide a single
Thought from me.
Thart strangely powerful o'er Ladies,
But what said she? have I no Rival in
The Duchess love.
Sir, she owns none but you, with a public
Confidence, only there is own impediment.
What first? prithee give it relation?
A spirit not tamed by his religion
Would hazard much rather then suffer it
Endanger such a hope.
Make it no morē a secrēt.
Could ye think she has observed your Nephew
With an amorous eye.
De pass, my Nephēw?
Thats the man sir, who is so much obliged
Unto her memory.
Stead this inclines so near miracle
T'would tax my judgement to believe it;
Confer her love upon a fool.
Pardon me sir! I doe not positively
Say she loves him. I make it (for your sake)
A cautulous suspect your jealous men
Strive against danger.
I doe affect thy discipline.
This morning she desired to speak with him.
To speak with him - good our brains are ne'er us,
Ere thou admitst him to her presence, weal
Furnish him with discourse, preposterous
Unto sense, and her demands; so make him
More cheap in her conception, here he comes.
Assist my prayers.
Seignior Uncle,
Nephew oppertunely
Seignior Giotto hath taken pains
To bring us knowledge of new graces, which
Our Duchess stores up for you, I am proud
To think what honour all our blood receives
From you, the top bough of our family:
I never hoped there could be stars in heaven
So auspicious, as I behold now shining,
And pointing all their golden beams on you,
The Duchess loves you—
Not carelessly, and with that common favour,
She does divide among the Courtiers,
They doe but glean her scattered graces,
For you the harvest's reserved and brought
Home to your bosom.
Other with much labour.
Clime this high rock, upon whose swelling top,
The Duchess smiles are placed, yet obtain not
One to reward their sweat.
But her own hand
Reaches you up, and tempts you to enjoying
The Perimids height, you may ascend by stayres,
And mount with ease unto that happiness,
Others adore afar off.
Does the Duchess
Affect me honourably, and for marriage otherwise?
That makes the Music high, it were not else
So ravishing, you are the man marked out
To be the Duke Depazzi.
Thats her desire,
She would not like a theife steal joys, but make
The pleasures lawful, nuptial holy rites,
Ushering your felicity, you must be
Her Husband Seignior, and all we your subjects,
Obsequious to your nod, when you have breath
To raise t'unlimitted height, and uncreate
Whom you would frown upon.
I see she is wise,
How will Comachio think his age blessed, to see
Princes borne to his Nephew, and with breath
Covetous to expire in prayers for them.
Kneel there great Uncle,
I have an ambition
If you think not the honour over great,
To beg tuition of your second son,
Whom I should study to bring up, with such
Choice education, as shall become
The greatness of his soul and birth.
Tic granted, my second son is thine, but are you sure
I am ordained to be the man you talk of;
Must I be craned up to that altitude.
My Lord
You may be confident, Giotto dares not
Play with your greatness, and my dare was never
Yet so uncertain, when I hear your name
So sweetened by your Duchess breath.
No more, I have a strong faith, tic so, for my Uncle
Doth practise already his observance, I
Purpose to visit our loving Duchess.
Nay you will be sent for and be courted to
That was intimated.
But my honoured Nephew
Would you admit instructions, for I see
With how much envy of the Court you rise
To this high sphere of sovereignty, be prudent,
Arm your self with some excellent discourses (thoughts.
For your first parley, you shall knit her soul to your own
If my abilities may doe you service.
Giotto, you are furnished to read Lectures
To us both of Courtship, and I know my Nephew
Will gratefully remember, what you add
To raise him to our wishes.
I desire to be a banquerout of knowledge, when
My portion may enrich you.
Should you lose
Your brain seignior in my service, you
Should find I would requite you.
At his first entrance to her graces presence
Something new and sublime, t'insinuate
How much she hath consulted with her best
Wisdom, when she elected one so meriting,
To be her husband.
So with one argument
He magnifies her judgement, and his worth.
I like that well, if you doe pen that speech
Commend me pray unreasonable, I shall study it.
That must be, to this we may guess she will
Reply, my Lord, I could miss in such a troop
Of Deservers to choose out the ablest.
Meaning my Nephew.
I know that, who else?
Hence take you fresh occasions to extol
Your self, and be not nice to let her know
Your active blood, and spirit to get Princes,
How much the people will be bound to bless
Her race in choosing you, whose promising body
Is able to incite them to make bonfires
For Dukes unborn.
Great reason, proceed.
It will be necessary you disparage all men
That are about her, though your Uncle, he
Will suffer to advance you.
Who my Nephew?
Let me alone to disgrace him.
It gives you lustre principally remember
To rail against her Ladies, call em hags,
You cannot be too bitter, this secures
Your love to the Duchess, beats of jealousy
When you appear to love her only of
All the sex.
It will be a good occasion to beat off
Laura, to whom I did pretend my self
A Lover excellent, pray let me have all these
Directions in manuscripts, Isle not see her
Till they be rotten in my head.
Giotto, bindus both to you, this will do it,
Art cannot shape him more ridiculous,
These are rare principles. Here's Contarini.
Remove your selfes: tic not fit he see ye.
Seignior Contarini, your minute is expired.
I crave your pardon seignior, have you learnt
From Laura ought that concerns my knowledge.
I have cause to entreat my intelligence.
I am your pensioner, you have enriched
My stable with a Barberry Roan.
A gift I am ignorant to requite;
I must return great thanks too, from the
Lady Laura, for the wealthy Carbanet
You sent her last night.
I me yet indebted to you both: Seignior
You are skilled in my affair: the noise still
Continue, our great Duchess will elect
A husband from her own Court, Isle only
Know the man; that so I may direct my
Observance the right way, you will call this
An honest policy.
Your contemplations are too humble.
You Seignior?
Ere I would think another worthier then
My self, to bearē a sovereign title;
I would disclaim my judgement and runnē mad.
But there's a cross bar to your ambition,
(Heaven excuse my sorrow for it?) you are
Married, you have a wife.
Sir, I beseech you give your meaning more expression
Has the Duchess any name within her memory,
So much as Contarinies?
Are not you he whose feature she admires?
Nay Sir, it is not long since Laura heard
Her wish you were unmarried: Interpret
My relation as you please;
But you know Princes are reserved. Whats he?
My servant Seignior, he has modest ears
And a quiet tongue. Dandalo, you may
Stay here, I shall use thy consent in a business.
I waite your pleasure.
But did her grace wish I werē unmarryēd?
By no iteration that breeds noise.
Well, I allow of her graces wish.
How my Lord?
If my marriage discontent her highnēsse:
I wish I had no wife—
He has a noble soul! is there no way
To avoid this trifle called a wife.
Yes Seignior, there are ways, but—
O sir, discharge your mind, it concerns my
Prēferment to be faithful.
Troth, were all impediments cleared, I think
We two should rule equally;
Ime strangely fond to those I love.
Seignior you have given me cause to know it.
If I could sue out a divorce——
I seignior, but the judge grants nonē without a
lawful cause.
Shēe shall commit adultery.
With whom?
Giotto, that I am comē to tell thee.
Shees a beauteous Lady, soft and buxsome?
Thou shalt lye with her.
I, my Lord?
It were an indeerement too great for my rēquitall.
Tic decreed, come, it must be so.
Seignior, I shall beg your pardon.
I keep my mercy for another use,
Suspect no danger, you shall come disguised
When you woo her too't, which done, the Duchess
Shall help my procurement of a divorce:
Why, I knew before, her highness loved me!
I have received favours from her looks and and speech.
Does not your man listen?
No matter, hes our confederate.
Dandalo know this Gentleman's hands
And kiss em often.
Ime his humble crēature.
I shall be glad to show you kindenēsse.
Lets perfect our design, good seignior
I have no leisure now to ruminate,
I affect action.
Madam, I ha signified to my Lord
What you commanded, but I hope your Ladyship
Hath heard his disposition.
He's not reconciled to our sex,
He has proclaimed that.
This place breeds no Ladies,
No not for civil entertainment, we
Have not a woman in the house, their pictures
Which adorn other galleries, you see
Tempt not the eye here, all his offices
Discharged by men, he says where he commands
He must not see a woman.
What not strangers?
Such is his will.
How then?
If you desire his presence and discourse,
You must be veiled here Madam, his own eye
Must not be witness to what face he speaks,
Ime but his servant.
Tell him Isle expect him in that form hē
Prescribes.
The other Lady too
Must be clouded, then Isle let his Lordship
Know you're prepared.
Pray doe Madam, I hope
Your discontent will give you leave to smile
At this, her grace found you but this employment,
With me, to beat your melancholy off,
Apply to the occasion.
My gratitude will teach me to conform.
Now Ladies whats your pleasures, that you summon
My appearance, I know ye ha supple joints,
What mystery of state sends you to me?
I cannot revel in long stockings, frisk
To please your wanton eye-sight; I ne'er bosted
'My ribs, or largeness of my thighs, to invite you;
I make no Sonnets of your antique dressings,
Cry up your colour of your face, and swear
You're divine pieces, for I know you are not:
I will not draw heavens curse upon me, for
Flattering into pride; say that the Lilies,
Are pale, for envy of your white, and the Roses
Blush, to see better in your cheeks, your hair
Beams, rather drawn up to a net, might catch
Jove when he plaid the Eagle; that your breasts
Raise up themselves like two fair Mountainers
In the pleasant vale of temptation, I hate this
I will not dam my self to make you proud,
Doe not, I know your faces?
Ours, we are not ashamed to show em.
Doe not unveil.
Good Madam.
Will you not see what you condemn?
Ime gone, if you attempt to let me seē
A piece of any countenance; while I thus
Look on ye, I can help my self t'imagine
Ye are some other creatures.
Troth my Lord, for pity to your self
End your invectives;
Madam I told you of this mirth.
Can he be serious?
Wrack me not with your stay,
Whats the design hath brought you hither?
This Seignior; tic the Duchess pleasurē
You make sudden repair to Court.
I?
That's our Embassy.
I am no Court physician, I but vexē
Your female constitutions, you know
All my receipts are bitter, and her excellēncē
Hath plenty of those, she gives a pension to
Can flatter; why does she send for me am so
Unwelcome?
My Lord, her grace employs
Not me to any so unhappy:
And though you have not lived so near the favour,
In the eye of the Court, which your own humour too
May have been the cause, I have no honour, if
You find your self unwelcome,
Tic a mystery.
I could instruct you further with a secret,
Your soul would dance to know, but I confess
Tic more then my commission:
Is there in nature any happiness for mē?
And from a woman: you will come my Lord?
Stay, from a woman, ha? the Duchess—
Heard a noise she would choose a Lover from
Her own Court, can it be that? death I havē
Been boundless in my railing. I begin
To curse my self fort.
Be all silence,
Thou hast a knowledge will be dangerous
To any hope, perhaps, I could be pleased
To see the tip of your nose Lady,
Or the mole upon your chin.
You will have cause to bless the occasion
Of this days message.
I could see your cheek,
Nay half your face for tother syllable.
Lady you can say more,
I dare not seignior, already we have exceeded.
I know such creatures cannot mock, sweet Lady.
Have you not heard her graces resolution,
Touching a husband?
Your are o'er dark still, enrich me,
I hope your honour will remember this poor ser∣vice when tic done.
What? one Letter of your meaning.
My Lord the Duchess loves you.
Ha?
Come Madam, I shall say you will waite.
Shall I not see the faces,
To which I owe my blessedness.
No words of those loose creatures in your custody,
Seal up the doors, still the air least that
Creep out too soon, and kill my growing fate.
was not Orseollo's humour, recreation
To thee Carintha?
I spent all my thoughts
In wonder Madam.
He began to soften—
We tamed his Tiger violence, not Magic
Could force him like the charm you sent.
Giotto? What speaks your hast?
Comachio Madam, and seignior Depazzi.
Usher em in.
Something in such a plenty may delight
Your dulled fancy.
Laura, remove your self,
Doe not eclipse the splendour of that Sun.
My Eagles eye must gaze at. Uncle know
Your distance.
Seignior Depazzi.
Giotto, my hand again, be proud, now Madam
I address my self to you, wonderful Princess,
Not so much for your beauty as your wisdom,
Your carnal wisdom.
Wherein Seignior.
Good.
Right you answer, right it is my qu:
Your carnal wisdom Madam, you proclaim
In choosing out a husband, and that man
Whose memory your subjects shall have cause
To curse, is I.
To curse?
Perfect still, have cause to curse,
You did no sooner choose him, which of all
Your fair Lords, though you look a squint upon
My merit, could your eye pick out more able?
Heroic, complete, tempting? I am fleshed,
Nothing shall put me out.
Observe.
Your grace says right, I doe acknowledge it.
You are too hasty, her grace says nothing.
Did your grace say nothing? speak it again,
I know you meant to say something to the purpose.
What purpose seignior?
Now she has put me quite out.
Then rail upon your Uncle.
Look on him Madam, there he stands, you may
Perhaps imagine him for his gray beard
And a starched face, that he is wise a statist:
Isle bring ye a justice, thats but newly packed
Into commission, of the peace, shall make
An ass on him.
Nephew, this will make you odious.
A very gull in mystery of state,
A most egregious—in comparison
Of one that I could name, but he may serve
To fright the pages, muster the black guard,
Or keep the door at masks, his face will doe
More then a hundred others; yet now I think on it,
Your grace shall magnify your favour to me,
And let me beg him.
Ha, ha.
I hope your grace will pardon him, these fits
Are ever at full Moon.
Beg your Uncle Seignior?
Yes I would furnish him with an
Houreglasse and a sith;
And sell him to the Masons for the picture
Of time, Madam, would he not show well?
This is witty, what detractor
Gave out Seignior Comachio, your Nephew
Had no rich brain, Carintha, doe you nold him
Laura, Comachio, ha?
Giotto, she has put me out again,
Then rail upon her Ladies,
Hum, when I contemplate on your highness face
I hate all others.
Can your excellence.
Why, is mine so bad?
I beseech your grace, speak your part right,
Oblivion is my qu. I doe remember.
Madam Carintha, speak to her grace.
Has Madam Laura such I lip or eye?
I doe confess she has a nose, but I
Pass over it.
He makes a bridge of that,
Her cheeks,—
Nephew—Madam I humbly pray I may remove
This rudeness, tic a discord must needs grate
Your soft ear,
Uncle you are out now, her cheeks.
Well Seignior, what of my cheeks.
Why your cheeks are, as they are, death, I ha forgot.
This tic when you won't come t'rehearsall.
My cheeks are
Such as creation framed em, and the colour
Is natures gift.
It had need be gift, I know none so prodigal
To be at charge to buy em, yet you thought
I was in love w'ye, I confess I did
Once cherish an opinion you were something
About a gypsy, and might serve in Lent
When flesh was rare, but you must take into
Your thoughts, I meant not honestly, you see
For whom fate hath reserved me, be as patient
As such a loss will suffer you, doe not mar
Your face, cause I condemn it, it may serve
Some hungry seignior, or some City heir
That would be dabled in nobility,
And pay for his cornuting.
He is most witty Carintha.
Giotto, she is taken with this imprudence,
What dullness hangs upon her soul? some fatal
Appoplexy seize him, that which we
Plotted to make him hateful does enchant her.
Madam, you see I have a body, ponderous
And full of marrow, Isle not get an heir
Less hopeful then my self, my first son shall be
An Emperor borne, may I doe things to purpose
When I am in once.
Will not this startle her?
Sure Madam, he will put down Hercules.
Hercules, Hercules, what, a Peddler.
Peddler, my Lord you would say peddler.
He shall be what I please, doe not I know Hercules,
He got but fifty in a night, but I—
Madam your ear.
My duty to your grace, makes me forget
He is my kinsman.
Signior Depazzi,
We have leisure to hear you finish your discourse
With Laura and Carintha.
He's courted to her privacy, her soul is
In a deep Lethargy.
Ha?
What was intended to destroy his hope,
Hath raised him to assurance, she applauds
That which to all understanding but her own,
Appears prodigious, did you suspect
She would hear this prate?
He had committed sin enough to have had
His lips sowed up eternally, death, I could
Grow into death with wonder.
She checked you for interrupting.
A fury revels in my brain, shoe's mad,
And so am I, but—
What for prevention,
If she have such a poverty in her reason,
In the humour she may marry him, and then
Beside the mighty fortune lost, you groan
Under his tyranny.
In his blood Isle bathe
My fears, a ship launched forth with all her wings,
Be calmed thus.
Isle dig the remora
That hangs upon the bark, this fool wo'd not
Be missed among the living, rather then—
You are my genius sacred director
To my bliss.
I ha so much suffering
In your ungentle stars, that I would purchase
Their better influence with my danger.
How I feel my heart incorporate with thine,
What doe I owe to heaven for sending me
Thy friendship, say, shall this thing be removed,
Giotto, that so ruins me.
Shall: there is
A most severe necessity, you must not
Be conscionable now; and charity
Unto your self, will drown the sin:
Retort disgrace t'your hate.
I shall extend my favour, where I see
Merit invite, perhaps commend you to
Some other Lord; Uncle, you shall continue
Your place; Giotto find out a monopoly,
It shall besign'd.
I congratulate your high fortune,
I knew t'wod take.
Here's a pretty front,
Seignior Orseollo, stay till I am valid.—
Nay, good Madam, I can endure to see
Your face, without danger to my eyes—Seignior
Giotto, I joy in your great fortunes.
They shall enable me to doe you service.
My Lord, you cherish my instructions,
You're come earlier then your hour.
I'd fine know my destiny; Madam Ime rough.
The wars have spoilt my Courtship; I cannot
Flatter kindness from you; but I affect
Gratitude. What news Lady, ho? has there
Been no mention of my name or person
Since I received your last intelligence?
I know nothing but what I am enjoined
To make a secret.
How dear Lady.
Giotto, shall I tell him that?
Not for both the Indies.
But she shall Giotto, she and wee be kind,—
Madam,—we three will share in all achievements.
I cannot hide it from him.
Are you weary of your life Lady?
My hopes are finished.
The Duchess has commanded him to get
Your picture for her.
Who'ld trust a secret in a women's breast?
My Lord, as you esteem our loves useful
Let no ear enjoy this but your own.
I will forget I heard it; I, I me a soldier
Seignior, and shall deserve your faith. Sancho!
My Lord!
Theres a famous Painter sojornes here
In Mantua, a Germane!
Shadan wierex.
The same, you are to seek him out, I have
Use for him.
Already you begin to make it public.
Doe not suspect my servants silence, I
Trust him with a secret of weightier
Consequence then this, my creature! hunk▪
Your hopes increase Seignior.
Give me thy hand, Giotto, thine too:
Weal govern like the Triumveri—
But sir, there is one obstacle—
What first?
Isle loose a Thumb to have it cleared.
Heart, let me but know it?
You've heretofore appeared so boisterous
And sullen to that sex, that the Duchess
Partly thinks—
What does she think?
You're insufficient.
How? a metophrase upon that word.
Sir t'would impeach her modesty t'expresse
Her meaning, in the blunt dialect, however
Twill become my tongue; there's a noise amongst
The Ladies, you're insufficient: that is
Your genitals want the perfect help in
Procreation.
Horror, horror, name the author of this
Calumny.
Be not so loud seignior, were it a truth
Twould not proclaim nature, or your parents
Guilty, you are a soldier, perhaps in
A skirmish at Lepauto, some Turk
Circumcised you with his semiler;
Or being at push a pike, you might be
Drilled below the navel, nay I ha known
The breath of a bullet snatch a remnant
Of loose flesh.
Stead insufficient! you shall know a secret
Which I have feared, even in the keeping of my own heart.
Twill trouble me to know a thing, so full
Of danger.
Tic only dangerous to me, but sir,
It must out, for Isle stifle now this damned
Aspersion. It reveals the cause, why I
Was still a satire against women.
I, that I would fine know.
Know what Lady? we are in a discourse, merely,
Concerns us two, walk aside, she must not heare't.
Sancho, I now release off the Oath,
Which did oblige your secrecy about
My continence, nay good Madam, troth we
desire to be particular.
Hereafter I shall grow reserved too.
A personal secret, as Ime a soldier.
You shall believe him Lady for my sake.
How many whores hast thou in keeping for my use?
Some ten my Lord!
You pass my belief.
Alas, Ime insufficient! a mere Eunuch, I.
But what urged your invectives against the Sex,
Since you thus cherish them in private!
The Duchess has a chaste court: it was safety
To disguise m'incontinence, least she should
Punish it.
You're not so ravenous (my Lord) but when
Your friend desires a taste, he may be furnished, ho?
You shall visit my seragho, and chose your whore.
May I presume—
That's the medicinal pimp; who prescribes
Plasters for my belly.
You maintain him in a gaudy outside.
His sins maintain him; those of his function.
Grow mighty now adays.
Lady you shall share in our secret,
Are you mad Seignior?
My Lord you are to modest: theres no error
So readily excused by Ladies as this
Of the blood. Fame has abused our noble friend:
Not Hercules was more enabled for
Increase; then he.
Indeed Seignior?
Indeed? why Madam, doe you doubt that I
Belly him, Ime sure he keeps ten whores.
Slight, you are treacherous.
She cries indeed, as if she did suspect
You can proffer like a Goat, and perform
Like an Elephant.
This was you that railed against women.
Fie my Lord.
Troth Madam, my constitution is to blame.
But a young sinner deserves mercy.
Your lustiness redress you more hopeful
To the state. Give me a Prince from whose loins
We may expect issue.
Howsoever I would not have the Duchess know
Of this; till I am more indeere unto
Her heart.
Does not her happiness, and mine depend
Upon your fate?
My Lord, be confident of my silence.
Her grace is now in the privy garden.
Walk you thither, and receive those favours,
Her looks administer: without reply
Of gratitude, she would not have it known
She loves you.
Enough I shall be politic.
Was there ever such a wanton Hipocrite?
He Neighs like a horse. I am not consent
In him, I still thought he was a lecher.
Seignior Giotto.
My good Lord?—
Tic my chief blessing to see your Lordship
In good health—
I thank you noble Lady.
Isle go pray to have it still continued.
What means this great observance, tic beyond
My merit. Dost not admire her graces
Favourite should use me thus?
These female Courtiers ha the trick on it.
What seignior?
Tic safe Idolatry to bow unto
The rising son, she sees your fortune smile,
And therefore flatters ye.
Heaven knows, I near
Shall gain by Courtship, I
Though all the Heralds
Called thee Duke, Isle not kiss your hand
Unless it were clean.
Thou hast heard some news.
Declare, come, declare,
And prosper.
My Lord, I first should chide your tardiness
In action. First now I saw your wife at Court,
Attending on the Duchess: Only she
Defeats your hope; yet her removal from
Your bed is not designed.
I have sent her to my house, provided you
A rare disguise which you shall wear, and woo
Her body to the dark deed, my man shall
Witness her adultery; and Isle sue out
A divorce; whilst you remain safe from law,
Because not known to her.
Why this I like, it tastes of sublime wit.
I will be active in my reign, in large
My Duchy. Genon is proud, it shall
Grow humble I have a long arm, twill reach
Florence. Or if I chance to lay my hand on Parma
I shall gripe it till my fist ache, ere I
For sake my tenure.
Orseollo.
Your greeting's too familiar!
From whence this pride, Isle anger him.
My Lord, though I am grown above the use
Of Poetry, there still remains in my
Remembrance a Sonnet, made in praise of
Women; Which if you'll please to hear—
He had a bold Muse, that durst undertake
So high an argument, sure a woman
Was the object, struck old Homer blind;
And for his eyes left him a Muse. I've lost
My business.
He was not wont to speak so well of women.
No humorist is constant to dislike,
Or commendation.
Nay lead the way my Lord:
Ime part of your attendance.
Seignior my affairs hither require haste,
The Duchess (on some sudden cause) hath sent for me.
I believe tic to take's advise about
A Masine for my wedding, hoe's excellent
At Revels. On my good Lord.—
You come lately from her, and I would know,
How you approve her present looks. Tic the Art
Of foreign Courtiers to visit Princes,
In lucky minutes; when their gesture shows
Em pleasant. How looks her grace to day: Is,
She not physical, but high and jocund?
You may without danger of your fortune
Choose this minute for conference with her grace.
Seignior th'as cause to clear her looks; Her thoughts
Grow easy to her, she had found out the man;
The man, that must: more might be said: but then
More must be spoke—
Slight; why this to me; how comes he to know
That I am he, her highness aims at? True
The man is known: nor is his worth concealed.
Worth Seignior!—None but Laura gave him
Notice, Ime the man, I near spoke of it
My self. My Lord, the man may with safety
Boast, he is the best deserver in the Court. hum.
Your Lordship does him too much right, tic certain,
He has been told that I am he.
He hath a glorious feature too.
Nay good seignior, comely; but not glorious.
How not glorious, speak that again.
This is a pretty kind of flattery,
He will not suffer me to abuse my self.
Isle admit he charms the Ladies? or so—
That's I; for I charm the Ladies. He knows
I shall be Duke, it cannot be concealed.
The man has travaild too.
Never I. But it seems the Duchess gives
It out so: the more to honour her choice
Seignior; I must doe you justice▪ the Court
Speaks you most accurate, in the Spanish garb.
The Spaniards (seignior) reserves all passion,
To express his feeling in accurences
Of statē, when in discourse; his Tooth-picke still
Is his parinthasis: which he doth manage
Subtly thus—Par les santos sennor—
Lo conosco portierto—porque es
Trabaso (conlicenzia diuvestra alteza)
Hablas mushes palabeas—
No puedo en veridad—
But why those things Seignior?
This elevation of the shoulders is a
Politic gesture, declares a meaning hid;
Which you may find out if you can: and is
Often used in trivial circumstances.
I question this your Man——
Your Lordship must speak my mothers tongue then.
Is Don Diego within?
Stay slave, weal be as politic as he—
Which don Diego doe you mean? he that plaide
The sloven in the great Church. The English
Have a Proverb on him.
Why not he of Valder, or any other Diego?
Be not enraged (my Lord) those grave shrugs appēare
Unmannerly, and would before Ladies,
Engender a suspect of vermin.
Then Isle prefer (sir) the French to your
Dislike or praise: whom though a surly Don,
Calls an impertinent people; giddy
Trifles? yet in my esteem they merit
Highly. They are active even in discourse
Let us begin cheerely, No matter
On what slight or trivial subject; Be it
On that single melancholy hair upon
Your chin. Rise and fall by my example.
I am prepared.
Monsieur, sell adirent que ete cheveil la sera brusle; que farions nous
Avec vostre menton: posse que le Roy.
Monsieur be not troubled! banish your fear,
For Isle toss the Antarctic pole
With like ease as Hercules could a bulrush.
Make it a secret.
O vi da', Ie slay bien que la volente, do it esere est eme• pour facet: maize quond
Ie vous donneray an cheque had prenez lamanie, que celus, que tomb
Gaigneray un pas; pour reu, que ce veleve—
Troth, I know not, may be it was a mistake in Plato, for those pins and feathers which you talk of, are useful unto Ladies. Besides tic well known, the man in the Moon will not permit excuse in business of this kind: Tic dange∣rous to law, and reason.
Ie no le croy pas, cesee un chanson dumonde.
So I was told by one that knows the Kings heart? he came hither to cheapen Ginger bread, for the Mogols daugh∣la.
Est in possibile? Il in a aucun chose ci dificile, maize je le prenderay tant tose.
Dost in faith, know then all the Lyons in Barberry shall not contrary me in this way.
How doe you like it Seignior?
It is put me into a heate, and French heats arē not
Very wholesome. But I've heard how nimbly
You dispose your person in a French Curvet!
I know your mind; but my body is now prepared
For a high visit. My joints moves by screwes,
Ime so starched together; a dance would
Loosen me, and make me fall in rumples.
Your man is well build for such a motion,
Mark tic only thus—and thus—
I ha seen your Lordship doe it ta da rum, ta da rum.
Good, very good, seignior Depazzi you owe
Heaven much thanks, for lending you this servant;
I ha not seen a Gentleman in all France
Move with so much regard, and vigour.
Your Lordship is my pattern.
M'affaires call me to Court, servitor tres humble.
First possible? This Lord must rise when I am Dukē:
Isle prefer none but such as can speak French and dance;
Crispino, prepare my Bath, Isle distill and grow amorous.
My Lord twill become me to receive
Whom you give up so noble, I should sin
Against obedience; you are most welcome seignior.
My best Carintha.
Madam you incouragē me
To serve your goodness, my Lord you undo me,
With too much honour.
Seignior, if your eye take delight in prospect
There's a room will feed it richly,
Show him Carintha, some
Affairs call me to Court. Cherish him
With my best care, please you walk.
So Dandalo, be faithful to your trust, no intērruption,
Giotto prosper in thy sin, thy deed
Will make me happy, though my honour bleed.
you're very jocund on the sudden.
Thank your love for it, that provided
Such a cure for melancholy;
To my self I seem not to go but dance,
When shall we have a mask
My Lord?
You'd be revelling again.
I am all for sport, your honour is much bound
To the Gentleman your friend, trust me my Lord
He is a rare physician.
He's well skilled in women's pulses.
Theres no fear my Lord,
But heel recover me, I doe like him infinitely
For my body, the best in Padua.
Good, good he gave you gentle physic,
But you hope twill work.
No Esculapius
Could ha behaved him more judicially
Did our Court Ladies know his skill
They would be all his Patients, and be sick a purpose.
You hold him then sufficient.
He has a way
So easy to doe good upon's.
Upon ye in the name of lust, you see
I had a care.
It was more compassion, and I am bound
To acknowledge it, I was all heaviness;
A thousand plummets hung upon my heart,
Tic by your means I am made light.
I think so, very light, ha, is she not quick already,
She moves so nimbly, Giotto has don't,
I have it here, I feel it spread, ha•ke you:
You're a whore.
Does your Lordship love bastard next your heart,
Though some hold wine unwholesome, it may thaw
Your congealed blood; oh the difference of constitutions.
Hey, she jeers me, how now?
My Lord, her grace hath sent a strict command
You waite to night at Court.
Ha?
The messenger seemēd full of hast, he onēly
Took time to say her highness had resolved,
This Night, to clear all doubts, and from her Court
Make happy one, with title of a Duke.
Be dumb, thou bring destruction to night,
Pray you may be mistaken, I am undone else.
It is my unhappiness then my Lord, to bring un∣welcome truth.
To night, why tic impossible
To sue out a divorce, Ime lost, my plots
Rebound and strike me dead.
My Lord, you seem
Troubled, does your head ache, Isle into the garden
And gather a few simples.
Madam a word w'e,
You magnified but now a curtsy
I did you, you were ever grateful, I
Know it, you shall not doe the benefit
If you will yet kill your self.
That's a small matter.
I know tic, considering you are stained,
Lost in thine honour, held but a disease
That grows upon thy sex, a tumour; prithee
Lance thy self tic soon done.
That's a poor favour,
Well, Isle think on it to morrow.
'T must be done to night, and early to, for else twill
Doe me no pleasure dear Carintha, make thy memory
Religious.
I am thinking where the sign is,
Ho, tic in Capricornus, Isle go let
My self blood in the knees, and dye praying,
That your Lordship may recover your wits again.
A fury lend me curses, make me all
An execration, I ha plotted fairly,
And made my self a fine rediculus thing
To no purpose, I am deep in shame, I must on
Giotto, have a nimble brain; you must sink too
Or boy me up again.
Make no words Crispino, for the Duchess
Would not have it published that she means to choose me.
Did she promise you?
Not by word of mouth, but I know her meaning,
As well as I were in her, I must be Duke man.
Tic certain, every body knows it, but say nothing
Least it break out, hast done.
A little with this locke, and Isle atone your Lordship
With a powder; I hope your honour will
Not forget Crispino's faithful service when you are Duke.
Why I am Duke already,
But for the ceremony, my reign's begun, Depazzi the first.
But that Isle not show my self unto my people,
Because the Duchess did entreat me, let me
See what place you are fit for: oh I have it,
Thou shalt be judge.
A judge my Lord
A Judge my Lord, at least, thou can discharge it,
Tic nothing to sit upon life and death, tic not
Required you should speak much, thy trade has half
Prepared thee, thou can pole the commons, Ime sure,
And cut off capital offenders.
Very good be it so, be a judge.
Where my good Lord?
Why thou shalt be a Judge in potentia.
I humbly thank your grace.
Oh my true friend, I have no happiness
But thou dost make me clime too't, twill be thy own
Instructor, and oblige me everlastingly.
Isle soon remove your fears, I cannot doubt
You will make good your promise Sir, to pardon
When you're Duke.
Pardon, reward and honour thee as my preserver,
Be not observed, I am your creature.
My Lord, I have assaid which you require privacy,
Send off Crispino,
I ha made him a Judge.
Tic very trimly done of you, I cry you mercy my very
Good Lord, I humbly desire your honourable absence.
It shall be granted.
Now Seignior what bring you.
Why some tokens for your Lordship, look you.
They are no tokens of love as I take it.
Yes but they are, and you must take em so,
But make your choice, which best affects you,
For one you must accept.
O what doe you mean Seignior.
Not too loud, lest I choose for you, here is a ball,
Better then any ere Crispino washed
Your honours face with twill scour you.
Hold, are you in earnest.
A bullet will quickly sing my errand to you,
Will you choose.
I beseech declare your meaning Seignior.
In short, I me sent to kill you, if you like
Any death better then another, briefly
Resolve and have it, nay without long study.
Every man should consider his end Seignior, alas!
The Duchess loves you, and there must be order
Taken to stay your raising, say your prayers.
I ha not the heart to say my prayers,
Ah, if I must needs, I would dye
Another death, you ha not brought me.
What first?
I would choose my gallows, ah, stay tic very
Short warning, and I am not half prepared:
What is this, Ratsbane; alas thats to kill
Vermin, I would be loath to be sent out of
The world like a Rat.
What say you to a halter?
Indeed Seignior I never loved swinging
In my life, and the halter is a dogs death,
I would dye like a man.
What say you to a sword?
Alas I have a sword of my own, and I had a mind to it
But my stomach will never digest it.
Then this pistol.
But that I have a weak constitution,
I have always been given to looseness,
And I doubt your pellet will put me into such a scouring.
Why, would you live then?
Alas every thing would live Seignior, but I should be
Sorry to enjoy a life, that stood not with your liking signior.
But if I live to be a Duke.—
Duke thats the sluice opened this torrent.
I am abused dear Seignior, Isle renounce it,
Isle be first a dog-killer.
This is but air, your not to be trusted,
I ha sworn to send you into another world,
You must not more be seen.
I wo'not; doe but trust me,
And as I am honourable Isle go
Into the wilderness, and live with Bears;
Any whether, hide me in a Well, and there be no
Water in it, Isle feed on gravel;
By this hand, this seven years, none shall know
But I am dead.
If they should find you living.
Never, Isle endure pinching to death
Ere Isle confess it.
Were I certain
You would be buried to all men's sight, but till
To morrow.
See me put into the ground your self,
So you'll not smother me, and it be seven nights
Isle feed on moles sweet Seignior.
The Duchess doth purpose this night her election,
Your Uncle envying your hope, must ha
Security for non appearance; had I
A faith you'd creep into obscurity,
But for twelve hours I should have one
Sin less to answer for.
Noble Seignior, Isle wrigle my self into a
Wormehole, or creep into a Molehill, and live
Upon Emmits eggs.
Be sure you do it then, poor sick nobility,
How thin he looks already.
Seignior Giotto.
Now the tide comes.
This is the night Seignior, t'inclines a pace.
Doe I remain unshaken in her opinion
Have I any square still.
O my good Lord.
Seignior a word,
Does this night then conclude—
Your happiness.
Be not tempted from me, I have writ
Pamphlets in praise of women, I have a volume
Of Recantations.
They are fruitless,
You are fixed already in her thoughts, away
You make your person cheap, meet, and
Be happy.
Giotto.
Dear Seignior.
What make they flattering here, ha they all hope
To enjoy her; all, only Contarini
Could gnaw his heartstrings now to be excluded,
When he expected his fate ripe, and all his
Hopes fit for gathering.
Be high and answer your great hopes;
Meet confidence.
Shall it be my fellow Caesar in the Empire.
Noble Contarini.
You've store of clients seignior, I am come
To know my fortune too.
Alas my Lord.
You'd say tic plain writ in my forehead, yes
In capital letters; you are known to the secretary,
That taught my wife this Text hand, but you must
Doe something, sure the marriage is decreed
To night to rid me of Carintha, or
Isle ha thee punished for adultery.
Are you mad?
As horns can make a man, it is no time
For patience, hear me carefully and have
Your best brains.
Adultery? was it not by your consent,
The very sinful act yours, I but moved
By your direction, will this published
Exempt you from the Law?
Isle laugh at thee
With my mans help, and oath against thee, Isle
Return thy calumny in the face, I am
A Lord, and shall out weigh thee, could thou give
Thy truth a body, that even men might see
As well as hear it.
This is strange and violent ha,
Doe, harrow thy skull, I am resolved.
This is but course reward for my last office,
No remedy but killing before supper;
Did my stars owe me this? you will pardon me
When you're Duke, thats but reason.
And reward thee.
I am in, and must wade through, she goes to bed
Supperless.
Oh happiness, may I trust too't?
Isle put her granam to the charge of worms
To entertain her, meet, and be Duke, Isle make
Your wife immortal.
Wo't thou be speedy, for Isle tell thee Giotto,
I cannot hope this night to have all perfect.
The noise of this her sudden death, must needs
Mar this nights revelling, and protract the choice
That is expected; then a little time
Presents me capable of the mighty favour:
I have encouragement to hope for marriage
With our great Duchess, ha.
Excellent brains,
Your wife is already carrying commendations.
To your friends in the tother world.
Oh let me hug thee.
I have your pardon.
And my heart too, on, be swift in thy great work
Believe it done.
This pleasantness becomes you well Carintha,
And you show duty in it, this night we dedicate
To our own delights.
Madam, I ha more wonder
To tell your grace, when you are pleased to hear me.
You'll find our disposition meet it, but
Laura, dost thou not smile to think upon
The event, we shall be censured humorous.
But your grace shall publish your reasons,
You will appear just.
That ambition
Should have such fear in humane natures, but
Court hath been long sick; they are my humours
And I must physic em.
Treason, treason, wheres the Duchess, O Madam
Never was heard of such a horrid treason.
Our guard.
Nay I discovered and prevented it
Already.
You amaze us, whats the treason, who is
The conspirator?
My Uncle, but I think most of the Lords
Had their hand in it:
Be brief.
There was a plot of treason to ha kilt.
Whom? defend us heaven.
Nay I ha defended my self, they wot a kilt.
Me, that shall be Duke, because they saw
You were inclined to marry me.
Is this the treason?
And who should be the villain think you, but
Giotto.
Giotto.
I Giotto, but like an honest rascal
Upon my promise, to go hide my self
For twelve hours, he saved my life, did y'ever
Hear of such a cunning traitor, but it is
Your destiny to ha me, you have cause
To pray heartily.
And so I have, here was a piece of treason,
But be reserved you are here safe; Isle take
My time to know and punish all; what bold
Intruders this?
My Lord, I heard your voice in fearful manner
Crying treason, are you in preservation.
One of my loving subjects; yes Crispino:
It is Crispino Madam, one that I ha promised
To make a judge, he was my Barber, and
Will fit the Common wealth to a hair.
He must deserve that place then.
It is confirmed.
I humbly thank your excellence.
Seignior Depazzi, you shall be near our person,
Here's mirth more then's expected; Laura, bid
Some waiter command Giotto's presence;
Carintha, weal retire and hear your wonder.
My Lord, weal sift the treason.
And let the traitors be bolted Madam I beseech you.
Quick, set things in order. The Gentlemen
That come to see this great preparation,
Must please to make room for it, so, so.
What are you Sir.
I am the terror of the Law.
What's that, a hangman?
When I look lean, and frown, thou dy'st, I am
A Judge, I say, a Judge in Potentia.
Have we a Town called Potentia, in our Duchy.
He's some foreigner, he comes to use his eyes,
Let him pass.
Cease your clamours Villains: sure the devils
Are singing a catch. Give order the outward
Doors be locked. Let none approach the presence;
The Lords must come hither up the back stairs,
And through the Privy gallery, bear back:
More noise yet, it were less troublesome living
In a drum then at Court, in nights of
Entertainment.
My Lord Comachio's voice.
The Lords are not yet met.
I hate this overgrown thing, tic high time
He should intent's affairs in Heaven, yet still
He hath some business upon earth,
Save you my good Lord, seignior Orseollo,
I hope you have an able faith.
Why do ye hope so?
That ye may be saved too.
The groom is witty.
Who makes that noise?
Why was Contarini warned, he has a wife,
His hope have no encouragement.
My Lord Volterre, I congratulate
Your safety, and your health seignior Contarini?
Is not this Depazzies Barber?
I wish he had more manners.
There are certain Judges in the dark
And thats the reason Justice is blind.
And those Judges shall come to light too, when
They shall think convenience proper—
His fingers speak his profession
Bear back Gentlemen, what doe you mean,
Pray bear back?
Music then.
Attendants.
My Nephew still alive, Giotto, you
Trifle with me, I am dangerous when
My wrath is.
You mistook your Nephew, I proffered him
Four or five several deaths, and could not get him
To accept of one. Come seignior there's great hope,
The Duchess but pretends a care o'er him,
The more to disguise her love of you.
This is but a weak comfort.
First done? softly in my ear?
It is not done.
Hell, and damnation!
Your wife is invisible: the Sun can hardly
Find her out.
Secure thy self, my ways are hidden.
Diable print e'te Droll la! parles doucement.
Doe not trust the Arch-Duke, he consent me at
Blow-point.
Abien, ce'te unchose'ci dificile. Iene scay que fair.
Right, why thats the cause I lent the Emperor my
Combecase.
Ma foy loblie! maize nous le voyerous tontastine grandement esbahy.
With like ease may I—hand saw, and invite the
Moon to supper.
Ho, who is the cause of this fury.
Tic only a French heate, an't like your excellence.
My Lord the time is now arrived wherein
We are to gain your thanks, and strive to oblige
Posterity, your care of the public weal,
Encouraged your continual suit to heaven,
And us, that we would make an earthy choice
Of a good husband. Even from this number,
Weal perform your wishes, envy is the sin
Of Cowards: therefore no Lord of high birth,
And temperate breeding will malign his destiny
Whom we shall think most worthy our esteem:
Nay, it would show decay of duty
In the greatest of our Court, to think that we
Want skill to make a safe election, such
A bold thought, in one we call our subject
Would soon corrupt our nature, and make our
Justice cruel; we doe expect (my Lords)
No verbal satisfaction in this point;
But as we single out our choice, weal make
A private trial of each heart, Contarini:
I can perceive no cause of fear from him,
Hoe's married,
How does your wife Seignior?
She has too much health Madam: but had I known
Your excellences purpose, to hasten thus
Your favour towards your humble subject:
She had ere this arrived in heaven: however
If your care find your blood so violent
You are not able to delay the use
Of this my person; she shall not live long
To find your desire.
O my good Lord you still increase my obligation
It is great pity custom should make Princes
So reserved in wooing, had ye told me
But two days since of this meeting, I had
Cashiered my wife; a nimbler way then by
Contriving a divorce.
Then you have practised a divorce already?
Alas, no design seems difficult, that makes
Me capable of your highness love.
What an Iron impudence rules in thy
Nature? thou seem to boast of crimes the devil
Would in modesty conceal.
How Madam?
Can thou expect kindness from a Lady,
That art so cruel to thy own: a soul
So much in the tongue of fame, as is Carintha:
You are one of the religious faction,
Whose care merely did reflect upon the
General good; the safety of your Country,
Isle not publish thy disgrace: kneel old man?
And thank the privilege of this great day;
Thou hast thy pardon.
Horrid torture, foiled in my hopes, and made
An argument for popular scorn, I fear
My own shadow, my horns are grown so ugly.
Orseollo.
She knows him a woman hater, his fate
Cannot hinder me.
How thrives your charity toward our sex,
What think you of a woman now my Lord?
A woman is the pride of nature: her
Husbands best Gaurius, made to credit
Heaven, to justify the first creation good:
She is the destiny of time, her womb
Contains the hope of our succession,
The power to add new life unto the world.
Stay seignior, this is a kin to flattery,
Doe you appear at this our summons, with
Hope to gain by it: you that have professed
Your self a natural enemy to all our sex?
Madam I recanted that heresy,
Giotto is my witness: there are creatures—
Heel tell me all I need not tempt it from him,
Bold Monsieur, I've heard of your Goattish tricks
Of your Seragho, and your Concubines;
Dare you be so much a Traitor, to think
I'd marry with a public stallious,
A Town Bull.
Your Highness—
No more? for the honour of this day I doe
Conceal your faults and pardon em.
Giotto, I shall prick your veins.
Volterre.
What means these several parleys?
I am to give you thanks (my Lord) for your
Great care of the public weal. You did implore
My haste to marriage, merely for your
Countries good, you your self not guilty of,
Any hope to profit by it.
Your excellence does me too much right.
And can your nature suffer you to doe
Me wrong: you under value me, my birth
And title, for else a little foreign
Vanity, show in corrupted mixture
Of unknown tongues; would not encourage thēē
T'attempt our person, and so become our equal.
Your highness will hold me in excuse.
Yes you've more deserved our mercy thēn
The rest—walk aside.
Comachio▪
Hey, I begin to prosper!
You are your Countries fathēr, chief of those
Whose zealous interrest in the common wealth,
Urged to entreat my first endeavours,
To help posterity with issue; yet
Prescribed your self no share in the benefit:
Fie my Lord! how sinful has ambition
Made you? tic strange, that he, whom we have held
Our Oracle, should conspire the death of
One so harmless as your Nephew.
My gracious Mistress:
We know all; but in hope you'll not malign
Our next election, you taste our mercy.
False Giotto, thou shalt suffer.
Seignior de Pass.
Home! now I begin my raignē: Dutchēsse,
We know thy mind: thou would protest thy great
Love unto our royal person. Contarini,
Thy speech and lets to bed, weal have our subjects
Know our prompt desire to furnish them
With a lusty hire.
Your Lordship will please to hearē me speak.
First we would know thy lips. I say it is
Our will to bus thy highness.
The fellows saucy, Take him away.
How now Nephew?—
Tic fine in faith—
Beehold (Lords) your Prince Foscari, Duke of
Parma, and of Mantua, now our Lover,
Whom lately you supposed dismissed our Court.
Indeed we see the Golden Fleece his order,
And a face like his, but yet his chin wants
Part of his beard.
I left that naked, more to disguise me
From your knowledge. And that our fame, (which must
Out live our person) may give reply to those,
Who shall hereafter question it; know, we
Undertake this shape, to help us in discovery
Of all your souls and hearts; the better to
Enable us; how to dispose of each
Beneath our government.
And I made secret promise, to bring you
To a Court purged, and in clear health: your Lords
Have all tan physic from my prescription.
Here I present em to you, penitent
And wise; for now they know themselves; which is
The best knowledge, and chief part of wisdom.
You are to grant their pardons for my sake.
With great alatrity, and I banish
All their crimes from my remembrance.
Deprived of my revenge too!
Then I am no Judge now.
Tic a new trick of state, continually
To shift great offices.
Ear I've made my cushion warm!
No remedy, If I'm his favourite,
Thou shalt be my Pimp, then you are sure to rise.
Must we not be reconciled to my Lord
Depazzi too?
I forgive your highness, I.
And I you, your love is soon requited:
I hope your excellence will pardon my
Rude intrusion into your acqu: intance.
Her grace concealed this part of her design
From me. I never knew till now, that you
Were more then Giotto, the Florentine.
Madam, you are truly noble: you have
Merited our best assistance.
Long Foscari, Duke of Mantua, and Parma.
This noise brings in Carintha.
Uneasy thoughts perplex her husband.
Make not rumour acquainted with
Your grief: as yet tic contained in the knowledgē
Of us four, I forgive his excellence
His sin against me. Make me your good example,
And forgive your wife her error.
Heaven has punished my ambition, it was
My own seeking. Ime content to suffer.
Then take your wife, and with assurance from
The faith of a true Knight and Prince, she doth
Retain that chaslity she had, when first
I saw her. Now each wrinkled brow grows smooth;
And I begin my sovereignty: with hope
To give succession cause, still to prefer
This Day, as chief within their Calendar.

YOu shanot go, indeed you shanot
Lady.
Unless the fault of your poor entertainment
Nay now you trespass, and dishonour me
With a suspicion that I can be so
Unjust, as not to acknowledge, you have made
A free, and liberal welcome—but excuse
Love shall supply, what else hath been defective,
To express my thanks for your kind visit
Tic
Business that now ravish me away
By this white hand, which but to kiss, would tempt me
To dwell an age here, I must waite upon
The Duke
Why so you may
Tic now my time.
You are not tied to such a strict observance
That half an hour can prejudice you, come
I know you may dispense with duty so much.
You may command;
Not any thing that shall
Reflect injurious to your self,
I know
〈◊〉 have more charity.
〈◊〉 there be other
〈◊〉 that concerns your honour, or your fortune,
〈◊〉 me, I would not by a minites stay
be guilty of your wrong, and yet me thinks
If there were any thing you might tell me;
〈…〉 thought, that I dare keep from you,
Nough•• you may know from whence it breaks,
I have not had a tear, but you have searched
The very spring, come first some other friend?
O doe not so far wound your servant Madam
To think my heart can allow any time
For the imagination of another
Woman, did all the goodness of the sex
Conspire in one without you, I should love
My first election, and be blessed to write
All my devotion here; if by the title
Of friend, you understand a man, there is
But one in the whole world I dare call friend,
And I am confident it would trouble me
As much to find a cause that would offend him
As to be guilty of the sin.
Hippolito.
If he expected me a day, the crime
Were easily purged, I can presume on him
This is but little of that Character
I have heard your tongue deliver, if his love
Be what you often have proclaimed, trust me
He is a treasure
Such as both the Indies
Sha'not buy, from me,
Whatthing's rare in him
'Bove other friends?
His love his love Clariana;
That may be found in many
But not so rich of so exact a nature
All other is but drossy;
He will venture
His life to advance your cause
He has don't often
But that is not the thing for which I bosom
Hippolite, I can return full weight
Of blood for his, engage my self to dangers
As high and horrid as he can for me,
But every daring fellow in the street
Can draw a sword, and will for his gay honour
Which sways him more then his religion,
In the field maintain a good or impious quarrel:
But he is such a one to me, the name
Of friend's too narrow for him, and I want
A word that carries more divinitly
To express his love.
You are not nice to extol him,
What has he done?
An act above all friendship
That yet had story, bov'e all recompense
I am not capable of a cause, to quit
His vnexampled virtue;
This is strange
You will acknowledge when you hear it, and
It does concern you somewhat.
Me, pray let not
My ignorance make me so unhappy, not
To give my thanks if he hath aimed apat
Of courtesy to me, what first?
He dares not see thee
Dares not see me why
Am I so terrible? does he fear I shall
Transform him? sure Minerva never dressed
My hairs, he should imagine I present
Medusa to him, dares not see me? I
Shoot no infection, nor breath any mist
That shall corrupt him, whats his reason pray?
Because I love thee, I ha courted him
As some would do their mistress, but to be
Companion of one visit, and his love
Would not permit him
Not to see your friend.
He loves me so well, that he dares not trust
His frailty with thy sight, whom I have so
Commended, least before our marriage
Some thing should share in his affection
Which he hath studied to preserve entire
For me, he will not trust his eyes with any
Beauty I love, least they should stray with too much
Licence, and by degrees corrupt his faith
He knows not what may theiue upon his seness
Or what temptation may rise from him.
To undo us all
A rare and noble friendship.
First not Clariana?
He need not fear I shall
Commit a rape upon his friendship, and
A love so just and perfect as his, cannot
With one sight of a woman, armed with more
Beauty then mine, be violated;
He dares not trust his frailty, he has faults
Belike though he be such a miracle
In friendship, pray enjoy him, and by no means
Tempt his soft nature to a crime so great
As seeing me, it shall suffice my love's
To thee inviolable, and what opinion
For your sake, I may modestly allow
The man I never saw, because your friend
Be confident he has it.
Thar't all sweetness
But I forget my attendance on the Duke
Now you allow my absence, virtuous thoughts
Stream in your bosom.
Not one kiss at parting?
Let one speak the devotion of your servant
That would but dares not stay, to print a thousand,
Milena.
Madam,
Is Bellamente gone?
Yes Madam
I must see this strange friend, bid make ready
The Caroch, and do attend—
I shall
Dares not trust his frailty with a woman, a fine fellow
Eubella come to Court
This morning Sir
And much graced by the Duke, Sebastian
Her father made a Knight
A Knight? Wy much good doot him, hoe's a gentleman may deserve it for his daughters sake. The Duke has the advan∣tage, he is able to make great men, there is no band to a round pension per annum, or the severe brow of authority, promote∣on will turn the stomach, we under-sinners of the common∣wealth, ha nothing but our good parts to procure for us, she is like to become game royal then.
The Duke pretends she shall be in some place near the Duchess,
In some near place with the Duke, when the Duchess is in another bed and never Dreams on it; she may in time be a gamester, in the mean time the Duke will play at Cards with her, and if he chance turn up a coat, the honour shall be hers, and a stock perhaps to set up the precious sin withal, is she not yet Ladified?
She is in the way to rise
Thou art mistaken, she is in the way to fall, a handsome Gen∣tle woman and new come to Court, in the high way to fall too, if any thing will doot, the Duke has taken a course to take in her Maiden towns.
Did not you love her?
No faith, I cannot properly say I did ever love her, she was too honest, if she have pried since, she has been sorry for loving me so well,—she was too wise to be a whore, and I was not so much a fool to marry, till my time were come,
What time?
Why the fall of the leaf, when my Summer is over, the Dog-days may do much wo me, marry before one and thirty?
a solescisme, tic more honourable to be a peep out, then stand at a single game, tic neither Courtly nor fashionable, and whats be∣come of her wise brother?
He cannot do amiss in the general advancement, if his father and sister rise—
He must needs show a high forehead, tic such a dog in a wheel, he will never become a doublet in fashion, he talks as if he had read Poetry out of Almanacs, and makes a leg like a Farmer, I wonder who begot him?
His father.
What father? It had been a question, had his mother been a Courtier, and not lived and died honest in the Country, they that look upon him, and his sister, would never think two, Pollux and Helena, twins, in the same egg, yet she may be a good hen hereafter and lay, but and he be not addled, he is wiser then his nurse took him for
Will you not see 'em in?
Where are they?
In the garden where the Duke hath been this half hour in private discourse with her
No Isle back again, I ha not eaten to day, and I dare not look upon an honest woman fasting, tic ominous, and we have too many fishdayes already, if the Duke ask for me make some excuse,
I owe my preferment to you, and you may challenge my services,
Friend whither in such hast
If thou love me interrupt me not, I dare not stay, there are new things at Court, and I ha not provided a complement yet Isle see thee anon.
Farewell. Wild as the wind some crochet has possessed him
And he is fixed to follow't he but wants
A little pruning, and no Courtier
Could grow up more accomplished, I could wish him
An ounce or two of snow to qualify
Some fury in his blood, were there no women
He would be a brave man, but why do I
Trouble my self, that am secure? the Duke.
You are too modest
That was not wont to be a vice my Lord
Or if it be too homely for the Court
And out of fashion, with your highness pardon
I shall be welcome with it, to the place
I came from.
Hold that constant my Eubella▪
Will you still be ignorant?
Is not that your daughter?
She was
Has she found another father?
She has found a misery
Let them tell the marks that lost it and take it again
By my consent
Bellamente
My Lord
Is she not an excellent creature, were it not pity
That so much beauty should be cast away
Upon a thankless woman?
How sir
That wonot use it to her best advantage?
I have been courting this hour for
A smile.
I like not this
Nor I.
I cannot but congratulate your good fortune
Do not, do not
You ever have been held an honest man.
Pray, do not mock me, it has pleased his grace
To give, me a new name; a ribbon in my forehead
Sebastian's a forehorse-but would I were to be the Dukes taster,
But there's a price too great set for the honour,
That is my daughter sir, and though I say it
She is yet a virgin, would you part with such
A child to buy a Kinghthood? bribe at such
Expense for a poor title?
Tic dark language
I dare not understand you, but you may
Mistake the Duke
I wot I did, the way
To be assured is to ask the question sir
Sebastian you put us well in mind, we have forgot
You have too little testimony of our favour
You shall be Captain of our Guard
Howes that? the Duke does love her, I hope not Honestly, she was not borne to he a Duchess, I have it Heaven forgive us, the Duke means to make her own father the Pander, tic so, he does not use to give such offices for nothing, well go thy ways for a princely Ferret, she cannot hold out upon these terms
I know not what to say, but do you think
She shall be safe here, is the Court a Sanctuary
For virgins?
Tw'ere better you were both pickeld,
It depends upon the Princes chastity
Whose example builds up virtue
Or makes iniquity a trade
Why should you
Be such an enemy to your self, come fair one
Think who it is that Courts you, he that may Command.
My life but not my honour.
Your honour? why I offer in exchange
A thousand.
But not all of value, to
Repurchase mine, when I have sold it to
Your wantonness, remember sir how much,
You may by one black deed, make forfeit of,
Your precious eternity
No doctrines
Warrant not so much ill by your example
To those that live beneath you, if you suffer,
That sordid vice reign in your blood, who shano't
Be afraid to live with virtue
Let a kiss correct this unkind language
I want patience to see any man kiss
A handsome Gentlewoman, and when my own lips
Cannot use their own privilege, I prophecy what Will
Become on her, for all her modesty, but dare stay
No longer the sight of so much temptation.
Why should any
Promotion charm my honest tongue? Id rather
Plough my own acres with my innocence
Then have my name advanced by poisoned honour,
He must not Whore my daughter
I commend.
Your noble soul, but be advised how you
Express your trouble, grief while it is dumb
Doth fret within, but when we give our thoughts
Articulate sound we must distinguish hearers,
Princes are dangerous and carry death
Upon their tongue, I wish you well and speak
My friendly counsel—alas poor gentleman!
Come you must wear this Jewel, I ha don,
But you must live at Court
You will be just
To your own honour, and not give me cause
To curse your entertainment
You're too scrupulous.
Great sir
Give order for his Patent to be drawn
We will create him Lord, no honour can
Reward your merit, and the title will
Become the father of this excellent maid
His mouth's stopped again.
Lord? What does the Duke mean?
No harm to the Gentlewoman.
If these wonot purchase the old mans consent to leave his Daughter to his highness mercy, for he rises that she may be humbled, there are other courses to be thought on, Sebastian has been a Soldier, there are quarrels now in the world and Christian wars he were a fit man for a General when hoe's abroad, the siege at home wonot be so desperate.
She must be the Court Star:
Do not you blaze it abroad neither, I do not
Think his grace will acquaint his counsel
With such a cause
The old man for ought I see has no stomach to it:
Wheres Hippolito?
I see him this morning.
He is an active Courtier, practised in these amorous
Paths, weal try his skill to win her to our
Close embrace, command him presently waite on vs
Bellamenti.
We hear you are to be married.
Ill tell you more hereafter
I do not like the Court, and yet I have
His royal word no force shall touch my chastity.
Be resolute for thy honour, I weigh not
The titles he would heap, remember girl
Thy mothers virtue, since thy birth, though noble
Cannot expect his Courtship for thy self,
Scorn to be called a Lady for his pleasure
Signior Boualdo, wheres your son?
So please your highness hoe's not ith Court
Unless he be in some of the lobbies, I could
Not examine all: ha? tic come about, and the
Father Isle lay my life is laying the law to her,
Why was not I a Duke, I have as many titil∣lotions, though I be the elder huntsman.
You would not thank us for
A law, that none about our Court should marry ere we
Choose a wife our self.
Your grace is pleasant
Tell me what hast heard of that Eubella?
A very noble character.
What doe you call noble?
Shoe's chas• and v•rtuous
A virtuous folly but we let her cool
Too much; Eubella
I know not, still I fear her innocence
Is not enough to guard her, if the Duke
Pursue her viciously, what is a virgin
Against so many flattering temptations?
Come fairest.
I would you would be pleased my Lord
I am infinitely pleased my Lord, with that rare modesty
Sets on this cheek, and with thy self whom we
Have not yet graced sufficiently, our state
Doth want such able honest men, and we
Admit you to our high and secret counsels;
I prophecy the Dukedom shall owe much
To your care, and grave directions.
Hayda a Privy Counselor too.
We are like to have fine smock-age ont, virgins will be virgins
If the Duke hold this humour and at such price forestall the market;
A widow will be excellent meat again; hoe's Melancholy,
Shall I be choked with honours and not speak?
Where is my courage, shall a few gay titles
Corrupt a father? Bovaldo thou art reported a
Good fellow.
Would you were as right for your own sake:
Is there no trick to give a man a spirit?
I would be valiant; I dare not talk;
If you have a mind to quarrel drink.
Well thought on, that shall arm me against all
His flattery shall's to a Tavern?
Isle bear you company
It shall be so; the Courts too open,
You shall command Sebastian
My Lord—
No titles, Isle thither to forget em and drink my self into a heate above his conjuration, if there be a spirit in wine Isle swallow it: How is man fallen; that to preserve his name and defend innocence must fly to shame.
Isle lead you sir.
Come on sir.
Pretty well I protest la, keep your guard, now sir
What de'e think ont, I shall never hit your subtle body
A very dextrose profer, bring it home, everwhile you live
Bring your weapon home,
Again sir
But you do not hit me the neat Schoole-way,
I wont give a rush to be kilt out of the Schoole-way, you must
Falsify thus.
How now man?
Pretty well, let us breath
A Gentlewoman?
That has wood me sir, if it were possible, to see you first
At some distance
Is she handsome?
I am no comeptent judge of beauty, but if you will have
My verdict, she is guilty of a good face.
Isle trouble you no more, I thank you for this exercise
The tother bout
Faces about good, Master Fencer, my Master has some business
You and I will try a vein below
I would have another thrust I protest
Not down stairs, what if my master desire to try his skill
With some body else.
What means the Gentlewoman? I am not to be bought Lady.
If you were I have not wealth enough to purchase you.
Do not over value me neither.
I would I had not seen him
Have you business with me Lady?
Expect me in the next room.
I came sir but to see you
To see how I doe, why I thank you, you are pretty, and I
Am'well, what and they were both put together
You may accuse my modesty that thus rudely,—
Nay Lady, you cannot offend me that way, I can be as
Rude as you—
What shall I say? do ye know me sir?
No good faith not I, but I shall desire to know you any way
You please
Did you never see me?
See you? you have a beauty would challenge a remembrance
But sure I was not so happy till this minute
You are a Courtier and can flatter.
And such beauty was made to be flattered
Tic a sign it carries not merit enough along to justify it
But tic as it is, I cannot help it, yet I could paint if I list
The more excellent, I do not love your artificial faces▪ give
Me one that dates blush, and have but her own colour for it
Her'es a cheek hath both Cream and Strawberry s••'t a lip with
Cheers that say come eat me.
You are very bold
Not so bold as you are welcome, you say you came to see me
And I would satisfy more then one of your senses. I do not
Know your name,
What would you do with it, if I told you?
Lay it up precious to memory, and open it as a relic for
Men to do it reverence, at my crowned table drink a health
To the excellent owner, and call it my everlasting Valentine.
You would not
By this kiss but I would;
No swearing
I cannot take too deep an oath in such brisk claret,
Say shall I know it Lady?
Excuse me sir
I would not have my name be the tossed for every cup of Sack You drink, you wild Gallants have no mercy upon Gentle∣women, when you are warm ithe Canaries
Why conceal it, I am not in love with a name, and yet I have a Grudging, asuspition, that you ha paund or lost it
What?
Your good name, but let it go, I can tarry 'till you recover it, I have a bed with in Lady, and a Couch.
What to do?
Nothing but to laugh and lie down:
You are very merry sir. I do like him infinitely, I came for no such purpose, I am not so weary but I can walk
There is a Gallery to walk after.
I find it true, what you are reported;
Leave this impertinence, and resolve me again what you
Came hither for
If you will have the truth, I heard you had a wit, and
A tall one, and I came hither
To take it down,
To try the keenesse, I confess it has a pretty edge ont, not altogether so sharpe as a razor
Very good, I shall love this periwinke.
They say you love women too
So they, say, but dare not lie with i'm
I do not believe you can love any woman truly, that love so many
Be like you hold some intelligence in my affairs, and have a
Catalogue of all my gannets, I think there be some women
In the world that wish me well, and shall not I
Love 'em again?
The misery on it is, I have never a Mistress
Do you not confess many?
Women I grant, some movables, trimmings for a chamber things that serve the turn, but never a mistress one that I would love and honour above all, my Lady Paramount, and super-inten∣dent Lindabrides and such an Empress would thou were.
Sir one from the Duke
The Duke; Lady Isle waite upon you presently.
I dare not name his friend nor who I am
All is not well within me.
Say I attend his grace immediately, Lady pardon my former rude trespasses, how unwelcome the cause is that must divorce me from your sweet company I can only imagine, but if you dare
be so gracious, having already so much honoured me to entertain the time of my absence in that gallery, where some Pictures may help away the time, you will oblige in the highest degree your servant, as I am a Gentleman I will return instantly, and ac∣knowledge the infinite favours:
The worst is past already, and I am desperately engaged
I have not yet expressed the business sir
That brought me hither, confident of your nobleness
I will expect a while,
Pray send my servant to me
Good fortunes w'ee
I must not loose her yet,
Lady with your pardon, you shall keep possession a while,
This key will secure you till my return.
I hope it will be a fashion shortly for Gentlewomen to come home and take their tribute, it will be some relief to our laundresses.
Venus grant me a speedy return,
And she scopes me very hard if she have not her come again.
Yet Lady have you changed your resolution
May I now hope to be admitted?
Whether?
To your embraces
Sir I dare not tell you
What I would say, I would some other man
Might plead your argument, I should be plain
And bolder in my answer, in your person
There's something makes me fearful to express
What is behind, another in your name
Would more encourage me to speak.
I'm glad,
I have provided for your modesty
I wonder hoe's so tedious—
Whither will these libidnous flames of men.
Pursue poor virgins? does a general fever
Possess their blood? who shall protect the chaste?
When would you have me doot?
Now she is in presence.
I am not so well
Fortified as I may be an hour hence
It must not be delayed, I will prepare her.
I am undone, the poor Gentlewoman will be in Purgatory when she finds I ha locked her up, and how to release her I know not, no trick, no device? Bellamento prithee friend go to my lodging, and with this key release a Gentlewoman, that expects my return, the Duke has put a scurvy business upon me, kiss her hand for me, and excuse my stay, wot? tell her hereafter I hope we shall meet and not be distracted, my honour is in pawn,
You dare trust me with your tame foul belike, for once
Because there is necessity, Isle take some compassion a your
Pigeons, yet you refused to see my Mistress, do ye remember?
No quittance now.
This is the man Lady, do ye start already? win her to the Game —
Isle do what I canne; I may have better luck for you then
For my self, give us opportunity.
Has the Duke pointed him to be his orator
Lady I bring you news, which you must welcome,
And give me thanks for,
If they be worthy.
The Duke loves you.
Do ye know sir what you say?
I am not drunk, the Duke, I say does love you
Oh do not use that modest name of love
To apparel sin, I know you meant to tell me
The Duke pursues me with hot lust.
You are a fool,
You understand his meaning, will you be wise, and meet it? such favours are not offred to every body, I ha known as handsome a Lady as you, would ha given all the world, and her self too for a bribe to any man that would ha procured her but a kiss, nay as honest women no dispraise ha longed for it, and it was mercy in his highness to save the child's nose, you have the whole treasure presented to you, Jupiter in a golden shower falling into your lap entreats to be accepted, come
You must receive him
Whom?
The Duke
Withal the duty of a servant,
Thats well said
If he bring virtuous thoughts along with him
Bring a Fiddlestick, come you do not know what it is to be a Dukes Mistress, to enjoy the pleasures of the Court to have all heads bare, the knees bow to you, every door fly open as you tread, with your breath to raise this Gentleman, pull down that Lord, and new mold the tother Lady, wear upon a tire the wealth of a province, have all the fashions brought first to you, all Courtiers sue to you, Tilts and Tournaments for you; to have the air you live in, nay your very breath perfumd, the pavement you tread upon kissed, nay your Dog, or Munkey, not saluted without an officious leg, and some title of reverence. Are you Melancholy? a Mask is prepared, and Music to charm Orpheus himself into a stone, numbers presented to your ear that shall speak the soul of the immortal English Ionson, a scene to take your eye with wonder, now to see a forest move, and the pride of summer brought into a walking wood, in the instant as if the sea had swallowed up the earth, to see waves capering about tall ships, Orion upon a rock playing to the Dolphins, the Tritons calling up the sea-Nimphes to dance before you: in the height of this rapture a tempest so artificial and sud∣deign in the clouds, with a general darkness and thunder so seeming made to threaten, that you would cry out with the Mariners in the work, you cannot scope drowning, in the turning of an eye, these waters ravish into a heaven, glorious and angelical shapes presented, the stars distinctly with their motion and music so enchanting you, that you would wish to be drowned indeed, to dwell in such a happiness
Fine painted blessings!
Will you feast, the water shall be summoned to bring in her finny and shell inhabitants, the air shall be unpeopled, and the birds come singing to their sacrifice, Banquets shall spread like wildernesses, and present more variety then men can possibly take in surfeits. Are you sick? all the Court shall take physic for you,
if but your finger ache, the Lords shall put on night-caps, and happiest that Courtier that can first betray how much he suffers with you. Doth not this Palace please, the Court removes to morrow: doth the Situation distaste, new places are built, and piramids to put down the Egyptians: will you hunt to day? the game is provided and taught news to delight you: will you take the pleasure of the River? the Barge attends, Music and the Mermaids go a long, Swans die a long the shores and sing their own dirges: will you spend? the Exchequer is yours all honour and offices yours, and which is the crown of all, the Duke himself is yours, whose ambition shall be to make those pleasures lasting, and every day create new ones to delight his Mistress.
And yet I think you would not give away
Your right hand for all these, much less present
A poniard to your heart and stab your self.
I think I should not.
And would you tempt me to do worse?
Worse?
To sell my honour basely for these vanities
Vanities?
Mere trifles.
And you go to that Lady, that which you part withal for
All these pleasures, is but a trifle
What?
Your maidenhead? where is it? who ever saw it? Is it a thing in nature? what marks has it? many have been lost you'd say, who ever found em'? and could say and justify, this is such or such a women's maidenhead? a mere fiction, and yet you think you have such a jewel on it
You cannot be so ignorant as you seem
I tell you what I think.
Is chastity and innocence no treasure?
Are holy thoughts and virgin purity
Of so small value? where is your religion?
Were we created men and women to
Have a command and empireore the creatures
And shall we loose our privilege our charter
And wilfully degrade our selves of reason
And piety, to live like beasts, nay be such?
For what name else can we allow our selves?
Hath it been held in every age a virtue
Rather to suffer death then stain our honour?
Does every sin struck at the soul and wound it
And shall not this, so foul as modesty
Allows no name, affright us? can the Duke
Whose wicked cause you plead, with justice punish
Those by his laws that in this kind offend,
And can he think me Innocent, or himself
When he has plaid the foul adulterer?
Princes are gods on earth and as their virtues
Doe shine more exemplary to the world
So they struck more immediately at heaven
When they offend.
I did not trouble you with this divinity,
I see you are a Gentleman he favours
Be worthy of his trust, and counsel him
To better ways, his shame is your dishonour;
For every good man suffers with his prince:
Put him in the memory of the holy vow,
When he received his Septer
He promised then protection to the innocent;
Tell him the punishment in store for lust
This were an Angels office.
But Isle not do it for a hundred angels, thank you as much
As though I did, that were the trick of a wise Courtier, tell
The Prince of his faults
If he have but the seeds of goodness in him
He will take it well
He shall doe when I take it upon me,
I am not weary o'my place, thou wodst make a very fine Court
Surgeon—well dee hear, you wo'not doe this feat for the
Duke then?
I dare not.
You wonot you're resolved for his sake, why then prithee do it for mine, you told me once you loved me,
Isle take it as a curtsy;
I never loved your vicious ways;
My ways, they shanot trouble you, Isle take my own
Course, meet him but to night for my sake and twine with him.
Isle sooner meet with a disease, with death;
You are ignoble, do you urge it as
An argument of my respect to you
To sin against my love?
I shall do no good upon her—were I the Duke, you should
Find another usage.
A tyrant might do any thing
How now is she moist and supple?
Will she stoop to the impression?
I told you sir, I was not armed to the purpose, you took me un provided, at the next bou't I may do somewhat, ith mean time let me Counsel you, to let her feed high, she'll never fall low enough else, she must be dieted, if you let her pick her sallets, you may fast another Lent, and all our pains be not worth an egg at Easter.
Come cruel fair one; we may take the air together.
So so Im'e discharged, now to my guest.
Not yet returned? I shall expect too long
He is a handsome Gentleman and witty
I must not always walk in clouds, his friend
Must bring us more acquainted, I do love him.
Not yet? his business has much force upon him▪
Madam the doors are locked
What should this mean? he knows me not
I cannot fear betraying
Now for this Ladybird ha
Madam tic Bellamente
Cupped defend wench, ha.
Sure tic a dream
All is at stake, I must be confident, how does my servant?
I am wondering
To see me here I warrant
Is not your name Clariana?
Yes.
Tic not sure
You are some other Lady without a name
Whom our friend made a prisoner to his Chamber,
And cause his business with the Duke detains him
Sent me to kiss your hand and disengage you
Will you not know me then?
Yes now I look better on you, you're Claria a
To whom Bellamente hath devoted all
His loving honest service, she that gave me
Vows in exchange of mine, if my eyes be not
Unfaithful and delude me.
Come Isle take
Your wonder off
Take it all off together, I ha not done
My admiration, have I not mistook
My way and fallen upon some other lodging?
Is this your dwelling Madam?
No?
His name, I pray you call the owner
Tic
Tic so and I am miserable, false Clariana
O whither is the faith of women fled!
You'll hear me sir?
Was it not Hippolito,
Whom I so often did entreat to see her
My friend Hippolito, he wot not go with me
To her, that were too public, he had plots
And private meetings, Lady he has seen you now
And knows you too,
And how dee like him Lady, does he not career handsomely
In the Devils saddle? my souls upon a torture
You'll hear me sir?
I must be mad come tell me, why do not I kill thee now,
Tic in your power to be a murderer, but if you knew,
I know too much but Isle begin with him.
What dee mean?
To write upon his hart he has abused me,
I like a tame fool must extol his friendship
But never for his sake will I trust man
Nor woman, you have forfeited your souls
There's not a grain of faith nor honesty
In all your sex, you have tongues like the Hyena
And only speak us fair to ruin us
You carry springs within your eyes and can
Out weep the Crocodile, till our too much pity
Betray us to your merciless devouring.
When you are temperate enough to hear
The cause that brought me hither happily
You will repent this passion, in which
I must be bold to tell you sir, my honour
Suffers unkindly—and your friends
Grow not from frail to impudent,
You are resolved
To be impatient? when you are collected
Stay I will hear, indeed I will, say any thing
First then you have no cause to accuse Hippolito
For breach of friendship, had he purposed any
Dishonour to your self through me, he could not
Be such a fool to send you to his chamber
Whoe's knowledge, it should last of all the world
Arrive at, if you soberly consider.
He knows not so much of me, as my name;
Think then but with what justice, you have all
This while inveighed against him—for my self
I confess freely sir I made a visit
But innocently and pure from any thought
To injure you; I had a curiosity
To see the man you had so much commended
That was my fault, and I before you came
Accused my self, and could without your fury.
Have chid my modesty enough. Yet sir
You took me in no action of dishonour
My maid was all my company.
But you looked for
One to return, misfortune kept him from you
Tell me but this, if thou hast any truth
Could any woman Clariana, that
Would ha the world but think her virtuous
Suffer her self to be'lock'd up suspitiously
Within a strangers lodging,
By all goodness
It was without my knowledge, I was weary
Expecting him, and meaning to depart;
Some minutes ere you came my servant told me
I was a prisoner, you have all the story
Which cannot, if but weight with reason
Carry a crime like yours
Like mine?
I ha said it
Tic you have made a greater fault then I,
With so much violence to condemn before
You know the offence, and I must tell you sir
But that my love is grounded upon virtue,
This were enough to stagger my affection
Rail at your Mistress but for going abroad
To see your friend? so just a one? I see
You will be jealous when we are married.
Never, you have awaked my honour Lady
I dare believe and ask thy pardon, trust me
I will command my passions hereafter
And if thou but consent, give proof, all jealousy
Is flown away, we'll marry instantly
Should he retain a thought not square of her
This will correct all, he is here, no word
Of discontent, put all off merrily.
Lets kiss
How now, he wo'not serve me so?
We are acquainted and now you have seen
My Mistress, I shall hope, we may enjoy
Your company hereafter,
Ha, your Mistress?
mine. Clariana
Tic my name
Come sh'as told me all
Isle take her word nothing has past offensive,
Salute her now as mine, the character
I gave her, and thy resolution
Not to see her, engaged her to this travel
May I be confident, you have forgiven
My wilde discourse, my studies shall hereafter
bend all to serve you nobly
There is cause that I should beg your pardon.
Weal not part.
Now till the Priest hath made all perfect
Isle assist the Clarke
You have power to steer me
Hymen light up thy Torches, woods of Pine
Should be cut up to make thy altars shine.
WE might with more discretion sent for wine▪
To my own lodgings.
Ever while you live drink wine at the fountain
Here I am not known, let no body interrupt us
Let it be rich and sparkling, my precious varlet, and how
And how go things at Court?
After a cup or two Isle tell thee.
I would Hippolito were here, hoe's a good fellow, and takes
After his father, the Duke makes much on him
Her'es a good health to him
Let it come, I am glad to see you sociable, come to the
City and leave purchasing, du•tie acres
The same justice that mine had.
And it were as deep as an usurers conscience,
My boy should have it
Wilt please you Gentlemen to hear any music.
Shall have any?
By no means, it takes from our own mirth
Be gon then.
A very good song, and please you
Yet again, will you have your occupation broke about
Your head?
Isle make you laugh Gentlemen.
Isle make you cry and tune your voice to the lamentation
Of oh my fiddle, if you remove not presently.
This is the trick of Taverns, when men desire to be private.
Come whom shall we now remember? here is to your Mistress
A Mistress at my years?
Till threescore you're allowed, I never wore more favours at one and twenty, this Rebind came from a Countess, this locke I wear for a young Ladies sake, this touch was the fall of a Gentlewoman's fan that is new come to Court
New come to Court? Isle pray for her, is she virtuous?
And she be, there is hope the Courtiers may convert her, here's
To her first
Gentlemen will you see a Iackanapes?
How many is there of you?
Yet more o'these raskalls?
I can show you very fine tricks
Prithee Hocus Pocus, keep thy grannams huckle bone.
And leave us.
Presto be gon, or isle teach you a trick for your Iackanapes
Learning, they will be deceived that choose a Tavern for privacy
Come our blood cools; here's to your fair daughter
Poor girl, I thank you sir.
I do not flatter you, but you may be proud, I say no more
Of what?
Your daughter, shoe's a handsome Gentlewoman, the're be
Worse faces at Court;
Her complexion is natural, she has no trick of art
A little breeding she has had; and some precepts to guard her Honesty
Honesty where is it?
It should be every where
Take heed what you say, least you be made to justify it
Honesty every where?
Here is to you, come.
I speak Bonaldo what I think, and it would be no
Dishonour to the greatest to be the first examples.
If all were of your mind who should thrive in this world?
Pledge me
How shall Christians behave themselves in great offices?
Or under-clarkes purchase honesty? but one term were enough to undo the City, the Court were but in ill case if great men should stand upon it, for the Country, tic bought and sold every market day.
Come begin to me
Name it
To the Duke.
The Duke, he does not love me
How?
No Bovaldo he does not,
He loves your daughter—
Tic not Princely, Nay I shall dare to tell him so, but
To his health.
Let it come, me thinks he is a very fine Gentleman,
I begin to be warm already.
And one that loves a wench as well—
As ill thou wodst say?
As ill as I, let it be so, I were no good subject to deny it
To his Highness.
Thou knew me a Gentleman
Are you not so still?
No I'm a Knight, a Lord I know not what,
I'm lost within a wilderness of names
But I will be my self again—the tother cup.
Tic welcome, shall we double our files?
This skirmish will doe well
Charge me home then.
Now I could talk me thinks.
I will not prostitute Eubella for
The wealth of his whole Dukedom, ther'es no honour
To a noble conscience, he is the greatest coward.
Dares not be honest.
Right, if a man dares not be honest he is a Coward
But he that dares be dishonest,
Dares cut his fathers throat
A pretty fellow here is to you again; shalls have a wench? now am I addicted to embrace any thing in the likeness of a woman, oh for a Chamber-maide to wrestle withal; send for a brace of Basilisks, thou hast no spirit no Masculine virtue, now could I o'er run the whole Country of the Amazons. Here is to a Penthesilia bear up my valiant Mirmidon and we will do such feats shall make the Troians wonder at our backs and bring Dame Helen to us.
I prithee leave this humour, tic not generous,
How not generous take heed what you say
I shanot eat my words
Then drink your drink,
Now Troy burnesblew, whereas Hecuba?
Thou art all for winching,
Upon a condition I will drink to thee
No, no, thou wot not doe so much, and a man should die for a lift a'the leg: the Duke has a great mind to thy daughter, he is but mortal flesh and blood, there be subjects that have as sound bodies no dispraise to his Excelency.
Dee not fear to talk thus?
Fear? would any durst send to me such
A virgin Pinnace, rigd and gay with all flags.
This is uncivil, and I shall tell Bonaldo
Nay nay, thou art so waspish, if a friend desired a courtesy, that is in fashion; because the Duke—
You're too bold, and forget your self, I am
Ashamed of this converse; because the Duke?
Did his hand grasp the Scepters of the world
And would propound i'm all to buy the honour
Of my Eubella, I would scorn his salary
And tell him he were poorer in his soul
Then he that feeds ith hospital, I'm armed
And shall grow very angry with your humour
Which ere it named my daughter carried wickedness
Enough, but in her cause I am easily
Provoked to teach that tongue repentance dares
Traduce her witness, I allow a mirth
But do not love this madness, and if I
Might counsel you, there is a way to quench
These wild licentious flames, earnest of those
Our souls shall feel hereafter, we are both
In years, and should look out our winding sheet
Not women,
Boy Isle pay the reckoning; Be honest and see what will
Come on it
Isle seek out my son Hippolito.
Hee'e be ruled by me, here's a coil about a tassel Gentle
Hoe's drunk already
That which has raised me but to noble anger
Is his distraction, theres for your wine
Now to the wanton Duke, heaven let him see
His shame and know, great men that practise lust
Both kill their body and corrupt their dust,
Let him fret do what he can,
The world shall call, Sebastian honest man.
Had I but one thing that did touch on honour
My friendship, and is that disea•d already
And languishing? was it for this I would not
See her that I might trespass with more guilt
When she was married? are not other women
As fair and tempting? or am I hurried
By violence of my fate to love her best
That should be most a stranger? and does she
Meet my modest flame? nay must the tapers
Sacred to Hymen light us to our sins?
Lust was too early up in both, oh man
Oh woman! that our fires had kissed like lightning
Which doth no sooner blaze but is extinct, shoe's here.
Whore's your master?
There he is Madam
Why do you walk so melancholy sir?
I was collecting my self about some business
Must be dispach'd this morning, sir pray
The groom make ready my horse
Not yet
You do not mean to leave me of the sudden?
I am alone, my husband is at Court,
Pray rob me not of all my company,
I shall not think upon his absence, with
So much sorrow if you make me happy
With your society.
There's the Devil already, I cannot leave her
My boy may go howsoever.
Oh Hippolito
If you have used no charms but simple courtship,
Perhaps you may condemn me in your thoughts
That I so soon (not studying the ways
Of cunning to disguise my love, which other
Women have practised, and would well become
The modesty of a wife) declare my self
At your dispose, but I suspect you have
Some command more then Natural, I have heard
There have been too much witchcraft exercised
To make poor women dote
You are not serious
In what you say? I hope you do not take me
For such a juggler? if you think I practise
That look acquits you, then at my nativity
Some powerful star raignd, I have heard Astrologers
Talk much of Venus
And of Mars when they are
in conjunction, they incline us mortals
Strangely to love and lie with one another
I am ignorant
What influence we have from them, but I
Am sure, something has strangely wrought on me
As how Madam?
Why to love, I know not home,
You know my meaning, but truth witness with me
When first I saw your person I gave up
My liberty, me thought I loved you strangely.
I had desires too I could not justify
But knowledge that you were my friends, for that time
All loose fires, but love that swayed you, then quenched
And kept your thoughts longing, met with my heart
And scald it up for you, yet when I think on Bellemente.
Theres wrestlings in my blood.
Just when I think on him tic so with mine,
That love should be so equal, dost not stir you
Sometimes to think of former vows? Nay I do dream
Sometimes of being surprised in thy dear arms
And then methinkes I weep, and sigh and wake.
With my own groans.
I never dream of that
It is my foolish fancy, yet such fears
Should waking never trouble me, those lovers
That have not art to hide, and to secure
Their amorous thefts, deserve to be reveled:
Sure there's no woman in the world but this
Could have such power against my friend, each syllable
Renews her force upon me,
I beseech you
Although a storm hath thrown me on your shore
Have not so little charity to think
I should accept of safety on another,
It is not possible any but your self
Withal the Magic of his tongue or fortunes
Could bribe me from Bellemente, if I fall
For too much loving you, your mercy may
Interpret fairly, by these tears
Sir your horse is ready
I shanot go yet, Lady if you please
We'll walk a turneith Garden.
Hark you my small friend, without offence is not your
Master a —
What
I would have another word for a whooremaster
How my dirty rubber of horse heals
Nay I do not say he is, I do but ask, whether he be or no, Be not angry demilance, there be as good gentlemen as he, that love a wench.
Why is your Mistress a wench?
My Mistress you didapper
I do not say she is, I do but ask whether she be or no, there be as handsome creatures none dispraisd, that take money for their warren, have I answered you my bold Merchant of dung in a wheel barrow?
How now Iackalent is shreeds of Satin, I shall swing you with a horse-rod, you whippet
Go meddle with your masters Gelding, and cheat him in the provender to keep you in perpetual pots of Ale, when you en∣tertaine the Kitchinmaide in the hayloft, talk of my Master?
Meddle with my Mistress?
Yes Isle speak to her to allow you a less proportion of clean straw to rubb boots and lie in sir, you think you are at rack and manger, when you divide beans with the horses and help to foul the stable
Sir whelp that has eaten knot-grasse, do not provoke me least I fetch a smith and curry your thin sides
Mine you beane-shifter, would you durst no better ride booty at the horse match or cousin your Master ith next parcel of Oats, I fear you not my canvas serving-man with half a livery, groom other stable once removd from the farrier.
What at difference?
Both No not we Madam.
Sir come hither.
Entreat my father meet me at Court,
I shall sir
Theres no hast for my Nag yet.
About your business sira.
My business is below stairs, and with a Gelding, what he
may prove I know not well, what I think I will keep to my self, my Lady may be honest enough, but he that is borne to be a Cuckold shall never die a bachelor.
Duke My Lord you are welcome
Give me leave to tell
Your highness I suspect it.
Why should a Prince dissemble?
This dialect becomes you not
Sir sir I must be honest
Father
Eubella express thy duty
To him thou call a father, for thy own
Sake leave this place, the Court's a fire
How sir
Can thou not see the flames that threaten thee?
Sebastian's wild
But you would make her tame, look look Eubella
The Duke himself burns, do not his eyes sparcke
With lust, his very breath will blast thee
I fear this will be dangerous, good sir,
If yet thou hast not lost thy innocence
I charge thee, by thy mothers memory
And colder ashes, keep thy self unstained
Let no temptation corrupt a thought
You are richer in thy chastity, then all
The Kings of earth can make thee, if thou fall
Thou kilst my heart
All this for thy sake we forbear to punish,
But you should know my Lord
Lord me no Lords
I groan under the burden of your honours
And here resign all, give me but my daughter
Let not your passion strangle thus your reason
Let not a sin so black as lust degrade
A Prince and register thy dishonord name
With foul adulteries
Yare very bold
I would preserve the name of our yet honest simile•
I fear she is ore come already, I do not like her silence.
To take off your fears
Although we need not give you satisfaction,
By this white brow, she is as pure as when
She came to Court.
Oh let Sebstian fall
Lower sir, I beseech you tread upon me
So you will still be honest to my child,
She is all my comfort
rise.
But will you not
Hereafter study to betray her innocence?
Or give her licence to return with me?
Isle ask no more assurance, grant but this
And when we are at home, it shall oblige us
Beside the duties we already owe
In heart to pray for you
We are not pleased, she should depart.
Then Isle vnthanke your Goodness
And dare thus boldly tell your highness, laws
Are most unjust that punish petty thieves
And let the great ones scope,
We are yet patient.
Dear sir
Princes may take our children from us, not
To advance but kill their names, corrupt their virtues;
When needy men, that steal to feed their lives
Are doo'md to the Gallouse.
Take the frantic hence.
Take hence the ravisher
Sebastian.
Although he ravish not Eubella
From her self, yet he does ravish
A daughter from her father, and isle voice it
Through every street, I am not bound to whisper
When griefs so loud within me.
Place him where his noise may make his own headake not others,
This liberty of tongue shall be corrected
It will but spread thy infamy, when men
Shall speak my cause, and thy lasciviousness
Which I will tell so often to the stones
The vault shall be ashamed to echo thee Eubella
Away with him
Do bury me alive, be strong Eubella
And let not death by my example shake thee.
This may incline her, do not weep Eubella
They are not worth a tear, yet tic within
Thy power to ransom their bold heads, were they
Humbled toth block, this Pity shows a child
But Princes loose their awe that are too mild.
Whore's your Lady?
In her Chamber.
Whoe's with her?
None but the Gentleman you left here
Hippolito? I wonot have so base a thought—Ilt to i'm,
Yet, you may go and say I am returned and wish her presence.
Ha? there is something busy with my brain
And in the shape of jealousy presents
A thousand fears, they have been very loving
Since we were married; thou souls corrupter
Who sent thee to me? to distract my peace,
Be gon, be gon, and scatter thy foul seeds▪
Upon a ground that will be fruitful to thee.
The innocence I carry in my breast
Arms me against the thoughts of others treason,
My friend, my wife? the very names are sacred
And like the heads of Saints, and holy Martyrs
Invested with such glorious beams they strike
Conspiracy blind, how now, whats in thy face?
Oh sir?
Whats the matter?
Would you could understand without my tongue
How does thy Lady
My Lady is—
Ha▪ why dost pause vilaine? answer me
Alas I know not with what words to tell you
Would I had never seen her, or you never
Married her.
Ha? stay there, Shall I trust thee now fury? but speak, and
Be not tedious, what is my Lady doing upon thy life?
Alas sir it will make you mad.
Speak or never speak again, I am prepared
Pardon my unhappiness to deliver then
A truth that will distract you, you have now
Nor friend nor wife
Are they both dead?
Yes dead to honour, finding her chamber locked
I know not what did prompt me to make use
Of a small cranny, where I beheld em both,
I want modest language
To tell how they are fallen, and yet too soon
I know you cannot choose but understand me.
How long hast thou been a Raven?
Good sir collect your self,
Tic my misfortune and no fault to be
The sad reporter
Do I live still?
And shall I hope long
You are most uncharitable, if thou had loved
Thy master thou would wish him happiness
Which all life denies, is my composition
So hard, a sorrow great and high like this
Cannot dissolve it? wonot my heart break
With this? then melt it some celestial fire,
In pity of my sufferings some cloud
Of rain, since my own eyes refuse to drown me,
Fall and orewhelme this miserable Island
Sir,
Can this be possible? be sure they are Devils
Or I shall find such a new hell for thee—
I would it were not true
I would it were not true
Some merciful whirlwind snatch this burden up
And carry it into some wilderness:
Leave not
If it were possible the mention
Of what I was behind, the wolves are honester
Then mankind is to man, I prithee kill me
I kneel to be destroyed, it is thy duty;
When thou shalt tell the world my wretched story
And what soul killing and devouring griefs
Thy good hand rid me of, it shall acquit thee
And call thy murder charity
Good sir
O whither shall I run to find a friend
Will do the gentle office to despatch me
Without my own hand?
Rather live to take
Justice upon their perjuries.
Good man.
My better Angel how had I forgot
My self? Coward to think of dying yet.
Who would put confidence in heaven hereafter.
If it should suffer me depart the world
Without revenge, and that my own upon em.
Come draw, take my sword, I will be double armed▪
I charge thee by 〈◊〉 duty, or thy life
If that be more, stay you at bottom of
The stairs, while I ascend their sinful chamber
And if my Pistol miss his treacherous heart
He has no way to pass but on thy sword,
The place gives such advantage that with
Safety thou moist command his life.
Kill him with loss compunction then a witch
Fleas a dead Infant for his skin to perfect
A hellish incantation, thou wo't do it?
Isle do my best he 〈◊〉 scope
Wife, friend,
You hang like ulcers on me, I am bound
To cut you from my heart to cure my wound.
WHat pity tic these pleasures are not lawful.
Lawful? that would take much from the delight
And value, I have heard some Gentlemen,
That want no venison of their own,
Swear they had rather strike their neighbours dear
Then hunt in their own park, what we possess
We keep for our necessity, not game,
Or wearied with enjoying give it a way
To purchase thanks abroad.
For all that Madam, there is danger in some purlieus, and when the Keeper is none of the wisest, their bolts are sooner shot, I like the sport, but would not be taken at the dear stealing, yet for such a Doe as thou art, I would venture—
Tic no glory to take a town without some hazard, that victory is sweetest which is got in the face of danger, when the very cannons are hoarse with clamour, then the bold soldier goes on and thinks the noise loud music to him, give me the man that fears no colours, was there ever any thing worth the enjoy∣ing that came easily and without trouble to us? what makes a maidenhead the richer purchase think you? but I am married and my husband is your friend
Prithee no more o'that
No more othat, in my conscience you are fearful this is the ballad right. Courtier hey Courtier ho, wilt thou be my true love, no no no, fie upon it. I should name my husband often to arm and fortify our selves▪ I confess, I do not wish him here, perhaps he would do some mischief, and hinder another meeting, but if he were present now, and should see us kiss, for and have were ten husbands, I would trust his eyes no further, what
could he say? for he did but kiss her, for he did but kiss her, and so let her go: come for shame be more sprightly, I have as much reason to look about, and play my game wisely, if my Cards were considerd.
Yet you are very confident.
He does use to keep his word, I know heel not return this two hours, come we are secure, prithee lets talk o something else.
Of death.
Are ye vntwind?
Are we betrayed.
You did not look for me—your sword is of no use, dee see Pity your own damnations; and obey me, get into that closet no considering, it must be done: so you are fast, now Lady Lechery dress you the bed a little, and lay the pillows handsomely bestir you
Upon my knees—
No petitioning, you can sing, quickly or—so so, you sir at the bottom of the stairs, come up. Be wise and do not kneel nor whimper.
Now sir speak and tell me truly
Or isle search every corner of thy soul
Why did thou play the vilaine, thus to mock me
With expectation to find my wife
Playing the adulteress with Hippolito?
Tell me?
Hold sir I beseech you
What Devil did instruct thee to disquiet
My heart, secure and confident of their honours
As conscious of my own, no head but mine
To bruise with jealosie, where is he? show me
Or take into thy bosom what my vows
Had fixed for him and her
If these be eyes I saw em'
If these be eyes, is that your proof, lay such
A cause upon the strength of a weak sense
That is a thousand ways deceived, your eyes!
O Clariana, this impudent slave
With such a cunning face, told me thou were
Nought, locked in the lustful arms of base
Hippolito, my friend, my honest friend.
One that commands not his own life so much
As I, that wo'd not for a Monarchy
Do me the least disgrace, hast found him vilaine?
Isle look under the bed sir.
And I beleevd him too, and had I found
But the least point of such a sin, within
Thy Chamber, furies should appear more tame
then Bellamente, hell should not have malice.
Enough to add to my revenge, but pardon.
My easy credulous nature, I confess
A fault, for had I loved thee nobly as
Became our holy vows, our vows Clariana
To which we called the Angels, I should never
Have entertained one thought against thy chastity
But this slave shall repent it.
Hold, I beseech you sir? by my life I thought
I saw em.
Thought? is that excuse
Good sir, Isle never trust my own eyes after this
There was deceptio visus. Oh be merciful
None but her honour, and my friends to poison?
Had this report not first arrived at me
How had we all been shamd—dost thou kneel too
Nay then I must forgive him, rise my honest
My dearest Clariana—but I shall hear
You will be prating of it, if one syllable
Come to my ear let fall by thee, that touches
But thy suspicion, Isle ha thy tongue
And heart.
Cut me into a thousand pieces. Madam your pardon
How was I consent
Be gon and thank her goodness thou dost live
But do not dare to be so desperate
To come within my eye reach till I call thee
Isle not come near you, Isle bury my self in the Cellar.
So so▪ Now sir you may come forth again
Nor do you my most excellent whore, think
There is no storm to follow—keep your distance
You have had a feast, a merry one, the shot
Is now to be discharged, what do you expect?
Death, from that hand, I apprehend no mercy
Not have I so much innocenee to hope
You will delay your justice,, were I armed
With power to resist, I should add more
Offences by defending of this life
That has so basely injured you.
Treacherous serpent
With this I have sometime releeud your valour
And had no pity of my blood, but then
I was a friend, in such a cause as this
I have no arm no weapon, not, if I
Were sure the bullet would dceline my heart.
It does beget a cowardice to think
How I am fallen.
O pardon
Pardon with what conscience can thou ask it?
You showed a charity above my hope
By giving a few minutes for my prayer,
Which shows you had no meaning to destroy
The soul, it was Rare compassion, but if you
Could possibly forgive?
How forgive
I say if it were possible you could
Remitt so foul (in me the blakst) offence
Not for the love I have to number days
But by some noble service, to wash off
This shame, this leprosy upon my name
Ha you found it now.
I have but vainly interrupt your fury
You cannot must not pardon it, such mercy
Becomes not an Italian.
Miserable woman.
O sir, it was my first offence, what woman is
Without some stain? if all that in this kind
Have sinned, had met with present death you would
Not find some names, that now shine gloriously
Within the catalogue of Saints, my soul
Is full of shame and tears.
Tel me Clariana▪
Still I shall hit upon thy name, how could thou
Use me so cruelly? did I want youth
And spring about me were my embraces cold
Frost in my blood? or in thy bed was I
Conveyed a snowball, rolled up the children
Do to play with winter, did I not affect thee
Beyond all the comfort of the world?
I know it.
And thou whom best of all mankind I loved
Whose friendship took up my whole heart till she
Came in a wife, yet then thou had a seat
One small degree below her, when this shall be
The talk of Ferrari who shall trust his friend
For thy sake, or at the mention of thy name
For swear ever to marry
Noble sir.
It is within your power
To kill you both
I am prepared so well
As this short time will give me leave.
Tic yet within your power to silence all,
What is already done should we turn fountains
We heartily may grieve for, not repair,
The world can have no knowledge of our trespass
Nor your dishonour, If you call it so
Unless you tell it, you have nobly sir
Secured all shame at home, which has won more
Repentance from me then my tears, go on
Increase that piety, and be not you
The trumpet of their infamy abroad
Whose lives hereafter may be spent with such
Religious sorrow for offending you
That you may not repent to have forgiven.
Shall I be won with foolish pity?
Our death will gain you nothing, but the fear
You shannot keep your own life
Or if blood
Must only satisfy, let your sword here
Bath in revenge, the greatest sinner kill
If men were not, what woman could be ill.
Your fears thus vanish, I delight not in
The bloody sacrifie, live both.
A miracle
But isle do more then kill you—take my love off.
I do desire never to see you more,
Nor will I be a Courtier to occasion
Meeting hereafter, what is done is circled
Within our knowledge, pray, farewell, for you
I do desire never to bed thee more
Isle force some smiles to keep suspicion off
But fear I never shall love heartily
Again, thou hast undone me here, Clariana
And yet I wonot wish thee dead for this
Repent and when I die ask for a kiss.
Not at the Court? why he desired I should meet him here
The Duke hath often asked for him
He waits well in the mean time, who in the name of wantonness keeps him away, I know tic a wench, tic a parlous boy, my own son to a hair, and he should not love a woman I would disinherit him, for I am of opinion an Athist sometime is better then an Eunnch, And yet cannot the Court find him game enough, but he must leap the pale and straggle so far for Venison, that the Duke must hunt after him; and he were not my own flesh and blood, I would counsel him to marry, but they are dangerous, and a disease is more curable then a wife, for she indeed is a he•tick fever although I buried mine seven year ago, yet I feel a grudging of her still, and for a need could guess at the change of weather by the knowledge her noise has infu•d into my bones.
The Duke.
Some one look out Hippolito
If please your grace let it be my employment
Signior Bonaldo?
Your highness humble servant▪ I am sorry my son should be absent, when your grace has service for him, but Isle find him out, I am acquainted with two or three of his haunts I know a Tavern is next door to a—
To a what?
It has a course name
No matter:
To a baudyhouse
Thats not impossible
To find him there, I cannot help it?
He loves him the better for it
Tic a trick he learned in France sir, where your nobility practise, he will leave it, when Capering and Kissing are out of fashion with Gentlemen
Oh he is young, I have heard you were as wild at his Years,
And wilder too I should be sorry else
How?
I had ne'er broke my wives heart else, with supping abroad and midnight revels▪ I should ha been troubled with her till this time
She was a shrew it seems? but you promise actively still?
Not much for the cross point,
But with your highness licence, Isle find out Hippolito
To attend your pleasure.
Good Signior
A blunt honest Gentleman.
He does not boast much honesty, with your pardon sir.
I like the freedom of his discourse, but see Hippolito
I must not appear melancholy
Signior the Duke expects you
His graces humble creature
Now is he come from some vaulting school Isle lay my life,
He is a pretty Gentleman tic pity that nothing can persuade him from the flesh.
The Duke employs him.
I leiger at home
Both in prison
Both.
We all know Eubella, her father is committed to prison for being
To free on's tongue.
Be confident I will prevail, I have a new spell for her
Be speedy and be fortunate, she is in that chamber
Return with her consent to love and be
What the Dukes power can make thee.
You too much honour me
Come Gentleman.
Lady, I am sent to know your full and final resolution touching the business the Duke propounded, though your father be shut up yet change of air is fitter for your complexion, the Duke is a Gentleman that may command in these parts tic not for want of provision, the Duke has a mind to cut up your virginity.
If this be your affair sir, tell the Duke
Eubella is a rock.
Thats very hard
His mermaids cannot win me with their songs
Nor all his tempests shake me
Stay a little
There's something more in my commission
Hippolito
I now have argument to think you were
Not borne a Gentleman, something, here is witness
I pity thee, this is no noble office
You mean a pander it he's been a thriving way for some,
But I am employed by his grace.
Shall fear or flattery
Corrupt a generous soul? I am a woman
The weakest of a thousand yet I dare
Give man example, rather to be sacrificed.
Then betray virtues cause, we give our life
To grow again, from our own funeral pile
Like the Assyrian brid.
Thou hast so rich
A stock of goodness, were all other women
Vicious, thou might impart enough to make
The whole sex white again, and leave thy self
One degree less then angel: can thou pardon
That I have tempted thee so far? thy hand
To give it a religious kiss, when next
My tongue is orator in so foul a cause
The argument it self turn a disease
And eat it to the root. I am changed Eubella
And more to try thy strength then to overcome
I speak now for the Duke, keep still thy thoughts
Devout to honour, after I have studied
A years repentance for my wrongs to thee,
I will presume to say I love Eubella
But hath Hippolito no other meaning?
I understand, and take some joy to hear this language
The first proof of my conversion
Shall be to tell the Duke he has done ill
To court thee sinfully
Howes this?
Pray do not mock, if you knew how much,
Delight heaven takes to hear you speak so well
To the distressed Eubella.
By this lip
If my profane touch make thee not offended
There is no good I will not act, nor ill
I will not suffer to deserve thy love
But I am miserable and cannot merit
I have not been at home these many years
Yet I will call my conscience to account
For all, and throw my self upon heavens charity,
Why dost thou weep?
My joy can wear no other livery
Then tears, and confident all this is truth
I cannot keep it in, you shall dispose
Eubellas heart.
Then here I take it in
To my possession
Vilaine Strumpet
Sir, here are none such I can assure your highness
Is this your faith to me?
I never did you.
True service till this minute, and I dare
Now tell you, though you cut my head off, tic
Not justice to pursue the ruin of
A harmless maid
Traitor
Call me some Name, I understand my Lord
This virgin now is mine.
Your whore
This cannot make me yet forget your person
Sir I beseech you.
By my Dukedom
The more you vex the more we grow together
In honour and chaste love
You speak as if
You were to be her husband,
Tic a title a prince should be ambitious of.
Very fine
Do you consent too, to be called his wife?
If he dare make me such there is no second
My heart affects.
First come to this? then hear what I determine
Sir consider
I have considered do not interrupt me
Too morrow if I live Isle see you both
Married, thou excellent maid forgive my passion,
Accept him freely, thou hast overcome
With chastity, and taught me to be a prince
Which character, my lust had near defaced
Release Sebastian.
What duty can poor Eubella pay?
No more, good deeds reward themselves, how have we slept.
This exceeds all your favours▪
Cherish my gift Hippolito, she is a wife for the best prince, no honour can be enough to satisfy thy virtue.
Here is a strange whirl, I do not like it, if the Duke con∣tinue this mind, we must all be honest.
Who can help it?
Save you Signior is my son here?
He wa's here very lately, too late
You do not answer as you were wont,
I ask for Hippolito, your friend,
And did not I answer you?
Cry you mercy Signior, indeed he is not here
How is it with your beauteous Clariana?
Shoe's well
Pray commend my service to her
What said ye?
Nothing but my service to your Lady
Oh I thank you, pray stay, and tell me how I look.
Look?
They will persuade me within I am not well
I must confess there is some cause of melancholy
Within me.
I guest so at first sight, may I presume to ask it?
And yet does not concern me in a higher nature then
My friend, a scurvy chance late hapn'ed to him
One that he loved most dearly, you will scarce
Believe, made him a Cuckold
That all?
That all. Dee understand what I have said?
Yes a friend was made a Cuckold by a friend
He did his wife and him a courtesy.
Go home and pray, you're in a desperate state
This is enough to weigh thee down to hell
I am not of your mind, and I had don't my self, I should
Never had so much despair as to hang my self, why tic as
Common as shifting a trencher
But hark you sir, how ere you talkeou cannot in your judgement think so, are you married?
What dee see in my forehead you should think me so miserable?
Isle tell you then, what a wife is, or should be
I can tell you, what they should be,
What?
They should be honest and love their husbands, and for their Sakes their bastards, which if they understand they are bound, to keep, because their ill conditions drive us a broad to get 'em.
No, hear me.
A wife is mans best piece, who till he marries
Wants making up, she is the shrine to which
Nature doth send us forth on Pilgrimage,
She was a syens taken from that tree
Into which if she have no second grafting
The world can have no fruit, she is mans
Arithemeticke which teaches him to number
And multiply himself in his own children,
She is the good mans Paradise, and the bads
First step to heaven, a treasure which who wants
Cannot be trusted to posterity
Nor pay his own debts, she is a golden sentence
Writ by our maker, which the Angels may
Discourse of, only men know how to use
And none but devils violate
All this you'll justify a wife
Now tell me Signior what punishment
That man deserves, that should deface or steal
This wealth away.
How mean you in the way of lying with her?
I am of my first opinion, there is not much treason
In it, if she be handsome
But is there no respect of friendship to be observed?
Nor kindred much in such a case
Would you not chide your son that should abuse his
Dear friends wife or Mistress?
Yes if he should abuse her, but if he did but lie with her I should commend him, make the case your own would you deny a friend that wanted linen the courtesy of your clean shirt? a wo∣man is a more necessary wearing, and yet never the worse for it
Away thou wot infect my dwelling else,
To what a monster, is man grown
Fare you well sir, I ha but answered to your questions
Cynic Isle hold thy Lantern now, and go with thee
Through Athens and the world to find one man
That's honest.
My Master remembers his humble service
To me? Id rather thank him to forget it
Why does he trouble me with letters? yet Isle read em.
Ha? to be married to morrow—This is an honest
Sentence, my heart bleeds still for wronging you.
Clariana Tic no secret
Ha to Eubella, I shanot conceal my passion, he must not marry
Give me the paper
Inspire me love isle cross it
Why does thy master boy, send me this letter?
I know not sir; unless it be to certify you of his marriage?
He will marry now and live honest, heaven give him joy.
But its not so fair to disturb my brain
That is not fully settled with his triumphs,
What first to me? He cannot satisfy.
My jniurie if he should court his wife
And prevail with her
To embrace me too.
The Duke he writes, will honour his solemnity
His conscience dares not suffer him to invite
Me as his guest, why then must I be troubled
Cannot he laugh and h•m• and kiss his bride
But he must send me word, whose soul he has
Put miserably out of tune.
Conceal that letter from all eyes but your Masters.
Sir you shall return, and say I will die shortly.
Heaven forbid sir
That is a kind of prayer, who bad thee thee sayo?
Then if I must live, Isle find out a Hermit
That dwells within the earth or hollow tree.
A great way hence there I shall be secure
And learn to pray for I want charity—be gon boy
Good sir talk not so strangely
Fare you well too, Isle come again to morrow, or I know
Not when, I have much business abroad
Will you ride forth?
Yes,
Shall none attend you?
No I shall be best alone, you know your chamber
Theres none so bold to rob me of my grief
Yet he thats sad as I; bears his own thief.
I Know not what to resolve, this letter has distracted me It is not wisdom to acquaint Eubella, let me perus't again. Sir, though I have repented my love, which drew my dishonour, I have not lost my charity, and therefore can take no pleasure in your ruin, meet me to morrow early in the grove behind the Palace, I will discover a plot against your life, I pity your danger, and will secure more joys to your bride, be secret yet and trust her, that is no otherwise then nobly yours, Clariana.
Tic some thing Bellamente has designed.
For his revenge, did he speak strangely say?
Very strangely sir, he said he would die shortly
Thou did mistake him, he meant I should die, he wonot •ill me at the altar? perhaps I shall be poisoned at dinner, a thousand ways there are to let out life
I must be certain. Eubella and her father
Some truce with my affliction.
More welcome then my liberty, Eubella
Has made my heart glad with your new character
And now my son Hippolito.
That title
Will be aboue all honours the Duke can
Let fall upon me, that I have been wild
I must with shame remember, but my study
Of after life to her and all the world
I hope shall purchase thee a better name.
You will not leave us this morning?
I shall return, excuse me a few minutes.
Do what you please▪ but if it be a business
You may dispense with
It concerns my honour, but nothing shall
Detain me long; all places are but darkness
Without thy eyes, Isle visit em' again
How soon?
You shall scarce think me absent
We must expect you then.
May the day shine bright upon thee
And all the blessings of it waite on you
Signior you are most welcome, I entreat you
To call my girl your daughter
My son has made this choice I hear, Isle
Call her any thing
I shall express my duty sir, in all things
But wheres Hippolito—a buxom thing.
Sir please you retire, he is new departed
Whither? a musical• lip.
Nay we did not examine his affair
But we expect his quick return
Wilt please you sir.
I should be pleased with such another,—a light wench
And a yare, Isle attend you Lady.
Be just Milena to me, and endear
My love for ever
Madam you know my faith
I promised to meet
Hippolito this morning in the grove
Behind the Palace, to confer about
Some business that concerns, thou shat presently
Excuse my travel and entreat him hither,
He and my husband lately had some difference
I know not why, in this convenient absence
Of Bellamente he securely may
Speak with me here, yet Isle not willingly
Have him come hither by the public way,
The Garden door shall be left open for him
And a clear passage to this Chamber
Madam I understand,
Prevail with him to come, tell him ell's safe
Isle swear it Madam to do you service
But use all hast.
Which way shall I begin, I shall want art
I fear to win upon him, oh for some
High, and prevailing oratory to
Express what my heart labours with •I could
Accuse my unkind destiny, declaim
Against the power of love, rail at the charms
Of language and proportion, that betray us
To hasty sorrow, and too late repentance,
But breath is this way lost, wounds that are made
Require a balsam, and not empty curses
To state our body, should the Mariner
When a storm meets him, throw away his Card
Neglect himself and vessel; and lie down
Cursing the winds and tempest? If he come
As but to doubt doth make me miserable
The genius of love assist my passion,
I must deliver something that doth make
My poor heart swell, and will if I conceal it
Like fire locked up in a thick cloud destroy
The prison that contains: shoe's returned
Already.
What says Hippolito?
Like an honest Gentleman, hoe's at the graden gate.
I told him how things were at home, I met him
hard by, as if he meant without inviting
Having expected you so long, to come
Nearer, and waite some opportunity
To speak with you.
You are fortunate admit him, tic nor
Safe to expect there, but while we confer
Use thy best diligence round about to bring
If there be such misfortune, the first news
Of Bellamente
Isle be careful Madam.
I my glad hes come
With what look shall I first salute him?
Pray excuse me sir!
Twill purchase but a pair of Gloves
I have him at my fingers ends, well I can but think
What serviceable creatures we Chambermaids are
Sometimes we are the best Cabinets for Ladies, and they
Trust their Jewels of honour with us, but I must look
About me, I know my office.
You've seen this face before, does it seem strange?
I have seen it, when it was less sad, but tic
The richer Jewel set in black, you never
Wore garments did so well become you Lady
I shall not love em'worse because they please
Your Eye, they fit the habit of my mind.
Your voice has better music too, it sounds
As some religious melancholy struck.
Upon your heart you've pried lately I distinguish
A tear upon your cheek still tic well done
If there be any sign of sorrow here
Tic for your sake
I cannot blame thy eyes,
If every time, I am presented to 'em
The unhadpy object thou dost weep Clariana,
I have deserved to find the lowest place
Within thy charity, yet such is thy
Compassion, when my fate is cast
And my unworthy life marked for the sacrifice
Thou art willing to preserve Hippolito
And to that purpose sentst to speak with me
You read my letter?
Clariana, I
Shall not have time enough to thank thee, when
Thou hast discovered what conspiracy
Threatens my head, unless you use some brevity
There is a work this morning to be finished
Requires my personal attendance.
I am.
Not ignorant what busnesse is designed
It was the reason of my zealous wishes
To change some words before
I waite your purpose
You are this morning to receive a wife
And such blessing as the earth were poor
Without her,
Tic Eubella I understand.
That most virtuous fair one
Isle not take from her
I have heard her much commended, but she is
No miracle
How Clariana.
Our sex were poor
If she alone had all the grace of woman.
Though she be fair, the Dukedom is not so
Barren but it may show some parallel.
And let it not be thought a pride, if I
Affirm there have been those, have said as much
Of me, all beavty is not circumscribed
In one.
You point at that which takes the Eye
And is but half a hansomnesse at best
Unless the mind be furnished with those virtues
Which write a woman fair, but Clariana
There is no time for this dispute, and I
Am somewhat sorry you have fallen upont
When I but praisd Eubella modestly,
She is to me the best and fairest now
Of all the world, but turn to the occasion
That brought me hither, I would hear what practise
Is meant against my life, which I would now
Preserve for that dear virgin, more then love
To keep it for my use, I did imagine
How ever Bellamente showed a formal
And calm release, yet he would meditate
Revenge at such a time he most should wound me
And had not I a perfect confidence
Your thoughts meant simple pity to my danger
I should not thus far have engaged my self,
Then I beseech you tell me
Any thing.
Why dee delay me thus Clariana?
Pardon o pardon me Hippolito
Indeed I will discover all the plot
I am prepared,
But there is no misfortune
Leveld at you, the danger is all mine
And I but use this policy, to take
My last farewell, for I must never see
You married
You amaze me, what unhappiness?
Will Bellamente be so cruel to thee
Having forgiven
A hand more severe.
Is armed against me
Is there no prevention
It is within your mercy to do much
Pronounce then as much safety as my strength can give thee against any enemy be
But Bellamente, I have wounded him
Too much already, may I credit then
There is treachery aiming at my blood
Declare what man I must oppose in thy
Protection
No man
You're mystical
A woman is my enemy
There will be
No use of valour then
But much of love
If you resolve to save bleeding Clariana
Thou must oppose Eubella.
What was that?
Kill my Eubella?
It stretches not so far, only I beg
You would not marry her, and I shall live.
Not marry her, why theres no steel can bring
So certain and so violent a death,
Forsake Eubella now, now when shoe's dressed
My glorious bride, the Nuptial ceremony
And Priest expecting us, I know you speak not
In hope I should believe, you may as well
Bid me'commit a murder on my life
For this will kill her and we both are one.
Who hath instructed you to this?
My love
My love that will not suffer me to know
Thou must be given thus away for ever
I could endure thy absence for whole years
And not complain, repent my equal sorrow
We have so far offended, while you keep
Your present freedom, there were then some hope
A possiblility, at last to meet
In new affections to redeem the old
But thus my expectation is destroyed,
You understand?
Too much, be not deceived,
There is no love that is not virtuous
And thy consenting thus far but in thought
Is sacrilege, and thou dost rob the Church•
Twice, first in violation of thy vows
Which there were registered, and then mine expected
I dare not hear you talk thus
Is this all?
All the reward for loosing of my self
For thy sake?
You're not yet quite lost
What curse
Made black the hour of my conception
Farewell Hippolito, when you hear me dead
Come to my grave, and drop one tear upon me
What means Clariana?
Oh Madam look behind me
I see my Master coming in, and he
Suspecting my hast this way, follows me
With his sword drawn
Are you so nimble? ha.
Woman thou hast undone me.
Oh my fortune again betrayed
Nay then, Isle make sure work
Alas what shall become of me, the doors are locked.
Cruel dessembler.
Hippolito the sequel shall acquit
My thoughts, Ime circled with more certain danger
And cannot hope life
Tic not that I fear
To die, thou know I am not guilty
Of any second shame, but my Eubella
That every minute looks to be my bride
How the thought rends me.
I can prevent his fury
Against thee
There is no way
Yes this.
Ha devil what hast done?
Alas what ha you both done?
I thank thee
Thou hast spared my execution on my self
Isle tell thee now Hippolito, by this
This crimson in whose ebb my life hastes from me
I did not look for Bellamente, but
Surprised I thought it honour to beg in
The tragedy, I know my fate was not
To be resisted, it was impossible.
To find a second mercy from him, and
I would secure no woman after me
Should boast the Conquest of Hippolito
Thy sword was gentle to me, searched again
And thou shalt see.
How my embracing blood will keep it warm
And kiss the kind destroyer
What are you humbled? must not serve your turn.
We have deceivd your triumph.
Bellamente.
Hear me first, and know this bold hand sa•'d
Thy fury to Hippolito, whom with
My last breath I pronounce not in a thought
Guilty of new dishonour
As soon persuade
It is not day
This letter summoned me
I had no other means to speak with him
And my unruly love did prompt me to it
I tremble not in my innocence to think
Of death but my Eubella, poor Eubella
If she but lovd thee as I did, sheel'le follow
Furies will lend a torch to light her to
The shades we go to
Is the wickedness all thine?
Except the wound my hasty sword
Gave as reward for this too near my heart
I fear
Dost fear?
For poor Eubellas sake
Now thou hast met a justice in thy blood
For thy first sin, but I will have a Surgeon
Send for Eubella rather
Oh let me breath my last upon her lips
It will concern thee Bellamente somewhat
The world will think this murder was thine else
Make hast:
O woman thou did weep once, when thy tears
Won my forgiveness, where are all the drops,
The penitent showers, in which thy stained soul
Should bath it self, this minute launching forth
To thy eternity.
They are of another colour, oh forgive me
Good heaven, I have wronged thee Bellamente
Oh wives hereafter, mean your hearts to them
You give your holy vows, what mist weighs down
My eyes already, oh tic death I see
In a long robe of darkness is preparing
To seal them up for ever, it were no death,
If we could loose our sins as we do breath
Shees gone to a long silence, place her body
There and then gently raise Hippolito
To the other chair
Hast, hast my dear Eubella.
How came this tragedy?
Give me your last blessing
Ime going a long Pilgrimage, you gave
Too great a licence to my youth
Howes this?
My wanton blood now pays fort, Clariana
And I have changed a wound, where is Eubella?
She is too near this grief, this punishment
Should ha been mine long since, I was his father
In sin as well as years, she is dead already
Thy glass had many sands till it was broken
Then those few minutes that are left of mine,
Isle number with my prayers.
Hippolito.
My wound hath had a happy patience. Farewell.
Eubella
He is departed
Bellamente who hath done all this?
Isle do my best to tell you
Here's all thats left of them whom how I loved,
Heaven and my poor heart knows,
And is he slain?
But once more let me kiss him.
I did not kill em sir, they were too willing
To leave the world together, but their wrongs
All all the payment for my honest love
awaked me to revenge, and had they been
The very strings that tie my life together
It should ha fallen to pieces, but their hands
Prevented mine.
The cause? you rather lead me
To think you were their murderer, we must
Be better satisfied or your blood must answer
For this effusion.
The cause my Lord—tic grown since it came hither
Pray give me leave, because you shanot suffer
Ith expectation, you shall have it all
Together, this Hippolito and that Clariana
Hark there tic.
His grief has overcharged him
None to decipher these sad characters?
With your pardon I can
Be comforted Eubella, all thy tears
Will not recall his life
Pray give me leave
Since he is dead to embalm him, had I di'ed
Before him, he would ha wept as much for me.
We have heard too much but moderate Eubella,
Thy sorrows, he surviues that will supply
A bridegroom, and thy virtue bids me tender
My self a recompense for thy sufferings
I know you wot not lead me to forget
Hippolito so soon, I dare not think
Of being a Bride again.
Does your grace mean this honour?
By my Duke dome.
After this shower is over, she will shine
Doubt not my Lord, and bless her happy stars
Lead from this charvell house they shall be entered
With all solemnity becomes there birth
And when their funeral rites and tears are done
New joys shall rise with the next mornings Sun.

Did bid him come?
I did.
Go back again,
And tell him, I am gone abroad▪
Hoe's here 
Already Sir.
Oh Cosmo!
Dear Pisano,
That I could let thee nearer, into me,
My heart counts this embrace a distance, yet,
Let us incorporate.
I was wooing Cosmo,
My man, to tell thee, I was gone abroad,
Before thou came.
How's this? your words and looks
Are strange, and teach me to infer I am
Not welcome, that on riper Counsel, you
Doe wish my absence.
What for telling truth?
Hee thus should ha but made thee fit to see
Thy friend, thou come with expectation
To hear me talk sense, dost not?
Yes.
La now!
And to discourse as I was wont, of State,
Our friendship, or of women, no such matter.
This is more wild then usual, your language
I not so clear as it was wont, it carries
Not the same even thread although some words
May knit, the sense is scattered.
Right, right Cosmo,
The reason is, I ha straggled,
And lost my se▪fe I know not where, in what
Part of the world, and would not this be shown
As well in him, to ha prepared thee now?
What humour's this Pisano, I am yet to understand?
Tounder stand? why Cosmo,
Had I not changed my Dialect and Method,
What need this tedious Apology?
Thats it, I would have had thee known before,
Thou can not understand me, yet thou hast
A name in Florence, for a ripe young man,
Of nimble apprehension, of a wise
And spreading observation, of whom
Already our old men doe prophecy
Good, and great things, worthy thy fair dimensions.
This is an argument above the rest,
Pisano is not well; for being temperate,
He was not wont to flatter, and abuse
His friend.
Beside, there is another reason,
Thou should discover me at heart, through all
These mist, thou art in love too, and who cānot,
That feels himself the heate, but shrewdly guess
At every symptom of that Wanton Fever,
Oh Cosmo!
What misfortune can approach
Your happy love in fairest Amid,
You have been long contracted, and have past
The tedious hope, Himen, doth only waite
An opportunity to light his torch,
Which will burn gloriousat your nuptial:
Let jealous, lovers fear and feel what tic
To languish, talk away their blood, and strength▪
Question their unkind stars, you have game
Before you sir.
Before me where? why dost
Thou mock me Cosmo? shoe's not here:
It is
No pilgrimage to travel to her lip.
Tic not for you.
How sir for me? you've no
Suspicion, I can be guilty of▪
A treason, to our friendship, be so just,
If malice have been busy, with my fame,
To let me know——
You hastily interpret,
Thy pardon I have only and, but not
With the least scruple of thy faith, and honour
To me, thou hast a noble Soul, and love me
Rather too well, I would thou were my enemy,
That wee had been borne in distant climes, and never
Took cement from our Sympathies in nature.
Would wee had never seen, or known each other,
This may seem strange, from him, that loves thee Cosmo,
More precious then his life.
Love me, and, wish
This separation?
I will give thee proof;
So well I love thee, nothing in the world
Thy soul doth heartily affect, but I
Doe love it too, does it not trouble thy
Belief? I wear not my own heart about me,
But thine exchangd, thy eyes let in my objects,
Thou hear for me, talk, kissest, and enjoyst
All my felicities.
What means this language?
But whats all this to thee? go to Oriana,
And bath thy lips in Rosy dew of kisses,
Renew thy eye that looks as Saturn hung
Upon the lid, take in some golden beam,
She'll dart a thousand at one glance, and if
At thy return, thou findst I have a being
In this vain world, Isle tell thee more.
But sir, you must not part so.
Not with my good will,
I have no great ambition to be mad.
Petruchio, let me conjure thee, tell
What weight hangs on thy Masters heart? why does he
Appear so full of trouble?
Do ye not guess?
Point at the cause, I cannot.
Why he loves—
The beauteous Amid, I know that.
Some such thing was, but you are his friend, my Lord,
His soul is now devoted to Oriana,
And he will dye for her, if this Ague hold him.
Ha.
Your doublet pinch you Sir? I cannot tel;
But ne'er a woman in the world should make
Me hang my self, it may be for his honour,
He will choose another death, hee is about one;
For it is not possible without some cure,
He should live long, he has forgot to sleep,
And for his diet, he has not eat this se'night
As much as would choke a Sparrow, a Fly is
An Epicure to him: Good sir, doe you counsel him.
So, so, it works; 
This was my Lord Lorenzoes plot, and I
Ha'beene his Engine in the work, to batter
His love to Amid, by praising
Oriana to him, he is here, my Lord.
Petruchio, whore's your Lord? how moves the work?
To your own wish my Lord, he has thrown off
The thought of Amid, and is mad
For Cosmo's Mistress, whom by your instructions
I have commended so—
My witty villain!
Cosmo is with him, to whom cunningly
I ha discovered his disease, and I
Beseech you interrupt 'em not.
This may
Have Tragical effects Petruchio:
For Cosmo, we shall prune his fortune thus,
Oriana's wealth would swell him in the S•…ate,
He grows too fast already, be still ours.
My Lord, you bought my life, when you procured
My pardon from the Duke.
O friend, thou can not be so merciful,
To give away such happiness, my Love
Is for some sin I have committed, thus
Transplanted, I looked rather thou should kill me,
Then give away this comfort, tic a charity
Will make thee poor, and it were a great deal better
That I should languish still, and dye.
While I have art to help thee? Oriana
And I were but in treaty, howsoever,
I were not worthy to be called his friend,
Whom I preferred not to a Mistress, if
You can find dispensation, to quit
With Amid, your first love, be confident
Oriana may be won, and it were necessary
You did prepare the Mother, be not modest—
Each syllable is a blessing, hark
Petruchio.
There is an Engine leveld at my fate,
And I must arm,
Away.
This for thy comfort,
Although some complements ha past between
Me and Oriana, I am not warm
Yet in the Mothers fancy, whose power may
Assist you much, but loose no time, lets follow.
Thou miracle of friendship!
Letters to us? from whom?
Castruchio.
The exile? whence?
Sienna my good Lord,
It came enclosed within my Letter, which
Imposd my care and duty, in the swift
Delivery.
The Duke is pale oath sudden.
A Palsy does possess me, ha? Lorenzo?
Our Cousin, the enemy of our life and State,
My bosom Kinsman? not too loud, the Traitor
May hear, and by escape prevent our justice.
What Traitor?
Signior Alonso, come you hither,
What correspondence maintain you with this
Castruchio?
None my Lord, but I am happy
In his election, to bring the first
Voice to your fafety.
Most ungrateful man!
Turn Rebel? I have worn him in my blood.
Tic time to purge the humour.
I will doot.
Our guard, were he more precious, had he shared
Our soul, as he but borrows of our flesh▪
This action makes him nothing, had I been
In heaven, I could have lent him my eternity,
He turn conspirator? oh the fate of Princes!
But stay, this paper speaks of no particular,
He does not mention what design what plot▪
More providence is necessary,
Right, right, good Alonso, thar't an honst man
And love us well, whats to be done?
Tic best
To make his person sure, by this you may
Discover soonest who are of his faction
And at our leisure study of his punishment,
Which must exceed death, every cōmon trespass
Is so rewarded, first apply all tortures
To enforce confession, who are his confederates,.
And how they meant to murder us, then some rare
Invention to execute the Traitor,
So as hee may bee half a year a dying,
Will make us famed for justice.
Hee is here,
Shal's apprehend him?
Happy morning to
My gracious Sovereign.
Good morrow Cousin.
Can Treason couch it self within that frame?
We ha letters for you.
Letters, these dread sir
Have no direction to me, your highness
Is only named.
They will concern your reading,
Alonso now observe and watch him Florio,
Depazzi come you hither, does Lorenzo
Look like a Traitor?
How sir? a Traitor?
I sir.
I sir, by my honour not I sir, I defy
Him that speaks it; I am in a fine pickle
I ha read—
No blush? not tremble? read again
The substance is, that you maintain
A vigilant eye over Lorenzo, who
Hath threatened with your death, his countries liberty
And other things, touching reducing of
A common wealth.
I like not that.
Ell's out:
A pox upon him for a Traitor, hee
Has hedged meee in but Isle confess—
What answer
Make you to this Lorenzo?
This of the sudden,
Sir I must owe the title of a Traitor
To your high favours; Envy first conspired,
And malice now accuses, but what story,
Mentioned his name, that had his Princes bosom,
Without the peoples hate, it is sin enough
In some men to be great, the throng of stars
The rout, and common people of the sky,
Move still another way then the Sun does,
That guilds the creature, take your honours back,
And if you can, that purple of my veins,
Which flows in yours, and you shall leave me in
A state I sh'anot fear the great ones envy,
Nor common peoples rage, and yet perhaps
You may be credulous against me.
Ha!
The Duke is cool.
Alonzo look you prove.
Lorenzo what you say.
I say my Lord?
I have discovered all my knowledge sir:
stand too't—
With licence of your highness, what
Can you imagine I should gain by Treason?
Admit I should bee impious, as to kill you,
I am your nearest kinsman, and should forfeit
Both name and future title to the State,
By such a hasty, bloody disposition,
The rabble hate me now, how shall I then
Expect a safety? is it reformation,
Of Floence they accuse me of? suggesting
I disaffect a Monarchy, which how
Vain and ridiculous would appear in me,
Your wisdom judge, in you I live and flourish,
What in your death can I expect, to equal
The riches I enjoy under your warm'th?
Should I for the ayre, and talk of a new government,
A Common wealth, loose all my certainties?
And you above 'em all, whose favours have
Fallen like the Dew upon me? have I a soul
To think the guilt of such a murder easy,
Were there no other torments? or can I
Expect the people will reward your murderer
With any thing but death, a parricide?
So so the Duke's already in his circle.
But I am tame, as if I had no sense
Nor other argument to vindicate
My Loyalty, thus poisoned by a paper,
In my eternal fame, and by a slave?
Call to my brow, some one that dare accuse me,
Let him have honour, great as mine, to forfeit,
Or since your grace hath taken me so near,
Your own hight, that may seal may not expect
Such a proportioned adversary, yet let him
Have name within his Country, and allow him
A Soul, sgainst which, I may engage my more,
Then equal honour, then Isle praise your justice
But let him not be one condemned already,
A desperate exile—is it possible
A Treason hatched in Florence, against the Duke
Should have no eyes at home to penetrate,
The growing danger but at Sienna, one
Mu t with a perspective discover all?
Ask this good Councellor, or these gentlemen
Whose faiths are tried, whose cares are always waking
About your person, how have I appeared
To them, that thus I should be rendered hateful,
To you and my good Country, they are virtuous
And dare not blemish a white faith, accuse
My sound heart of dishonour? sir you must
Pardon my bold defence, my virtue bleeds
By your much easiness, and I am compelled
To break all modest limits, and to waken
Your memory (if it be not to late
To say you have one,) with the story of
My fair deservings, who sir overthrw
With his designs your late ambitious brother
Hippolito, who like a Meteor threatened
A black and fatal omen?
It was Lorenzo.
Be yet as just, and say whose art directed
A countermine to check the pregnant hopes
Of Saluiati, who for his Cardinals Cap,
In Rome was potent, and here popular?
None but Lorenzo.
Admirable Traitor?
Whose service was commended when the exiles
One of whose tribe accuses me had raised
Commotions in our Florence when the hindga
Of State did faint under the burden▪ and
The people sweat with their own fears, to think
The Soldier should inhabit their calm dwellings,
Who then rose up your safety, and crushed all
Their plots to air?
Our dear Cozen Lorenzo.
When he that should reward, fogets the men
That purchased his security, tic virtue
To beast a merit with my services
I ha not starved your treasury, the grand
Captain Gonzales accounted to King Ferdinand,
Three hundred thousand crowns, forspies, what bills
Have I brought in for such intelligence?
I doe grow hearty
All thy actions
Stand fresh before us, and confirm, thou art
Our best and dearest friend, thus wee assure
Our confidence, they love us not that feed
One jealous thought of our dear Cousin Lorenzo
New welcome to us all, for you Alonzo
Give o'er your paper kites, learn wit, tic time.
Where shall wee meet to night?
Pardon me sir I am a dangerous man.
No more a that
I'll credit my soul with thee, shall wee revel
This night with Amid?
The Duke courts him,
Well go thy ways, for one of the most excellent
Impudent Traitors—
Yet a murmuring
Of a Traitor? wee shall sooner suspect him,
That thinks Lorenzo guilty.
I my Lord,
Dare boldly swear, his honour is as free—
From any treason, as my self,
I did prophisie this issue.
It is an age
Till night, I long to fold her in my are mes,
Prepare Sciarrha, but be very wise
In the discovery, hee is all touchwood.
I know he is her brother, leave the managing
Of things to me.
Still when we expect,
Our bliss, time creeps, but when the happier things
Call to enjoy, each saucy hour hath wings.
MY Sister, though hee be the Duke, he dares not,
Patience, patience, if there be such a virtue,
I want it Heaven, yet keep't a little longer,
It were a sin to have it, such an injury
Deserves a wrath next to your own, my Sister?
It has thrown wild-fire in my brain Lorenzo,
A thousand furies revel in my skull,
Has he not sins enough in's Court to damn him.
But my Roof must be guilty of new Justs,
And none but Amid? these the honours
His presence brings our house?
Temper your rage.
Are all the Brothels rifled? no quaint piece
Left him in Florence, that will meet his hot
And valiant luxury, that we are come
To supply his blood out of our families?
Diseases gnaw his title off.
My Lord—
He is no Prince of mine, he forfeited
His greatness, that black minute he first gave
Consent to my dishonour.
Then I'm sorry.
Why should you be sorry sir?
You say it is my Sister he would strumpet,
Mine, Amid? tic a wound you feel not,
But it strikes through, and through the poor Sciarrah,
I doe not think, but all the ashes of
My Ancestors doe swell in their dark urns
At this report, of Amidea's shame:
It is their cause as well as mine, and should
Heaven suffer the Dukes sin to pass unpunishd,
Their dust must of necessity conspire,
To make an earthquake in the Temple.
Sir,
You said you would hear me out.
Why is there more
Behind?
And greater Master, your high blood
Till I conclude Sciarrha, I accuse not
Your noble anger, which I have observed,
Is not on every cheap and giddy motion
Inflamed, but Sir, be thrifty in your passion,
This is a petty trespass.
Has mischief any name
Beyond this? will it kill me with the sound?
My Lord, though the dishonouring your Sister,
Be such a fact, the blood of any other
But Alexander could no less then expiate,
Yet this sin stretches farther, and involves
With hers, your greater stain did you ever promise him?
Yet why doe I make any question?
It were another crime, to think Sciarrah
Could entertain a thought, so far beneath
His birth, you stoop to such a horrid baseness,
Then all the virtue of mankind would sicken,
And soon take leave of earth.
You torture me.
What then could the Duke find, to give him any
Encouragement you would be guilty of
An act, so fatal unto honour, what
When you were least your self? (as we are all
Frail compositions) did appear so wicked
In you, he should conceive a hope, and flatter
Himself with possibility, to corrupt
Your Soul to a deed so monstrous?
To what?
Though all the •…eeming glories of His Dukedom,
Nay Florence State off•…rd it 〈◊〉 a •…rib▪
And tempted the betraying of your name
To infamy, yet to imagine, you
Would turn officious pander to his lust,
And interpose the mercenary bewde
To Court your Sister to his sinful coupling▪
Tic horrid, affrights nature, I grow stiff
With the imagination.
Ho!
Yet this was his command I should impose▪
Lorenzo,
I doe want breath, my voice is ravished from me,
I am not what I was, or if I be,
Sciarrha thou hast talked too, all this while
Look heedfully about me, and thou moist
Discover through some cranny of my flesh,
A fire within, my soul is but one flame,
Extended to all parts of this frail building,
I shall to ashes, I begin to shrink▪
Is not already my complexion alto•…'d,
Does not my face look parchd, and my skin gather
Into a heap? my breath is hot enough
To thaw the Alps.
Your fancy would
Transport you.
Tic my rage, but let it cool,
And then we'll talk o'something, something sir,
Shall be to purpose.
Now the flame is mounted,
My Lord I have given proof, although he be
My Duke, and Kinsman, I abhorte his vices,
How ever the world without examination,
Shoot their malicious noise, and stain my actions:
Tic policy in Princes, to create
A Favourite, who must bear all the guilt
Of things ill managed in the State, if any
Design be happy, tic the Princes own.
Heaven knows, how I have counselled this young man,
By virtue to prevent his fate, and govern
With modesty: O the religious days
Of Commonwealths!
We have outlived that blessing.
But I have thought a cure for this great State
Impostume.
What?
To lance it, is it, not ripe?
Lets draw cuts, whether your hand or mine
Shall doe an act for Florence liberty,
And send this Tyrant to another world.
How, I draw cuts?
Coy it not thus Lorenzo,
But answer, by thy name and birth, you are
His Kinsman; we all kuow it, that you dwell
In's bosom, great in favour, as in blood,
We know that too, and let me tell you more:
We know you but disguise your heart, and wish
Florence would change her title.
How is this?
We know you have firm correspondence with
The banished men, whose desperate fortunes waite
Your call to tumult, in our streets, all this,
Not to feed your ambition with a Dukedom,
By the remove of Alexander, but
To serve your Country, and create their peace,
Who groan under the Tyranny of a proud,
Lascivious Monarch, is it not true Lorenz•…?
My phrase is blunt my Lord.
My Genius
And thine are friends, I see they have convers't
And I Applaud the wisdom of my Stars,
That made me for his friendship, who preserves
The same religious fire, I will confess,
When Alexander left his piety
To Florence, I placed him beneath my Country,
As we should all, but we have lost our soules'
Or changed our active spirits, for a dull
And lazy sufferance, let this secret bee
•…n argument, how much I dare repose
Upon Sciarrahs honour, virtue witness,
I choose no other destiny, command
Lorenzo'es fate, dissolve me with your breath,
Isle either iv, in your exchange of faith
A patriot, or die my Countries martyr.
Thou hast a fire beyond Prometheus
To quicken earth, thy flame is but a prophsie
Of that high pyramid, the world shall build
To thy immortal name: it was the glory
Of Romans to prefer their Empires safety
To their own lives, they were but men like us,
And of the same ingredients, our souls
Create of no inferior substance; ha?
Heaven knows I've no particular design
To leap unto a throne, I will disclaim
The privilege of blood, let me advance
Our liberty, restore the ancient Laws
Of the republic, rescue from the jaws
Of lust your mothers, wives, your daughters, sisters,
Sisters.
From horrid Rape las Amid:
I am resolved, by all thats blessed, hee dyes
Return my willingness to be his pander,
My sisters readiness to meet his Dalliance,
His promises have bought our shame, hee dyes,
The roof hee would dishonour with his 〈◊〉
Shall be his tomb, bid him bee confident,
Conduct him good Lorenzo, isle dispose
My house for this great scene of death.
Be constant.
Now brother, what news brings the great Lorenzo?
Let me have truce vexation for some minutes,
What news? preferments, honours, offices;
Sister, you must to Court.
Who, I to Court?
Or else the Court will come to you, the Duke
Hath sent already for us Amid:
O that I knew what happy Stars did govern
At thy Nativity: It were no sin
To adore their influence.
What means my brother?
Hoe's transported.
I shall suspect your health.
I easily could forget I am Sciarrha,
And fall in love my self, is she not fair,
Exceeding beautiful, and tempting Florio?
Look on her well, me-thinkes I could turn Poet,
And make her a more excellent piece then heaven.
Let not fond men hereafter comm•…nd what
They most admire, by fetching from the Stars
Or flowers their glory of similitude;
But from thy self the r•…le •…o know all beauty,
And he that shall 〈◊〉 at so much boldness,
To say his Mistress eyes, or 〈◊〉, or •…reath,
Are half so bright, so clea•…, so 〈◊〉 as thine,
Hath told the 〈◊〉 enough of miracle.
These are the Dukes o•…e Raptures, Amid,
His own Poetic flames, an argument
He loves my Sister.
Love me?
Infinitely,
I am in earnest, he employed Lorenzo,
No meaner person in this 〈◊〉,
You must to Court, O•… happiness!
For what?
What doe great Ladies doe at Court I pray?
Enjoy the pleasures of the world, dance, kiss
The Amorous Lords, and change Court breath, sing loose
Belief of other, heaven, tell wanton dreams,
Rehearse your sprightly bed-scenes, and boast, which
Hath most Idolaters, accuse all faces,
That trust to the simplicity of nature,
Talk witty blasphemy,
Discourse their gaudy wardrobes, plot new pride,
Jest upon Courtiers legs, laugh at the wagging
Of their own feathers, and a thousand more
Delights, which private Ladies never think of:
But above all, and wherein thou shalt make
All other beauties envy thee, the Duke,
The Duke himself shall call thee his, and single
From the fair troop, thy person forth, to exchange
Embraces with, lay siege to these soft lips,
And not remove, till he hath sucked thy heart,
Which soon dissolved with thy sweet breath, shall be
Made part of his, at the same instant, he
Conveying a new soul into thy breast,
With a creating kiss.
You make me wonder,
Pray speak that I may understand.
Why will you
Appear so ignorant? I speak the dialect
Of Florence to you, come, I find your cunning;
The news does please, the rolling of your eye
Betrays you, and I see a guilty blush
Through this white veyle upon your cheek, you wo'd
Have it confirmed, you shall, the Duke himself
Shall swear he loves you.
Love me? why?
To Court,
And ask him; be not you too peevish now,
And hinder all our fortune•…; I ha promised him
To move you for his arme-full, as I am
Sciarrha, and your brother, more I ha sent
Word to him by Lorenz•…, that you should
Meet his high flame, in plain Italian
Love him, and—
What for heaven, be the Dukes whore?
No, no, his Mistress, command him, make us.
Give up my Virgin-honour to his lust?
You may give it a better name, but do it.
I doe mistake you brother, doe I not?
No, no, my meaning is so br•…ad, you cannot.
I would I did then, is it not possible
That this should be a dream? where did you drop
Your virtue Sir? Flori•…, why move you not?
Why are you slow to tell this man? for sure
Tic not Sciarrah, he hath talked so ill,
And so much, that we may have cause to fear,
The ayre about's infected.
Are not you
My brother?
Be not you a fool, to move
These empty questions, but join to make her
Supple, and pliant for the Duke, I hope
We are not the first ha bin advanced by a wagtai•…e:
No matter for the talk of musty people,
Look up to the reward, thou art young, and skilled
In these Court temptings, naturally soft,
And moving, I am rough hewn, assist, wo't,
With some quaint charm, to win her to this game?
My Sister?
I, I.
Come not near him Florio,
Tic not Sciarrha, sure my brothers Nurse
Played the impostor, and with some base issue
Cheated our house.
Gypsy, use better language,
Or Isle forget your sex.
Offer to touch her
With any rudeness, and by all that's virtuous▪—
Why how now boy?
I doe not fear your sword,
This with my youth, and innocence, is more
Defence then all thy armoury, what Devil
Has crept into thy soul?
You'll not help?
Isle never kill thee.
Tic very well,
Have you considered better o•…the motion?
Yes.
And whats your resolve
To have my name
Stand in the Ivory register of Verge•…s,
When I am dead, before 〈◊〉 f•…tious thought
Should lurk within 〈◊〉 to betray my fame,
To sucha blot, my hands shall mutiny,
And boldly with a poniard teach my heart
To weep out a rep•…tance.
Let me kill thee
My excellent chaste •…ster, Flori•…
Thou hast my soul, I did but try your virtues,
It is truth, the Duke does love thee, viciously,
Let him, let him, he comes to be our guest,
This night he means to revel at our house,
The Tarquine shall be entertained; he shall,
My Lord, Pisano is come.
I had forgot his promise, Look up Sister
And shine with thy own smiles, Pisano's come,
Pisano thy contracted, honoured friend,
A gentleman so rich in hopes, wee shall 
Bee happy in's alliance▪
Welcome all,
But you above the rest, my brother shortly,
Sister and Florio entertain your noble
Friends, some few minutes, I am absent, wee
Must not forget prepare for the Dukes coming,
Isle soon return
You are not cheerful sir.
How first my Lord? you were not wont to look
So sad when you came his•…r.
I am not well Amid.
Oh my 〈◊〉!
Bee you
Comforted Lady let all gr•…ifs repair
To this, their proper Center.
Sir how fare you?
Altered of late a little.
Virtuous Lady,
I cannot choose but pity her, and accuse
Pisano's levity.
Wo'd hee were come back,
I might ha finished ere he went, and not
Delayed his business much, two or three words,
And I had dispatched.
How sir? your language is
Another then you use to speak, you look not
With the same brow upon me.
Las sweet Lady,
But who shall accuse me?
Wee shall expect to long, Lady I am come
To render all my interest in your love,
And to demand my self again, live happier,
In other choice Fair Amid, tic
Some shame to say my hearts revolted.
Ha.
Hears witness, all is canceled betwixt us,
Nay and you weep—
Farewell.
Hes gone.
I am amazed.
Now lead me to my blessing.
Shall a long suite and speeding in his love
With the worlds notice, and a general fame
Of contract too, just in the instant when
A marriage is expected, bee broke off
With infamy to our house.
Brother, if ever
You loved poor Amid, let not this
Arrive Sciarrhas ear theirs danger in
His knowledge of it, this may be a trial
Of my affection
A trial; no
It showed too like a truth
My tears entreat
Your silence
You have
Power to command it, dry your eyes then,
Hoe's returned.
How now,
Weeping? where is Pisano, and his friends?
Their gon sir.
Ha!
Guess by my eyes, you may
Something of sorrow hath befallen, no sooner
You were beparted, cut some strange distemper
Iuvaded him, wee might discern a change
In's countenance, and though wee prayed him to
Repose with us, hee would straight back again,
So with Frederico,
And signior Cosmo, he returned.
The alteration was strange and sudden.
Las noble gentleman—but come clear up
Your face again, wee hope it wonot last,
Look bright again I say, I ha given order—
My Lord the Dukes already come.
Remove,
Good Amid, and reserve thy person
To Crown his entertainment, be not seen yet.
Sciarrah, we are come to be your guest.
Your highness doth an honour to our house.
But wher's thy Sister, she must bid us welcome
She is your graces handmaid,
For this night,
Let the whole world conspire to our delight.
Lorenzo—
Sir bee confident—and perish.
You shu'd not rashly give away your heart,
Nor must you without me dispose your self,
Pray give access to none—yet if Pisano
Enquire, direct him to the garden, Cosmo
Is young, and promising, but while Lorenzo
Lives must expect no sun-shine.
Theres for thy pains,
They are now at opportunity
My Lord,
Doe you prepare the Mother, and let m•… •…lose
With Oriana.
What service can reward thee?
Take occasion
To leave us private, this hour be
Propitious, win but the Matron to you.
She is prepared already
Loose no time
Take the other walk.
My dear Cosmo:
My best Oriana.
You have bin too much absent I must chide you
You cannot sweet, I would I knew which way.
To make thee angry, yes, that I might see
How well it would become thee, I doe fear
Thou art some Angel, and that sin would bee
An argument, to me, that thou were mortal
I must suspect thy too much goodness else,
And leave thee for the fellowship of Saints,
I am to wicked.
You will make me angry.
But you will love me still, I fear.
Do ye fear it?
I'st a misfortune?
What?
My love
Your anger,
And yet the tother often times may carry
An evil with it, wee may love to well
And thats a fault
Not where the objects good.
Oyes: Always beware of the extremes.
What mean you? I affect none but my Cosmo,
Nor him with too much flame.
If you should Lady, it were
Not nobly done.
To love another?
Yes,
If there be cause, that may be called a virtue:
For what have I to engross the affection
Of any Lady, if she can discern
A greater merit in some other man:
Wisdom forbid, but she command her smiles,
To warm and cherish him.
So we should be inconstant.
Why not, if our reason be
Convincd, that's no such fault as the world goes:
Let us examine all the creatures, read
The book of Nature through, and we shall find
Nothing doth still the same, the stars do wander
And have their divers influence, the Elements
Shuffle into innumerable changes,
Our constitutions vary, Herbs, and Trees
Admit their Frosts and Summer: and why then
Should our desires, that are so nimble, and
More subtle then the spirits in our blood,
Be such stayed things within us, and not share
Their natural liberty, shall we admit a change
In smaller of things, and not allow it in
What most of all concerns us?
What?
Our Loves?
Have you a suspicion I am changed, and thus
Would school me for it, or shall I imagine
That you are altered.
Yes, I am, and therefore
Proclaim thy freedom, I doe love thee less,
To show I love thee more.
What riddle's this.
I will explain, upon maturity
Of Council Oriana, I have found
I am not worthy of thee, therefore come
To make thee satisfacton for my sin
Of loving thee, by pointing out a way,
And person, will become thy affection better.
You have a pretty humour.
What dost think
Of brave Pisano, shall his merit plead
Succession in thy chaste thoughts?
I doe know him.
Thou can not choose, and I could study none
Worthy thy love but him.
Tic very likely you would resign then.
I to honour thee,
His service will deserve thee at the best,
And richest value.
Why it shall bee so.
Nay but be serious, and declare me happy
That I may say, I have made thee just amends.
I will thank thee.
Why sir I doe love him.
Oh when did Cupped aim that golden shaft•…
But dost thou love him perfectly with a
Desire, when sacred rites of marriage
Are past, to meet him in thy bed, and call him
Thy husband?
Why sir, did you ever think
I was so taken with your worth, and person,
I could not love another Lord as well?
By your favour, there be many as proper men,
And as deserving, you may save your plea,
And be assured I need no lesson to
Direct my fancy, I did love Pisano,
Before, but for your sake, I mean to place him,
A great deal nearer, sure he does but jest. You did love me.
Now by my heart. I love thee.
This act shall crown our story Oriana,
Thou dost not know how much thou honour me,
For hes not in the common▪ list of friends,
And he does love thee past imagination
Next his religion, he has placed the thought
Of Oriana, hee sleeps nothing else.
And I shall wake him into Heaven, to say
Thou hast consented to be his.
Pray tell me:
But truly I beseech you, doe you wish
Pisano mine indeed? are you jealous,
And name him to accuse me?
Not by goodness,
But if there be a charm beyond thy innocence,
By that I would conjure thee Oriana,
Love him and make three happy, it shall be
My bliss to call you his, let me but o wne
A servant in your memory.
Unkind,
And cruel Cosmo, dost thou think it possible,
I can love any but thy self? thou wilt
Undo my heart for ever.
You shall be
Ever most welcome, if I be her Mother,
She must declare obedience, Oriana—
Go cheerfully, thy Mother calls, to him
Whose Orator I have been, alas poor Lady,
I half repent me since she is so constant:
But a friends life weighs down all other love;
Beside, I thus secure my fate, Lorenzo
Threatens my spring, he is my enemy.
You'll not compel affection?
No, but Court it
With honour, and religion, thus invite it,
I shall forget the nature of a Parent,
Unless you show more softness, and regard
To what is urged, what promise could you make
To Cosmo without me? or if you had—
Here Cosmo' doth give up all •…tle to it,
I have no part in Oriana now▪
I've heard too much, doe with me what you please
I am all passive, nothing of my self,
But an obedience to unhappiness.
Follow her Pisano.
You are all friendship.
Trace their warm steps, Virgins resolves are weak.
Leave not her eyes, until you see day break.
ROgero?
My Lord.
Make fast the Chamber-doore, stiffle the key∣hole and the crannies, I must discourse of secret matters, dost thou smell nothing Rogero? ha?
Smell? not any thing my Lord to offend my nostril.
Come hither, what do the people talk abroad of me?
Answer me justly, and to the point what doe they say?
Faith my Lord, they say that you are—
They lie, I am not, they are a lousy impudent multi∣tude, a many-headed, and many horned generation, to say that I am—
A noble gentleman, a just and discreet Lord, and one that deserved to have his honours without money.
Oh is that it? I thought the rabble would have said, I had been a Traitor, I am half mad certainly ere since I con∣scented to Lorenzo, tic a very hard condition, that a man must loose his head to recompense the procuring of his honours: what if I discover him to the Duke, ten to one, if Lorenzo come but to speak, his grace wonot ha the grace to believe me and then I run the hazard to be thrown out of all otto∣there side: tic safest to be a Traitor, hum, who is that you whispered to?
I whisper?
Marry did you sir.
Not I good faith my Lord.
Sir, sir, sir, I smell a Rat behind the hangings? Here's no body, ha? are there no Trunks to convey secret voices?
Your Lordship has a pair on.
I doe not like that face in the arras, a my conscience hee points at me, a pox upon this treason, I have no stomach too't, I do see my self upon a Scaffold, making a pitiful speech alrea∣die, I shall ha my head cut off, seven years ago I laid my head upon a wager I remember, and lost it; let me see, it shall be so, tic good policy to be armed, Rogero, imagine I were a Traitor.
How sir?
I but say imagine, we may put the case, and that I were apprehended for a Traitor.
Heaven defend.
Heaven has something else to doe, then to defend Tray∣tors:
I say, Imagine I were brought to the bar.
Good my Lord, you brought to the bar?
I will beat you, if you wonot imagine at my bidding:
I say, suppose I now were at the bar to answer for my life.
Well sir.
Well sir, that's as it happens, you must imagine I will answer the best I can for my self, conceive I prithee, that these chairs were Judges most grave and venerable beards and faces at my arraignment, and that thy self were in the name of the Duke and state to accuse me what could thou say to me?
I accuse your good honour? for what I beseech you?
For high Treason you blockehead.
I must be acquainted with some particulars first.
Mass thou says right: why imagine, do ye hear? you must but imagine, that some greatman had a conspiracy a∣against the Dukes person, and that I being an honest Lord, and one of this great mans friends, had been drawn in, for that's the plain truth on it, it was against my will, but that's all one: Well, thou understandst me, show thy wit Rogero, scratch thy nimble pericranium, and thunder out my accusati∣on ex tempore: Here I stand Signior Depazzi, ready to an∣swer the indictment.
Good my Lord it will not become me, being your hum∣ble servant.
Humble Coxcomb, is it not for my good? I say, ac∣cuse me, bring it home, jerk me soundly to the quick Rogero,
tickle me as thou lovst thy Lord; I doe defy thee, spare me not, and the devil take thee if thou be not malicious,
Why then have at you, first Signior Depazzi, thou art indicted of high Treason, hold up thy hand, guilty, or not guilty?
Very good.
Nay, very bad sir, answer I say, guilty or not guilty?
Not guilty.
Tic your best course to say so, well imagine Irise up the Duke's most learned in the Laws, and his nimble tongued Orator, have at your Signior.
Come, come on sir, here I stand.
I will prove thou least in thy throat, if thou deny thy Treason, and so I address my self to the most understanding seats of Justice •… most wise, most honourable, and most in∣corrupt Judges, sleep not I beseech you, my place •…ath called me to plead in the behalf of my Prince and Country against this notable, this pernicious, and impudent Traitor, who hath plotted and contrived such high, heinous, and horrible treasons as no Age nor History hath ever mentioned the like. Here hee stands, whose birth I will not touch, because its altogether un∣known who begot him: He was brought up among the small wares in the City, became rich by sinister and indirect practi∣ses, married a Merchants wife at adventures, and was soon after advanced to be a Head-officer.
Why you rascal.
Peace sir, peace, nay your Lordships shall find him very audacious: This fellow not content to have his branches spread within the City, I speak it to his face, let him deny it, was afterword by the corruption of his confederate, and the mere grace of his highness raised to honour, received infi∣night favours from his Prince of blessed memory, yet like a wretch, a villain, a viper, a Rat of Nilus, he hath practised Treasons against the sacred person of the Duke, for which he de∣serves not only to die, but also to suffer tortures, whips, racks, strapadoes, wheels, and all the fiery brazen bulls that can bee in∣vented, as I shall make it appear to this honourable and il∣lustrious Court.
This rogues transported.
With all my heart I obey your Lordships—thus then I pass from these circumstances, and proceed to the principal villainies that wee have to lay to his charge. Imprimis
thou Signior Depazzi did offer to a groom a 100 crowns to poison his highness hunting saddle.
Did I?
Do not interrupt me varlet I will prove it, his hunting saddle, and woe shall be unto thy breech therefore, and finding this serpentive treason broken in the shell, doe but lend your reverend ears to his next designs I will cut em off presently. This irreligious nay Atheistical Traitor, did with his own hands poison the Dukes prayer book, oh impiety! and had his highness as in former times, hee accustomed but prayed once in a month, which by special grace hee omitted, how fatal had it been to Florence? but as by justice his excellence did then, and by his own want of devotion, prevent this assassinates purpose, so we hope in his own discretion, and the council of his state, hee will take heed how he prays hereafter while hee lives, to which every true subject will say Amen.
May it please your honours—
Thou impudent brazen faced Traitor, wilt thou deny it? more over, and like your good Lordships, hee hath for this fort∣night or three weeks before his apprehension, walked up and down the Court with a case of pistols charged wherewith, as he partly confessed, hee intended to send the Duke to heaven with a powder.
This rogue will undo the Devil at invention, may it please this honourable—
These are but sprinklings of his treason.
Will you justify this? did I any of these things you tadpole?
Hold your self contented my Lord, he that is brought t•… the bar in case of treason, must look to have more objected then hee can answer, or any man is able to justify.
I confess and please your good Lordships.
Mark, hee will confess.
Thats the the way to be sent of a headles errand▪ indeed I confess that I never intēded any treasō to his highness, nor ever sought the princes life, true it is, that I heard of a conpiracie.
That that my Lord hath overthrown him, he says hee never sought the princes life, ergo he sought his death, besides he hath heard of treason, now he that hears and discovers not is
equally guilty in fact: for in offences of this nature there are not accessories, ergo hee is a principal, and being a principal Traitor, hee deserves condemnation.
Shall I not speak?
No, traitors must not be suffered to speak, for when they have leave, they have liberty, and hee that is a Traitor deserves to bee close Prisoner.
All that this fellow hath vtterd, is false and forgd, ab∣hominable lies.
I will speak truth, and I will be heard, and no man else in this place.
I never dre'mt of a hunting saddle, nor never had so much as a thought of any prayer book.
You sit hear to do justice, I speak for the Duke and the safety of the common wealth.
As for pistols, tic well known I could never endure the report one i'm, I defy powder and shot as I doe him that ac∣cuseth me.
I defy al the world that will hear a Traitor speak, for him∣self, tic against the Law which provids that no man shall defend treason, and he that speaks for himself being a Traitor, doth de∣fend his treason, thou art a Capital obstreporous malefactor.
Thou art a madman:
Go to you have played the fool too much.
Thou continual motion cease, a pox upon thee hold thy tongue.
The pox wonot serve your turn.
Why then this shall.
Hold, hold good my Lord, I am sensible, I ha done, imagine I ha done, I but obeyed your Lordship, whose baton I find stronger then my imagination, my Lord you will answer this to strickei'th Court thus?
I Am as weary—hark Rogero one knocks, see, see theirs to make thee amends see good
and say nothing pray heaven it be no pursevant.
Petruchio my Lord, Pisanoes Secretary.
But Lorenzoes Engine a very knave,
My very good Lord.
What's here? it can be no goodness:
My very good Lord.
No matter and you were both hanged, Rogero, show him the Wine-sellar: let me see, I must report the Dukes death, I cannot abide this word Death, yet he desires me but to re∣port it, hum, if it be false, why so much the better; th•…re will be the less harm in it, if it should prove true, they will believe me another time: Well I will drink my self half drunk, and be fortified.
Sciarrha, you exceed in entertainment,
Banquet our 〈◊〉 too.
He will feast all Senses.
Only a toy my Lord, I cannot call it,
A mask, not worthy of this presence, yet
It speaks the freedom of my heart, and gratitude
For this great honour.
Amid must sit near us.
Lords your places, 'twonot be
Worth half this ceremony, let'em begin.
Whose the presenter?
Lust sir, pray observe:
Now let Lust possess the throne
Of Love, and rule in hearts alone:
You sweet tempters to my Sin,
Beauty, smiles, and kisses win
Upon frail mortals, let them know
There is no happiness, but you
Shoot no arrows tipped with lead
Each shaft have his golden head:
Call no Love, delude menstill,
Through the flesh, their spirits kill,
Nor spend all your art to take
Common persons, greatness make
By your potent charms to bee
Subjects unto hell and me,
Inflame but Kings with loose desire,
Ye soon set all the world on fire.
Whats hee?
A wild young man that follows lust,
He has too much blood it seems.
Why looks hee back?
There is a thing called death that follows him
With a large train of furies, but the Sirens
Of lust make him secure, and now the hag
Embraces him, and circles him with pleasures,
The harpies mean to dance too, hang his conscience
It whines too much.
This is too plain.
Hee does not tremble yet,
By an by sir you shall see all his tormentors
Join with 'em, ther's the sport on it.
Me thinks they
Should have been first forth' antimaske.
Oh no!
In hell they doe not stand upon the method
As wee at Court, the gr•…not mask and the glory
Begin the revels, Sister you doe ill
To keep the Duke in talk, he cannot see
The devil for you, and the whips: does not
That deaths head look most tēptingly? the worms
Have kissed the lips off. 
How does your highness like this dance?
My eyes so feasted here, I did not mark it,
But I presume it was handsome.
Oh the Lethargy
Of Princes! we ha kept you Sir from bed:
More lights.
Good night to all, to you the best:
Sciarrha bind us ever by performance.
We are all yours.
And Florence thine, once more—
Brightest of Ladies.
You are firm.
Suspect not.
I doe not like my brothers Moral Mask,
The Duke himself was personated, I
Wonder it did not startle him.
I hope
Sciarrha does not mean so ill as that
Did promise, he's returned: his looks are full. 
Of threatening.
Amid, go not to bed,
And yet no matter, I can do it alone:
Take both your rest, and in your prayers commend
The Duke to Heaven, tic charity; has made
His will already, and bequeathd his body
To you Sister, pity his soul for it, tic now
Within few minutes of departing.
How?
Why this way I must help him in his groans
To bring his flesh a bed.
You wonot kill him?
I am not of your mind.
I know you cannot.
You are not studied so perfect in
His destiny I hope; I will endeavour—
To kill your Prince?
What here?
No, in his Chamber.
Shall it be read in Stories of our Florenoe,
Sciarrha first did stain his family
With such a Treason?
Was he not invited?
Yes, by his lust.
And in your crowned tables,
And Hospitality will you murder him?
Yes, and the reason wherefore he was murderd,
Shall justify the deed to all posterity,
He came to wrong my Sister.
Wanton heate,
Let youthful blood excuse him.
So it must.
Mistake me not, oh think but who he is,
The Duke, that word must needs awake your piety.
How will good men in this remembrance
Abhor your cruelty, that send to hell
One with the weight of all his sins upon him.
It is too late to cool with argument
My incensed blood, will you go dally with him,
And let him board your pinnace: I hagon
So far in promise, if you clasp not with him,
It will be dangerous if he out-live
This night.
I ha thought on it, send him to my bed.
Ha?
Doe not question what I purpose, heaven
Witness to my chaste thoughts.
Wot thou trust him?
I will doe much sir, to preserve his life,
And your innocence: be not you suspectful▪
At the worst, you can but respite your revenge.
Dost thou not fear unhappy Luenesse chance,
Or wretched Philomels dishonour?
No:
Give me his life, and send your wanton to me;
Isle to my Chamber, fear me not Sciarrha,
Have not one thought so bad, I sha' not prosper;
Virgins n heaven will suffer with me.
Trust her?
Tic but deferring of my justice,
She wonot kill him sure: draw on her soul
The guilt she hates in mine, if she doe yield
To the hot encounter: ha? twill be just,
That both their hearts weep blood▪ to purge their lust.
My Poniard?
I've no black intent
To stain't with any blood.
Take it, I know, thou art my virtuous Sister,
It were wickedness to doubt thy purpose
Or the event.
Now leave me.
Thou hast a guard of Angels.
They are coming.
Look, there she is sir, you know how to undress her.
Dearest Sciarrha.
To your recreation, here
Isle obscure my self, Florio? tic well.
Lady you know me?
Yes my Prince.
I was so,
Till I saw thee, but I gave up that title,
A conquest to thy beauty, which among
Her other wonders hath created me
A subject and servant, and I shall
Be happier to be received yours by
One of those names then Duke of Tuscany.
Oh take your self again, use your greatness
To make the hearts of Florence bow to you,
And pay their duties thus.
Rise Amid,
And since you have given my power back, it will
Become me to command.
And me to obey.
I see thy noble brother hath bin faithful
To my desires, he has prepared thee with
A story of my love, which thou rewardst
With too much humbleness: thou hast a quarrel,
And a just one with thy Stars, that did not make thee
A Princess Amid, yet you are greater,
And borne to justify unto these times
A Queen of Love, Venus was but thy figure,
And all her graces prophesies of thine,
To make our last age best; I could dwell ever
Here, and imagine I am in a Temple,
To offer on this Altar of thy lip, 
Myriads of flaming kisses with a cloud
Of sighs breathed from my heart,
Which by the oblation would increase his stock,
To make my pay eternal.
What mean you?
That question is propounded timely, had
Not interrupted me, I should ha lost
My self upon thy lips, and quite forgot
There is a bliss beyond it, which I came for:
Let others satisfy themselves to read
The wonders in thy face, make proud their eye,
By seeing thine, turn statues at thy voice,
And think they never fix enough to hear thee.
A man half dead with famine, would wish here
To feed on smiles, of which the least hath power
〈◊〉 〈◊〉 an Anchorite from his prayers, tempt Saints
〈◊〉 their bodies on, thou dost with •…as
〈◊〉 aptivate Kings with every beam, and moist
Lead them like prisoners round about the world,
•…roud of such golden chains; this were enough,
Had not my Fate provided more, to make me
Believe my self immortal in thy touches,
Come to thy bed, transform me there to happiness;
Isle laugh at all the fables of the gods,
And teach our Poets after I know thee,
To write the true Elizium.
Good my Lord,
I understand you not, and yet I fear
You doe not mean well, if you have brought with you
A sinful purpose which I may suspect.
Why Lady, what doe yon imagine I
Came hither for?
I know not.
How? is it come to that?
Your brother gave you more.
Desirous of the sport, and brought me hither
Ripe for your dalliance, did you not expect me?
Yes.
And to what other purpose?
To tell you that you are not virtuous.
I'm of your mind.
But I am not so wicked
To bee of yours: oh think but who you are,
Your title speaks you nearest heaven, and points
You out a glorious reign among the Angels,
Doe not depose your self of one, and bee
Of the other disin'herited.
I would
Your brother heard you, prithee doe not wast
This tedious divinity, I am
Resolved to grapple with you.
Keep off.
Ha?
Turned Amazon.
Prince, come not to near me.
For by my honour, since you have lost your own,
Although I bow in duty to your person,
I hate your black thoughts, tempt not my just hand
With violent approach, I dare, and will
Doe that will greeve you, if you have a soul.
Thou dare not kill me.
True, but I dare die.
Bee thy own murderer?
Rather then you should be my ravisher.
Thou can not be so merciless, uslesse sin
To be unchaste, I am thy Prince, I prithee
Throw by that cruel weapon, let our war
De soft embraces, shooting amorous smiles,
Kill and restore each other with a kiss,
I know thou can not bee unkind so long,
Then I command thee.
I must not obey
To be your strumpet, though my hand be unskilful,
I shall soon find my heart.
Isle not believe—
Let this deserve your faith, I dare be just, 
This crimson river issuing from my arm.
Hold.
Never, it shall flow, and if this channel
Yield not enough, Isle struck another vein,
And after that another, and not pity
The murmuring stream, till through a prodigal wound
I have draind the fountain: this doth weep for you,
And shall extol my death, if it may teach
You to correct your blood.
There's so much gone
From me Icoole apace; this action
Hath shot an ague through me; Amid,
Pity thy self.
Not, till you swear repentance;
I doe not faint yet, tic somewhat about,
But I can find a nearer way, this does it.
Contain, I am sorry, sorry from my soul,
Trust me, I doe bleed inward, Amid
Can answer all thy drops: oh pardon me,
Thou faintst already, dost not? I am fearful,
The Phoenix with her wings, when she is dying
Can fan her ashes into another life:
But when they breath more sweet then all the spice
That helps the others funeral, returns
To heaven, the world must be eternal looser:
Look to thy wound.
May I believe you sir?
I dare not think awry, again I ask
Forgiveness, in thy innocence I see
My own deformity.
Now a thousand blessings
Reward thy goodness; thou deservst a statue,
A tall one which should reach above the clouds.
Justly the moon, that people a far off
Beholding it, may be invited hither
In hope to climb to heaven by it, but apply
Betimes unto thy wound; Florio assist her. 
And now my Lord—
Sciarrah Isle begin to bee thy Lord,
I brought intentions of dishonour to thee,
And thy fair sister, but I am reconciled
To virtue, and will study how to satisfy
For you and Floreuce.
You will be more precious,
Then had you never fallen, I am all joy
in your conversion.
Lorenzo? I think he has not said his prayers yet,
But—
What?
I cannot tel, may be, he does not use it.
How?
My Lord, you now are lovely,
It were better you'd forget him, hoe's not right
At heart I fear.
Fear nothing.
To be plain,
You cherish your disease in him, and are
Not safe while hee is near you.
Doe not envy him.
Then I must tell you sir he is a Traitor,
Within my knowledge hath conspired your death.
With whom?
With me, I should ha kilt you sir
This night, and every mineut hee expects
To hear you numberd with the dead, I can
Demonstrate this, your pardon, but in truth,
The injuries you meant us were severe,
And he with as much violence did urge em
To your destruction, but your piety
Hath charmed my purpose, and I look upon you
With new obedience.
Possible.
Wee wonot shift the scene till you believe it,
Florio, entreat my Lord Lorenzo hither,
Step but but behind the arras, and your ear
Shall tell you who's the greatest Traitor living,
Observe but when I tell him, you are slain,
How heel rejoice, and call me Florence great
Preserver, bless my arm that in your blood,
Hath given our groaning state a liberty:
Then trust Sciarrha, but observe, I here i'm
Whom talked he too?
Tic done—
What good Sciarrha?
The Duke is dead.
Wee are not left so miserable,
Heaven is more kind to Florence.
With this hand
I made a passage for his soul.
Defend
Omnipotence, what murdered? and by noble
Sciarrha? how my ear abuses me!
Did not wee plot it too?
How wee? collect,
I fear you are not well: pray tell me why
You talk thus? wher's the Duke? he hath a guard,
An army of heaven about him; who in Florence,
Dares be so black a devil to attempt
His death.
This is fine awning, why that devil is
Lorenzo, if hee dars deny it, wee are in private,
You need appear no stranger to that's done
By your direction.
I in the practice?
Then let me creep into the earth, and rise
A monster to affright man-kinde, Sciarrha,
I must abhor thee for it, oh my Prince!
My dearest kinsman, may thy hand rot off,
Treason, treason.
Then my sword shall fetch 
another witness in thy heart
Hold.
Tush, let him come,
My royal Lord, nay, let him kill me now,
Iv so much joy and peace about me, it were
A sin to wish my life beyond this minute.
Put up I say.
My Lord, we are both consent:
That very smile's a Traitor.
Come, be calm:
You are too passionate Sciarrha, and
Mistook Lorenzo.
But I hold him noble:
I see hee made this trial of my faith,
And I forgive him.
Ye shall be friends, you shall I say.
The Duke—
Whore's the Duke?
My Lord, we are blessed to see you safe, report
Hath frighted all the City with your death:
People forsake their beds, and seeking how
To be informed, increase the wretched tumult.
There's nothing but confusion: all men tremble
As if some general fire invaded Florence.
Have comfort sir.
Whats to be done?
Depazzi has remembered,
My Lord there is no safety for the State,
Unless you personally appease 'em.
How?
I hope theile tear him, would he were dead any way.
He hath counselld well.
Your presence only hath the power to charm 'em.
I fear their rage: where is our Guard?
Alonzo, haste before, proclaim our pardon,
And that we live to give the offenders mercy.
Why are we borne to greatness, mocked with State,
When every tumult staggers our proud fate?
Our quarrel is deferd Sir.
MY plots thrive not, my Engines all deceive me;
And in the very point of their discharge
Recoil with danger to my self: are there
No faithful villains left in nature? all
Turned honest? man nor spirit aide Lorenzo,
Who hath not patience to expect his fate:
But must compel it? how Sciarrha plaid
The dog-boltwo'me, and had not J provided
In wisdom for him, that distress had ruined me,
His frozen Sister Amid too
Hath half converted him; but J must set
New wheels in motion, to make him yet
More hateful, and then cut him from his stalk,
Ripe for my vengeance: Jle not trust the rabble
Confusion on the giddy multitude,
That but two minutes ere the Duke came at'em,
Bellowed out liberty, shook the City with
Their throats, no sooner saw him but they melted
With the hot apprehension of a gallows:
And when a pardon was proclaimed, (a fine
State-snaffle for such Mules) they turned their cry
To acclamations, and deaf'd Heaven to beg
His long and prosperous reign, a sudden rot
Consume this base heard, and the devil want,
Any Cattle for his own teeth, these are for him.
Sciarrha, my Lord desires to speak with you.
Sciarrha, come near—you understand, admit him. 
Welcome my noble Lord, 
You were not wont to visit me.
Nor mean ever to doot again.
You bring frowns,
J can be sullon too: what is your pleasure?
You have abused me.
You have injured me.
In what?
Betrayed me basely to the Duke.
You denied then, you were a Traitor.
Yes, J was no fool to run my neck•… upon
The Axe, and give you such a cause of triumph,
Were it again in question—
You're a villain sir.
And I must have it certified under your own hand
To show the Duke.
You shall be humbled to
Confess the contrary, nay subscribe
That I am honest, and desire my pardon;
Look, I have a sword, and arm, and vigour
Dare fight with thee, did ride upon a whirlwind,
Provoke me on a rock, in waves, in fire?
And kill thee without scruple, such a strength
Is innocence.
Innocence? dost not fear a thunder-bolt?
I shall be charitable to the world, and I
Cut thee in pieces; and yet then I fear
Thou wo't come together again: the devil does
Acknowledge thee on earth the greater mischief,
And has a fear when thou art dead, he sha'not
Be safe in hell: thou wot conspire with some
Of his black fiends, and get his kingdom from him:
Did not thou rail upon the Duke?
I grant it.
Call him a Tyrant?
More I doe confess,
I did exasperate you, to kill or murder him;
Give it what name you please, with joy I brought him
Under the colour of your guest, to be
The common sacrifice: all this I remember;
But is heavens stock of mercy spent already,
That sins though great and horrid, may not be
Forgiven, to the heart that groans with penitence?
Are the eternal fountains quite sealed up?
I was a Villain, Traitor, Murderer,
In my consenting to his death, but hope
Those staines are now washed off.
Hast thou repented?
Trust me, I have.
The devil is tum'd religious, augment not thy dānation.
As he was
A lustful Duke, a Tyrant, I had lost him
In his return to piety: he commanded
My prayers, and fresh obedience to waite on him;
Hoe's now my Prince again.
This is but cunning to save your life.
My life? within there, ha? welcome.
My gracious Lord.
Wilt please your honour
Command my service?
Or me?
Or any?
Our swords and lives are yours.
Perhaps your Lordship hath some business
With these Gentlemen, Isle take some other time.
By no means good Sciarrha:
You visit seldom, those are daily with me,
Men that expect employment, that wear swords,
And carry spirits, both to be engaged,
If I but name a cause: Gentlemen, •…raw.
My providence has betrayed me.
Now Sciarrha, you that with single valour dare come home
To affront me thus; know; but too late, thy heart
Is at the mercy of my breath: these swords
Can fetch it when I please, and to prevent
Your boast of this great daring: I beseech
As you doe love and honour your Lorenzo,
No hand advance a weapon, sheath again,
And leave us; I owe service to your loves;
But must not so dishonour you.
We obey.
They're gone: this is some nobleness.
You see
I doe not fear your sword; alone I have
Too much advantage, yet you may imagine
How easily I could correct this rashness:
But in my fear to offend gracious Heaven
With a new crime, having so late obtained
My peace, I give you freedom.
Doe I dream?
Pray chide me still, I will be patient
To hear my shame.
Is this to be believed?
Doth not Lorenzo counter feit this virtue?
Hee does? it is impossible he should repent.
Why tell me Sciarrha, and let us argue a while
In cooler blood; did not you once resolve
To kill the Duke too?
I confess—
To give him death with your own hand?
Methinkes it should be the same parricide
In you, if not a greater; yet you change
Your purpose, why did you not go through
And murder him?
He was converted.
Good, that taught you mercy, &amp; perhaps repētance
For your intent.
It did.
Why should not sir
The same conversion of the Duke possess
My heart, with as much piety to him
And sorrow for my self? if I should say
You are but cunning, is this shape of honesty,
And still suspect your soul to be a Traitor?
Might you not blame my want of charity?
He says but right, we are
Both men, frail things▪ •…is not impossible.
I am reconcild to heaven already, and the Duke, if you
Be still unsatisfied, I am ready sin.
The circumstance considerd, I incline
To think this may be honest.
Come Sciarrha,
We are both hasty: pardon my rash language
In the beginning, I will study service
Shall make you love me: I ha bin too wicked,
Too full of passion, inexorable:
My nature is corrected, at this minute:
I'm friends with all the world, but in your love
Shall number many blessing.
I am converted.
Whats the news?
My Lord Depazzi prays some conference
In the next chamber we arrived by chance
Together at your gate: I doe not like his talk sir.
Hang him property, let him
Expect, thou art come in the opportunity:
I could have wished, be wise and second me.
He waits upon Pisano,
Whose health I may enquire, I ha not seen him
Since he departed sick, a fit occasion.
Married to Oriana: thou mistake,
Tic Amid, Lord Sciarrha's sister.
That contract's broken, and the old Lady
Morrossa is violent to have the marriage
Finished with her daughter.
Sciarrha,
I'st true Pisano marries Oriana
The rich Morassa's daughter.
Ha?
Wee did expect to here your sister should
Have been his bride: has he forsaken Amid?
Do not you serve Pisano?
Yes my Lord.
And dare you talk hoe's to be married
To Oriana?
If they live till to morrow:
Ther's great provision to my knowledge and—
Take that, &amp; learn to speak a truth hereafter.
That blow shall cost his life,
It is not possible hee dares affront
You thus; the world takes notice of a contract,
Hoe's much to blame if he should wrong so sweet
A Lady as Amid, now by Hymen.
Tic not so honourable hee need not scorn,
Such an alliance.
I am not to give
Account for my Lords actions, let him answer
And justify his honour: but my Lord
Since J am provoked, J must declare he has
Called back his vows to Amid, given
Her freedom, and does mean to use his own,
And this he dares publish.
What, disclaimed a Lady of her birth and glorious merit?
You are a villain,
My Lord he is not worth your anger, hee
Declares but what his master hath committed,
Tic none of his fault.
It becomes my duty
To take correction my Lord, from you,
I am a servant, a poor gentleman.
Shall I suspect the circumstance at his departure?
It is strange you knew not this before.
I must examine if he dares—
Be patient.
Teach fools and children patience,
The dogs eat up Sciarrha; let me live
The prodigy of sorrow, die a death
That may draw tears from Scithians, if Pisano
Lead o•…re his threshold, any soon won dame
To be my sisters shame: I am calm now;
One false, heaven why should thy altars save?
Tic just that Hymen light him to his grave.
A thousand furies swell his rage, although
Pisano bleed, this is the safest killing;
Wisemen secure their fates and execute
Invisibly, like that most subtle flame
That burns the heart, yet leaves no path or touch
Upon the skin to follow or suspect it:
Farewell dull passionate fool, how this doth feed me?
Kill and be lost thy self; or if 〈◊〉 sword
Conclude thy life both ways I am revenged.
Petruchio, thou did hit my instructions rarely,
And I applaud through: now send in Depazzi, and visit me anon.
I shall my Lord.
Some Politician
That is not wise, but by a president,
Would think me weak for using such an instrument,
As this Depazzi; but I know by proof,
Such men whom fear and honour make our creatures,
Doe prove safe Engines, fools will still obey,
When cunning knaves our confidence betray.
My Lord, I would speak a word or two in private.
You may.
Is no body within hearing? all clear behind the arras?
Make no doubt sir.
My Lord the truth is, I am very fearful: is your Lord∣ship sure there are no eves droppers.
What needs this circumstance? I pray come to the point.
Tic not unknown to your Lordship, that you have bin my very good Lord, neither am I ignorant, that I am your humble servant, you advanced men, brought me into the number∣ber of the nobles, and I brought you a reasonable number of crowns: I am not the first wise Citizen that hath bin converted into a foolish Courtier, but my Lord, I beseech you pardon me: it will out.
Whats the matter?
I am ready to burst.
With what?
Treason, treason, now'ts out, and I feel my body the lighter fort already: the last plot did not take you see, and I would humbly entreat your Lordship to excuse me, and get some body else hereafter to be your Traitor in my stead.
How sir?
If you did but know the tenderness of my constitute∣on, or feel the pangs and conv•…sions that I suffer, you would pity me: I fall away you see, I cannot sleep for dreaming of an axe, I have cause, my hangings of Holefernes to be taken down in my dining room, because I dare not look upon a head that is cut off in it, something of my complexion: my wisdom tells me I am a fool to be so fearful, but my con∣science tells me I am a greater fool if I ha not wit enough in my pare to keep my head on my shoulders, I beseech your Lordship take me into your consideration, I am but a mortal, though I bee a Lord, every man hath not the like gift of impudence, I have a weak stomach▪ and treason is physic to me, and al∣though I do not vomit up your secrets they may out some other way.
You wonot betray me.
But alas in such a case I may soon bewray my self, and then your Lordship may soon be smelt out: to prevent therefore some mischief that may happen, I desire to leave off while I am well, end that your Lordship may know I mean plainly: I ha brought you all your letters, I durst not trust any other place with 'em for fear of state rats, I have unripped my
by some to you, and there they are to a title—now I may safely swear I have no hand with your Lordship.
This is very strange.
Mistake not my good Lord, J am still your creature, but I have a great mind to bee honest a little while, among the weaker sort of nobility: yet thus much persuade your self, I will ne'er wrong your Lordship in a syllable, should you tell me of athousand treasons, and stratagems, J will never reveal any, J scorn that, but your Lordship must pardon me, J will be a Traitor no longer, that's certain, J will be honest, and the ra∣there because nobody shall hit me in the teeth after J am dead, and say look were Depazzi carries his head very high, and my Lord the more to induce your Lordship to dismiss me—Rogero.
My Lord.
Give me the gold, I have brought 1500 crowns more.
Wherefore?
That J may have my Lordships good will, to leave my office before it be taken from me, and preferred to a worse, tic half the price J paid for it, J love peace and a little honesty, J know your honour will find an able man for it, and it is fit J should pay for my quietus.
And what doe you resolve?
To return to the dunghill from whence J came, for though J was borne in the City, J have some land in the coun∣try dirty acres, and Mansion house, where J will be the miracle of a courtier, and keep good hospitality, love my neigh∣bours, and their wives, and consequently get their i will∣drone, bee admired amongst the Justices, sleep upon every bench, keep a Chaplain in my own house to be my I∣dolator, and furnish me with jests; and when I have nothing else to doe, I will think of the court, and how much I have bin obe∣legged to your Lordship: my Lord I may doe you service with a leading voice in the country, the kennel will cry a my side if it come to election, you or your friend shall carry it, against the Common wealth.
Well sir, since you have expressed your self so freely, I will not council you against your disposition to stay at court, you may go when, and whither you please; and though at
parting J have nothing worth your acceptance, I will bestow these Crowns upon your servant.
Thou shalt give 'em me again.
Indeed my Lord J love a little honesty, tic his Lordships bounty, it will bee a stock to set me up, for my self at Court, when your Lordship is retired into the Country, I humbly thank your Lordship: and take my leave of yours.
The Duke my Lord.
How the Duke?
Signior Depazzi.
He has bin earnest with me, and please your highness
To be his humble suitor, he may have
Freedom to leave the Court.
Hee shall be banished
How?
What time will your grace allow to provide?
Two hours.
I had rather loose my head at home, and save charges
Of travail, I beseech your grace.
Well tic granted, let him not trouble us.
Enjoy the country, and return when the Duke sends for you.
I hūbly thank his highness, and wilpray for your increase of grace.
Lorenzo, are wee private?
Yes my Lord.
I am very melancholy.
J know the cause, tic Amid.
Right.
I doe not wish her dead.
It were a sin.
Not in heaven sir, yet
There be Ladies, that would think it a promotion.
It were pity she should leave
The world, till she hath taught by her example
The nearest way
I am very confident shoe's yet honest.
Yet Lorenzo?
I sir, but I'm not of opinion it is
Impossible to know a change.
Take heed.
I must confess she has been very valiant,
In making you remove your siege, and showed
Pretty dexterity at the poniard,
See her self bleed: but this a mortal Virgin
Might doe, and not be adored for it: other women
Have gone as far, or else false Legends have
Been thrust upon the easy world: some say
There have bin creatures that have killed themselves,
To save their sullen chastities; but I
Have no strong faith that way, yet you were startled
To see her strike her arm, and grew compassionate.
I was not Marble, we break Adamant
With blood, and could I be a man, and not
Be moved to see that hasty eb be of li•…e
For my sake?
I have read some aged Stories:
What think you of Lucrece? she is rememberd.
Chastities great example.
How the world
Was consent in her? she knew of Tarquin first,
And then suspecting she should never meet
Again the active Gentleman, having
Determined of his death, with well dissembled
Sorrow did stab her self, in hope to meet
The gamester in Elizium, Amid,
You will allow beneath this Roman Dame.
Lorenzo had the burning ravisher,
Made this attempt on Amid, she
Would have compelled his penitence, to quench
His fire with holy tears. I had a body
Refined to air, or I was borne up by
A thousand wings: methought I could have flown
And kissed the cheek of Cynthia, thence with ease
Have leapt to Uenus Star, but I was wounded,
And the gay feathers, in whose pride I had
My confidence, served now but with their weight
To hasten me to earth.
Ascend again,
And fix in your loved orb, he brings this comfort
That can assure it, if you have not lost
A heart to entertain with love and pleasure
The beauteous Amid.
Ha?
You shall enjoy her.
Enjoy fair Amid? doe not tempt,
Or rather mock my frailty with such a promise.
Shake off your melancholy slumber, I
Have here decreed you shall possess her: she
Be sent submissive to your arms, and you
Be gracious to accept what she made coy of.
Is this in nature?
Thus: Sciarrhas life
And fortunes are already growing forfeit
These brains have plotted so: your mercy shall
Purchase what you can wish, for, in his Sister
And hee acknowledge rifling of her honour,
A fair and cheap redemption.
Doe this,
And Isle repent the folly of my penitence,
And take thee to my soul, a nearer pledge
Then blood or nature gave me: I'm renewd,
I feel my natural warmth return, when, where,
Is this to be expected? I grow old,
While our embraces are deferd.
J go, to hasten your delight, prepare your blood
For amorous game: Sciarrhas fate is cast
Firmer then destiny.
Thou art my Prophet, Jle raise thee up an Altar.
Trust these brains.
Thou make my spirit caper in my veins.
This way they pass.
J would not see 'em.
Why?
What melancholy of the sudden? it is now past cure.
J know it is, and therefore doe not
Desire to witness their solemnity, should Oriana
See me to day.
What then?
The object
J Fear would be too prodigious.
We dispute not those nice formalities.
She has spied you already.
I am sorry for it.
How is it my child?
My dearest Oriana,
She faints, what grief is so unmannerly
To interrupt thee now Oriana?
Daughter!
Will Heaven divorce vs ere the Priest have made
Our Marriage perfect? we in vain hereafter
Shall hear him teach, that our Religion binds
To have the Churches ceremony, she returns.
Why were you so unkind to call me from
A pleasing slumber? Death has a fine dwelling.
This shows her heart's not yet consenting, tic
Her Mothers fierce command.
Something spake to me from that window.
There is nothing.
Nothing now.
Set forward.
I doe not like this interruption: tic
Ominous.
Not for my sake, but for your own, go back,
Or take some other way, this leads to death
My brother.
What of him?
Transported with
The fury of revenge for my dishonour,
As he conceives; for tic against my will:
Hath vowed to kill you in your Nuptial glory.
Alas I fear his haste, now good my Lord,
Have mercy on your self, I doe not beg
Your pity upon me, I know too well
You cannot love me now, nor would I rob
This Virgin of your faith, since you have pleased
To throw me from your love: I doe not ask
One smile, nor one poor kiss, enrich this maid
Created for those blessings: but again,
I would beseech you, cherish your own life,
Though I be lost forever.
It is worth
Your care my Lord, if there be any danger.
Alas her grief hath made her wilde poor Lady:
J should not love Oriana to go back,
Set forward, Amid, you may live
To be a happier Bride: Sciarrha is not
So irreligious to profane these rites.
Will you not then believe me? pray persuade him,
You are his friends. Lady, it will concern
You most of all indeed: fear you'll weep
To see him dead as well as J.
No more,
Go forward.
J have done, pray be not angry,
That still J wish you well, may heaven divert
All harms that threaten you, full blessings crown
Your Marriage: J hope there is no sin in this;
Jndeed J cannot choose but pray for you,
This might have been my wedding-day.
Good Heaven
J would it were, my heart can tell, J take
No joy in being his bride, none in your prayers,
You shall have my consent to have him still:
J will resign my place, and waite on you,
If you will marry him.
Pray doe not mock me,
But if you doe, J can forgive you too.
Dear Amid, doe not think J mock
Your sorrow; by these tears that are not worn
By every Virgin on her wedding day;
J am compelled to give away my self:
Your hearts were promised, but he ne'er had mine:
Am not J wretched too?
Alas poor Maid,
We two keep sorrow alive then, but J prithee
When thou art married, love him, prithee love him;
For he esteems thee well, and once a day
Give him a kiss for me, but doe not tell him,
It was my desire, perhaps twill fetch a sigh
From him, and I had rather break my heart,
But one word more, and heaven be with you all,
Since you have led the way, I hope my Lord
That I am free to marry too.
Thou art.
Let me beseech you then, to be so kind
After your own solemnities are done,
To grace my wedding, I shall bee married shortly.
To whom?
To one whom you have all heard talk of,
Your fathers knew him well: one, who will never
Give cause I should suspect him to forsake me,
A constant lover, one whose lips though cold
Distill chaste kisses, though our bridal bed
Be not adorned with roses, twill bee greene,
We shall have Virgin Laurel Cyprus, Ewe,
To make us garlands, though no Pi•…e do burn,
Our nuptial shall have torches, and our chamber
Shall be cut out of marble, where weal sleep
Free from all care for ever: death my Lord
I hope shall be my husband, now farewell▪
Although no kiss, accept my parting tear,
And give me leave to wear my willow here.
Sciarrha! then I prophecy—
Pisano, wheres Pisano?
Here, Sciarrha.
I should have answered with less el•…more.
But I would not lose my voice, I must be heard,
And does concern you, I profess no Ague•…ie,
I have not quarterd out the heavens▪ to take
The flight of birds, nor by inspection
Of entrails made a divination.
But I must tell you, tic not safe to marry.
Why?
Twill be fatal, Hymen is gone abroad,
And Venus, Lady of your nativitoe,
Is found by wise Astrologers this day
In the house of death.
This must not fright me sir, set forward.
One cold word you are a villain,
I doe not flatter.
I am patient:
This day I consecrate to love, not anger;
Weal meet some other time.
Deride my fury?
Then to thy heart I send my own revenge 
And Amideas.
I am murderd.
Help, murder gentlemen, oh my unhappiness!
Bloody Sciarrha.
Hold.
Come all at once,
Yet let me tell you, my revenge is perfect,
And I would spare your blood, if you despise
My charity—
No man attempt his death,
Isle give yea reasons, this attempt deserves
An exemplary justice.
I am above
Your politic reach, and glory in the wound
That punished our dishonour: is he dead?
I would not be so miserable, not to ha sped him
For the Empire.
Oh my friend, poor Oriana.
Disarm him:
Return and comfort one another, some 
Remove Pisanos body, while I make it
My care Sciarrha scope not.
None of all give me a scrach?
You have forced him with discretion.
Now what must I expect?
You are my prisoner.
J am so.
And be confident to find that favour.
Favour.
Be at distance, more
My Lord, J am sorry for your great misfortune
And if you can but study how I may
Assist you, you shall soon discern my love
My readiness to serve you.
Ha, this honest?
I would deserve your faith,
A friend but in affliction justify
His heart and honour, I durst run some hazard,
Might I secure your fate, name something to me
That may declare my friendship.
Be still safe,
And teach the world repentance, for mistaking thee
I pity not my self, but envy thy Heroic honours.
I will impose no more
Restraint, then your own house, you're honourable:
You have many severe enemies, the Duke
Looked graciously upon Pisano, but—.
You shanot loose the smallest beam of favour,
To buy a man so desperate, I never
Thought death the monster, that weak men have fancied,
As foil to make us more in love with life,
The Devils picture may affright poor fowls
Into their bodies paleness, but the substance
Too resolute: man's a shadow, and cold sweat
Dare not approach his forehead, I am armed
To die, and give example of that fortitude
Shall shame the Laws severity: my sister
May now give back Pisano his false vows,
To line his coffin, one tear shed on mee's
Enough, the justice I ha done, shall make
My memory beloved.
I ha thought a way.
To recover you, if you incline too't,
Dare you consent?
To any thing that's noble,
Although I never feared to suffer; I
Am not so foolish to despise a life.
There is no difficulty attends it, listen▪
The time will not permit much circumstance:
The Duke you know did love your sister.
Viciously.
Her Virtue did but cool him for the present,
As sprinklings on a flame, hoe's now more passionate▪
To enjoy her.
Ha?
If she consent to meet
His soft embrace, with his first kiss, he seals
Your pardon, then the act upon Pisano
Appears a true revenge, when none dares question it:
Beside addition of state and fortune,
To you and Amid, weigh your danger,
And what a trifle she gives up, to save
Your life, that never can be valued,
Less recompensed; the Duke may be so taken
With her return to his delight, who knows
But he may marry her, and discharge his Duchess
With a quaint sallet, you doe apprehend me.
And repent more, I had one good thought of thee,
Then I had kilt a thousand: save my life
And prostitute my sister, though I have
No weapon, I will look thee dead, or breath
A damp shall stifle thee, that I could vomit
Consuming flames, or stones like Aetna, make
The earth with motion of my feet shrink lower,
And take thee in alive, oh that my voice
Could call a Serpent from corrupted Nile,
To make thee part of her accursed bowels,
Is this noble friendship? readiness
To save my life? let malice read all stories
Famous for cruelty, awake dead Tyrants,
Or be instructed by their ghosts with tortures,
Such as will make a damned fury weep
Only to see inflicted, I would beare'em,
And weary my tormentors, ere consent
In thought to thy temptation.
I ha done,
And praise your heathen resolution
Of death, go practice immortality,
And tell us when you can get leave to visit
This world again, what fine things you enjoy
In hell, for thither these rash passions drive thee,
And ere thy body hath three days inhabited,
A melancholy chamber in the earth,
Hung round about with skulls and dead men's bones,
Ere Amid have told all her tears
Upon thy Marble, or the Epitaph
Belie thy soul, by saying it is fled
To Heaven: this Sister shall be ravished,
Maugre thy dust and Heraldry.
Ha, ravished?
When I am d•…ad, was it not so? oh my soul,
I feel it weep within me, and the tears
Soften my flesh: Lorenzo, I repent my fury.
I advised you the best way my wisdom could direct.
I thank you for it,
You have awaked my reason, I am ashamed
I was no sooner sensible: does the Duke
Affect my Sister still say you?
Most passionately.
She shall obey him then, upon my life:
Thats it, my life; I know she loves me dearly.
I shall have much ado to win her too't,
But she shall come, Isle send her.
Perform this?
I wonot only send her, but prepared
Not to be disobedient to his Highness:
He shall command her any thing.
Doe this,
And be for ever happy, when these have
Only for form but waited on you home:
This disingages'em.
My humblest service
To the Duke I pray, and tell him, Amid
This night shall be at his dispose, by this.
I'm confident, farewell; attend Sciarrha.
Pity the Sea-man, that to avoid a shelf,
Must strike upon a rock to save himself.
THe doors are fast,
Enough is wept already for Pisano:
Theres something else that must be thought on, and
Of greater consequence: I am yet unsafe,
That for thy sake am guilty of his blood.
Though all my stock of tears were spent already
Upon Pisanoes loss, and that my brain
Were banquerout of moisture, and denied
To lend my grief one drop more for his Funeral;
Yet the remembrance that you have made
A forfeit of your dear life
Is able to create a weeping spring
Within my barren head: oh my lost brother,
Thou hast a cruel destiny, my eyes
In pity of thy fate desire to drown thee.
The Law will only seek thee upon land,
Hid in my tears, thou shalt prevent the stroke
Kills both our name and thee.
I know thou love me
Poor Girl. I shall desire to cherish life
If thou lament me thus: so rich a comfort
Will tempt me, wish I might delay my journey
To Heaven.
Good Heaven that we might go together.
That must not be.
Then let me go before.
How?
Make my suite unto the Prince, my blood
May be your ransom; let me die, Sciarrha
My life is fruitless unto all the world,
The Duke in justice will not deny this:
And though I weep in telling thee, I shall
Smile on the Scaffold.
How my Honour blushes
To hear thee Amid? in this love
Thou woundst me more, then thou desire to save:
Suffer for me? why thou art innocent:
I have provoked the punishment, and dare
Obey it manly; if thou could redeem me
With any thing but death, I think I should
Consent to live, but I'd not have thee venture
All at one chance.
Nothing can be too precious
To save a brother, such a loving brother
As you have been.
Death's a devouring gamester,
And sweeps up all: what think thou of an eye?
Could thou spare one, and think the blemish r•…cōpenc'd,
To see me safe with tother; or a hand,
This white hand, that hath so often
With admiration trembled on the Lu•…e,
Till we have prayed thee leave the strings awhile,
A•…d laid our ears close to thy Ivory fingers,
Suspecting all the Harmony proceeded
From their own motion, without the need
Of any dull or passive instrument.
No Amid, shalt not bear one scarre
To buy my life: the sickle shall not touch
A flower that grows so fair upon his stalk:
Thy tother hand will miss a white companion,
And wither on thy arm; what then can I
Expect from thee to save me? I would live
And owe my life to thee, so it were not bought
Too dear.
Doe you believe I should not find
The way to Heaven: were both mine eyes thy ransom,
I shall clime up those high and rugged 〈◊〉
Without a hand.
One way there is▪ if thou
Doest love wit•… that tenderness.
Pronounce it,
And let no danger that attends, incline you
To make a pause.
The Duke thou know did love thee.
Hi?
Nay doe not start already, nor mistake me;
I doe not as before, make tria•…l of thee,
Whether thou can, laying aside thy honour,
Meet his lascivious arms but by this virtue
I must beseech thee to for go it all,
And turn a sinful woman.
Bless me!
I know the kingdoms of the world contain not
Riches enough to tempt thee to a fall
That will so much undo thee: but I am
Thy brother, dying brother; if thou love
Him therefore, that for thee hath done so much;
Died his pale hands in blood to revenge thee,
And in that murder wounded his own soul
Almost to death, consent to loose thy innocence▪
I know it makes thee grieve, but I shall live
To love thee better for it: wee 〈◊〉 repent
Together for ou•… sins, and pray and weep
Till Heaven hath pardoned all.
Oh never, never.
Doe but repeat thy words, to save my life,
And t•…at will teach com•…occasion: my 〈◊〉,
Our shame, the stain of all our family,
Which wi•…l succeed in my ignoble death▪
Thou wish off.
But stain my self for ever.
Where? in thy •…ace, who shall behold one blemish,
Or one •…ot more in thy whole frame, thy beauty
Will be the very same, thy speech, thy person
Wear no deformity.
Oh doe not speak
So like a rebel to all modesty,
To all Religion, if these arguments
Spring from your jealousy that I am fallen,
After a proof you did so late applaud.
I had not killed Pis•…no then: I am now
More spotted then the Marble, then my head
Did owe no forfeiture to Law:
It does ache now, then I but tried thy virtue.
Now my condition calls for mercy to thee,
Though to thy self thou appear cruel for it:
Come we may live both if you please.
I must never
Buy my poor breath at such a rate, who has
Made you afraid to die: I pity you,
And wish my self in any noble cause
Your Leader, when our souls shall leave this dwelling,
The glory of one fair, and virtuous action
Is above all the scutcheons on our •…ombe,
Or silken bann•…rs over us.
So valiant,
J will not interpose another syllable
To entreat your pity say your prayers, and then
Thar't ripe to be translated from the earth,
To make a Cherubine.
What means my brother?
To kill you.
Doe not fright me good Sciarrha.
And I allow three minutes for your devotion.
Will you murder me?
Do ye tremble?
Not at the terror of your sword,
But at the horror will affright thy soul,
For this black deed: J see Pisanos blood
Is texted in thy forehead, and thy hands
Retain too many, too many crimson spots already
Make not thy self, by •…urthering of thy •…ester
All a red letter,
You shall be the martyr.
Yetstay, is there no remedy but death,
And from your hand? then keep your word, &amp; let me
Use one short prayer.
J shall relent▪
Forgive me heaven, and, witn•…sse J have •…till 
My Virgin thoughts, tic not to •…ave my life,
But his eternal one.
Sciarrha give me leave to veil my face, 
J dare not look upon you and pronounce,
J am too much a sister, live, hereafter
I know you will condemn my frailty for it.
I will obey the Duke.
Dare thou consent.
Oh let me see the wound 
Tic well, if any other hand had done it:
Some Angel tell my brother now, I did
But seem consenting.
Ha b•…t seem?
You may believe my last breath.
Why did say so?
To gain some time, in hope you might call in
Your bloody purpose, and prevent the guilt
Of being my murderer; but Heaven forgive thee.
Again, again, forgive me Amid,
And pray for me, live but a little longer,
To hear me speak, my passion hath betrayed
Thee to this wound, for which I know not whether
I should rejoice, or weep, since thou art virtuous:
The Duke, whose soul is black again, expects thee
To be his whore: good Death be not so hasty.
The Agent for his lust, Lorenzo, has
My Oath to send thee to his bed: for otherwise
In my denial, hell; and they decree
When I am dead, to ravish thee: mark that,
To ravish thee: and I confess in tears,
As full of sorrow, as thy soul of innocence,
In my religious care to have thee spotless,
I did resolve, when I had found thee ripe,
And nearest Heaven, with all thy best desires
To send thee to thy peace: thy faind consent
Hath brought thy happiness more early to thee,
And saved some guilt, forgive me altogether.
With the same heart I beg Heaven for my self,
Farewell.
Thou shalt not die yet Amid Sister.
I cannot come:
But one word more: oh which way went thy soul?
Or is it gone so far it cannot hear me?
Look, here's our Sister! so, so, chafe her:
She may return; there is some motion.
Sister?
Speak aloud Florio, if her spirit be not
Departed, I will seal this passage up:
I feel her breath again, here is Florio
Would fine take his leave; so, so, she comes.
Amid, how came this wound?
I drew the weapon to it:
Heaven knows my brother loved me: now I hope
The Duke wo'not pursue me with new flames.
Sciarrha, tell the rest, love one another
The time you live together: Isle pray for you
In Heaven, farewell, kiss me when I am dead;
You else will stay my journey.
Did not hear
An Angel call her? Florio, I have much
To tell thee, take her up; stay I will talk
A little more with her, she is not dead,
Let her alone; nay then shoe's gone indeed.
But hereabouts her soul must hover still:
Lets speak to that, fair Spirit.
You talk idly.
Doe you talk wisely then? an excellent pattern
As she now stands for her own Alabaster:
Or may she not be kept from putrefaction,
And be the very figure on her Tomb:
Cannot thy tears and mine preserve her Florio?
If we want brine, a thousand Virgins shall
Weep every day upon her, and themselves
In Winter, leaning round about her Monument,
Being moist creatures, stiffen with the cold,
And freeze into so many white supporters.
But we loose time, I charge thee by thy lo
To this pale Relic, be instructed by me,
Not to thy danger; some revenge must be,
And I am lost already; if thou fall,
Who shall survive to give us Funeral?
Petruchio?
My Lord.
You are now my servant.
I ever was in heart your humblest vass•…ll.
You are faithful, I must cherish thy desert,
I shortly shall reward it, very shortly;
Next morning must salute me Duke; the Sun
And I must rise together.
I shall pray
Your glory may out-shine him in your Florence,
Apd when he sets, we may enjoy your Sun-beame.
Tic handsome flattery, and becomes a Courtier▪
J flatter not my Lord.
Then you are a fool:
No Music to a Great man chimes so sweetly:
And men must thrive, come hither, how many
Hast thou killed?
But one my Lord.
But one?
And J must owe
My life to your Lordship, I had been hanged else.
But one? waite at the door, he is
Not fit to kill a Duke, whose hand is guilty
But of a single murder; or at least
Not fit alone to act it: J ha been
Practised already, and though no man see it,
Nor scarce the eye of Heaven, yet every day
I kill a Prince, appear thou Tragic witness.
Which though it bleed not, I may boast a Murder:
Here first the Duke was painted to the life:
But with this Pencil to the death: I love
My brain for the invention, and thus
Confirmed, dare trust my resolution.
I did suspect his youth, and beauty might
Win some compassion when J came to kill him:
Or the remembrance that he is my Kinsman,
Might thrill my blood: or something in his Title,
Might give my hand repulse, and startle Nature:
But thus J have armed my self against all pity,
That when J come to strike, my Poniard may
Through all his charms as confidently wound him,
As thus J stab his Picture, and stare on it.
Me thinks the Duke should feel me now: is not
His soul acquainted; can he less then tremble
When J lift up my arm to wound his counterfeit?
Witches can persecute the lives of whom
They hate, when they torment their senseless figures,
And stick the waxen model full of pins.
Can any stroke of mine carry less spell
To wound his heart, sent with as great a malice?
He smiles, he smiles upon me: J will dig
Thy wanton eyes out, and supply the dark
And hollow Cells with two pitch burning Tapers:
Then place thee Porter in some Charnel house
To light the Coffins in.
My Lord.
The Duke's not come already.
Signior Florio desires to speak with you.
This must retire again into my Closet: admit him. 
Welcome, how does Sciarrha?
He commends
His service to your Lordship, and hath sent—
His Sister?
Much ado he had to effect it:
He hopes his Grace will quickly sign his pardon.
It shall be done.
I have a suite my Lord.
To me?
My Sister would entreat your Honour
She may be admitted privately▪ and that
I may have privilege to prepare her chamber:
She does retain some modesty, and wo'd not▪
Trust every servant with her shame: their eyes
Are apt to instruct their tongues.
I wonot see her my self, command what you desire.
You're gracious.
Isle give directions instantly: poor Lady,
This is the Dukes hot blood, but Heaven convert him,
Follow me good Florio.
I attend my Lord.
Things shall be carried honourably.
We are all bound to you.
This is a sad employment.
The last wee're shall doe my Lady.
So, now you may return, it will become
Your modest duties, not to enquire the reason
Of this strange service, nor to publish what
You've bin commanded; let me look upon 
My sister now, still she retains her beauty,
Death has been kind to leave her all this sweetness.
Thus in a morning have I oft saluted
My sister in her chamber, sate upon
Her bed, and talked of many harmless passages,
But now tic night, and a long night with her,
Ineere shall see these Curtains drawn again
Until wee meet in heaven. The Duke already.
May I believe?
Trust me my Lord 〈◊〉.
Call me no more thy Lord, but thy companion
I will not wear that honour in my title,
Shall not be thine. Whoe's that?
Her brother Florio.
She is a bed.
The readier for your pastime.
She means no make a night on it.
This shall declare thee to posterity
The best of Sisters—what of that? and is not
A brothers life more precious then a trifle?
I prithee doe not sigh: how many Ladies
Would be ambitious of thy place to night?
And thank his Highness? yes, and Virgins too.
He pleads for me.
He will deserve some office about your person.
With what words shall I express my joy?
I leave you sir to action, Florio
Is soon dismissed.
Hoe's come: good-night—
Florio?
Your Slave.
My friend! thou shall•… be near our bosom.
Pleasures crown your expectation.
All perfect, till this minute, I could never
Boast I was happy: all this world has not
A blessing to exchange, this world? tic Heaven;
And thus I take possession of my Saint:
Asleep already? it were great pity to
Disturb her dream, yet if her soul be not
Tired with the bodies weight, it must convey
Into her slumbers I waite here, and thus
Seal my devotion—what winter dwells 
Upon this lip? two's no warm kiss, Isle try
Again—the snow is not so cold, I have
Drunk ice, and feel a numbness spread through
My blood at once—ha? let me examine
A little better; Amid, she is dead, she is dead!
What horror doth invade me? help Lorenzo;
Murder, where is Lorenzo?
Here my Lord.
Some Traitor hid within the chamber, see
My Amidea's dead.
Dead? tic impossible,
Y•…, sh'as a wound upon her breast.
I prithee kill me: 
Ha wilt thou murder me, Lorenzo, villain?
Oh spare me to consider, I would live
A little longer: Treason.
A little longer say•…ee
It was my duty to obey you sir.
Lets make him sure my Lord.
What would you say? no cares but ours
Can reach his voice, but be not tedious.
Oh spare me, I may live and pardon thee:
Thy Prince begs mercy from thee, that did never
Deny thee any thing; pity my poor so•…le,
I have not prayed.
I could have wished you better
Prepared, but let your soul e'entake his chance.
No tear prevail? oh whither must wander
Thus Caesar fell by Brutus. I shall tell
News to the world I go to, will not bee
Beleevd, Lorenzo kilt me.
Will it not?
Isle presently put in security.
I am coming Amid, I am coming
For thee inhumane murderer, expect
My blood shall fly to heaven, and there inflamed,
Hang a prodigious meteor all thy life.
And when by some as bloody hand as thine
Thy soul is ebbing forth, it shall descend
In flaming drops upon thee: oh I faint!
Thou flattering world farewell: let Princes gather
My dust into a glass, and learn to spend
Their hour of state, that's all they have; for when
Thats out, times never turns the glass again.
So lay him beside his mistress, hide their faces,
The Duke dismissed the train came with him.
He did my Lord.
Run to Sciarrha, pray him come, and speak wo'mee,
Secure his passage to this Chamber, haste, 
Hoe's dead; Isle trust him now, and his ghost too;
Fools start at shadows, I'm in love with night
And her complexion.
My Lord, hoe's come without your summons.
Already? leave us.
Welcome, let embraces
Chain us together, noble Florio welcome:
But I must honour thy great soul.
Wheres the Duke?
They are a bed together.
Ha?
Hoe's not stirring yet:
Thou kildst thy sister, did not?
I preserved her.
So it was bravely done.
But wheres the wanton Duke?
A sleep I tell you.
And hee shall sleep eternally.
You cannot wake him, look you.
Is he dead?
And in his death we two begin our life
Of gr•…tnesse, and of Empire, nay hoe's dead.
That labour's saved.
Now I pronounce Sciarrha,
Thy pardon, and to recompense thy loss,
The share of Florence, Isle but wear the title,
The power weal divide.
I like this well:
You told a tale once of a common wealth
And liberty.
It was to gain a faction
With discontented persons, a fine trick
To make a buzz of reformation.
My ends are compased: hang the ribble rabble.
Shall wee sweat for the people? loose our breath
To get their fame?
Isle have it given out
The Duke did kill thy sister.
Excellent.
Havingfirst ravished her, he cannot bee
Too hateful; it will dull the examination
Of his own death, or if that come to question—
What if I say, I kilt him in revenge
Of Amid? they will pity me.
Beside, 'twil be in your power to pardon
Me altogether.
Most discreetly thought on.
The Devil wonot leave us of the sudden.
Rare wit:
How hastily hee climbs the the precipice,
From whence one Fillup topples him to ruin:
Wee two shall live like brothers.
stay wee two—now I consider better,
I have no mind to live at all—&amp; you shanot,
Isle give you proof, if you but make a noise,
You gallop to the Devil.
I'm betrayed.
To death inevitable, brother be you
Spectator only.
This is somewhat noble.
Thank me not Lorenzo, Isle not engage
His innocence to blood, thy hands are white,
Preserve i'm Florio, and unless my arm•…
Grow feeble, doe not interpose thy sword
I charǵe thee.
None to assist me? help Petruchio, help.
Reach thy jaws wider villain, cry out murder,
Treason, any thing; hold—oh.
Will you not fall Colossus?
Are not you hurt?
I know not. Ha? yes he has pricked me somewhere
But Isle make sure of him; now must I follow:
Isle fight with him in the tother world—thy hand,
Florio. Farewell.
Hes dead too: tic in vain for me to fly
Within Break open the doors▪
You shanot need.
Disarm him.
Lorenzo, and Sciarrha slain?
Where is the Duke?
Look here my Lords.
What Traitor?
See Amid murderd too.
I tremble, here is a heap of Tragedies.
Wee must have an account from Florio.
He can inform you best that brought you hither.
Lay hands upon Petruchio, disarm him.
What blood is that upon his sword? tic fresh.
I'm caught.
To tortures with him.
Spare your fury▪ know
It was the best blood in Florence, I must quit
Young Florio; Lorenzo, and my self,
Are only guilty of the princes death.
Inhumane traitors?
But who kilt Amid?
The Dukes lust:
There was no other way to save her honour,
My brother has revenged it here, but fate,
Denied him triumph.
I never heard
Such killing stories, but tic meet, wee first
Settle the state, Cos•…o you are the next
Of blood to challenge Florence.
Pray defer
That till the morning, drag that murderer
To prison: Florio, you must not expect
Your liberty, till all things be exam'nd.
Lorenzo, now I am above thy malice,
And will make satisfaction to Oriana.
Tic a sad night my Lords, by these you see
There is no stay in proud mortality.

IT is the saying of that great and wise Philoso∣pher
Heraclitus; That all things are created
in manner of a contention, or battle. His
words are these, Omnia secundùm litem
fiunt. A Sentence in my opinion, worthy per∣petuall
memory; and, for that most certain it
is, that every word of a wise man, is pregnant, and full; of this it may
be said, that through too much fullness it is ready to burst, shooting
forth such spreading, and well-growne boughs and leaves, that out of
the smallest Sucker, or least Sprig thereof, fruit enough may be ga∣thered
by men of discretion and judgment. But because my poor
understanding is not able to doe anymore, then to nibble on the dry
bark and rugged rind of the wise sayings of those, who for the clear∣ness
and excellence of their wits, deserved to be approved; with that
little which I shall pluck from thence, I will satisfy the intent and
purpose of this short Prologue. This Sentence did I find to be streng∣thened
by that great Orator, and Poet Lauriat Francisco Petrar∣ca,
who tells vs, Sine lite at{que} offensione nihil genuit nature
parens: That Nature, who is the mother of all things, engendered
nothing without strife and contention. Furthermore saying, Sic
est enim, &amp; sic propemodun vniuersa testantur; Rapido
stellae obuiant firmamento; Contrary inuicem Element
confligunt; Tarry tremunt; Mariafluctuant; Aër quati
tur; Crepant flame; Bellum immortal vent gerunt;
Tempora temporibus concertant; secum, singula; Nobis∣cum
omnia. Which is as much to say; Indeed so it is, and so
all things almost in the world doe witness as much. The Stars
encounter one another in the a hirling firmament of heaven; your
contrary Elements wage war each with other; the earth, that
trembles and quakes, as if it were at odds with it self; the Sea,
that swells and rages, breaking it's billows one against another; the
Ayre, that darts arrows of lightning, and is moved this way and
that way; the flames, they crack, and sparkle forth their fury;
the winds are at perpetual enmity with themselves; times with
times doe contend; one thing against another, and all against vs.
We see, that the Summer makes vs complain of too much heate;
and the Winter, of cold and sharpness of weather. So that this,
which seems unto vs a temporal revolution; this, by which we
are bred up, and nourished, and live, if it once begin to pass
aboue it's proportion, and to grow to a greater height then usual,
it is no better then open war. And how much it ought to bee
feared, is manifested by those great earth-quakes and whirl∣winds,
by those ship-wrackes and fires, as well in the ayre, as the
earth; by the source of water-courses, and violence of inundate∣once,
by those courses, and resources, those rackings to and fro of
the Clouds, of whose open motions, to know the secret cause from
whence they proceed, no less is the dissention of the Philosophers
in the schools, then of the waives of the Sea. Besides, among your
bruit beasts, there is not any one of them that wants his war;
be they Fishes, Birds, Beasts, or Serpents; whereof, every kind
persecuteth, and pursues one another: The Lyon, hee pursues the
Wolf; the Wolf the Kid; the Dog the Hare. And if it might
not be thought a Able, or old wives tale, sitting by the fire side, I
should more fully enlarge this Theme. The Elephant, that is so
powerful and strong a beast, is afraid, and flies from the sight of a
poor silly Mouse; and no sooner hears him coming, but hee
quakes and trembles for fear. Amongst Serpents, Nature cry∣ted
the Basilisk, so venomous and poysonfull, and gave him such a
predominant power over all the rest, that only with his hissing, he
doth affright them; with his coming, put them to flight, and dis∣perseth
some one way, some another, and with his sight, kills and
murders them. The Viper, a crawling creature, and venomous
Serpent, at the time of engendering, the Male puts his head into the
mouth of the Female, and she through the great delight, and sweet∣ness
of her pleasure, strains him so hard, that she kills him. And
conceiving her young, the eldest, or first of her brood, breaks the
bars of his mothers belly, eats out his way thorough her bowels,
at which place all the rest issue forth; whereof she dies; hee doing
this, as a revenger of his fathers death. What greater conflict, what
greater contention or war can there be, then to conceive that in
her body, which shall eat out her Entrails? Again, no less natu∣rall
dissention can we suppose to be amongst fishes; for most certain
it is, that the Sea doth contain as many several sorts of fishes, as the
earth and ayre do nourish bords and beasts; and much more. Aristo∣tle
and Pliny doe recount wonders of a little fish called Each∣neis;
how apt his nature is, and how prone his property for di∣•ers
kinds of contentions, especially this one; that if hee cling to a
shiper Carrack, he will detain and stop her in her course, though she
have the wind in the poop of her, and cut the Seas with never so
stiff a gale. Whereof Lucan makes mention, saying,
Non puppim retinens, Euro tendente rudentes,
In medijs Aecheneis aquis.
Nor Aecheneis, whose strength, though Eurus rise,
Can stay the course of ships.
O natural contention! worthy of admiration, that a little fish
should be able to doe more then a great ship, with all the force and
strength of the winds. Moreover, if we will discourse of birds, and of
their frequent enmities, we may truly affirm, that all things are cre∣ated
in a kind of contention. Your greater live of rapine, as Eagles
and Hawks; and your craven Kites press upon our Pullen, insulting
over them even in our own houses, and offering to take them even from
under the Hens wings. Of a bird called Roque, which is bred in the
East Indian Sea, it is said to be of an incredible greatness, that the
like hath never bin heard of; and that with her beak, she will hoise
up into the ayre, not only one man, or ten, but a whole ship laden with
men and merchandise; and how that these miserable passengers,
hanging thus in suspense in the ayre, till her wings wax weary, she
lets them fall, and so they receive their deaths. But what shall we say
of men, to whom all the foresaid creatures are subject? Who can ex∣press
their wars, their iars, their enmities, their envies, their heats,
their broils, their brawls, and their discontentments? That
change and alteration of fashions in their apparel? That pulling
down and building up of houses? and many other sundry effects
and varieties; all of them proceeding from the feeble and weak
condition of mans variable nature? And because it is an old and an∣cient
complaint, and used heretofore time out of mind; I will not
much marvel, if this present work shall prove an instrument of war
to its Readers, putting strifes and differences amongst them, every one
giving his verdict and opinion thereupon, according to the humour
of his own will. Some perhaps may say that it is too long; some too
short; others to be sweet and pleasant; and other some to be dark
and obscure: So that to cut it out to the measure of so many, and such
different dispositions, is only appropriate to God; Especially, since
that it, together with all other things, whatsoever are in this
world, march under the standard of this noble Sentence; For even
the very life of men, if we consider them from their first and tendeer
age, till they grow gray-headed, is nothing else but a battle. Children
with their sports, boys with their books, young men with their plea∣sures,
old men with a thousand sorts of infirmities, skirmish and
war continually: and these Papers, with all ages. The first blots
and tears them; the second knows not well how to read them; the
third (which is the cheerful livelihood of youth, and set all upon
jollity) doth utterly dislike of them. Some gnaw only the bones, but
do not pick out the marrow, saying there is no goodness in it; that it
is a History, huddled, I know not how, together, a kind of hodgepode,
or gallimaufrey; not profiting themselves out of the particular∣ties,
accounting it a fable, or old wives tale, fitting for nothing, save
only for to pass away the time upon the way. Others call out the wit∣tie
conceits, and common proverbs, highly commending them, but
slighting and neglecting that which makes more to the pur∣pose,
and their profit. But they for whose true pleasure it is wholly
framed, reject the story it self, as a vain and idle subject, and ga∣there
out the pith and marrow of the matter for their own good and
benefit, and laugh at those things that savour only of wit, and plea∣sant
conceit, storing up in their memory, the sentences and say∣ings
of Philosophers, that they may transpose them into such fit ply∣ces,
as may make, upon occasion, for their own use and purpose.
So that when ten men shall meet together to hear this Comedy, in
whom perhaps shall happen this difference of dispositions, as it vsu∣ally
falls out; who will deny, but that there is a contention in that
thing which is so diversely understood? the Printers, they likewise
have bestowed their puncture, putting Titles, and adding Arguments
to the beginning of every Act; delivering in brief, what is more
largely contained therein; a thing very excusable, in former times
being much used, and in great request with your ancient Writers;
others have contended about the name, saying, that it ought not to
be called a Comedy, because it ends in sorrow and mourning, but ra∣there
termed a Tragedy. The Author himself would have it take
it's denomination from it's beginning, which treats of pleasure, and
therefore called it a Comedy. So that I seeing these differences, between
their extremes have parted this quarrel, by dividing it in the midst,
and call it a Tragick-Comedy. So that observing these contentions,
these disagreements, these dissonant and various judgements, I had
an eye, to mark whither the mayor part inclined, and found that
they were all desirous, that I should enlarge my self in the pursuit
of the delight of these Lovers; whereunto, I have been earnestly im∣portuned;
in so much, that I have consented (though against my
will) to put now the second time my Pen to this so strange a task,
and so far estranged from my faculty, stealing some hours from my
principal studies, together with others allotted to my recreation,
though I know, I shall not want new Detractors for my new
Edition.
GALISTO, who was of Linage Noble, of
Wit Singular, of Disposition Gentle, of
Behaviour Sweet, with many graceful
qualities richly endowed, and of a com∣petent
estate; fell in love with Melibea, of
years young, of blood Noble, of estate Great, and only
daughter and heir to her father Pleberio, and to her mo∣there
Alice; of both exceedingly beloved. Whose chaste pur∣pose
conquered by the hot pursuit of amorous Calisto,
Celestine interposing her self in the business, a wicked and
crafty woman, and together with her two deluded servants
of subdued Calisto, and by her wrought to be disloiall, their
fidelity being taken with the hook of covetousness and
pleasure; Those Lovers came, and those that served them,
to a wretched and unfortunate end. For entrance whereun∣to,
adverse fortune afforded a fit and opportune place,
where, to the presence of Calisto, the desired Melibea presen∣ted
her self.
CAlisto entering into a garden after his usual 〈◊〉, met there with
Melibea, with whose love being caught, he began to court 〈◊〉 by whom
being sharply checked and dismissed, he gets him home, being much troubled and
grieved: be consults his servant Sempronio, who after much intercourse of 〈…〉
till Sempronio and Celestina 〈…〉. Parmeno
was known by Celestina, who tells him of the good against 〈◊〉 which she
had of his mother, and many matters that had past between them; inducing
him in the end to love and concord with Sempronio.
In this, Melibea, I see heavens greatness, and goodness.
In what, Calisto?
Greatness, in giving such power to nature, as to endow
thee with so perfect a beauty; goodness, in affoording me so great
a favour as thy fair presence, and a place so convenient to unsheathe
my secret grief; A grace undoubtedly so incomparable, and by ma∣ny
degrees fargreater than any service I have performed can merit
•omaboue. What inhabitant here below ever saw a more glorious
creature then I behold? Certainly, if sublunary bodies can give a ce∣lestiall
reflection or resemblance, I contemplate and find it in thy di∣vine
beauty: had it perpetuity, what happiness beyond it? Yet wretch
that I am, I must live like another Tantalus; see what I may not en∣joy,
not touch; and my comfort must be the thinking of thy disdain∣ness,
thy pleasing coyness, and the torment which thy absence will
inflict upon me.
Hold thou this, Calisto, so great a reward?
So great, that if you should give me the greatest good
upon earth, I should not hold it so great a happiness.
I shall give thee a reward answerable to thy deserts, if
thou persevere and go on in this manner.
O fortunate ears! which are (though unworthily) admitted
to hear so gracious a word, such great and comfortable tidings.
But unfortunate, by that time thou hast heard thy
doom. For thy payment shall be as foul, as thy presumption was
foolish, and thy entertainment • small, at thy intrusion was great.
How durst such a one as thou hazard thy self on the virtue of such
a one as I? Go wretch, be gone out of my sight, for my patience
cannot endure, that so much as a thought should enter into any mans
heart, to communicate his mind unto me in illicite love.
I go; but as one, who am the only unhappy mark, a∣gain
whom adverse fortune the extremity of her hate.
〈…〉 I say, Where is this accursed
〈◊〉
〈…〉
Is'te'en so? Now the devil take thee; misfortune waite
on thy heals to thy destruction; mischief light upon thee;
let some perpetual intolerable torment sey•e upon thee in so
high a degree, that it may be beyond all comparison, till it bring
thee (which shortly I hope to see) to a most painful, miserable and
disastrous death. Go, thou unlucky rogue, go I say, and open the
chamber door, and make ready my bed.
Presently Sir, the bed is ready for you.
Shut the windows, and leave darkness to accompany
him, whose sad thoughts deserve no light. Oh death! how well∣come
art thou, to those who out-liue their happiness? how well∣come,
would thou but come when thou art called? O that Hypo∣crates
and Galen, those learned Physicians were now living, and both
here, and felt my pain! O heaven, if ye have any pity in you,
inspire that Pleberian heart therewith, lest that my soul, helpless
of hope, should fall into the like misfortune with Pyrramus &amp; Thisbe.
What a thing is this? What's the matter with you?
Away, get thee gone, doe not speak to me unless thou
wilt, that these my hands, before thy time be come, cut off thy
days by speedy death.
Since you will lament all alone, and have none to share
with you in your sorrows, I will be gone, Sir.
Now the devil go with thee.
With me Sir? there is no reason that he should go with
me, who stays with you. O unfortunate, O sudden and unexpected
ill; what contrary accident, what squint-ey'd ••am is it that
hath robbed this Gentleman of his wonted mirth? and not of that
alone, but of it (which is worse) his wits. Shall I leave him all a∣lone?
or shall I go in to him? If I leave him alone, he will kill him∣self.
If I go in, he will kill me. Let him bide alone, and bite upon
the bit, come what will, come I care not. Better it is that hee dye,
whose life is hateful unto him, then that I dye, when life is pleasing
unto me, and say that I should not desire to live, save only to see
my Elicia, that alone is motive enough to make me look to my
self, and guard my person from dangers: but admit he should kill
himself without any other witness, then must I be bound to give
account of his life. Well, I will in for that, but put case when I come
in, he will take neither comfort nor counsel: mary his case is des∣pirate,
for it is a shrewd sign of death, not to be willing to be cu∣red.
Well, I wi•l let him alone a while, and give his humour leave
to work out it self; I will forbear, till his angry fit be ouer-past,
and that his hat be come again to his colour. For I have heard say,
that it is dangerous to lance or crush an Impostume before it bee
ri•e, for then it will 〈◊〉 the more: Let him alone a while, let vs
suffer him to weep who suffers to sorrow, for tears and sighs doe
ease the heart that is surcharded with grief; but then again, if he
see me in sight, I shall see him more incensed against me: For
there the sun scorches most, where he reflected most: the sight
which hath no object set before it, waxes weary-and dull, and ha∣uing
its object, is as quick. And therefore I think it my best play,
to play least in sight, and to stay a little longer; but if in the mean
while he should kill himself, then farewell he. Perhaps I may get
more by it then every man is aware of, and cast my skin,
changing rags for robes, and penury for plenty: But it is an old say∣ing,
He that looks after deadmen's shoes, may chance to go
barefoot: Perhaps also the devil hath deceived me. And so his
death may be my death, and then all the fat is in the fire: The rope
will go after the Bucket: and one loss follow another; on the other∣side,
your wise men say, That it is a great ease to a grieved soul,
or one that is afflicted, to have a companion, to whom he may com∣municate
his sorrow. Besides, it is generally received, that the
wound which bleeds inward, is ever the more dangerous. Why
then in these two extremes hang I in suspense what I were best to
doe? Sure, the safest is to enter: and better it is that I should
endure his anger, then for fear of his displeasure to forbear to
comfort him. For, if it be possible to cure without Art, and with∣out
things ready at hand, far easier is it to cure by Art, and wan∣ting
nothing that is necessary.
Sempronio?
Sir.
Reach me that Lute.
Sir, here it is.
Tell me what grief so great can be,
As to equal my misery.
This Lute, Sir, is out of tune.
How shall he tune it, who himself is out of tune? Or how
can thou hear harmony from him, who is at such discord with
himself? Or how can he do any thing well, whose will is not obedi∣ent
to reason? Who harbors in his breast needles, peace, war, truce,
love, hate, injuries and suspicions; And all these at once, and from
one, and the same cause. Doe thou therefore take this Lute unto
thee, and sing me the most doleful ditty thou can devise.
Narrow, from Tarpey, doth behold.
How Rome doth burn all on a flame;
He hears the cries of young and old,
Yet is not grieved at the same.
My fire is far greater, and less her pity whom now I
speak of.
I was not deceived when I said, my Master had lost
his wits.
Whats that (Sempronio) thou muttrest to thy self?
Nothing Sir, not I.
Tell me what thou said▪ Be not afraid.
Marry I said, How can that fire be greater which but tor∣menteth
one living man, then that which burnt such a City as that
was, and such a multitude of men?
How? I shall tell thee. Greater is that flame which lasts
sourescore years, then that which endures but one day. And gre∣la
that fire, which burns one soul, then that which burns an
hundred thousand bodies: See what difference there is betwixt ap∣parencies,
and existences; betwixt painted shadows, and lively
substances, betwixt that which is counterset, and that which is re∣all.
So great a difference is there betwixt that fire which thou spea∣kissed
of, and that which burns me.
I see, I did not mistake my bias; which, for ought I per∣ceiue,
runs worse and worse. Is it not enough to show thy self a
fool, but thou must also speak profanely?
Did not I will tell thee, when thou speak, that thou
shouldest speak aloud? Tell me whats that thou mumblest to thy
self.
Only I doubted of what religion your Lovers are.
I am a Melibean, I adore Melibea, I believe in Melibea,
and I love Melibea.
My Master is all Melibea: who now but Melibea? whose
heart not able to contain her, like a boiling vessel, venting it's
heate, goes bubbling her name in his mouth. Well, I have now as
much as I desire: I know on which foot you halt, I shall not
heal you.
Thou speak of matters beyond the Moon. It is im∣possible.
O Sir▪ exceeding easy; for the first recovery of sickness,
is the discovery of the disease.
What counsel can order that, which in it self hath nei∣there
counsel nor order?
Ha, ha, ha, Calisto's fire; these, his intolerable pains:
As if love had been his bow, shot all his arrows only a∣against
him. Oh Cupped, how high and unsearchable are thy mist∣ries?
What reward hast thou ordained for love, since that so noses∣sary
a tribulation attends on lovers? Thou hast set his bounds, as
marks for men to wonder at: Lovers ever deeming, that they on∣lie
are cast behind; and that others fill out〈◊〉 them: That all
men break thorough, but themselves like your ••light 〈◊〉 bulls,
which being set loose in the place, and ga••ed with 〈◊〉, take over
the 〈◊〉 as soon as they feel themselves 〈◊〉.
〈1 paragraph〉
〈1 paragraph〉
〈1 paragraph〉
〈1 paragraph〉
〈1 paragraph〉
〈1 paragraph〉
〈1 paragraph〉
It is misery enough to have a mans will captivated, and
chained to one place only.
Thou wot not what constancy is.
Perseverance in ill is not constancy, but obstinacy, or
pertinacy, so they call it in my country; how-euer it please you
Philosophers of Cupped to phra•e it.
It is a foul fault for a man to belie that which he teach∣eth
to others: for thou thy self take pleasure in praising thy Elicia.
Do you that good which I say, but not that ill which I do.
Wy dost thou reprove me?
Because thou dost subject the dignity and worthiness of
a man, to the imperfection and weakness of a frail woman.
A woman? O thou blockhead, she's a Goddess.
Are you in earnest, or doe you but jest?
Jest? I verily believe she is a Goddess.
As Goddesses were of old, that is, to fall below morta∣lity,
and then you would hope to have a share in her deity.
A 〈◊〉 on thee for a fool, thou make me laugh, which
I thought not to doe to day.
What, would you weep all the days of your life?
Yes.
And why?
Because I love her, before whom I find my self so un∣worthy,
that I have no hope to obtain her.
O Coward, baser then the son of a whore: why, Alexan∣der
the Great did not only think himself worthy the dominion
of one only, but of many worlds.
I did not well hear what thou said, say it again: re∣peat
it again before thou proceed any further.
I said Sir, Should you, whose heart, is greater then
Alexanders, despair of obtaining a woman? wherefore many, ha∣uing
been seated in highest estate, have balsely prostituted them∣selves
to the embraces of Muleteers, and Stablegroomes, suf∣fering
them to breathe in their faces, with their unsavoury breaths,
and to imbosome them between their breast•▪ And othersome not
ashamed to have companied with bruite-beasts. Have you not
heard of Pasiphae, who played the wanton with a Bull? and of Mi∣nerve,
how she dailled with a dog?
Tusa, I believe it not, they are but fables.
And that of your Grandmother and her Ape, that's a
fable too: Witness your Grandfathers knife, that killed the vile∣lain
that did cuckold him.
A pox of this cocks-combe, what go•• he gives!
Have I •ettled you (Sir?) 〈◊〉 your histories, study
your philosophers, examine your 〈◊〉; and you shall find how
full their books are of their 〈…〉 and of the
ruins and destructions whereinto they have run, who held them
in that high esteem as you doe. Consult with 〈◊〉 and you shall
see how vilely he reckons of them. 〈◊〉 unto 〈◊〉, and you
shall find that all of them to this agree: but whatsoever I have, or
shall hereafter speak in them; mistake me not, I pray you, but
consider them as words, commonly and generally spoken: For
many of them have been, and are holy, virtuous and noble, whose
glorious and resplendent crowns blot out this general re∣proach.
But touching the other, who can recount unto you their
falsehoods, their tricks, their tradings, their truckings, their exchan∣ging
commodities, their lightness, their tears, their mutabilities,
and their boldness and impudencies: For whatsoever they con∣ceit,
they dare to execute without any deliberation, or advisement
in the world; their dissemblings, their talketiuenesse, their deceits,
their forgetfulness, their unkindness, their ingratitude, their in∣constancy,
their sickliness, their saying and gaine-saying, and all
in a breath; their windings and turnings, their presumption, their
vaine-glory, their baseness, their foolishness, their disdainfulnesse,
their coyness, their pride, their haughtiness, their base submissions,
their prattlings, their gluttony, their luxury, their slut•ishnesse, their
timorousness, their witeneries, their cheatings, their gibings, their
slandrings and their bawdry. Now consider with your self, what
idle gyddy-headed brains are under those large and fine cob-web
veils; what wicked thoughts under those gay gorgets; what
pride and arrogance under those their long, rich and stately robes;
what mad toys under their painted Temples.
Tell me, I pray, this Alexander, this Seneca, this Aristotle,
this Virgil, these whom thou tell me of; did not they subject
themselue unto them? Am I greater then these?
I would you should follow those that did subdue them;
not those that were subdued by them. Fly from their deceits.
Know you (Sir) what they doe? They doe things that are too hard
for any man to understand: they observe no mean; they have no
reason; not doe they take any heed in what they doe. They are
the first themselves that cause • man to love: and themselves are
the first that begin to loath. They will privately pleasure him,
whom afterwards they will openly wrong, and draw him secretly
in at their windows, whom in the streets they will publicly rail
at. They will give you roste-meate, and beat you with the spit.
They will inuit you unto them, and presently send you packing
with a flea in your ear; Call you, and yet exclude you; seal you
her love, and yet proclaim hate; quickly be won, and quickly be
lost; soon pleased, and as soon displeased; and (which is the true
humour of a woman) whatsoever her will divines, that must bee
affected. Her apprehensions admit no delays; and bee they
impossible to bee attained to, yet not effecting them, she straight∣way
censures it want of wit or affection, if not both. O what a
plague? what a hell? nay, what a loathsome thing is it for a man to
have to doe with them any longer, then in that short prick of time
that hee holds them in his arms, when they are prepared for plea∣sure!
Thou see the more thou tell me, and the more incon∣ueniences
thou set before me, the more I love her. I know not
how, nor what it is, but sure I am, that so it is.
This is no fit counsel I see for young men, who know not
how to submit themselves to reason, nor to be governed by descry∣tion;
it is a miserable thing, to think that hee should be a Master,
who was never any scholar.
And you Sir, that are so wise, who I pray taught you all
this?
Who? why, they themselves, who no sooner discover their
shame, but they lose it. For all this, and much more then I have
told you, they themselves will manifest unto men. Balance thy
self then aright in the true scale of thine honour, give thy repute∣tion
it's due proportion, it's just measure, and think your self to
be more worthy then in your own esteem you repute your self.
For (believe me) worse is that extreme, whereby a man suffers
himself to fall from his own worth, then that which makes a man
ouer-valew himself, and seat himself in higher place then be∣seem
him.
Now, what of all this? what am I the better for it?
What? why this: First of all, you are a man; then, of an ex∣cellent
and singular wit; To this, endowed with those better sort
of blessings, wherewith Nature hath endowed you, to wit, wise∣dome,
favour, feature, largeness of limbs, force, agility, and
abilities of body. And to these, fortune hath in so good a mea∣sure
shared what is hers with thee, that these thy inward graces, are
by thy outward the more beautified. For, without these outward
goods, whereof fortune is chief Mistress, no man in this life comes
to be happy. Lastly, the stars were so propitious at thy birth,
and thy self borne under so good a Planet, that thou are beloved
of all.
But not of Melibea. And in all that, wherein thou dost
so glorify my gifts, I tell she (Sempronio) compared with Melibea's,
they are but as stars to the Sun; or dross compared to gold.
Doe but consider the nobleness of her blot, the ancientnesse of her
house, the greatestate she is borne unto, the excellence of her wit,
the splendour of her virtues, her stately, yet comely carriage, her
ineffable gracefulness in all that she doth; and lastly, her divine
beauty; whereof (I pray thee) give me leave to discourse a little,
for the refreshing of my soul. And that which I shall tell she, shall
be only of what I have discovered, and lies open to the eye: For,
if I could discourse of that which is concealed, this contestation
would be needless, neither should wee argue thereupon so earnest∣lie
as now wee doe.
What lies and fooleries will my captived Master now
tell me?
What's that?
I said, I would have you tell me: for I shall take great
pleasure in hearing it, so fortune befriend you Sir, as this speech
of yours shall be pleasing unto me.
What say thou?
That fortune would so befriend me, as I shall take plea∣sure
to hear you.
Since then, that it is so pleasing unto thee, I will figure
forth unto thee every part in her, even in the fullest manner that
I can devise.
Heir's a deal of doo indeed: This is that I looked for,
though more then I desired, it will be a tedious piece of business,
but I must give him the hearing.
I will begin first with her hairs; Hast thou seen those
skaynes of fine twisted gold which are spun in Arabia? Her hairs
are more fine, and shine no less then they; the length of them is to
the lowest pitch of her heel, besides, they are daintily combed,
and dressed, and knit up in knots with curious fine ribbaning, as
she her self pleases to adorn and set them forth, being of pow∣er
themselves, without any other help, to transform men into
stones.
Into Asses rather.
What say thou?
I say that these could not bee Asses hairs.
See what a beastly and base comparison this fool makes!
It is well Sir that you are so wise.
Her eyes are quick, clear and full; the hairs to those
lids rather long then short; Her eye-browes thinnish, not thick of
hair, and so prettily arched, that by their bent, they are much
the more beautiful; Her nose of such a middling size, as may not be
mended; Her mouth little; Her teeth small and white; her lips
red and plump; The form of her face rather long then round;
Her breasts placed in a fitting height; but their rising roundness, and
the pretty pleasing fashion of her little tender nipples, who is able
to figure forth unto thee? So distracted is the eye of man when he
does behold them; Her skin as smooth, soft, and sleek as Satin,
and her whole body so white, that the snow seems darkness unto
it; Her colour so mingled, and of so singular a temper, as if she had
chosen it her self.
This fool is fallen into his thirteens. O how hee over∣reaches!
Her hands little, and in a measurable manner, and fit pro∣portion
accompanied with her sweet flesh; Her fingers long; Her
nails large and well coloured; seeming Rubies, intermixed with
pearls. The proportion of those other parts which I could not eye,
undoubtedly (judging things unseen, by the seen) must of force
be incomparably far better then that, which Paris gave his judge∣meant
of in the difference between the three Goddesses.
Have you done, Sir?
As briefly as I could.
Suppose all this you say were true, yet in that you are a
man, I still say, you are more worthy then she.
In what?
In that she is imperfect: Out of which defect, she lusts
and longs after your self, or some one less worthy. Did you
never read that of the Philosopher, where he tells you, That as the
matter desires the form, so woman desires man?
O wretch that I am, when shall I see this between me
and Melibea?
It is possible that you may: and as possible that you may
one day hate her as much as now you love her, when you shall come
to the full enjoying of her, and to looking on her with other eyes,
free from that error which now blinds your judgement.
With what eyes?
With clear eyes.
And with what I pray doe I see now?
With false eyes; Like some kind of spectacles, which
make little things seem great; and great little. Doe not you des∣pair;
my self will take this business in hand, not doubting but to
accomplish your desire.
Jove grant thou majesty: howsoever, I am proud to hear
thee, though hopeless of ever obtaining it.
Nay, I will assure it you.
Heaven be thy good speed; my cloth of gold doublet,
which I wore yesterday, it is thine, Sempronio. Take it to thee.
I thank you for this, and for many more which you
shall give me. My jesting hath turned to my good. I hitherto
have the better of it. And if my Master clap such spurs to my sides,
and give me such good encouragements, I doubt not, but I shall
bring her to his bed. This which my Master hath given me, is a
good wheel to bring the business about: for without reward, it is
impossible to go well thorough with any thing.
See, you be not negligent now.
Nay, be not you negligent; For it is impossible, that a
careless Master should make a diligent servant.
But tell me, How dost thou think to purchase her pity?
I shall tell you. It is now a good while ago, since at the
lower end of this 〈◊〉 I fell acquainted with an old 〈◊〉 wo∣man,
called 〈◊〉, a which, 〈◊〉 as the 〈…〉, and 〈…〉
in all the rogueries and 〈◊〉 that the world can a•foo•; One
who in my conscience hath marred and made up again a 〈◊〉
thousand maiden-heads in this City: Such a power, and such au∣thority
she hath, what by her persuasions, and other her cunning
devices, that none can escape her: she will move hard rocks, if she
list, and at her pleasure provoke them to Luxury.
O that I might but speak with her!
I will bring her hither unto you; and therefore prepare
your self for it, and when she comes, in any case use her kindly,
be frank and liberal with her; and whilst I go my ways, doe
you study and devise with your self, to express your pains, as
well as I know she is able to give you remedy.
O but thou staiest too long.
I am gone, Sir.
A good luck with thee. You happy powers that pre∣dominate
humane actions, assist and be propitious to my desires, se∣cond
my intentions, prosper Sempronio's proceedings &amp; his success•e,
in bringing me such an Aduocatrix as shall, according to his pro∣mise,
not only negotiate, but absolutely compass and bring to
a wished period, the preconceiued hopes of an incomparable
pleasure.
Elicia, what will you give me for my good news?
Sempronio is come.
O hush; peace, peace.
Why? What's the matter?
Peace, I say, for here is Crito.
Put him in the little chamber where the besomes bee.
Quickly, quickly, I say, and tell him a cousin of yours, and a friend
of mine is come to see you.
Crito, come hither, come hither, quickly; O my cou∣sin
is come, my cousin is beneath; What shall I doe? Come
quickly, I am undone else.
With all my heart: Doe not vex your self.
O my dear mother, what a longing have I had to come
unto you! I thank my fate, that hath given me leave to see you.
My son, my king, thou hast ravished me with thy pre∣sense,
I am so ouer-joyed, that I cannot speak to thee; Turn
thee about unto me, and embrace me once more in thine a••.
〈…〉 so long away together, and
〈…〉 here?
Who, mother?
〈◊〉, daughter?
〈…〉 O, how my heart rises How 〈…〉
And what of him?
〈1 paragraph〉
〈…〉
Hy, hy, hy! Why, now now my 〈◊〉 what is it
〈…〉
Wh••! Three days? Three whole days away? And in
all that time not so much as once come and see me? Not once 〈◊〉
upon me? Fortune never look on thee; never comfort thee,
〈◊〉 thee: Wo to that woman, wretched as •he is, who in 〈…〉
her hope, and the end of all her happiness.
No more (dear Love.) Think thou (sweet heart) that
distance of place can divorce my inward and disembowel 〈…〉
Or dead but the least spark or that true 〈…〉?
Where-e're I go, thou go 〈…〉
Th•n hast not felt more affliction 〈…〉,
then I have suffered and endured for thee. 〈…〉
Me thinks I here some bodies seete move aboue: Who is it?
Who is it? One of my sweet hearts.
Nay, like though, I easily believe it.
Nay, it is true: Go up and see else.
I go.
Come hither (my son) come along with me, let this fool
alone, for she is idle-headed, and almost out of her little wits; such
thought hath she taken for thy abc•nce. Regard not what she says,
for she will tell you a thousand film-flam tales; Come, come with
me, and let vs talk. Let vs not spend the time thus in idlements.
But I pray, who is that aboue?
Would you know who?
I would.
A Wench recommended unto me by a Fryer.
What Fryer?
O, by no means.
Now, as you love me, good mother, tell me what Fryer
is it?
Lord, how earnest you be? you would dye now, if you
should not know him; Well, to save your longing, it is that fat
Fryers Wench: I need say no more.
A•ac•e 〈◊〉 wench) what a heavy load is she to bear?
You see, wee women must bear all, and it were greater•
wee 〈…〉 you have seen but few murders commit•
upon a women in 〈◊〉
〈…〉 No but many great swellings, besides 〈…〉
what not?
〈…〉 upon you how you talk; you doe but 〈…〉
〈…〉 me see her.
〈…〉
and see her, but see you come at 〈…〉
Be patient, my dear, thou that are the only Idol of my
〈◊〉; •s this the gall that w•ings you? This your grief? Nay,
If this make you so anger, I will neither see her, not any other wo∣man
in the world. I will only speak a word or two with my mo∣there,
and so b•d you eddie•.
Go, go, be gone, ungrateful, unthankful as thou art,
and 〈◊〉 away three years more if thou wilt, ere ever thou see me.
Mother, you may rely upon what I have told you, and
assure your self, that of all the women in the world, I would 〈…〉
or ••••amble with you: Put on your Mantle then, and 〈…〉
and by the way, I will tell you all. For if I should stay here cita∣ting
upon the business, and protract the time in delivering my
mind, it would turn much to both our hurts, and hinder thy pro∣fit
〈…〉
〈…〉, fare well; make fast the door;
〈…〉
So law. Now (mother) laying all other things apart,
〈…〉, be attentius to that which I shall tell you; let not
your 〈◊〉 go a wool gathering; nor scatter your thoughts, nor
〈◊〉 them into many parts: for hee that is every where, is no
where: and cannot, (unless it be by chance) certainly determine
anything. I will that you know that of me, which as yet you no∣for
〈◊〉. Besides, I could never since the time that I first entered
〈…〉 with thee, and had plighted my faith unto thee, desire
〈…〉, therein thou might not share with me.
And Jove (my good son) share his good blessings with
thee, which (••so it p•ease him) he shall not doe without cause; be∣cause
thou take pity of this poor wicked old woman: say on there∣fore,
make no longer delay; for that friendship, which betwixt thee
and me hath taken such deep rooting, needs no Preambles, no
cirum••urions, no preparations or insinuation to win affection:
Be brief therefore and come to the point; for it is idle to utter that
in many words, that may be understood in a few.
It is true: And there fore thus, Calisto is hot in love with
Melibea, he stands in need of thine &amp; my help. And because he needs
our joint furtherance, let vs join together to make some purchase
of him. For to know a mans time, to make use of opportunity, and
to take occasion by the foretop, and to work upon a man whilst his
humour serves him, why it is the only round, by which many have
climbed up to prosperity.
Well hast thou said: I perceive thy drift. The winking or
beckoning on the eye is enough for me, for as old as I am, I 〈◊〉 see
day 〈…〉 this thy
news, as Surgeons of broken〈◊〉 And 〈…〉
Delayed hope afflict•• the heart, And the farther
he is off from obtaining, the fairer will be promise to have it effe∣cted.
Understand you me.
Hush. No more. We are now at the gate, and walls (they
say) have ears.
Knock.
Tha, tha, tha.
Parmeno!
Sir.
What a pocks, art thou deaf? Can thou not hear?
What would you, Sir?
Some body knocks at the gate. Run.
Who's there?
Open the door for this matronly Dame and me.
Sir, wot you who they are that knock so loud? It is
Sempronio, and an old bawd hee hath brought along with him. O
how she is bedaubed with painting!
Peace, peace, you Villain; she is my Aunt. Run, run (you
rascal) and open the door. Well, it is an old saying, and I perceive,
as true, The fish leaps out of the pan, and falls into the fire. And a
man thinking to shun one danger, runs into another, worse
then the former. For I thinking to keep close this matter from Par∣mono,
(on whose neck, either out of love, faithfulness, or fear, Rea∣son
hath laid her reins) I have fallen into the displeasure of this
woman, who hath no less power over my life, then Jove himself.
Sir why doe you vex your self? why grieve you? Doe you
think, that in the ears of this woman, the name, by which I now
call her doth any way sound reproachfully? Believe it not. Assure
your self, she glories as much in this name, as oft as she hears it,
as you do, when you hear some voice, Calisto to be a gallant Gen∣tleman.
Besides, by this is she commonly called, and by this Title
is she of all men generally known. If she pass along the streets
among a hundred women, and some one perhaps blurts out, See,
whore's the old Bawd; without any impatience, or any the least
distemper, she presently turns her self about, nods the head, and
answers them with a smiling countenance, and cheerful look. At
your solemn banquets, your great feasts, your weddings, your gos∣sippings,
your merry meetings, your funerals, and all other assem∣bless
whatsoever, where there is any resort of people, thither doth
she repair, and there they make pastime with her. And if she
pass by where there be any dogs, they straightway b•ke out this
name; If she come amongst birds, they have no other note but
this; If she sight upon a flock of sheep, their bleatings proclaim
no less; If she meet with beasts, they bellow forth the same: The
frogs that lie in ditches, croake no other tune; Come she a∣amongst
your Smiths, your Carpenters, your Armourers, your Fer∣rears,
your Braziers, your Ioyners: why, their hammers beat all
upon this word. In a word, all sorts of tools and instruments
return no other Echo in the ayre; your Shoemakers sing
this song; your Combe-makers join with them, your Gardeners,
your Plough-men, your Reapers, you Vine-keepers pass away the
pain fullness of their labours, in making her the subject of their
discourse; your Table-players, and all other Gamesters never lose,
but they peal forth her praises: To be short, be she wheresoever
she be, all things whatsoever are in this world, repeat no other
name but this: O what a devourer of roasted eggs was her husband?
What would you more? Not one stone that strikes against another,
but presently noyseth out, Old whore.
How can thou tell? dost thou know her?
I shall tell you Sir, how I know her: It is a great while ago,
since my mother dwelt in her Parish, who being entreated by this
Celestina, gave me unto her to wait upon her, though now she know
me not, grown out perhaps of her remembrance; as well by rea∣son
of the short time I abode with her, as also through the alterati∣on
which age hath wrought upon me.
What service did thou doe her?
I went into the market place, and fetched her vitailes; I
waited on her in the streets, and supplied her wants in other the
like services, as far as my poor sufficiency, and slender strength
was able to perform. So that though I continued but a little
while with her, yet I remember every thing as fresh, as if it were
but yesterday, in so much that old-age hath not been able to wear
it out. This good honest whore, this grave matron, forsooth, had
at the very end of the City, there where your Tanners dwell, close
by the waterside, a lone house, somewhat far from neighbours, half
of it fallen down, ill contrived, and worse furnished. Now, for to
get her living, ye must understand, she had six several Trades:
she was a Laundress, a Persumeresse, a Former of faces, a Mender
of cracked maiden-heads, a B••d, and had some smatch of a Witch;
Her first Trade was a cloak to all the test; under color whereof, being
withal a piece of a Sempstresse, many young wenches that were of
your ordinary sorts of servants, came to her house to work: some
on smocks, some on gorgets and many other things: but not one of
them that came thither, but brought with her either bacon, wheat,
flower, or a Jar of wine, or some other the like provision, which they
could conveniently steal from their Mistresses, and some other
thefts of greater quality, making her house (for she was the re∣ceiuer,
and kept all things close) the Rendezvous of all their
Roguery: she was a great friend to your Students, Noble men's
Ca•errors, and Pages: To these she sold that innocent blood of
these poor miserable souls, who did easily adventure their virgin∣ties,
drawn on by fair promises, and the restitution and reparation
which she would make them of their lost maiden-heads. Nay, she
proceeded so far, that by cunning means, she had access and com∣munication
with your very Vestalls, and never left them, till she
had brought her purpose to pass. And what time do you think she
chose when she would deal with any of these? At the time of their
chiefest ceremonies; as when they kept their most mysterious ce∣lebration
of the feasts of their Vesta, nay, and that most strictly so∣lemnized
day of Bone Dea, where it is death to admit men: even then
by unheard of disguises, she had her plots and proiects effectually
working upon them, to the utter abolition of their vows and fire∣ginity.
Now, what think you, were the trades and merchandise
wherein she dealt? She professed her self a kind of Physician, and
fained that she had good skill in curing of little children: She
would go and fetch flax from one house, and put it forth to spin∣ning
to another, that she might thereby have pretence for the freer
access unto all: One would cry, Here mother: and another, There
mother: Look, says the third, where the old woman comes: Yonder
comes that Beldam so well known to all. Yet notwithstanding all
these her cares, troubles, and trottings to and fro, being never out
of action, she would never miss any great meeting, any religious
processions, any Nuptials, Loue-ties, Balls, masks or games what∣soever;
They were the only markets, where she made all her bar∣gains.
And at home in her own house she made perfumes, false
and counterfeit Storax, Beniamin, Gum, Anime, Amber, Ci∣uit,
Powders, Musk and Mosquito: She had a chamber full of
Limbecks, little vials, pots, some of earth, some of glass, some
brass, and some tin, formed in a thousand fashions. She made
sublimated Mercury, boiled confections for to clarify the skin,
waters to make the face glister, paintings, some white, some ver∣million,
lip-salues, scarlet-dy'd clothes, fitted purposely for wo∣men
to rub their faces therewith, ointments for to make the face
smooth, lustrifications, clarifications, pargetings, fardings, waters
for the morphewes, and a thousand other slibber slabbers: Some
made of the lees of wine, some of daffodils, some of the barks and
rindes of trees, some of Scar-wolfe, otherwise called Cittibush, or
Trifolium, some of Tarragon, some of Centory, some of sour
grapes, some of Must, or new wine taken from the press, first
distilled, and afterwards sweetened with sugar. She had a trick to
supple and refine the skin with the juice of Lemmons, with Turpen∣tine,
with the marrow of Dear, and of Heron-shawes, and a thou∣sand
the like confections: she distilled sweet-waters, of Roses, of
Flowers, of Oranges, of Iesmine, of three-leafed Grass, of Wood∣bine,
of Gilly-flowers, incorporated with Musk and Ciuit, and
sprinkled with wine: she made likewise Lees, for to make the
〈◊〉 turn yellow, or of the colour of Gold; and this she com∣p••d
of the sprigs of the Vine, of Holme, of Rye, of Horehound in∣termixt
with Salt-peter, with Alum, Mill-foyle, which some call
Y•••ow, or Nose-bleed, together with divers other things. The
oils, the butters, and the greases which she used, it is loathsome to
tell you, and would turn your stomach: as of Kine, Bears, Horses,
Ca••e•s, Snakes, Conies, When•es, Herons, Bettors, Bucks, Cats
of the mountains, Badgers, Squirrels, Hedge-hogges and others.
For her preparatives for bathings, it is a wonderful thing to ac∣quaint
you with all the herbs and roots which were ready ga∣thered
and hung up a-high in the roof of her house: as Ca•to∣mill,
Rose-mary, Marth-mallowes, Maiden-haire, Blue-bottle,
Flowers of Elder, and of Mustard, Spike and white Laurel, buds of
Roses, Rosecakes, Gramenilla, Wild-Sauory, Green figs, Picodorae,
and Folia-tinct. The oils which she extracted for the face, it is in∣credible
to recount, of Storax and of Iesmine, of Lēmons, of Apple-kernels,
of Violets, of Ben•uy, of Fistick-nuts, of Pine-apple kernels,
of Grape-stores, of Iujuba, of Axenuz or M•lanthien, of Lupins,
of Peas, of Carilla, and Paxarera; and a small quantity of Balsa∣mum
she had in a little vial, wherewith she cured that scotch given
her overthwart her nose. For the mending of lost maiden-heads,
some she help with little bladders, and other some she stitch't up
with the needle: she had in a little Cabinet, or painted work∣box,
certain fine small needles, such as your Glovers sow withal,
and threads of the slenderest &amp; smallest silk, rubbed over with wax:
she had also roots hanging there of Folia-Plasme, Fuste-sanguinio,
Squill or Sea-Onion, and ground Thistle. With these she did work
wonders; and when the French Ambassador came thither, she
made sale of one of her wenches, three several times for a virgin.
So she might a hundred as well.
Believe me (Sir) it is true as I tell you. Besides, out of
charity forsooth, she relieved many Orphans, and many straggling
wenches, which recommended themselves unto her. In another
partition, she had her knacks for to help those that were loue-sicke,
and to make them to be beloved again, and obtain their desires.
And for this purpose, she had the bones that are bred in a Stags
heart, the tongue of a Viper, the heads of Quails the brains of
an Ass, the kills of young Colts, when they are new foaled, the
bearing cloth of a new-borne babe, Barberry beans, a Sey-Com∣pass,
A Horne-fish, the halter of a man that hath been hanged,
Juice berries, the prickles of a Hedgehog, the foot of a Badger,
Fearne-seed, the stone of an Eagles nest, and a thousand other things.
Many both men and women came unto her: of some she would de∣mand
a piece of that bread where they had bit it: of others, some
part of their apparel: of some, she would crave to have of their
hair: others, she would draw characters in the palms of their
hands with Saffrom; with othersome she would doe the same with
a kind of colour, which you call Vermilion: to others she would
give hearts made of wax, and stuck full of broken needles; and
many other the like things, made in clay, and some in lead, very
fearful, and ghastly to behold: she would draw circles, portrait
forth figures, and mumble many strange words to her self, ha∣uing
her eyes still fixed on the ground. But who is able to deliver
unto you those things that she hath done? And all these were mere
mockeries and lies.
Parmeno, hold thy hand; thou hast said enough; what
remains, leave it till some fitter opportunity. I am sufficiently in∣structed
by thee, and I thank thee for it; Let vs now delay them
no longer, for necessity cuts off slackenesse. Know thou, that she
comes hither requested, and wee make her stay longer then stands
with good manners. Come, let vs go, lest she be offended, and take
it ill. I fear, and fear makes me more and more think upon her,
quickens my memory, and awakens in me a more provident care∣fullness
how I communicate my self unto her. Well, let vs go,
and arm our selves as well as we can against all inconveniences. But
I pray thee Parmeno, let me entreat thee, that the envy thou bear
unto Sempronio, who is to serve and pleasure me in this business, be
not an impedimēt to that remedy, whereon no less then the safety of
my life relyeth. And if I had a doublet for him, thou shalt not want
a Mandillion. Neither think thou, but that I esteem as much of
thy counsel and advice, as of his labour and pains; and as bruit
beasts (we see) doe labour more bodily then men, for which they
are well respected of vs, and carefully looked unto; but yet for all
this, we hold them not in the nature of friends, nor affect them with
the like love: the like difference doe I make between thee and Sem∣pronio.
And laying aside all power and dominion in my self, under
the priuie-Seale of my secret love, sign my self unto thee for
such a friend.
Sir, it grieves me not a little, that you should seem
doubtful of my fidelity, and faithful service, which these your fair
promises and demonstrations of your good affection, cannot but call
into question and jealousy. When (Sir) did you ever see my envy
prove hurtful unto you? Or when for any interest of mine own,
or dislike, did I ever show myself cross, to cross your good, or
to hinder what might make for your profit?
Take it not offensively, not misconstrue my meaning▪ for
assure thy self, thy good behaviour towards me, and thy fair car∣riage,
and gentle disposition, makes thee more gracious in mine eyes,
then any, nay, then all the rest of my servants. But because in a case
so difficult and hard as this, not only all my good, but even my life
and wholly depends; it is needful that I should in all that I am
ab•e, provide for my self; and therefore seek to arm my self in
this sort as thou see, against all such casualties, as may endanger
my desire; howsoever, persuade thy self, that thy good qualities,
as far excel every natural good, as every natural good excelled
the artificial, from whom it hath it's beginning. But of this, for
this time no more; but let vs now go and see her, who must work
out well fare.
Soft: me thinks I hear some body on the stayres; they
are now coming down: Sempronio, make as though you did not
hear them: stand close, and litten what they say; and let me alone
to speak for vs both. And thou shalt see how I and somely I will
handle the matter, both for thee and me.
Due so then. Speak thou.
Trouble me no more, I say, leave importuning me; for
to overcharge one, who is heavy enough already laden with pain,
and ••uish, were to spur a sick beast. Alas, poor soul, me
thinks 〈◊〉 so possessed with thy Masters pain, and so affected
with his affliction, that Sempronio seems to be Calisto; and Calisto,
to be Semp•onio; and that both your torments are both but in one
and the same subject. Besides, I would have you think, that I came
not hither to leave this controversy vndecided, but will dye rather
in the demand and pursuit of this my purpose, then not see his
desire accomplished.
Parmeno, stay, stay awhile, make no noise; stand still
I pray thee, and listen a little what they say. So, hue•h, that we may
see in what state wee live; what wee are like to trust to, and how
the world is like to go with vs. O notable woman! O worldly
goods, unworthy to be possessed by so high a spirit! O faithful,
and trusty Sempronio! Hast thou well observed him (my Parmeno?)
Hast thou heard him? Hast thou noted his earnestness? Tell me,
have I not reason to respect him? What say thou, man? Thou
that art the Closet of my secrets, the Cabinet of my Counsel, and
Council of my soul?
Protesting first my innocence for your former suspicion,
and cumplying with my fidelity, since you have given me such free
liberty of speech, I will truly deliver unto you what I think. Hear
me therefore, and let not your affection make you deaf, nor hope
of your pleasure blind you; have a little patience, and be not too
hasty; for many through too much eagerness to hit the pin•e, have
shot far beside the white. And albeit I am but young, yet have I
seen somewhat in my days: besides, the observation and fight of
many things, doe teach a man much experience. Wherefore, as∣sure
your self, and thereon I durst pawn my life, that they over∣heard
what wee said, as also our coming down the stayres, and
have of set purpose fallen into this false and feigned expression of
their great love and care, wherein you now place the end of your
desire.
Believe me (Celestîna) Parmeno aims unhappily.
Be silent: For I swear by my haly-doome, that whi∣there
comes the Ass, thither also shall come the saddle. Let me
alone to deal with Parmeno, and you shall see, I will so temper him
ever I have done with him, that I will make him wholly ours. And
see what wee gain, hee shall share with vs: for goods that are not
common, are not goods; It is communication that makes combine∣tion
in love: and therefore let vs all gain, let vs all divide the spoil,
and let vs laugh and be merry all alike. I will make the slave so tame,
and so gentle, that I will bring him like a bird to pick bread from
my first. And so we will be two to two, and all three join to cousin
the fourth. Thou and I will join together, Parmeno shall make a
third, and all of vs cheat Calisto.
Sempronio?
Sir.
What art thou doing, thou that art the key of my life? Open
the door. O Parmeno! now that I see her, I feel my self well, me
thinks, I am now alive again: See what a reverend Matron it is:
What a presence she bears, worthy respect! A man may now see,
how for the most part, the face is the Index of the mind. O virtuous
old age! O inaged virtue• O glorious hope of my desired end!
O head, the all air of my passion! O reliever of my torment, and
viuification of my life, resurrection from my death! I desire to
draw near unto thee, my lips long to kiss those hands, wherein con∣sists
the fullness of my recovery; but the unworthiness of my per∣son
debars me of so great a favour. Wherefore I here adore the
ground whereon thou treads, and in reverence of thee, bow down
my body to kiss it.
Sempronio; Can fair words make me the fatter? Can I
live by this? Those bones which I have already gnawn, does this
fool thy Master think to feed me therewith? Sure the man
dreams; when he comes to fry his eggs, he will then find what
is wanting. Bid him shut his mouth, and open his purse: I miss∣doubt
his words, much more his works. Holla, I say; are you so tick∣lish?
I will curry you for this gear, you lame Ass: you must rise a
little more early, if you mean to go beyond me.
Woe to these ears of mine, that ever they should hear
such words as these. I now see, that hee is a lost man, who goes
after one that is lost. O unhappy Calisto, deject wretch, blind in thy
folly, and kneeling on the ground, to adore the oldest, and the rot∣tannest
piece of whorish earth, that ever rubbed her shoulders in the
Stews! He is undone, he is overthrown horse and foot, hee is
fallen ino a trap, whence he will never get out; hee is not capable
of any redemption, counsel, or courage.
Wat said my mother? It seems unto me, that she
thinks I offer words for to excuse my reward.
You have hit the nail on the head, Sir.
Come then with me, bring the keys with you, and thou
shalt see, I will quickly put her out of that doubt.
In so doing, you shall doe well, Sir. Let vs go presently:
for it is not good to suffer weeds to grow amongst corn, not suspi∣tion
in the hearts of our friends, but to root it out straight with the
weed-hooke of good works.
Wittily spoken; come, let vs go, let vs slack no time.
Believe me (Parmeno) I am very glad, that we have lighted
on so fit an opportunity, wherein I may manifest and make known
unto thee the singular love, wherewithal I affect thee; and what
great interest (though undeservedly) thou hast in me, I say vnde∣seruedly,
in regard of that, which I have heard thee speak against
me: whereof I make no more reckoning, but am content to let it
pass. For, virtue teaches vs to suffer temptations, and not to ren∣der,
evil for evil; and especially when wee are tempted by young
men, such as want experience, and are not acquainted with the cour∣ses
of the world, who out of an ignorant and foolish kind of loyal∣tie,
undo both themselves and their Masters, as thou thy self dost,
Calisto. I heard you well enough, not a word you said, that escaped
mine care. Nor do you think, that with these my other outward sen∣ses,
old age hath made me lose my hearing; for not only that which
I see, hear, and know, but even the very inward secrets of thy heart
and thoughts, I search into, and pierce to the full with these my in∣tellectuall
eyes, these eyes of my understanding. I would have thee
to know (Permeno) that Calisto is loue-sicke, sick even to the death.
Nor art thou for this, to censure him to be a weak and foolish man:
for unresistable love subdues all things. Besides, I would have thee
to know, if thou know it not already, that there are these two con∣clusions,
that are evermore infallibly true. The first is, that every
man must of force love a woman, and every woman love a man.
The second is, that he who truly loves, must of necessity be much
troubled &amp; moved with the sweetness of that superexcellent delight,
which was ordained by him that made all things, for the perpetuating
of mankind, without which, it must needs perish: and not only in hue∣mane
kind, but also in fishes, birds, beasts, &amp; all creatures that creep
and crawl upon the earth; Likewise in your souls vegetatiue, some
plants have the same inclination &amp; disposition, that without the in∣terpositiō
of any other thing, they be planted in some little distance
one of another, and it is determined and agreed upon by the gene∣rall-consent
of your Gardeners, and husband-men, to be Make and
Female. How can you answer this, Parmeno? Now my pretty 〈◊〉
fool, you mad wag, my souls sweet Genius, my Pea•le, 〈…〉
well, my honest poor silly Lad, my pretty little Monky-face, come
hither you little whoreson; Alack, how I pity thy simp•licity! thou
know nothing of the world, nor of it's delights. Let me run mad,
and dye in that fit, if I suffer thee to come near me, as old as I am.
Thou hast a harsh and ill favoured hoarse voice, by thy bristled
beard, it is easily guest what manner of man you are. Tell
me, is all quiet beneath? No motions at all to make in Venus
Court?
O! As quiet as the tail of a Scorpion.
It were well, and it were no worse.
Ha, ha, he.
Laugh thou, thou pocky rogue?
Nay, mother, be quiet: hold your peace, I pray. Doe
not blame me; and doe not hold me, though I am but young, for a
fool. I love Calisto, tied thereunto out of that true and honest fi∣delity,
which every servant owes unto his Master; for the breeding
that he hath given me, for the benefit which I receive from him,
as also because I am well respected, and kindly entreated by him,
which is the strongest chain, that links the love of the servant to
the service of his Master: As the contrary is the breaking of it. I
see hee is out of the right way, and hath wholly lost himself; and
nothing can befall a man worse in this world, then to hunt after his
desire, without hope of a good and happy end; especially, he thin∣king
to recover his game (which himself holds so hard and dif∣ficult
a pursuit) by the vain advice, and foolish reasons of that
beast Sempronio, which is all one, as if he should go about with the
broad end of a Spade, to dig li•le worms out of a mans hand.
I hate it. I abhor it. It is abominable: and with grief I speak it I
doe much lament it.
Know thou not, Parmeno, that it is an absolute folly,
or mere simplicity to bewail that, which by wailing cannot bee
helped?
And therefore doe I whale, because it cannot be helped:
For if by wailing and weeping, it were possible to work some re∣medy
for my Master, so great would the contentment of that hope
be, that for very joy, I should not have the power to weep. But
because I see all hope thereof to be utterly lost, with it have I lost all
my joy, and for this cause doe I weep.
Thou weepest in vain for that, which cannot by wee∣ping
be avoided; thou can not turn the istreame of his violent
passion; and therefore moist truly presume that he is past all•re,
Tell me (Parmeno) hath not the like happened to others, as well
as to him?
Yes. But I would not have my Master through more∣ning
and grieving, languish, and grow sick.
Thy Master is well enough. He is not sick: and were
hee never so sick, never so much pained and grieved, I my
self am able to cure him. I have the power to doe it.
I regard not what thou say. For in good things, better
is the Act, then the Power: And in bad things, better the Power,
then the Act. So that, it is better to be well, then an the way to bee
well. And better is the possibility of being sick, then to be sick in∣deed:
and therefore, Power in ill, is better then the Act.
O thou wicked villain! How Idly dost thou talk, as
if thou did not understand thy self? It seems thou dost not know
his disease; What hast thou hitherto said? What would thou
have? What is it that grieves you, Sir? Why lamentest thou? Be
you disposed to jest, and make your self merry? or are you in
good earnest, and would fine face out truth with falsehood? Be∣leeue
you what you list; I am sure hee is sick, and that in Act, and
that the Power to make him whole, lies wholly in the hands of this
weak old woman.
Nay rather, of this weak old Whore.
Now the Hang-man be thy ghostly father, my little ras∣call,
my pretty villain; how dare thou be so bold with me?
How, as though I did not know thee?
And who art thou?
Who? marry, I am Parmeno, son to Alberto thy gossip,
who lived some little while with thee; for my mother recommen∣ded
me unto thee, when thou dwelt'st close by the rivers side in
Tanners row.
Good Lord, and art thou Parmeno, Claudina's son?
The very same.
Now the fire of the pockes consume thy bones; for thy
mother was an old whore, as my self: Why dost thou persecute
me, Parmeno? It is he in good truth, it is hee. Come hither unto
me; come I say; many a good jerk, and many a cuff on the ear
have I given thee in my days, and as many kisses too. A you lit∣tle
rogue, dost thou remember, sirrha, when thou lay at my beds
feet?
Passing well: and sometimes also, though I was then but
a little Apish boy, how you would take me up to your pillow, and
there lye hugging of me in your arms; and because you savoured
somewhat of old age, I remember how I would fling and fly from
you.
A pocks on you for a rogue. Our (impudent!) art thou not
ashamed to talk thus? But to leave off all jesting, and to come
to plain earnest; Hear me now (my child) and hearken what
I shall say unto thee. For, though I am called hither for one
end, I am come for another. And albeit I have made my
self a stranger unto thee, and as though I knew thee not, yet
thou wast the only cause that drew me hither. My son, I am
sure thou art not ignorant, how that your mother gave you un∣to
me, your father being then alive; who, after thou went from
me, dyed of no other grief, save only what she suffered for the un∣certainty
of thy life and person. For whose absence in those latter
years of her elder age, she led a most painful, pensive and care∣full
life. And when the time came, that she was to leave this world,
she sent for me, and in secret recommended thee unto me, and
told me, (no other witness being by, but heaven the witness to
〈◊〉 our works, our thoughts, our hearts, whom she alone interpo∣•e
between her and me) that of all loves I should doe so much
〈◊〉, as to make inquiry after thee, and when I had found thee,
〈◊〉 thee up, &amp; foster thee as mine own: and that as soon as thou
〈◊〉 come to mans estate, &amp; were able to know how to govern
thy self, and to live in some good manner and fashion; that then I
should discover unto thee a certain place, where, under many a lock
and key, she hath left thee more store of Gold and Silver, then all
the revenues come to, that thy Master Calisto hath in his posses∣zion.
And because I solemnly vowed, and bound my self by pro∣mise
unto her, that I would see her desire, as far forth as lay in me,
to be well and truly performed, she peacefully departed this more∣tall
life; and though a mans faith ought to be inviolably observed
both to the living and the dead, yet more especially to the dead; for
they are not able to doe any thing of themselves, they cannot come
to me, and prosecute their right here upon earth. I have spent much
time &amp; money in inquiring &amp; searching after thee, &amp; could never till
now hear what was become of thee: and it is not aboue three days
since, that I first heard of your being, and where you abode. Verily,
it hath much grieved me, that thou hast gon travelling, &amp; wandering
throughout the world, as thou hast done from place, to place, lo∣sing
thy time, without either gain of profit, or of friends. For, (as
Seneca saith) Travellers have many ends, and few friends. For, in
so short a time they can never fasten friendship with any: and hee
that is every where, is said to be no where. Again, that meat can∣not
benefit the body, which is no sooner eaten, then eiected. Nei∣there
doth any thing more hinder it's health, then your diversities,
and changes of meates. Nor doth that would come to be healed,
which hath daily change of tents, and never plasters. Nor doth that
Tree never prove, which is often transplanted and removed from
one ground to another. Nor is there any thing to profitable, which
at the first sight brings profit with it▪ Therefore (my good son)
leave off these violencies of youth, and following the doctrine, and
rule of thy Ancestors, return unto reason, settle thy self in some
one place or other. And where better, then where I shall advise thee,
taking me, and my counsel along with thee, to whom thou art re∣commended
both by thy father and mother? And I, as if I were
thine own true mother, say unto thee, upon those curses and ma∣ledictions,
which thy parents have laid upon thee, if thou should
be disobedient unto me, that yet a while thou continue here, and
serve this thy Master which thou hast gotten thee, till thou hear
further from me, but not with that foolish loyalty, and ignorant
honesty, as hitherto thou hast done; thinking to find firmness
upon a false foundation, as most of these Masters now a days are.
But doe thou gain friends, which is a durable and lasting common∣ditty;
stick closely and constantly unto them; doe not thou live
upon hopes, relying on the vain promises of Masters, who suck
away the substance of their servants, with hollow-hearted, and idle
promises, as the horse-leaches suck blood; and in the end fall off
from them, wrong them, grow forgetful of their good services, and
deny them any recompense or reward at all. Wo be unto him that
grows old in Court. The Masters of these times love more them∣selves
then their servants; neither in so doing doe they doe amiss.
The like love ought servants to bear unto themselves. Liberality
was lost long ago; rewards are grown out of date; magnificence
is fled the country; and with her, all nobleness. Every one of
them is wholly now for himself, and makes the best hee can of his
servants service, serving his turn, as hee finds it may stand with
his private interest and profit. And therefore they ought to doe
no less, since that they are less then they in substance, but to live
after their law, and to doe as they doe. My son Parmeno, I the
rather tell thee this, because thy Master (as I am informed) is (as
it seems▪ likewise unto me) a Rompenecios, one that befooles his
servants, and wears them out to the very stumps, looks for much
service at their hands, and makes them small, or no recompense:
He will look to be served of all, but will part with nothing at all.
Weigh well my words, and persuade thy self, that what I have
said is true: Get thee some friends in his house, which is the gre∣test,
and preciousest Jewel in the world. For, with him thou must
not think to fasten friendship. A thing seldom seen, where there
is such difference of estate and condition, as is between you two.
Opportunity, thou see, now offers her self unto vs, on whose fore-top,
if wee will but take hold, wee shall all of vs be great gainers,
and thou shalt presently have something, wherewithal to help thy
self. As for that which I told you of, it shall bee well and safely
kept, when time shall serve; in the mean while, it shall be much
for thy profit, that thou make Sempronio thy friend.
Celestina, my hair stands an end to hear thee, I trem∣ble
at thy words; I know not what I should doe, I am in a great
perplexity. One while I hold thee for my mother, another while
Cal•sto for my Master, I desire riches, but would not get them
wrongfully; for, hee that rises by unlawful means, falls with
greater speed, then he got up. I would not for all the world thrive
by ill gotten gain.
Marry, Sir, but so would I: right, or wrong, so as my
house may be raised high enough, I care not.
Well, wee two are of contrary minds. For, I should no∣for
live contented with ill gotten goods; for I hold cheerful po∣uerty,
to be an honest thing. Besides, I must tell you, that they are
not poor, that have little, but they that desire much; And there∣fore
say all you can, though never so much, you shall never per∣swade
me in this, to be of your belief. I would fine pass over
this life of mi•e without envy: I would pass thorough solitary
woods and wildernesses without fear: I would take my sleep with∣out
•••rtings: I would avoid injuries, with gentle answers: endure
violence without reviling: and brooke oppression by a resolute
resistance.
O my son! it is a true saying; that Wisdom cannot be
but only in aged persons. And thou art but young.
True, but contented poverty is safe and secure.
But tell me, I pray thee, whom doth fortune more ad∣uance,
then those that be bold and venturous? Besides, who is hee,
that comes to any thing in a Common-wealth, who hath resolved
with himself to live without friends? But (heaven be thanked)
thou hast wealth enough of thine own, yet thou know not what
need thou moist have of friends for the better keeping of them.
Nor do thou think, that this thy inwardnesse with thy Master can a∣ny
way secure thee. For the greater a mans fortune is, the less secure
it is; and then most ticklish, when most prosperous. And there∣fore,
to be armed against misfortunes, we must arm our selves with
friends. And where can thou get a fitter, nearer, and better com∣pinion
in this kind, then where those three kind of friendships
doe concur in one? To wit, goodness, profit, and pleasure. For
goodness; behold the good will of Sempronio, how agreeable, and
conformable it is to thine: and with it, the great similiancy, and
suteablenesse, which both of you have in virtue: For profit; That
lies in this hand of mine, if you two can but agree together: For
pleasure, That likewise is very likely. For now you are both in the
prime of your years, young and lusty, and fit for all kind of sports
and pleasures whatsoever; wherein young men, more then old folks,
do join and link together: as in gaming, in wearing good clothes,
in jesting, in eating, in drinking and winching together. O Perm∣no!
if thou thy self would, what a life might wee lead? Even as
merry as the day is long. Sempronio, hee loves Elteia, Kinsewoman
to Arouse.
To Arouse?
I, to Arouse.
To Arouse, the daughter of Eliso?
To Arouse, the daughter of Eliso.
Is this certain?
Most certain.
It is marvelous strange.
But tell me man, Dost thou like her?
Nothing in the world more.
Well, now I know thy mind, let me alone. Heir's my
hand; I will give her thee. Thou shalt have her; Man, she is thine
own, as sure as a Club.
Nay soft mother, you shall give me leave not to be∣leeue
you; I trust no body with my faith.
He is unwise, that will believe all men; And hee is in an
error, that will believe no man.
I said, that I believe thee, but I dare not be so bold. And
therefore let me alone.
Alas, poor silly wretch; faint-hearted is hee that dares
not venture for his good. Jove gives nuts to them, that have no
teeth to crack them. And beans to those, that have no jaws to
chew them. Simple as thou art, thou moist truly say, Fools have
fortune: for it is commonly seen, that they who have least wise∣dome
have most wealth: and that they who have the most descry∣tion,
have the least means.
O Celestina; I have heard old men say, that one exam∣ple
of luxury or covetousness, does much hurt, And that a man
should converse with those that may make him better; and to for∣sake
the fellowship of those whom hee thinks to make better.
As for Sempronio, neither by his example shall I be won to be ver∣tuous;
nor he by my company be withdrawn from being vicious.
And suppose that I should incline to that which thou say, I would
fine know this one thing of thee, how by example faults may bee
concealed. And though a man overcome by pleasure, may go a∣against
virtue; yet notwithstanding, let him take heed how hee
spot his honesty.
There is no wisdom in thy words; For, without comp∣ny,
there is no pleasure in the possession of any thing. Doe not thou
then draw back, doe not thou torment and vex thy self. For,
Nature shuns whatsoever favours of sadness; and desires that
which is pleasant and delightsome. And delight is with friends, in
things that are sensual; but especially in recounting matters of
love, and communicating them, the one to the other. This did I do
my self; this such a one told me; such a jest did wee break; in
this sort did I win her; thus often did I kiss her: thus often did
she bite me; thus I embraced her; thus came wee nearer and no∣rer.
O what speech, what grace▪ what sport, what kisses! Let vs go
thither, Let vs return hither, Let vs have music, Let vs paint Mot∣to's,
Let vs sing songs, Let vs invent some pretty devices; Let vs
tilt it; What shall be the Impress? What the letter to it? To¦morrow
she will walk abroad; Let vs round her street; Read
this her Letter; Let vs go by night; Hold thou the ladder;
Guard well the gate; How did she escape thee? Look, where
the Cuckold her husband goes; I left her all alone; Let vs give an∣other
turn; Let vs go back again thither. And is there any de∣light
(Parmeno) in all this, without company? By my say, by my say,
they that have trial can tell you, that this is the delight, this is the
only pleasure; As for that other thing you wot of, your Asses have
a better, and can doe better then you, or the best of you all.
I would not, mother, that you should draw me on by
your pleasing persuasions to follow your advice, as those have
done, who wanting a good foundation to build their opinion on,
have invited and drawn men to drink of their heresies, sugring
their cup with some sweet kind of poison, for to catch and capti∣uate
the wills of weak•minded men, and to blind the eyes of their
reason, with the powder of some sweet-pleasing affection.
What is reason, you fool? What is affection, you Ass?
〈◊〉 (which thou hast not) must determine that; And 〈…〉
gives the upper hand to prudence; and prudence cannot be
〈◊〉 without experience; and experience cannot bee found but in
old folks, and such as are well stricken in years. And therefore
wee are called fathers, and mothers; and good parents doe al∣ways
give their children good council: as I more especially now
doe thee; whose life and credit, I prefer before mine own. And
when, or how, can thou be able to requite this my kindness•e?
For, Parents and Tutors can never receive any recompense, that
may equal their desert
I am very jealous and suspicious of receiving this doubt∣full
council. I am afraid to venture upon it.
Wilt thou not entertain it? Well, I will then tell thee,
Hee that wilfully refuses council, shall suddenly come to destru∣ction.
And so (Parmeno) I rid my self of thee, as also of this
business.
My mother (I see) is angry; and what I were best to do, I
know not. I am doubtful of following her council: it is as great an
error to believe nothing, as it is to believe every thing. The more
humane and civil courie is, to have affiance and confidence in her.
Especially in that, where besides the present benefit, both profit
and pleasure is proposed. I have heard tell; that a man should be∣leeue
his betters, and those whose years carry authority with them.
Now; What is it she advises me unto? To be at peace with Sem∣pronio:
and to peace, no man ought to be opposite. For blessed are
the peaceful. Love and charity towards our brethren, that is not
to be shunned and avoided by vs; and few are they, that will forgo
their profit. I will therefore seek to please her, and hearken unto
her. Mother, a master ought not be offended with his Scholars
ignorance; at least, very seldom in matters of depth and know∣ledge.
For though knowledge in its own nature, be communica∣ble
unto all, yet is it infused but into few. And therefore I pray par∣don
me, and speak a new unto me; For, I will not only hear and
believe thee, but receive thy council as a singular kindness, and a
token of thy great favour, and especial love towards me. Nor
yet would I, that you should thank me for this; Because the
praise and thanks of every action, ought rather to be attributed
to the giver then to the receiver. Command me therefore; for
to your commandments shall I ever be willing, that my consent
submit it self.
It is proper to a man to err; but to a beast, to persevere
in an error. It doth much glad me, Parmeno, that thou hast cleared
thosee thick clouds, which darkened thy eye-sight, and hast ensue∣red
me according to the wisdom, discretion, and sharpe wit of
thy father, whose person, now representing it self fresh to my re∣membrance,
doth make my tender eyes to melt into tears, which
thou feast in such abundance to trickle down my cheeks. He some∣times
would maintain hard and strange propositions, but would
presently (such was the goodness of his nature) see his error, and
embrace the truth▪ I swear unto thee; that in thus seeing thee to
thwart the truth, and then suddenly upon it, laying down all country∣diction,
and to be conformable to that which was reason; me thinks,
I doe as lively now behold thy father: as if he now were living, and
present here before me. O what a man he was, how proper in his
person, how able in his actions, what a part did he bear, and what
a venerall and reverend countenance did hee carry! But hush, I
hear Calisto coming, and thy new friend, Sempronio, whose re∣concilement
with him, I refer to some fitter opportune•y. For,
two living in one heart, are more powerful both for action, and
understanding.
Dear mother, I did much doubt, considering my mis¦fortunes,
to find you alive: but marvel more, considering my
desire, that my self come alive unto you. Receive this poor gift
of him, who with it offers thee his life.
As in your finest gold, that is wrought by the hand of your
cunningest and curiosest Artificer, the workmanship oftentimes
doth far surpass the matter: So the fashion of your fair liberality
doth much exceed the greatness of your gift. And questionless,
a kindness that is quickly conferred, redoubles it's effect; for hee
that slacks that, which he promises, seems in a manner to de∣ny
it, and to repent himself of his promised favour.
Sempronio, what hath hee given her?
A hundred crowns in good gold.
Ha, ha, ha.
Hath my mother talked with thee?
Peace, she hath.
How is it then with vs?
As thou wilt thy self. Yet for all this, me thinks I
am still afraid.
No more. Be silent. I fear me, I shall make thee twice
as much afraid, ever I have done with thee.
Now fie upon it. I perceive there can be no greater plague,
nor no greater enemy to a man, then those of his own house.
Now mother, go your ways get you home and cheer
up your own house; and when you have done that, I pray hasten
hither, and cheer up ours.
Good chance attend you.
And you too: and so farewell.
CELESTINA, being departed from Calisto, and gone home
to her own house; Calisto continues talking with Sempro∣nio,
his servant; who like one that is put in some good hope,
thinking all speed too slow, sends away Sempronio to Celesti∣na,
to solicit her for the quicker dispatch of his conceived business;
Calisto and Parmeno in the mean while reasoning together.
Tell me (my Masters) The hundred crowns
which I gave yonder old Beldam, are they well be∣stowed,
or no?
Yes Sir, exceeding well. For, besides, the
saving of your life, you have gained much honour by
it. And for what end is fortune favourable and prosperous, but to be
a handmaid to our honour, and to wait thereon, which of all
worldly goods is the greatest? For honour is the reward and recom∣pence
of virtue; and for this cause wee give it unto the Divine
Essence, because wee have not any thing greater to give him.
The best part whereof consists in liberality and bounty: and
this close-fistednes, and vncommunicated treasure, doth eclipse and
darken, whereas magnificence and liberality doth gain, and highly
extol it. What good is it for a man to keep that to himself, which
in the keeping of it, does himself no good? I tell you, Sir, and what
I speak is truth; Better is the use of riches, then the possessing of
them. O, how glorious a thing is it to give? and how miserable to
receive? See, how much better action is then passion: so much
more noble is the giver, then the receiver. Amongst the Elements,
the fire, because it is more active, is the more noble: and therefore
placed in the Spheres, in the noblest place. And some say; that
nobleness is a praise proceeding from the merit, and antiquity of
our Ancestors. But I am of opinion, that another mans light can no∣for
make you shine, unless you have some of your own. And
therefore doe not glory in the nobleness of your father, who was so
magnificent a Gentleman, but in your own. Shine not out of his,
but your own light; and so shall you get your self honour, which
is mans greatest outward good. Wherefore not the bad, but
the good, (such as your self) are worthy to partake of so perfect
a virtue. And besides, I must tell you, that perfect virtue doth not
suppose that Honour hath it's fellow: and therefore reioce with
your self, that you have been so magnificent, and so bountiful.
And thus, Sir, having told you my mind, let me now advise you
that you would be pleased to return back to your chamber, and
there take some rest, since, that your business is deposited in
such hands; assuring your self, that the beginning being so good,
the end will be much better: and so let vs go presently to your
chamber; where I shall treat more at large with you concer∣ning
this business.
Me thinks (Sempronio) it is no good counsel, that I
shouldest here accompanied, and that she should go all alone,
who seeks to cure my ill: it were better that thou should go a∣long
with her, and hasten her on, since thou know, that on her dili∣ligence
depends my well-fare; on her slowness, my painfulnesse,
on her neglect, my despair. Thou art wise, I know thee to bee
faithful, I hold thee a good servant. And therefore so handle the
matter, that she shall no sooner see thee, but that she may judge of
that pain which I feel, and of that fire which torments me;
whose extreme heat will not give me leave to lay open unto her the
third part of my secret sickness. So did it tie my tongue, and
took such hold on my senses, that they were not only busied, but
in a manner wasted and consumed; which thou, as one that is free
from the like passion, moist more largely deliver, letting thy words
run with a looser reyne.
Sir, I would fine go to fulfil your command: And
I would fain stay, to ease you of your care; your fear puts spurs
to my sides; and your solitariness, like a bridle, pulls me back.
But I will obey and follow your council; which is, to go and la∣bore
the old woman. But how shall I go? For, if I leave you thus
all alone, you will talk idly, like one that is distracted; doe no∣thing
but sigh, weep, and take on, shutting your self up in dark∣ness,
desiring solitude, and seeking new means of thoughtful tor∣meant;
wherein if you still persevere, you cannot escape either death
or madness. For the avoiding whereof, get some good company
about you, that may minister unto you occasion of mirth, by recoun∣ting
of witty conceits, by entertaining you with Music, and sing∣ing
merry songs, by relating Stories, by devising Motto's, by tel∣ling
tales, by playing at cards, jesting, sporting. In a word, by in∣uenting
any other kind of sweet and delightful recreation, for to
pass away the time, that you may not suffer your thoughts to run
still wandering on in that cruel error, whereinto they were put
by that your Lady and Mistress, upon the first trance and encoun∣la
of your Love.
How like a silly fool thou talk! Know thou not,
that it eases the pain, to bewail it's cause? O how sweet is it to
the sorrowful, to unsheathe their griefs? What ease doe broken
〈◊〉 bring with them? O what a diminishing and refreshing to
tearefull complaints, is the unfolding of a mans woes, and bitter
〈◊〉? As many as ever writ of comfort, and consolation, doe
all of them jump in this.
Read a little farther, and but turn over the leaf, and you
shall find they say thus: That to trust in things temporal, and to
seek after matter of sorrow, is a kind of foolishness, if not mad∣ness.
And that Macias, the Idol of Lovers, forgetful of himself,
because his mistress did forget him; and careless of his well •are,
because she cared not for him, complains himself thus: That the
punishment of love consists in the contemplation thereof: And
that the best remedy against love, is, not to think on thy love.
The ease lies in the forgetting it. Kick not therefore against the
pri•ke, feyne thy self to be merry, pluck up your spirits and be of
good cheer, and all, you shall see, shall be well: for oftentimes,
opinion brings things whither it lists: Not that it should cause vs
to swerve from the truth; but for to teach vs to moderate our
se•ce, and to govern our judgment.
Sempronio, my friend, (for so thy love makes me stile
thee) since it so grieves thee that I should be alone, call Parmeno hi∣there,
and hee shall stay with me: and henceforth, be thou, (as thou
hast ever been) faithful and loyal unto me. For, in the service
of the servant, consists the Masters remuneration. O Parmeno!
Here, Sir.
O I think not, for I cannot see thee. Leave her not, Sem∣pronio:
Ply her hard, follow her at an inch. Forget me not, I
pray thee. Now Parmeno, what think thou of that which hath
past to day? My pain is great; Melibea stately, Celestina wise, she
is her crafts Master, and we cannot doe amiss. Thou hast mainly
opposed thy self against her: and to draw me to a detestation of her,
thou hast painted her forth to the purpose, and set her out in her
colours: and I believe thee. For such and so great is the force of
truth, that it commands even the tongues of our enemies. But be she
such, as thou hast described her to be; yet had I rather give her an
hundred Crowns, then give another five.
Is the wind in that door? Doe you begin to com∣plain
already? Have you now better bethought your self? Wee
shall shortly complain too at home; for I fear me, we shall fast
for this frankenesse.
It is thy opinion, Parmeno, that I ask; Gratify me
therein: Hold, dost thou look? Why hang thou down thy
head, when thou shouldest answer me? But I perceive, that as en∣uy
is sad, and sadness without a tongue; thine own will can doe
more with thee, then fear of my displeasure. What is that thou
grumble at? What did thou mutter to thy self, as though
thou were angry?
I say, Sir, that it had been better you had employed your li∣berality
on some present, or the like services upon Melibea her self,
then to cast away your money upon this old Bawd: I know well
enough what she is; and which is worse, on such a one, as minds
to make you her slave.
How (you fool) her slave?
I, her slave. For to whom thou tell thy secret, to him
doest thou give thy liberty.
It is something that the fool hath said; but I would
fine know this of thee; whether or no, when as there is a great di∣stance
betwixt the intreater, and the entreated, the suitor, and the
party sued unto, either out of authority of obedience, or greatness
of estate and dignity, or nobleness of descent of blood, as there is
betwixt my Mistress, and my self; Whether or no (I pray) it
be not necessary to have an intercessor, or mediator for me,
who may every foot go to and fro with my messages, until they are∣rive
at her ears, of whom, to have a second Audience, I hold it im∣possible.
And if it be thus with me, tell me, whether thou appro∣uest
of what I have done, or no?
The devil approve it for me.
What say thou?
Marry, I say, Sir, that never any error came yet vnac∣companied;
and that one inconvenience is the cause of another,
and the door that opens unto many.
Thy saying I approve, but understand not thy purpose.
Then thus, Sir, your losing of your Hawk the other
day, was the cause of your entering into the Garden, where Melibea
was to look if she were there; your entering, the cause that you both
saw her, and talked with her; your talk engendered love; your love
brought forth your pain; and your pain, will be the cause of your
growing careless and wretchlesse both of your body, soul, and
goods. And that which grieves me most, is, that you must fall into
the hands of that same Trot-vp-and down; that maiden-head-mon∣ger,
that same gadding to and fro Bawd, who for her villainies, and
rogueries in that kind, hath been three several times implu∣med.
Is it even so, Parmeno? Is this all the comfort thou can give
me? Tell me rather something that may please me, and give me
better content then this can. And know withal, that the more
thou dost dispraise, the better doe I like her. Let her cumply with
me, and effect my business, and let them implume her the fourth
time too, if they will, I care not. Thou hast thy wits about thee; thou
speak 〈◊〉 having any sense of pain; thou art not heart-sicke, as I
〈◊〉 Parmeno, nor is thy mind touched with that sense of sorrow,
〈…〉
I had rather, Sir, that you should be angry with me, and
reprehend me out of your choler, for crossing your opinion, then
out of your after-repentance, to condemn me for not counselling
you 〈◊〉 the contrary. For I should but dissemble with you, if I
should not tell you, That then you lost your liberty, when you did
first captivate, and imprison your will.
This Villain would be well eudgelled; Tell me (thou
vnmanerly Rascal) Why dost thou blaspheme that which I adore?
And you, Sir, who would seem to be so wise, what wot thou of
honour? Tell me, what is Love? show me wherein Civility con∣sisteth;
Or what belongs to good manners? Thou would fine be
accounted discreet, and would that I should think so, and yet dost
not consider with thy self, that the first round in follies ladder, is for
a man to think himself wise. If thou did but feel the pain that
I do: with other water would thou bathe that burning, and wash
that raging wound, which the cruel shaft of Cupped hath made in my
〈◊〉. See, what remedy Sempronio brings unto me with his feet,
the same dost thou put away with thy tongue, with thy vain and
uncomfortable words. And feyning thy self (forsooth) to be faith∣full,
thou art in realty of truth, nothing else but a mere Clot, and
Him• of earth; a box filled with nothing but the very dregs and
〈…〉 of malice: the very Inn and House, that gives open inter∣•••
〈…〉 Envy; not caring so as thou moist defame, &amp; discredit
〈…〉 it right or by wrong, how thou put a dis∣••••
〈…〉 thou knowing that this my pain, and over∣•••
〈…〉 by reason, nor will admit advice, but
is 〈◊〉 of counsel, which is as if one should tell me; that
That which is bred in the bone, may be fetched out of the flesh: or
that which is glowed to the very heart and entrails of a man, may
be un•oo•ed without renting the •ou•e from the body Sempronio did
fear his going, and thy staying: it was mine own seeking; I
would needs have it so; And therefore worthily suffer the trouble
of his absence and thy presence: and better is it, for a man to be a∣lone,
then ill accompanied.
Sir, it is a weak fidelity, which fear of punishment can
turn to flattery; more especially, with such a Master, whom sor∣row
and affliction deprive of reason, and make him a stranger to
his natural judgment. Take but away this same veil of blind∣ness,
and these momentary fi•es will quickly vanish; and then shall
you know, that these my sharpe words are better to kill this strong
Canker, &amp; to stifle these vio•ent flames, then the soft smoothings of
foot•ing Sempronio, which feed your humour, quicken up your love,
kindle afresh your flames, and join brands to brands, which shall
never leave burning, till they have quite consumed you, and
brought you to your grave.
Peace, peace, you Var•et; I am in pain and anguish, and
thou reddest philosophy unto me. But I expect no better at thy
hands; I have not the patience to hear thee any longer. Go, be¦gone;
Get forth my horse; See hee be well and clean dressed;
〈◊〉 him well. For I must pass by the house of my Melibea, or
rather of my Goddesie.
Holla, boys, where be you? Not a boy about the house.
I must be fine to doe it my self; and I am glad it is no worse: for
I fear 〈◊〉 it be long, wee shall come to a worse office, then to
be boys of the spur, and to lackey it at the stirrup. Well, let the
world slide, and things be as they may be, when they cannot be as
they should be. My Gossips (I see as it is in the proverb) are an∣gry
with me for speaking the truth. Why, how now you Jade?
Are you neig•ing too? Is not one jealous Lover enough in a house?
Or dost thou wind Melibea?
When comes this horse? Why, Parmeno, what dost thou
mean? why bring• thou him not away?
Here hee is: Sosia was was not within.
Hold the stirrup. Open the gate a little wider. If Sem∣pronio
chance to come in the mean while, and the old woman with
him, will them to stay; for I will return presently.
Go, never to return, and the devil go with thee. Let
a man tell these fools all that he can for their own good, they will
never see it; and I, for my part believe; that if I should now at
this instant give him a blow on the heel, I should beat more brain
out of his hee•e then his head. Go whither thou wilt for me: For
I dare pawn my life, that Celestina and Sempronio will fleece
you ere they have done with you, and not leave you so much as
one Master-feather to maintain your flight. O unfortunate that I
am, that I should suffer hatred for my truth, and receive harm for
my faithful service! Others thrive by their knavery, and I lose
by my honesty. The world is now grown to that pass, that it is
good to be bad, and bad to be good; and therefore I will follow
the fashion of the times, and doe as other men doe: since that Trai∣tours
are accounted wise and discreet, and faithful men are deemed
silly honest fools. Had I credited Celestina, with her six dozen of
years about her, and followed her counsel, I had not been thus
ill entreated by Calisto. But this shall bee a warning unto me
ever hereafter, to say as he says. If he shall say, Come, let vs eat,
and be merry, I will say so too. If, Let vs throw down the house, I
also will approve it. If hee will burn all his goods, I will help to
fetch the fire. Let him destroy, hang, drown, burn himself, and
give all that hee hath (if hee will) to Bawds; I for my part will
hold my peace, and help to divide the spoil. Besides, it is an an∣cient
and true received Rule; That it is best fishing in troubled
〈◊〉▪ Wherefore I will never any more be a dog•e in a mill, to
be beaten for my barking.
SEMPRONIO goes to Celestina's house; Hee reprehends
her for her slackness. They consult what course they shall take
in Calisto's b•sia•sse concerning Melibea. At last comes Elicia;
Celestina, she hies her to the house of Pleberio, In the mean
while, Sempronio remains in the house with Elicia.
Look what leisure the old bearded Bawd
takes How softly she goes How one leg comes draw∣ling
after another Now she has her money, her arms
are broken. Well overtaken, Mother, I perceive, you
will not hurt your self by too much haste.
How now, son? What news with you?
Why, this our sick patient knows not well himself
what hee would have. Nothing will content him; hee will have
his cake baked before it be dough; and his meat roasted, before it be
spitted. He fears thy negligence; and curses his own covetous∣ness;
hee is angry with his close fistednesse, and offended that he
gave thee no more.
There is nothing more proper to Lovers, then impati∣ence
Every small tarriance, is to them a great torment; the least de∣lay
breeds dislike; In a moment what they imagine, must be full∣lie
effected; nay, concluded before begu•no; especially these new
Lovers, who against any luring whatsoever, fly out to check, they
care not whither, without any aduisemēt in the world, or once thin∣•king
on the harm which the meat of their desire may (by over∣•••• ••ing)
occasion unto them, intermingled amidst the affairs and
〈◊〉 concerning their own persons, and their servants.
What say thou of servants? Think thou, that any
〈◊〉 is like to come unto vs, by labouring in this business? Or,
that wee shall be burned with those Sparkles which scatteringly
fly forth of Calisto's 〈◊〉? I had rather see him, and all his love
〈◊〉 to the devil; upon the 〈◊〉 discovery therefore of any danger,
(〈◊〉 chance to go 〈◊〉) I will eat no more of his bread, I
will• not stay with him, no not an 〈◊〉. For, it is better to lose
his serve, then 〈◊〉 in serving him. But Time will tell me
what I 〈◊〉 doe. For, before his final downfall, he will (like a
house, that is ready to fall) give some token himself of his own
ruin. And therefore, Ma••er, let vs in any case keep our persons
from peril; let vs doe what may be done; if it be possible, let vs
work her for him this year: if not this, the next; if not the next, when
we may; if never, the worse luck his: Though there is not any
thing so ha•d to suffer in it's beginning, which time doth not sof∣ten
and reduce to a gentle sufferance. And there is no wound so
painful, which in time doth not slacken much of it's torment. Nor
was there ever any pleasure so delightful, which hath not by long
continuance been much diminished and lessened. Ill and good,
prosperity and adversity, glory and grief; all these with time
lose the force and strength of their rash and hasty beginning;
Whereas matters of admiration, and things earnestly desired,
once obtained, have no sooner been come, then forgotten, no so∣ner
purchased, but relinquished. Every day we see new and strange
accidents, wee hear as many, and wee pass them over; leave
those, and hearken after others; them also doth time lessen &amp; make
co•tingible, as things of common course. And I pray, what won∣der
would you think it, if some should come and tell you; There
was such an earth-quake in such a place, or some such other things;
tell me, would you not straight forget it? As also, if one should say
unto you, Such a River is frozen, such a blind man hath recovered
his sight; thy father is dead; such a thunder bolt fell in such a place;
Granada is taken; the King enters it this day; the Turk hath re∣ceiu'd
an ouer-throw; to morrow you shall have a great Eclipse;
such a bridge is carried away with the flood; such a one is now
made a Noble man; Peter is robed; Annes hath hanged her self. Now
in such cases, what wilt thou say, save only this? That some three
days past, or upon a second view thereof, there will be no wonder
made of it. All things are thus; they all pass after this manner; all
is forgotten and thrown behind vs, as if they had never been. Just
so will it be with this my Masters Love; the farther it goes on, the
more it will slacken: For long custom doth allay sorrow, weaken∣eth
and subdues our delights, and lessens wonders. Let vs make
our profit of him, whilst this plea is depending; and if wee may
with a dry root doe him good, the easier the better; if not, by little
and little wee will solder up this flaw, and make all whole by Me∣•••••
holding him in scorn and contempt. And if this will doe no
good upon him, Better it is, that the Master be pained, then his
man 〈◊〉
We•l hast thou said; I hold with thee, and jump in thy
opinion; thy words have well pleased me, wee cannot err. Yet
notwithstanding (my son) it is necessary, that a good Proctor
should follow his Clients cause diligently and painfully; that hee
colour his plea with some feigned show of reason; that hee press
some quillet or quirk of Law; to go and come into open Court,
though hee be checked, and receive some harsh words from the Iud∣ges
mouth, to the end that they who are present, may both see and
say, that though hee did not prevail, yet he both spake and labou∣red
hard for his fee. So shall not hee want Clients, nor Celestina
suitors in cases of Love.
Doe as thou think good. Frame it to thine own liking;
This is not the first business thou hast taken in hand.
The first, (my son?) Few virgins (I thank Fortune
for it) hast thou seen in this City, which have opened their shops,
and traded for themselves, to whom I have not been a broker to
their first spun thread, and help them to vent their wares; there
was not that wench borne in the world, but I writ her down in
my Register, and kept a Catalogue of all their names, to the intent
that I might know how many escaped my net. Why, what did
thou think of me, Parmeno? Can I live by the ayre? Can I feed
my self with wind? Doe I inherit any other land? Have I any
other house or Vineyard? Know thou of any other substance of
mine, besides this office? By what doe I eat and drink? By
what doe I find clothes to my back, and shoes to my feet? In
this City was I borne; in it was I bred; Living (though I say it) in
good credit and estimation, as all the world knows. And dost thou
think then, that I can go unknown? Hee that knows not both
my name, and my house, thou moist hold him a mere stranger.
Tell me, (Mother) what past betwixt you and my fellow
Parmeno, when I went up with Calisto for the Crowns?
I told him his dream, and the interpretation thereof;
and how that hee should gain more by our company, and joining
in friendship with vs, then with all his gay g•ozings, and imbroyde∣re•
works which he utters to his Master; How he would always
live poor and in want, and be made a scoff and laughing stock,
unless he would turn over a new leaf, and alter his opinion; that he
should not make himself a Saint, and play the hypocrite before
such an old beaten bitch as my self. I did put him in mind of
his own mother relating unto him what a one she was, to the end
that hee might not set my office at nought, her self having been of
the same Trade: for should hee but offer to speak ill of me, hee
must needs stumble first on her.
Is it long (mother) since you first knew her?
This Celestina, which is here now with thee, was the wo∣man
that saw her borne, and help to breed her up: why, I tell thee
(man) his mother and I were nail, and flesh, buckle and thong;
Of hee I learned the better part of my trade. Wee did both eat,
both sleep, both enjoy our pleasures, our counsels, &amp; our bargains,
〈◊〉 one with another; we lived together like two sisters
both at home and abroad: there was not a farthing which ey∣there
of vs gained, but was faithfully and truly divided between
vs. Had she lived, I should never have lived to be deceived. But
it was not my fortune to be so happy, she died too soon for me.
O death, death, how many doest thou deprive of their sweet and
pleasing society! How many doest thou discomfort with thy un∣welcome
and troublesome Visitation? For one that thou eatest be∣ing
ripe, thou croppest a thousand that are greene; For were she
alive, these my steps should not have been unaccompanied, not
driven (as now I am) to walk the streets alone. I have good cause
to remember her; for to me she was a faithful friend, and a good
companion. And whilst she was with me; she would never suf∣fer
me to trouble my body, or my brains about any thing: if I
brought bread, she would bring meat; if I did spread the cloth,
she would lay the napkins: she was not foolish, nor fantastical, nor
proud, as most of your women now adays are. And by my say,
I swear unto thee, she would go barefaced from one end of the
City to the other, with her Fan in her hand, and not one, all the way
that she went, would give her any worse word, then Mistress Clau∣dina.
And I dare be bold to say it, that there was not a woman of a
better palate for wine in the world, nor better skilled in any kind of
merchandise whatsoever. And when you have thought that she had
been scarce out of doors, with a whip-Sir Iohn, ever you could scarce
say this, she was here again. Every one would inuit and feast
her, so great was the affection which they bare unto her; And
she never came home, till she had taken a taste of some eight or ten
sorts of wine, bearing one pottle in her Jar, and the other in her bell∣lie:
and her credit was so good, that they would have trusted her for
a Runlet or two upon her bare word, as if she had pawned unto
them a piece of plate. Why, her word was as currant as gold, in all
the Innes and Taverns in the Town. If wee walked the streets,
whenever we found our selves thirsty, we entered straight the next
Tavern that was at hand, and called presently for a quart of wine
for to moisten our mouths withal, though we had not a penny to
pay for it. Nor would they (as from others) take our veils and our
coifs from off our heads, till we had discharged the reckoning, but
score it up, and so let vs go on our way. O Sempronio; Were it but
Cat after kind, and that such were the son, as was the mother, assure
thy self that thy master should remain without a feather, and
we without any farther care. But if I live, I will bring this iron to
my fashion; I will work him like wax, and reckon him in the
number of mine own.
How dost thou think to make him thine? Hee is a craf∣tie
subtle fox; Hee will hardly be drawn in; Hee is a shrewd fell∣low
to deal withal.
For such a crafty Knave, wee must have a Knave and a
half, and entertain two traitors for the taking of one. I will
bring him to have Arouse, so and make him Cock-sure ours; and he
shall give vs leave without any let, to pitch our nets, for the catch∣ing
of Calisto's coin.
But dost thou think thou can doe any good upon Meli∣bea?
Hast thou any good bought to hang by?
There is not that Surgeon, that can at the first dressing,
give a true judgment of his Patients wound: but what I see, and
think for the present, I will plainly deliver unto thee. Melibea
is fair; Calisto fond and frank; he cares not to spare his purse, nor
I my pains; hee is willing to spend, and I to speed him in his bu∣sinesse;
Let his money be stirring, and let the suite hang as long
as it will. Money can doe any thing; it splitteth hard Rocks; it
passes over Rivers dry-foote; there is not any place so high,
whereunto an Ass laden with gold will not get up; his unadvised∣ness,
and feruentnesse of affection, is sufficient to mar him, and to
make vs. This I have thought upon; this I have searched into; this
is all I know concerning him and her: and this is that which must
make most for our profit. Well, now must I go to Pleberio's house.
Sempronio, fare-well. For though Melibea brave it, and stands so high
upon her pantofles; yet is not she the first that I have made to
stoop, and leave her cackling; they are all of them ticklish, and
skittish; the whole generation of them is given to winching &amp; flin∣ging:
but after they are well weighed, they prove good high-way
Jade, and travel quietly; you may kill them, but never tyre them.
If they journey by night, they wish it may never be morning. They
curse the Cocks, because they proclaim it is day: the Clocks,
because they go too fast: they lye prostrate, as if they looked after the
Pleyades and the North star, making themselves Astronomers, and
star gazers; But when they see the morning star arise, they sigh
for sorrow, and are ready to forsake their bodies. And the clearing
of the day, is the clouding of their joy. And aboue all, it is worth
the while, to note how quickly they change copy, and turn the
Cat in the pan; They entreat him, of whom they were entreated;
they endure torment for him, whom before they had tormented;
they are servants to those, whose Mistresses they were; they break
thorough stone walls, they open windows, feyne sickness; if the hen∣ges
of their doors chance to creak, they anoint and supple them
with oil, that they may perform their office without any noise.
I am not able to express unto thee the great impression of that
sweetness, which the primary and first kisses of him they love, lea∣ueth
imprinted in their hearts. They are enemies of the mean, and
wholly set upon extremes.
Mother, I understand not these terms.
Marry, I say, that a woman either loves, or hates him
much, of whom she is beloved, so that, if she entertain not his love,
she cannot dissemble her hate; there are no reins strong enough
to bridle their dislike. And because I know this to be true, it makes
me go more merrily and cheerfully to Melibea's house, then if I
had her fast in my fist already. For I know, that though at the first
I must be forced to woo her, yet in the end, she will be glad to sue to
me. And though at present perhaps she threaten me, and flatly fall
out with me; yet at last will she be well pleased, and fall as much
a flattering, as she did a reviling me. Here in this pocket of mine, I
carry a little parcel of yarn, and other such like trinkets, which I al∣ways
bear about me; that I may have some pretence at first to
make my easier entrance and free access, where I am not thoroughly
known: As Gorgets, Coifs, Fringes, Rolls, Fillets, Hayre-laces,
Nippers, Antimony, Ceruse, and sublimated Mercury, Needles
and Pins; they shall not ask that thing, which I shall not have
for them. To the end, that look whatsoever they shall call for, I
may be ready provided for them. And this bait upon the first sight
thereof shall work my acceptance, and hold fast the fish which I
mind to take.
Mother, look well about you. Take heed what you doe.
For a bad beginning can never make a good ending. Think on her
father, who is noble &amp; of great power and courage; her mother iea∣lous
and furious, and thou, suspicion it self. No sooner seen, but
mistrusted: Melibea is the only child to them both, and she miscarry∣ing,
miscarrieth with her all their happiness; the very thought
whereof, makes me quake and tremble. Go not to fetch wool, and
come home shorn your self; seek not to pluck her wings, and
your self without your plumes.
Without my plumes, my son?
Or rather implumed, mother, which is worse.
Now by my say, in an ill hour had I need of thee to be
my companion. As though thou could instruct Celestina in her own
Trade? As if I knew not better what to doe, then thou can teach
me? Before ever thou wast borne, I did eat bread with crust. O!
you are a proper man to make a Commander, and to marshall o∣there
men's affairs, when thy self art so dejected with sinister dive∣nations,
and fear of ensuing harms.
Marvel not, Mother, at my fear, since it is the com∣mon
condition of all men; That what they most desire, they think
shall never come to pass. And the rather, for that in this case now
in hand, I dread both thine, and my punishment; I desire profit; I
would that this business might have a good end; not because my
Master thereby might be rid of his pain, but I of my penury. And
therefore I cast more inconveniences with my small experience,
then you with all your aged Art and cunning.
I will bless my self; Sempronio, come; I will make a
••eake in the water, I will score it up. This is news indeed: I had
thought to have strewed greene rushes against your coming.
What? Come hither twice? Twice in one day?
Peace, you fool. Let him alone. We have other thoughts
(I wi••e) to trouble our heads withal; matters of more impor∣tance,
then to listen to your trumperies. Tell me; Is the house
•ear? Is the young wench gone, that expected the young Novice?
Gone? yes; and another come, since she went, and
gone too.
Sai'st thou me so, Girl? I hope then it was not in vain.
How? in vain? No by my fey was it not; it was not
i• value; for though he came late, yet better late then never. And
little need hee to rise early, whom his stars have a purpose to
help.
Go, hye you up quickly to the top of all the house, as
high as you can go, and bring me down hither the bottle of that
oil of Serpents, which you shall find fas•ned to that piece of rope,
which I brought out of the fields with me that other night, when it
rained so fast, and was so dark: then open my chest where the
paintings be, and on your right hand you shall find a paper written
with the blood of a Bat, or Flitter-mouse; bring it down also with
you, ogether with that wing of the Dragon, whereof yesterday
we did cut off the claws. And take heed, you do not shed the May∣dew,
which was brought me for to make my confection.
It is not here, mother; you never remember where you
lay your things.
Doe not reprove me, I pray thee, in mine old age; mis•use
me not, Elicia. Doe not you feyne untruths, though Sempronio be
•eere, be not you proud of it. For hee had rather have me for his
counsellour, then you for his play-fellow, for all you love him so
well. Enter into the chamber where my ointments be, and there
in the skin of a black Cat, where I willed you to put the eyes of
the shee-Wolfe, you shall not fail to find it: and bring down the
blood of the hee Goat, and that little piece of his beard which you
your self did cut off.
Take it to you (mother.) Lo, here it is; while you stay
here, I will go up, and take my Sempronio with me.
I conjure thee (thou sad god Pluto) Lord of the infernal
〈◊〉, Emperor of the damned court, Captain general and proud
Cōmander of the wicked spirits, Grand signor of those sulp•ureous
fires, which the flaming hills of Aetna flash forth in most fearful,
and most hideous manner; Governor, and Supervisor both of the
torments, and tormentors of those sinful souls, that lye bowling in
Phlegeton; Prince, and chief Ruler of those three hellish Furies,
Tesiphone, Meghera, and Alecto; Administrator of all the black
things belonging to the kingdoms of Styx and Dis, with all their
pitchy Lakes, infernal shades, and litigious Chaos; Maintainer of
the flying Harpies, with all the whole rabblement of frightful Hy∣draes;
I Celestine, thy best known, and most noted Client, conjure
thee by the virtue and force of these red Letters, by the blood of this
bird of the night, wherewith they are charactred, by the power and
weight of these names and signs, which are contained in this paper,
by the•e▪ and bitter poison of those Vipers, whence this oil was ex∣tracted,
wherewith I anoint this ••ew of yarn, thou come presently
without delay to obey my will, to inuelop, and wrap thy self therein,
and there to abide, &amp; never depart thence, no, not the least moment
of time, until that Melibea, with that prepared opportunity, which
shall be offred unto her, shall buy it of me, and with it, in such sort
be entangled and taken, that the more she shall behold it, the more
may her heart be mollified, and the sooner wrought to yield to my
request: That thou wilt open her heart to my desire, and wound her
very soul with the love of Calisto; and in that extreme, and violent
manner, that despising all honesty, and casting off all shame, she
may discover her self unto me, and reward both my message, and
my pains; Doe this, and I am at thy command, to doe what thou
wilt have me: But if thou doe not doe it, thou shalt forthwith
have me thy Capital foe, and Professed enemy. I shall strike with
light, thy sad and darksome dungeons; I shall cruelly accuse thy con∣tinuall
lyings, and daily false-hoods. And lastly, with my charming
words, and enchanting terms, I will chain and constringe thy
most horrible name. Wherefore, again and again; once, twice,
and thrice, I conjure thee to fulfil my command. And so presu∣ming
on my great power, I depart hence, that I may go to her
with my clew of yarn; wherein I verily believe, I carry thy self
inwrapped.
CELESTINA, going on her way, talks to her self, till she comes
to Pleberio's gate, where she meets with Lucrecia one of Ple∣barrio's
maid-seruants; she boards her, and enters into discourse
with her, who being ouer-heard by Alice, Melibea's mother, and
understanding it was Celestina, causes her to come near the house.
A messenger comes to call away Alice, she goes her ways; Ce∣lestina
in the mean while being left alone with Melibea, disco∣uers
unto her the cause of her coming.
Now that I am all alone, I will, as I walk
by my self, weigh and consider that which Sempronio
feared, concerning my travel in this business. For,
those things which are not well weighed, and consi∣dered,
though sometimes they take good effect, yet
commmonly fall out ill. So that much speculation brings forth
much good fruit; for although I dissembled with him, and did set
a good face on the matter, it may be, that if my drift and intent
should chance to be found out by Melibea's father, it would cost
me little less then my life: Or at least, if they should not kill me,
I should rest much impaired in my credit, either by their tossing me
in a blanket, or by causing me to be cruelly whipped; so that my sweet
meats shall have sour sauce: and my hundred Crowns in Gold
be purchased at too dear a rate; Ay wretched me• into what a Laby∣rinth
have I put my self? What a trap am I like to fall into, through
mine own folly? For that I might show my self solicitous and re∣solute,
I have put my self upon the hazard of the dice. Wo is me;
what shall I doe? To go back, is not for my profit; and to go
on, stands not with my safety. Shall I persist? or shall I desist? In
what a strait am I? In what a doubtful and strange perplexity?
I know not which I were best to choose. On my daringnesse depen∣death
manifest danger; on my cowardice shameful damage. Which
way shall the Ox go, out he must needs plough? Every way, go
which way I will, discovers to my eyes deep and dangerous fur∣rows;
desperate downefalls; if I be taken in the manner; if the
theft be found about me, I shall be either killed, or carted, with a
paper-crowne set upon my head, having my fault written in great
Text-letters. But in case I should not go, what will Sempronio then
say? Is this all thou can doe? Thy power, thy wisdom, thy
stoutness, thy courage, thy large promises, thy fair offers, thy
tricks, thy subtilties, &amp; the great care (forsooth) thou would take;
What? are they all come to this? And his Master Calisto, what will
he say? what will hee doe? or what will hee think? save only
this; That there is much deceit in my steps; and that I have disco∣uered
this blot to Pleberio, like a preuaricating Sophistresse, or cun∣ning
Ambi-dexter, playing the traitor on both sides, that I might
gain by both? And if he doe not entertain so hateful a thought,
he will rail upon me like a mad-man; he will upbraid me to my
face, with most reproachful terms; He will propose a thousand in∣conveniences,
which my hasty deliberation was the cause of; say∣ing,
Out you old whore; Why did thou increase my passions
with thy promises? False Bawd as thou art; For all the world be∣sides,
thy feet can walk, for me only thy tongue; Others can
have works; I only words. Others can have remedy at thy hands;
I only the man that must endure torment. To all others, thy force
can extend it self; and to me is it only wanting. To all others thou
art Light; to me Darkness. Out thou old tretcherous, disloyal
wertike; Why did thou offer thy self and service unto me? For,
it was thy offer that did put me in hope: and that hope did delay
my death, prolonged my life, and did put upon me the Title of a
glad man. Now, for that thy promises have not proved effectual,
neither shalt thou want punishment, nor I woeful despair: so that,
look I on which side I will (miserable man that I am) it is ill here,
and it is ill there; pain &amp; grief on either hand: But when extremes
shall want their mean, and no means to avoid either the one or
the other; of two cuils, it is the wiser course to incline to the les∣ser.
And therefore I had rather offend Pleberio, then displease Calisto.
Well then, I will go. For greater will my shamebe, to be con∣damned
for a Coward, then my punishment, in daring to accom∣plish
what I promised. Besides, Fortune still friendeth those that
are bold and valiant. Lo, yonder's the gate; I have seen my self in
greater danger then this in my days, Coraggio, Coraggio, Celestina;
Be of good cheer; Be not dismayed; For, there are never suitors
wanting for the mitigating, and allaying of punishment. All Dive∣nations
are in my favour, and show themselves prospicious in my
proceedings; or else I am no body in this my Art, a mere bungler,
an Idiot, an Ass. Of four men that I meet by the way, three of
them were Ihon's; whereof two were Cuckolds. The first word
that I heard, passing along the street, was a Loue-complaint. I have
not stumbled since I came forth, as at other times I used to doe.
•e thinks the very stones of the street did sunder themselves one
from another, to give me way as I past. Nor did the skirts of my
clothes wrumple up in troublesome folds, to hinder my feet. Nor do
I feel any faintness, or weariness in my legs. Every one salutes
me. Not a dog that hath once barked at me; I have neither seen
any bird of a black feather, neither Thrush, nor Crow; nor any o∣there
of the like unlucky nature; and which is a better sign of
good luck then all these, yonder doe I see Lucrecia, standing at
Melibea's gate, which is kinsewoman to Elicia: it cannot but go
well with vs; it is impossible wee should miss of our purpose;
All is Cocke-sure.
What old witch is this, that comes thus trailing her
tail on the ground? Look how she sweeps the streets with
her gown? Fie, what a dust she makes?
By your leave, sweet Beauty.
Mother Celestina, you be welcome. What wind, I trow,
drives you this way? I doe not remember, that I have seen you in
these parts this many a day. What accident hath brought you
hither?
My love (daughter, my love) and the desire I have to see
all my good friends; and to bring you commendations from your
Cousin Elicia: as also to see my old and young Mistress, whom I
have not seen since I went from this end of the Town.
Is this your only errand from home? Is it possible,
you should come so far for this? I promise you, you make me
much to marvel; For I am sure you were not wont to stir your
stumps, but you knew wherefore; nor to go a foot forth of doors,
unless it were for your profit.
What greater profit (you fool) would you have, then a
man to cumply with his desires? Besides, such old women as we
never want business: especially my self, who having the breeding
of so many men's daughters as I have, I go to see if I can sell a
little yarn.
Did not I tell you so before? I wot well what I said;
you never put in a penny, but you take out a pound: Be your pains
never so little, you will be sure you will be well paid for it. But to
〈◊〉 that pass, my old mistress hath begun a web; she hath need
to buy it, and thou hast need to sell it. Come in, and stay here a∣while,
you and I will not fall out.
Lucrecia, who is that you talk withal?
With that old woman forsooth, with the scotch on
her nose, who sometimes dwelt hard by here in Tanners Row, close
upon the Riuer-side.
Now I am further to seek then I was before; if thou wilt
give me to understand an unknown thing, by a thing that is less
known, is to take up water in a Sieve.
Madame! Why, this old woman is better known
then the herb Few. Doe not you remember her that stood on
the Pillory for a Witch? That sold young wenches by the great
and by wh•le sale? and that hath mart many thousands of marri∣ages,
by sundring man and wife, and setting them at odds?
What Trade is she of? What is her Profession? it may
be, by that I shall know her better.
Fosooth, she presumes Calls, Veils, and the like; she
makes your sublimate Mercury, and hath some thirty several
Trades besides; she is very skilful in herbs; she can cure little
children: And some call her, The old woman, The Lapidary,
for her great dealing in stones.
All this makes me never a whit the wiser. Tell me her
name, i• thou •nowst it.
If I knew it? Why, there is neither young nor old in
all this City, but knows it. And should not I then know it?
If you know it so well, why then doe not you tell it me?
I am ashamed, forsooth.
Go too, you fool; Tell me her name; Doe not an∣ger
me by this your delay.
Her name (saving your Reverence) is Celestina.
Hi, hi, hi! Now beshrew your fingers; O my heart!
O my sides! I am not able to stand for laughing, to see that the lo∣thing
which thou hast of this poor old woman, should make thee
ashamed to name her unto me. Now I call her to mind; Go too;
you are a wag; No more of this. She (poor soul) is come to
beg somewhat of me. Bid her come up.
Aunt, it is my Mistress pleasure, you come up.
My good Lady; All blessings abide with you, and your noble
daughter. My many griefs and infirmities have hindered my visiting
of this your house, as in duty I was bound to doe; But heaven
knows how fair are the entrails of my inward affection, how free
from any spot of foulness. It knows the sincerity of my heart, and
trunesse of my love. For, distance of place displaces not that love,
which is lodged in the heart: So that what heretofore in my self
I did much desire, now my necessity hath made me to perform.
And amongst other my many Crosses and miseries in this life, my
Crosses in my purse grow daily less and less; so that I have no
better remedy to help my self withal, and to relieve this my
poor estate, then to sell this little parcel of yarn of mine own
spinning to make Coifs, and Kerchiefs; and understanding by
your maid, that you had need thereof (howbeit I am poor in eve∣rye
thing, I praise my fate, save the richness of this grace) it is who∣lie
at your command, if either it or I may doe you any service.
Honest neighbour, thy discourse and kind offer move me
to compassion: and so move me, that I had rather light upon some
fit occasion, whereby I might supply thy wants, then diminish thy
web, still thanking thee for thy kind offer: and if it be such as will
serve my turn, I shall pay you well for it.
Madame, by my life, as I am true old woman, or by any
other oath you shall put me to, it is such, as all the whole Town is
not able to match it. Look well upon it; it is as fine as the hair of
your head, even and equal, as nothing more strong, as the strings of
a Vial; white as a flake of Snow, spun all with mine own fingers;
reeled and wound up with mine own hands. Look you (Lady)
on some of the same in skeins; Did you ever see better? Three
Royals, as I am true woman, I received no longer ago then yester∣day
for an ounce.
Daughter Melibea, I will leave this honest woman with
you; For me thinks it is now high time, if I have not stayed too
long, to go visit my sister, Wife unto Chromes: for I have not seen
her since yesterday; and besides, her Page is now come to call me,
and tells me that her old fit hath already been on her this pretty
while.
Now does the Devil go preparing opportunity for my
Stratagem, by re-inforcing this sickness upon the other. Go on,
my good friend, stand stiffly to your tackling; be strong and shrink
not. For now is the time or never; see you leave her not: and re∣move
away this woman from me. But soft; I fear she hears
me.
Say, (friend) what is that thou sai'st?
I say (Madame) Cursed be the devil and my evil Fortune,
that your sisters sickness is grown now upon her in such an un∣lucky
hour, that we shall have no fit time to dispatch our business:
But I pray, what is her sickness?
A pain in her side, which takes her in such grievous man∣ner,
that if it be true which her Page tells me, I fear me it will cost
her her life. Good neighbour, let me entreat you for my sake to
recommend her recovery unto your best devotions and prayers.
Here (Lady, I give you my faithful promise, that as
soon as I go hence, I will hyemee to my Vestalls, where I have
many devout virgins, my friends, upon whom I will lay the same
charge as you have laid upon me.
Doe you hear, Melibea? Content our neighbour, and
give her that which is reason for her yarn. And you mother, I pray
hold me excused, for I doubt not, but you and I shall have ano∣there
day, when wee shall have more leisure to enjoy one ano∣there.
Madame, there is no need of pardon, where there is no
fault committed. Jove pardon you, and I doe. For I thank you, you
have left me here with very good company. Jove grant she may
long enjoy her noble youth, and this her flourishing prime; a time
wherein more pleasures and delights are found, then in this old de∣caye.
Carcass of mine, which is nothing else but a very Spittle-house
of diseases, an Inn full of infirmities, a Store-house, or Ma∣gazine
of sad and melancholy thoughts, a friend to brangling and
brawling, a continual grief, and incurable plague: pitying that
which is past, punished in that which is present: and full of wret∣ched
care in that which is to come: A near neighbour unto death;
a poor Cabin, without one bough of shelter, whereinto it raynes
on all sides; a stick of Willow; a staff of weak Osiers, which is
doubled with any the least stress you put it to.
Tell me (mother) why doe you speak so ill of that, which
the whole world so earnestly desires to enjoy and see?
They desire so much their more hurt; they desire so
much their more grief; they desire to live to be old; because by
living to be old, they live. And life (you know) is sweet; and li∣uing,
they come to be old. Hence is it, that your children desire to
be men; and your men to be old men; and your old men, to be
more and more old; and though they live in never so much pain,
yet doe they still desire to live. For, (as it is in the Proverb) Fine
would the Hen live, for all her pip; she would not be put out of
her life, to be put out of her pain. But who is hee (Lady) that can
recount unto you the inconveniences of old age? The discommo∣ditties
it brings with it? it's torments, it's cares, it's troubles, it's
infirmities, it's colds, it's heats, it's discontentments, it's brawls,
it's janglings, it's griefs, which like so many weights lye heavy up∣on
it? Those deep furrows and deep wrinkles in the face? That
change and alteration in the hair? That fading of fresh and lively
colour? That want of hearing? That weakness of sight? That
hollowness in the eyes? Seeing, as if they were shut up in a
shade? That sinking and falling of the jaws? That toothlesnesse
of the gummes? That failingnesse of force and of strength? That
feebleness of legs? That slowness in feeding? Besides, (Madame)
which makes me sigh to think upon it, when all these miseries I
have told you of, come accompanied with poverty, all sorrows to
this must stoop and strike sail, when the appetite shall be great,
and the provision small; The stomach good, and the diet nought;
For I never knew any worse habit, then that of hunger.
I perceive, so goes the market, as it goes with you. And
as you find your pennyworths, so you speak of the Fair. And
though you perhaps complain, the rich will sing another song.
Daughter, and Mistress, there is no way so fair, but
hath some foul; if you have one mile of good, you have three of
bad. At the foot of every hill, you have three Leagues of ill foal∣lowes.
And of a thousand that live contentedly, you have ten thou∣sand
doe the contrary: True contentedness, rest, renown, glory,
and quietness, run from the rich by other by-conduits, and gut∣ters
of subtlety and deceit; which pipes, whereby they are convey∣ed,
are never perceived, because they are paved and brickt over
with smooth and well wrought flatteries. He is rich that hath Gods
blessing. I mary, that is wealth indeed▪ And shall I tell you, Lady?
Safer it is with him that is despised, then with him that is feared.
And a far better sleep doth the poor man take, then hee who is
bound to keep that with care which hee hath gotten with labour,
and must leave with sorrow. My friend will not dissemble with
me, but the rich mans will with him; I am loved for mine own
sake; the rich man for his welds sake. A rich man shall never
hear the truth; every one will flatter him, and seek to please his hue∣more
in whatsoever he shall say. Besides, he lies open to every mans
envy; and you shall scarce find one rich man amongst a thousand,
but will ingeniously confess, that it had been better for him to
have bin in a middling estate, or in good honest poverty. For riches
make not a man rich but busied; not a Master, but a Steward. More
are they that are possessed by their riches, then they that possess
their riches. To many they have been a means of their death; and
most men they have robed of their pleasure, and their good and
commendable qualities; and to say the truth, they are enemies to
all goodness. Have you not heard say, Men have lien down,
and dreamed of their riches, and behold, they have waked, and found
nothing in their hands? Every rich man hath a dozen of sons, or
Nephews, which repeat no other prayer, nor tender any other
Orison to God, but that he would be pleased to take him out of this
world; and desire nothing more, then to see the hour that they
may come to enjoy his estate; to see him under ground, and what
was his, in their hands; and with a small charge, to lay him up in
his last and everlasting mansion here on earth.
Me thinks, mother, it should be a great grief unto
you, to think upon those good days of yours, which are past and
gone. Would you not be willing to run them over again?
That Trauellour (Lady) were a fool, who having tyred
out himself with a hard days travel, would, to begin his journey
again, desire to return to the same place, from whence hee came.
For all those things, whose possession is no whit pleasing, it is better
to enjoy them as they are, then to desire their longer stay. For then
are they so much the nearer to their end, by how much the farther
they are from their beginning. Nor is there any thing in the world
more sweet, or more pleasing to him that is truly weary, then his
Inn, wherein hee may rest himself. So that though youth be a
thing very io•not, yet hee that is truly old, doth not desire it. But
he indeed that wants reason and true understanding, that man in a
manner loves nothing else, but the days that are past and gone.
Were it but only to live, it is good to desire that
which I say.
As soon (Lady) dies the young Lamb as the old Sheep;
they go both to the shambles together; there is no man so old, but
hee may live one year more; nor no man so young, but hee may
dye to day: so that in this you have little, or no advantage of vs.
Thou hast scarred me with thy words; thy reasons
put me in remembrance that I have seen thee heretofore. Tell
me (mother) art not thou Celestina, that dwelt in Tanners Row,
near the River?
Even the very same.
By my fey you are an old woman. Well, I see it is
a true saying; That days go not away in vain. Now (never trust
me) I did not know you; neither should I, had it not been for that
slash over your face; then were you fair, now wonderfully al∣tered.
She changed? Hi, hi, hi! the devil she is: she was
fair when she met with him (saving your reverence) that scotched
her over the nose.
What say thou fool? Speak, what is it thou-saist?
What laugh thou at?
As though I did not know Mother Celestina?
Madame, Take you hold on time, that it slip not from
you. As for my complexion, that will never change: have you not
read what they say? The day will come, when thou shalt not know
thy self in a glass? Though I am now grown gray before my
time, and seem double the years I am of; of four daughters
which my mother had, my self was the youngest. And therefore,
I am sure, I am not so old as you take me to be.
Friend Celestina, I am very glad both to see and know
thee; and I have taken great pleasure in thy discourse. Here, take
your money and fare-well; for thou look (poor soul) as if
thou had eaten nothing all this day.
O more then mortal image! O precious pearl! How
truly have you guest? O! with what a grace doe thy words come
from thee? I am ravished hearing thee speak. But yet it is not on∣lie
eating, that maintains a man or woman; especially me, who
use to be fasting a whole, nay, two days together, in soliciting o∣there
folks businesses. For, I intend no other thing, my whole life
is nothing else; but to doe good offices for the good, and (if occa∣zion
serve)
to dye for them. And it was evermore my fashion, ra∣there
to seek trouble to my self by serving of others, then to please
and content my self. Wherefore, if you will give me leave, I will
tell you the necessitated cause of my coming, which is another
manner of matter then any you have yet heard; and such as we
were all undone, if I should return in vain, and you not know
it.
Acquaint me (mother) with all your necessities and
wants, and if I can help you in them, or doe you any good, I shall
willingly doe it, as well out of our old acqaintance, as out of neigh∣bour-hood,
which in good and honest minds, is a sufficient bond
to tie them thereunto.
My wants, Madame? My necessities doe you mean?
Nay, others (as I told you) not mine. For mine own, I pass at
home with my self in mine own house, without letting the whole
Country to know them: Eating when I may, and drinking when I
can get it. For, for all my poverty, I never wanted a penny to buy
me bread, nor a Quart, that is, the eighth part of six pence to send
for wine, no, not in all this time of my widowhood. For before,
I never took thought for any, but had always a good Vessel still in
my house. And when one was empty, another was full. I never
went to bed, but I did first eat a toast well steeped in wine, and two
dozen of draughts, sipping still the wine after every sop, for fear of
the Mother, wherewith I was then wont to be troubled. But now, that
I husband all things my self, and am at mine own finding, I am fine
to fetch my wi•e in a little poor Jar, which will scarce hold a pot∣•le.
And sometimes in punishment of my sins (which Cross I am
willing to bear) I am forced to go six times a day with these my
silver hairs about my shoulders, to fill and fetch my wine my self
at the Tavern. Nor would I by my good will dye, till I see my
self have a good Runlet or Terse of mine own within mine
own dootes. For (on my life) there is no provision in the world
like unto it. For as the saying is; It is bread and wine, not the
young man that is spruce and fine, that makes vs rid the way, and
travel with mettle; yet let me tell you, that where the good man is
missing, all other good is wanting. For ill does the spindle move,
when the beard does not wag aboue. And this I thought good to
tell you by the way, upon those speeches which I used concerning
others, and not mine own necessities.
Ask what thou wilt, be it either for thy self, or any by∣die
else, whom it pleases thee.
My most gracious and courteous Lady, descended of high
and noble parentage; your sweet words, and cheerful gesture, ac∣companyed
with that kind and free proffer, which you are pleased
to make to this poor old woman, gives boldness to my tongue, to
speak what my heart even longs to utter. I come lately from one,
whom I left sick to the death, who only with one word, which
should come from your noble mouth, &amp; entrusted in this my bosom
to carry it hence with me, I verily assure my self, it will save his life,
so great is the devotion which he bears to your gentle disposition,
and the comfort he would receive by this so great a kindness.
Good woman; I understand thee not, unless thou de∣li•er
thy mind unto me in plain terms. On the one side thou dost
anger me, and provoke me to displeasure; on the other thou doest
move and stir me to compassion. Neither know I how to return
thee a convenient answer, because I have not fully comprehended
thy meaning; I should think my self happy, if my words might
carry that force, as to save the life of any man, though no∣for
so mean. For to doe good, is to bee like unto the Deity.
Besides, he that doth a benefit, receives it when it is done to a per∣son
that desires it. And he that can cure one that is sick, not doing
it, is guilty of his death; and therefore give not over thy petition,
but proceed and fear nothing.
All fear fled (fair Lady) in beholding your beauty
For, I cannot be persuaded, that Nature did paint in vain one
face fairer then another, more enriched with grace and favour,
more fashionable, and more beautiful then another; were it not to
make them Magazines of virtue, mansions of mercy, houses of com∣passion
and pity, Ministers of her blessings, and dispensers of
those good gifts and graces, which in her bounty she hath
bestowed upon them, and upon your self in a more plenti∣full
manner. Besides, since wee are all mortal, and borne to
dye; as also, that it is most certain, that hee cannot bee said
truly to be borne, who is only borne for himself; for then
should men be like unto bruit beasts, (if not worse;) Amongst
which, there are some, that are very pitiful: as your Unicorn, of
whom it is reported, that hee will humble and prostrate himself
at the feet of a Virgin. And your dog, for all his fierceness, and
cruelnesse of nature, when hee comes to bite another, if hee throw
himself down at his feet, hee will let him alone, and doe him no
harm; and this is all out of pity. Again, to come to your birds,
and fowls of the ayre; your Cock eats not any thing, but hee
first calls his Hens about him, and gives them part of his feeding.
The Pelican, with her beak breaks up her own breast, that she
may give her very bowels and entrails to her young ones to eat. The
Storks maintain their aged parents as long in the nest, as they did
give them food, when they were young and unable to help them∣selves.
Now, if God and Nature gave such knowledge unto beasts
and birds; why should wee that are men, be more cruel one to
another? Why give we not part of our graces, and of our persons,
to our neighbours? Especially when they are involved and afflicted
with secret infirmities, and those such, that where the Medicine is,
thence was the cause of the malady?
For Gods love, without any more dilating, tell me who
is this sick man, who feeling such great perplexity, hath both his
sickness and his cure, flowing from one, and the selfsame Foun∣taine?
You can not choose (Lady) but know a young Gentle∣man
in this City, nobly descended, whose name is Calisto.
Enough, enough; No more (good old woman;) Not a
word, not a word more, I would advise you. Is this the sick pa∣tient,
for whom thou hast made so many prefaces to come to thy
purpose? For what, or whom came thou hither? Came thou to
seek thy death? Know thou for whom (thou bearded Impu∣dent)
thou hast trodden these dangerous steps? What ails this wic∣ked
one, that thou plead for him with such passion? He is fool∣sick,
is hee not? Is hee in his wits, I trow? What would thou
have thought, if thou should have found me without some suspi∣cion
and jealousy of this fool? What a wind-lace hast thou fetched,
with what words hast thou come upon me? I see it is not said
in vain; That the most hurtful member in a man, or woman, is the
tongue. I will have thee burned, thou false Witch, thou enemy to
honesty, thou Causeresse of secret errors; Fie upon thee Filth; Lu∣crecia,
out of my sight with her, send her packing; away with her
I pray, she makes me ready to swooned: ay me, I faint, I dye; she
hath not left me one drop of blood in my body. But I well deserve
this, and more, for giving ear to such a paltry huswife as she is.
Believe me, were it not, that I regarded mine honour, and that I am
unwilling to publish to the world his presumptuous audaciousness
and boldness, I would so handle thee (thou accursed Hag)
that thy discourse, and thy life, should have ended both toge∣there.
In an ill hour came I hither. If my spells and conjuration
fail me. Go to, go to; I wot well enough to whom I speak.
This poor Gentleman, this your brother, is at the point of
death, and ready to dye.
Dare thou yet speak before me? and mutter words
between thy teeth, for to augment my anger, &amp; double thy punish∣meant?
Would thou have me soil mine honour, for to give life to
a fool, to a mad man? Shall I make my self sad, to make him mer∣rye?
Would thou thrive by my loss? And reap profit by my per∣dition?
And receive remuneration by my error? Would thou have
me overthrow, and ruin my fathers house and honour, for to raise
that of such an old rotten Bawd as thou art? Dost thou think, I
doe not perceive thy drift? That I doe not track thee step by step?
Or that I understand not thy damnable errand? But I assure thee,
the reward that thou shalt get thereby, shall be no other, save (that
I may take from thee all occasion of farther offending heaven) to
give an end to thy evil days. Tell me (Traitor as thou art) how
did thou dare to proceed so far with me?
My fear of you (Madame) doth interrupt my excuse;
but my innocence puts new courage into me: your presence again
disheartens me, in seeing you so angry. But that which grieves and
troubles me most, is, that I receive displeasure without any rea∣son,
and am hardly thought on without a cause. Give me leave
(good Lady) to make an end of my speech, and then will you nei∣there
blame it, nor condemn me; then will you see, that I rather seek
to doe good service, then endeavour any dishonest course; and that
I do it more to add health to the Patient, then to detract any thing
from the fame and worth of the Physician. And had I thought that
your Ladyship would so easily have made this bad construction out
of your late noxious suspicion, your licence should not have been
sufficient warrant to have emboldened me to speak any thing, that
might concern Calisto, or any other man living.
Let me hear no more of this mad man, name not this
fool unto me; this leper over walls; this Hob-goblin; this
night-walker; this fantastical spirit; long-shanked, like a Stork;
in shape and proportion, like a picture in Arras, that is ill-wrought;
or an ill-favoured fellow in an old suit of hangings; Say no more of
him, unless you would have me to fall down dead where I stand.
This is hee who saw me the other day, and began to court me
with I know not what extravagant phrases, as if hee had not been
well in his wits, professing himself to be a great Gallant. Tell him
(good old woman) if hee think that I was wholly his, and that he
had won the field, because it pleased me rather to consent to his
folly, then correct his fault, and yield to his errand, then chastise
his error; that I was willing rather to let him go like a fool as
hee came, then to publish this his presumptuous enterprise. More∣over,
advise him, that the next way to have his sickness leave him,
is to leave off his loving, and wholly to relinquish his purpose, if he
purpose to impart health to himself; which if he refuse to doe, tell
him from me, that he never bought words all the days of his life
at a dearer rate. Besides, I would have him know, that no man is o∣uercome,
but he that thinks himself so to be. So shall I live secure,
and he contented. But it is evermore the nature of fools, to think
other like themselves. Return thou with this very answer unto
him; for other answer of me shall he none, nor never hope for any:
for it is but in vain to entreat mercy of him, of whom thou can not
have mercy. And for thine own part, thou moist thank God, that
thou scapest hence scot-free; I have heard enough of you heereto∣fore,
and of all your good qualities, though it was not my hap
to know you.
Troy stood out more stoutly, and held out longer.
And many fiercer Dames have I tamed in my days; Tush? No
storm lasts long.
You mine enemy, what say you? Speak out, I pray,
that I may hear you. Hast thou any thing to say in thy excuse,
whereby thou moist satisfy my anger, and clear thy self of this
thy error and bold attempt?
Whilst your choler lives, my cause must needs dye.
And the longer your anger lasts, the less shall my excuse be
heard. But wonder not that you should be thus rigorous with me:
For a little heate will serve to set young blood a boiling.
Little heate, say you? Indeed thou moist well say little;
because thy self yet lives, whilst I with grief endure thy great pre∣sumption.
What words can thou demand of me for such a one as
he is, that may stand with my good? Answer to my demand, be∣cause
thou say thou hast not yet concluded. And perhaps thou
moist pacify me for that which is past.
Mary, a certain Charm, Madame, which (as hee is
informed by many of his good friends) your Ladyship hath,
which cures the tooth-ache; as also that same admirable Girdle
of yours, which is reported to have been found and brought from
Cumae the Cave there, and was worn, it is thought, by the Sibilla, or
Prophetess of that place; which Girdle they say, hath such a sin∣gular
and peculiar property and power, with the very tutch to
abate and ease any ache or anguish whatsoever. Now this Gentle∣man
I told you of, is exceedingly pained with the tooth-ache, and
even at deaths door with it. And this was the true cause of my
coming: But since it was my ill hap to receive so harsh and un∣pleasing
an answer, let him still for me continue in his pain, as a pu∣nishment
due unto him, for sending so unfortunate a messenger. For
since in that muchnesse of your virtue I have found much of your
pity wanting; I fear me, hee would also want water, should he
send me to the Sea to fetch it. And you know (sweet Lady) that
the delight of vengeance, and pleasure of revenge endures but a
moment, but that of pity and compassion continues for ever
and ever.
If this be that thou would have, why did thou not
tell me of it sooner? Why went thou about the bush with me?
What needed all those circumstances? Or why did thou not de∣liver
it in other words?
Because my plain and simple meaning made me believe,
that though I should have proposed it in any other words whatsoe∣for,
had they been worse then they were, yet would you not have
suspected any evil in them. For, if I were failing in the fitness of
my preface, and did not use •o due and convenient a preamble as I
should have done, it was, because truth needs no colours. The
very compassion that I had of his pain, and the confidence of your
magnificence, did choke in my mouth, when I first began to
speak the expression of the cause. And for that you know (Lady)
that sorrow works turbation, and turbation doth disorder and al∣la
the tongue, which ought always to be tied to the brain; for
heavens love, lay not the fault on me; and if he hath committed an
error, let not that redound to my hurt; for I am no farther blame∣able
of any fault, then as I am the messenger of the faulty. Break
not the rope where it is weakest. Be not like the Cobweb, which
never shows it's force, but on poor little Flies. No humane Law
condemns the father for the sons offence, nor the son for the
fathers: nor indeed (Lady) is it any reason, that his presumption
should occasion my perdition; though considering his desert, I
should not greatly care, that hee should be the delinquent, and my
self be condemned, since that I have no other Trade to live by, save
to serve such as hee is; This is my occupation, this I make my hap∣pines.
Yet withal (Madame) I would have you to conceive, that
it was never in my desire to hurt one, to help another, though
behind mybacke, your Ladyship hath perhaps been otherwise infor∣med
of me. But the best is, it is not the vain breath of the vulgar,
that can blast the truth; assuredly I mean nothing in this, but one∣lie
plain and honest dealing. I doe little harm to any; I have as
few enemies in this City, as a woman can have; I keep my word
with all men; and what I undertake, I perform as faithfully, as if
I had twenty feet, and so many hands.
I now wonder not, that your Ancients were wont to
say; That one only teacher of Vice, was sufficient to mar a great
City. For I have heard such and so many tales of thy false and cun∣ning
tricks, that I know not whether I may believe, thy errand was
for this charm.
Never let me pray: or if I pray, let me never be heard,
if you can draw any other thing from me, though I were to be put
to a thousand torments.
My former late anger will not give me leave to laugh
at thy excuse. For I wot very well, that neither oath nor torment
shall make thee to speak the truth. For it is not in thy power to
doe it.
You are my good Lady and Mistress, you may say
what you list, and it is my duty to hold my peace; you must com∣mand,
and I must obey, but your rough language (I hope) will cost
your Ladyship an old petticoat.
And well hast thou deserved it.
If I have not gained it with my tongue, I hope I have not
lost it with my intention.
Thou dost so confidently plead thy ignorance, that thou
make me almost ready to believe thee; yet will I in this thy so
doubtful an excuse, hold my sentence in suspense, and will not dis∣pose
of thy demand upon the relish of so light an interpretation.
Neither for all this would I have thee to think much of it, nor
make it any such wonder, that I was so exceedingly moved; For
two things did concur in thy discourse, the least of which was suf∣ficient
to make me run out of my wits. First, in naming this Gen∣tleman
unto me, who thus presumed to talk with me: then, that
thou should entreat me for him, without any further cause given;
which could not but engender a strong suspicion of intention of hurt
to my honour. But since all is well meant, and no harm intended, I
pardon a•l that is past; for my heart is now somewhat lightened, si∣thence
it is a pious, and a holy work, to cure the sick, and help the
distressed.
I, and so sick (Madame) and so distressed, that did you
know it as well as I, you would not judge him the man, which
in your anger you have censured him to be. By my say, the poor
Gentleman hath no gall at all, no ill meaning in his heart. Hee is
endowed with thousands of graces; for bounty, he is an Alexander; for
strength, an Hector; he has the presence of a Prince; hee is fair in
his carriage, sweet in his behaviour, and pleasant in his conuersati∣on;
there is no melancholy, or other bad humour, that reigns in
him; Nobly descended, as your self well knows; a great Tilter;
and to see him in his armour, it becomes him so well, that you
would take him to be another Saint George. Hercules had not that
force and courage as he hath; His deportment, his person, his fea∣ture,
his disposition, his agility, and actiuenesse of body, had need
of another manner of tongue to express it, then mine. I ache him
all together, and for all in all, you shall not find such another; and
for admired form, a miracle; and I am verily persuaded, that that
fair and gentle Narcissus, who was enamoured with his own proper
beauty, when as in a glass he viewed himself, in the water was no∣thing
so fair as he, whom now one poor tooth, with the extra∣mity
of its pain, doth so torment, that hee doth nothing but
complain.
The Age, I pray; How long hath hee had it?
His age (Madame?) Mary, I think hee is about some
three and twenty. For here stands she, who saw him borne, and
took him up from his mothers feet.
This is not that which I ask thee; Nor doe I care
to know his age. I ask thee how long he hath been troubled with
his tooth-ache?
Some eight days (Madame) but you would think he had
had it a year, hee is grown so weak with it, and the greatest ease,
and best remedy he hath, is, to take his Vial, whereto hee sings so
many songs, &amp; in such doleful notes, that I verily believe, they did
far exceed those, which that great Emperor and Musician Hadrian
composed concerning the souls departure from the body; the bet∣la
to endure without dismayment, his approaching death. For
though I have but little skill in music, me thinks he makes the Vi∣all,
when he plays thereon, to speak; and when hee sings thereun∣to,
the birds with a better will listen unto him, then to that Muse∣cian
of old, which made the trees and stones to move. Had he been
borne then, Orpheus had lost his prey. Weigh then with your self
(Sweet Lady) if such a poor old woman as I am, have not cause to
count my self happy, if I may give life unto him, to whom the hey∣uens
have given so many graces? Not a woman that sees him, but
praises Natures workmanship, whose hand did draw so perfect a
piece; and if it bee their hap to talk with him, they are no more
mistresses of themselves, but are wholly at his disposing; and of
Commanders, desire to be commanded by him. Wherefore, seeing I
have so great reason to doe for him, conceive (good Lady) my
purpose to be fair and honest, my courses commendable, and free
from suspicion and jealousy.
O how I am fallen out with mine own impatience!
How angry with my self, that hee being ignorant, and thou inno∣cent
of any intended Ill; thou hast endured the distemperature of
my enraged tongue? But the great reason I had for it, frees me
from any fault of offence, urged thereunto by thy suspicious spea∣ches:
but in requital of thy sufferance, I will forthwith fulfil thy
request, and likewise give thee my Girdle. And because I have not
leisure to write the charm, till my mother comes home, if this will
not serve the turn, come secretly for it to morrow morning.
Now, now, is my Mistress quite undone. All the
world cannot save her; she will have Celestina come secretly to more∣row.
I smell a Rat; there is a Pad in the straw; I like not this,
Come secretly to morrow; I fear me, she will part with some∣thing
more then words.
What sai'st thou, Lucrecia?
Mary, I say, Madame, you have worded well. For it
is now somewhat late.
I pray (mother) say nothing to this Gentleman of what
hath passed betwixt you and me, lest he should hold me either crew∣ell,
sudden, or dishonest.
I did not lye even now; I see well enough how ill the
world goes.
Madame, I much marvel you should entertain any the
least doubt of my service. Fear you not; for I can suffer, and co∣for
any thing: and I well perceive, that your great jealousy and
suspicion of me, made you (as commonly it doth) to interpret my
speeches to the worst sense. Well, I will take my leave, and go
hence with this Girdle so merrily, as if I did presently see his heart
leaping for joy, that you have graced him with so great a kindness;
and I doubt not, but I shall find him much eased of his pain.
I will doe more for your sick Patient then this, if
need require, in requital of your great patience.
Wee shall need more, and you must doe more then this,
though perhaps you will not so well like of it, and scarce thank
vs for it.
Mother, what's that thou talk of thanks?
Mary I say (Madame) That we both give you thanks,
that wee are both at your service; and rest both deeply indebted
to your Ladyship; and that the payment is there most certain, where
the party is most bound to satisfy.
Heere's Cat in the Pan. What choplogic have
we here?
Daughter Lucrecia; Hold thy peace; Come hither to
me. If to morrow I may see thee at my house, I will give thee such a
Lye, as shall make thy hair as yellow as gold; but tell not your
Mistress of it. Thou shalt also have a powder of me to sweeten
thy breath, which is a little of the strongest. There is not any in
this kingdom, that can make it but my self. And there is not any
thing in a woman that can be worse then a stinking breath.
A blessing on your aged heart; for I have more need
of this, then of my meat.
And yet (you fool) you will be talking and prating
against me. Hold thy peace; for thou know not what need thou
moist have of me. Doe not exasperate your Mistress, and make
her more angry now, then she was before. But let me go hence
in peace.
What sai'st thou to her, mother?
Nothing (Madame) wee have done already.
Nay, you must tell me what you said to her; for I can∣not
abide, that any body should speak any thing in my presence,
and I not have a part therein. And therefore, without any more a∣doe,
let me know it.
I entreated her to put your Ladyship in mind of the
Charm, that it might be writ out ready for me; and that she
should learn of me to temper her self in the time of your anger,
putting her in mind of that ancient Adage; From an angry man,
get thee gone but for a while; but from an enemy, for ever. But you
(Madame) had only a quarrel to those words of mine which you
suspected, and not any enmity to my person. And say, they had bin
such as you conceited them; yet were they not so bad, as you
would have made them to be. For it is every days experience, to see
men pained &amp; tormented for women; and women as much for men.
And this, Nature works; and Nature (you know) is crafts master,
and works nothing that is ill: So that my demand (you see) was
(as my desire was it should be) in it self commendable, as having
it's growth from so good a root. Many the like reasons could I
render you, were not prolixity tedious to the hearer, and hurtful
to the speaker.
Thou hast shown a great deal of temper, as well in
saying little, when thou saw me angry, as also in thy great and
singular sufferance.
Mad•me, I endured your chiding with fear, because
I knew you were angry with reason. Besides, a fit of anger is but
like a flash of lightning; which made me the more willing to give
way, till your heate were overpassed.
This Gentleman is beholding unto you, whom I recom∣mend
to your care.
Not so, Madame; His deserts challenge more at my hands.
And if by my entreaties, I have done him any good, I fear me,
by my over long-stay, I have done him as much harm. And there∣fore
if your Ladyship will license me, I will haste to see how he does.
Had thou spoke for it sooner, sooner had thou been
sped. Go thy ways, and a good luck with thee: for neither thy
coming hither hath done me any good; nor thy going hence
can doe me any harm; Thy message being as bootless, as thy
departure shall be harmless.
CELESTINA having taken her leave of Melibea, trudges a∣long
the street mumbling and muttring to her self. Being come
home, there she found Sempronio, who staid expecting her re∣turn.
They go both talking together, till they come to Calisto's
house. And being espied by Parmeno, he tells it his Master, who
wills him to open the door.
O cruel encounter! O daring and discreet
attempt! O great and singular sufferance! O how
near had I been to my death, if my much subtlety
and cunning craft had not shifted in time the sails
of my suite! O braving menaces of a gallant Lady!
O angry and enraged Damsel! O thou Devil
whom I conjured! O how well hast thou kept thy word with me in
all I that desired! I am much bound unto thee; so handsomely hast
thou appeased this cruel Dame by thy mighty power, and afforded
me so fit a place and opportunity, by reason of her mothers ab∣sense,
to utter my mind unto her. O thou old Celestina; cheer
up thy heart, and think with thy self; that things are half ended,
when they are well begun! O thou oil of Serpents! O thou de∣licit
white thread; how have you bestirred your selves in my bu∣sinesse!
whose favourable furtherance if I had not found, I would
utterly have broken and destroyed all the enchantments which ei∣there
I have already, or hereafter are to be made; nor would I ever
any more have had any belief in herbs, stones, or words. Be
merry then (old Stinkard) Frolic with thy self (old wench) for,
thou shalt get more by this one suite, then by soldring of fifteen
cracked Maidenheads. A pocks upon these long and large playtings
in my Petticoats; Fie how they rumple and fold themselves about
my legs, hindering my feet from hasting thither, whither I de∣sire
my good news should come. O good fortune, what a friend
art thou to the valiant! what a foe to those that are fearful! Nor
by flying doth the Coward fly death. O how many failed of that
which I have effected! How many have struck at, but mist that
nail, which my self only have hit on the head! What in so
strong and dangerous a strait as this, would these young Graduates
in my Art have done! Perhaps have bolted out some foolish word
or other to Melibea, whereby they would have lost as much by their
prattling, as I have gained by my silence. And therefore it is an old
saying; Let him play that hath skill: and that the better Physici∣an
is hee that hath experience, then hee that hath learning;
For experience, and frequent warnings, make men Artists in their
professions; and it must be such an old woman as I am, who at eve∣rye
little Channel holds up her coats, and treads the streets with
leisurely steps, that shall prove a Proficient in her trade. O girdle,
my pretty girdle, let me hug thee a little! O how my heart
leaps in looking upon thee! If I live, I will make thee bring her to
me by force, who is so unwilling to come to me of her own ac∣cord,
that I had much ado to get a good word from her.
Either mine eyes are not matches, or that is Celestina. Now
the Devil go with her; how her gown comes dragging on the
ground? how the skirts of her coat trouble her? how her mouth
goes? Sure, she is muttring something to her self.
Why dost thou keep such a crossing of thy self? I be∣leeue,
thou blessest thy self to see me.
I will tell thee: why? Rarity (you know) is the mother of
admiration; and admiration being conceived in the eyes, entered
straight into the mind: and the mind is enforced again by the
eyes, to discover it self by these outward signs. Who did ever
see thee walk the streets before with thy head hanging in thy by∣some;
with thy eyes cast down to the ground? Who did ever see
thee go thus mumbling of thy words to thy self? and to come in
such post-haste, as if thou were going to get a Benefice? so that the
rarity and strangeness thereof, makes those who know thee, to
wonder what it should mean? But to let this pass; Tell me of all
loves, what good news thou bring. Say: Is it a Son, or a Daughter?
That is, whether we have sped well or ill? Forever since one of the
Clock I have waited here for you; all which while, I have had no
greater or better token of comfort, then that of your long staying.
This foolish Rule (my Son) is not always true; for had
I stayed but one hour longer, I might perhaps have left my nose be∣hind
me, and two other noses, had I had them, &amp; my tongue to boot:
so that the longer I had stayed, the dearer it would have cost me.
Good mother, as you love me, go not hence, till you
have told me all.
Sempronio, my friend, neither have I time to stay here,
nor is this a fit place to tell it thee. Come, go along with me to
Calisto, and thou shalt hear wonders (my Bully.) For by commu∣nicating
my self to many, I should as it were deflower my Emboss∣sage,
whose maidenhead I mean to bestow on your Master; for, I
will that from mine own mouth, hee hear what I have done; for
though thou shalt have parcel of the profit, I mind to have all the
thanks for my labour.
What? Are you at your parcels now? Doe you think,
Celestina, to put me to my parcels? Tho you shall have your parcel;
mary, come up: I tell you plainly, I doe not like this word, that
I doe not. And therefore parcel me no more of your parcels.
Go to, you fool; Hold your peace, be it part or par∣cell,
man, thou shalt have what thou wilt thy self. Doe but ask,
and have; what is mine, is thine: Let vs laugh and be merry, and
benefit our selves the best that we can: Hang all this trash, this pu∣trified
dirt, rather then thou and I should fall out about dividing
the spoil; yet must I tell you, (which is no more then your self
knows) that old folks have more need then young; Especially
you, who live at full table, upon free cost.
There goes more (I wise) to a mans life, then eating
and drinking.
What, Son? A dozen of points, a hat, or a stone-bow, to go
from house to house shooting at birds, aiming at other birds with
your eye, that take their standing in windows. I mean pretty
wenches (you fool) such birds (you mad-cap) as have no wings to
fly from you: you know my meaning, Sir; for there is no better
Bawd, for them, then a bow: under colour whereof, thou moist enter
any house whatsoever, making it thy excuse to seek after some
bird thou shootst at, &amp;c. It is your only delicate trick you can use.
But wo (Sempronio) unto her, who is to uphold and maintain her
credit, and begins to grow old, as I now doe.
O cogging old Hag; O old Bawd, full filled with mis∣chief;
O covetous and greedy Cormorant; O ravenous glutton!
I perceive she would as willingly cousin me, as I would my Master;
and all to enrich her self. But seeing she is so wickedly minded, and
cares not who perish, so as she may thrive, I will mar her mar∣ket;
I will look to her water hereafter; I will keep her from
fingering any more Crowns; nor will I any longer rent out the
gains unto her, which I make of my Master, but reserve the pro∣fits
for my self: or rather (which is the surer and honester course)
seek to save his purse, and play the good husband for him. For he
that rises by lewd and unlawful means, comes tumbling down
faster then hee clambred up. O! how hard a thing is it to know
man? True is that vulgar saying, No manner of merchandise, or
beast, is half so hard to be known. Cursed old witch, she is as
false as truth is truth; I think the Devil brought me acquainted
with her: it had been better for me, to have fled from this vene∣mous
Viper, then to put her, as I have done, in my bosom; but it
was mine own fault, I can blame no body but my self: and there∣•ore
let her gain what she can gain, be it by right or wrong, I will
keep my word with her.
What say thou Sempronio? Whom dost thou talk
to? Goosed thou gnawing of my skirts? What is that thou grumble
at? Why comes thou not forward?
That which I say (mother Celestina) is this; that I doe
not marvel that you are mutable: for therein you doe, but as o∣theirs
have done before you, following that common track that ma∣ny
more have trod in: you told me, you would defer this busi∣ness,
lead•ng my Master along in a fools paradise; and now thou
run head-long without either sense or wit, to tell Calisto of all
that hath passed. Know thou not, that men esteem those things
most, which are most difficult to be achieved? And prize them the
more, the more hardly they come by them? Besides, Is not every
day of his pain, unto vs a double gain?
A wise man altered his purpose, but a fool perseveres in
his folly: a new business requires new counsel; and various accidents,
various advice. Nor did I think (Son Sempronio) that fortune would
have befriended me so soon. Besides, it is the part of a discreet
messenger, to doe that which the time requires; especially, when
as the quality of the business cannot conceal or admit of dissem∣bled
•ime. And moreover, I know that thy Master (as I have heard)
is liberal, and somewhat of a womanish longing; and therefore will
give more for one day of good news, then for a hundred, wherein
he is pained. And with his pain, mine will be increased: his in lo∣uing,
and mine in trudging to and fro. For your quick and speedy
pleasures beget alteration; and great alteration doth hinder deliberation∣ration.
Again, where will you find goodness, but in that which
is good? And nobleness of blood, but in large and long continued
rewards? Peace, you fool, let me alone with him, and you shall see
how your old woman will handle h•m.
Then tell me what passed concerning that noble Lady.
Acquaint me but with one word of her mouth; for trust me, I
long as much to know her answer, as my Master doth.
Peace, you fool; What? Does your complexion change?
Does your colour alter? I know by your nose, what porridge you
ove. You had rather have the taste, then sent of this business. Come
I prithee, let vs hye vs, for thy Master will be ready to run mad,
if we stay ouer-long.
And I am little better, because you will not stay and tell me.
Master, Master?
What's the matter, you fool?
I see Sempronio and Celestina coming towards the house.
And at every step they make a stop; and look where they stand
still, there Sempronio, with the point of his sword, makes streakes
and lines in the ground. It is some earnest matter sure that they
are debating, but what it should be, I cannot devise.
O thou careless absurd Ass; Can thou descry land, and
not make to the shore? See them coming, and not hye thee to
open the door? O thou Supreme Deity: with what come they?
What news doe they bring? whose stay hath been so long, that
I have longed more for their coming, then the end of my reme∣die.
O my sad ears, prepare your selves for that which you are
now to hear: for in Celestina's mouth rests either my present case,
or eternal heart-griefe. O that I could fall into a slumber, and pass
away this short, this litlte, little space of time, in a dream wherein I
might see the beginning, and ending of her speech. Now I verily
believe, that more painful to a Felon, is the expecting of that
his cruel and capital sentence, then the Act it self, of his certain
and fore-knowne death. O leaden-heeled Parmeno; slower then
the Snail, dead-handed as thou art, dispatch, I say, and vnbolt this
troublesome door, that this honourable woman may enter in, in
whose tongue lies my life.
Dost thou hear him; Sempronio? Your Master is now of
another temper; these words are of another tune, then those wee
lately heard both of Parmeno, and him, at our first coming hither.
The matter I see is well amended; there is never a word I shall tell
him, but shall be better to old Celestina, then a new petticoat.
Make at your coming in, as though you did not see Ca∣listo,
using some good words as you go.
Peace, Sempronio; Though I have hazarded my life for
him, yet Calisto's own worth, and his, and your joint entreaties,
merit much more then this. And I hope, he will well reward me for
my pains, being so frank and Noble a Gentleman as hee is.
CELESTINA being entered Calisto's house, Calisto with great
affection and earnestness, demands of her, what had happened
betwixt her and Melibea? While they continue talking together,
Parmeno hearing Celestina speak wholly for her self, and her
own private profit, turning himself toward Sempronio, at eve∣rye
word he gives her a nip, for the which he is reprehended by Sem∣pronio.
In the end, old Celestina discovers to Calisto all the
whole business, and shows him the Girdle she brought from Me∣libea.
And so taking her leave of Calisto, she gets her home to
her own house, taking Parmeno along with her.
What good news (mother?) speak (dear
mother.)
O my good Lord and Master Calisto,
How is it? how is it with you? O my new
Lover (and not without just cause) of fairest Me∣libea!
How can thou make this old woman a∣mends,
who hath hazarded her life in thy service?
What woman was ever driven to such narrow shifts? The very
thought whereof, makes my heart to faint, emptying my vital
veins of all their blood. I would have given my life for less then
the price of this old tottred Mantle, which you see here on my
back.
Thou art all (I see) for thy self. That is it thou shoot'st
at. Thou art like a Lattice, that grows betwixt two Cole-worts;
If thou be let alone, thou will ouer-top them. The next word I look
for, is, that she beg a Kirtle for her Mantle: thou art all (I per∣ceiue)
for thy self; and wilt not ask any thing, whereof others
may have part. The old woman will implume him, not leaving
him so much as one feather; how cunningly does she work him?
how craftily pitch her no•s to catch me and my Master, seeking to
make me faithless, and him foolish? Doe but mark her (Sempronis)
be still, and give her but the hearing, and you shall see, she will
not demand any money of my Master, because it is divisible.
Peace, (thou despairful fellow) lest Calisto kill thee, if
he chance to hear thee.
Good mother, either cut off thy discourse, or take thou
this sword and kill me.
Now, what a Devil ails he? He shakes and quivers like
a fellow that hath had his senses ouer-toucht with quicke-siluer.
Look, hee cannot stand on his legs; would I could help him to
his tongue, that I might hear him speak again: sure, he cannot
live long, if this fft continue. Wee shall get well by this his love,
shall wee not? Every man his mourning weed, and there's an end.
Your sword, Sir. Now I hope not: What? Take your
sword and kill you? There's a word indeed to kill my heart. No;
let your sword serve to kill your enemies, and such as wish you
harm. As for me, I will give thee life, man, by that good hope,
which I have in her, whom thou love best.
Good hope, mother?
I, good hope; and well may it be called so, since that
the gates are set open for my second return. And shall I tell you?
she will sooner receive me in this poor tottred Gown and Kirtle,
then others in their silks, and cloth of gold.
Sempronio, sow me up this mouth; for I can no longer
hold. A pocks on her, she hath hedged in the Kirtle to her Gown.
Could not one alone have contented her?
You will hold your peace, will you not? By Jove you
were best be quiet, or I shall set you hence in a devils name. What?
Is there no ho with you? Say she beg her apparel of him, what's
that to thee? she does well in it; and I commend her for it, having
such need thereof as she has. And thou know, Where the Flamen
sings, there hath he his offerings, he must have food and raiment.
True, he hath so; but as his service is, so is his allowance; he
sings all the year long for it: and this old Jade would in one day,
for treading some three steps, cast off all her rugged hairs, and get
her a new coat; which is more then she could well doe these fifty
years.
Is this all the good she taught thee? Is all your old acquain∣tance
come to this? Is this all the obligation you owe her for her
pains in breeding you up? Sure, she he's brought her Hogs to a
good market, in bestowing so great kindness on so very a Pig.
I could be well content, that she should pill and pole, ask
and have, shave &amp; cut, but not cut out all the cloth foe• her own coat.
It is her fault, I must confess, but other Vice hath she
none, save only that she is a little too covetous. But let her alone,
and give her leave to provide straw, first, for to thatch her own
walls, and to lay the ioyses first of her own house, then afterwards
shall she board ours; else had it been better for her she had never
known vs.
Mother, as you love goodness, if you be a good woman,
tell me what was she doing? How got you into the house? How
was she apparelled? On which side of the house did you find her?
What countenance did she show thee at thy first entrance? How
did she look on thee?
With such a look and countenance, as your brave fierce
bulls use towards those that cast sharp darts against them, when they
come for to be baited: or like your wilde bores, when they make
towards those Mastiues which set upon them.
Be these thy good hopes? These signs of health? What
then are those that are mortal? Why, death it self could not be
half so deadly. For that would ease and rid me of this my torment,
then which none is greater, none more grievous.
These are my Masters former fires; he renews afresh his
wonted flames: What a strange kind of man is he? He hath not the
patience to stay to haere that which so earnestly hee hath desired.
Now Sir; Who talks now? I must not speak a
word; but did my Master hear you, he would cudgel your coat,
as well as mine.
Some evil fire consume thee: for thou speak prediu∣dicially
of all; but I offend no man. Let some intolerable more∣tall
disease, or some pestilent plague seize upon thee, and consume
thee; Thou quarrelsome, contentious, envious, and accursed Cay∣tiff;
Is this thy friendship, this the amity thou hast contracted
with Celestina and me? Go with the Devils name, if this be thy
love.
If thou wilt not (thou that art sole Queen, and some∣reign
of my life) that I dye desperate, and that my soul go con∣damned
from hence to perpetual pain (so impatient am I of hey∣ring
these things) delay me no longer, but certify me briefly,
whether thy glorious demand had a happy end, or no? As also
whether that cruel and sterne look of that impious face, whose
frowns murder as many as they are bent against, sorted to a gentle
entertaining of thy suite? For all that I have heard hitherto, are ra∣there
tokens of hate, then of love.
The greatest glory, which is given to that secret office
of the Bee, which little creature of nature, the discreeter sort ought
to imitate, is, that whatsoever be touches, he converts it into
a better substance, then in it self it was. In like manner hath it so
befallen me, with those coy and squeamish speeches of Melibea,
and all other her scornful and disdainful behaviours; all her
sour looks and words I turned into honey; her anger into mild∣ness;
her fury into gentleness; and her running from me, into run∣ning
to me. Tell me, man, What did thou think Celestina went
thither for? What would she make there, whom you have already
rewarded beyond her desert, unless it were to pacify her fury, to
oppose my self to all accidents, to be your shield and buckler in
your absence, to receive upon my mantle all the blows that were
struck at you, to endure those revilings, bitter tauntings, and those
disdainful terms, which, such as she is, usually make show of, when
they are first sued unto for their love. And why forsooth doe they
this? Only to the end, That what they give, may the better be
esteemed; and therefore, they still speak worst of him, whom
they love best; and make a show of most dislike, where they like
most. Which if it should not be so, there would be no difference
between the love of a common whore, and an honest Damsel that
sty• is upon her honour; if every one should say yea, as soon as she
is asked. And therefore, when they see a man loves them (though
themselves burn, and fry in the liveliest flames of love) yet for mo∣•esties
sake, they will outwardly show a coldness of affection,
a sober countenance, a pleasing kind of strangeness, a constant
mind, a chaste intent, and power forth words as sharpe as Vinegar,
that their own tongues wonder at this their great sufferance, ma∣king
them forcibly to confess that with their mouths, whose con∣trary
is contained in their hearts. But because I would have thee
have some ease of thy sorrows, and take some repose, whilst I re∣late
at large unto thee all the words that passed between her and
me, and by what means I made my first entrance into Melibea's
house; Know for thy comfort, that the end of her discourse was ve∣rye
good.
Now (dear mother) that you have given me assurance,
that I may boldly with comfort expect the extremest vigour of her
answer; say what thou wilt, and I shall be attentive thereunto. Now
my heart is at rest; now my thoughts are quiet; now my veins
receive and recover their lost blood; now have I lost my fear; now
doe I find some joy; now am I cheerful. Let vs (if it please you)
go up; where, in my chamber you shall report that at full, which
I have heard in brief,
With all my heart, Sir, Come, let vs go.
O what starting holes does this fool seek for to fly
from vs, that he may, at his pleasure, weep for joy with Celestina,
and discover unto her a thousand secrets of his light, and doting ap∣petite!
First, to ask her, I know not how oft of every particular:
and then have her answer him to the same, six several times one af∣la
another, and never to make an end, but over, and over, and o∣for
with it again, having no body by to tell him how tedious he is;
Fie upon him, I am sick to think upon it. Go your ways (you fool)
Get you up with a murrain; but we will not stay long after you.
Mark (mother) how Parmeno goes mumbling to himself;
see how the slave crosses himself, to hear what thou hast brought
to pass by thy great diligence! Observe in what a maze he stands!
Look, look, Celestina; dost thou see what hee is doing? See,
and the villain does not cross himself again? Come up, up, up;
and sit you down (I pray) whilst I on my knees give ear to thy
sweet answer. Say on; And tell me quickly, by what means
thou gotst into the house?
By selling a parcel of thread which I had; by which trick,
I have taken in my days, more then thirty of as good worth and
quality as her self, (So it pleased fortune to favour me in this
world) and some better women, I wise, and of greater rank,
were she more honourable then she is.
Greater (mother) perhaps in body, but not in nobleness
of birth, not in state, not in beauty, not in discretion, not in state∣lines,
linked with gracefulness and merit, not in virtue, nor
in speech.
Now the fools steel begins to strike fire; now his bells
begin to jangle; mark how his clock goes; it never strikes un∣der
twelve; the finger of his dial point is still upon high noon; all
upon the most. Sempronio, tell the clock, keep true reckoning,
how standst thou gazing like a wide-mouthed drivelling fool, hey∣ring
his fooleries, and her lies?
O thou venomous tongued Villain; thou railing Ras∣call;
Why should thou alone stop thy ears at that, to which all
the world besides is willing to harken? And say they are but tales
and fables which she tells him; yet were it only but for this, that
their discourses are of love, thou oughtst to lend them a willing at∣tention.
Noble Calisto, Let thy ears be open to that which I
shall tell thee, and thou shalt see what thy good fortune, and my
great ear have effected for thee. For, when I was about to pitch a
price of my thread, and to sell it, Melibea's mother was called away
to go visit a sister of hers, that lay exceeding sick: and because she
could not stay with me her self (so necessary was her absence) she
left Melibea to conclude the bargain, and to drive such a price with
me, as she should think fit.
O joy beyond compare! O singular opportunity! O sea∣sonable
time! O that I had lain hid underneath thy mantle, that I
might have heard her but speak, on whom heaven hath so plenti∣fully
powered forth the fullness of his graces!
Under my mantle (noble Sir?) Alack, poor soul as
I am, what would you have done there? Why, she must needs
have seen you at least thorough thirty holes, should not fortune give
me a better.
Well, I will get me gon; I say nothing, Sempronio; hear
you all for me: I will be hanged, if the fool my Master doe not
measure with his thoughts, how many steps there be between this
and Melibea's house. And if hee not contemplate every kind of
action and gesture she might use; as how she looked, how she stood,
when she was bargaining for the thread: All his senses, all the
powers &amp; faculties of his soul are wholly taken up, and possessed with
her: but he will find in the end, that my counsel would have done
him more good, then all the cunning tricks, and coozenages of
Celestina.
Whats the matter with you there? I am hearing of a
cause, that concerns no less then my life; and you keep a tattling
and a prattling there (as you still use to doe) to trouble and molest
•me in my business, and provoke me to anger: as you love me, hold
your tongues, and you will dye with delight; such pleasure will
you take in the repetition of her singular diligence; Go on (dear
mother) what did thou doe, when thou saw thou wast left all a∣lone?
O Sir, I was so overjoyed, that whosoever had seen
me, might have read in my face the merriment of my heart.
It is so now with me; But how much more had a man
beforehand conceived some such image in his mind? But tell me,
wast thou not stricken dumb with this so sudden and unexpected
an accident?
No. But rather grew thereby the bolder to utter my
mind unto her; it was the thing that I desired; it was even as I
would have wished it: There was nothing could have fell out so pat
for me, as to see my self all alone with her: then began I to open
the very bowels and entrails of my heart; then did I deliver my em∣bassage,
and told her in what extreme pain you lived, and how
that one word of her mouth, proceeding favourably from her,
would ease you of your mighty torment. And as one standing in
suspense, looking wisely and steadily upon me, somewhat amazed
at the strangeness of my message, harkening very attentively, till
she might come to know who this should be, that for want of a
word of her mouth, lived in such great pain, and what manner of
man he might be, whom her tongue was able to cure? In naming
you unto her, she did cut off my words, and with her hand struck
her self a blow on the breast, as one that had heard some strange and
fearful news; charging me to cease my prattle, and to get me
out of her sight, unless I would her servants should become my Exe∣cutioners,
and make short work with me in these my old and latter
days; aggravating my audacious boldness; calling me Witch,
Sorceress, Bawd, old Whore, false Baggage, bearded Miscreant, the
Mother of mischief; and many other more ignominious names,
wherewithal they fear children. And when she had ended with
her Bugge-beares, she began to fall into often swownings and
trances, making many strange gestures, full of fear and amaze∣meant,
all her senses being troubled, her blood boiling within her,
throwing her self this way and that way, bearing in a strange kind
of manner the members of her body one against another; and then
in a strong and violent fashion, being wounded with that golden
shaft, which at the very voicing of your name, had struck her to the
heart, writhing and winding her body, her hands and fingers being
clinched one within another, like one struggling &amp; striving for life,
that you would have thought, she would have rent them asunder,
hurling and rolling her eyes on every side, striking the hard
ground with her tender feet. Now, I all this while, stood me still
in a co•ner, like a cloth that is shrunk in the wetting, as close as I
could for my life, not saying so much as any one word unto her; yet
glad with all my heart, to see her in this cruel and pitiful taking.
And the more her throws and pangs were, the more did I laugh
in my sleeve at it; because I thereby knew, her yielding would be
the sooner, and her fall the nearer: yet must I tell you, that whilst
her anger did foam out it's froth, I did not suffer my thoughts to be
idle, nor give them leave to run a wooll-gathering, but recall∣cting
my self, and calling my wits about me, I took hold on
Times fore-top, and found a salve to heal that hurt, which my
self had made.
Dear mother, thou hast told me that, which whilst I was
hearing thee, I had fore-casted in mine own judgment, I did still
dream it would come to this; but I doe not see how thou could
light upon a fit excuse, that might serve the turn, and prove good
enough to cover and colour the suspicion of thy demand; though I
know, that thou art exceeding wise, and in all that thou dost (to
my seeming) more then a woman. Since, that as thou did prog∣nosticate
her answer, so did thou in time provide thee of thy reply.
What could that Tuscane Champion (so much famoused thorough∣out
all Italy) have done more? Whose renown (had thou then
been living) had been quite lost; who three days before she die∣ed,
divined of the death of her old husband, and her two sons.
Now doe I believe that, which is so commonly spoken; that a
woman is never to seek for an answer; and though it be the weaker
Sex, yet is their wit more quick and nimble then that of men.
Say you me so, Sir? Well, let it be so then, I told her, your
torment was the tooth-ache; and that the word which I craved of
her, was a kind of Prayer, or Charm, which she knew to be very
good, and of great power against that pain.
O admirable craft! O rare woman in thy art! O cun∣ning
creature! O speedy remedy! O discreet deliverer of a mes∣sage!
What humane understanding is able to reach unto so high a
means of help? And I verily persuade my self, that if our age
might purchase those years past, wherein Aeneas and Dido lived,
Venus would not have taken so much pains, for to attract the love
of Elisa to his son, causing Cupped to assume the form of Ascanius,
the better to deceive her: but would (to make short work of the
business) have made choice of thee to mediate the matter: and
therefore doe I hold my death happily employed, since that I have
put it into such hands, and I shall evermore be of this mind, that if
my desire obtain not it's wished effect, yet know I not what could
be done more, according to nature, for my good and welfare. What
think you now my Masters? What can ye imagine more? Was
there ever the like woman borne in this world? Had she ever her
fellow?
Sir, doe not stop me in the course of my speech. Give
me leave to go on, for night draws on. And you know, Hee that
does ill, hates the light.
How? What's that? No, by no means; For heavens
sake, doe not offer it, you shall have Torches, you shall have Pages,
any of my servants, make choice of whom you will to accompa∣ny
you home.
O yes, in any case! I pray take care of her; because she
is young and handsome, and may chance to bee ravished by the
way. Sempronio, thou shalt go with her, because she is
afraid of the Crickets, which chripe in the dark, as she goes
home to her house.
Son Parmeno, what's that thou said?
I said, Sir, it were meet, that I and Sempronio should ac∣company
her home; For it is very dark.
It is well said, Parmeno: you shall by and by, proceed, I
pray, in your discourse; and tell me what farther past between
you. What answer made she for the Charm?
Mary, that with all her heart I should have it.
With all her heart? O Jove! How gracious and how
great a gift!
Nay, this is not all; I craved more then this.
What, my honest old woman?
Her Girdle, which continually she wore about her, offer∣ming
that it was very good for the allaying of your pain; because
of some Supereminent Influence from the Sibilla Cumanae.
But what said she?
Give me Albricias; reward me for my good news,
and I will tell you all.
Take my whole house, and all that is in it, on condition
you tell me; or else besides what thou wilt.
Give but this poor old woman a Mantle, and I will
give that into thy hand, which she wears about her.
What dost thou talk of a Mantle? Tut, a Kirtle, a Pet∣ticoate,
any thing, all that I have.
It is a Mantle that I need; that alone shall content me; In∣large
not therefore your liberality; Let not any suspectful doubt
interpose it self in my demand; My request is reasonable, and
you know, it is a common saying; To offer much to him,
that asks but a little, is a kind of denial.
Run, Parmeno, call hither my Taylor, and let him pre∣sently
cut her out a Mantle and a Kirtle of that fine pure cloth,
which hee took to cottoning.
So, so; all for the old woman; because like the Bee, she
comes home laden with lies, as hee does with honey; as for me,
I may go work out my heart, and go hang my self when I have
done; whilst she with a pockes must have every day change
of raiment.
Now the Devil go with him, with what an ill will does
he go? I think there is not any man living so ill served as I am;
maintaining men that devise nothing but mischief, murmurers,
grudgers of my good, repiners of my prosperity, and enemies to my
happiness. Thou Villain, what goosed thou mumbling to thy self?
Thou envious wretch, what is that thou say? for I understand thee
not. Doe as I command you, you were best, and that quickly too.
Get you gone with a murrain, and vex me no more, for I have
grief enough already to bring me to my grave. There will as much
of the piece be left (which remnant you may take for your self) as
will serve to make you a Jerkin.
I say nothing, Sir, but that it is too late to have the Tay∣lore
for to come to night.
And have not I told you, that I would have you not divine of
things aforehand, but to doe as I bid you? Let it alone then till to
morrow; and for you (mother) let me entreat you out of your love
to me, to have patience until then; for that is not auferred, which is
but deferred. Now I pray let me see that glorious girdle, which was
held so worthy to ingirt so goodly a body, that these my eyes, to∣gether
with the rest of my senses, may enjoy so great a happiness,
since that together, they have all of them been a little affected with
passion. My afflicted heart shall also rejoice therein, which hath
not had one minute of delight, since it first knew that Lady. All my
senses have been wounded by her, all of them have brought whole
basket-fulls of trouble to my heart. Every one of them hath vexed
and tormented it all they could; the eyes, in seeing her; the
ears in hearing her; and the hands in touching her.
Ha; What's that? Have you touched her with your hands?
you make me startle.
Dreaming of her, I say in my sleep.
O! in your dreams; that's another matter.
In my dreams have I seen her so oft, night, by night,
that I fear me, that will happen unto me, which befell Alcibia∣des,
who dreamed that he saw himself inwrapped in his mistresses
mantle, and was the next day murdered, and found none to remove
him from forth the common street, no, nor any to cover him, save
only she who did spread her Mantle over him. Though I, for
my part, be it alive, or dead, would any way bee glad to see
my self clothed with any thing that is hers.
You have punishment, Sir, enough already; for when o∣theirs
take their rest in their beds, thou properest thy self to suffer
thy next days torment. Be of good courage, Sir. Pluck up your
heart: after a Tempest, follows a Calm; afford thy desire some
time; take unto thee this Girdle: for if death prevent me not, I
will deliver the Owner thereof into thy hands.
O new guest! O happy girdle! which hast had such po∣were
and worth in thee, as to hedge in that body, and be its enclosure,
which my self am not worthy to serve. O ye knots of my passion,
it is you that have entangled my desires; Tell me, if thou were pre∣sent
at that uncomfortable answer of fairest she, whom thou serve,
and I adore. And yet the more I torment my self for her sake,
mourning and lamenting night and day, the less it avails me, and
the less it profits me.
It is an old Proverb; He that labours least, often-times
gets most. But I will make thee by thy labouring, to obtain that
which by being negligent, thou should never achieve. For Camora
was not won in an hour; yet did not her besiegers for all this de∣spear.
No more was Rome built in one day; nor Troy ruined in a
year.
O unfortunate that I am! For Cities are encircled, and
walled in with stones; and stones by stones are easily ouer-throwne.
But this my dear Lady hath her heart environed with steel; there
is no mettle that can prevail against her; no shot of that force▪ as to
make a breach: and should Ladders bee reared to scale the walls,
she hath eyes which let fly darts of repulsion, and a tongue which
discharges whole volleys of reproaches, if you once approach, force∣ing
you to stand farther off, and so inaccessible is her Castle, that
you cannot come near it by half a league.
No more, good Sir, no more; bridle your passion; for the
stout courage, and hardy boldness of one man, did get Troy. Doubt
not then, but one woman may work upon another, and at last win
her unto thee; thou hast little frequented my house, thou art igno∣rant
of my courses, thou know not what I can doe.
Say, Mother, what thou wilt, and I will believe thee, since
thou hast brought me so great a Jewel, as is this. O thou glory of
my soul, and incirler of so incomparable a creature; I behold thee,
and yet believe it not. O girdle, girdle, thou lovely lace! Wast
thou mine enemy too? Tell me the truth; if thou were, I forgive
thee: For it is proper unto good men, to forgive; but I doe not be∣leeue
it. For had thou likewise been my foe, thou would not
have come so soon to my hands, unless thou had come to dis∣blame
and excuse thy doings. I conjure thee, that thou answer me
truly, by the virtue of that great power, which thy Lady hath o∣for
me.
Cease (good Sir) this vain and idle humour;
for my ears are tyred with attention, and the Girdle almost worn
out with your often handling.
O wretch that I am! far better had it been for me,
had the heavens made me so happy, that thou had been made and
woven of these mine own arms, and not of silk, as now thou art,
that they might have daily rejoiced in clasping and enclosing with
due reverence those members, which thou without sense or feeling,
not knowing what it is to enjoy so great a glory, hold still in
strict embraces. O what secrets should thou then have seen
of that so excellent an image?
Thou shalt see more, and enjoy more, in a more ample and
better manner, if thou lose it not by talking as thou dost.
Peace (good mother,) give me leave a little; for this,
and I, well understand one another. O my eyes call to your remem∣bronco,
how that ye were the cause of my ill; and the very door,
thorough which my heart was wounded; and that he is seen to doe
the hurt, who doth give the cause of the harm. Call to your re∣membrance,
I say, that ye are debtors to my well-fare. Look
here upon your medicine, which is come home to your own house
to cure you.
Sir, it is not your rejoicing in this girdle, that can make
you to enjoy Melibea.
How like a fool thou prate, without either wit or
reason? Thou disturber of my delight, what meanest thou by
this?
Mary, that by talking, and babbling so much as you doe,
you kill both your self, and those which hear you; and so by con∣sequence,
overthrow both thy life and understanding; either of
which to want, is sufficient to leave you darkling, and say good
night to the world. Cut off your discourse therefore, and listen un∣to
Celestina, and hear what she will say unto thee.
Mother, are my words troublesome unto you? or is
this fellow drunk?
Howbeit they be not, yet should you not talk thus
as you doe; but rather give an end to these your long complaints.
Use a girdle like a girdle, that you may know to make a difference
of your words, when you come to Melibea's presence; let not your
tongue equal the apparel, with the person; making no destine∣ction
betwixt her, and her garments.
O my much honoured Matron, my mother, my com∣fortress!
Let me glad my self a little with this messenger of my
glory. O my tongue! Why doest thou hinder thy self in entertai∣ning
any other discourse? leaving off to adore that present Excel∣lency,
which, peradventure, thou shalt never see in thy power?
O ye my hands! With what presumption, with what slender reave∣rinse
doe you touch that Treacle, which must cure my wound?
Now that poison cannot hurt me, wherewith that cruel shot of
Cupped hath it's sharpe point deeply indipped. For now I am safe,
since that she who gave me my wound, gives me also my medi∣cine.
O dear Celestina! Thou that art the delight of all old Dames,
the joy of young wenches, the ease of the afflicted, and comfort of
such comfortless wretches as my self; do not punish me more with
fear of thee, then I am already punished with shame of my self; suf∣fer
me to let loose the reins of my contemplation; give me leave to
go forth into the streets with this jewel, that they who see me,
may know, that there is not any man more happy then my self.
Doe not infistulate your wound, by clapping on it still
more and more desire. Sir, it is not this string, nor this girdle alone,
wherein your remedy must depend.
I know it well, yet have I not the power to abstain from
adoring so great a relic? so rich a gift?
That's a gift, which is given gratis; but you know that
she did this for to ease your tooth-ache; and to close up your
wounds; and not for any respect or love, which she bears to
you: But if I live, she shall turn the leaf, ere I leave
her.
But the Charm you talked of?
She hath not given it me yet.
And what was the cause why she did not?
The shortness of time; and therefore willed me that
if your pain did not decrease, I should return to her again to
morrow.
Decrease? Then shall my pain decrease, when I see a de∣crease
of her cruelty.
Sir, content your self with that, which hath hitherto bin
said and done; she is already bound, I have showed you, how (as
farreforth as she is able) she will be ready to yield you any help
for this infirmity of yours, which I shall crave at her hands. And
tell me, I pray, if this bee not well for the first bowt. Well, I will
now get me home; and in any case, have a care, that if you chance
to morrow to walk abroad, that you go muzzled about the cheeks
with a cloth, that she seeing you so bound about the chaps, may not
accuse me of petitioning a false-hood.
Nay, to doe you service, I will not stick to clap on
four double clothes: but of all loves tell me, past there any thing
more between you? For I dye out of longing, for to hear the
words which flow from so sweet a mouth. How did thou dare, not
knowing her, be so bold, to show thy self so familiar, both in thy
entrance, and thy demand?
Not knowing her? They were my neighbours for four
years together; I dealt with them; I conversed with them; I tal∣ked
with them; and laughed together with them day and night. O!
how merry wee have been! Her mother, why she knows me bet∣la
then her own hands: and Melibea too, though now she bee
grown so tall, so great, so courteous, and discreet a Lady.
Sempronio, a word with you in your ear.
Say on: What's the matter?
Mary this: Celestina's attention gives matter to our
Master to enlarge his discourse; give her a touch on the toe; or
make some sign to her that she may be gone, and not waite thus,
as she doth upon his answers. For, there is no man, bee hee
never so much a fool, that speaks much, when hee is all a∣lone.
Did thou say Melibea was courteous? I think it was
but in a mock. Was her like ever borne into the world? Did God
ever create a better, or more perfect body? Can the like propor∣tion
be painted by any pencil? Is she not that Paragon of beauty,
from whence all eyes may copy forth a true pattern of unimitable
excellence? If Helen were now alive, for whom so great a slaughter
was made of Greeks and Troianes, or fair Polix•na, both of them
would have done their reverence to this Lady, for whom I lan∣guish.
If she had been present in that contention for the Apple with
the three Goddesses, the name of contention had never been quest∣oned:
For without any contradiction, they would all of them have
yielded, and jointly have given their consent, that Melibea should
have borne it from them: so that it should rather have been called
the Apple of concord, then of discord. Besides, as many women as
are now borne, and doe know her, curse themselves and their for∣tune;
complaining of heaven, because it did not remember them,
when it made her, consuming as well their bodies as their lives with
envy, being ready to eat their own flesh for very anger, still aug∣menting
martyrdomes to themselves, thinking to equal that per∣fection
by art, which Nature had bestowed upon her without any
labour. They pill, and dis-haire their eye-browes with nippers,
with plasters of Pitch or Barm, and other the like instruments▪
They seek after Wall-wort, and the like herbs, roots, sprigs, and
flowers to make Lies, wherewithal to bring their hair to the co∣lore
of hers, spoiling and martyring their faces, clothing them with
divers colourings, glissenings, paintings, vnctions, ointments,
strong waters, white and red pargetings, which, to avoid prolixity,
I repeat not. Now judge then, whether she whom Nature hath
so richly beautified, be worthy the love and service of so mean a
man as my self?
Sempronio, I understand your meaning; but give him leave
to run on; for he will fall anon from his Ass, and then his jour∣ney
will be at an end: you shall see, he will come by and by to a full
point, and so conclude.
In her, Nature, as in a glass did wholly behold her self;
that she might make her most absolutely perfect; for those graces,
which she had dif•used unto divers, she had jointly united them in
her, and ouer-viewed this her work with so curious an eye, that
nothing might be added to make it fairer. To the end that they
might know, who had the happiness to see her, the worthiness and
excellence of her Painter: only a little fair Fountaine-water with
a comb of ivory, is sufficient (without any other slibber-slabbers)
to make her surpass all other of her Sex, in beauty and curtsy.
These are her weapons; with these she kills and ouer-comes; and
with these hath she bound me in so hard and strong a chain, that I
must for ever remain her prisoner.
Sir, put a period to your words, trouble your self no
more; for this chain which shackles thee, is not so strong, but my
file is as sharpe to cut it in sunder, which I will doe for thee, that
thou may be at liberty. And therefore give me now licence to take
my leave of you; For it grows very late; and let me have the ger∣dl
a•ng with me. For you know, I must needs use it.
O disconsolate that I am! my misforunes still pursue me;
for with thee, or with this girdle, or with both, I would willingly
have been accompanied all this dark and tedious night. But be∣cause
there is no perfect happiness in this our painful and unhap∣pie
life; let solitariness wholly possess my soul, and cares be my
continual companions. What ho? Where be these men? Why
Parmeno, I say!
Here, Sir.
Accompany this Matron home to her house; and as
much pleasure and joy go with her, as sorrow and woe doth stay
with me.
Sir, fare you well. To morrow I shall make my return,
and visit you again; not doubting but my gown and her answer
shall meet here together; for now time doth not serve. And in
the interim, let me entreat you to be patient. Settle your thoughts
upon some other things, and doe not so much as once think upon
her.
Not think upon her? It is impossible. Nay, it were
profane to forget her, for whom my life only pleases me.
CELESTINA talks with Parmeno, inducing him to con∣cord,
and omit with Sempronio; Parmeno puts her in
mind of the promise she made him, for the having of Arouse, whom
he exceedingly loved. They go to Areusa's house, where that night
Parmeno remained. Celestina hies her home, to her own house;
and knocking at the door, Elicia opens it unto her, blaming her
for her tarrying so long.
Parmeno, my son; since we last talked to∣gether,
I have not had any fit opportunity to
express unto thee the infiniteness of that love
which I bear unto thee, and as all the world can
well witness for me, how well I have spoken of
thee in thy absence. Every man, ear hath been
filled with the good reports I have made of thee. The reason there∣of
I need not to repeat; for I ever held thee to be my son, at
least, by adoption; and therefore thought thou would have showed
thy self more natural and loving towards me. But in stead there∣of,
thou gau'st me bad payment, even to my face; crossing, what∣soever
I said; thinking ill of all that I spake; whispering and mur∣muring
against me in the presence of Calisto. I was well persuaded,
that after thou had once yielded to my good counsel, that you
would not have turned your heel, and kicked against me as you did,
nor have fallen off from your promise. But notwithstanding all this,
I perceive some old relic yet still remaining of my former folly.
And so speaking rather to satisfy thine own humour, then that thou
••nst render any reason for it; thou dost hinder thy self of profit,
to give thy tongue contentment. Hear me (my son) if thou hast
not heard me already. Look I, say, and consider with thy self, that
I am old, and well stricken in years; and good counsel only lod∣geth
with the elder sort, it being proper to youth, to follow pleasure
and delight. But my hope is, that of this thy error, thy youth one∣lie
is in fault: and I trust that you will bear your self better to∣wards
me hereafter, and that you will alter your ill purpose, to∣gether
with your tender years; For as it is in the Proverb: Our
customs suffer change, together with our hairs; and wee vary
our disposition, as we vary our years. I speak this (my son) be∣cause
as we grow in age, so grow we in experience; new things daily
offering themselves to our view: for youth looks no farther then to
things present, occupying his eye only in that he sees set before him;
but riper years omit neither things present, things past, nor things
to come. And son Parmeno, if you would but bethink your self of
the love I have heretofore borne you, I know it cannot escape your
knowledge, that the first nights lodging that you took, when you
were a stranger, and came newly to this City, was in my house. But
you young men care not for vs that are old; but govern your selves
according to the savour and relish of your own palates; you never
think that you have, or shall have need of vs: you never think upon
sickness; you never think, that this flower of your youth shall fade.
But doe you hear me, (my friend) and mark what I say unto you;
That in such cases of necessity, as these, an old woman, (bee she
well experienced) is a good help, a comforter, a friend, a mother;
nay, more then a mother: A good Inn, to give ease and rest to a
sound man; and a good Hospital for to cure a sick man; a good
Purse in time of need; a good Chest, to keep money in prosper∣tie;
a good Fire in winter, environed with spits of good rost-meat;
a good Shade in summer, and a good Tavern to eat and drink in.
Now my pretty little fool, what sai'st thou to all this? What dost
thou think of it? I know, thou art by this time ashamed of that
which thou hast spoken to day; thou can not say B to a Battle-doore;
thou art struck so dumb, and so dead: and therefore I will
press thee no further, nor crave any more at thy hands, then that
which friendship craves of thee, which is, Look upon Sempronio;
next under heaven, my self have made him a man; I could wish you
would live and love together as brothers and friends: for being in
league with him, thou shalt live in the favour and love of thy Master,
and in good repute with all the world: for Sempronio, I tell thee, is
well beloved, hee is diligent, a good Courtier, a proper servant, a
fellow of a good fashion, and one that is willing to embrace thy
friendship, which will turn to both your profits, if you will but
hand-fast your affections each to other. Besides, you know, that
you must love, if you will be beloved. Trouts cannot bee taken
with dry breeches. And if the Cat will have fish, she must wet her
foot. Nor does Sempronio owe this of right unto thee; nor is hee
bound to love thee, unless thou exchange love for love: it is mere
simplicity, not to be willing to love, and yet look to be beloved of
others. And as great folly, to repay friendship with hatred.
Mother, I confess my second fault; and craving pardon
for what is past, I offer my self to be ordered by you in all my future
proceedings. But yet me thinks it is impossible, that I should hold
friendship with Sempronio; hee is frappish, and I cannot bear; he
is choleric, and I can carry no coals. How then is it possible to
make a true contract betwixt two such contrary natures?
But you were not wont to be thus froward.
In good fey (mother) you say true. But the more I grow
in years, the less I grow in patience; Tush, I have forgotten that
lesson, as if I had never known what it meant; I am (I confess) the
man I was, nor is Sempronio himself; neither can hee, nor will
hee stead me in any thing. I never yet tasted any the least kind∣ness
from him.
A sure friend is known in a doubtful matter; and in ad∣uersity
is his faith proved. Then comes he nearest unto him, when
hee is farthest from comfort; and with greater desire doth
hee then visit his house, when as prosperous fortune hath forsaken
it. What shall I say unto thee, Son, of the virtues of a good
and fast friend? There is nothing more to bee beloved; no∣thing
more rare: he refuses no burden. You two are equals, and
parity of persons, similitude of manners, and sympathy of hearts are
the maine props that vp-hold friendship. Take heed (my son;)
for if thou hast any thing, it is safely kept for thee. Be thou wise to
gain more, for this is gained already to your hands. Your father,
O what pains took hee for it! But I may not put it into your
hands, till you lead a more reposed life, and come to a more com∣pleate
and full age.
Mother, what doe you call a reposed life?
Mary son, to live of your self. Not to go thorough o∣there
men's houses, nor to set thy foot under another mans table:
which thou shalt still bee enforced to doe, unless thou learn to
make profit of thy service; for out of very pity to see thee go thus
totred and torn, not having a rag almost to hang on thy breech,
did I beg that mantle which thou saw, of Calisto, not so much for
the mantles sake, as for that there being a Taylor belonging to the
house, and thou before being without a Jerkin, hee might bestow it
upon thee. So that I speak not for mine own profit, (as I heard
you say) but for thy good. For, if you rely only upon the ordina∣rye
wages of these Gallants, it is such, that what you get by it after
ten years service, you may put it in your eye and never see the
worse. Enjoy thy youth, good days, good nights, good meat, and
good drink; when thou mai'st have these things, lose them not;
Let that be lost that will be lost. Doe not thou morn for the
wealth which was left thy Master (for that will but shorten thy
days) since wee can enjoy it no longer then wee live. O Son
Parmeno, (and well may I call thee son, since I had the breeding
of thee so long a time) follow my counsel, seeing it proceeds out of
pure love, and an earnest desire, to see thee grow up in honour.
O! how happy should I be, might I but see thee and Sempronio a∣gre;
see you two friends, and sworn brothers in every thing, that
ye may come to my poor house to be merry, and to see me
now and then, and to take your pleasure each of you with his
Wench!
His Wench, mother?
I, his Wench; and a young one too: As for old flesh, my
self am old enough, and such a wench as Sempronio would be glad
of with all his heart, with t'one half of that regard and affection
which I show to thee. What I speak, comes from my entrails, and
the very bowels of me.
Mother, you shall not be deceived in me.
And if I should, the matter is not great; For what I doe, I
do for charity, and for that I see thee here alone in a strange Land,
and for the respect which I bear unto those bones of her, who re∣commended
thee unto me. When you are more man, you will
think of all this, and come to a truer knowledge of things, and then
thou wilt say, that old Celestina gave me good counsel.
I know that as well now, though I am but young, as if I
were elder: and howbeit I spake against you to day, it was not
because I thought that to be ill spoken which you said; but be∣cause
I saw, when I told my Master the truth, and advised him for
the best, he ill entreated me, and therefore henceforth let vs shake
hands, and use him accordingly; doe what thou wilt unto him, I
will hold my peace; for I have already too much offended, in not
crediting thee in this business concerning him.
In this and all other, thou shalt not only trip, but fall, as
long as thou shalt not take my counsel with thee, which comes
from thy true and faithful friend.
Now, I bless the time wherein I served thee: coun∣ting
those days happy, under which thou bredst me up of a child,
since old age brings with it such store of fruit.
Son, no more. For mine eyes already run
over, and my tears begin to break over those banks, which
should bound them in. O! had I in all this world, but such
another friend? Such another companion? Such a comfor∣tress
in my troubles? Such an easer, and lightener of my hearts hey∣vines?
Who did supply my wants? Who knew my secrets?
To whom did I discover my heart? Who was all my happiness,
and quietness, but thy mother? She was nearer and dearer unto me,
then my gossip, or mine own sister. O! how well-fauored was she,
and cheerful of countenance? How lusty? How quick? How
neat? How portly and majestic in her gate? How stout and
manly? Why, she would go you at midnight without or pain,
or fear, from Church-yard, to Church-yard, seeking for imple∣mints
appertaining to our Trade, as if it had been day. Nor did she
omit either Christians, Moors, or Jaws, whose Graves and Sepul∣chres
she did not visit. By day she would watch them, and by night
she would dig them out; taking such things as should serve her
turn. So that she took as great pleasure in darkness of the night,
as thou dost comfort in the brightness of the day. She would vsu∣ally
say; that the night was the sinful mans cloak, that did hide and
cover all his rogueries, that they might not be seen, though per∣haps
she had not the like dexterity and skill in all the rest of those
tricks that appertāined to her Trade: yet one thing shall I tell thee,
because thou shall see what a mother thou hast lost, though I was a∣bout
to keep it in; but it makes no matter, it shall out to thee.
She did pull out seven teeth out of a fellows head that was hanged,
with a pair of Pincers, such as you pull out stubbed hairs withal;
whilst I did pull off his shoes. She was excellent at a Circle, and
would enter it far better then my self, and with greater boldness,
though I also was very famous for it in those days, more I wise,
then I am now; who have together with her, lost almost my cun∣ning.
What shall I say more unto thee, but that the very Devils
themselves did live in fear of her? She did hold them in horror,
and dread, making them to tremble and quake, when she began
to exercise her exorcisms, her spells, her incantations, her charms,
her conjurations, and other words of most horrisonous roaring, and
most hideous noise. She was as well known to them all, as the
beggar knows his dish; or as thy self in thine own house. One
Devil coming tumbling in upon the neck of another, as fast, as
it pleased her to call them up, and not one of them durst tell her
a lye; such power had she to bind them: so that ever since she
died, I could never attain to the truth of any thing. Parmeno, may
this woman no better thrive, then she pleases me with those her
wordy praises.
What sai'st thou, my honest Parmeno? My son, nay,
more then my son.
I say, How should it come to pass, that my mother should
have this advantage of you, being the words which she and you
spake, were both one?
How? Make you this so great a wonder? Know you not,
the Proverb tells vs: That there is a great deal of difference be∣twixt
Peter and Peter? Trust me truly, wee cannot all be alike in
all. Wee cannot all of vs attain to those good gifts and graces of
my deceased Gossip. And have not you your self seen amongst
your Artisans some good, and some others better then they? So
likewise was it betwixt me and your mother. She was the only
woman in our Art, she had not her fellow: and for such a one was
she of all the world both known and sought after, as well of Ca∣ualleroes,
as married men, old men, young men, and children, be∣sides,
Maids and Damsels, who did as earnestly pray for her life, as
for that of their own fathers and mothers. She had to doe with
all manner of persons; she talked with all sorts of people. If wee
walked the streets, as many as we met, they were all of them her
God-sonnes. For her chiefest profession for some sixteen years
together, was to play the Mid-wife: so that albeit thou knew
not these secrets, because thou wast then but young, now it is fit that
thou should know them, since that she is dead, and thou
grown up to be a man.
Tell me, mother: When the Justice sent Officers to ap∣prehend
you, at which time I was then in your house, was there a∣ny
great acquaintance between you?
Any great acquaintance? You are disposed to jest. Our
cases were both alike; they took vs both alike; they accused vs
both alike; and they did punish vs both alike, which (if I be not de∣ceiued)
was the first punishment that ever we had. But thou wast a
little one then. I wonder how thou▪ should remember it; For, it is a
thing of all other, the most forgotten, that hath happened in this City;
so many, and so daily in this world are those new occurrents, which
obliterate the old. If you go but out into the market-place, you
shall every day see, Peguey Pague; the Peccant and his punishment.
It is true, but the worser part of wickedness, is the
perseverance therein.
How deadly the fool bites! Hee hath hit me home, and
pricked me to the quick; I will therefore be now Tom-tell-troth. And
assure thy self, since thou hast galled me, I will wring thee till
I make thee winch and fling; I will tickle thee on the right vein.
What say you mother?
Mary I say, son, that besides this, your mother was ta∣ken
four several times, she her self alone: and once she was ac∣cussed
for a Witch; For she was found one night by the watch,
with certain little candles in her hand, gathering I know not what
earth in a cross way; for which she stood half a day in the o∣pen
market-place upon a Scaffold, with a high paper Hat, like the
coffin of a Suger-loafe, painted full of Devils, whereon her fault was
written (being brought thither, riding thorough the streets upon an
Ass, as the fashion is in the punishment of Bawds &amp; Witches.) Yet
all this was nothing; for men must suffer something in this wicked
world, for to vp-hold their lives, and their honours. And mark, I
pray, what small reckoning they made of it, because of her great
wisdom and discretion. For she would not for all this, give over
her old occupation; and from that day forward followed it more
earnestly, then she did before, and with happier proof. This I
thought good to tell you, to cross that opinion of yours, touching
perseverance in that, wherein we have once already erred; for all
that she did, did so well become her, and such a grace had she with
her, that upon my conscience, howbeit she stood thus disgracefully
upon the Scaffold, every one might perceive, that she cared not a
button for those that stood beneath, staring and gazing upon her;
such was her behaviour and carriage at that instant: look they
might their fill, but I warrant you, she was not a farthing in debt, no
not to the proudest of them all; wherein, I thought fit to instance,
to show thereby unto you; that they, who have any thing in them
as she had, and are wise, and of worth, fall far more easily and
sooner into error, then any other. Doe but weigh and consider
with your self, what a manner of man Virgil was; how wise in all
kind of knowledge; and yet I am sure you have heard, how in a
wicker basket hee was hung out from a Tower, all Rome looking
upon him; yet for all this, was hee neither the less honoured, ney∣there
lost he the name of Virgil.
That is true which you say; but it was not enjoined by
the Justice.
Peace, you fool, thou art ignorant what a sinister and
course kind of Justice was used, and rigorously executed upon thy
mother, to the most extremity, which, as all men confess, is a
mere injury. And the rather, because it was commonly spoken of
all men, that wrongfully, and against all right and reason, by sub∣orning
of false witnesses, and cruel torments, they enforced her to
confess that, which in reality of truth was not. But because she
was a woman of a great spirit, and good courage, and her heart had
been accustomed to endure, she made matters lighter then they
were; And of all this, she reckoned not a Pin: for a thousand
times have I heard her say; If I broke my leg, it was all for my
good; for this made me better known then I was before. And
certainly so she was, and the more noted and respected, nay, and
thrived the better by it, both she and I, and the more plentiful our
harvest and incomes of customers of the best, and wee loved and
lived merrily together to her last. And be but thou unto me, as she
was; that is to say, a true and faithful friend; and withal, endeavour
thy self to be good, since thou hast so good a pattern to follow.
And for that which thy father left thee, thou hast it safely kept
for thee.
Let vs now leave talking of the dead, and of patrimonies,
and let vs parley of our present businesses, which concerns vs more
then to draw things past unto our remembrance. If you be well re∣membred,
it is not long since that you promised me, I should have
Arouse, when as I told you at my Masters house, that I was ready to
dye for love; so servant is my affection towards her.
If I did promise thee, I have not forgot it; nor would I
you should think, that I have lost my memory with my years. For
I have thrice already, and better, given her the check, concerning
this business, in thy absence; but now I think the matter is grown
to some ripeness. Let vs walk towards her house; for now, doe
what she can, she shall not avoid the Mate. For this is the
least thing of a thousand, that I will undertake to doe for thee.
I was quite out of hope ever to have her; for I could no∣for
come to any conclusion with her, no, not to find so much fa∣uour,
as but to speak with her, or to have but a word with her. And
as it is in the proverb: In love it is an ill sign, to see his Mistress
fly, and turn the face. And this did much dis-hearten me in
my suite.
I marvel not much at thy discouragement, considering
I was then a stranger unto thee; at least, not so well acquainted with
thee as now I am: and that thy self did not then know, (as now
thou dost) that thou mai'st command her, who is the Doctresse of
this Art; but now thou shalt see, what favour thou shalt find for
my sake; what power I have over these wenches; how much I can
prevail with them; and what wonders I can work in matters of
Jove: but hush, tread softly; Lo, hears the door, let vs enter in
with still and quiet steps, that the neighbours may not hear vs.
Stay, and attend me here at the stairs foot, whilst I go up and
see what I shall be able to doe with her, concerning the business
wee talked of; and it may be, wee shall work more with her, then
either thou or I did ever dream of.
Who's there? Who is that, that at this time of night
comes up into my chamber?
One, I assure you, that means you no ill; one that no∣for
treads step, but she thinks on thy profit; one that is more
mindful of thee, then of her self; one that loves thee as her life,
though I am now grown old.
Now the Devil take this old Trot! what news with
you, that you come thus stealing like a Ghost, and at so late an
hour? How think you (Gentlewoman) is this a fair hour to
come to ones chamber? I was even putting off my clothes to go
to bed.
What? To bed with the Hen, daughter? So soon to
roost? •ye for shame; Is this the way to thrive? Think you ever
to be rich, if you go to bed so timely? Come, walk a turn or
two, and talk with me a little; let others bewail their wants, not
thou. Herbs feed them that gather them. Who but would, if hee
could, lead such a life?
How cold it is! I will go put on my clothes again: be∣shrew
me if I am not cold at my very heart.
Nay, by my fey shall you not; but if you will go in∣to
your bed, doe; and so shall wee talk more conveniently toge∣there.
Yes indeed, I have need so to doe; for I have felt my
self very ill all this day; so that necessity, rather then laziness,
hath made me thus early to take my sheets, in stead of my petti∣coat,
to wrap about me.
Sit not up, I pray any longer, but get you to bed, and co∣for
your self well with clothes, and sink lower in, so shall you be
the sooner warm. O! how like a Siren doest thou look? How
fair, how beautiful? O! how sweetly every thing smells about
thee, when thou heauest and turn thy self in thy bed? I assure
you, every thing is in very good order: how well have I always
been pleased with all thy things, and thy doings? You will not
think, how this neatness, this handsomeness of yours in your
lodging doth delight me; to see every thing so trim and trick∣sie
about you; I promise you, I am even proud of it. O! how
fresh dost thou look? What sheets? What quilts be here? What
pillows? O! how white they be? Let me not live, if every thing
near doth not like me wonderful well: My Pearl, my Jewel of
gold, see whether I love you or no, that I come to visit you at this
time of night? Let my eye take its fill in beholding of thee; it does
me much good to touch thee, and to look upon thee.
Nay (good mother) leave, doe not touch me; pray you
doe not, it doth but increase my pain.
What pain (Sweet heart?) Tell me (pretty Duck.)
Come, come, you doe but jest, I am sure.
Jest? Let me never taste of joy, if I jest with you; it is
scarce four hours since, that every minute I was ready to dye with
pain of the Mother, which rising in my breast, swelled up to my
throat, and was ready to stifle me; that I still looked when I should
leave the world; and therefore am not so gamesome and wanton as
you think I am: now I have little mind of that.
Go to, give me leave a little to touch you; and I will
try what I can doe. For I know something of this evil, which e∣very
one calls the Mother, and the passion thereunto belonging.
Lay your hand higher up towards my stomach.
Alack (poor heart) how I pity thee: that one so plump, so
fair, so clear, so fresh, so fragrant, so delicate, so dainty a creature,
that art indeed the very abstract of beauty, the most admired mo∣dell
for complexion, feature, comeliness, and rarest composure;
every Limb, every Lineament carrying such an extraordina∣rye
lustre and ornament by reflection from thee. I say, How
doe I pity thee, that any ache, sickness, or infirmity should dare to
seize, or presume to usurp over such a Peerless Potent, a comman∣ding
Power, as thy imperious unparalleled beauty! But I dare say, it
is not so, nor so; No no, your disease is selfe-conceited, and the
pride of your good parts, this puffs you and makes you slight and
contemn all. Go to, go to, (daughter) you are to blame if it be
so, and I tell you, it is a shame for you, that it is, not to impart these
good graces and blessings, which heaven hath bestowed upon you,
to as many as wish you well; For they were not given you in vain,
that you should let them wither, and lose the flower of your youth
under six linings of Woollen, and Linen; have a care, that you be
not covetous of that, which cost you but little; doe not like, a Mi∣ser,
hoard up your beauty; make not a hidden treasure of it, si∣thence
in it's own nature it is as communicable, and as commonly
currant as money from man to man. Be not the Mastiff in the gar∣den,
nor the Dog in the manger: and since thou can not take any
pleasure in thy self, let others take their pleasure▪ and do not think
thou wast borne for nothing: for when thou wast borne, man was
borne: and when man was borne, woman was borne; nothing in
all this wide world was created superfluous, nor which Nature
did not provide for with very good consonance, and well suiting
with reason. But think on the contrary, That it is a fault to vex
and torment men, when it is in thy power to give them remedy.
Tush, mother, these are but words, and profit me no∣thing;
give me something for my evil, and leave your jesting.
In this so common a grief, all of vs, (the more misfor∣tune
ours) are in a manner Physicians to our selves; that which I
have seen practised on others, and that which I found good in my
self, I shall plainly deliver unto you: but as the states of our by∣dies
are divers, and the qualities differing; so are the medicines al∣so
divers, and the operations different. Every strong sent is good:
as Penny-royall, Rue, Wormwood, smoke of Partridge feathers,
of Rosemary, and of the Soles of old shoes, and of Muske-roses, of
Incense, of strong perfumes, received kindly, fully, and greedily,
doth work much good; much slakes and eases the pain, and
by little and little returns the Mother to it's proper place. But
there is another thing that passes all these, and that I ever found
to be better then any one, or all of them put together; but what it
is, I will not tell you, because you make your self such a piece
of niceness.
As you love me, (good mother) tell me: see thou me
thus pained, and concealest thou thy self?
Go to, go to, you understand me well enough; doe not
make your self more fool then you are.
Well, well, well; now trust me no more, if I un∣derstood
thee▪ But what is it thou would have me to doe? you
know that my friend went yesterday with his Captain to the wars;
would you have me to wrong him?
O! take heed, great wrong, I promise you.
Yes indeed, for hee supplies all my wants; hee will see
I shall lack nothing; hee holds me honest; hee does love me,
and uses me with that respect, as if I were his Lady and Mi∣stress.
Suppose all this to be true, be it in the best sort it may be,
yet what of all this? This retiredness is no cure for your disease;
you must be free and communicable, for I must tell you, there are
griefs and pangs cannot easily be posted off, and dispossessed, and
some not to be removed but by being a mother, (you know my
meaning;) and such is your disease, and you can never recover it, but
by living sole and simple (as you now doe) without company.
It is but my ill hap, and a curse laid upon me by my pa∣rents,
else had I not been put to prove all this misery and pain,
which now I feel. But to let this pass, because it is late, tell me
I pray, what wind drove you hither?
You know already what I have said unto you concerning
Parmeno; who complains himself unto me, that you refuse to see
him; that you will not vouchsafe him so much as a look: what
should be the reason, I know not, unless because you know, that
I wish him well, and make account of him, as of my son. I have
a better care of your matters, and regard your friends in a kinder
fashion. Not a neighbour that dwells near you, but she is welcome
unto me, and my heart rejoices as often as I see them, and all be∣cause
they converse with thee, and keep thee company.
It is true (A•ned) that you say; and I acknowledge my
beholdingness.
I know not whether you doe or no: Dost thou hear me
(girl?) I ••used believe works; for words are wind, and are sold
every where for nothing; but love is never paid, but with pure
love: and works with works. Thou know the alliance between
thee and Elicia, whom Sempronio keeps in my house. Parmeno
and hee are fellows and companions, they both serve the Gentle∣man
you wot of; and by whom you may gain great good, and
grace unto your self. Doe not therefore deny him that, the gran∣ting
whereof will cost thee so little; you are kinse-women, and
they companions: see, how pat all things fall! far•ie better then we
our selves could have wished; and to tell you truly, I have brought
him along with me: how say you? Shall I call him up?
Now, heavens forbid. Fie; What did you mean?
Ay me; I fear me, hee hath heard every word.
No: for hee stays beneath; I will call to him to come
up; for my sake show him good countenance; take notice of him;
speak kindly unto him; entertain him friendly; and if you think
fit, let him enjoy you, and you him; and both one another; for
though he gain much, I am sure, you shall lose nothing by the
bargain.
Mother, I am not ignorant, that as well these, as all o∣there
your former speeches unto me, have ever been directed to my
good and benefit: but how is it possible, that I should doe this, that
you would now have me? For you know to whom I am bound to
give an account, as already you have heard; and if hee know I play
false, he will kill me. My neighbours, they are envious and malice∣os,
and they will straight-way acquaint him therewith. And say,
that no great ill should befall me, save only the losing of his love; it
will be more then I shall gain, by giving contentment to him, for
whom you entreat, or rather command me.
For this fear of yours, my self have already provided:
for wee entered in very softly.
Nay, I doe not speak for this night, but for many other
that are to come. Tush, were it but for one night, I would not care.
What? Is this your fashion? Is this the manner
of your carriage? And you use these niceties, you shall never
have a house with a double room, but live like a beggar all the
days of your life. What? are you afraid of our Sweet-heart now
he is absent? What would you then doe, were he now in Town?
It hath ever been my ill fortune, to give counsel unto fools,
such as cannot see their own good; say what I will, they will
err; still stand in their own light. But I doe not much won∣der
at it; For though the world be wide, yet there are but few wise
in it. Great is the largeness of the earth, but small the number of
those that have experience. Ha, daughter! Did you but see your
cousins wisdom, or but know what benefit my breeding, and
counsel hath brought her, how cunning, how witty, and what a
Mistress in her art; you would be of another mind; say, what I
will unto her, she patiently endures my reprehensions, she hear∣kens
to my advice, and does all what I will have her doe; she
will sometimes boast, that she hath at one time had one in bed
with her; another waiting at the door; and a third sighing for
her within the house; and yet hath given good satisfaction to them
all. And art thou afraid, who hast but two to deal with∣all;
Can one cock fill all thy Cisterns? One conduit-pipe water all
thy Court? If this be your diet, you may chance to rise a hungered,
you shall have no meat left against another time; I will not rent
your fragments; I cannot live upon scraps; One could never please
me; I could never place all my affection upon one; two can doe
more then one; they give more, and they have more to give. It
goes hard (Daughter) with that Mouse, that hath but one hole to
trust to; for if that be stopped, she hath no means to hide her self
from the Cat: he that hath but one eye, you see in what danger he
goes? One sole Act makes not a Habit. It is a rare, and strange
thing to see a Partridge fly single; to feed always upon one dish,
brings a loathing to the stomach; one Swallow makes not a Sum∣mer;
one witness alone is of no validity in Law. Hee that hath
but one suite of clothes, and she that hath but one gown to her
back, quickly wears them out. What would you doe (daughter)
with this number of one? Many more inconveniences can I tell thee
of this single soale number (if one may be a number.) If you be wise,
be never without two; for it is a laud•ble and commendable com∣pany,
as you may see it in your self; who hath two ears, two feet,
and two hands; two sheets upon one bed; and two smocks where∣with
to shift you; and the more you have, the better it is for you;
for still, (as it is in the Proverb) The more Moors, the better
market; and honour without profit, is no other but as a Ring up∣on
the finger. And because one Sack cannot hold them both,
apply your self to your profit, Son Parmeno, come up.
O let him not come up if you love me: the pockes be
my death, if I am not ready to swooned, to think on it; I know not
what to doe for very shame. Nay fie, mother, what mean you to
call him up? you know that I have no acquaintance with him; I
never exchanged a word with him, in all my life; Fie, how I am
ashamed!
I am here with thee (wench;) I, who will stand betwixt
him and thee; I will quit thee of this shame, and will cover thee
close, and speak for you both: For hee is as bashful as you for
your life.
Gentlewoman, heavens preserve this gracious presence
of yours.
You are welcome, gentle Sir.
Come hither you Ass, whither go you now, to sit mo∣ping
down in a corner? Come, come, be not so shamefaced, for it
was the bashful man whom the Devil brought to Court; for hee
was sure, he should get nothing there; hearken both of you, what
I shall now say unto you: You, my friend Parmeno, know already
what I promised you: and you (daughter) what I entreated at your
hands. Laying aside therefore the difficulty, in drawing thee to
grant that which I desi•ed, few words I conceive to be best, be∣cause
the time will not permit me to be long. He for his part hath
hitherto lived in great pain and grief for your sake: and therefore
you seeing his torment, I know you will not kill him: and I like∣wise
know, that your self likes so well of him, that it shall not be
amiss, that he stay with you here this night in the house.
For my mayden-heads sake (mother) let it not be so,
pray doe not command it me.
Mother, as you love my life, as you love goodness, let me
not go hence, until we be well agreed: for she hath wounded me
with her eyes, to death, and I must dye through love, unless you
help me; offer her all that which my father left with you for me;
tell her, I will give her all that I have. Besides, doe you hear?
Tell her, that me thinks, she will not vouchsafe to look upon me.
What doth this Gentleman whisper in your ear?
Thinks he that I will not perform ought of your request.
No, daughter, no such matter; he says that he is very glad
of your good love and friendship, because you are so honest, and so
worthy; and that any benefit shall light well, that shall fall upon you.
Come hither (Modesty) Come hither you bashful fool.
He will not be so uncivil, as to enter into another by∣dies
ground without leave, especially, when it lies in several.
So uncivil? Doe you stand upon leave? Would you
have him stand with cap in hand, and say, I pray shall I? Will yo•
give me leave forsooth? And I know not what fiddle-come-faddles?
Well, I will stay no longer with you: and I will pass my word,
that you shall rise to morrow painelesse.
Nay fie, good Sir, for modesties sake, I beseech you let
me alone: content your self, I pray, I pray let be. If not for my
sake, yet look back upon those gray hairs of that reverend old
Dame, which stands by you, and forbear for her sake. Get you
gone, I say, for I am none of those you take me to be, I am none
of your common hackneys, that hire out their bodies for money.
Would I might never stir, if I doe not get me out of the house, if
you doe but touch so much as a cloth about me.
Why, how now Arouse, what's the matter with you?
Whence comes this strangeness? Whence this coyness of yours?
This niceness? Why (Daughter) doe you think that I know not
what this means? Did I never see a man and woman together be∣fore?
And that I know not all their tricks and devices? What they
say, and what they doe? I am sorry to hear that I doe. Besides,
I must tell you, I was once as wanton as you are now, and thought
my penny as good silver as yours: and many a friend I had that
came unto me: yet did I never in all my life exclude either old
man, or old woman out of my company, or that ever I refused their
counsel, were it public or private, By my little honesty, I had
rather thou had given me a box on the ear, then to hear what
I hear. You make of me, as if I had been borne but yesterday. O!
how cunning forsooth, how close you be? for to make your self
seem honest, you would make me a fool. I must be a kind of
Ignoramus, without shame, secrecy, and experience. Ye would
discredit me in my Trade, for to win your self credit in your
own. But the best is, betwixt Pirate and Pirate, there is nothing
to be got but blows and empty barrels. And well I wot, that I
speak far better of thee, behind thy back, then thou can think
of thy self before me.
Mother, if I have offended, pardon me, for I had rather
give contentment to you, then to my self. I would not anger you
for a world.
No, I am not angry, I doe but tell you this against a∣another
time, that you may beware you doe so no more. And so
good night, for I will be gone, I will get me away alone by my
self.
Good night, Aunt.
Mother, will you that I waite upon you? Shall I accom∣pany
you home?
No mary shall you not; that were but to strip one, and
cloth another; or again, it needs not, for I am old, and therefore
fear not to be forced in the streets. I am past all danger of raui∣shing.
The dog barks. The old Witch comes hobbling
home.
Tha, tha, tha.
Who is there? who knocks at door?
Daughter, Come down, and open the door.
Is this a time to come in? You are disposed still to be out
thus a nights. To what end (I trow) walk you thus late? What a
long time (mother) have you been away? What doe you mean
by it? You can never find the way home, when you are once a∣broad:
but it is your old wont, you cannot leave it; and so as you
may pleasure one, you care not and you leave a hundred disconten∣ted:
you have been sought after to day, by the father of her that was
betrothed, which you brought from the Prebendary upon Easter
day, whom he is purposed to marry within these three days, and
you must needs help her, according as you promised, that her hus∣band
may not find her virginity cracked.
Daughter, I remember no such matter. For whom is it
that you speak?
Remember no such matter? Sure, you have forgot your
self. O! what a weak memory have you? Why, your self
told me of it, when you took her hence; and that you had renewed
her maidenhead seven times at the least.
Daughter, make it not so strange, that I should forget.
For hee that scattered his memory into many parts, can keep it
steadfast in no part. But tell me, Will he not return again?
See whether hee will return or no? He hath given you
a bracelet of Gold, as a pledge for your pains: and will hee not
then return again?
O! wast hee that brought the bracelet? Now I know
whom you mean. Why did you not prepare things in a
readiness, and began to doe something against I came home?
For in such things you should practise your self when I am absent,
and try whether you can doe that by your self, which you so often
have seen me doe; otherwise, you are like to live all your life∣time
like a beast, without either art, or in-come: and then when
you grow to my years, you will too late lament your present lazi∣ness;
for an idle, and lazy youth brings with it a repentfull, and
a painful old age. I took a better course I wise, when your Grand∣mother
showed me her cunning: for, in the compass of one year,
I grew more skilful then her self.
No marvel; for many times, (as it is in the Proverb) a
good Scholar goes beyond his Master; and it is all in the will and
desire of him that is to learn; for no Science can be well employ∣ed
on him, who hath not a good mind and affection thereunto.
But I had as lief dye, as go about it. I am sick (me thinks)
when I set my self to it; and you are never well, but when you
are at it.
You may say what you like. But believe me, you will dye
a beggar for this. What? doe yo think to live always under my
wing? Think you never to go from my elbow?
Pray let vs leave off this melancholy talk; now is now;
and then is then. When time serves, we will follow your counsel;
but now let vs take our pleasure, while we may. As long as we have
meat for to day, let vs not think on to morrow: Let to morrow care
for it self; as well dies he that gathers much, as hee that lives but
poorly; the Master, as the servant; he that is of a Noble Linage,
as he that is of a meaner stock: and thou with thy art, as well as I
without it; we are not to live for ever: and therefore let vs laugh and
be merry, for few are they that come to see old age; and they who
doe see it, seldom dye of hunger. I desire nothing in this world,
but meat, drink, and clothing, and a part in pleasure. And though
rich men have better means to attain to this glory, then he that
hath but little; yet there is not one of them that is contented, not
one that says to himself, I have enough. There is not one of them,
with whom I would exchange my pleasures for their riches. But let
vs leave other men's thoughts and cares to themselves; and let vs go
sleep, for it is time; and a good sound sleep without fear, will fat
me more, and doe me more good, then all the Treasure and wealth
or Venice.
THe day appears; Parmeno departs, and takes his leave of A∣reusa,
and goes to his Master Calisto. He finds Sempro∣nio
at the door; they enter into amity; go jointly to Calisto's
chamber; they find him talking with himself; being risen, hee
goes to Church.
It is day. O what a spite is this? Whence
is it, that it is so light in the chamber?
What doe you talk of day? Sleep, Sir,
and take your rest; for it is but even now, since we lay
down. I have scarce shut mine eyes yet, &amp; would you
have it to beday? I pray you open the window by you, the window
there by your beds head, and you shall then see whether it be so or
no?
Gentlewoman, I am in the right; it is day: I see it is
day: I am not deceived. No, no; I knew it was broad day, when
I saw the light come thorough the chinks of the door. O what a Vile∣lain
am I? Into how great a fault am I fallen with my Master? I
am worthy of much punishment. O how far days is it?
Far days?
I, far days; very far days.
Never trust me; Alas, I am not eased of my Mother yet.
It pains me still; I know not what should be the reason of it.
Dear love, what would thou have me to doe?
That wee talk a little on the matter concerning my in∣disposition.
What should we talk (Love) any more? if that which
hath been said already be not sufficient, excuse that in me, which is
more necessary; for it is now almost high noon: and if I stay any
longer, I shall not be welcome to my Master. To morrow is a new
day, and then I will come to see you again; and as often afterwards
as you please: and therefore was one day made after another, be∣cause
that which could not be performed in one day, might bee
done in another: as also, because wee should see one another the
oftener. In the mean while, let me entreat you to doe me the fa∣uour,
that you will come and dine with vs to day at Celestina's
house.
With all my heart; and I thank you too. Fare-well,
good luck be with you. I pray pull the door after you.
And fare you well too. O singular pleasure! O singular joy!
What man lives there this day, that can say he is more fortunate
then I am? Can any man be more happy? any more successful
then my self, that I should enjoy so excellent a gift? so curious
a creature? and no sooner ask then have? Believe me, if my heart
could brooke this old women's treasons, I could creep upon my
knees to doe her a kindness. How shall I bee able to requite her?
O heavens! To whom shall I impart this my joy? To whom shall
I discover so great a secret? To whom shall I discover some part
of my glory? It is true that the old woman told me; That of no
prosperity, the possession can be good without company; and that
pleasure not communicated, is no pleasure. O! who can have so
true a feeling of this my happiness, as my self? But lo, yonder is
Sempronio, standing at our door; hee hath been stirring betimes;
I shall have a piteous life with my Master, if he be gone abroad;
but I hope hee is not; if hee be, hee hath left his old wont. But be∣ing
he is not now himself, no marvel if he break custom.
Brother Parmeno, if I knew that country, where a man
might get wages by sleeping, it should go hard, but I would make
a shift to get thither. For, I would not then come short of any man;
I would scorn to be put down; but would gain as much as ano∣there
man, be hee who hee will be that bears a head. But what is
the matter, that thou, like a careless and retchles fellow, loitering,
I know not where, hast been so negligent, and slow in thy return?
I cannot devise, what should be the cause of this thy so long stay, un∣less
it were to give old Celestina a warming to night; or to rub
her feet, as you were wont to doe, when you were a Little-one.
O Sempronio, my good friend, I pray thee doe not inter∣rupt,
or rather corrupt my pleasure; Doe not intermix thy anger
with my patience; doe not involve thy discontentment with my
quiet; Doe not soil with such troubled water, the clear liquor of
those gladsome thoughts, which I harbour in my heart; Doe not
sour with thy malicious taunts and hatefully reprehensions, the
sweetness of my delight. Receive me cheerful, embrace me with
joy, and I shall tell thee wonders of my late happy prose∣dings.
Come, out with it, out with it. Is it any thing touching
Melibea? Say, Lad, hast thou seen her?
What talk thou to me of Melibea? It is touching another,
that I wish better unto then Melibea. And such a one (if I be not de∣ceiued)
as may compare with her both in hand•omnes, and beauty.
Melibea? Why, she is not worthy to carry her shoes after her: as
though forsooth, the world and all that therein is, be it beauty, or
otherwise, were only enclosed in Melibea?
What means this fellow? Is hee mad? I would fain
laugh, but I cannot. Now I see, wee are all in love: the world is
at an end. Calisto loves Melibea; I, Elicia: and thou out of mere
envy, hast found out some one, with whom thou might lose that
little wit thou hast.
Is it folly (say you) to love? Then am I a fool. But if
foolishness were a pain, some in every house would complain.
I appeal to thy self; by thine own judgment thou
art no better: For my self have heard thee give vain and foolish
counsel to Calisto, and to cross Celestina in every word she spake,
to the hinderance of both our profits. O Sir, you were glad of this;
it was meat alone to you. Who, you? No, not for a world,
would you bear a part with vs. But since I have caught you in my
clutches, I will hamper you in faith. Now, that thou art in those
hands, that may hurt thee, they shall doe it; assure thy self they
shall.
It is not, Sempronio, true courage, nor manly valour, to hurt
or hinder any man, but to doe good, to heal, and help him: and
far greater is it to be willing so to doe. I have evermore made
reckoning of thee, as of mine own brother. Let not that be very∣fied
of thee, which is commonly spoken amongst vs; that a slight
cause should part true friends; I tell you, you doe not use me well.
Nay, you deal very ill with me; I know not whence this rancor
should arise. Doe not vex me (Sempronio;) Torment me not with
these thy wounding words. And shall I tell you? It is a very strange
and strong kind of patience, which sharpe taunts and scoffs, which
like so many needles and by•kins set to the heart, cannot pierce and
prick thorough.
I say nothing, but that now you have your wench, you
will allow one pilchard more to the poor boy in the Stable.
You cannot hold, your heart would burst, if you should
not vent your choler. Well, I will give way, and should you use me
worse, I will pocket up all your wrongs: and the rather, because
it is an old saying, No humane passion is perpetual.
But you can use Calisto worse; advising him to that, which
thou thy self seek to shun: never letting him alone, but still
urging him to leave loving of Melibea: wherein, thou art just like
unto a sign in an Inn, which gives shelter to others, and none to it
self. O Parmeno, now mai'st thou see, how easy a thing it is to
find fault with another mans life, and how hard to amend his
own. I say no more, your self shall be your own Judge: and from
this day forward, we shall see how you behave your self, since
you have now your porringer, as well as other folks. If thou had
been my friend (as thou profess) when I stood in need of thee,
thou should then have favoured me, and made show of thy love,
and assisted Celestina in all that had been for my profit, and not to
drive in at every word a nail of malice. Know moreover, that as
wine in the Lees, when it is drawn to the very dregs, drives
drunkards from the Tavern: the like effect hath necessity, or aduer∣city
with a fained friend: and false mettle, that is gilded but slight∣lie
over, quickly discovers it self to be but counterfeit.
I have often-times heard it spoken, and now by expo∣rience
I see it is true; that in this wretched life of ours, there is no
pleasure without sorrow; no contentment without some cross, or
counterbuffe of fortune. We see our fairest days, our clearest Sunne-shines
are ouer-cast with clouds, darkness and rain: our solaces
and delights are swallowed up by dolours and by death: laughter,
mirth, and merriment are waited on by tears, lamentations,
and other the like mortal passions. In a word; Sweet meat will
have sour sauce: and much ease and much quietness, much pain
and much heaviness. Who could come more friendly, or more
merrily to a man, then I did now to thee? And who could receive
a more unkind welcome, or unfriendly salutation? Who lives there,
that sees himself, as I have seen my self, raised with such glory
to the height of my dear Areusa's love? And who, that sees himself
more likely to fall from thence, then I, being so ill entreated, as I
am of thee? Nay, thou wilt not give me leave to tell thee, how
much I am thine, how much I will further thee in all I am able, how
much I repent me of that which is past, and what good counsel and
reprehensions I have received of Celestina, and all in favour of thee,
and thy good, and the good of vs all. And now, that we have our
Masters and Melibea's game in our own hands; now is the time that
wee must thrive or never.
I like your words well, but should like them better,
were your works like unto them: which as I see the performance,
so shall I give them credence; but tell me, I pray thee, what's that,
me thought, I heard you talk even now of Arouse? Doe you know
Arouse, that is Cousin to Elicia?
Why, what were all the joy I now enjoy, did I not in∣joy
her?
What does the fool mean? He cannot speak for
laughing. What doest thou call this thy enjoying her? Did she
show her self unto thee out at a window? Or what is the mat∣la?
No great matter. Only I have left her in doubt, when∣there
she be with child or no.
Thou hast struck me into a maze; continual travel
may doe much; often dropping makes stones hollow.
How? continual travel? Why, I never thought of
having her till yesterday; then did I work her; and now she is
mine own.
The old woman had a finger in this business, had she
not?
Why should you think so?
Because she told me how much she loved you, how
well she wished you, and that she would work her for you; you were
a happy man, Sir, you had no more to doe, but to come and take
up. And therefore they say, It is better with him whom fortune
helps, then with him that rises early. But was she the godfa∣there
to this business?
No, but she was the godmother, which is the truer of
the two. And you know, when a man comes once to a good tree, he
will stay a while by it, and take the benefit of the shade. I was long
a coming, but when I came, I went quickly to work: I dispatcht
it in an instant. O brother, what shall I say unto thee of the gre∣ces
that are dwelling in that wench, of her language, and beauty of
body? But I will defer the repetition thereof to a fitter oppor∣tunitie.
She can be no other but cousin to Elicia; thou can not
say so much of her, but that this other hath as much, and somewhat
more. But what did she cost thee? Hast thou given her any
thing?
No, not any thing, but whatsoever I had given her, it had
been well bestowed: for she is capable of every good thing; and
such as she, are by so much the better esteemed, by how much the
dearer they are bought: and like Jewels, are the higher prized, the
more they cost vs. But, save in this my Mistress, so rich a thing was
never purchased at so low a rate. I have invited her to day to dinner
to Celestina's house; and if you like of it, let vs all meet there.
Who, brother?
Thou and she, and the old woman and Elicia; and there
wee will laugh and be merry.
O good heavens, how glad a man hast thou made me!
Thou art frank, and of a free and liberal disposition, I will never
fail thee: now I hold thee to be a man; now my mind gives me,
that Fate hath some good in store for thee: all the hatred and malice
which I bare thee for thy former speeches, is now turned into love;
I now doubt not, but that the league which tho• hast made with vs,
shall be such as it ought to be. Now I long to embrace thee; Come,
let vs now live like brothers; and let the devil go hang himself. All
those contentious words notwithstanding, whatsoever have passed
between vs, let there be now no falling out, and so have peace all the
year long; for, the falling out of friends, is evermore the renewing
of love; let vs feast and be merry, for our Master will fast for vs all.
What does that man in desperation doe?
Hee lies where you left him last night, stretching him∣self
all along upon his palate, by his bed-side; but the Devil a
wink that hee sleeps; and the Devil a whit that hee wakes, but
lies like a man in a trance, between them both, resting, and yet
taking no rest. If I go in unto him, hee falls a routing, and a
snorting; If I go from him, hee either sings or raves: nor can I
for my life comprehend (so strange is his carriage herein) when∣there
the man bee in pain or ease; whether hee take grief or plea∣sure
in it.
What a strange humour is this? But tell me (Sempronio)
Did hee never call for me? Did hee not remember me when
I was gone?
Hee remembered not himself; Why should hee then re∣member
you?
Even in this also fortune hath been favourable unto me.
And since all things go so well, whilst I think on it, I will send
thither our meat, that they may the sooner make ready our din∣ner.
What hast thou thought upon to send thither, that
those pretty fools may hold thee a complete Courtier, well bred
and bountiful?
In a plentiful house a supper is soon provided: that, which
I have here at home in the Larder, is sufficient to save our credit.
Wee have good white bread, wine of Monuiedro, a good gammon
of Bacon, and some half dozen couple of dainty Chickens, which
my Masters Tenants brought him in the other day, when they came
to pay their rent; which if hee chance to ask for▪ I will make him
believe, that he hath eaten them himself: and those Turtledoues,
which hee willed me to keep against to day; I will tell him, that
they were a little to blame, and none of the sweetest, and that they
did so stink, that I was fine to throw them away; and you shall
justify it, and bear me witness. We will take order, that all that
hee shall eat thereof, shall doe him no harm; and that our own
Table (as good reason it is it should) be wellfurnished; and there
with the old woman, as oft as we meet, wee will talk more largely
concerning this his love, to his loss, and our profit.
Call thou it love? Thou mai'st call it sorrow with a avenge∣ance.
And by my fey, I swear unto thee, that I verily think, that
he will hardly now escape either death or madness: but since it is,
as it is, dispatch your business, that we may go up, and see what
hee does.
In peril great I live,
And strait of force must dye:
Since what desire doth give,
That, hope doth me deny.
Hark, hark, Sempronio! Our Master is a riming: Hee
is turned Po•t, I perceive.
O whore-sonne Sot! What Poet, I pray? The great An∣tipater
Sidonius, or the great Poet Ouid, who never spake but in
Verse? I, it is he; the very same: we shall have the Devil turn
Poet too shortly, he does but talk idly in his sleep; and thou
think the poor man is turned Poet.
This pain, this martyrdom,
O heart, well dost thou prove,
Since thou so soon wast won
To Melibea's love.
Lo, did I not tell thee hee was turned true Rimer?
Who is that, that talks in the Hall? Why ho?
Anon, Sir.
How far night is it? Is it time to go to bed?
It is rather, Sir, too late to rise.
What sai'st thou fool? Is the night past and gone then?
I, Sir, and a good part of the day too.
Tell me (Sempronio) does not this idle-headed Knave
lye, in making me believe it is day?
Put Melibea (Sir) a little out of your mind, and you
will then see, that it is broad day: for through that great brightness
and splendour, which you contemplate in her clear shining eyes,
like a Partridge dazzled with a buffet, you cannot see, being blinded
with so sudden a flash.
Now I believe it, and it is far day too. Give me my
clothes; I must go to my wonted retirement to the Mirtle-groue,
and there beg of Cupped, that hee will direct Celestina, and put my
remedy into M•libea's heart, or else that hee will shorten my sor∣rowfull
days.
Sir, doe not vex your self so much: you cannot doe all
that you would in an hour: nor is it discretion for a man to desire
that earnestly, that may unfortunately fall upon him. If you will
have that concluded in a day, which is well, if it be effected in a
year, your life cannot be long.
I conceive your meaning; you would infer that I am
like Squire Gallego's boy, who went a year without breeches, and
when his Master commanded a pair to be cut out for him, he would
have them made in a quarter of an hour.
Heaven forbid (Sir) I should say so: for you
are my Master, and I know besides, that as you will recompense me
for my good counsel, so you will punish me, if I speak amiss;
though it be a common saying, that the commendation of a mans
good service, or good speech, is not equal to the reprehension and
punishment of that which is either ill done or spoken.
I wonder (Sempronio) where thou got so much philoso∣phie?
Sir, all that is not white, which differs from black; nor
is all that gold which glisters. Your accelerated, and hasty desires,
not being measured by reason, make my counsels to seem better
then they be. Would you, that they should yesterday, at the first
word, have brought Melibea manacled, and tied to her girdle, as
you would have sent into the market for any other merchandise?
Wherein there is no more to doe, then to go into the market, and
take the pains to buy it. Sir, bee of good cheer; give some ease
and rest to your heart; for no great happiness can happen in an in∣stant.
It is not one stroke that can fell an Oak; prepare your self
for sufferance, for wisdom is a laudable blessing; and he that is pre∣pared,
may withstand a strong encounter.
Thou hast spoken well, if the quality of my e•ill would
consent to take it so.
To what end serves understanding, if the will sha•• 〈◊〉
reason of her right?
O thou fool, thou fool! The sound man says to the
sick, Heaven send thee thy health. I will no more counsel, no more
kearken to thy reasons: for, they doe but revive, and kindle those
flames afresh, which burn and consume me. I will go and inuo∣cate
Cupped; and will not come home, till you call me, and crave a
reward of me for the good news you shall bring me, upon the
happy coming of Celestina: nor will I eat any thing, till Phoebus
his horses shall feed, and graze their fill in those greene meadows
where they use to bait, when they come to their journeys end.
Good Sir, leave off these circumlocutions; leave off these
poetical fictions; for that speech is not comely, which is not
common unto all: which all men partake not of, as well as your
self: or which few doe but understand. Say, till the Sun set,
and every one will know what you mean. Come, eat in the
mean while, some Conserves, or the like confection, that you may
keep some life in you, till I return.
Sempronio, my faithful servant, my good counsellour,
my loyal follower; Be it as thou wilt have it: for I assure my self
(out of the vnspottednesse of thy pure service) that my life is as
dear unto thee as thine own.
Dost thou believe it, Parmeno? I wot well that thou wilt not
swear it. Remember, if you go for the Conserves, that you nimme
a barrel for those you wot of; you know who I mean. And to a
good understanding every thing will light in his lap: or (as he
phrase is) fall into his Cod-pisse.
What say thou, Sempronio?
I speak, Sir, to Parmeno, that hee should run quickly
and fetch you a slice of Conserves, of Citron, or of Lemons.
Lo (Sir) here it is.
Give it me hither.
See, how fast it goes down! I think the Devil makes
him make such quick work. Look, if hee does not swallow
it whole, that hee may the sooner have done?
My spirits are returned unto me again; I promise you it
hath done me much good. My Sons both, farewell. Go look
after the old woman, and waite for good news, that I may reward
you for your labour.
So, now hee is gone. The devil and ill fortune follow
thee; for in the very same hour hast thou eaten this Citron, as
Apuleius did that poison which turned him into an Ass.
SEMPRONIO and Parmeno go talking each with other to
Celestina's house; being come thith••, they find there Elicia
and Arouse. They sit down to dinner; being at dinner, Elicia and
Sempronio fall out; being risen from Table, they grow friends
again. In the mean while comes Lucrecia, servant to Melibea,
to call Celestina to come and speak with Melibea.
Parmeno, I pray thee bring down our
Cloaks, and our Rapiers; for I think it be time
for vs to go to dinner.
Come, let vs go presently; for I think
they will find fault with vs, for staying so long. Let
vs not go thorough this, but that other street, that
wee may go in by the Vestals, so shall we see, whether Celestina have
ended her devotions, and take her along with vs.
What? Doe you think to find her at her Theme now?
Is this a fit hour? This a time for her to be at her Orisons?
That can never be said out of time, which ought to be
done at all times.
It is true, but I see, you know not Celestina; when she he's
any thing to do, she never thinks upon heaven, the devil a whit that
she cares then for devotion; when she hath any thing in the house to
gnaw upon, farewell all holiness, farewell all prayers: and indeed,
her going to any of these Ceremonies, is but to spy and pry only up∣on
advantages for such persons as she may preuaricate and make for
her profit. And though she bred thee up, I am better acquainted
with her qualities, then you are. That which she doth ruminate:
how many cracked maiden-heads she hath then in cure; how many
Lovers in this City; how many young wenches are recommended
unto her; what Stewards afford her provision; which is the more
bountiful: and how she may call every man by his name; that when
she chances to meet them, she may not salute them as strangers.
When you see her lips go, then is she inventing of lies, and devising
s•eights, and tricks for to get money; then doth she thus dispute
with her self; In this manner will I make my speech; In this fashi∣on
will I close with him. Thus then will he answer me; And to
this I must thus reply. Thus lives this creature, whom we so high∣lie
honour.
Tush, this is nothing; I know more then this. But
because you were angry the to there day, when I told Calisto so much,
I will forbear to speak of it.
Though wee may know so much for our own good, yet
let vs not publish it to our own hurt; For, to have our Master to
know it, were but to make him discard her for such a one as she is,
and not to care for her; and so leaving her, hee must needs have ••∣there,
of whose pains wee shall reap no profit, as we shall be sure
to doe by her, who by fair means, or by foul, shall give vs part
of her gains.
Well, and wisely hast thou spoken; but hush: the door
is open, and she in the house. Call before you go in; peraduen∣ture,
they are not yet fully ready; or things are not in that order
as they would have it; and then will they be loath to be seen.
Go in, man, never stand upon those niceties; for we are all
of a house. Now, just now, they are covering the Table.
O my young amorous youths, my Pearls of gold! Let
the year go about as well with me, as you are both welcome
unto me.
What complements has the old Bawd? Brother, I
make no question, but you well enough perceive her foystings, and
her flatteries.
O! you must give her leave, it is her living. But I
wonder what devil taught her all her knacks, and her knaveries.
What? Mary, I will tell you. Necessity, Poverty, and
Hunger; then which there are no better. Tutors in the world:
No better quickeners, and reuiuers of the wit. Who taught your
Pies, and your Parrots to imitate our proper Language, and
tone, with their slit tongues, save only necessity?
Hola: wenches, girls: where be you, you fools? Come
down; Come hither quickly▪ I say; for there are a couple of young
Gallants that would ravish me.
Would they would never have come hither for me. O!
it is a fine time of day! is this a fit hour, when you have invited
your friends, to a feast? You have made my cousin to waite here
these three long hours: but this same lazy-gut (Sempronio) was the
cause I warrant you, of all this stay; for hee has no eyes to look
upon me.
Sweet-Heart; I pray thee be quiet. My Life, my Love!
you know full well, that he that serves another, is not his own man.
He that is bound, must obey. So that my subjection frees me from
blame. I pray thee be not angry. Come, let vs sit down, and fall to
our meat.
I, it is well, you are ready at all times to sit down, and
eat, as soon as the cloth is laid, with a clean pair of hands, but
a shameless face.
Come, we will chide and brawl after dinner: Now let
vs fall to our vitailes. Mother Celestina, will it please you to sit
down first?
No, first sit you down (my son) for here is room
enough for vs all; let every one take their place, as they like, and
sit next her whom he loves best: as for me, who am a sole woman, I
will sit me down here by this Jar of wine, and this good goblet. For
I can live no longer, then while I talk with one of these two. Ever
since that I was grown in years, I know no better office at board,
then to fall a skinking, and to furnish the Table with pots and fla∣gons:
For he that handles honey, shall feel it still •linging to his fin∣gers.
Besides, in a cold winters night, you cannot have a better war∣ming-panne.
For, when I toss off two of these little pots, when I
am even ready to go into my bed, why, I feel not a jot of cold all
the night long. With this, I fur all my clothes at Christmas: This
warmes my blood; This keeps me still in one estate; This makes
me merry, where-e're I go; This makes me look fresh, and rud∣die,
as a Rose. Let me still have store of this in my house, and a fig
for a dear year, it shall never hurt me: for one crust of Mouse-eaten
bread will serve me three whole days; This drives away all
care and sorrow from the heart, better then either Gold or Coral;
This gives force to a young man, and vigour to an old man; It adds
colour to the discoloured; courage to the coward; diligence to the
slothful; it comfort the brain; it expels cold from the sto∣macke;
it takes away the stinkingnesse of the breath; it makes cold
constitutions, to be potent and active: it makes husbandmen en∣dure
the toil of tillage; it makes your painful and weary mow∣ers
to sweat out all their waterish ill humours; it remedies Rheumes;
and cures the tooth-ache. This may you keep long at Sea without
stinking; so can you not water: I could tell you more properties of
this wholesome liquor, than all of you have hairs on your head. So
that I know not the man, whom it doth not delight to hear it but
mentioned, the very name of it is so pleasing: only, it has but this
one fault: That that which is good, costs vs dear; and that which is
bad, does vs hurt; So that what makes the Liver sound, the same
makes the purse light; but for all this, I will be sure to seek after
the best; for that little which I drink, which is only some dozen
times a meal. Which number, I never pass, unless now, when
I am feasted, or so.
It is the common opinion of all: That thrice in a dinner,
is good, honest, competent, and sufficient for any man. And all that
doe write thereof, doe allow you no more.
Son, the phrase is corrupted; they have put three
time, in stead of thirteen.
Aunt, wee all like well of your gloss. Let vs eat, and
talk, and talk and eat: For else wee shall not afterwards have
time to discourse of the love of our lost Master, and of that fair
handsome, and courteous Melibea, lovely gentle Melibea.
Get thee out of my sight, thou distasteful companion,
thou disturber of my mirth; the Devil choke thee with that thou
hast eaten. Thou hast given me my dinner for to day; now as I live, I
am ready to rid my stomach, and to cast up all that I have in my by∣die,
to hear that thou should call her fair and courteous, lovely,
and gentle. I pray thee how fair, how lovely, how courteous, how
gentle is she? It angers me to the heart-bloud, to see you have so
little shame with you. How gentle, how fair is she, more then o∣there
women? Believe me, if she be as thou report her; nay, if she
have any jot in her of beauty, or any the least gracefulness. But I
〈◊〉 there are some eyes, that make •o difference betwixt •one, and
my Lady, and that it is with every one as hee likes, as the good man
said, when he kissed his Cow. Draff I perceive is good enough for
Swine. I will cross my self in pity of thy great ignorance, and
want of judgment▪ Who I pray, had any mind to dispute with
you, touching her beauty, and her gentleness? Gentle Melibea?
Fair Melibea? And is Melibea so gentle, is she so fair as you make
her to be? Then it must be so; and then shall both these hit right in
her, when two Sundays come together. All the beauty she hath,
may be bought at every Peddlers, or Painters shop for a penny mat∣la,
or the like trifle: and believe me, I my self, upon mine own
knowledge, know, that in that very street where she •wels, there
are four maidens at the least, if not more, to whom Nature hath
imparted a greater part of beauty, and other good graces in
greater abundance, then she hath on Melibea; and if she have any
jot of handsomeness in her, she may thank her good clothes; her
neat dressings, and costly Jewels, which if they were hung upon a
post, thou would as well say by that too, that it were fair and
gentle; and by my say (be it spoken without os•entation) I think
my penny to be as good silver as hers; and that I am every way as
fair as your Melibea.
O sister! had thou seen her as I have seen her (I tell
thee no lye) if thou should have met her fasting, thy stomach
would have taken such a loathing, that all that day thou would
not have been able to have eaten any meat. All the year long she is
mewed up at home, where she is daubed over with a thousand slut∣tech
slibber•slabbers; all which (forsooth) she must endure, for once
perhaps going abroad in a twelue-month to be seen: she anoints
her face with gall and honey, with parched grapes and figs crew∣shed
and pressed together, with many other things, which for man∣ners
sake, and reverence of the Table, I omit to mention. It is their
riches, that make such creatures as she to be accounted fair; it is
their wealth, that causes them to be thus commended, and
not the graces, and goodly features of their bodies. For, she
has such breasts, being a maid, as if she had been the mother of three
children; and are for all the world, like nothing more, then two
great Pompeans, or big bottled-Goords. Her belly I have not
seen, but judging it by the rest, I verily believe it, to be as slack,
and as flaggy, as a woman of fifty year old. I know not what Calisto
should see in her, that for her sake, hee should forsake the love of o∣theirs,
whom hee may with great ease obtain, and far more plea∣sure
enjoy: Unless it be, that like the Palate that is distasted, hee
thinks sour things the sweetest.
Sister, it seems here unto me, that every Peddler pray∣seth
his own needles; but I assure you, the quite contrary is spo∣ken
of her throughout the whole City.
There is nothing farther from truth, then the opinion of
the vulgar, and nothing more false, then the reports of the multi∣tude,
nor shalt thou ever live a merry life, if thou govern thy self
by the will of the common people: and these conclusions, are un∣controllable,
and infallibly true; that whatsoever thing the vulgar
thinks, is vanity: whatsoever they speak, is false-hood: what they
reprove, that is good: what they approve, that is bad, And since
this is a true rule, and common custom amongst them, doe
not judge of Melibea's either goodness or beauty, by that which
they affirm.
Gentlewomen; let me answer you in a word. Your ill
tongued multitude, and prattling vulgar, never pardon the faults of
great persons, no, not of their Sovereign himself, which makes
me to think, that if Melibea had so many defects, as you tax her
withal, they would ever this have been discovered by those who
know her better then wee doe. And howbeit I should admit all you
have spoken to be true, yet pardon me, if I press you with this par∣ticular.
Calisto is a Noble Gentleman; Melibea the Daughter of
Honourable parents; So that, it is usual with those, that are descen∣d•d
of such high Linage, to seek and inquire each after other; and
therefore it is no marvel, if he rather love her, then another.
Let him be base that holds himself base; they are the
Noble Actions of men, that make men Noble. For in conclusion,
we are all of one making flesh and blood all. Let every man strive to
be good of himself, and not go searching for his virtue in the
Nobleness of his Ancestors.
My good children; as you love me, cease this content∣os
kind of talk: and you Elicia; I pray you come to the Table a∣gain;
sit you down, I say, and doe not vex, and grieve your
self, as you doe.
With this condition, that my meat may be may poison;
and that my belly may burst with that I eat. Shall I sit down and
eat with this wicked Villain, that hath stoutly maintained it to my
face, and no body must say him nay, That Melibea: That Dish∣clout
of his, is fairer then I?
I prithee (Sweet-heart) be quiet, it was you that made
the comparison; and comparisons (you know) are odious: and there∣fore
it is you that are in the fault, and not I.
Come, sister, come, and sit with vs; I pray, come eat
with vs. Have you no more wit, then to be angry with such a cross
fool as hee? I would not doe him so much pleasure, as to forbear
my meat for him; let him go hang, if hee be peevish, will you
be peevish too? I pray you sit down, unless you will have me like∣wise
to rise from the Table.
The necessity which I have imposed upon my self, to
please thee in all things, and in all thy requests, makes me against
my will, to give contentment to this enemy of mine; and to carry
my self out of my respect to this good company more fairly to∣wards
him, then otherwise I would.
Ha, ha, he.
What dost thou laugh at? Now the evil Canker eat
and consume that unpleasing and offensive mouth of thine.
Son, I pray thee no more. Do not answer her; for then
we shall never make an end: This is nothing to the present purpose;
Let vs follow our business, and attend that which may tend to our
good. Tell me, How does Calisto? How hoped it you left him thus all
alone? How fell it out, that both of you could slip away from
him?
He flung from vs with a vengeance, fretting and fuming
like a mad-man, his eyes sparkling forth fire, his mouth venting
forth curses, despairful, discontented in mind, and like one that
is half besides himself: and is now gone to Saint Mary Mag∣dalens,
to desire of God, that thou moist well and truly gnaw the
bones of these Chickens; vowing never to come •ome, till hee
hear that thou art come with Melibea in thy lap. Thy gown and
kirtle, and my cassock are cock-sure. For the rest let the world
slide; but when we shall have it; that I know not, all the craft is in
the catching.
Let it come when it will come, it shall be welcome, when
ever it comes. A cassock is good wear after winter. And sleeves
are good after Easter: Every thing makes the heart merry that is
gotten with ease, and without any labour, especially coming from
thence, where it leaves so small a gap, and from a man of that
wealth and substance, who with the very bran and scraps of his
house, would make me of a begget, to become rich: such is the sir∣plus
and store of his goods; and such as hee, it never grieves them
what they spend, considering the cause wherefore they give:
For they feel it not; when they are in the heat and passion of their
love, it pains them not; they neither see, nor hear; which I judge
to be true by others, that I have known to be less passionate, and
less scorched in the fiery flames of love, then Calisto is; in so much,
that I have seen them neither eat nor drink; neither laughed nor weep;
neither sleep nor wake; neither speak nor hold their peace; neither
live in pain, nor yet find ease; neither be contented, nor yet com∣plain
of discontentment, answerable to the perplexity of that sweet
and cruel wound of their hearts. And if natural necessity forces
them to any one of these, they are so wholly forgetful of them∣selves,
and struck into such sudden senslesnesse of their present be∣ing
and condition, that eating, their hands forget to carry their
meat to their mouths: Besides, if you talk with them, they never
answer you directly. Their bodies are there with you, but where
they love, there are their hearts, and their senses. Great is the force
of love. His power doth not only reach over the earth, but passes
also over the seas. He holds an equal command over all mankind.
He breaks thorough all kind of difficulties; and dangers whatsoever.
It is a tormentfull thing, full of fear, and of care. His eye roles eve∣rye
way; nothing can escape him. And if any of you that be here,
ing perhaps 100. stripes upon them, and afterwards thrust them out
of doors, with their hair about their cares, and their farthels at their
backs, rating them in most vile manner, crying, Out of my doors,
you thief, you whore, you strumpet: this is no place for such paltry
baggages. Thou shalt not spoil my house, I will not be thus dis∣honoured
by thee. So that in stead of expected recompense, they re∣ceiue
nothing but bitter reuilements. Where they expect to go
preferred out of the house, they go preiudiced out of the house.
And where they expect to be well married, they are quite mared in
their reputation. And where they expect jewels and wedding ap∣apparel,
there are they sent out naked, and disgraced: these are
their rewards, these their benefits, and these the payments they
receive for their service. They are bound to give them husbands,
and in lieu thereof, they strip them of their clothes. The greatest
grace and honour which they have in their Ladies house, is to be im∣ployed
in walking the streets from one Lady to another, and to
deliver their Ladies message▪ (As, My Lady hath sent to know how
you doe? how you did rest to night? how your physic wrought
with you; and how many occasions it gave your Ladyship, &amp;c?)
They never hear their own name out of their Ladies mouth. But
the best they can call them by, is, Come hither, you whore, Get
you gone, you drab, or I'll set you going: Whither gad you
now, you mangy harlotry; you pockey slut? what have you done
to day, you loitering Queen? why did you eat this, you ravening
thing, you gor-belly, you greedy cormorant? A you filthy Sow, how
clean this frying pan is kept? This piss-pot (Minion) it is well
scoured, is it not? why you lazy bones, did you not brush my
clothes, when I left them off, and make clean my Mantle? Why
said you thus and thus, you Sot, you foolish Ass? Who lost the
piece of plate, you scatter-good, you draggle-tayle? Whats be∣come
of my handkercher, you purloining thief? you have given
it to one of your copes-mates, some sweet-heart of yours, that must
help to make you a whore: Come hither, you foul flappes, say▪
Where is my Hen, my crammed Hen, that I cannot find her?
you were best look her me out, and that quickly too, unless you
mean I shall make you pay for her, when I come to pay you your
wages. And besides all this, her pantofles shall walk about her
ears a thousand times a day; pinchings, cudgellings, and scourgings
shall be as common to her as her meat and drink. There is not a∣ny
that knows how to please and content them; not any that can
endure their tartness and curstness: their delight is to speak loud;
their glory to chide and to brawl, and the better one does, and the
more one seeks to please them, the less are they contented. And
this (mother) is the reason, why I have rather desires to live free
from controlment, and to be mistress in a poor little house of
mine own, then to live a slave, and at command in the richest pa∣lace
of the proudest Lady of them all.
Thou art in the right, my girl; I will take no care
for you, you will shift for your self; I perceive you know what
you doe, you need not to be told on which side your bread is but∣tred,
you are no baby, I see: and wise men tell vs, that better is a
crust of bread, and a cup of cold water with peace and quietness,
then a house full of dainties, with brabbling and wrangling. But
now let vs leave this argument, for here comes Lucrecia.
Much good to you (good Aunt) and to all this fair
company and great meeting.
So great, daughter? hold you this so great a meeting?
It appears that you have not known me in my prosperity, which
is now some twenty years since. There be those that have seen
me in better case then I am now; and hee that now sees me, I
wonder his heart doth not burst with sorrow. I tell thee,
(wench) I have seen at this table, where your kinswomen now sit,
nine gallant young wenches, much about your age; for the eldest
was not aboue eighteen, and not one of them under four∣teene.
But such is this world, it comes and goes upon wheels.
We are like pots in a water-wheele, or like buckets in a Well; one
up, and another down, one full, and another empty; it is fortunes
Law, that nothing can continue any long time in one, and the self∣same
state of being. Her order is alteration; Her custom, change.
I cannot without tears deliver unto you the great honour I then
lived in; though now, (such is my ill fortune) by little and little, it
hath gone decaying▪ And as my days declined; so diminished and
decreased my profit. It is an old saying; That whatsoever is in this
world, it doth either increase or decrease. Every thing hath it's li∣mitts;
Every thing it's degrees of more or less: my honour did
mount to that height, as was fitting for a woman of my quality to
rise unto; and now of force, it must descend and fall as much: By
this I know, that I am near to my end, and that the Lease of my
life is now expiring, and all my years are almost spent and gone:
and I also well know, that I did ascend, that I might descend; that
I flourished, for to wither; that I had joy, that I might have sorrow;
that I was borne to live; lived, to grow; grew, to grow old; and
grow old to dye: and though it did always appear unto me, that I
ought in this respect to suffer my misery the more patiently, yet as I
am formed of flesh and blood▪ and bear this heavy mass of sin
about me, I cannot but think on it now and then with grief, nor
can I wholly as I would, blot every thought thereof out of the
woeful role of my wretched remembrance.
Me thinks (mother) it could not choose but be won∣dross
troublesome unto you, to have the charge of so many young
wenches. For they are very dangerous Cattle to keep, and will
ask a great deal of pains.
Pains, Sweet-heart? Nay, they were an ease, and plea∣sure
unto me; they did all of them obey me; they did all of them
honour me; they did all of them reverence me: not one of them
that would swerve from my will: what I said, stood for a Law; it
was good and currant amongst them; not any one of them, to whom
I gave entertainment, ever made their own choice any further
then it stood with my liking; were he lame, crooked, squint-ey'd,
or crippled: all was one, he was the welcom'st and the soundest, that
brought me the soundest gains; mine was the profit, and theirs the
pains. Besides, I needed no servants; for in keeping them, I had
servants enough. Why, your Noblemen, your Knights, your old
men, your young men, your learned men, men of all sorts and dig∣nights,
from the highest to the lowest; why, they were all at my
service: and when I came to a feast, my foot was no sooner in,
but I had presently as many Bonnets veiled unto me, as if I had been
a Duchess: he that had least acquaintance, least business with me,
was held the most vile, and basest fellow. They spying me almost a
League off; they would forsake their most earnest occasions, one by
one, two by two, and come to me, to see if I would command them
any service; and withal, ask me severally, how his love, how his
mistress did? When they saw me once pass by, you should have
such a shuffling and scraping of feet, and all in such a general gaze,
and so out of order, that they did neither doe nor say any thing a∣right.
One would call me mistress, another Aunt, others their
love, others honest old woman. There, they would consent, when
they should come to my house: there they would agree when I
should go unto theirs; there they would offer me money; there
they would make me large promises; there likewise present me with
gifts: some kissing the lappet of my Coat; and some other my
cheek, that by these kindesses, they might give me contentment,
and work me to their will. But now Fortune hath brought me to
so low a place in her wheel, that you may say unto me, Mesh you
good dich you with your old ware, you hindges are now grown
rusty for want of oiling.
Mother, you make my hair stand on end, to hear these
strange things, which you recount unto vs; would your Nobles,
your Knights, and Learned men fall so low? I am sure, they are not
all of them so bad as you make them to be.
No (my son) Jove forbid that I should raise any such report,
or lay a general scandal upon any of their rank. For, there were
many old good men amongst them, with whom I had but small
dealings, and could scarce endure to see me: But amongst the gre∣test,
as they grew great in number, so had I a great number of them:
some of one sort, and some of another; some I found very chaste, and
some that took the charge upon them to maintain such Traders as
my self. And I am still of this belief, that of these there is no lack;
and these, forsooth, would send their Squires and young men to
waite upon me, whithersoever I went: and I should scarce have set
my foot within mine own doors, but straight at the heals of me,
you should have one come in with chickens, another with Hens, a
third with Geese, a fourth with Ducks. This man sends me in Par∣triges,
that man Turtle Doves, he a gammon of Bacon, such a one a
Tart, or a Custard; and some good fellow or other a good sucking
Pig, or two: for every one, as soon as he had a convenient pre∣sent,
so they came presently to register them in my house; that I,
and those their pretty souls, might merrily eat them together: and
as for wine, we wanted none; the best that a man could lay his lips
to in the whole City, was sent unto me from divers parts and cor∣ners
of the Town: as that of Monviedro, of Lugne, of Toro, of Ma∣drigall,
of San-Martin, and many other Towns and Villages; And
indeed so many, that albeit I still keep the differences of their taste
and relish in my mouth, yet doe I not retain the diversity of their
foils in my remembrance. For it is enough for such an old wo∣man
as I, that when a good cup of wine comes near my nose, I can
be able to say, This is such a wine, or it comes from such a place,
or person; why, your presents from all parts, from all sorts came
upon me as thick as hops, as flies to a pot of honey, or as stones that
are thrown upon a stage: boys came tumbling in at my door,
with as much provision, as they could carry on their backs. But now
those good days are past, I have eaten all my white bread in my
youth, and know not how in the world to live, being fallen from
so happy an estate.
Since we are come hither to be merry, (good mother)
doe not weep, I pray, doe not vex your self: be of good cheer,
pluck up your heart like a woman; the world while wee are in it,
is bound to keep vs all, and no doubt but you shall have enough.
O daughter! I have cause enough, I think, to weep, when
I call to mind those pleasant days that are past and gone, that mer∣rye
life which then I led, and how I had the world at will, being ser∣ued,
honoured, and sought to of all. Why, then there was not any
new fruit, or any the like dainty, which I had not in my hands, be∣fore
others knew they were scarce blossomed: in those days, they
were sure to be found in my house, if any one with child should
long for such a Toy.
Mother, the remembrance of the good time we have had,
doth profit vs nothing, when it cannot be recovered again, but ra∣there
brings grief and sorrow to our selves, as this interrupting dis∣course
hath done: but mother, we will go off and solace our selves,
whilst you stay here: and give this maid her answer.
Daughter Lucrecia, passing over our former discourse, I
pray you tell me what is the cause of your happy coming hi∣there?
Believe me, I had almost forgot my chief errand un∣to
you, with thinking on that merry time which you talked of. Me
thinks, I could continue fasting almost a whole year in harkening
unto thee, and thinking on that pleasant life, which those young
wenches led; me thinks, that with the very talking thereof, I have a
conceit with my self, that at this present, I feel my self in the
same happiness with them. I shall now, mistress, give you to un∣derstand
the cause of my coming: I am sent unto you for my
Ladies Girdle; and moreover, my Lady entreats you, that you
would come and visit her, and that out of hand, for she feels her
self very ill, and much pained and troubled with griefs and pangs
about the heart; I assure you, she is very heart-sicke.
Of these petty griefs, the report is more then
the pain. Is it about the heart, say you? I marvel (I promise
you) that so young a Gentlewoman as she is, should be pained at
the heart.
Would thou were as well dragged along the streets,
(thou old traitorous Hag) as thou know well enough what she
ails. The subtle old Bawd comes, and does her witcheries, and her
tricks, and then goes her ways, and afterwards when one comes un∣to
her for help, she makes forsooth as if she knew no such matter,
it is news (forsooth) to her.
What sai'st thou, Daughter?
Mary, I say (mother) would we were gone once; and
that you would give me the Girdle.
Come, let vs go. I will carry it along with me.
whilst Celestina and Lucrecia go onward on their way,
Melibea talks, and discourses with her self. Being
come to the door, first enters Lucrecia, anon after, causes Cele∣stina
to come in. Melibea, after some exchange of words, opens her
mind to Celestina; telling her how fervently she was fallen in love
with Calisto. They spy Alice, Melibea's mother coming; they
take their leave each of other. Alice asks her daughter Melibea,
what business she had with Celestina? and what she made there?
dissuading her from conversing with her, and forbidding her, her
company.
O wretch that I am! O unfortunate Dam∣sell!
Had I not been better yesterday, to have
yielded to Celestina's petition and request, when in
the behalf of that Gentleman, whose sight hath
made me his prisoner, I was so earnestly sued un∣to:
and so have contented him, and cured my self,
then to be thus forcibly driven to discover my heart, when hap∣lie
he will not accept of it; when as already disaffianced in his hope,
for want of a good and fair answer, hee hath set both his eyes and
his heart upon the love and person of another? how much more ad∣uantageous
unto me, would an entreated promise have been, then
a forced offerture? to grant being requested, then to yield being
constrained? O my faithful servant, Lucrecia, what wilt thou say
of me, what wilt thou think of my judgment and understanding,
when thou shalt see me to publish that, which I would never disco∣for
unto thee? how wilt thou stand astonished of my honesty and
modesty, which (like a Recluse, shut up from all company) I have
ever hitherto kept inviolable? I know not whether thou hast suspe∣cted,
or no, whence this my sorrow proceeds, or whether thou
art now coming with that Solicitresse of my safety? O thou high
and supreme Power! thou, unto whom, all that are in misery and
affliction, call, and cry for help; the appassionated beg remedy,
the wounded crave healing; thou, whom the heavens, seas, earth,
and the Center of hell it self doth obey; thou who submittedst all
things unto men, I humbly beseech thee, that thou wilt give suffe∣rance
and patience to my wounded heart, whereby I may be able to
dissemble my terrible passion. Let not this Leaf of my chastity lose
it's guylding, which I have laid upon this amorous desire, publi∣shing
my pain to be otherwise then that, which indeed torments
me. But how shall I be able to doe it; That poisoned morsel so crew∣elly
tormenting me, which the sight of that Gentleman's presence
gave me? O Sex of woman kind! feeble and frail in thy being; why
was it not granted as well unto women, to discover their torment∣full
and fervent flames, as unto men? For then neither should Calisto
have cause to complain, nor I to live in pain.
Aunt, stay here a while behind this door, whilst I
go in, and see with whom my Mistress is talking. Come in; she
is talking alone to her self.
Lucrecia, make fast the door there, and pull down the
hanging over it. O wise and honest old Dame, you are exceeding
welcome; what think you, that chance should so dispose of things,
and fortune so bring about her wheel, that I should stand in need
of this wisdom, and crave so suddenly of you, that you would •die
me in the selfsame coin, the curtsy which was by you demon∣ded
of me for that Gentleman, whom you were to cure by the ver∣tu
of my Girdle?
Say, Lady, what is your disease, that you so lively ex∣press
the tokens of your torment, in those your maiden blushes?
Truly, mother, I think there be some Serpents within
my body, that are gnawing upon my heart.
It is well, even as I would have it. I will be even with
you (you fool) for your yesterdays anger, I will make you pay
for it with a witness.
What's that you say? Have you perceived by my
looks, any cause from whence my malady proceeds?
You have not, Madame, told me the quality of your dis∣ease;
and would you have me divine of the cause? That which I
say, is this, that I am heartily sorry to see your Ladyship so sad and
so ill.
Good old woman; Doe thou make me merry then. For
I have heard much of thy wisdom.
Madame, as far as humane knowledge can discern of
inward grief, I dare presume. And for as much, as for the health and
remedy of infirmities, and diseases, these graces were imparted un∣to
men, for the finding out of fit and convenient medicines, whereof
some were attained to by experience, some by Art, and some by a
natural instinct; some small portion of these good gifts, this poor
old creature my self have gotten, who is here present to doe you
the best service she can.
O how acceptable and pleasing are thy words to mine
ears! it is a comfortable thing to the sick patient, to see his physi∣cian
to look cheerfully upon him. Me thinks I see my heart broken
between thy hand in pieces, which with a little labour, and by
power and virtue of thy tongue, thou art able (if thou wilt) to join
together, and make it whole again; even as easily, as Alexander
that great King of Macedon dream't of that wholesome root in
the mouth of a Dragon, wherewith he healed his servant Ptolomy,
who had been bitten by a Viper; and therefore, for the love of
Jove, disroabe your self, that you may more easily, and more dili∣gently
look into the nature of my disease, and afford me some re∣medy
for it.
A great part of health, is the desiring of health. And a
good sign of mending, to be willing to mend. For which reason I
reckon your grief the less, and hold it the less dangerous; But
that I may minister a wholesome medicine unto you, and such a
one as may be agreeable to your disease; it is requisite, that you
first satisfy me in these three particulars. The first is, on which side
of your body your pain doth lye most? The second, how long
you have had this pain; whether it hath taken you but of late, or
no? For your newly growing infirmities are sooner cured in the
tenderness of their growth, then when they have taken deep
rooting by ouer-long persevering in their office: So beasts are so∣ner
tamed when they are young, and more easily brought to the
yoke, then when their hide is thoroughly hardened: So far better doe
those plants grow up, and prosper, which are removed when they
are young and tender, then those that are transplanted, having long
borne fruit. The third is, whether this your evil hath proceeded
of any cruel thought, which hath taken hold on you? This being
made known, you shall see me set my self roundly to work a∣bout
your cure; for it is very fit and convenient, that you should
open the whole truth, as well to your Physician, as your Confess∣sour.
Friend, Celestina, Thou wise Matron, and great Mi∣stress
in thy Art, thou hast well opened unto me the way, by which
I may manifest my malady unto thee. Believe me, you have quest∣oned
me like a wise woman, and like one that is well experienced in
these kind of sickenesses. My pain is about my heart, it's residence,
near unto my left Pap; but disperses it self over every part of
my body. Secondly, it hath been so but of late; nor did I ever
think, that any pain whatsoever could have so deprived me of my
understanding, as this doth; it troubles my sight, changes my coun∣tenance,
takes away my stomach, I cannot sleep for it, nor will it
suffer me to enjoy any kind of pleasure: touching the thought,
which was the last thing you demanded, concerning my disease, I
am not able to deliver it unto you, and as little the cause thereof;
For neither death of kinsfolk, nor loss of temporal goods, nor a∣ny
sudden passion upon any vision, nor any doting dream, nor any
other thing can I conjecture to be the cause of it, save only a kind
of alt•ration, caused by your self upon your request, which I suss∣pected
in the behalf of that Gentleman Calisto, when you entry∣ted
me for my Charm.
What, Madame? Is Calisto so bad a man? Is his name so
bad; that only but to name him, should, upon the very sound there∣of,
send forth such poison? Deceive not your self; Doe not be∣leeue
that this is the cause of your grief: I have another thing in
the wind, there is more in it then so; but since you make it so dain∣tie,
if your Ladyship will give me leave, I will tell you the cause
of it.
Why, how now, Celestina, what a strange request is this
that thou make unto me? Neatest thou to crave leave of me, who
am to receive help from thee? What Physician did ever demand
such security, for to cure his patient? Speak, speak what you
please; for you shall always have leave of me to say what you
will; always excepted, that you wrong not my honour with your
words.
I see (Lady) that on the one side you complain of
your grief, and on the other side, I perceive, that you fear your
remedy, your fear strikes a fear into me; which fear causes si∣lence,
and silence truce betwixt your malady and my medicine; so
that you self will be the cause that your pain shall not cease, nor
my cunning cure you.
By how much the longer you defer my cure, by so
much the more doe you increase my pain, and augment my passion.
Either thy medicines are of the powder of infamy, and of the juice
of corruption, confectionated with some other more cruel pain,
then that which thy patient already feels; or else thy skill is no∣thing
worth; For if either the one, or the other did not hinder thee,
thou would tell me of some other remedy boldly, and without
fear, since I entreat thee to acquaint me therewith, my honour
full preserved.
Madame, think it not strange, that it is harder for him
that is wounded, to endure the torment of hot-scalding Turpentine,
and the sharpe incisions, which gall the heart, and double the pain;
then the wound that is newly inflicted on him that his whole. And
therefore, if you be willing to be cured, and that I should discover
unto you the sharp point of my needle, without any fear at all,
frame for your hands and feet a bond of patience and of quietness;
for your eyes, a veil of pity and compassion; for your tongue, a
bridle of silence; for your ears, the bombast, or stuffing of suffe∣rance
and bearing; and then shall you see, what effects this old Mi∣stress
in her Art, will work upon your wounds.
O how thou kill me with delays! For Gods love,
speak what thou wilt, doe what thou wilt, exercice thy skill, put
thy experience in practice. For, there is not any remedy so sharpe,
as can equal the bitterness of my pain and torment. No, though it
touch upon mine honour, though it wrong my reputation, though it
afflict my body, though it rip and break up my flesh, for to pull
out my grieved heart. I give thee my faith, to do what thou wilt se∣curely;
and if I may find ease of my payne, I shall liberally reward
thee.
My Mistress hath lost her wits: she is exceeding ill:
this same sorceress hath captivated her will.
One devil or other is still haunting me. One while here,
another while there. I have escaped Parmeno, and have fallen upon
Lucrecia.
Mother, what is it you say; what said the wench unto
you?
I cannot tell (Lady) I did not well hear her. But let
her say what she will; yet let me tell you: That there is not any thing
more contrary in great Cures, before strong &amp; stout-hearted Sir∣goons,
then weak &amp; fainting hearts, who with their great lemon∣tations,
their pitiful words, and their sorrowful gestures strike a
fear into the patient, make him despair of his recovery, and anger
and trouble the Surgeon, which trouble makes him to alter his
hand, and direct his needle without 〈…〉
clearly know, that it is very necessary 〈◊〉 your 〈◊〉, that there
bee no body about you, no, not so much as 〈◊〉. And therefore,
it is very meet, that you command her absence daughter Lucre∣cia,
you must pardon me.
Get you out quickly, be gone.
Well, well, we are all undone I go, madame.
Your great pain and torment doth likewise put boldness
into me, as also that I perceive by your suspicion, you have already
swallowed some part of my cure. But notwithstanding it is needful,
that we bring a more manifest remedy, and more wholesome mi∣tigation
of your pain, from the house of that worthy one Calisto.
Mother, I pray you, good now hold your peace; fetch
not any thing from his house, that may work my good. If you
love me, doe not so much as once name him unto me.
Madame, I pray be patient. That which is the chief and
principal pill•▪ must not be broken. For then all our labour is lost:
your wound is great, and hath need of a sharpe cure. And hard 〈◊〉
hard, doth smooth and mollify more effectually and more delicate∣lie.
And wise men say, That the cure of a lancing 〈…〉
behind it the greater scar: And that without danger, no danger
is overcome. Have patience then with your self. For seldom is
that cured without pain, which in it self is painful. One nail
drives out another. And one sorrow expels another. Doe not con∣ceiue
hatred nor disaffection, nor give your tongue leave to speak
ill of so virtuous a person, as Calisto, whom, if you did but know
him.
O you kill me•no more of him, for Gods sake no more.
Did not I tell you, that you should not commend him unto me?
and that, you should not speak a word of him neither good nor
bad?
Madame, this is that other, and maine point in my cure;
which if you, by your impatience will not consent unto, my com∣ming
can little profit you. But if you will (as you promised) be pati∣ent,
you shall remain found, and out of doubt, and Calisto be well
apaid, and have no cause to complain. I did before acquaint you
with my cures, and with this invisible needle, which before it come
at you to stitch up your wound, you feel it, only but having it in
my mouth, and naming it unto you.
So often wilt thou name this Gentleman unto me,
that neither my promise, nor the faith I plighted thee, will suffice to
make me any longer to endure your words. Wherein should he be
well apaid? What doe I owe unto him? Wherein am I bound un∣to
him? What charge have I •ut him to? What hath he ever done
for me? What necessity is there, that wee must be driven to use
him, as the instrument of my recovery? More pleasing would it
be unto me, that you would tear my flesh and sinews asunder, and
tear ou• my 〈◊〉, then 〈◊〉 utter such words as these.
Without any rupture, or renting of your garments,
love did lance your breast; and therefore will not sunder your
flesh, to •ur your sore.
How call you this grief, that hath seized on the bet∣la
part of my body?
Sweet Love.
Tell me then, what thing this sweet Love may be?
For only in the very hey•ing of it named, my heart leaps for joy.
It is a concealed fire; a pleasing wound; a savoury poi∣son;
a sweet bitterness; a delightful grief; a cheerful torment;
a sweet, yet cruel hurt; and a gentle death.
O wretched, that I am! for if thy relation be true, I rest
doubtful of my recovery: For, according to the contrariety which
these names doe carry, that which shall be profitable for one, shall
to another being more passion.
Let not your noble youth be diffident of recovery; be of
good cheer; take a good heart to you; and doubt not of your well∣fare:
For where heaven gives a wound, there it gives a remedy;
and as it 〈◊〉, so it heales; and so much the sooner, because I
know where the flower grows, that will free you from all this
torment.
How is it called?
〈…〉 not tell you.
〈…〉 and spare not.
Calisto. O Madame; Malibea; ah woe is me, why wo∣man,
what mean you? What a cowardly heart have you? What
a fainting is here? O miserable that I am, hold up your head, I
pray lift it up; O accursed old woman! Must my steps end this?
If she go 〈◊〉 •way in a swooned, they will kill me; if she revive,
she will be much pained: For she will never endure to publish her
pain, nor give me leave to exercise my cure. Why, Melibea, my
sweet Lady; my fair Angel; What's the matter, Sweet-heart?
Where is your grief? why speak you not unto me? What is be∣come
of your gracious and pleasing speech? Where is that cheer∣full
colour, that was wont to beautify your cheeks? Open those
brightest Lamps, that ever nature tinded: Open your eyes, I say,
those 〈◊〉 furnes, that are able to give light to darkness. Lucrecia,
Lucrecia, Come hither quickly; come quickly, I say, you shall see
your Lady lye here in a swooned in my arms; run down quick∣lie
for a Jar•e of water.
Softly, speak softly I pray; I'll see if I can rise; In
no case doe not trouble the house.
Ay me! Sweet Lady, doe not sink any more: speak,
speak unto me as you were wont.
I will, and much more then I was wont. But peace, I
pray a while, and doe not trouble me.
What will you have me to doe (my precious pearl?)
Whence arose this sudden qualm? I believe, my points are bro∣ken.
No; it is my honesty that is broken; it is my modesty
that is broken; my too much bashfulness and shamefastness, oc∣casioned
my swowning, which being my natural and familiar
friends, and companions, could not slightly absent themselves from
my face, but they would also carry away my colour with them for
a while, my strength, my speech, and a great part of my vnderstan∣ding.
But now (my good Mistress, my faithful Secretary) since
that which thou so openly know, it is in vain for me to seek to
smother it; many, yea many days, are now overpassed, since that no∣ble
Gentleman motioned his love unto me; whose speech and
name was then as hateful, as now the reviving thereof is pleasing
unto me: with thy Needles thou hast stitched up my woūd; I am come
to thy Bent; it is in thy power to do with me what thou wilt. In my
girdle, thou carriedst away with thee the possession of my liberty:
His anguish was my greater torment; his pain my greater punish∣meant.
I highly praise and cōmend your singular sufferance, your dis∣create
boldness, your liberal pains, your solicitous &amp; faithful steps,
your pleasing speech, your good wisdom, your excessive solici∣tude,
and your profitable importunity: the Gentleman is much
bound unto you, and my self more; for my reproaches and
revilings could never make thee to slack thy courage, thy strong
continuance, and forcible perseverance in thy suite, relying still on
thy great subtlety and strength of wit; or rather bearing thy self
like a most faithful and trusty servant, being then most diligent,
when thou wast most reviled; the more I did disgrace thee, the more
wast thou importunate; the harsher answer I gave thee, the better
did thou seem to take it: when I was most angry, then wast thou
most mild and humble: and now, by laying aside all fear, thou
hast gotten that out of my bosom, which I never thought to have
discovered unto thee, or to any other whosoever.
My most dear both Lady &amp; friend, wonder not so much
at this; for those ends, that have their effect, give me daringnesse to
endure those craggy and dangerous by-waies, by which I come to
such Recluses as your self. True it is, that until I had resolved
with my self, as well on my way hitherwards, as also here in your
house, I stood in great doubt, whether were I best discover my peti∣tion
unto you or no? When I did think on the great power of your
father, then did I fear; but when withal, I weighed the nobleness
of Calisto, then I grew bold again; when I observed your descry∣tion,
I waxed timorous; but when I considered your virtue, and
your curtsy, I recovered new courage: in the one, I found fear;
in the other, safety. And since, Madame, you have been willing to
grace me with the discovery of so great a favour, as now you have
made known unto me, declare your will unto me, lay your se∣crets
in my lap; put into my hands the managing of this matter,
and I will give it such a form, as both you and Calisto shall very
shortly accomplish your desires.
O my Calisto! my dear Lord, my sweet and pleasing
joy, if thy heart feel the like torment, as mine, I wonder how thy
absence gives thee leave to live. O thou, both my mother, and mi∣stress,
so handle the business, that I may presently see him, if you
desire I should live.
See him? you shall both see him, and speak with him.
Speak with him? it is impossible.
Nothing is impossible to a willing mind.
Tell me how?
I have it in my head: Mary thus, within the doors of
thy house.
When?
This night.
Thou shalt be glorious in mine eyes, if thou compass
this. But soft, at what hour?
Just when the clock strikes twelve.
Go, be gone, hye you, good Mistress, my faithful
friend, and talk with that Gentleman, and will him that hee come
very softly at his appointed hour, and then wee will conclude of
things, as himself shall think fit to order them.
Farewell. Lo, yonder is your mother making hither∣ward.
Friend Lucrecia, my loyal servant, &amp; faithful secretary,
you have here seen, that I have no power over my self; and
what I have done, lies not in my hands to help it. Love hath made
me prisoner to that Gentleman. I entreat thee (for pity sake) that
you will sign what you have seen, with the seal of secrecy, where∣by
I may come to the enjoying of so sweet a Love: In requital
whereof, thou shalt be held by me, in that high regard, as thy faith∣full
service deserves.
Madame, long before this, I perceived your wound, and
sounded your desire: I did much pity your torment; for, the more
you sought to hide from me the fire which did burn you, the more
did those flames manifest themselves in the colour of your face, in
the little quietness of your heart, in the restlessness of your members,
in your tossing to and fro, in eating without any appetite, and in
your unableness to sleep: So that I did continually see from time
to time, as plainly as if I had been within you, most manifest, and
apparent signs of your wretched estate; but because in that instant,
when as will reigns in those whom we serve, or a disordinate ap∣petite,
it is fitting for vs that are servants, to obey them with by∣deli
diligence, and not to check and control them with the Are∣tificiall
counsels of the tongue. And therefore did I suffer with
pain, held my peace with fear, concealed with fidelity; though I
always held it better to use sharpe Counsel then smooth flattery.
But since that your Ladyship hath no other remedy for your reason∣very,
but either to die or to live; it is very meet, that you should
make choice of that for the best, which in it self is best.
How now neighbour? What's the matter with you, that
you are here thus day by day?
I wanted yesterday a little of my weight in the thread
I sold, and now I am come (according to my promise) for to make
it up. And now that I have delivered it, I am going away. Jove have
you in his good keeping.
And you too. Daughter Melibea, what would this old
woman have?
She would have sold me a little sublimated Mercury.
I mary, I rather believe this, then that, which the old lewd
Hag told me. She was afraid, I would have been angry with her,
and so she popped me in the mouth with a Lye. Daughter, take
heed of her. For she is an old crafty Fox; and as false as the
devil. A whole Country can not afford you such another treache∣rous
huswife. Take you heed therefore (I say) of her. For, your
cunning and crafty thieves go always a prolling about yo•r
richest houses. She knows by her treasons and false merchandise,
how to change chaste purposes. She causes an ill report, brings
a bad name and fame upon those tha• have any thing to do with
her. If she be but seen to have entered one house thrice, it is enough
to engender suspicion.
My old Ladies Counsel comes too late.
I charge you (Daughter) upon my blessing, and by that
love which I bear unto you, that if she come hither any more,
when I am out of the way, that you do not give her any entertain∣meant,
no manner of welcome, no, not so much as to show her any
the least countenance of liking, lest it should encourage her to
come again. Let her find, that you stand upon your honesty and
reputation. And be you round and short with her in your answers,
and she will never come at you again. For true virtue is more
feared then a sword.
Is she a blade of that making? is she such a whipster?
Is she one of those, you know what? She shall never come at me
more. And believe me (Madame) I much joy in your good advice,
and that you have so well instructed me, of whom I ought to be∣ware.
CELESTINA having taken her leave of Melibea, goes
mumbling and talking along the streets to her self. She
espies Sempronio and Parmeno, who are going to Saint Marie
Magdalens to look out their Master Sempronio, takes with
Calisto; In the mean while comes in Celestina. They go all to
Calisto's house. Celestina delivers her message; and the means
for their meeting appointed by Melibea. In the interim that Ce∣lestina
and Calisto are discoursing together, Sempronio and
Parmeno fall a talking between themselves; Celestina takes her
•eaue of Calisto, and gets her whom to her own house. She knocks
at the door; Elicia opens it unto her. They sup, and then go to
take their rest.
O thrice happy day! would I were at home
with all my joy, wherewith I go laden. But I see
Parmeno and Sempronio going to the Mi•tle-Groue: I
will after them. And if I meet with Calisto there, we
will all along together to his house, to demand a re∣ward
for the great good news that I bring him.
Take heed, Sir, lest by your long stay, you give occa∣zion
of talk to the world. For your honesty have a care, that you
make not your self become a by-word to the people. For nowadays,
it is commonly spoken amongst them, He is an Hypocrite,
that is too devout. For, what will they say of you, if they see you thus,
but s••ffe in derision at you, and say, He is gone to the Mirtle-Groue
to sacrifice some halfescore Hecatombes of sighs and ay-mees to
Venus son, to prosper and preferred him to the favour &amp; fruition
of some Mistress? If you are oppressed with passion, endure it at home
in your own house, that the world may not perceive it. Discover
not your grief unto strangers, since the drum is in their hands,
who know best how to beat it: and your business in her hands,
who knows best how to manage it.
In whose hands?
In Celestina's?
Who is that names Celestina? What say thou of this
slave of Calisto's? I have come trudging all along the Aug•rs street,
to see if I could overtake you, I did put my best leg foremost, but
all would not doe: the skirts of my Petticoat were so long, and did
so often interfold themselves between my feet.
O thou joy of the world! thou ease of my passions,
thou relieueresse of my pain, my eyes looking-glasse, my heart
doth even exult for joy, in beholding so honoured a presence, an age
so ennobled with years; tell me, what is it thou come with, what
good news dost thou bring? For I see thou look cheerfully: And
yet I know not of what terms my life doth stand; in what it con∣sisteth.
In my tongue.
What say thou then? Speak, thou that art my glory
and comfort. Deliver it more at large unto me.
Sir, let vs first go more privately; and as wee go
home to your house, I will tell you that, which shall make you glad
indeed.
Brother, the old woman looks merrily; Sure, she hath
sped well to day.
Soft, listen what she says.
All this day, Sir, have I been labouring in your busi∣ness,
and have neglected other weighty and serious affairs, which
did much concern me: many doe I suffer to live in pain, only
that I may yield you comfort. Besides, I have lost more by it, then
you are aware of, but farewell it. All is well lost, since I have
brought my business to so good an end: And hear you me, for I
will tell it you in few words (for I love to be short) Melibea is who∣lie
at your service.
O what doe I hear?
Nay, she is more yours then her own: more at your
service and command, then of her father Pleberio.
Speak softly (good mother) take heed what you say;
let not my men hear you, lest they should call thee fool. Melibea
is my mistress, Melibea is my desire, Melibea is my life, I am her ser∣•ant,
I am her slave.
Good Sir, with this distrustfulnesse of yours, with this un∣derva•ewing
of your self, you interse•t such doubts, as cut off Ce∣lestina,
in the midst of her discourse; you would tire out a whole
world with your disordered, and confused interruptions. Why doe
you cross &amp; bless your self? Why do you keep such a wondering?
It were better you would give her some thing for her pains. For
these words are worthy better payment, and expect no less at your
hands.
Well hast thou spoken, dear mother, I wot full well,
that my small reward can no ways reward your pains; but in¦stead
of a gown and a kirtle (because Trades-men shall not share
with you) take this little chain, put it about your neck, and go
on with your discourse, and my joy.
Call you that a little chain? Heard you him, Sem∣pronio?
This Spend-thrift makes no reckoning of it; but I assure
you, I will not give my part thereof for half a Mark of gold, let
her share it never so ill.
Peace, I say, for should my Master have ouer-heard you,
you should have had work enough, to pacify him, and to cure your
self; So offended is he already with your continual murmuring.
As you love me (brother) hear, and hold your peace; for to this
end, thou hast two ears, and but one tongue.
He hath hanged himself so fast to that old women's mouth,
that hee is both deaf, dumb and blind, like a body without a soul,
or a bell without a clapper; insomuch, that if wee should point
at him scornfully with our fingers, he would say, We lifted up our
hands to heaven, imploring his happy success in his love.
Peace, hearken, listen well unto Celestina. On my soul,
she deserves it all, and more too, had hee given it her. She speaks
wonders.
Noble Calisto, to such a poor weak old woman as my
self, you have showed your self exceeding frank and liberal; but
as every gift is esteemed great, or little, in regard of him that gives
it, I will not therefore compare therewith my small desert,
which it surpasses both in quality and quantity; but rather mea∣sure
it with your magnificence, before which it is nothing. In re∣quitall
whereof, I restore unto thee thy health, which was upon lo∣sing;
thy heart, which was upon fainting; and thy wits, which
were upon turning. Melibea is pained more for you, then you for
her: Melibea loves you, and desires to see you: Melibea spends
more hours in thinking upon you, then on her self: Melibea
calls her self thine; and this she holds as a Title of liberty, and
with this, she allayes that fire, which burns more in her, then thy
self.
You my servants; Am I here? Hear I this? Look
whether I am awake or not? Is it day, or is it night? O thou great
God of heaven, I beseech thee, this may not prove a dream;
Sure, I doe not sleep, me thinks I am fully awake. Tell me,
mother, dost thou make sport with me, in paying me with words?
Fear nothing, but tell me the truth; for thy going to and fro
deserves a great deal more then this.
The heart, that is wounded with desire, never entertain∣eth
good news for certain; nor bad for doubtful. But whether I
jest, or no; your self shall see, by going this night to her house
(her self having agreed with me about the time) appointing you
to be just there as the clock strikes twelve, that you may talk toge∣there
thorough the chinks of the door; from whose own mouth, you
shall fully know my solicitude, and her desire, and the love which
she bears unto you, and who hath caused it.
It is enough; Is it possible, I should hope for so great a
happiness? Can so great a blessing light upon Calisto? I dye till
that hour come. I am not capable of so great a glory. I doe not de∣serve
so great a favour, nor am I worthy to speak with so fair a
Lady, who of her own free-will, should afford me so great a
grace.
I have often heard, that it is harder to suffer prosperous,
then adverse fortune; because the one hath never any quietude, and
the other still takes comfort. It is strange, Sir, that you will not
consider who you are, nor the time that you have spent in her ser∣vice;
nor the person, whom you have made to be your means:
And likewise, that hitherto, thou hast ever been in doubt of having
her, and yet did still endure all with patience; and now, that
I doe certify unto thee the end of thy torment, wilt thou put an
end to thy life? Consider, consider, I pray, with thy self, that
Celestina is on thy side; and that although all should be wanting un∣to
thee, which in a Lover were to be required, I would sell thee for
the most complete gallant of the world; for I would make for thee
mountains of most craggy rocks, to grow plain, and smooth. Nay,
more, I would make thee go to thorough the deepest channel, or the
lightest swelling sea, without wetting of thy foot: you know not on
whom you have bestowed your Largess.
Remember your self, mother, did you not tell me, that
she would come to me of her own accord?
Yes, and that upon her very knees.
Pray heaven it be not a false alarm; one thing rumord,
another purposed: It may be a false fire-worke, to blow vs all up.
I fear me, it is a false train, a made match, and a trappe purpose∣lie
set to catch vs all. Bethink your self, mother, that so men use
to give crooked pins wrapped up in bread; poysonsome pills rolled
up in Sugar, that they may not be seen and perceived.
I never heard thee speak better in my life: the sudden
yielding of this Lady, and her so speedy consenting to all that Cele∣stina
would have her, engenders a strong suspicion within me; and
makes me to fear, that deceiving our will with her sweet and ready
words, she will rob vs on the wrong side, as your Gypsies use to doe,
when they look in our hands to tell vs our fortunes. Besides, mo∣there,
it is an old saying: that with fair words, many wrongs are
revenged: and the counterfeit stalking horse, which is made but of
Canvas, with his dissembled gate, and the alluring sound of the
tinkling of a bell, drives the Partridges into the net: the songs of
the Sirens deceive the simple Mariner with the sweetness of
their voices: Even so, she with her exceeding kindness, and sud∣den
concession of her love, will seize hand-smooth on a whole
drove of vs at once, and purge her innocence with Calisto's ho∣nor,
and our deaths: Being like herein to the teatling Lamb,
which sucks both her damm's teat, and that of another Ewe.
She by securing vs, will be revenged both of Calisto, and all of vs;
so that with the great number of people which they have in the
house, they may catch both the old ones and the young one to∣gether
in the nest, whilst she shrugging and rubbing her self by
the fire side, may safely say, Hee is out of gun-shot, that rings the
bell to the battle.
Peace, you Knaves, you Villains, you suspicious Ras∣calls,
will you make me believe that Angels can doe ought that
is ill? I tell you, Melibea is but a dissembled Angel, that lives
here amongst vs.
What? will you still play the Heretic? Harken to
him, Parmeno; but take thou no care at all; let it not trouble thee.
For, if there be any double dealing, or that the play prove foul, he
shall pay for all; for our feet be good, and wee will betake vs to
our heals.
Sir, you are in the right, and these in the wrong; o∣uer-lading
their thoughts with vain suspicions and jealousies; I
have done all that I was enjoined: and so I leave you to your joys.
Good Angels defend you and direct you: as for my self, I am
very well satisfied. And if you shall have further occasion to use
me, either in this particular, or any thing else, you shall find me
ever ready to doe you the best service I can.
Ha, ha, he.
I pray thee, why dost thou laugh?
To see what haste the old Trot makes to be gone: she
thinks every hour a year, till she be gone clear away with the
chain; she cannot persuade her self, that it is as yet sure enough
in her hands; for she knows, that she is as little worthy of that
chain, as Calisto is of his Melibea.
What would you have such an old whorish Bawd as she,
to doe? who knows and understands that which wee silence and
keep secret, and uses to patch up seven Virginities at a clap for
two pieces of Silver: And now, that she sees her self to be laden
with gold, what, I say, would you have her to doe, but to make it
safe and sure, by taking possession thereof, for fear lest hee should
take it from her again, after that hee hath had his desire? But let vs
beware of the Devil, and take heed that wee go not together by
the •ares, when wee come to divide the spoil.
Mother, fare you well, I will lay me down to sleep,
and rest my self a while, that I may redeem the nights past, and
satisfy the better for that, which is to come.
Tha, ta, ta.
Who knocks?
Daughter Elicia, open the door.
How chance you come so late? It is not well done of you
(being an old woman, as you are) for you may hap to stumble,
where you may so fall, that it may be your death.
I fear not that (wench:) For I consult with my self in
the day, which way I shall go in the night; for I never go near
any bridge, bench, pit or Casey: for (as it is in the Proverb)
He goes not safe, nor never shall, who goes too close unto the wall:
And hee goes still most safe and sound, whose steps are placed on
plainest ground: and I had rather foul my shoes with dirt, then
be-bloody my Kerchief at every walls corner. But does it not
grieve thee to be here?
Why should it grieve me?
Because the company I left here with you, is gone, and
you are all alone.
It is some four hours ago, since they went hence; and
would you have me to think on that now?
Indeed the sooner they left you, the more reason you had
to think thereon; but let vs leave to talk of their speedy going,
and of my long staying, and let vs first provide for our supper, and
then for our sleep.
MIdnight being come, Calisto, Sempronio, and Parmeno,
being well armed, go towards the house of Melibea. Lucrecia
and Melibea stand at the door, watching for Calisto. Calisto
comes; Lucrecia first speaks unto him; she calls Melibea. Lu∣crecia
goes aside; Melibea and Calisto talk together, the door
being betwixt them; Parmeno and Sempronio withdraw
themselves a little ways off. They hear some people coming a∣long
the street; they prepare themselves for flight. Calisto takes his
leave of Melibea, leaving order for his return the next night foal∣lowing;
Pleberio awakened with the noise which he heard in the
street, calls to his wife Alice; they ask of Melibea who that was,
that walked up and down in her chamber? Melibea answers her
father, by faining she was athirst. Calisto with his servants, go
talking home to his house. Being come home, he lays him down to
sleep; Parmeno and Sempronio go to Celestina's house, they
demand their share of her pains; Celestina dissembles the matter,
they fall a wrangling; they lay hands on Celestina, they murder
her. Elicia cries out; the Justice comes, and apprehends them both.
Sirs, what's a clock?
It struck now ten.
O how it discontents me, to see servants
so wretchlesse! Of my much mindfulness for this
nights meeting, and your much vnmindfulnesse,
and extreme carelessness, there might have been
had some indifferent both remembrance, and
care; how inconsiderately (knowing how much it imports me,
to be either ten or eleven) dost thou answer me at hap-hazard,
with that which comes first to mouth? O unhappy I, if by chance
I had overslept my self! and my demand had depended on the an∣swer
of Sempronio, to make of eleven, ten, and of twelve, but eleven?
Melibea might have come forth; I had not gone out; and she
returned back: so that, neither my misery should have had an end,
nor my desire have taken effect. And therefore it is not said in
vain, That another mans harm hangs but by one hair, no man
caring whether hee sink or swim.
Me thinks it is as great an error in a man, to ask what
hee knows, as to answer to what hee knows not. It were better
(Sir) that we should spend this hour that remains, in preparing
weapons, then in propounding questions.
The fool says well, I would not at such a time receive a
displeasure. I will not think ont that which may be, but on that
which hath been; not on the harm which may arise by his negli∣gence,
but on the good which may come by my carefulness. I will
give leisure to my anger, and will either quite dismiss it, or force
it to be more remiss. Parmeno, Take down my Corslets, and arm
your selves, so shall we go the safer: For it is in the Proverb, Half
the battle is then waged, when a man is well prepared.
Lo, Sir, here they bee.
Come help me here to put them on. Doe you look
on, Sempronio, and see if any body be stirring in the street.
Sir, I see not any, and though there were, yet the dark∣ness
of the night is such, and so great, that it is impossible for any
that shall meet vs, either to see or know vs.
Let vs along then. Here, my masters, this way; for
though it be somewhat about, yet is it the more private way, and
the lesser frequented. Now it strikes twelve, a good hour.
Wee are near unto the place.
Wee are come in very good time. Go thou, Parmeno,
and peep in at the door, to see if that Lady be come or no?
Who, I, Sir? God forbid, that I should mar that
which I never made. Much better were it (Sir) that your presence
should be her first encounter, lest in seeing me, she should be mo∣ued
to anger, in seeing so many acquainted with that, which she so
secretly desires to be done, and vndergoeth with so great fear: as
also, because she may happily imagine that you mock her.
O how well hast thou spoken! thou hast given me my
life, by giving me this sound advice; for there needs nothing
more to bear me home dead to my house, then that she through my
improvidence, should have gone her ways back: I will go thy∣there
my self, and doe you stay here.
What dost thou think (Sempronio) of the fool our
Master, who thought to have made me to be his Target, for to re∣ceiue
the encounter of this first danger? What doe I know, who
stands between or behind the doors? What know I if there be a∣ny
treason intended, or no? What can I tell, whether Melibea have
plotted this, to cry quittance with our Master, for this his great pre∣sumption?
Besides, wee are not sure, whether the old Trot told
him truth or no. Thou know not, Parmeno, how to speak. Thy
life shall be taken from thee, and thou ne'er the wiser for it: thy
soul shall be let forth, &amp; thou not know who was he that did it. Do
not thou turn flatterer, nor sooth up thy Master in every thing,
that he would have thee, and then thou shalt never have cause to
weep for other men's woes, or to morn for others miseries. Doe
thou not follow Celestina's counsel in that which is fit and conueni∣ent
for thee, and thou were as good go break thy neck blind-fold.
Go on with thy good persuasions, and faithful admonitions, and
thou shalt bee well cudgell'd for thy labour. Turn the leaf
now no more, lest thou be forced to bid the world good night, be∣fore
thou be willing to leave it. I will solemnise this as my birth∣day,
since I have escaped so great a danger.
Hush, I say, softly (Parmeno) softly. Doe not you keep
such a leaping and skipping, not for joy make such a noise, lest you
may hap to be heard.
Content your self (brother) hold your peace, I pray,
for I cannot contain my self for very joy, to think, that I should
make him believe, that it was most fit for him to go to the door;
when as indeed, I did only put him on, because I held it fittest for
mine own safety. Who could ever have brought a business more
handsomely about for his own good, then I my self have done?
Thou shalt see me doe many such things, if thou shalt heerafter
but observe me, which every man shall not know of, as well to∣wards
Calisto himself, as all those who shall any way inter-meddle,
or interpose themselves in this business. For, I am assured that this
Damsel is but the bait to this hook, whereat hee must hang him∣self:
or that flesh which is thrown out to Vultures, whereof hee
that eats, is sure to pay soundly for it.
Let this pass, ne'er trouble thy head with these jealousies,
and suspicions of thine; no, though they should happen to be true.
But prepare thy self, and like a tall soldier, be in readiness upon
the first Alarm, or word given, to betake thee to thy heals. Do like
the men of Villa-Diego, who being besieged, ran away by night,
with their Breeches in their hands.
Wee have read both in one book, and are both of the
same mind; I have not only their Breeches, but their light easy Bus∣kins,
that I may run away the nimbler, and out-strip my fellows.
And I am glad (good brother) that thou hast advised me to that,
which otherwise, even for very shame, and fear of thee, I should
never have done: as for our Master, if he chance to be heard, or o∣therwise
discovered, he will never escape, I fear me, the hands of
Pleberio's people; whereby hee may hereafter demand of vs, how
wee behau'd our selves in his defence, or that he shall ever be able
to accuse vs, that wee cowardly forsook him.
O my friend (Parmeno) how good and joyful a thing is it,
for fellows and companions to live together in love and unity!
And though Celestina should prove good to vs in no other thing,
save only this; yet in this alone hath she done vs service enough,
and deserved very well at our hands.
No man can deny that, which in it self is manifest. It
is apparent, that we for modesties sake, and because wee would not
be branded with the hateful name of cowardice, wee stayed here,
expecting together with our Master, no less then death, though we
did not so much deserve it as he did.
Melibea should be come. Hark, me thinks I hear
them whispering each to other.
I fear rather that it is not she, but some one that coun∣terfaytes
her voice.
Heavens defend vs from the hands of Traitors; I pray
God, they have not betaken themselves to that street thorough which
we were resolved to fly. For I fear nothing else but that.
This stirring and murmur which I fear, is not of one
single person alone. Yet will I speak, come, what will come, or
be who as will be there. Madame; Mistress, be you there?
If I be not deceived, this is Calisto's voice. But for the
more surety, I will go a little nearer. Who is that that speaks?
Who is there without?
He that is come addressed to your command.
Madame, why come you not? Come hither, I say,
be not afraid, for here is the Gentleman you wot of.
Speak softly (you fool.) Mark him well, that you
may be sure it is hee.
Come hither I tell you, it is hee, I know him by his
voice.
I fear me, I am deluded, it was not Melibea that spake
unto me, I hear some whispering; I am undone. But live or dye,
I have not the power to be gone.
Lucrecia, go a little aside; and give me leave to call
unto him. Sir, what is your name? Who willed you to come hi∣there.
She that is worthy to command all the world, she whom
I may not merit to serve. Let not your Ladyship fear to discover
her self to this Captive of your gentle disposition; for the sweet
sound of those your words, which shall never fall from my ears,
give me assurance that you are that Lady Melibea, whom my heart
adores; I am your servant Calisto.
The strange and excessine boldness of thy messages,
hath enforced me (Calisto) to speak with thee: who having al∣ready
received my answer to your reasons, I know not what you
may imagine to get more out of my love, then what I then made
known unto you. Banish therefore from thee, those vain and foo∣lish
thoughts, that both my honour and my person may be secured
from any hurt they may receive by an ill suspicion. For which pur∣pose,
I am come hither to take order for your dispatch, and my
quietness. Doe not, I beseech you, put my good name and repu∣tation
upon the balance of back-biting and detracting tongues.
To hearts prepared with a strong and dauntless resolute∣on
against all adversities whatsoever, nothing can happen unto
them, that shall easily be able to shake the strength of their wall.
But that unhappy man, who weaponless, and disarmed, not thin∣king
upon any deceit or Ambuscado, puts himself within the
doors of your safe-conduct and protection, whatsoever in such a case
falls out contrary to my expectation, it cannot in all reason but tor∣meant
me, and pierce thorough the very soul of me, breaking all those
Magazines and storehouses, wherein this sweet news was laid up. O
miserable and unfortunate Calisto! O, how hast thou been mocked
and deluded by thy servants! O thou coozening and deceitful Cele∣stina;
thou might at least have let me alone, and given me leave to
dye, and not gone about to revive my hope, to add thereto more
fuel to the fire, which already doth sufficiently waste and consume
me. Why did thou falsify this my Ladies message? Why hast
thou thus with thy tongue given cause to my despair, and utter un∣doing?
Why did thou command me to come hither? Was it
that I might receive disgrace, interdiction, diffidence, and hatred,
from no other mouth, but that which keeps the keys of my pard∣tion,
or happiness? O thou enemy to my good! Did not thou
tell me, that this my Lady would be favourable, and gracious un∣to
me; Did not thou tell me, that of her own accord, she had
commanded this her captive to come to this very place, where
now I am? Not to banish me afresh from her presence, but to re∣peal
that banishment, whereunto she had sentenced me by her
former command? Miserable that I am, whom shall I trust, or in
whom may I hope to find any faith? Where is truth to be had? Who
is void of deceit? Where doth not falsehood dwell? Who is he
that shows himself an open enemy? or who is he that shows him∣self
a faithful friend? Where is that place, wherein treason is not
wrought? Who, I say, durst trespass so much upon my patience, as
to give me such cruel hope of destruction?
Cease (good Sir) your true and just complaints. For
neither my heart is able to endure it, nor mine eyes any longer to
dissemble it; thou weepest out of grief, judging me cruel; and I
weep out of joy, seeing thee so faithful. O my dearest Lord, and my
lifes whole happiness; how much more pleasing would it be unto
me, to see thy face, then to hear thy voice! But since that at this
present we cannot enjoy each others as wee would, take thou the as∣signement,
and seal of those words, which I sent unto thee, writ∣ten,
and engrossed in the tongue of that thy diligent and careful
messenger. All that which I then said, I doe here anew confirm.
I acknowledge it as my Deed, and hold the Assurance I have
made thee, to be good and perfect. Good Sir, doe not you weep;
dry up your tears, and dispose of me as you please,
O my dear Lady! Hope of my glory; Easeresse of my
pain, and my hearts joy: What tongue can be sufficient to give
thee thanks, that may equal his so extraordinary and incompara∣ble
a kindness; which in this instant of so great and extreme a
sorrow, thou hast bin willing to confer upon me; in being willing
(I say) that one so mean, and unworthy as my self, should be by
thee enabled to the enjoying of thy sweetest love; whereof, although
I was ever more most desirous, yet did I always deem my self un∣worthy
thereof, weighing thy greatness, considering thy estate,
beholding thy perfection, contemplating thy beauty, and looking
into my small merit, and thy great worth; besides, other thy singu∣lar
graces, thy commendable, and well-known virtues? Again;
O thou great God, how can I be ungrateful unto thee, who so mira∣culously
hast wrought for me so great and strange wonders? O,
how long ago did I entertain this thought in my heart, and as a
thing impossible, repeld it from my memory, until now, that the
bright beams of thy most clear shining countenance, gave light
unto my eyes, inflamed my heart, awakened my tongue, enlarged
my desert, abridged my cowardice, vnwreathed my shrunke-vp spy∣ritz,
reinforced my strength, put life and metal into my hands and
feet; and in a word, infused such a spirit of boldness into me, that
they have borne me up by their power, unto this high estate, wherein
(with happiness) I now behold my self, in hearing this thy sweet-pleasing
voice; which if I had not heretofore known, and scented out
the sweet and wholesome savour of thy words, I should hardly have
believed they would have been without deceit. But now, that I am
well assured of thy pure and noble, both blood and actions, I stand
amazed at the gaze of my good, and with a stricter eye, begin to
view and look upon my self, to see whether I am that same Calisto,
whom so great a blessing hath befallen?
Calisto; Thy great worth, thy singular graces, and
thy nobleness of birth, have (ever since I had true notice of thee)
wrought so effectually with me, that my heart hath not so much as
one moment bin absent from thee. And although (now these many
days) I have strove, and strove again to dissemble it, yet could
I not so smother my thoughts, but that as soon as that Woman
returned thy sweet name unto my remembrance, I discovered my
desire, and appointed our meeting, at this very place and time:
Where, I beseech thee to take order for the disposing of my person,
according to thine own good will and pleasure. These doors de∣bar
vs of our joy, whose strong locks and bars I curse, as also
mine own weak strength. For were I stronger, and they weaker,
neither should thou be displeased, nor I discontented.
What (Madame) is it your pleasure, that I should suf∣fer
a paltry piece of wood to hinder our joy? Never did I conceive,
that any thing, save thine own will, could possibly hinder vs. O
troublesome and sport-hindring doors, I earnestly desire, that you
may be burned with as great a fire, as the torment is great, which
you give me; for then the third part thereof would be sufficient to
consume you to ashes in a moment. Give me leave (sweet Lady) that
I may call my servants, and command them to break them open.
Hark, hark (Sempronio) Hear thou not what he says?
He is coming to seek after vs; wee shall make a bad year of
it, we shall run into a peck of troubles. I tell you truly, I like
not of his coming. This love of theirs, I verily persuade my self,
was begun in an unlucky hour; if you will go, go; for I'll stay
here no longer.
Peace, hark; she will not consent wee come.
What means my Love? Will you undo me? Will
you wound my reputation? Give not your will the reins: your
hope is certain, and the time short: even as soon as your self shall
appoint it. Besides, your pain is single, mine double; yours for your
self, mine for vs both: you only feel your own grief, I both
your own and mine. Content your self therefore, and come you to
morrow at this very hour, and let your way be by the wall of my
garden; for if you should now break down these cruel doors,
though happily wee should not be presently heard, yet to morrow
morning there would arise in my fathers house a terrible suspicion
of my error: and you know, besides, that by so much the greater
is the error, by how much the greater is the party that erreth: And
in the turning of a hand, will be noised thorough the whole City.
In an unfortunate hour came we hither this night; we
shall stay here, till the day hath overtaken vs, if our master go on
thus leisurely, and make no more haste. And albeit fortune hath hi∣thereto
well befriended vs in this business; yet I fear me, if we
stay overlong, we shall be overheard, either by some of Pleberio's
household, or of his neighbours.
I would have had thee bin gone 2. hours ago; for he will never
give over, but still find some occasion to continue his discourse.
My dear Lady, my joy and happiness; why dost thou
stile this an error, which was granted unto me by the Destinies; and
seconded by Cupped himself, to my petitions in the Mirtle-Groue?
Calisto talks▪ idly, surely, he is not well in his wits. I am
of the belief (brother) that he is not so devout. That which that old
traitorous Trot, with her pestiferous Sorceries hath compassed
and brought about, he sticks not to say, that the Destinies have
granted, and wrought for him: and with this confidence, he would
adventure to break op these doors; who shall no sooner have
given the first stroke, but that presently he will be heard, and taken
by her fathers servants, who lodge hard by.
Fear nothing (Parmeno) for we are far enough off. And
upon the very first noise that we hear, we will betake vs straight
to our heals, and make our flight our best defence. Let him alone,
let him take his course, for if he doe ill, he shall pay for it.
Well hast thou spoken; thou know my mind, as well as if
thou had bin within me▪ Be it as thou hast said; let vs ••un death;
for we are both young; and not to desire to dye, nor to kill, is not
cowardice, but a natural goodness. Pleberio's followers, they are
but fools and mad-men, they have not that mind to their meat
and their sleep, as they have to be brabbling and quarrelling. What
fools then should we be, to fall together by the ears with such en∣mies,
who doe not so much affect Victory and Conquest, as conti∣nuall
War, and endless co•tention? O, if thou did but see
(brother) in what posture I stand, thou would be ready to burst
with laughing. I stand sidling, my legs abroad, my left foot for∣most,
ready to take the start; the skirts of my Cassock tuckt under
my girdle, my Buckler clapped close to my arm, that it may not
hinder me; and I verily believe, that I should out-runne the swif∣test
Buck; so monstrously am I afraid of staying here.
I stand better; for I have bound my Sword and
Buckler both together, that they may not fall from me when I run;
and have clapped my Cask in the cape of my cloak.
But the stones you had in it, What hast thou done with
them?
I have turned them all out, that I might go the lighter;
for I have enough to doe to carry this Corslet, which your impor∣tunity
made me put on; for I could have been very well content to
have left it off, because I thought it would be too heavy for me, when
I should run away. Hark, hark, hear thou Parmeno? the bu∣sinesse
goes ill with vs; wee are but dead men. Put on, away, be
gone, make towards Celestina's house, that we may not be cut off,
by betaking vs to our own house.
Fly, fly, you run too slowly. Passion of me, if they
should chance to overtake vs. Throw away thy Buckler and all.
Have they kilt our Master? Can you tell?
I know not. Say nothing to me, I pray; Run, and
hold your peace; as for him, he is the least of my care.
Zit, zit, Parmeno, not a word; turn, and be still; for
it is nothing, but the Alguazills men, who make a noise as they pass
thorough this other street.
Take your eyes in your hand, and see you be sure. Trust
not I say, too much to those eyes of yours; they may mistake, taking
one thing for another; they have not left me one drop of blood in
my body. Death had even almost swallowed me up; for me thought
still as I ran, they were cutting and ca•bonading my shoulders.
I never in my life remember, that I was in the like fear, or ever
saw my self in the like danger of an affront, though I have gone ma∣ny
a time thorough other men's houses, and thorough places of much
peril, and hard to pass. Nine years was I servant to Guadaluppe,
and a thousand times my self and others were at buffets, cutting
one another for life, yet was I never in that fear of death, as now.
And did not (I pray) serve at Saint Michaels? and
mine Host in the Market-place? and Molleias the gardiner; I also
(I trow) was at fisty-cuffes with those which threw stones at the Spar∣rows,
and other the like birds, which sate upon a green Poplar that
we had, because with their stones, they did spoil the herbs in
the garden; But God keep thee, and enery good man from the
sight of such weapons as these: these are shrewd tools; this is true
fear indeed: and therefore it is not said in vain; Laden with I∣ron,
laden with fear. Turn, turn back; for it is the Alguazill,
that's certain.
What noise is that (Calisto) which I hear in the street?
It seems to be the noise of some that fly and are pursued; for
your own sake and mine, have a care of your self; I fear me, you
stand in danger.
I warrant you, Madame, fear you nothing; for I stand on a
safeguard. They should be my men, who are madcaps, and disarm
as many as pass by them; and belike, some one hath escaped them, af∣la
whom they hasten.
Are they many, that you brought?
No (Madame) no more but two; but should half a do∣zen
set upon them, they would not be long in disarming them, and
make them fly; they are such a couple of tall lusty fellows; they are
men of true, and well approved metal; choice lads for the nonste;
for I come not hither with a fire of straw, which is no sooner in, but
out. And were it not in regard of your honour, they should have
broken these doors in pieces; and in case we had been heard, they
should have freed both your self and me from all your fathers ser∣uants.
O! of all loves, let not any such thing be attempted;
yet it glads me much that you are so faithfully attended; that bread
is well bestowed which such valiant servants eat. For that love (Sir)
which you bear unto me, since Nature hath enriched them with so
good a gift, I pray make much of them, and reward them well; to
the end that in all things, they may be trusty and secret, that con∣corn
thy service; and when for their boldness and presumption,
thou shalt either check, or correct them; intermix some favours
with thy punishments, that their 〈◊〉 and courage may not be
daunted, and abated, but be stirred and provoked to out dare dan∣gers,
when thou shalt have occasion to use them.
Sist, Sist; Hear you Sir? make haste and be gone, for
here is a great company coming along with To•ches; and unless
you make haste, you will be seen, and known; for here is not any
place, where you may hide your self from their view.
O unfortunate that I am! How am (enforced (Lads) a∣against
my will to take my leave! Believe me, the fear of death
would not work so much upon me, as the fear of your honour doth;
but since it is so, that we must part; Angels be the guardians of thy
fair person. My coming (as you have ordered it) shall be by the
garden.
Be it so, and all happiness be with you.
Wife, are you asleep?
No, Sir.
Doe not you hear some noise, or stirring in your
daughters withdrawing chamber?
Yes mary doe I. Melibea, Melibea?
She does not hear you; I will call a little louder.
Daughter Melibea?
Sir.
Who is that, that tramples up and down there, and
makes that stirring to and fro in your chamber?
It is Lucrecia (Sir) who went forth to fetch some wa∣la
for me to drink, for I was very thirsty.
Sleep again (daughter) I thought it had been some∣thing
else.
A little noise (I perceive) can wake them; me thought
they spoke somewhat fearfully, as if all had not been well.
There is not any so gentle a creature, who with the love
or fear of it's young, is not somewhat moved. What would they
have done, had they had certain, and assured knowledge of my go∣ing
down?
My Son, shut the door; and you Parmeno, bring up a
light.
You were better (Sir) to take your rest; and that little
that it is till day, to take it out in sleep.
I will follow thy counsel; for it is no more then needs.
I want sleep exceedingly; but tell me, Parmeno, what dost thou
think of that old woman, whom thou did dispraise so much unto
me? what a piece of work hath she brought to pass? what could
wee have done without her?
Neither had I any feeling of your great pain; nor knew
I the gentleness, and well-deseruingnesse of Melibea; and there∣fore
am not to be blamed. But well did I know both Celestina, and
all her cunning tricks and devices; and did thereupon advise you,
as became a servant to advise his Master, and as I thought, for the
best; but now I see, she is become another woman, she is quite
changed from what she was, when I first knew her.
How? changed? How dost thou mean?
So much, that had I not seen it, I should never have
believed it: but now, heaven grant you may live as happy, as this
is true.
But tell me; did thou hear what past betwixt me and
my Mistress? what did you doe all that while? were you not a∣afraid?
Afraid, Sir? of what? all the world could not make vs a∣afraid;
did you ever find vs to be fearful? did you ever see any
such thing in vs? we stood waiting for you well provided, and with
our weapons in our hands.
Slept you not a whit? took you not a little nap?
Sleep, Sir? It is for boys and children to sleep▪ I
did not so much as once sit down, nor put one leg over another,
watching still as diligently as a Cat for a Mouse; that if I had heard
but the least noise in the world, I might presently have leapt forth,
and have done as much as my strength should have been able to
perform. And Parmeno, though till now, he did not seem to serve
you in this business with any great willingness, hee was as glad,
when hespy'd the Torches coming, as the Wolf, when hee spies
the dust of a drove of cattle, or flock of sheep; hoping still that
he might make his prey, till he saw how many they were.
This is no such wonder (Sempronio) never marvel at it;
for it is natural in him to be valiant; and though he would not have
bestirred himself for my sake, yet would he have laid about him
because such as he cannot go against that which they be used unto.
for though the Fox change his hair, yet he never changes his na∣ture;
hee will keep himself to his custom, though hee cannot
keep himself to his colour. I told my Mistress Melibea, what was in
you, &amp; how safe I held my self, having you at my back for my guard.
My sons; I am much bound unto you both, pray to heaven for our
welfare &amp; good success; and doubt not, but I will more fully guer∣don
your good service. Good night, and heaven send you good rest.
Whither shall wee go (Sempronio?) To our chamber
and go sleep, or to the Kitchen and break our fast?
Go thou whither thou wilt, as for me, ever it be day, I
will get me to Celestina's house, and see if I can recover my part in
the chain: she is a crafty Hileding, and I will not give her time to
invent some one villainous trick or other whereby to shift vs
off, and cousin vs of our shares.
It is well remembered, I had quite forgot it; let vs go
both together, and if she stand upon points with vs, let vs put her in∣to
such a fear, that she may be ready to bewray her self; for mo∣ney
goes beyond all friendship.
Cist, cist, not a word; for her bed is hard by this little
window here; let me knock her up: Tha, tha, tha; Mistress
Celestina, Open the door.
Who calls?
Open door, your Sons be here.
I have no sons that be abroad at this time of night.
It is Parmeno, and Sempronio; open the door; we
are come hither to break our fast with you.
O ye mad lads, you wanton wags, Enter, enter, how chance
you come so early? It is but now break of day, what have you done?
what hath past? Tel me, how goes the world? Calisto's hopes, are they
alive or dead? Has he her, or has he her not? how stands it with him?
How, mother? Had it not been for vs, his soul ever
this had gone seeking her eternal rest; and if it were possible to
prize the debt wherein hee stands bound unto vs, all the wealth hee
hath, were not sufficient to make vs satisfaction. So true, is that
trivial saying; that the life of man, is of more worth, then all the
gold in the world.
Have you been in such danger, since I saw you? Tell
me, how was it? How was it I pray?
Mary in such danger, that as I am an honest man, my
blood still boils in my body, to think upon it.
Sit down, I beseech you, and tell me how it was.
It will require a long discourse; besides, we have fret∣ted
out our hearts, and are quite tired with the trouble and toil, we
have had, you may doe better to provide something for his and my
breakfast: it may be, when wee have eaten, our choler will be
somewhat allayed; for I swear unto thee, I desire not now to meet
that man that desires peace. I should now glory to light upon some
one, on whom I might revenge my wrath, and stanch my anger;
for I could not doe it on those that caused it: so fast did they fly
from my fury.
The pockes canker out my carcass to death, if thou
make me not afraid to look on thee, thou look so fierce
and so ghastly. But for all this, I doe believe you doe but jest. Tell
me, I pray thee Sempronio, as thou love me what hath befallen you?
By heavens, I am not my self, I come hither I know
not •ow, without wit, or reason. But as for you (fellow Parmeno) I
cannot but find fault with you, for not tampering of your choler,
and using more moderation in your angry mood; I would have thee
look otherwise now, and not carry that sour countenance heer, as
thou did there, when we encountered so many; for mine own part,
before those, that I knew could doe but little, I never made show
that I could doe much. Mother, I have brought hither my arms
all broken and battered in pieces, my Buckler without it's ring of I∣ron,
the plates being cut asunder, my Sword like a Saw, all to be∣hack't
and hewd, my Cask strangely bruised, beaten as flat as a
Cake, and dented in with the blows that came hammering on my
head: so that I have not any thing in the world to go further with
my Master, when hee shall have occasion to use me. For it is a∣greed
on, that my Master shall this night have access unto his Mi∣stress,
by the way of her garden. Now for to furnish my self anew,
if my life lay on it, I know not where to have one penny or farthing.
Since it is spoiled and broken in your Masters service,
go to your Master for more, let him (a Gods name) pay for it. Be∣sides,
you know it is with him, but ask and have; he will present∣lie
furnish you, I warrant you. For hee is none of those who say to
their servants: Live with me, and look out some other to main∣taine
thee; he is so frank, and of so liberal a disposition, that hee
will not give thee money for this only, but much more, if need be.
Tush, what's this to the purpose? Parmeno's be also spoil∣led
and marred. After this reckoning, we may spend our Master all
that he hath in arms. How can you in conscience think, or with
what face imagine, that I should be so importunate, as to demand
more of him, then what he hath already done of his own accord?
He for his part hath done enough, I would not it should be said of
me, that hee hath given me an inch, and that I should take an ell.
There is a reason in all things; he hath given vs a hundred crowns
in gold; he hath given vs, besides, a chain; three such picks more,
will pick out all the wax in his ear; hee hath, and will have a
hard market of it. Let vs content our selves with that which is rea∣son;
Let vs not lose all, by seeking to gain more then is meet; for
he that embraces much, holds little.
How wittily this Ass thinks he hath spoken! I swear to
thee, by the reverence of this my old age, had these words been
spoken after dinner, I should have said, that wee had all of vs taken
a cup too much; that we had been all drunk. Art thou well in
thy wits, Sempronio? What has thy remuneration to doe with my
reward? Thy payment with my merit? Am I bound to buy you
weapons? Must I repair your losses, and supply your wants? Now
I think upon it; let me be hanged, or dye any other death, if thou
hast not took hold of a little word, that carelessly slipped out of my
mouth the other day, as we came along the street; for as (I remem∣ber)
I then told you, that what I had was yours; and that I would
never be wanting unto you in any thing, to the utmost of my poor
ability; and that if Fortune did prosper my business with your
Master, that you should lose nothing by it; But you know (Sempro∣nio)
that words of compliment and kindness, are not obligatory,
nor bind me to doe, as you would have me; all is not gold that
glisters, for then it would be a great deal cheaper then it is. Tell me
(Sempronio) if I have not hit the right nail on the head? Thou
moist see by this, that though I am old, that I can divine as much
as thou can imagine. In good faith (Son) I am as full of grief,
as ever my heart can hold, I am even ready to burst with sorrow and
anguish. As soon as ever I came from your house, and was come
home; I gave the chain I brought hither with me, to this fool
Elicia, that she might look upon it, and cheer her self with the
sight thereof; and she, for her life, cannot as yet call to mind what
she hath done with it: and all this liue-long night, neither she
nor I have slept one wink, for very thought and grief thereof:
Not so much for the value of the chain (for it was not much
worth) but to see, that she should be so careless in the laying of it
up; and to see the ill luck of it; at the very same time that we mist
it, came in some friends of mine, that had been of my old and fa∣miliar
acquaintance; and I am sorely afraid, lest they have lighted
upon it, and taken it away with them; meaning to make use of that
vulgar saying, Si spy it, tum sport face; Si non spy it, pack and away
Jack. But now (my Sons) that I may come a little nearer unto
you both, and speak home to the point: If your Master gave me
any thing, what he gave me, that (you must think) is mine: As for
your cloth of gold doublet, I never asked you any share out of it, nor
ever will. We all of vs serve him, that he may give unto vs all, as
he sees wee shall deserve: And as for that which he hath given me,
I have twice endangered my life for it; more blades have I blunted
in his service then you both; more material and substantial stuff
have I wasted, and have worn out more hose and shoes; And you
must not think (my Sons) but all this costs me good money.
Besides, my skill, which I got not playing or sitting still, or war∣ming
my tail over the fire, as most of your idle housewives doe, but
with hard labour and paines-taking: as Parmeno's mother could
well witness for me, if she were living. This I have gained by mine
own industry and labour; as for you, what have you done? If you
have done any thing for Calisto, Calisto is to requite you. I get my
living by my Trade and my travel; you, yours, with recreation and
delight; and therefore you are not to expect equal recompense,
enjoying your service with pleasure, as I, who go performing it
with pains: but whatsoever I have hitherto said unto you, be∣cause
you shall see, I will deal kindly with you: if my chain be
found again, I will give each of you a pair of Scarlet Breeches,
which is the comeliest habit that young men can wear. But if it
be not found, you must accept of my good will, and my self be con∣tent
to sit down with my loss; and all this I doe out of pure love,
because you were willing that I should have the benefit of mana¦ging
this business before another: and if this will not content you,
I cannot doe withal. To your own harm be it.
This is not the first time I have heard it spoken; how
much in old folks, the sin of avarice reigns: as also that o∣there,
When I was poor, then was I liberal; when I was rich, then
was I covetous: So that covetousness increases with getting, and
poverty with coveting: and nothing makes the covetous man
poor but his riches. O heavens! How doth penury increase with
abundance, and plenty? How often did this old woman say, that I
should have all the profit that should grow from this business? think∣ing
then perhaps, that it would be but little: but now she sees how
great it grows, she will not part with any thing, no, not so much
as the patings of her nails; that she may comply with that common
saying of your little children: Of a little, a little; of much, nothing.
Let her give thee that which she promised; let her make
that good, or let vs take it all from her. I told you before (would
you have believed me) what an old coozening companion you
should find her.
If you are angry either with your selves, your Master,
or your arms, wreck not your wrath upon me; for I wot well
enough whence all this grows, I wind you where you are: I now
perceive on which foot you halt, not out of want of that which you
demand; nor out of any covetousness that is in you: but because you
think I will tie you to Rack and Manger, and make you capt•ues
all your life-time to Elicia, and Arouse, and provide you no other
fresh ware, you make all this ado, quarrel thus with me for mo∣ney,
and seek by fearing me, to force me to a parting and sharing
of stakes. But be still (my boys) and content your selves; for she
who could help you with these, will not stick to furnish you with
half a score of handsome wenches apiece, fairer then these by far,
now that I see, that you are grown to greater knowledge and more
reason, &amp; a better deseruingnesse in your selves. And whether or no,
in such a case as this, I am able to be as good as my word, let Par∣mono
speak for me. Speak, speak, Parmeno, be not ashamed, man,
to tell what did betide vs, with what wench you wot of, that was
sick of the Mother?
I go not for that which you think. You talk of Chalk,
and we of Cheese. Doe not think to put vs off with a jest; our de∣mands
desire a more, serious answer. And assure your self (if I can
help it) you shall take no more Hares with this Greyhound; and
therefore lay aside these tricks, and do not stand arguing any longer
on the matter; I know your fetches too well: To an old dog, a
man need not cry, Now, now. Come off therefore quickly, and give
vs two parts of that which you have received of Calisto. Dispatch, I
say, and doe not drive vs to discover what you are; come, come,
exercise your wits upon some other. Flap those in the mouth, you
old Filth, with your coggings and foistings, that know you not;
for wee know you too well.
Why, what am I, Sempronio? What doe you know me to
be? Did thou take me out of the Puteria? Broughtst thou me, as a
whore, out of the Stews? Bridle your tongue for shame, and doe
not dishonour my hoary hairs. I am an old woman of Gods ma∣king,
no worse then all other women are: I live by my occupation
as other women doe, very well, and handsomely; I seek not after
those who seek not after me; they that will have me, come home
to my house to fetch me; they come home, I say, and entreat me
to doe this or that for them. And for the life that I lead, whether it
be good or bad, heaven knows my heart: and doe not think out
of your choler to mis-vse me, for there is Law and Justice for all,
and equal to all; and my tale, I doubt not, shall be as soon heard
(though I am an old woman) as yours, for all you be so smoothly
combed. Let me alone, I pray, in mine own house, and with mine
own fortune. And you, Parmeno, doe not you think that I am thy
slave, because thou know my secrets, and my life past, and all those
matters that happened betwixt me, and that unfortunate mother of
thine; for she also was wont to use me on this fashion, when she
was disposed to play her pranks with me.
Doe not tit me in the teeth with these thy idle memory∣alls
of my mother, unless thou meanst I should send thee with these
thy tidings, unto her, where thou may better make thy com∣plaint.
Elicia, Elicia, arise and come down quickly, and bring
me my mantle; for by heaven, I will hye me to the Justice, and
there cry out and rail at you, like a made woman. What is it you
would have? What do you mean, to menace me thus in mine own
house? Shall your valour and your brauings be exercised on a
poor silly innocent sheep? On a Hen, that is tied by the leg, and
cannot fly from you? On an old woman of sixty years of age?
Get you, get you, for shame, amongst men, such as your selves; go
and reek your anger upon such as are girt with the Sword, and not
against me and my poor weak Distaff; it is an infallible note of
great cowardice, to assail the weak and such as have but small, or
very little poor to resist: your filthy Flies bite none but lean and
feeble Oxen: and your barking Cures fly with greater eager∣ness,
and more open• mouth upon your poorest passengers. If she
that lies aboue there in the bed, would have hearkened unto me, this
house should not have been (as now it is) without a man in the
night; nor wee have slept (as wee doe) by the naked shadow of a
candle. But to pleasure you, and to be faithful unto you, wee suf∣fer
this solitude; and because you see wee are women, and have no
body here to oppose you, you prate, and talk, and ask, I know not
what, without any reason in the world, which you would as soon
have been hanged, as once dared to have proffered it, if you had
heard but a man stirring in the house; for, as it is in the Proverb,
A hard adversary appeases anger.
O thou old covetous Crib, that art ready to dye with
the thirst of gold! cannot a third part of the gain content thee?
What third part? A pocks on you both; out of my house
in a devils name, you and your companion with you; doe not you
make such a stir here as you doe. Cause not our neighbours to
come about vs, and make them think wee be mad. Put me not
out of my wits; make me not mad: you would not, I trow, would
you, that Calisto's matters and yours should be proclaimed openly
at the Cross? Heere's a stir indeed.
Cry, bawl, and make a noise; ell's one, we care not: either
look to perform your promise, or to end your days. Dye you
must, or else doe as wee will have you.
Ah woe is me! put up your Sword; hold him, hold him,
Parmeno; for fear lest the fool should kill her in his madness.
Justice, Justice; help neighbours, Justice, Justice; for
here be Ruffians, that will murder me in my house. Murder,
murder, murder.
Ruffians, you Whore? Ruffians, you old Bawd? have
you no better terms? Thou old Sorceress; thou witch, thou;
look for no other favour at my hands, but that I send thee post un∣to
hell; you shall have letters thither, you shall (you old Inchan∣tress)
and that speedily too; you shall have a quick dispatch.
Ay me, I am slain. Ay, ay. Confession, Confession.
So, so: kill her, kill her; make an end of her, since thou
hast begun; be brief, be brief with her; lest the neighbours
may chance to hear vs. Let her dye, let her dye; let vs draw as few
enemies upon vs as wee can.
Oh, oh, oh!
O cruel-hearted as you are! Enemies in the highest na∣ture;
shame and confusion light upon you; the extremity of In∣stice
fall upon you, with it's greatest vigour, and all those that have
had a hand in it. My mother is dead, and with her, all my
happiness.
Fly, fly, Parmeno, the people begin to flock hi∣therward.
See, see, yonder comes the Alguazil.
Ay me, wretch that I am! there is no means of escape
for vs in the world; for they have made good the door, and are
entering the house.
Let vs leap out at these windows; And let vs dye
rather so, then fall into the hands of Justice.
Leap then, and I will follow thee.
CALISTO awakened from sleep, talks a while with himself;
anon after hee calls unto Tristan, and some other of his ser∣uants.
By and by Calisto falls asleep again; Tristan goes
down, and stands at the door. Sosia comes weeping unto him;
Tristan, demanding the cause, Sosia delivers unto him the death
of Sempronio and Parmen•; they go• and acquaint Calisto
with it, who knowing the truth thereof, makes great lamentation.
O how daintily have I slept! Ever since that
sweet short space of time, since that harmonious
discourse I enjoyed; I have had exceeding ease, ta∣ken
very good rest; this contentment and quietude
hath proceeded from my joy. Either the travail of
my body caused so sound a sleep; or else the glory
and pleasure of my mind: Nor doe I much wonder, that both the
one and the other should link hands, and join together to close
the lids of mine eyes, since I travailed the last night with my body
and person, and took pleasure with my spirit and senses. True it is,
that sorrow causes much thought; and overmuch thought, much
hindered sleep: as it was mine own case within these few days,
when I was much discomfited and quite out of heart, of ever hoping
to enjoy that surpassing happiness, which I now possess. O my
sweet Lady, and dearest Love, Melibea, what dost thou think on
now? Art thou asleep, or awake? Think thou on me, or some
body else? Art thou up and ready, or art thou not yet stirring?
O most happy, and most fortunate Calisto, if it be true, and that it
be no dream, which hath already passed! Dream't I, or dream't I
not? was it a mere fantasy, or was it a real truth? But now I re∣member
my self, I was not alone, my servants waited on me, there
were two of them with me; if they shall affirm it to be no dream,
but that all that past was true; I am bound to believe it: I will com∣mand
them to be called, for the further confirmation of my joy. Tri∣stanico,
Why •ho? Where are my men? Tristanico, Hye you and
come up: arise, I say, get you up quickly and come hither.
Sir, I am up, and here already.
Go, run, and call me hither Sempronio and Parmeno.
I shall, Sir.
Now sleep, and take thy rest,
Once grieved, and pained Wight;
Since she now loves thee best,
Who is thy hearts delight.
Let joy be thy souls guest;
And care be banished quite;
Since she hath thee expressed
To be her Favourite.
There is not so much as a boy in the house.
Open the windows, and see whether it be day or no?
Sir, it is broad day.
Go again, and see if you can find them; and see you
wake me not, till it be almost dinner-time.
I will go down and stand at the door, that my Master
may take out his full sleep; and to as many as shall ask for him; I
shall answer that hee is not within. O what an out-cry doe I hear
in the Market-place! whats the matter a Gods name? There is
some execution of Justice to be done, or else they are up so early
to see some Bull-baiting. I do not know what to make of this noise,
it is some great matter, the noise is so great; but •o, yonder comes
Sosia, my Masters foot-boy; hee will tell me what the business is.
Look how the Rogue comes pulling and tearing of his hair; he
hath tumbled into one Tavern or other, where he hath been scuf∣fling.
But if my Master chance to sent him, hee will cause his coat
to be well cudgelled; for though hee be somewhat foolish, punish∣meant
will make him wise; but me thinks hee comes weeping.
What's the matter, Sosia? Why dost thou weep? Whence come
thou now? Why speak thou not?
O miserable that I am! what misfortune could be 〈◊〉 ore?
O what great dishonour to my Masters house! O what an vnfortu∣nate
morning is this? O unhappy young men!
What's the matter, man? Why dost thou keep such a∣doe?
Why grieu'st thou thus? What mischief hath befallen vs?
Sempronio, and Parmeno!
What of Sempronio and Parmeno? What means this
fool? Speak a little plainer, thou torment me with delays.
Our old companions, our fellows, our brethren.
Thou art either drunk or mad; or thou bring some
ill news along with thee. Why dost thou not tell me what thou
hast to say, concerning these young men?
That they lie slain in the street.
O unfortunate mischance! Is it true? Did thou see
them? Did they speak unto thee?
No. They were even almost past all sense; but one of them
with much ado, when hee saw I beheld him with tears, began
to look a little towards me, fixing his eyes upon me, and lifting up
his hands to heaven, as one that is making his prayers unto God;
and looking on me, as if hee had asked me, if I were not sorry for
his death? And straight after, as one, that perceived whither he was
presently to go, he let fall his head, with tears in his eyes, giving
thereby to understand, that hee should never see me again, till
we did meet at that day of the great Judgment.
You did not observe in him, that he would have asked you
whether Calisto were there or no? But since thou hast such manifest
proofs of this cruel sorrow, let vs haste with these doleful tidings
to our Master.
Master, Master, doe you hear, Sir?
What, are you mad? Did not I will you, I should not be
wakened?
Rowze up your self, and rise: for if you doe not stick unto
vs, we are all undone. Sempronio and Parmeno lie beheaded in the
Market-place, as public malefactors; and their fault proclaimed
by the common Crier.
Now heaven help me! What it's thou tell me? I
know not whether I may believe thee, in this thy so sudden and
sorrowful news. Did thou see them?
I saw them, Sir.
Take heed what thou say; for this night they were
with me.
But rose too early to their deaths.
O my loyal servants! O my chiefest followers! O my
faithful Secretaries and Counsellours in all my affairs. Can it
be, that this should be true? O unfortunate Calisto! thou art dis∣honoured
as long as thou hast a day to live; what shall become of
thee, having lost such a pair of trusty servants? Tell me, for pity's
sake) Sosia, what was the cause of their deaths? What spake the
Prolamation? Where were they slain? by what Justice were they
beheaded?
The cause, Sir, of their deaths, was published by the crew∣ell
executioner, or common hangman, who delivered with a loud
voice; Justice hath commanded, that these violent murderers be
put to death.
Who was it they so suddenly slew? who might it be?
it is not four hours ago since they left me. How call you the par∣tie
whom they murdered? What was hee for a man?
It was a woman, Sir, one whom they call Celestina.
What's that thou say?
That which you heard me tell you, Sir.
If this be true, kill thou me too, &amp; I will forgive thee. For
sure, there is more ill behind; more then was either seen, or
thought upon, if that Celestina be slain, that hath the slash over
her face.
It is the very same, Sir: for I saw her stretched out in her
own house, and her maid weeping by her, having received in her
body aboue thirty several wounds.
O unfortunate young men! How went they? Did they
see thee? Spake they unto thee?
O Sir, had you seen them, your heart would have burst with
grief: One of them had all his brains beaten out in most pitiful
manner, and lay without any sense, or motion in the world: The
other had both his arms broken, &amp; his face so sorely bruised, that
it was all black, and blue, and all of a goare-bloud. For, that they
might not fall into the Alguazils hands, they leapt down out of a
high window; and so being in a manner quite dead, they chopped
off their heads, when, I think, they scarce felt, what harm was
done them.
Now I begin to have a taste of shame; and to feel
how much I am touched in mine honour: would I had excused them
and had lost my life, so I had not lost my honour, &amp; my hope of at∣chieuing
my commenced purpose, which is, the greatest grief and
distaste that in this case I feel. O my name and reputation, how
unfortunately dost thou goefrom Table to Table, from mouth to
mouth! O ye my secret, my secret actions, how openly will you
now walk thorough every public street, and open Market-place?
What shall become of me? Whither shall I go? If I go forth to the
dead, I am unable to recover them, and if I stay here, it will be
deemed cowardice. What counsel shall I take? Tell me, Sosia,
what was the cause they kilt her?
That maid (Sir) of hers, which sate weeping and crying over
her, made known the cause of her death to as many as would hear
it; saying, that they slew her, because she would not let them share
with her in that chain of gold, which you had lately given her.
O wretched and unfortunate day! O sorrow, able to break
even a heart of Adamant! How go my goods from hand to hand,
and my name from tongue to tongue? All will be published and
come to light, whatsoever I have spokē, either to her, or them; what∣soever
they knew of my doings; &amp; whatsoever was done in this busi∣ness.
I dare not go forth of doors; I am ashamed to look any man
in the face. O miserable young men! that ye should suffer death by
so sudden a disaster. O my joys, how doe you go declining, and
waining from me! But it is an ancient Proverb; That the higher a
man climbs, the greater is his fall. Last night I gained much; to¦day
I have lost much. Your Sea-calmes are rare, &amp; seldom. I might
have been listed in the roll of the happy, if my fortune would but
have allayed these tempestuous winds of my perdition. O Fortune▪
how much, and thorough how many parts hast thou beaten me!
But howsoever thou dost shake my house, and how opposite soever
thou art unto my person, yet are adversities to be endured with an
equal courage: and by them, the heart is proved, whether it be
of Ok, or Elder, strong, or weak; there is no, better Say, or
Touchstone in the world, to know what fineness, or what Characts
of Virtue or of Fortitude remain in man. And therefore come what
will come, fall back, fall edge, I will not desist to accomplish her
desire, for whose sake all this hath happened. For it is better for me
to pursue the benefit of that glory, which I expect, then the loss of
those that are dead. They were proud, and stout, and would have
been slain at some other time, if not now. The old woman was
wicked and false, as it seems, in her dealings, not complying with
that contract which she had made with them: so that they fell out
about the true mans cloak; taking it from the true owner, to share
it amongst themselves. But this was a just judgment of God upon
her, that she should receive this payment, for the many adulteries,
which by her intercession and means have been committed.
Sosia and Tristianico shall provide themselves; they shall accompany
me, in this my desired walk; they shall carry the Scaling-ladders,
for the walls are very high. To morrow I will abroad, and see if I
can revenge their deaths; if not, I will purge my innocence with
a fained absence; or else fine my self mad, that I may the better
enjoy this so tasteful a delight of my sweet Love; as did that great
Captain Vlysses, to shun the Trojan war, that hee might lie
dulcing at home with his wife Penelope.
MELIBEA is much afflicted; she talks with Lucrecia, con∣corning
Calisto's slackness in coming, who had vowed that
night to come and visit her. The which hee performed. And with
him came Sosia, and Tristan; and after that he had accomplished
his desire, they all of them betook them to their rest. Calisto gets
him home to his Palace; and there begins to complain and la∣meant,
that he had stayed so little a while with Melibea; and begs
of Phoebus, that hee would shut his beams, that he might the
sooner go to renew his desire.
Me thinks, the Gentleman, whom we look
for, stays very long. Tel me (Lucrecia) what think
thou? will he come, or no?
I conceive (Madame) he hath some
just cause of stay, and it is not in his power to
come so soon as you expect.
Good spirits be his guard, and preserve his person
from peril. For, his long stay doth not so much grieve me: but I am
afraid, lest some misfortune or other may befall him, as he is on
his way unto vs. For, who knows, whether he cōming so willingly
to the place appointed, and in that kind of fashion, as such Gentle∣men
as hee, on the like occasion, and the like hour use to go;
whether, or no, I say, he may chance to light upon the night-watch,
or be met by the Alguazils, and they not knowing him, have set up∣on
him, and he to defend himself, hath either hurt them, or they
him? Or whether some roguish Cur or other with his cruel
teeth (for such dogs, as they make no difference of persons,) have•
perhaps unfortunately bit him? Or whether, he hath fallen upon
the Casey, or into some dangerous pit, whereby he may receive
some harm? But (Ay me) these are but inconveniences which
my conceived love brings forth, and my troubled thoughts present
unto me. Goodness forbid, that any of these misfortunes should be∣fall
him! Rather let him stay as long as it shall please himself from
coming to visit me. But hark, hark, what steps are those that▪
I hear in the street? And to my thinking likewise, I hear some∣body
talking on this side of the garden.
Tristan, set the ladder here; for, though it be the higher,
yet I take it to be the better place.
Get up, Sir: And I will along with you. For, we know not
who is there within, they are talking (I am sure) who-ere they be.
Stay here (you fool) I will in alone, for I hear my
Lady and Mistress.
Your servant, your slave, Calisto, who prizes more
yours then her own life. O my dear Lord, take heed how you
leap, leap not down so high; you kill me, if you doe: I shall
swooned in seeing it. Come down, come down gently, I pray.
Take more leisure in coming down the ladder; as you lo•e me,
come not so fast.
O divine Image; O precious pearl; before whom, the
whole world appears foul! O my Lady and my glory; I im∣brace
and hug thee in mine arms, and yet I not believe it: such a
turbation of pleasure seizes on my person, that it makes me not
feel the fulness of that joy I possess.
My Lord, •ithence I have entrusted my self in your
hands, since I have been willing to cumply with your will, let me
not be worse thought of for being pitiful, then if I had been coy
and merciless. Nor doe not work my undoing, for a delight so
momentary and performed in so short a space. For, Actions that
are ill, after they are committed, may easier be reprehended then
amended. Rejoice thou in that, wherein I rejoice; which is, to see
and draw near unto thy person, to view and touch thee. But do
not offer either to ask or take that, which being taken away, is not
in thy power to restore. Take heed (Sir) that you go not about
to overthrow that, which with all the wealth in the world, you
are not able to repair.
Dear Lady, since for to obtain this favour, I have
spent my whole life, what folly were it in me, to refuse that which
you have so kindly conferred upon me? Nor (Madame) do I hope,
that you will •ay so hard a command upon me, or if you should,
yet have I not power to contain my self within the limits of your
command. Doe not impose such a point of cowardice upon me:
For I tell you, it is not in any man that is a man, to forbear in such
a case, and to condition so hard with himself; much less in me,
loving as I do, and having swam, as I have done all my life long,
thorough this sea of thy desire and mine own love. Will you then
after my so many travels, deny me entrance into that sweet
haven, where I may find some ease of all my former sorrows?
As you love me (Calisto) though my tongue take
liberty to talk what it will; yet, I prithee, let not thy hands doe
all what they can. Be quiet (good Sir) since I am yours, suffice it
you content your self in the enjoying of this outwardnes, which
is the proper fruit of Lovers, and not to rob me of the
greatest ewell, which Nature hath enriched me with; Consider
besides, That it is the property of a good shepherd, to fleece,
but not to flay his sheep; to shear them, but not to uncase them.
Madame, What mean you by this? That my passions
should not be at peace? That I shall run over my torments
anew? That I shall return to my old yoke again? Pardon (Sweet
Lady) these my impudent hands, if too presumptuously they press
upon you, which once did never think (so all together were they
unworthy) not to touch, no not so much as any part of thy garments,
that they now have leave to lay themselves with a gentle palm
on this •ainty body of thine, this most white, soft, and delicate
flesh.
Lucrecia, go aside a little.
And why Madame? I should be proud to have such
witnesses as she of my glory.
So would not I, when I doe amiss. And had I but
thought that you would have used me thus, or been but half so
violent, as I now see you are; I would not have trusted my person
with such a rough and cruel conversation.
Tristan, you hear what hath past, and how the gear goes.
I hear so much, that I hold my Master the happiest
man that lives. And I assure thee (though I am but a boy to speak
of) me thinks, I could give as good account of such a business as
my Master.
To such a jewel as this, who would not reach out his
hand? But allow him this flesh to his bread, and much good may
it doe him. For, he hath paid well for it: for a couple of his ser∣uants
served to make sauce for this his Love.
I had quite forgot that. But let them die, as instru∣mints
of their own destruction. And let others as many as will,
play the fools upon affiance to be defēded. But for mine own part, I
well remember when I served the Count, that my father gave me
this Council: that I should take heed how I killed a man. Of all
other things, that I should beware of that. For (quoth hee) you
shall see the Master merry and kindly embraced, when his man
(poor soul) shall be hanged and disgraced.
O my life and my dear Lord, how could you find in
your heart, that I should lose the name and crown of a Virgin,
for so momentary and so short a pleasure? O my poor Mother,
If thou did but know what wee have done, with what willingness
would thou take thine own death? and with what violence and
enforcement give me mine? How cruel a butcher would thou
become of thine own blood? And how doleful an end should I
bee of thy days? O my most honoured father, how have I wronged
thy reputation? And given both opportunity and place to the
utter overthrowing and undoing of thy house? O Traitor that I
am! Why did I not first look into that great error, which would
ensue by thy entrance, as also that great danger; which I could not
but expect?
You should have sung this song before. Now, it comes
too late: you know, it is an old saying; when a thing is done, it
cannot be undone. There is no fence for it, but what, if the fool
Calisto should hap to hear me?
Is it possible? Look and it be not day already: Me
thinks, we have not been here aboue an hour, and the Clock now
strikes three.
My Lord, for Ioues love, now that all that I have, is
yours; now, that I am your Mistress; now, that you cannot deny
my love; deny me not your sight. And on such nights as you shall
resolve to come, let your coming bee by this secret place, and at
the self same hour: for then, shall I still look for you prepared
with the same joy, wherewith I now comfort my self in the hope∣full
expectation of those sweet nights that are to come. And so
for this present, I will take my leave. Farewell (my Lord) my
hope is, that you will not be discovered, for it is very dark; Nor
I heard in the house, for it is not yet day.
Doe you hear there? bring hither the ladder:
Sir, it is here ready for you to come down.
Lucrecia, come hither, I am now all alone. My Love is
gone, who hath left his heart with me, and hath taken mine with
him. Did thou not hear vs, Lucrecia?
No Madame, I was fast asleep.
Tristan, wee must go very softly, and not speak a
word. For, just about this time, rise your rich men, your co∣uetous
money-mongers, your penny-fathers, your Venereans and
Loue-sicke souls, such as our Master; your day-labourers, your
plough-men and your shepherds; who about this time vnpinne
their sheep, and bring them to their sheepcotts to be milk't. And
it may be, they may hear some word escape vs, which may wrong
either Calisto's or Melibea's honour.
Now you silly Ass, you whoresonne Horse-currier, you
would have vs make no noise, not a word, but Mum▪ and yet
thy self doest name her. Thou art an excellent fellow▪ to make a
Guide or Leader to conduct an Army in the Moors Country:
so that prohibiting, thou permittest; covering, thou discouerest;
defending, offendest; bidding others hold their peace, thou thy
self speak aloud, nay, proclaims it; and proclaiming, makes
answer thereunto. But though you are so subtle wetted and of so
discreet a temper, you shall not tell me in what month our
Lady day in harvest falls. For we know that we have more straw
in the house this year, then thou art able to eat.
My Masters, what a noise make you there? My cares
and yours are not alike. Enter softly, I pray, and leave your prat∣ling,
that they in the house may not hear vs; Shut this door,
and let vs go take our rest. For, I will up alone to my chamber, and
there disarm me. Go get you to bed; O wretch that I am, how
su•able and natural unto me is solitariness, silence, and darkness.
I know not whether the cause of it be, that there comes now to
mind, the treason that I have committed in taking my leave of
that Lady, whom I so dearly love, before it was further day? Or
whether it be the grief, which I conceive of my dishonour, by
the death of my servants? I, I; this is it that grieves me, this is
that wound whereof I bleed. Now, that I am grown a little
cooler; now, that that blood waxes cold, which yesterday did
〈◊〉 in me; now that I see the decaying of my house, my want
of service, the wasting of my patrimony, and the infamy which
lights upon me by the death of my servants? what have I done?
How can I possibly contain my self? How can I forbear any
longer, but that I should presently express my self, as a man much
wronged? and show my self a proud &amp; speedy revenger of that o∣pen
injury• which hath been offered me? O the miserable sweet∣nes
of this most short and transitory life! who is he so covetous
of thy countenance, who will not rather choose to die presently,
then to enjoy a whole year of a shamfull life? and to prorogue it
with dishonour, loosing the good report and honourable memory
of his noble Ancestors? Especially, since that in this world,
wee have not any certain or limited time: no not so much as a
moment or a minute. We are debtors without time: wee stand
continually bound to present payment. Why have I not gone
abroad, and made all the inquiry I can, after the secret cause of my
open perdition? O thou short delight of the world, how little do
thy pleasure last? and how much doe they cost? Repentance
should not be bought so dear. O miserable that I am, when shall
I recover so great a loss? what shall I doe? what counsel shall I
take? To whom shall I discover my disgrace? why do I conceal
it from the rest of my servants and kinsefolke? They clip and note
my good name in their Councell-house and public Assembly,
and make me infamous throughout the whole Kingdom: and
they of mine own house and kindred must not know of it; I will
out amongst them. But if I go out and tell them that I was pre∣sent,
it is too late; if absent, it is too soon. And to provide me
of friends, ancient servants, and near àllyes, it will ask some
time, as likewise that we be furnished with Arms, and other proper∣rations
of vengeance. O thou cruel Judge, what ill payment hast
thou made me of that my fathers bread, which so often thou hast
eaten? I thought, that by thy favour I might have killed
a thousand men without controlment. O thou falsifier of faith,
thou persecutor of the truth, thou man moulded of the baser sort
of earth! Truly is the proverb verified in thee; that for want of
good men thou wast made a Judge. Thou should have considered,
that thy self, and those thou did put to death, were servants to
my Ancestors and me, and thy fellows and companions. But when
the base to riches doth ascend, he regards neither kindred nor
friend. Who would have thought, that thou would have wrought
my undoing? But there is nothing more hurtful, then an vnex∣pected
enemy. Why would thou that it should be verified of
thee, That that which came out of Aetna, should consume Aetna?
And that I hatched the Crow, which picked out mine eyes? Thou
thy se•fe art a public delinquent, and yet punishest those that were
private offenders. But I would have thee to know; that a private
fault is less then a public, and less the inconvenience and danger:
At least, according to the Laws of Athens, which were not written
in blood, but doe show that it is a less error, not to condemn a de∣linquent,
then to punish the innocent. O how hard a matter is it,
to follow a just cause before an unjust Judge! How much more
this excess of my servants, which was not free from offence! But
consider with all spite of all Stoical Paradox, their guilt was not
equal, though their sufferings alike. What deserved the one, for
that which the other did? That only because he was his com∣pinion,
thou should doom them both to death? But why doe
I talk thus? With whom doe I discourse? Am I in my right wits?
What's the matter with thee, Calisto? Dream thou, sleep thou,
or wake thou? Stand thou on thy feet? Or least thou all along?
Consider with thy self that thou art in thy chamber. Doest thou
not see that the offender is not present? With whom doest thou
contend? Come again to thy self; weigh with thy self, that the ab∣sent
were never fōnd just. But if thou wilt be upright in thy judge∣meant,
thou must keep an ear for either party. Doest thou not
see, that the Law is supposed to be equal unto all? Remember
that Romulus, the first founder of Rome, killed his own brother, be∣cause
he transgressed the Law. Consider that Torquatus the Roman
slew his own son, because he exceeded his Commission. And
many other like unto these did this man doe. Think likewise with
thy self, that if the Judge were here present, hee would make
thee this Answer; that the Principal and the Accessory, the Actor
and Consenter, doe merit equal punishment. Howbeit, they
were both notwithstanding executed, for that which was cōmitted
but by one. And if that other had not his pardon, but received
a speedy judgment, it was, because the fault was notorious, and
needed no further proofs: as also that they were taken in the very
Act of murder, and that one of them was found dead of his fall
from the window. And it is likewise to be imagined, That that
weeping wench which Celestina kept in her house, made them to
hasten the more by her woeful and lamentable noise: And that
the Judge, that he might not make a hurly burly of it, that he
might not defame me, and that he might not stay till the people
should press together, and hear the proclaiming of that great in∣famy,
which could not choose but follow me, hee did sentence
them so early as he did; and the common Hangman, which was
the Crier, could doe no otherwise, that he might cumply with
their execution and his own discharge. All which, if it were
done as I conceive it to bee, I ought rather to rest his debtor,
and think my self bound unto him the longest day of my life, not
as to my fathers sometimes servant, but as to my true and natural
brother. But put case it were not so; or suppose I should not co•ster
it in the better sense, yet call, Calisto, to mind the great joy and solace
thou hast had, bethink thy self of thy sweet Lady and Mistress,
and thy whole and sole happiness: and since for her sake thou e∣steemest
thy life as nothing for to doe her service, thou art not to
make any reckoning of the death of others: and the rather, because
no sorrow can equal thy received pleasure. O my Lady and my
life, that I should ever think to offend thee in thy absence! And
yet in doing as I doe, me thinks, it argues against me, that I hold
in small esteem that great and singular favour, which I have re∣ceiued
at thy hands. I will now no longer think on grief; I will
no longer entertain friendship with sorrow. O incomparable
good! O insatiable contentment! And what could I have asked
more of heaven, in requital of all my merits in this life (if they be
any) then that which I have already received? Why should I not
consent my self with so great a blessing? which being so, it stands
not with reason that I should be ungrateful unto him, who hath
conferred upon me so great a good: I will therefore acknowledge
it, I will not with care craze my understanding, lest that being lost,
I should fall from so high and so glorious a possession. I desire no
other honour, no other glory, no other riches, no other father nor
mother, no other friends nor kinsfolks. In the day, I will abide
in my chamber: In the night, in that sweet Paradise, in that plea∣sant
grove, that greene plot of ground amidst those sweet trees
and fresh and delightsome walks. O night of sweet rest and quiet!
O that thou had made thy return! O bright shining Phoebus, drive
on thy Chariot apace, make haste to thy journeys end. O comfort∣able
and delightful stars, break your wont, and appear before
your time, &amp; out of your wonted and continued course! O dull and
slow clock, I wish to see thee burned in the quickest and loveliest
fire that Love can make. For did thou but expect that which I
doe, when thou strike twelve, thou would never endure to bee
tied to the will of the master that made thee! O ye hyematicall
and winterly months, which now hide your heads, and live in dark∣nes
and obscurity! Why haste ye not to cut off these tedious days
with your longer nights? Me thinks, it is almost a year, since I
saw that sweet comfort and most delightful refreshing of my
travels. But what doe I ask? Why like a fool doe I, out of im∣patience
desire that which never either was or shall bee? For your
natural courses did never learn to wheel away. For to all of
them there is an equal course, to all of them one and the selfsame
space and time. Not so much as to life and death, but there
is a settled and limited end. The secret motions of the high firm∣meant
of heaven, of the Planets and the North-starre, and of the in∣crease
and wane of the Moon, all of these are ruled with an equal
reyne, all of these are moved with an equal spur. Heaven, Earth,
Sea, Fire, Wind, Heate and Cold. What will it benefit me, that
this clock of iron should strike twelve, if that of heaven doe not
hammer with it? And therefore though I rise never so soon, it
will never the sooner be day. But thou my sweet Imagination,
thou, who can only help me in this case, bring thou unto my
Fantasy the unparalleled presence of that glorious Image. Cause
thou to come unto my ears that sweet Music of her words,
those her unwilling hangings off without profit, that her pretty,
I prithee leave off; Forbear, good Sir, if you love me; Touch me
not; Doe not deal so discourteously with me. Out of whose ruddy
lips, me thinks, I hear these words still sound, Doe not seek my un∣doing:
which she would evermore be out withal. Besides, those her
amorous embraces betwixt every word; that her loosing of her
self from me; and clypping me again; that her flying from me
and her coming to me; those her sweet sugared Kisses; and that
her last salutation wherewith she took her leave of me. O with
what pain did it issue from her mouth! with what resuscitation of
her spirits! with how many tears, which did seem to be so many
round pearls, which did fall without any noise from her clear
and resplendent eyes!
What think thou of Calisto? How hath he slept? It is
now upon four of the clock in the afternoon, and he hath ney∣there
as yet called vs, nor eaten any thing.
Hold your peace, for sleep requires no haste. Besides,
on the one side, he is oppressed with sadness and melancholy for his
servants: and on the other side transported with that gladsome de∣light
and singular great pleasure, which he hath enjoyed with his
Melibea. And thou know, that where two such strong and con∣trary
passions meet, in whomsoever they shall house themselves,
with what forcible violence they will work upon a weak and
feeble subject.
Dost thou think that he takes any great grief and care for
those that are dead? If she did not grieve more, whom I see here out
of the window go along the street, she would not wear a veil
that colour as she does.
Who is that, brother?
Come hither and see her, before she be past. See thou
that mournful maid, which wipes the tears from her eyes? That
is Elicia, Celestina's servant, and Sempronio's friend: she is a good,
pretty, handsome, wel-fauoured wench, though now (poor soul)
•hee be left to the wide world, and forsaken of all. For she ac∣counted
Celestina her mother, and Sempronio her chiefest and best
friend. And in that house, where you see her now enter, there dwells
a very fair woman, she is exceeding wel-fauoured, very fresh and
lovely, she is half Courtesan; yet happy is hee, and counts him∣self
so to be, that can purchase her favour at an easy rate, and win
her to be his friend. Her name is Arouse, for whose sake, I know,
that unfortunate and poor Parmeno endured many a miserable
night. And I know, that she (poor soul) is nothing pleased with
his death.
AREVSA utters injurious speeches to a Ruffian, called Cen∣turio,
who takes his leave of her, occasioned by the coming in
of Elicia, which Elicia recounts unto Arouse the deaths, which
had ensued upon the love of Calisto and Melibea. And Arouse
and Elicia agree, and conclude together, that Centurio should re∣avenge
the death of all those three, upon the two young Lovers. This
done, Elicia takes her leave of Arouse, and would not be entreated
to stay, because she would not lose her market at home in her accu∣stomed
Lodging.
What ails my Cousin, that she cries, and
takes on as she does? It may be she hath al∣ready
heard of that ill news, which I came to
bring her: if she have, I shall have no reward of her
for my heavy tidings. So, weep, weep on, weep
thy belly-full; let thine eyes break their banks,
and overflow thy bosom with an eternal deluge; for two such men
were not every where to be had; it is some ease yet unto me, that
she so resents the matter, and hath so true a feeling of their deaths.
Doe, tear, and rent thy hair, as (I poor soul) have done before
thee: and think, and consider with thy self, that to fall from a
happy life, is more miserable then death it self. O how I hug her
in my heart! How much more, then ever heretofore, doe I now
love her; that she can express her passion in such lively colours, and
paint forth sorrow to it's perfect and true life!
Get thee out of my house, thou ruffianly Rascal; thou
lying companion; thou cheating Scoundrel; thou hast deluded
me, thou Villain; thou hast played bob-foole with me, by thy
vain and idle offers; and with thy fair words and flattering spea∣ches
(A pocks on that smooth tongue of thine!) thou hast robed me
of all that I have. I gave thee (you Rogue) a Jerkin and a Cloak,
a Sword and a Buckler, and a couple of Shirts, wrought with a thou∣sand
devices, all of needle-worke; I furnished▪ thee with arms and
a Horse, and placed thee with such a Master, as thou wast not worcester∣thy
to wipe his shoes. And now that I entreat thee to do a business
for me, thou make a thousand frivolous excuses.
Command me to kill ten men, to doe you service,
rather then to put me to walk a League on foot for you.
Why then did you play away your horse? You must be
a Decor with a murrain; had it not been for me, thou had been
hanged long since. Thrice have I freed thee from the gallows;
four times have I disimpawnd thee, first from this, and then from
that Ordinary, when as thou might have rotted in prison, had not
I redeemed thee, and paid thy debts. O that I should have any
thing to doe with such a Villain? that I should be such a fool?
that I should have any affiance in such a false-hearted, white-liuer'd
slave? that I should believe him and his lies? that I should once
suffer him to come within my doors? What a devil is there good
in him? his hair is cu•led, and shagged like a water Spaniel; his
face scotched, and notched; he hath been twice whipped up and down
the Town; hee is lame on his sword-arme, and hath some thirty
whores in the common Stews. Get thee out of my house, and that
presently too; look me no more in the face; speak not to me;
no not a word; neither say thou, that thou did ever know me;
lest, by the bones of my father, who begot me, &amp; of my mother, who
brought me forth; I cause 2000. Bastinadoes to be laid upon that
Millers back of thine. For, I would thou should know, I have a
friend in a corner, that will not stick to doe a greater matter then
that for me, and come off handsomely with it, when he has done.
The fool is mad, I think. But doe you hear, Dame?
if I be nettled, I shall sting some body; if my choler be moved, I
shall draw tears from some; I shall make some body put finger
in the eye; I shall, in faith. But for once, I will go my ways and say
nothing; I will suffer all this at your hands, lest some body may
come in, or the neighbours chance to hear vs.
I will in, for that is no true sound of sorrow, which sends
forth threatenings and revilings.
O wretch that I am; Is it you, my Elicia? I can hardly
believe it. But what means this? Who hath clothed thee thus in
sorrow? What mourning weed is this? Believe me (Cousin)
you much affright me. Tell me quickly, what's the matter? For I
long to know it. O, what a qualm comes over my stomach! Thou
hast not left me one drop of blood in my body.
Great sorrow, great loss; that which I show, is but
little to that which I feel and conceal. My heart is blacker then
my mantle; my bowels, then my veyle. Ah, Cousin, Cousin; I am
not able to speak through hoarseness; I cannot for sobbing, send
my words from out my breast.
Ay miserable me; why dost thou hold me in suspense?
Tell me, tell me, I say, doe not you tear your hair, doe not you
scratch and martyr your face; deal not so ill with your self. Is
this evil common to vs both? Appertains it also unto me?
Ay, my Cousin! my dear Love, Sempronio and Parmeno
are now no more; they live not; they are no longer of this world;
dead, alas they are dead.
What dost thou tell me? No more I entreat thee; for
pity hold thy peace, lest I fall down dead at thy feet.
There is yet more ill news to come unto thine ears.
Listen well to this woeful wight, and she shall tell thee a longer
Tale of woe; thy sorrows have not yet their end; Celestina, she
whom thou knew well; she whom I esteemed as my Mother;
she who did cocker me as her child, she who did cover all
my infirmities; she, who made me to be honoured amongst my
equals; she by whose means I was known thorough all the City
and suburbs of the same, stands now rendering up an account of all
her works. I saw her with these eyes stabbed in a thousand places.
They slew her in my lap, I folding her in mine arms.
O strong tribulation! O heavy news worthy our be∣wailing!
O swift-footed misfortunes! O incurable destruction▪
O inrreparable loss! O how quickly hath fortune turned about
her wheel! Who slew them? How did they dye? Thou hast made
me almost besides my self with this thy news, and to stand, ama∣zed
as one, who hears a thing that seems to be impossible. It is
not eight days ago since I saw them all alive. Tell me (good
friend) How did this cruel and unlucky chance happen?
You shall know. I am sure (Cousin) you have already
heard tell of the love betwixt Calisto and that fool Melibea. And
you likewise saw how Celestina, at the intercession of Sempronio, so
as she might be paid for her pains, undertook the charge of
that business, and to be the means to effect it for him; wherein
she used such diligence, and was so careful in the following of it,
that she drew water at the second spitting. Now when Calisto
saw so good and so quick a dispatch, which he never hoped to
have effected, amongst divers other things, hee gave this my un∣fortunate
Aunt a chain of gold. And as it is the nature of that me∣tall,
that th• more we drink thereof, the more wee thirst; she,
when she saw her self so rich, appropriated the whole gain to her
self, and would not let Sempronio and Parmeno have their parts,
it being before agreed upon between them, that whatsoever Ca∣listo
gave her, they should share it alike. Now, they being come
home weary one morning from accompanying their Master, with
whom they had been abroad all night, being in great choler and
heate, upon I know not what quarrels and brawls, (as they them∣selves
said) that had betided them, they demanded part of the
chain of Celestina, for to relieve themselves therewith. She stood
upon denial of any such covenant or promise made between
them; affirming the whole gain to be due to her; and disco∣ring
withal other petty matters of some secrecy. For, (as it in
the Proverb) when Gossips brawl, then out goes all. So that
they being mightily enraged, on the one side necessity did urge
them, which rents and breaks all the love in the world; on the o∣there
side, the great anger and weariness they brought thither with
them, which many times works an alteration in vs. And besides,
they saw that they were forsaken in their fairest hopes, she break∣ing
her faith and promise with them: So that they knew not in
the world what to do; and so continued a great while upon terms
with her, some hard words passing to and fro between them. But
in the end perceiving her covetous disposition, and finding that she
still persevered in her denial, they laid hands upon their swords,
and hacked and hewed her in a thousand pieces.
O unfortunate woman! Wast thou ordained to end thy
days in so miserable a manner as this? But for them, I pray what
became of them? How came they to their end?
They, as soon as ever they had committed this foul
murder; that they might avoid the Justice, the Alcalde passing by
by chance at that very instant, made me no more ado, but leapt
presently out at the windows; and being in a manner dead with
the fall, they presently apprehended them, and without any further
delay, chopped off their heads.
O my Parmeno, my love; what sorrow doe I feel for thy
sake? How much doth thy death torment me? It grieves me, for
that my great love, which in so short a space, I had settled upon
him, since it was not my fortune to enjoy him longer. But be∣ing
that this ill success hath ensued, being that this mischance hath
happened, and being that their lives now lost, cannot be bought, or
restored by tears, doe not thou vex thy self so much in grieving
and weeping out thine eyes: I grieve as much, and believe, thou hast
but little advantage of me in thy sorrowing; and yet thou see
with what patience I bear it, and pass it over.
O! I grow mad. O wretch that I am, I am ready to run
out of my wits! Ay me, there is not any bodies grief, that is like
to mine; there is not any body, that hath lost that which I have lost!
O how much better, and more honest had my tears been in ano∣there
persons passion, then mine own! whither shall I go? for I
have lost both money, meat, drink, and clothes; I have lost my
friend, and such a one, that had hee been my husband, hee could
not have been more kind unto me. O thou wise Celestina, thou
much honoured Matron, and of great authority; how often did
thou cover my faults by thy singular wisdom? Thou took pains,
whilst I took pleasure; thou went abroad, whilst I staid at home;
thou went in tatters and rags, whilst I did ruffle in Silks and
Satens; thou still came home like a Bee, continually laden, whilst
I did nothing but spend, and play the unthrift: for I knew
not else what to doe. O thou worldly happiness, and joy, which
whilst thou art possessed, art the less esteemed! Nor'dost thou e∣for
let vs know what thou art, till we know that thou art not; fin∣ding
our loss, greater by wanting, then in enjoying thee; never
knowing what we have, till we have thee not. O Calisto and Melibea,
occasioners of so many deaths! let some ill attend upon your love;
let your sweet meat have some sour sauce; your pleasure, pain;
let your joy be turned into mourning; the pleasant flowers whereon
you took your stolen solace, let them be turned into Serpents and
Snakes; your songs, let them be turned into howlings; the shady
trees of the garden, let them be blasted and withered with your loo∣king
on them; your sweet scenting blossoms and buds, let them
be black and dismal to behold.
Good Cousin, content your self, I pray, be quiet; in∣join
silence to your complaints; stop the Couduit-pipes to your
tears; wipe your eyes; take heart again unto you. For when for∣tune
shuts one gate, she usually sets open another; and this estate of
yours, though it be never so much broken, it will be soldred, and
made whole again: And many things may be revenged, which are
impossible to be remedied; whereas this hath a doubtful remedy,
and a ready revenge.
But by whom shall we mend our selves? Of whom shall
we be revenged, when as her death, and those that slew her, have
brought all this affliction and anguish upon me? Nor doth the
punishment of the delinquent less grieve me, then the error they
committed. What would you have me to do, when as all the bur∣then
lies upon my shoulders? I would with all my heart that I were
now with them, that I might not lie here, to lament and be∣wail
them all as I doe. And that which grieves me most, is, to
see that for all this, that Villain Calisto, who hath no sense, nor fee∣ling
of his servants deaths, goes every night to see and visit his
filth Melibea, feasting and solacing himself in her company, whi∣lest
she grows proud, glorying to see so much blood to be sacrifi∣ced
to her service.
If this be true, of whom can wee revenge our selves bet∣la?
And therefore, hee that hath eaten the meat, let him pay the
shot; leave the matter to me, let me alone to deal with them: For,
if I can but track them, or but once find the sent of their footing,
or but have the least inkling in the world, when, how, where, and
at what hour they visit one another, never hold me true daughter
to that old pasty-wench whom you knew full well, if I doe not give
them sour sauce to their sweet meat; and make that their love
distasteful, which now they swallow down with delight; and if I
employ in this business that Ruffian, whom you found me railing
against, when you came into the house, if he prove not a worse Ex∣ecutioner
for Calisto, then Sempronio was for Celestina, never trust me
more. O! how quickly the Villain would fat himself with joy,
and how happy would hee hold himself, if I would but impose any
service upon him! for he went away from me very sad and heavy,
to see how coursely I used him: and should I but now send for him
again, and speak kindly unto him, he would think himself taken
up in some strange sweet rapture; so much will he be ravished with
joy. And therefore tell me (Cousin) how I may learn, how this bu∣sinesse
goes, for I will set such a trap for them, as, if they be taken in
it, shall make Melibea weep as much, as now she laughs.
Mary, I know (sweet Cousin) another companion of
Parmeno's, Calisto's groom of the stable, whose name is Sosia, who
accompanies him every night that hee goes; I will see, what I can
suck from him; and this (I suppose) will be a very good course for
the matter you talk of.
But hear you me, Cousin, I pray doe me the kindness,
to send Sosia hither unto me, I will take him in hand a little, I will
entertain talk with him; and one while I will so flatter him, an∣other
while make him such fair offers, that in the end, I will dive
into him, and reach the very depth of his heart, and learn from
him, as well what hath been already, as what is to be done here∣after:
At least learn so much as we desire to know, or may serve our
turn; and when I shall have effected this, I will make him and his
Master to vomit up all the pleasure they have eaten. And thou (Eli∣cia)
that art as dear to me, as mine own soul, doe not you vex
your self any more, but bring your apparel, and such implements
as you have, and come and live with me; for there where you are,
you shall remain all alone: and sadness (you know) is a friend to
solitariness. What wench? anew Love will make thee forget the
old: one Son that is borne, will repair the love of three that
be dead. With a new successor, we receive a new the joyful me∣mori,
and lost delights of forepassed times. If I have a loaf of bread,
or a penny in my purse, thou shalt have half of it. And I have more
compassion of thy sorrow, then of those that did cause it. True it is,
that the loss of that doth grieve a man more, which hee already
possesses, then the hope of the like good can glad him, be it never so
certain. You see, the matter is past all remedy; and dead men cannot
be resold: you know the old saying: Fie upon this weeping, let them
dye, and we live. As for the rest that remain behind, leave that
to me; I will take order for Calisto and M•libea; and I shall give
them as bitter a potion to drink, as they have given thee. O Cou∣sin,
Cousin, how witty am I when I am angry, to turn all these their
plots upside down! and though I am but young, and a Girl to
speak of, to break the neck of these their devises, I shall over∣throw
them horse and foot.
Bethink your self well, what you mean to doe. For, I
promise you, though I should doe as you would have me, and
should send Sosia unto you, yet can I not be persuaded that your de∣sire
will take effect. For the punishment of those who lately suffered
for disclosing their secrets, will make him seal up his lips, and look
a little better to his life. Now for my coming to your house, and
to dwell with you; as the offer is very kind, so I yield you the best
kind of thanks I can render you; and Jove bless you for it, and
help you in your necessity; for therein dost thou well show, that
kindred and Alliance serve not for shadows, but ought rather to be
profitable and helpful in adversity; and therefore, though I should
be willing to doe, as you would have me, in regard of that desire,
which I have to enjoy your sweet company; yet can it not conueni∣ently
be done, in regard of that loss which would light upon me; for
I know, it cannot but be greatly to my hindrance; the reason there∣of
I need not to tell you, because I speak to one that is intelligent,
and understands my meaning; for there, Cousin, where I am, I am
well known; there am I well customed; that house will never
lose the name of old Celestina; thither continually resort your young
wenches bordring thereabouts, loving creatures, willing worms,
and such as are best known abroad, being of half blood to those,
whom Celestina bred up; there they drive all their bargains, and
there they make their matches, and doe many other things besides,
(as you know well enough) whereby now and then I reap some
profit. Besides, those few friends that I have, know not elsewhere
to seek after me. Moreover, you are not ignorant, how hard a
matter it is, to forgo that which we have been used unto; and to
alter custo•e, is as distasteful as death: A rolling stone never ga∣theirs
moss, and therefore I will abide where I am: And if for no
other reason, yet will I stay there, because my house-rent is free,
having a full year yet to come, and will not let it be lost, by lie∣ing
idle and empty; so that though every particular reason may
not take place, yet when I weigh them altogether, I hope I shall
•est excused, and you contented. It is now high time for me to be
gone; what wee have talked of, I will take that charge upon me;
and so farewell.
PLEBERIO, and Alice, thinking that their daughter Meli∣bea
had kept her virginity unspotted and untouched, which was
(as it seemed) quite contrary; they fall in talk about marrying of
Melibea, which discourse of theirs, she so impatiently endured, and
was so grieved in hearing her father treat of it, that she sent in
Lucrecia to interrupt them, that by her coming in, she might oc∣cession
them to break off both their discourse and purpose.
My wife, and friend Alice; time (me thinks)
slips (as they say) from between our hands; and our
days doe glide away like water down a River
There is not any thing that flies so swift, as the life
of man: Death still follows vs, and hedges vs in
on every side; whereunto we our selves now draw nigh. Wee are
now (according to the course of nature) to be shortly under his ban∣ner;
this wee may plainly perceive, if wee will but he hold our e∣quills,
our brethren and our kinsfolk round about vs; the grave
hath devoured them all; they are all brought to their last home.
And since we are uncertain when we shall be called hence, see∣ing
such certain and infallible signs of our short abode, it beho∣ueth
vs (as i• is in the Proverb) to lay our beard a soaking, when
we see our neighbours shaving off, and to fear, left that which be∣fell
them yesterday, may befall vs to morrow. Let vs therefore pre∣pare
our selves, and pack up our farthels, for to go this enforced
•journey which cannot be avoided. Let not that cruel and doleful
sounding trumpet of death, summon vs away on the sudden and
unprovided. Let vs prepare our selves, and set them in order whi∣lest
we have time, for it is better to prevent, then to be prevented;
let vs conf•rre our substance on our sweet successor; let vs couple
our only daughter to a husband, such a one as may suit with our
e•ta•e, that wee may go quietly and contentedly out of this world.
The which with much diligence and carefulness, wee ought from
henceforth to endeavour and put in execution: and what we have at
other times commenced in this matter, we ought now to consume∣mate
it. I would not by our negligence have our daughter in Guar∣deans
hands; I like not she should be a Ward; she is not fit for mar∣riage,
and therefore much better for her to be in a house of her
own, then in ours: by which means wee shall free her from the
tongs of the vulgar; for there is no virtue so absolute &amp; so perfect,
which hath not her detracting and foule-mouthed slanderers; ney∣there
is there any thing, whereby a Virgins good name is kept more
pure and vnsported, then by a mature and timely marriage. Who in
all this City will refuse our Alliance? who will not be glad to enjoy
such a Jewel, in whom those four principal things concur,
which are demanded and desired in marriage? The first, Discretion,
Honesty and Virginity. The second, Beauty. The third, Noble
birth and Parentage. The last, Riches. With all these nature hath
endowed her. Whatsoever they shall require of vs, they shall find it
to be •ull and perfect.
My Lord Pleberio, heaven bless her, and send her so to
doe, that we may see our desires accomplished in our life time. And
I am rather of opinion that wee shall want one that is equal with
our daughter, considering her virtue and nobleness of blood, then
that there are ouer-many that are 〈◊〉 to wear her; but be∣cause
this office more properly appertains to the father then the
mother, as you shall dispose of her, so shall I rest contented, and she
remain obedient, as shall best beseem her chaste carriage, her ho∣nest
life, and meek disposition.
But if you knew as much as I doe, your hearts would
burst in sunder. I, I, you mistake your mark, she is not the wo∣man
you wot of; the best is lost; an ill year is like to attend upon
your old age. Calisto hath plucked that flower wherein you so much
glory. There is not any that can now new film her, or repair her
lost Virginity, for Celestina is dead, the only curer of a cracked my∣den-head,
you have awaked somewhat of the latest; you should
have risen a little earlier. Hark, hark; good Mistress Melibea,
hark, I say.
What does the fool there sneaking in the corner?
Come hither, Madame, and you shall hear how for∣ward
your father and mother are for to provide you a husband, you
shall be married out of hand, out of hand, Madame.
For all loves sake speak softly; they will hear you by
and by; let them talk on, they begin to dote; for this month
they have had no other talk; their mind hath run on nothing
else; it may be their heart tells them of the great love which I
bear• to Calisto, as also of that which for this months space hath
passed between vs. I know not whether they have had any inkling
of our meeting? or whether they have ouer-heard vs? nor can I de∣•ise
in the world, what should be the reason, why they should be so
hot upon the matter, and more eager for the marrying of me now,
then ever heretofore: but they shall miss of their purpose; they
shall labour it in vain: for to what use serves the clapper in the Mil,
if the Miller be deaf? Who is he that can remove me from my glo∣rye?
Who can withdraw me from my pleasure? Calisto is my Soul,
my Life, my Lord; on whom I have set up my rest, and in whom
I have placed all my hopes; I know that in him I cannot be decay∣ued.
And since that hee loves me, with what other thing but love
can I requite him? All the debts in the world receive their pay∣meant
in a divers kind; but love admits no other payment, but love.
I glad my self in thinking on him; I delight my self in seeing him;
and rejoice my self in hearing him. Let him doe with me what
he will, and dispose of me at his pleasure; if he will go to Sea, I
will go with him; if hee will round the world, I will along with
him; if he will sell me for a slave in the enemies Country, I will
not resist his desire. Let my Parents let me enjoy him, if they mean
to enjoy me; let them not settle their thoughts upon these vanities,
nor think no more upon those their marriages. For, it is better to
be well beloved, then ill married; and a good friend is better then
a bad husband. Let them suffer me to enjoy the pleasure of my
youth, if they mind to iniov any quietness in their age; if not,
they will but prepare destruction for me, and for themselves a Se∣pulchre.
I grieve for nothing more, then for the time that I have
lost in not enjoying him any sooner, and that hee did not know me,
as soon as he was known unto me. I will no husband; I will not
fully the knots of matrimony, nor tread against the matrimonial
steppes of another man; nor walk in the way of wedlock with a
stranger, as I find many have done, in those ancient books
which I have read, which were far more discreet, and wiser then
my self; and more noble in their estate and Linage, whereof some
were held among the heathens for goddesses: as was Venus, the
mother of Ones and of Cupped, the god of love, who being married,
broke her plighted troth of wedlock: as likewise divers others,
who were inflamed with a greater fire, and did commit most knife∣rios
and incestuous errors: as Myrrh, with her father; Semyramis
with her son; Canace with her brother; others also in a more
cruel and beastly fashion, did transgress the Law of Nature: as
Pasiphae, the wife of King Minos, with a Bull: and these were Queens
and great Ladies, under whose faults (considering the foulness of
them) mine may pass as reasonable, without note of shame, or dis∣honesty.
My love was grounded upon a good and just cause, and a
far more lawful ground. I was wooed and sued unto, and captive∣ted
by Calisto's good deserts; being thereunto solicited by that subtle
and cunning Mistress in her Art, Dame Celestina, who adventured her
self in many a dangerous Visit, before that ever I would yield my
self true prisoner to his love. And now for this month, and more
(as you your self have seen) hee hath not failed, no, not so much
as one night, but hath still scaled our garden walls, as if hee had
come to the scaling of a fort; and many times hath been repulsed,
and assaulted it in vain, being driven to withdraw his siege. And
yet for all this, hee continued more constant and resolute still, and
never would give over, as one that thought his labour to be well
bestowed. For my sake, his servants have been slain; for my sake,
hee hath wasted and consumed his substance; for my sake hee
hath feigned absence with all his friends in the City; and all
day long hee hath had the patience to remain close prisoner in his
own house, and only upon hope (wherein hee counted ••mselfe
happy) to see me in the night: Far, far therefore from me •e
all ingratitude; far be all flattery and dissimulation towards so
true and faithful a Lover; for I regard (in my regard to him) ney∣there
husband, father, nor kindred; for in losing my Calisto, I lose my
life, which life of mine doth therefore please me, because it plea∣seth
him; which I desire no longer to enjoy, then he shall joy in it.
Peace, Madame, hark, hark, they continue in their
discourse.
Since (wife) me thinks you seem to like well of this
motion, it is not amiss, that wee make it known to our daugh∣la;
wee may doe well to tell her how many doe desire her, and
what store of suitors would be willing to come unto her, to the end
that she may the more willingly entertai•e our desire, and make
choice of him whom she likes best. For in this particular, the
Laws allow both men and women, though they be under paternal
power, for to make their own choice.
What doe you mean, husband? Why doe you talk,
and spend time in this? Who shall be the messenger to acquaint
our daughter Melibea with this strange news, and shall not affright
her therewith? Alas, doe you think that she can tell what a man
means, or what it is to marry, or be married? or whether by the
conjunction of man and woman, children are begot or no? Doe
you think, that her simple, and unspotted Virginity, can suggest un∣to
her any filthy desire, of that which as yet she neither knows, nor
understands; nor cannot so much as conceive what it means?
It is the least part of her thought. Believe it, (my Lord Pleberio' she
doth not so much as dream on any such matter; and assure your
self, be hee what hee will be, either noble or base, fair or soul,
we will make her to take whom it pleases vs: whom we like, him
shall she like: she shall confirm her will to ours, and shall think
that fit, which wee think fit, and no further; for I know, I trow,
how I have bred and brought up my daughter.
Lucrecia, Lucrecia; run, hye thee quickly, and go in
by the back door in the hall, and break off their discourse with
some fained errand or other, unless thou would have me cry out,
and take on like a Bedlam; so much am I out of patience with
their misconceit of my ignorance.
I go, Madame.
ELICIA wanting the chastity of Penelope, determines to cast
off the care and sorrow which she had conceived upon the deaths
of those for whom she mourned, highly to this purpose commending
Areusa's counsel; she gets her to Areusa's house, whither likewise
comes Sosia, out of whom, Arouse, by fair and flattering words,
drew those matters of secrecy which past betwixt Calisto and
Melibea.
I doe my self wrong, to morn thus.
Few doe visit my house; few doe pass this way.
I can hear no music nor stirring betimes in
the morning; I have no amorous ditties sung
by my Lovers at my window; there are no
frays, nor quarrels before my door; they do
not cut and slash one another anights for my
sake, as they were wont to doe: and that which most of all grieves
me, is, that I see neither penny nor farthing, nor any other present to
come within my doors. But for this, can I blame no body but my
self; my self only is in fault; for had I followed the counsel of her,
who is my true and faithful Sister, when as I brought her the other
day the news of this sad and heavy Accident, which hath brought
all this penury upon me, I had not lived alone mur'd up between
two walls; nor others loathed to have come, and seen me. The
devil (I think) makes me to morn thus for him, who, had I
been dead, would scarce, perhaps, have shed one tear for me.
Now I dare boldly say, that Arouse told me truth. Sister (quoth
she) never conceive, nor show more sorrow for the misfortune, or
death of another, then he would have done for thee. Sempronio,
had I been dead, would have been ne'er a whit the less merry, he
would not have wronged-his delights, nor abridged his pleasures.
And why then like a fool should I grieve and vex my self, for one
that is dead and gone, and hath lost his head by order of Law?
And what can I tell, whether being a choleric and hastly-hayre∣brained
fellow as he was, he might have killed me too, as well as he
did that old woman, whom I reckoned of as of mine own mother?
I will therefore by all means follow Arcusa's counsel, who knows
more of the world then I doe; and go new and then to visit her,
that I may learn something from her, how I may live another day.
O what a sweet participation will this be? what a delightful con∣uersation?
I see it is not said in vain; That of more worth is one
day of a wise man, then the whole life of a fool; I will therefore
put off my mourning weeds, lay aside my sorrow, dismiss my
tears, which have hitherto bin so ready to offer their service to my
eyes. But since that it is the very first office that we doe, as soon
as we are borne, to come crying into the world; I nothing wonder
that it is so easy to begin to cry; and so hard to leave off. But
this may teach one wit, by seeing the hurt it does to the eyes; by
seeing that good clothes and neat dressings, make a woman seem
••ire and handsome, though she be nothing so, nor so; making
her of old, young; and of young, younger. Your coloured paintings,
and your Cerusses which give women such a pure white &amp; red, what
are they, but a slimy clinging thing, a kind of bird-lime, wherewith
men are taken and ensnared? Come then thou my glass, come hi∣there
again unto me; and thou to my Antimonium; for I have too
much already wronged my eyes, &amp; almost marred my face, with my
blubbering &amp; weeping. I will on with my white Veils, my wrought
Gorgets, my gay Garments, my more pleasing Attire, and such
other apparel, as shall speak pleasure. I will presently provide
some Lye for my hair, which now through neglect, hath lost it's
bright burnished hew. And this being done, I will count my Hens, I
will make up my bed: for it glads a women's heart, to see things neat
and handsome about her. I will have all well swept and made clean
before my door, and the street that buts upon it, sprinkled with
water, as well to keep it cool, as to lay the dust; to the end, that
they who pass by, may plainly thereby perceive, that I have ba∣nisht
all grief, and shaken hands with sorrow. But fi•st of all, I will
go and visit my Cousin, to know whether Sosia have been with
her or no? And what good she hath done upon him? For I have
not seen him; since I told him that Arouse would fine speak with
him. I pray Jove, I may find her all alone; for she is seldom any
more without Gallants, then a good Tavern is without drunkards;
the door is shut, there should be no body within; I will knock,
and see. Tha, tha, tha.
Who's at door?
I pray open it; it is Elicia.
Come in, good Cousin, heaven reward you for this kind∣ness;
believe me, I think my self much beholding unto you,
that you would take the pains to come and visit me. I mary,
wench, now it is as it should be; now thou please me, thou can
not imagine what contentment my eye takes, to see that habit of
mourning and of sorrow, to be changed into garments of joy, and
of gladness; now wee will enjoy one another; wee will laugh and
be merry; now I shall have some heart to come and visit thee; thou
shalt come to my house, and I will come to thine; it may be that
Celestina's death will turn to both our goods; for I find, that it
is better now with me, then it was before; and therefore it is said,
that the dead doe open the eyes to the living; to some by wealth;
to other some by liberty, as it is with thee.
I hear some body at the door; we are too soon cut off
from our discourse, for I was about to ask you, whether Sosia had
been here or no?
No, not yet; stay, wee will talk more anon. How loud
hee knocks! I will go down and see who it is. Sure; either he is a
mad-man, or our familiar friend. Who first that knocks there?
Open the door, Mistress: its Sosia, servant to Calisto.
Now in good time: The Wolf is in the fable. Hide
your self, sister, behind these hangings, and you shall see how I
will work him; and how I will puff him up with the wind of my
fair and flattering words. And assure your self, that before we two
part, I will make him wholly ours; he shall not go hence the same
Sosia that he came; but with my smooth and enticing terms, my so•t
and gentle handling of him, I will quite vnmaw him, and draw from
him all that hee either knows concerning his Master or any body
else, as hee draws dust from his horses with his curry-combe.
What? My Sosia? My inward friend? Him whom I wish so well
unto, though perhaps he knows not of it? Him, whom I have lone∣general
to know, led only by the fame and good report, which I hear of
him? What? He that is so faithful to his Master? So good a friend
to his acquaintance? I will embrace thee (my Love) I will hug
thee in mine arms; for now that I see thee, I see report comes short;
and verily persuade my self, that there are more virtues in thee,
then I have been told of. Fame hath been too sparing of thy praise;
come (sweet heart) let vs go in, and sit down in my chamber; for
it does me good to look upon thee. O! how thou dost resemble
my unfortunate Parmeno! How lively doth thy person represent
him unto me? This is it that makes this day to shine so clear,
that thou art come to visit me. Tell me (gentle Sir) did you ever
know me before?
The fame (gentlewoman) of your gentle and sweet dis∣position
of your good graces, discretion and wisdom, flies with so
swift a wing, and in so high a pitch, through all this City, that you
need not much to marvel, if you be of more known, then know∣ing.
For there is not any man, that speaks any thing in praise
of the fairest and beautifulest in this City, but that you are ranked
in the first place, and remembered, as the prime and chiefest amongst
them all.
This poor silly fellow, this wretched son of a whore,
to see how hee exceeds himself, and speaks beyond the compass
of his common wit! hee doth not use to talk thus wisely. He that
should see him go to water his horses, riding on their bare ridge
without a Saddle, and his naked legs hanging down beneath his
Canvas frock, cut out into four quarters; and should now see
him thus handsome, and well suited, both in his cloak, and other his
clothes, it would give a man wings, and tongue; and make him
crow, as this Cockerel doth.
Your talk would make me blush, and run away for
shame, were there any body here, to hear how you play upon me.
But (as it is the fashion of all you men) you never go unprovided of
such kind of phrases as these: these false and deceitful praises are
too common amongst you; you have words moulded of purpose,
to serve your turn withal, and to suite your selves as you see cause,
to any woman whatsoever: yet for all this, am I not afraid of you,
neither will I start, or budge from you. But I must tell you (Sosia)
by the way; this praising of me thus, is more then needs, for though
thou should cōmend me, yet should I love thee. And that thereby
thou should think to gain my love, is as needless; for thou hast
gained it already. There are two things, which caused me (Sosia)
for to send for thee, entreating thee to take the pains to come and
see me; wherein if I find you to double, or dissemble with me, I
have done with you. What they are, I will leave them to your self
to relate, though I know it is for your own good, which makes
me to doe as I doe.
Heaven forbid that I should use any cogging with you, or
seek by subtlety to deceive you. I came hither upon the assurance
that I had of the great favours which you intend, and now do me; hole∣ding
my self not worthy to pull off your shoes. Do thou therefore
direct my tongue; answer thou for me to thine own questions:
for I shall ratify and confirm whatsoever thou shalt propound.
My Love, thou know how dearly I loved Parmeno.
And as it is in the Proverb, Hee that loves Beltram, loves any
thing that is his; all his friends were always welcome unto
me; his good service to his Master did as much please me, as
it pleased himself. When hee saw any harm towards Calisto,
hee did study to prevent it. Now as all this is true, so thought I it
good to acquaint thee with it. First then did I send for thee, that I
might give thee to understand how much I love thee; &amp; how much
I joy and ever shall, in this thy visiting me; nor shalt thou lose a∣ny
thing by it, if I can help it, but rather turn to thy profit and be∣nefit.
Secondly, since that I have settled my eyes, my love and affecti∣on
on thee, that I may advise thee to take heed how thou comes
in danger; and besides, to admonish thee, that thou doe not dis∣cover
thy secrers to any: For you see what ill befell Parmeno and
Sempronio, by imparting things of secrecy unto Celestina; for I would
not willingly see thee dye in such an ill fashion, as your fellow and
companion did; it is enough for me that I have bewailed one of
you already, and therefore I would have you to know, that there
came one unto me, and told me that you had discovered unto him
the love, that is betwixt Calisto and Melibea; and how hee wanne
her; and how you your self night by night went along with him;
and many other things which now I cannot call to mind. Take
heed (friend) for not to keep a secret, is proper only unto wo∣men,
yet not unto all, but such as are fools and children. Take
heed (I say) for heere-hence great hurt may come unto you: and
to this end did Nature give you two ears, and two eyes, and but
one tongue; to the end that what you see and hear, should be
double to that you speak. Take heed, and doe not think your
friend will keep your secret, when you your self cannot keep it;
when therefore thou art to go with thy Master, Calisto, to that La∣dies
house, make no noise, lest you be heard; for some have told
me, that every night you keep a coil, and cannot contain your
selves, as men transported and overjoyed.
O what busie-bodies, and what idle-headed persons be
they who abuse your ears with such frivolous tales! whosoever
told you that hee heard any such matter out of my mouth, hee told
you an untruth; and some others, perhaps, because they see me go
anights when the Moon shines, to water my horses, whisling, and
singing, and such like kind of mirth, to drive away care, and to
make me forget my toiling and my moyling, and all this before
ten a clock at night, conceive an evil suspicion; and of this
suspicion, make certaineties, and affirm that to be true, which
themselves doe falsely surmise. And Calisto is not so mad, or foo∣lish,
that at such an hour as that, he should go about a business of
so great a consequence, but that he will first be sure that all abroad
is quiet, and that every man reposes himself in the sweetness of
his first sleep: and less are you to suppose, that hee should go e∣very
night unto her; for such a duty will not endure a daily visit∣tion.
And that you may (Mistress) more manifestly see their false∣hood;
for (as the Proverb is) A liar is sooner taken, then he that
is lame; wee have not gone eight times a-month; and yet these
lying babblers stick not to avouch, we go night after night.
If you love me then (my dear Love) that I may accuse
them to their faces, and take them in the noose of their falsehood,
acquaint me with those days you determine to go thither; and
if then they shall err in their report, I shall thereby be assured of
your secrecy, and their roguery; for that being not true, which
they tell me, your person shall be secured from danger, and I freed
from any sudden fear of your life, hoping long to enjoy you.
Mistress, let vs not stand any longer upon examination of
witnesses. This very night, when the clock shall strike twelve, they
have appointed to meet by the way of the garden; to morrow, you
may ask them what they know; whereof, if any man shall give you
true notice, I will be content that hee shall scotch and notch me
for a fool.
And on which side of the garden (my sweet-heart?) be∣cause
I may contradict them the better, if I find them varying.
By the street where the fat Hostess dwells, just on the
backside of her house.
No more (good man Ragge-tayle) it is enough, we need
no more. Cursed is hee who makes such Muleteers acquainted with
his secrets. The Blockhead hath swallowed the bait; hee hath
let her vnhinge him.
Brother Sosia; this that thou hast said, shall suffice to
make known thy innocence, and their wickedness; and so a good
speed with thee: for I have some other business to dispatch, and I
fear me I have spent too much time with you.
O wise wench! O what a proper dismission, well befit∣ting
such an Ass, who hath so easily revealed his secrets.
Courteous sweet Mistress, pardon me, if my long stay
hath been troublesome unto you. And if it shall please you to ac∣cept
of my service, you shall never light upon any that shall more
willingly therein adventure his life. And so your own best wishes
attend you.
And you too. So: Are you gone, Muleteer? How proud∣lie
the Villain goes his way! I have put a trick upon you (you
Rogue) I have bored you I wise, thorough the nose; pardon me, if I
turn my back to thee, and withdraw my favour from thee. I will
have your coat soundly cudgelled for this gear. But to whom doe
I speak? Sister, come forth, tell me what dost thou think of him,
whom I sent away? Have I not handsomely played my part with
him? Thus know I how to handle such fellows; thus doe such
Asses go out of my hands, beaten and laden with blows; thus
your bashful fools, and no better do I use your discreeter men that
are timorous; and your devout persons that are passionate; and your
chaste men, when they are once set on fire. Learn of me therefore,
Cousin: for this is another kind of Art then that of Celestina; it
is a trick beyond any that she had in her budget; though she took
me for a fool, because I was content to be so accounted at her
hands. And since now that wee have squeezed the Orange, and
wrung out of this fool as much as wee desire to know; I think it
not amiss, that we go to seek out that dogs-face, at his house,
whom on Thursday last I rated so bitterly out of mine. You shall
make show, as though you were desirous to make vs friends, and
that you had earnestly entreated me to come and see him.
ELICIA, being resolved tomake Arouse and Centurio friends,
as Arouse had before instructed her, they go to Centurio's
house; where they entreat him to revenge their friends deaths
upon Calisto and Melibea, which he promises them to doe. And
as it is the nature of such Ruffians as he, not to perform what they
promise, he seeks to excuse himself, as you shall see in the sequel.
Who's at home here?
Boy, run and see: Who dares presume to
enter my house, and not first have the manners to
knock at the door? Come, come back again,
Sirrha; I now see who it is. Doe not cover your
face (Mistress) with your mantle, you cannot hide
your •elf from me. For, when I saw Elicia come in before you, I
knew she could not bring with her any bad company, nor any
news that could offend me, but rather that should please and
delight me.
If you love me (Sister) let vs not in any further; for the
Villain stands upon his pantofles, and begins to look big; think∣ing,
perhaps, that I am come to cry him mercy. Hee had rather
have such company as himself then ours; come, let vs go, for I am
the worse to look upon him; I am ready to swooned with the very
sight of such an ill-favoured face. Think you (Sister) that you have
used me well, to train me thus along to such a walk as this? Is it a
fit thing, that we should come from good company, and enter in
here to see this villainous fellow, that flayed off the skins from
dead men's faces, that hee may go disguised and unknown?
If you love me, come back again; I pray you doe not
you go, unless you mean to leave half your mantle behind you.
I will hold you fast, indeed I will not let you go.
Hold her, as you love me, hold her. Do not let her go.
I wonder, Cousin, what you mean by this? you seem
to be wiser then I am. Tell me, what man is so foolish, or so void,
of reason, that is not glad to be visited, especially by women?
Come hither, Centurio; now trust me, I swear, she shall im∣brace
thee, whether she will or no; if she will be angry, let her,
I will bear the blame of it.
Embrace him? Mary gup with a murrain! I had ra∣there
see him under the power and rigour of the Law; and had ra∣there
see him dye by the hands of his enemies, then that I should doe
the slave such a kindness. No, no, I have done with him; I have
nothing to say to him; as long as I live, he and I shall be two. And
wherein (I pray) am I so beholding unto him, that I should embrace
him? nay, so much as once vouchsafe to look upon such a profes∣sed
enemy as hee? I did but entreat him the other day, to have gone
but a little way for me about a business that did as much concern
me as my life; and doe you think that I could get him to go?
Speak him fair, entreat him, doe what I could for my life, hee still
answered me, No. And shall I embrace a Villain, that regards me
no more then so?
Command me, Mistress, in such things as I know:
exercise me in my Art, and employ me in such offices as appear∣taine
to my profession: as, to fight for you with three men at once;
or say they should be more, for your sake, I would not refuse them,
but challenge them the field. Command me to kill this or that man;
to cut off a leg or an arm; to slash any woman over the face, that
shall stand in competition with thee, and deface her beauty; such
trifles as these, shall be no sooner said, then done. But doe not (I
prithee) entreat me to walk afoot; nor to give thee any money;
for thou know! have it not. Gold and Silver will not tarry with
me; they are flinchers, they will not abide with me. I may cut
three Capers, and yet not shake one poor blarke out of my bree∣ches:
no man gives that which hee has not; you can have no more
of a Cat, then his skin. Heart and good will, but not a rag of
money. I live here in a house as you see, wherein you may throw a
bowl and meet with never a rub; all the movables that I have,
are not worth a button; my implements are such as you see here
before me; an old Jar, with a broken brim; a rusty Spit with∣out
a point; the bed wherein I lye, is bound about with hoops of
Bucklers, which I broke in fight; my feather-bed, a bundle of bro∣ken
pikes; my sheets, shirts of torn mayle; for my pillow, I have
a pouch filled with pibble-stones. And should I bestow a collation
on you, I have nothing in the world that I can pawn, save this poor
ragged and thred-bare cloak, which I have on my back.
So let me prosper, as his words doe exceedingly please
me; why, hee is as obedient to you, as a servant; hee speaks to
you like a Suppliant, and hee hath said nothing, but what is reason.
What would you more of a man? I prithee, as thou love me,
speak unto him, and lay aside your displeasure; suffer him not to
live thus sad and melancholy, but speak kindly unto him, and put
him out of his dumps, since hee offers his person so willingly to
your disposal.
Offer my self, Elicia? I swear unto thee, by the Chris∣cross
Row, by the whole Alphabet, and sillabication of the letters,
that my arm trembles, to think what I would execute for her sake;
for it is, and ever shall be my continual meditation, to study how
I may please her, but it is my unhappiness, that it never hits right.
The last night I was adream'd, that in her quarrel I challenged
four men into the field, all of them well known unto her, if I
should name them; and me thought I slew one of them; and for
the rest which fled, he that escaped best, left his left arm at my foot.
Much better should I have bestirred my self, had it been day, and
that I had been awake, if the proudest of them should have once
presumed but to have touched her shoo.
I take thee at thy word; now wee be friends; and in
good time have wee met. I here pardon what is past, but upon
condition that you revenge me upon a Gentleman, called Calisto,
who hath wronged both me, and my Cousin.
O! how I turn Renegade? How fine would I re∣new
the condition? But tell me; has hee made even with the
world?
Ell's one for that, take you no care.
Well, seeing you will have it so, let vs send him to dine
in hell, without company.
But doe you hear? Interrupt me not; Fail me not, I
advise you; this night (if you will) you may take him napping.
No more, I apprehend your meaning; I know the
whole course of his love; how hee carries himself in it; how such
and such suffered in the business: as also where you two are galled;
I know whither hee goes, at what hour, and with whom. But tell
me, how many accompany him?
Only two; and those young fellows.
This is too small a prey, too poor a pittance; my
sword will have but a short supper; it would fare far better at
some other time, then that which now you have concluded on.
No, no; this is but to shift vs off, and to excuse your not
doing it. It will not serve your turn, you must give this bone to
some other dog to pick; I must not be fed with delays; I will
see whether sayings and doings eat together at your Table; when∣there
deeds and words sit both at one board with you?
If my sword should but tell you the deeds it hath
done, it would want time to utter them. What does impeople
Church-yards but it? Who makes Surgeons rich but it? Who sets
Armourers aworke but it? Who hues, and vnriuiteth the finest
maile but it? Who drives before him, and shivers in pieces the
bucklers of Barcelona, but it? Who slices the helmets of Colatay•d, but
it? Who shreds the Casks of Almazen, as short as if they were made
of Pumpions, but it? These twenty years hath it found me food;
by means of it am I feared of men, and beloved of women, only
your self excepted; for it, the name of Centurio was given to my
Grandfather; for it, my father likewise was called Centurio, and so
am I.
But I pray, tell me, what did your sword, that your Grand∣father
should gain his name by it? Was hee by it made Captain
of a hundred men?
No, hee was made by it Champion to an hundred wo∣men.
Wee will have nothing to doe with your Pedigree, nor
famous Acts of old; if you will doe that I spake to you of, resolve
suddenly, for wee must be gone.
I long more for this night, wherein I may give you con∣tent,
then you long to be revenged. And that every thing may be
done to your good liking; make your own choice, what death you
will have him dye. For I can show you a Bead-roll (if you will see
it) wherein there are set down some seven hundred and seventy se∣uerall
sorts of deaths; which when you have seen, you may choose
that which likes you best.
If you love me (Arouse) let not this matter be put into
such a mad-mans hands; hee is too bloody for the business: and it
were better to let all alone, then that the City should receive such a
scandal; so that our second harm shall be worse then the first.
I pray content your self, Sister, hold your peace. Name
that City unto vs (if you can) which is not full of hurly-burlies,
and where some scandals doe not arise.
The affronts and disgraces which are now in request,
and wherein I am most conversant, are banging a man over the should∣ders
with a sword, having it's scabbard on; dry-beatings, without
drawing of blood; thumping him on the breast, or making his head
ring noon with the pōmell of my sword, or by falsifying of a thrust
or blow, to give him his payment where hee least looks for it. O∣theirs
I use like Siues, pricking them full of holes with my poniard;
some I cut in a large size, giving them a fearful stocada, or mortal
wound: and now and then I use my cudgel, or bastonado, that my
sword may keep holy-day, and rest it self from it's labour.
For loves sake ha done, tell vs of no more. Bastonado him,
I pray thee: for I would have him beaten, but not slain.
I swear by the whole generation of Turk and Term∣gaunt,
that it is as possible for this right arm of mine to bastona∣do
a man, and not kill him, as it is for the Sun to stand still in the
Firmament, and never move.
Sister, let not you and I sorrow for the matter; why
should wee seem to pity him? Let him doe with him what hee
will; let him kill him, as hee finds himself humoured, when hee
comes to doe the business: let Melibea weep as well as you have
done before her: and so let vs leave him. Centurio; see you give a
good account of that which is committed to your charge. Take
your own course; any way, so as you revenge vs on him, shall con∣tent
vs; but in any case take heed, that hee doe not escape without
paying for his error.
O Heavens! he is going to Pluto I warrant you already; I
will give him his passe-port, I warrant you, unless hee betake him
to his heals, and run away from me. Dearest in my affection, it
glads me to the heart, that I have this occasion offred unto me
(though it be but in a trifle) and a matter scarce worth thanks; that
you may know by this, how far I would (if occasion served) in∣force
my self for your sake.
Mars direct thy hand aright. And so farewell, for it is
time for vs to be gone.
Well, adieu. Go your ways, like a couple of head∣strong
and pertinacious whores as you be. Now will I bethink my
self, how I may excuse my self of my promise; and in such sort
too, that they may be persuaded, that I used all possible diligence
for to execute their desire, and that it was not of negligence, for the
freeing of my self from danger. I will fine my self sick: But
what will that profit me? for then they will be at me again when I
am well. Again, if I shall tell them that I have been there, and
that I forced them to fly, they will ask me who they were? how
many in number, and in what place I buckled with them? and what
apparel they wore? and by what marks I knew them to be such
and such? and the devil awhit shall I be able to tell them: And then
all the fat is in the fire. What counsel then shall I take, that may
cumply with mine own safety, and their desire? I will send for lame
Thraso, and his companions, and tell them, that because this night
I shall be otherwise employed, they would go and make a clattering
with their Swords and Bucklers in manner of a fray, for to fear, and
affright certain young men, whom they shall find in such a place,
which service was faithfully recommended unto me to execute.
This I know is a sure course, and no other hurt can follow thereup∣on,
save to make them fly, and so get them home to bed.
CALISTO, going with Sosia and Tristan to Pleberic's gar∣den
to visit his Melibea, who staid looking for him, attended by
Lucrecia; Sosia recounts unto Tristan all that which had passed
betwixt him and Arouse. Calisto remaining in the garden with
Melibea: Thraso and his companions come, sent thither by the
appointment of Centurio, for the fulfilling of that which hee had
promised to Arouse, and Elicia. Upon whom Sosia sallies forth.
Now Calisto hearing from the garden where hee remained with
Melibea, the clashing and clattering which they made, would
needs goefoorth amongst them. Which issuing forth was the cause
that his days were finished; for this is the recompense which such
Lovers receive. Whence they may learn, that it is better for them
not to love at all, then so to love.
Softly, that wee may not be heard. As wee go
from hence to Pleberio's garden, I will tell thee all (bro∣there
Tristan) that passed this day, betwixt Arouse, and
my self, taking my self now to be the happiest man
in the world. Thou shalt understand then, that upon
the good report which she heard of me, she fell ex∣tremely
in love with me, and sent me word by Elicia, that I would
doe her the kindness, as to come and speak with her. But omitting
many other speeches of good counsel, which then past between
vs, she made present show unto me, that she was now as much
mine, as ever she was Parmeno's. She requested me, that I would
continually come and visit her; and that she did not doubt, but that
she should long enjoy my love. And I swear to thee (brother) by
that dangerous way wherein wee walk, and as ever any good may
hereafter befall me, that twice or thrice it was as much as ever I
could doe for my life, to forbear from boarding her; but that ve∣rye
shame did hinder me, seeing her so fair, and so well clad, and
my self in an old Mouse-eaten cloak: still as she moved and ad∣uanced
her self, she did breathe forth a most sweet and redolent
odour of Musk; and I never stirred, or heaved my body, but I sent
forth a most rank sent of that horse-dung, which had got within
my shoes: She had a hand as white as snow, and ever and anon,
as she pulled off her glove, thou would have thought, that she had
scattered flowers of Oranges about the room; so that as well in
regard of this, as also because at that time she was somewhat busy,
I was content to defer my boldness till another day: as likewise
because all things at the first sight are not so tractable; for the
more they are communicated, the better are they understood in
their participation.
Friend Sosia, another more ripe and mature brain, and
better experimented in matters of the world then mine is, were ve∣rye
necessary to be your adviser in this business; yet as farreforth
as my tender age, and the means of my natural parts and wit shall
be able to reach unto; I will tell you what I think. This woman,
(as you told me your self) is a known and a noted whore; and there∣fore
whatsoever hath past between you, flatter not your self, but
rather believe, that her words doe not want deceit. Her offers, I
persuade me were false, though I know not to what end she made
them. If she love thee, because thou art a Gentleman; how many
better then thy self hath she rejected? If because thou art rich; she
knows well enough that thou hast no other dust, then that which
clings to the Curry-combe. If because thou art nobly descended,
and of high Linage; she knows thy name is Sosia, and so was thy
fathers; and that he was borne and bred in a poor little Hamlet,
getting his living by following the Plough-tayle, and breaking
Clods of earth, for which thy self art more fit then to make a Lo∣for.
Be wi•e, Sosia, and consider with thy self, if she doe not go
a bear•ing, to see if she could get out of thee, the secrecy of this
walk, whereby to work some heart-burning, and breed no good
blood betwixt Calisto and Pleberio, out of that envy which she bears
to Melibea's pleasure. Beware (I say:) for Envy (I tell you) is an in∣curable
infirmity, when it is once settled: she is a guest that is al∣ways
more troublesome, then thankful for her lodging, and is no∣for
merry, but at other folks miseries; nor ever laughs, but at a
shrewd turn. Now then, if this be so: O! how this wicked wo∣man
will deceive thee with her smooth and subtle words, whereof,
such as she are never to seek, but have them still ready in the deck,
and more perfect then their Pater noster? With this venomous
vice, she will not stick to damn her soul, so as she may please
her appetite; she would fine turn all things topsituruy, and set
men together by the ears, and only for to content her damnable
desire. O Ruffianly Strumpet! O mankind Queen! With what
white bread hath she given thee crooked pins, to choke thee?
She cares not now she sells and barters her body, so as she may
truck and exchange it for strife and contention. Hear me, Sosia,
and if thou doest as thou may presume upon it, that it is as I tell
thee, deal (if thou wilt be advised by me) as doubly with her; for
he that deceives the deceiver, you know what I mean: and if
the Fox be crafty, more crafty is hee that catches him. I would
have thee make a counter-mine against these her wicked, and devil∣lish
imaginations. Set up scaling ladders to meet with her lewd∣ness;
and then cry quittance with her, when she thinks her self
most safe and secure; and laugh at her afterwards, when thou art
by thy self all alone in thy stable: the bay horse thinks one thing,
and hee that saddles him, another.
O Tristan! thou discreet young man; more hast thou
spoken then could be expected from one of thy years. A shrewd
suspicion hast thou raised in me, and I fear me too true; but be∣cause
wee are hard by the garden, and our Master is close at our
heals, let vs break off this discourse, which is too large for the pre∣sent,
and defer it to some fitter opportunity.
Doe you hear there? Set up the ladder, and see you
make no noise; for me thinks I hear my Mistress tongue. Sure
it is she, she is talking to some body, who ever it be. I will get me
up to the top of the wall, and there will I stand harkening awhile, to
see if I can hear from her any good token of her love to me, in
this my absence.
Sing on (Lucrecia) if thou love me; I prithee sing on;
for it does my heart good to hear thee; sing on, I say, till my
Lord come. Be not too loud, and let vs go aside into this greene
walk, that they that pass by may not hear vs.
O that I kept the Key,
Which ops to these fair flowers,
To pluck them day by day,
When you doe leave these bowers.
The Lilies and the Roses,
Put on their newest colours,
And when thy Love reposes,
They breathe their freshest odours.
O how sweet is thy music to mine ears! it makes my
heart even to melt and dissolve for joy. I prithee give not over.
Sweet is the fount, the place,
I drank at, being dry;
More sweet Calisto's face,
In Melibea's eye.
And though that it be night,
His sight my heart will cheer,
And when hee down shall light,
O how I'll clip my Dear!
The Wolf for joy doth leap,
To see the Lambkins move,
The Kid joys in the teat,
And thou ioy'st in thy Love.
Never was loving wight,
Of's friend desired so;
Ne'er Walks of more delight,
Nor nights more free from woe.
Friend Lucrecia, me thinks, I see that which thou sin∣gest,
represented most lively unto me; me thinks, I see him as per∣fectly
with these mine eyes, as if hee stood just before me. Go on;
for thou dost exceeding well, and with an excellent Ayre: I will
bear a part with thee, and help thee as well as I can.
Sweet trees who shade this mold
Of earth, your heads down bend,
When you those eyes behold
Of my best-loued friend.
Fair stars whose bright appear,
Doth beautify the sky,
Why wake ye not my Dear,
If he asleeping lie?
Hear me now, I prithee; I will sing alone.
You birds, whose warblings prove
Aurora draws near,
Go fly, and tell my Love,
That I expect him here.
The night doth posting move,
Yet comes hee not again;
God grant some other Love
Doe not my Love detain.
The sweetness of thy voice hath ravished me; I cannot
endure to let thee live any longer in a pained expectation. O my
sweet Mistress, and my lifes happiness; what woman could ever be
borne into the world, that should be able to deprive thee of thy
great deseruingnesse? O interrupted melody! O music suddenly
broke oft! O short-timed pleasure! O my dear heart, why did
thou not continue thy harmony, without interrupting thy joy, and
cumplying with both our desires?
O pleasing treason; O sweete-sudden passion! What?
my Lord? my soul; Is it hee? I cannot believe it; where hast
thou been, thou bright shining Sun? In what place hast thou
hid thy brightness from me? Is it not a pretty while since that thou
heard me? Why did thou suffer me to send forth my words in∣to
the Ayre, senseless and foolish as they were, and in this hoarse
Swinish voice of mine? look on the Moon, and see how bright
she shines upon vs: look on the Clouds, and see how speedily
they rack away: harken to the gurgling waters of this fountain:
how sweet a murmur, and what a pretty kind of purling they make,
rushing along these fresh herbs, and pleasant flowers: harken to
these high Cypresses, how one bough makes peace with another by
the intercession of a mild, gentle, &amp; temperate wind, which moves
them to and fro. Behold these silent and quiet shades, how dark
they are, and how excellently well prepared for the covering and
concealing of our sports. Lucrecia? why, how now friend? what
are you doing? art thou turned mad with pleasure? Let me alone
with my Love; touch him not, I charge you; doe not you pluck
and hale him from me; doe not burden his body with your heavy
arms. Let me enjoy what is mine, you shall not possess any part
of my pleasure.
Dear Lady, and glory of my life; if you love me, give
not over your singing; let not my presence, which glads thee, be of
a worse, and more unfortunate condition, then my absence which
did grieve thee.
Why (my Love) would you have me sing? or how
can I sing? for my desire of thee, was that which ruled my voice,
and made me to ayre my notes. But now that thou art come, that
desire disappears, it is vanished, and the Tone of my voice dis∣tempered,
and out of tune. And because you, Sir, are the pattern
of curtsy and good behaviour, how can you in reason require my
tongue to speak, when as you cannot rule your own hands, and
keep them quiet? Why doe not you forget these tricks, and learn
to leave them? Lay your command upon them to be quiet, and will
them to lay aside this offensive custom, and consider (my dearest)
that as to see thee, whilst thou carry thy self quietly and civilly,
is the greatest happiness that either my heart or my eye can enjoy;
so is it as displeasing unto me, to see thee handle me so roughly. Thy
honest sporting pleases me, but thy dishonest hands offend me,
especially when they are too far out of reason. And, though love
ofttimes forget reason, yet amongst your well-educated, and noble
and generous spirits, kindness keeps a decorum, and revels not
but with decency; let such (Sweet-heart) be our embraces, such and
so modest be our dalliance (my dearest Calisto, my Love, my Lord.)
And since I wholly subject my self to your pleasure; be it your plea∣sure,
to take &amp; make such worthy benefit of my affection, presence
and service, as best beseems true Lovers, and is agreeable to both
our high births and breeding. But alas silly woman, why should I
direct you? No, I will not, Doe, Calisto, doe what you will, and say
what you will, I am yours to use; please your self, and you shall
please me.
Madame, ferueney of love loves not to be idle; pardon
then, I pray you, if I have been too busy.
Now never trust me again, if I harken to them any
longer. Heir's a life indeed! O how I feel my self melt with∣in,
like snow against the Sun; and how squeamish my Mistress
seems, because, forsooth, she would fine be entreated! Issue∣redly,
had I been in her case, and have lost so much time, I should
think the worse of my self the longest day of my life.
Sir, shall I send Lucrecia to fetch you some sweet-meats?
No, Lady; no other sweet-meats for me, save only to
embrace this thy body, to fold it within mine arms, and to have the
possession of thy beauty. Every where a man may eat and drink
for his money; that a man may have at any time; it is every where to
be bought: but that which is not vendible, that which in all the
world is not to be matched; and save only in this garden, not to
be found again from one Pole to the other. Why wish you me not
rather that I should not let slip the least moment, in enjoying so
sweet a treasure?
My head aches with hearing; and yet their tongues ache
not with talking, nor their arms with colling, nor their lips with
kissing. Sure, they will make me gnaw the finger of my glove all
to pieces.
O my dear Mistress! I could wish it would never be
day, that I might still enjoy that sweet happiness, and fullness of
content, which my senses receive in the noble conversing with this
thy delicate, and dainty sweet Self.
Sir, it is I that enjoy this happiness, this fullness of
content. If any body gain by it, it is I; and I must acknowledge
my self most infinitely beholding unto you, that you would vouch∣safe
to visit me in so kind and loving a manner, as no thanks are
able to requite so great a favour.
Out, you Ruffianly Rascals; come ye to fright those that
fear you not? Had I bin ware of your coming, or had you staid
any longer, I would have sent some of you packing, and have given
you somewhat that should have stuck by you• Out, you Rogues.
Madame, this is Sosia's voice; suffer me to go and see,
that they doe not kill him, for there is no body with him but a little
Page that came with me. Give me my cloak quickly, it lies under
you.
O unfortunate that I am! I pray do not go without your
Curaces. If you love me, come back; I will help to arm you my self.
That (Mistress) which a sword, a cloak, and a good heart
cannot doe, can never be effected by Curace, Cask or Cowardice.
Yea? are you come again? I shall be with you to bring
by and by; you come for wool, doe you? But if you stay a little
longer, I shall send you home without a fleece, I shall plume you, I
shall, you Rascals.
Lady, if you love me, let me go. The ladder stands
ready for me.
O miserable me! Why dost thou go so furiously, and
so fast? and all disarmed as thou art, to hazard thy life amongst
thou know not whom? Lucrecia, come hither quickly; for Ca∣listo
is gone to thrust himself into a quarrel. Let vs take his Cura∣ces,
and throw them over the wall; for he hath left them here be∣hind
him.
Stay, Sir, doe not come down. They are gone; it
is no body but lame Thraso, and a company of other Rogues with
him, that made a noise as they past by: And Sosia is come back a∣gain.
Take heed, Sir, hold fast by the ladder, for fear lest you fall.
Oh, oh. Look upon me. Ay me! I am a dead man: oh.
Come hither quickly, Sosia; for our unfortunate Master
is fallen from the ladder, and neither speaks nor wags.
Master, Master, doe you hear, Sir? Let vs call a little at
this other door. Hee hears on neither ear; hee is as dead as a
doore-nayle; there is no more life in him, then in my great
grand-father, who died some hundred years since. O foul mis∣hap!
What will become of vs?
Hark, hark, Madame! what a great mischance is this?
O wretch that I am! what doe I hear?
O, my Master, my master is dead! and with him all
my happiness, all my good; hee is fallen headlong down; hee is
dead; hee is dead: and (which is a fearful thing) suddenly dead.
O pitiful, pitiful, O horrible sight. Help Sosia, help to gather
up these brains, that lye scattered here amongst the stones, and
let vs put them again into his head. O unfortunate Master! O un∣lucky
day! O sudden and unexpected end!
O disconsolate woman that I am! What a thing is this?
What vile mishap, that hath thus disturbed our quiet? What mis∣chance
can possibly prove so cruel, as that which I now hear? Help
me (Lucrecia) to get up this wall, that I may see my sorrow, unless
you will have me fill my fathers house with cries and skrikes.
What? Is all my joy turned into smoke? Is all my pleasure lost?
All my glory come to an end?
Tristan, wha'ts the matter (my Love) why dost thou
weep so bitterly? why take you on so, beyond all measure &amp; reason?
I bewail my great misery; I bewail my many sor∣rows.
My Master Calisto hath fallen from the ladder, and is dead;
his head is in three pieces; hee dyed suddenly, and lamentably
torn and dashed to pieces; bear this sad message to his new friend,
that she must never more expect her pained Lover. Sosia, doe thou
take up his feet, and let vs carry his body hence, that hee may not
in this place suffer dishonour, though hee have suffered death. Let
mourning go along with vs; let solitariness accompany vs; let
discomfort waite upon vs; let sorrow apparel vs; let mourning
weeds cover vs; and let vs put on sad habits.
Ay me, of all other the most miserable! So short a time,
to possess my pleasure? so soon, to see my sorrows come upon me?
Madame, tear not your face; rent not your hair:
What? but even now all pleasure? and now all sorrow? Out alas!
that one, and the selfsame Planet should so suddenly afford an
effect so contrary? where is your courage? Fie, what a faint heart
have you? pray you arise from the ground; let not your father find
you in so suspicious a place: for if you continue thus, you cannot
choose but be heard. Why, Madame, Madame, I say hear you me?
Doe you hear, Lady? Of all loves, do not fall any more into these
swounds. Be as valiant and courageous in enduring your sorrow, as
you were hot and hardy in committing your error.
Hear you what moan his poor servants make?
hear you how woefully they lament his loss? wailing, and weeping,
praying, and answering each to other, they carry away from me all
my good, all my happiness; my dead joy, my dearest Love, they
carry away from me; my time is come; I am but a dead woman; I
can live no longer, since I may no more enjoy the joy of my heart.
O that I should let thee go! that I should hold that Jewel no faster
which I so lately held in my hands. O ungrateful mortals! O un∣thankful
as wee be, who never know our happiness, until wee
want it!
Up, up, Madame; for it will be a greater dishonour unto
you, to be found thus here in the garden, then either the pleasure
you received by his coming, or the sorrow which you take for
his death. Come, let vs into your chamber. And go lay you down
on your bed; and I will call your father. Wee will feign some
other ill, since to hide this, it is impossible.
LVCRECIA comes to Pleberio's chamber, and knocks at the
door. Pleberic asks her what's the matter? Lucrecia in∣treats
him to come presently to see his daughter Melibea. Plebe∣rio
rises, and goes straight to Melibea's chamber. Hee comforts
her; demanding what she ails? and where was her grief?
Melibea feigns her pain to be about her heart. Melibea sends
her father forth for some musical Instruments. She and Lucrecia
get them, when hee was gone, to the top of a Tower. She sends a∣way
Lucrecia, and shuts the door after her. Her father comes to
the foot of the Tower, Melibea discovers unto him all the whole
business of what had passed. That done, she throws her self down
from the top of the Tower.
What would you, Lucrecia. What means
this exceeding haste, and with so great importu∣nity,
and troublednesse of mind? What ails
my daughter? What sudden sickness hath seized
on her, that I cannot have the leisure to put on my
clothes? nay, scarce so much time as to rise?
Sir, if you will see her alive, come quickly.
What her grief is, I know not; Nay, scarce know I her,
so disfigured is her face.
Come, let vs go quickly; lead the way; in before; lift
up the hangings; open this same window; set it wide open, that I
may have light enough to take a full view of her. Why, how now
daughter? What's the matter? What is your pain? Where lies
it? What a strange thing is this? What faintness doe I see? What
weakness and feebleness? Look upon me, daughter! I am thy
father: Speak unto me, for pities sake speak; and tell me the
cause of your grief, that wee may the sooner provide a remedy.
Send not my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave; thou know
I have no other good but thee; no other worldly happiness. Open
thy gladsome eyes; look cheerfully upon me.
Ay me! What shall I doe?
What woe can equal mine, to see thee in such woeful
plight? Your mother, as soon as ever she but heard you were ill,
fell presently into a swooned, and lies in that extremity, and in a man∣ner
senseless, that she is not able to come and see thee. Be of good
cheer, pluck up thy heart; and so raise up thy spirits, that thou
may rise and go along with me to visit her. Tell me (sweet
soul) the cause of thy sorrow.
My cure is remediless.
My dear daughter, the best beloved of thy aged fa∣there;
for pities sake, let not this thy cruel torment, cause thee to
despair of recovery, being carried away with the violence and in∣firmity
of thy passion: for sorrow still assaulteth the weakest hearts,
and conquers them most, that are most cowardly: if thou wilt but
tell me thy grief, it shall presently be remedied; for neither physic
nor Physicians, nor servants shall be wanting, for the recovery of
thy health, whether it consist in herbs, in stones, or in words, or
remain more secret in the bodies, and bowels of beasts. Doe not
then vex me any more; torment me no longer; force me not out
of my wits; make me not mad, but tell me, good daughter, what,
and where is your pain?
I feel a mortal wound, even in the very midst of my heart,
the anguish whereof is so grievous unto me, that it will scarce suf∣fer
me to fetch my breath, much less to speak: there is no ma∣lady
like unto mine; it is of a different nature from all other diseases.
And before you can come to cure it in my heart, you must first take
out my heart; for it lies even in the hidden and most secret place
thereof.
Too too soon hast thou received this feeling and sense
of elder years; youth should be a friend to pleasure and mirth, and
an enemy unto care and sorrow. Rise then from hence, and let vs
go and take some fresher ayre along by the River side; come, and
make merry with your mother; you shall see, that will ease and rid
away your pain. Take heed what you doe; doe not wilfully cast
away your self; for if you fly and shun mirth, there is not
any thing in the world more contrary to your disease.
Let vs go whither you please: and if it stand with your
liking, Sir, let vs go up to the top of the Leads; for from thence I
may enjoy the pleasing sight of those Ships that pass to and fro, and
perhaps it may give some ease to my grief.
Come, let vs go and take Lucrecia with vs.
With a very good will. I pray (father) will you cause
some musical instrument to be sent unto me, that by playing there∣on,
or singing thereunto, I may see if I can drive away this grief;
for though on the one side, the force and violence thereof doth
much torment me; yet on the other side, I doubt not but those
sweet sounding Instruments and delightful harmony, will much
lossen and mitigate my sorrow.
This (daughter) shall presently be done: I will go
my self, and will it to be provided.
Friend Lucrecia, this place (me thinks) is too high; I
am very loath to leave my fathers company. I prithee make a step
down unto him, and entreat him to come to the foot of this Tower;
for I have a word or two, which I forgot to tell him, that he should
deliver from me to my mother.
I go, Madame.
They have all of them left me. I am now alone by my
self, and no body with me. The manner of my death falls fit and
pat to my mind; it is some ease unto me, that I and my beloved
Calisto shall so soon meet again. I will shut and make fast the door,
that no body may come up to hinder my death, nor disturb my de∣parture,
nor to stop me in my journey, wherein I purpose to post un∣to
him; not doubting, but to visit him as well this very day, as he did
me this last night. All things fadge aright, and have fallen out as
luckily, as I could wish it; I shall now have time and leisure e∣nough,
to recount to my father Pleberio, the cause of this my short
and sudden end. I confess, I shall much wrong his silver hairs,
and offer much injury to his elder years; I shall work great wo unto
him by this my error; I shall leave him in great heaviness and
desolation all the days of his life: But admit my death will be the
death of my dearest parents, and put case, that the shortening of my
days, will be the shortening of theirs; who doth not know, but that
others have been more cruel to their parents then I am? Prusias,
King of Bythinia, without any cause, not enduring that pain, which
I doe, slew his own father Ptolomy, King of Egypt, slew both father
and mother, and brother and wife, and all for the love of his Mistress.
Orestes killed his mother, Clytemnestar, and that cruel Emperor Narrow,
only for the fulfilling of his pleasure, murdered his own mother.
These, and such as they, are worthy of blame. These are true Par∣ricides;
not I; who with mine own punishment, and with mine
own death, purge away the guilt, which otherwise, they might
more justly lay upon me for their deaths. There have been others,
far more cruel, who have slain their own children, and their own
brothers, in comparison of whose errors, mine is as nothing; at
least nothing so great. Philip, King of Macedon; Herod, King of In∣ryne;
Constantine, Emperor of Rome; Laodice, Queen of Cappado∣cea;
and Medea the Sorceress; all these slew their own sons and
dearest children, and that without any reason or just cause, preser∣uing
their own persons still in safety. To conclude, that great
cruelty of Phr•ates, King of the Parthians, occurs to my remem∣bronco,
who, because hee would have no successor behind him,
murdered Orodes, his aged father, as also his only son, besides
some thirty more of his brethren. These were delicts worthy blame
indeed; because they keeping their own persons free from peril,
butchered their Ancestors, their successors, and their brethren.
True it is, that though all this be so, yet are we not to imitate them
in those things wherein they did amiss; but it is not in my power
to doe otherwise. And thou great Governor of the heavens, who
art witness to my words, thou see the small power that I have o∣for
my passion; thou see how my liberty is captivated, and how
my senses are taken with that powerful love of that late deceased
Gentleman, who hath deprived me of that love, which I bear to
my living parents.
Daughter Melibea, what make you there alone?
what is it you would you have with me? shall I come up to you?
No (good father) content you where you are, trouble
not your self▪ nor strive to come to me; you shall but disturb and
interrupt that short speech which I am now to make unto you.
Now, by and by shalt thou be suddenly wounded; thy heart shall
presently be pricked with grief, and shall bleed abundantly, to see
the death of thy only daughter. My end draws near; at hand is
my, rest, and thy passion▪ my ease, and thy pain; my hour of keep∣ing
company and thy time of solitariness. You shall not need (my
most honoured father) to seek out any instruments of music to as∣swag
my sorrow; nor use any other sound, save the sound of bells,
for to ring my knell, and bring my body to the grave. And, if
thou can harken unto me for tears, if thine eyes will give thine
cares leave to hear, thou shalt hear the desperate cause of this my
forced, yet joyful departure; see thou neither speak nor weep;
interrupt me••ot, either with tears or words, unless thou mean
more hereafter to be tormented, in not knowing why I doe kill my
self, then thou art now sorrowful to see my death. Neither ask,
nor answer me any thing; nor question me any further, then what
of mine own accord I shall willingly tell thee; for when the heart
is surcharged with sorrow, the ear is deaf to good counsel; and
at such a time, good and wholesome words rather incense, then allay
rage. Hear (my aged father) the last words that ever I shall speak
unto you. And if you entertain them, as I hope you will, you will
rather excuse, then condemn my error. I am sure, you both well
perceive and hear that most sad and doleful lamentation, which is
made thorowout all this City; I am sure you hear this great noise
and ringing of bells, the skriking and cryings out of all sorts of peo∣ple,
this howling, and barking of dogs, this noise and clatte∣ring
of Armour. Of all this, have I been the cause; I, even this
very day, have clothed the greater part of the Knights, and Gentle∣men
of this City in mourning. I, even this very day, have left ma∣ny
servants orphaned, and quite destitute of a Master. I have been
the cause, that many a poor soul hath now lost it's alms and re∣lief.
I have been the occasion, that the dead should have the com∣pany
of the most complete Gentleman, for his good graces and qua∣lites
that ever was borne. I have been the occasion, that the living
have lost the only Pattern and Paragon of curtsy, of gallant in∣uentions,
of witty devices, of neatness and decency in his clothes,
of speech, of gate, of kindness, and of virtue. I have been the oc∣cession,
that the earth doth now enjoy the most noble body, and the
freshest flower of youth, that ever was created in this age of ours.
And because you may stand amazed and astonished at the sound
of these my unusual and unaccustomed crimes; I will open the
business, and make this matter appear more clear unto you.
It is now (dear father) many days since that a Gentleman called
Calisto, whom you well knew, as likewise his Ancestors, and noble
Linage, did languish and pine away for my love. As for his virtues
and goodness, they were generally known to the whole world.
So great was his loue-torment, and so little both place and oppor∣tunity
to speak with me, that he was driven to discover his passion
to a crafty and subtle woman, named Celestina, which Celestina, com∣ming
as a suitor unto me in his behalf, drew my secret love from
forth my bosom, and made me to manifest that unto her, which I
concealed from mine own mother; she found the means to win me
to her will; she made the match between vs; she plotted how
his desire and mine should take effect. And if hee dearly loved me,
I was not therein deceived; she made up that sad conclusion of
that sweet and unfortunate execution of his will; and thus being
ouer-come with the love of Calisto, I gave him entrance into your
house; hee scaled your walls with ladders, and brake into your gar∣den;
brake my chaste purpose, by taking from me the flower of
my Virginity. And thus almost this month have wee lived in this
delightful error of love. And as he came this lastnight unto me,
as hee was wont to doe, even just about the time that he should have
returned home (as ill fortune would have it, who in the mutability
of her nature, ordered and disposes all things, according to her
disordered custom) the walls being high, the night dark, the lad∣der
light and weak, his servants that brought it, unacquainted with
that kind of service, hee going down somewhat hastily to see a
fray, which he heard in the street between his servants and some
others that then passed by, being in choler, making more haste
then good speed, thinking he should never come soon enough, not
eyeing well his steps, he sets his foot quite besides the rounds, and so
fell down, and with that woeful and unfortunate fall, hee pitched
upon his head, and had his brains beaten out, and dashed in pieces a∣against
the stones and pavement of the street. Thus did the desti∣niece
cut off his thread; thus cut off his life without confession; cut
off my hope; cut off my glory; cut off my company. Things
therefore being thus; tell me (father) What cruelty were it in me,
he dying disbrained, that I should live pained all the days of my
life? His death inuiteth mine; inuiteth? nay, enforces me, that
it be speedily effected, and without delay; it teaches me, that I
should also fall headlong down, that I may imitate him in all things.
It shall not be said of me, that those that are dead and gone, are
soon forgotten. And therefore I will seek to content him in my
death, since I had not time to give him content in my life. O my
Love, and dear Lord, Calisto, expect me, for now I come. But
stay a little, though thou dost expect me; and be not angry, I
prithee, that I delay thee, being that I am now paying my last
debt, and giving it my final account to my aged father, to whom
I owe much more. O my best beloved father, I beseech you, if ever
you did love me in this painful forepassed life, that we may both
be interred in one Tomb, and both our Obsequies be solemnised
together. I would fine speak some words of comfort unto you,
before this my gladsome and well-pleasing end, gathered and col∣lected
out of those ancient books, which for the bettering of my
wit and understanding, you willed me to read, were it not that my
memory fails me, being troubled and disquieted with the loss and
death of my Love: as also because I see your ill endured tears
trickle so fast down your wrinkled cheeks. Recommend me to
my most dear and best-beloued mother; and doe you inform her
at large of the doleful occasion of my death. I am glad with all my
heart, that she is not here present with you; for her sight would
but increase my sorrow. Take (aged father) the gifts of old
age; for in large days, large griefs are to be endured. Receive the
pledge and earnest of thy reverend age; receive it at the hands of
thy beloved daughter. I sorrow much for my self, more for
you, but most for my aged mother: and so I recommend me to you
both, and both of you unto your more happiness, to whom I of∣fer
up my soul; leaving the care to you, to cover this body that
is now coming down unto you.
PPLEBERIO, returning weeping to his chamber; his wife Alice
demands the cause of this so sudden an ill? Hee relates unto her
the death of her daughter Melibea; showing unto her, her bruised
body, and so making lamentation for her, hee gives a conclusion to
this Tragic Comedy.
Why Pleberio? my Lord! what's the matter?
why doe you weep and snob? and take on in such
extreme and violent manner? I have lain ever since
in a dead swooned, so was I overcome with grief,
when I heard that our daughter was so ill. And
now hearing your pitiful lamentations, your loud
cryings, your unaccustomed complaints, your mornings and great
anguish, they have so pierced my very bowels, made so quick a
passage to my heart, and have so quickened and revived my troubled
and benumbed senses, that I have now put away the grief, which
I entertained: thus one grief drives out another; and sorrow expel∣leth
sorrow. Tell me the cause of your complaint; Why doe you
curse your honourable old age? Why do you desire death? Why doe
you tear your milke-white hairs up by the roots? Why doe
you scratch, and rend your reverend face? Is any ill befallen Me∣libea?
For I pray you tell me; for if she be not well, I can∣not
live.
Out alas! Ay me; (my most noble wife.) Our so∣lace
is in the suds; our joy is turned into annoy; all our conceived
hopes are utterly lost; all our happiness is quite overthrown; let
vs now no longer desire to live. And because unexpected sorrows
leave a greater impression of grief; and because they may bring
thee the sooner to thy grave; as also, that I may not alone by my
self bewail that heavy loss which belongs to vs both; look out
and behold her, whom thou broughtst forth, and I begot, dished and
broken all to pieces. The cause I understood from her self, but
laid open more at large, by this her sad and sorrowful servant.
Help to lament these our latter days, which are now growing to an
end. O ye good people, who come to behold my sorrows, and
you Gentlemen, my loving friends, doe you also assist to bewail
my misery! O my daughter! and my only good! it were cruelty
in me, that I should out-liue thee. My threescore years were fit∣la
for the grave, then thy twenty; but the order of my dying was
altered by that extremity of grief, which did hasten thy end. O ye
my boary hairs, grown forth to no other end, save sorrow; it
would better have suited with you, to have been buried in the
earth, then with these golden tresses which lye here before me.
Too too many are the days that I have yet to live; I will com∣plain
and cry out against death; I will accuse him of delay; how
long will hee suffer me to remain here after thee! Let my life
now leave me, since I must leave thy sweet company. O my dear
wife, rise up from her, and if any life be left in thee, spend that
little with me in tears and lamentations, in sobs, and in sighs;
but in case thy soul rests now with hers; if out of very grief,
thou hast left this life, why would thou lay this heavy burden on
me? why let me remain here alone, and have no body to help
me in the unsheathing of my sorrows? In this, ye women have a
great advantage of vs that are men; for some violent grief can
make you go out of the world without any pain; or at least cast
you into a swooned, which is some ease to your sorrows. O the hard
heart of a father, why dost thou not burst with grief? why doe not
your heart-strings crack in sunder, to see thy self bereaved of thy be∣loved
heir? For whom did thou build these Turrets? For whom
got I honours? For whom planted trees? For whom built ships?
O hard-hearted earth, why dost thou bear me any longer? Where
shall my disconsolate old age find any resting place? O variable
fortune, and full of change, thou Ministresse, and high Stewardesse
of all temporal happiness; Why did thou not execute thy cruel
anger upon me? Why did thou not overwhelm him with thy
mutable waives, who professes himself to be thy subject? Why
did thou not rob me of my patrimony? Why did thou not set
fire on my house? Why did thou not lay waste mine inheritance?
Why did thou not strip me of my great revenues? What is it
I would not thou should have done, so as thou had left me that
flourishing young plant, over which thou ought not to have had
such power? Thou might, O fortune (fluctuant, and fluent as thou
art) have given me a sorrowful youth, and a mirthful age; neither
have therein perverted order. Better could I have borne thy blow,
better endured thy persecutions, in that my more strong, and Oaky
age, then in this my weak and feeble declining. O life fulfilled with
grief, and accompanied with nought but misery! O world, world!
much have men spoken of thee, much have men writ concerning
thy deceits; and much have I heard my self: And mine own wo∣full
experience is able to say something of thee, as one who have bin
in the unfortunate fair, and have often bought and sold with thee,
but never had any thing that succeeded happily with me. As one
who many a time heretofore, even to this present hour, have silen∣ced
thy false properties, and all because I would not purchase thy
displeasure, and pull thy hatred upon me: and that thou should
not untimely pluck this flower from me, which this day thou hast
cropped by the mightiness of thy power. And therefore now will I
go without fear, like one that hath nothing to lose; or as one to
whom thy company is now odious and troublesome; or like a
poor traveller, who fearless of thieves, goes singing on his way.
I thought in my more tender years, that both thou and thy actions
were governed by order, and ruled by reason: But now I see thou
art Pro and Con; there is no certainty in thy calms: thou seem
now unto me to be a Labyrinth of errors; a fearful wilderness;
an habitation of wilde Beasts; a Dance full of changes; a Fen full
of mire, and dirt; a Country full of thorns; a steep and craggy
mountain, a field full of stones; a meadow full of Snakes and Ser∣pents;
a pleasant garden to look to, but without any fruit; a
fountain of cares, a river of tears, a sea of miseries; trouble with∣out
profit; a sweet poison, a vain hope, a false joy, and a true sor∣row.
O thou false world! thou dost cast before vs the baits of thy
best delights, and when we have swallowed them, they seeming sa∣uoury
unto vs, then doest thou show vs the hook that must choke
vs. Nor can we avoid it, because together with vs, thou dost cap∣tiuate
our wills: Thou promise mountains, but performest
Mole-hils: and then thou dost cast vs off, that wee may not
put thee in mind of making good thy vain promises. We run
thorough the spacious fields of thy rank vices, retchles•y, and with
a loose reyne; and then doest thou discover thy ambushes unto vs,
when thou see there is no way forvs to retreat. Many have forsaken
thee, fearing thy sudden forsaking of them. And well may they stile
themselves happy, when they shall see, how well thou hast rewar∣ded
this poor heavy sorrowful old man, for his long service. Thou
dost put out our eyes, and then to make vs amends, thou anointest
the place with oil: thou break our head, and gives vs a plaster;
after thou hast done vs a great deal of harm, thou gives vs a poor
cold comfort; thou dost hurt unto all, that no man may boast, that
others have not their crosses as well as wee; telling them, that it is
some ease to the miserable, to have companions in their misery.
But I alas, disconsolate old man stand all alone. I am singular in my
sorrows; I am grieved, and have no equal companion of my grief.
No mans misfortune is like unto mine; though I revolve in my
troubled memory, persons both present and past, I cannot instance
in the like. If I shall seek to comfort my self with the severity and
patience of Paulus Aemilius, who having lost two sons in seven
days, bore this brunt of fortune with so undaunted a courage, that
the people of Rome had rather need to be comforted by him, then
he by them; yet cannot this satisfy me, for hee had two more re∣maining
that were his adopted sons. What companion then will
they allot me of my misery? Pericles, that brave Athenian Captain?
or valiant Xenophon? Tush, they lost sons indeed, but their sons
dyed out of their sight, having lost their lives abroad in foreign
Countries, far from home; so that it was not much for the one, not
to change countenanee, but to take it cheerfully: nor for the other
to answer the messenger, who brought him the ill tidings of his
sons deaths, that he should receive no punishment, because him∣self
had received no grief; for all this is far differing from mine;
less can thou say (thou world replenished with evil) that Anaxa∣gores,
and I, were alike in our loss; that wee were equal in our
griefs: and that I should say of my dead daughter, as he did of his
only son, when he said; Being that I was mortal, I knew, that
he whom I had begot was to die. For my Melibea, willingly, and out
of her own election, killed her self before mine eyes, enforced
thereunto through the extreme passion of her love, so great was
her torment; whereas his son was slain in battle, in a just and
lawful war. O incomparable loss; O most wretched and sor∣rowfull
old man that I am! who the more I seek after comfort, the
less reason doe I find for my comfort; for much more miserable
doe I find my misfortune, and doe not so much grieve at her death,
as I doe lament the manner of her death. Now shall I lose together
with thee (most unhappy daughter) those fears, which were dai∣lie
wont to affright me. Only thy death is that which makes me
secure of all suspicions and jealousies. What shall I doe, when I
shall come into thy chamber, and thy withdrawing room, and shall
find it solitary and empty? What shall I doe, when as I shall call
thee, and thou shalt not answer me? Who is he that can supply that
want which thou hast caused? Who can stop up that great breach in
my heart which thou hast made? Never any man did lose that which
I have lost this day. Though in some sort, that great fortitude of Lam∣bas
de Auria, Duke of Genoa, seems to suit with my present estate
and condition, who seeing his son was wounded to death, took
him and threw him with his own arms forth of the ship into
the sea. But such kind of deaths as these, though they take away
life, yet they give reputation; and many times, men are enforced to
undergo such actions, for to cumply with their honour, and get
themselves fame and renown. But what did enforce my daughter
to dye, but only the strong force of love? What remedy now,
(thou flattering world) wilt thou afford my wearisome age? How
would thou have me to rely upon thee, I knowing thy falsehoods,
thy gins, thy snares, and thy nets, wherein thou intrap'st and take
our weak and feeble wills? Tell me, what hast thou done with my
daughter? where hast thou bestowed her? who shall accompany my
disaccompanied habitation? who shall cherish me in mine old age?
who with gentle usage shall cocker my decaying years? O Love,
Love, I did not think thou had had the power to kill thy subjects!
I was wounded by thee in my youth: did pass thorough the midst of
thy flames. Why did thou let me scope? Was it that thou might
pay me home (for my flying from thee then) in mine old age? I had
well thought, that I had bin freed from thy snares, when I once be∣began
to grow towards forty; and when I rested contented with my
wedded consort, and when I saw I had that fruit, which this day
thou hast cut down, I did not dream that thou would in the i will∣drone
have taken vengeance of the parents; and I know not whether
thou wound with the sword, or burnest with fire. Thou leave
our clothes whole, and yet most cruelly wound our hearts; thou
make that which is foul, to seem fair and beautiful unto vs.
Who gave thee so great a power? who gave thee that name which
so ill befitted thee? If thou were Love, thou would love thy ser∣uants;
and if thou did love them, thou would not punish them as
thou dost. If to be thy fellow, were to live merrily, so many would
not kill themselves, as my daughter now hath, &amp; infinite of vs. What
end have thy servants and their Ministers had? as also that false
Bawd, Celestina, who died by the hands of the faithfullest company∣once,
that ever she lighted upon in her life, for their true performance
in this thy venomous &amp; empoisoned service? They lost their heads;
Calisto, he brake his neck; and my daughter, to imitate him, submit∣ted
her self to the selfsame death. And of all this thou wast the
cause; they gave thee a sweet name; but thy deeds are exceeding
sour: thou dost not give equal rewards; and that Law is unjust,
which is not equal alike unto all. Thy voice promises pleasure, but
thy actions proclaim pain; happy are they who have not known
thee, or knowing thee, have not cared for thee. Some led with, I
know not what error, have not stickt to call thee a god; But I would
have such fools as these to consider with themselves, it savours not of
a Deity, to murder or destroy those that serve and follow him. O
thou enemy to all reason! To those that serve thee least, thou gives
thy greatest rewards, until thou hast brought them at last into this
thy troublesome dance. Thou art an enemy to thy friends, and a
friend to thy enemies; and all this is, because thou dost not govern
thy self according to order &amp; reason. They paint thee blind, poor,
and young; they put a Bow into thy hand, wherein thou draw,
and shootest at random; but more blind are they that serve thee. For
they never taste or see the unsavoury &amp; distasteful recompense, which
they receive by thy service; thy fire is of hot burning lightning,
which scorches unto death, yet leaves no impression or print of any
wound at all. The sticks which thy flames consume, are the souls
and lives of humane creatures, which are so infinite, and so number∣less,
that it scarce accurreth unto me, with whom I should first be∣gin,
not only of Christians, but of Gentiles &amp; of Jaws; and all foe••ooth
in requital of their good services. What shall I speak of that Macias
of our times; and how by loving, he came to his end? Of whose sad
and wofu•l death, thou wast the sole cause. What service did Paris
do thee? What Helena? What Clytemnestra? What Aegisthus? All the
world knows how it went with them. How well likewise did thou
requite Sapho, Ariadne, and Lender, and many other besides, whom
I willingly silence, because I have enough to do in the repetition of
mine own misery? I complain me of the world, because I was bred
up in it; for had not the world given me life, I had not therein be∣got
Melibea; not being begot, she had not been borne; not being
borne, I had not loved her; and not loving her, I should not have
mourned, as now I do, in this my latter and uncomfortable old age!
O my good companion! O my bruised daughter, bruised even all to
pieces! Why would thou not suffer me to divert thy death? why
would thou not take pity of thy kind and loving mother? why
did thou show thy self so cruel against thy aged father? why
hast thou left me thus in sorrow? why hast thou left me comfortless,
and all alone, in hâc lachrimarum valle, in this veil of tears, and sha∣dow
of death?

THus from the Poet, I am bid to say;
Hee knows what Judges sit to Doom each Play,
(The Over-curious Critic, or the Wise)
The one with squint; Tother with Sunn-like eyes,
Shoots through each scene; The one cries all things down
Tother, hides strangers Faults, close as his Own:
Las! Those that out of custom come to jeer,
(Sung the full quire of the Nine Muses here)
So Carping,—not from Wit, but Apish spite,
And Fether'd Ignorance,—Thus! ô Poet does slight.
It is not a gay suit, or Distorted Face,
Can beat his Merit off,—Which has won Grace
In the full Theater;—Nor can now fear
The Teeth of any Snaky whisperer;
But to the white, and sweet unclowded Brow,
(The heaven where true worth moves) our Po•• do's bow:
Patrons of Arts, and Pilots to the Stage,
Who guide it (through all Tempests) from the Rage
Of envious Whirlewindes,—ô, doe you but steer
His Muse, This day; And bring her to the wished shore,
You are those Delphic Powers whom she'll adore.
WEe surfeit here on Pleasures: Seas nor Land
Cannot invite us to a Feast more glorious,
Then this day we have sat at: my Lord Vane,
You have an excellent seat here; Tic a building
May entertain a Caesar: but you and I
Should rather talk of Tombs, then Palaces,
Let's leave all to our hoires, for we are old.
Old! hem? all heart of brass, sound as a bell,
Old? why, Isle tell your Graces; I have gone
But half the bridge ore yet; there lies before me
As much as I have passed, and I'll go it all.
Mad Vane still.
Old Oaks doe not easily fall:
Decembers cold hand combs my head and beard,
But May swims in my blood; and he that walks
Without his wooden third leg, is never old.
What is your age my Lord?
Age, what call you age?
I have lived some half a day, some half an hour.
A tree of threescore-yeares growth; nothing.
A mere slip, you have kept good diet my lord.
Let whores keep diet,
Tibaldo ner'e; never did Rivers run
In wilder, madder streams, then I have done,
I'll drink as hard yet as an Englishman,
And they are now best Drinkers.
They put down the Dutch-men clean,
Isle yet upon a wager hit any fencers button,
Some of 'em have no buttons to their doublets.
Then knave Isle hit his flesh, and hit your cocks-
If you cross mine once more. (comb
Nay be not angry.
I have my Passees: and my Passadoes,
My Lunges, my Stockadoes, Imbrocadoes,
And all my Pimtoes, and Pimtillioes
Here at my fingers ends.
By my faith it is well.
Old why; I ne'er took Physic, nor ever will,
I'll trust none that has Art and leave to kill:
Now for that chopping herb of hell Tobacco;
The idle-mans-Devill, and the Drunkards-whore,
I never meddled with her, my smoke goes,
Out at my kitchen chimney, not my nose.
And some Lords have no chimneys but their noses.
Tobacco-shopps show like prisons in hell;
Hot, smoky, stinking, and I hate the smell.
Who'd think that in a coal of Ashy white,
Such fire were glowing?
May not a snuff give light?
You see it doe's in him.
A withered-tree, doth oft bear branches.
What think you then of me swear Lady.
Troth my Lord as of a horse, vilely, if he can
Neither wihi, nor wagg's-Taile.
The Lady Alphonsina Neri, has given it you my Lord.
The time may come I may give it her too.
I doubt Lord Vane she will crack no Nuts,
With such a tough shell, as is yours and mine,
But leaving this, lets see you pray, at Court,
I thank your grace.
Your wife, and your fair daughter,
One of the stars of Florence with your son
Heir to your worth and Honours, Trebatio Vane.
I shall attend your grace.
The holy knot,
Him shall shortly tie, and in fair bands,
Unite Florence and Pisa by the hands,
Or Fyametta and this Pisa• Duke
(Our Noble-son in law) and at this day,
Pray be not absent.
We shall your will obey,
We hear there is a gallant that out-vies
Vs, and our court for bravery, and expense,
For royal feasts, trium hs and revellings.
He's my near kinsman, mine own brothers son,
Who desperately a prodigal race doth run,
And for this riotous humour, he has the by-name,
Signior Torrenti, a swift Head-long stream.
But ther's another lays on more then he.
Old Iacomo? open handed charity,
Sit's ever at his gates to welcome guests,
He makes no bone-fires, as my riotous kinsman,
And yet his chimneys cast out braver smoke,
The Bellows which he blows with are good deeds,
The rich he smiles upon, the poor he feeds.
These gallants we will be feasted by, and Feast
Fems praises of 'em, shall make us their guest,
Mean time we will hence
I have News to tell your Lordship, Signior Angelo (of the Lost Family is banished.
How banished? alas poor Angelo Lot.
Why must he go from Florence?
Because he can stay there no longer.
To what end is he driven from the City?
To the end he should go into some other my Lord.
Hoida.
I hope this is news Sir.
What speak the people of him?
As bells ring; some out, some in, all jangle, they say he Has dealt with the Genoway against the state: but whether with the men, or the women; tic to be stood upon.
Away Sir knave and fool.
Sir knave, a new word: fools, and knaves Sir?
This muttering long ago flew to mine ear,
The Genoway is but a line thrown out,
But Fiametta's love, the net that chokes him.
He's worthy of her equal,
Peace foolish boy,
At these state bone-fires (whose flames reach so high)
To stand aloose, is safer then too nigh.
Why brother, what's the matter?
I'm ill, exceeding ill.
That's not well.
Sure I did surfeit at Lord Vannies.
Surfeit? you eat some Meat against your stomach.
No, but I had a stomach to one dish, and the not tasting it, makes me sick at heart.
Was it fish or flesh?
Flesh sure, if I hit the mark right.
I'st not the missing of a mark (which you long to hit)
Makes you draw sighs in stead of arrows?
Would I had been a thousand leagues from thence,
When I sat down it's table or bin partner
With Angelo Lot in his banishment;
Oh! sister Alphonsina, there I drank
My ba•e the strongest poison that ever man
Drew from a Ladies eye, now swelling in me.
By casting of thy water thy, I guess thou would
Have a medcine for the greene sickness.
It is a greene wound indeed.
Tent it, tent it, and keep it from ranckling, you are
Over head and ears in love.
I am and with such mortal Arrows pierced
I shall fall down—
There's no hurt in that.
And dye unless he her pity
Send me a quick and sweet recovery.
And faith what doctresse is she must call you patient?
Fair Dariene, the Lord Vannies wife—
How! Dariene? can no feather fit you but the broach in an
Old mans hat? were there so many dainty dishes
To fill your belly, and must you needs long for that dish
The master of the house sets up for his own tooth.
Could love be like a subject, tied to laws,
Then might you speak this language.
Love? a disease as common with young-gallants as
Swaggering and drinking Tobacco, there's not one
Of um all but will to day lie drawing on for a
Woman, as if they were puffing and blowing at a straight boot,
And to morrow be ready to knock at deaths door,
But I wo'd fine see one of you enter and set in
His staff.
You shall see me then do so.
I shall look so old first, I shall be taken for thy gran∣dame; come, come it is but a worm between the skin And the flesh, and to be taken out with the point of a Waiting-womans needle, as well as a great Countesses.
If this be all the comfort you will lend me,
Would you might leave me—
Leave thee in sickness? I had more need give thee a Caudle; and thrust thy adle-head into a night-Capp, for look you brother—
Even what you will must out
If what you will might so too, then would you be in
Tune: I warrant, if the sucket stood here before
Thee, thy stomach would go against it.
Yes sure my stomach would go against it:
It is only that which breeds in me despair.
Despair for a woman? they hang about men's
Necks in some places thicker then hope upon poles.
Her walls of chastity cannot be beaten down.
Walls of chastity? walls of wafer-cakes, I have
Known a woman carry a featherbed, and a man in it
In her mind, when in the street she cast up the white of
Her eye like a Puritan.
Sister you do but stretch me on the rack
And with a laughing cheek increase my pain,
Be rather pitiful and ease my torments
By teaching me how in this dreadful storm,
I may escape ship-wrack and attain that shore
Where I may live, here else I'm sure to die.
Well brother, since you will need s sail by such a
Star as I shall point out, look you here it is; if she were
Your Fether-makers, Taylors or Barbers wife,
Bait a hook with gold, and with it—
I doe conjure you by that noble blood
Which makes me call you sister, cease to power
Poison into a wound, so near my heart,
And if to cure Loves-paines there be an Art.
Woman me thinks should know it cause she breeds it,
That cunning woman you take me to be, and because
I see you dissemble not, heir's my medcine.
I shall for ever thank you.
First send for your Barber.
For heavens sake.
Your barber shall not come to rob you of your beard,
I'll deal in no concealments—
Oh! fie, fie, fie—
But let him by rubbing of you quicken
Your spirits.
So so.
Then whistle your gold-finches (your gallants) to your fist.
You're mad, you're mad.
Into a Tanerne, Drink stiff, swear stiff; have your music, and your brace, dance, and whiff Tobacco,
Till all smoke Again, and split Sir.
You split my very heart in pieces.
And doe thus, but till the Moore cuts off her horns; Laugh in the day, and sleep in the night: and this winching fire will be burnt out of you.
Away, away, cruel you are to kill,
When to give life, you have both power and skill.
Alas, poor brother now I pity thee and wo'd doe
Any thing to help thee to thy longing, but that a
Gap must be broken, in another mans hedge to rob
His orchard, within there Luca Angelo, give him
Music:
Music has helped some mad-men, let it then
Charm him, Love makes fools of the wisest men.
Yonders that villain, keep off Iaspero:
This prey I'll cease.
Be more advised Sir.
At whose life shoot you?
At that slaves there.
Slave? I know you for the Dukes son, but I know noc ause of quarrel, or this base reproach.
Thou art a villain.
Wherein?
And by witch-craft,
Had stole my sister Fiamettas heart,
Forcing her leave a Prince his bed for thine.
If for her love you come to kill me; here
I'll point you to a door where you may enter and fetch out a loathed life.
Iaspero.
Oh my Lord.
Let him come, I ow her all;
And that debt will I pay her gladly.
Dear Sir hear him—
But if on any other fire of rage;
You thirst to drink my blood, here I defy
You, and your malice; and return the villain
Into your throat.
So brave sir.
I charge you in the Dukes name, keep the peace;
Beat down their weapons, knock em down Cargo.
I have a Justices warrant to apprehend your weapons,
Therefore I charge you deliver.
Oh my Lord: make a fray in an open street? it is to
Make a bon-fire to draw children and fools
Together; Signior Angelo, pray be wise, and begone.
I doe but guard my life (my Lord) from danger.
Sir, you doe exercise your violence;
Upon a man, stabbed to the heart with wounds;
You see him sinking, and you set your foot
Upon his head, to kill him with two deaths;
Trample not thus on a poor banished man.
If hee be banished, why dwells hee ith'house, whose
Tiles are pulled down over his head? You must hunt
No more in this Park of Florence; why then
Doe you lie sneaking here, to steal venison?
My Lords, I take my last leave of you all;
Of love, and fortunes—
Lower thou can not fall.
Trust me, my Lord, This Lot is a man,
(Setting aside his rivall-ship in love,
For which you hate him) so abundant rich
In all the Virtues of a Gentle-man,
That had you read their file, as I have done,
You would not only fall in love with him,
And hold him worthy of a Princess bed,
But grieve, that for a woman, such a man
Should so much suffer; in being so put down,
Never to rise again.
A terrible case, i'd not be in it for all Florence.
Troth dear friend,
The praises which have crowned him with thy Judgment,
Make me to cast on him an open eye,
Which was before shut, and I pity him.
I Never heard amongst all your Roman spirits.
That any held so bravely up his head,
In such a sea of troubles (that come rolling
One on another neck) as Lot doth,
Hee puts the spite of Fortune to disgrace,
And makes her, when she frowns worst, turn her face.
No more: I love him; and for all the Dukedom,
Would not have cut so Noble a spreading Vine,
To draw from it one drop of blood; Lord Vane,
I thank you that you cured our wounded peace,
So fare you well.
A good health to you both.
You play the Constable wisely.
And I his Beadle, I hope as wisely.
The Constable wisely; Cargo he calls me fool by craft,
But let 'em pass.
As Gentle-men doe by Creditors (muffled)
I have another case to handle: thou know the Donna Alphonsina, of the Neri Family.
The little Paraquinto that was here when the Duke
Was feasted, she had quick-silver in her mouth, for
Her tongue, like a Bride the first night, never lay still.
The same Aspen-leafe, the same; is it not a Galley for
The Great Turk to be rowed in?
I think my Lord, in calm weather, she may set upon
A Gally-ass big as your Lordship.
Commend me to this Angelica.
Angelica-water is good for a cold stomach.
I am all fire.
Shoe's a cooler.
Would it were come to that.
A small thing does it my Lord; in the time a
Flemming drinks a Flap-dragon.
Give her this paper, and this; in the one she may know my mind, in the other, feel me: this a Letter, this a Jewel:
Tell her, I kiss the little white nail of her little white
Finger, of her more little white hand, of her most
Little white body.
Her tell-tale, for all this will I bee.
Thou hast been my weavers shuttle to run betwixt me and my stuffs of Procreandi causa.
A suite of Stand-farther-off, had bin better sometimes.
No Cargo, I have still the Lapis mirabilis; be thou close—
As my Ladies Chamber-maide.
Away then, nay quick knave, thou rack'st me.
I go to stretch you to your full length.
Happy be your arrival, Noble friends;
You are the first, that like to Doves repair
To my new building; you are my first-borne guests,
My eldest sons of hospitality;
Here's to my hearty welcomes.
Worthy Lord,
In one word, and the word of one, for all,
Our thanks are as your welcomes, Infinite.
Rome in her Ancient pride, never raised up
A work of greater wonder, then this building.
Tic finished, and the cost stands on no score,
None can for want of payment, at my door,
Curse my foundation, praying the roof may fall
On the proud builders head, seeing the smoke go
Out of those Chimneys, for whose bricks I owe.
To erect a frame so glorious, large, and hie,
Would draw a very sea of silver dry.
My Lord Iocomo Gentile, pray tell us,
How much money have you buried under this kingly building?
Pray call it not so:
The humble shrub, no Cedar here shall grow;
You see Three hundred Doric pillars stand
About one square, Three hundred Noble friends
Laid (in their loves) at raising of those Columns,
A piece of gold under each Pedestal,
With his name graved upon the bottom stone,
Except that cost, all other was mine own;
See here, each days expenses are so great,
They make a volume, for in this appears,
It was no task of weeks, or months, but years:
I trust my steward only with the key,
Which keeps that secret; heere's Arithmetic
For churls to cast up, there's nhe root of all;
If you have skill in numbers, number that.
Good Mr. Steward read it.
All the charge
In the gross sum, amounted to—
To what?
Thou vain vaine-glorious fool, go burn that Book,
No Herald needs to blazon Charities Arms;
Go burn it presently.
Burn it?
Away,
I launch not forth a ship, with drums and guns,
And Trumpets, to proclaim my gallantry;
He that will read the wasting of my gold,
Shall find it writ in ashes, which the wind
Will scatter ere he spends it; Another day,
The wheel may turn, and I that built thus high,
May by the storms of want, be driven to dwell
In a thatched Cottage; Rancor shall not then
Spit poison at me, pinning on my back
This card; Hee that spent thus much, now does lack.
Why to your house add you so many gates?
My gates fill up the number of seven days,
At which, of guests, seven several sorts Isle welcome:
On Monday, Knights whose fortunes are sunk low;
On Tuesday, those that all their life-long read
The huge voluminous wonders of the deep,
Sea-men (I mean) and so on other days,
Others shall take their turns.
Why have you then built twelve such vast rooms.
For the years twelve moons;
In each of which, twelve Tables shall be spread;
At them, such whom the world scorns, shall be fed,
The windows of my building, which each morn,
Are Porters, to let in mans comfort (light)
Are numbered just three hundred sixty five,
And in so many days the sun does drive
His chariot stuck with beams of Burnished gold,
My Alms shall such diurnal progress make
As doe's the sun in his bright-Zodiack.
You differ from the guise of other lands,
Where Lords lay all their livings on the rack,
Not spending it in bread, but on the back.
Such Lords eat men, but men shall eat up me,
My uncle the Lord Abbot had a soul
Subtle and quick, and searching as the fire,
By Magicke-stayers he went as deep as hell,
And if in devils possession gold be kept,
He brought some sure from thence, it is hid in caves
Known (save to me) to none, and like a spring
The more it is drawn, the more it still doth rise,
The more my heap wastes, more it multiplies.
Now whither (as most rich-men doe) he pawned
His soul for that dear purchase none can tell,
But by his bed-side when he saw death stand
Fetching a deep groan, me he catch't-by'th hand
Called me his heir, and charged me well to spend
What he had got ill, deal (quoth he) a doale
which round (with good men's prayers) may guard my soul
Now at her setting forth: let none feel want
That knock but at thy gates: do wrong to none,
And what request to thee so ear is made,
If honest, see it never be denied.
And you'll perform all this?
Fair &amp; upright,
As are the strict vows of an Anchorite:
A benefit given by a Niggards hand
Is 〈◊〉 and gravely bread, the hunger-sterv'd
Takes it, but cannot eat it; Isle give none such.
Who with free heart shakes out but crumbs, gives much.
In such a ship of worldly cares my Lord
As you must sail now in, you'll need more Pilots
Then your own self to sit and steer the Helm.
You might doe therefore well to take a wife;
A wife? when I shall have one hand in heaven,
To write my happiness in leaves of stars;
A wife wo'd pluck me by the other down:
This Bark hath thus long sailed about the world,
My soul the Pilot, and yet never listened
To such a Mare-maids song: a wife, oh fetters,
To mans blessed liberty! All this world's a prison,
Heaven the high wall about it, sin the jalour,
But the iron-shackles weighing down our heals,
Are only women, those light Angels turn us,
To fleshly devils, I that Sex admire,
But never will sit near their wanton fire.
Who then shall reap the golden corn you sow?
It is half a curse to them, that build, and spare, and hoard up wealth, yet cannot name an heir.
My heirs shall be poor children fed on alms,
Soldiers that want limbs, scholars poor and scorned.
And these will be a sure inheritance;
Not to decay: Manors and Towns will fall,
Lord-ships and Parks, Pastures and woods be sold;
But this Land still continues to the Lord:
No subtle tricks of law, can me beguile of this.
But of the beggers-dishe, I shall drink healths
To last for ever; whilst I live, my roof
Shall cover naked wretches; when I die,
It is dedicated to St. Charity.
The Duke informed, what trees of goodness grow,
Here of your planting, in true love to your virtues;
Sent us to give you thanks, for crowning Florence,
With fame of such a subject, and entreats you
(Until he come himself) to accept this token,
Of his fair wishes towards you.
Pray return
my duty to the Duke, tell him I value his love
beyond all jewels in the world.
He has vowed ere long to be your visitant.
He shall be welcome when he comes, that's all;
Not to a Palace, but my hospital.
We'll leave your Lordship.
My best thoughts go with you:
My Steward?
Here my Lord.
Is the Book fired?
As you commanded Sir, I saw it burned.
Keep safe that Jewel, and leave me; letters! from whom?
Signior Ieronimo Guydanes.
Oh sir, I know the business: yes, yes, it is the same;
Cuidanes lives amongst my bosom friends:
He writes to have me entertain you sir.
That's the bough, my bolt flies at, my Lord.
What Qualities are you furnished with?
My Education has bin like a Gentle-man.
Have you any skill in song, or Instrument?
As a Gentleman shoo'd have, I know all, but play on none: I am no Barber.
Barber! no sir, I think it; Are you a Linguist?
As a Gentleman ought to be, one tongue serves one head;
I am no Peddler, to travel Countries.
What skill ha'you in horseman-ship?
As other Gentlemen have, I ha'rid some beasts in my Time.
Can you write and read then?
As most of your Gentle-men doe, my band has bin
Taken with my mark at it.
I see you are a dealer, give me thy hand, Isle entertain thee howsoever, because in thee I keep half a score Gentlemen; thy name.
A sinius Buzardo——
I entertain thee, good Buzardo.
Thanks sir.
This fellow's a stark fool, or too wise,
The trial will be with what wing he flies.
IN Laws of curtsy, wee are bound sweet Lady,
(Being thus nigh) to see you and your brother,
Our noble friend, though the Duke had not sent.
Thanks worthy sir.
Signior Tibaldo hath desire to sleep.
Then leave him, Company offends the sick.
Our humblest duty to my Lord the Duke;
If in my Brothers name, and mine, you tender
For this his noble love, wee both shall rest
Highly indebted to you all.
Sweet Madam,
You shall command our lives to work your good.
Signior, your love.
All at your service Madam.
A quick, and good health to your noble Brother.
And all fair fortunes doubled on your self.
So: me-thinkes a Lady had more need have a new pair of lips, then a new pair of gloves, for though they were both of one skin, yet one would wear out sooner then the other; I think these Courtiers have al offices in the Spicery, And taking my lips for sweet-meates, are as saucy with 'em, as if they were Fees; I wonder Tibaldo thou can fit still, and not come in for a share; If old Vane's wife had been here, all the parts about you had moved.
Thou think I lie in, heere's such a gossiping, as if it were a Child-bed Chamber.
So it is, for Isle swear, all this stir is about having a wo∣man brought to bed; marry I doubt it must be a mans lying in.
I would thy tongue were a man then, to lie.
I had rather it were a woman, to tell truth.
Good sister Alphonsina, you still play
The bad Phisicion, I am all on fire,
And you to quench me, power on scoops of oil;
I feel ten thousand plummets at my heart,
Yet you cry, Lay on more and are more cruel
Then all my tortures.
Sadness, I pity thee,
And will to doe thee service, venture life,
Mine honour being kept spotless.
Gentle sister,
The easiest thing in the world to beg, I crave,
And the poorest Alms to give.
But ask and have.
A friendly counsel, lo that's all.
It is yours.
Be ruled by me then; in an ashy sheet,
Cover these glowing embers of defer.
Embers? I wo'd you telt em, it is a fire—
Come, and set hand to paper, Isle indite.
And she'll condemn me; no, I will not write.
Then prithee take this Physic; be not the sea, to drink strange Rivers up, yet still be dry; Be like a noble stream, co∣vet to run betwixt fair banks, which thou may call thine own, and let those banks be some fair Ladies arms, fit for thy youth, and birth.
Against your charms,
Witch, thus I stop mine ears.
Isle hollow them: this Dear runs in my Lords Park,
And if you steal it, look to have Blood-hounds scent you.
Are you mad?
Yes, you shall find venison-sawce dearer then other flesh.
No, no, none else must, none shall, none can,
My hunger feed but this; down will I dive,
And fetch this Pearl, or ne'er come up alive—
Are all my warm cawdles come to this? now I see you are too far gone, this Lady hath overspent thee therefore settle thine estate, pluck up a good heart, and Isle pen thy will.
Oh fie, fie.
Bequeath thy kisses to some Taylor, that hunts out wed∣dings every sunday; Item, Thy sighs to a noise of fiddlers ill paid, thy paleness to a Fencer fighting at sharpe, thy want of stomach to one of the Dukes guard.
I beg it at thy hands, that being a woman, thou'It make a wonder.
What's that?
Hold thy tongue.
It's an Instrument ever plaid on, cause well strung,
Who's that come into the Chamber there? Oh, Mr. Cargo.
My Lord hath sent you a Jewel, locked up in this paper, and the moisture of a goose quill, that's to say, words in that—
Oh sir, I thank your Lord, and this your pains; have him into the Buttery—let me see, Lady, that I love you, I dare swear like a Lord (I shall have oaths enough then) I send you all that is mine, in hope all shall bee mine that is yours, for it stands to reason, that mine being yours, yours should bee mine, and yours being mine, mine should be yours. Love me, or I die, If I die, you kill me, If you kill me, I will say nothing, but take the blow patiently. I hold my life this Lord has bin bastinadoed, out upon him rammish fox, he stinks hither; Prithee good Bro∣there read.
I will.
Is it Gander month with him? How the devil is my may∣denhead blasted? that among such shoals of Gallants, that swim up and down the Court, no fish bites at the bait of my poor beauty, but this tough Cods-head?
Oh sister, peace for heavens sake; here lies health
Even in this bitter pill (for me) so you
Would play but my Physician, and say, take it;
You are offered here, to sojourn at his house:
Companion with his Lady.
Sr, I have you. And I going upon so weighty a busi∣ness, as getting of children, you would have me pin you to my sleeve.
Most true.
You care not so I turn whore to pleasure you.
Oh Sister, your high worth is known full well
Against b•se assault, a Fort Impregnable;
And therefore, as you •ova my life, in the sprindge,
Catch this old Wood-cocke.
In the flame I'll singe
My wings, unless I put the candle out,
That you i'th'darke may bring your hopes about.
You have won me.
You revive me.
Have a care you cast not your self down too soon now.
I warrant you.
As for my old Huck-sters artillery, I have walls of
Chastity strong enough shoot he never so hard, to keep him
From making any breach.
Twill be a noble-battaile on each side;
Yet now my spirits are roused, a stratagem
Lies hatching here, pray help me noble sister,
to give it form and life.
My best.
What think you?
(The mark of man not yet set in my face)
If as your sister, or your kins-woman,
I go in women's habit, for thereby,
Speech, free access, fair opportunity;
Are had without suspicion.
Mine be your will;
Oh me! what pains we take to bring forth ill!
Such a disguise is safe too, since you never but once
Were seen there.
My wise sister ever.
Send in the fellow there that brought the letter;
Why how now? doe his legs fail him already?
A staff for his declining age.
I have a pikestaff of mine own already, but I could not
Keep our your scurvy desperate hoggs-head from coming
In upon me, I'm cut i'th'cockscombe.
Nothing I see is so like an old-man, as a young∣man drunk.
Or when he comes from a wench.
Before he bear your answer let him sleep.
Whilst you laugh at what I could almost weep.
Dear friend, I should both wrong my faith &amp; fortunes,
To make'em thus dance Antiques; I shall never play the dissembler.
Then never play the Lover;
Death! for a woman, I'd be fleade alive,
Could I but find one constant: i'st such a matter
For you then to put on a Doctours-gowne,
And his flat velvet-Cap, and speak the gibbering
Of an Apothecary.
If thus disguised
I'm taken all the physic in the world
Cannot prolong my life.
And dying for her,
You venture bravely, all women o'er you grave
will pray that they so kind a man may have,
As to die for'em; say your banishment
Had borne you hence, what hells of discontent,
Had racked your soul for her as hers for you?
Should you but faint, well might you seem untrue,
Where this attempt your loyalty shall approve,
Who ventures farthest wins a Ladies-love.
How are my beard and hair?
Friend I protest,
So rarely counterfeit, as if a painter
Should draw a Doctor: were I sick my self,
And met you with an urinal in my hand,
I'd cast it at your head, unless you cast
The water for me, come, ell's passing well;
Love which makes pale the cheeks, gives you complexion,
Fit for a sallow French-man.
I will on then,
In France I long have lived, And know the Garb
Of the French-Mounte-bankes, whose apish gesture,
Although in them I hold ridiculous,
My self shall practise.
For a Doctours-man,
You see I'm fitted, foot by foot I'll walk,
and meet all dangers sent against your breast.
I thank thee noble friend; let's then to court.
The pangs a lover suffers are but short.
How now Nurse, how does my Fiametta?
Oh my sweet Lord, shees at it again, at it again!
Who are with her? call for more help.
More help! alas there's my Lady Vane with her, and Ladies upon Ladies, and Doctors upon Doctors, but all can∣not doe.
How does it take her Nurse?
Oh sweet Princess, it takes her all over with a prick∣ing; first about her stomach, and then she heaves and heaves, that no one man with all his weight, can keep her down.
At this I wonder, that her sickness makes her Doctors fools.
He that she finds most ease in, is Dr. Iordan.
I will give half my Duke-dome for her health.
Well, well, If death do take her, he shall have the sweet∣est bed-fellow that ever lay by lean mans-side.
I entreat thee Nurse be tender over her.
Tender quoth a? I'm sure my heals are grown as hard as hooves, with trotting for her, I'll put you in one comfort.
What's that Nurse?
In her greatest conflict sh'as had a worthy feeling of her self.
So, so, I'm glad of it my Lord of Pisa.
Under this common blow, which might have struck the
strongest heart, here pray doe not you shrink.
Sickness is lifes retainer, Sir, and I
(What is not to be shunned) bear patiently;
But had she health as sound as hath the spring,
She wo'dto me prove sickly Autumn still.
Oh say not so,
I find it, for being loyal,
As the touch-needle to one star still turning,
I loose that star, my faiths paid with scorning.
Who then with eag'es wings of faith and truth,
W'ud in her sun-beames play away his youth,
And kiss those flames, which burn but out mine eyes,
With sealding rivers of her cruelties?
It is but her way-ward sickness casts this eye of slightness on you.
It is my Lord her hate;
For when death sits even almost on her brows,
She spreads her arms abroad, to welcome him,
When in my bridall-bed I find a grave.
Now Mutio?
There's a French-man come to court,
A professed Doctor, that has seen the Princess,
And will on her recovery pawn his life.
Comfort from heaven, I hope, let's see this Doctor.
Welcome good Doctor: have you seen my daughter?
Restore her health, and nothing in my Duke-dome,
Shall be too dear for thee, how doe you Judge her?
Be me trat me Lord, I find her a very bad lady, &amp; no well.
Piero take the Duke of Pisa pray and be your sisters visi.
Sir we shall, if the Duke please—(tants.
The poisoned may drink gall.
Attend the Duke.
The party Sir.
Thou shalt have Caesars pay—my Coach,
Old January goes to lie with May.
Doctor I thus have singled you, to sound
The depth of my girls sickness, that if no skill
Of man can save her, I against heavens will,
May arm my breast with patience, therefore be free.
By my troth and fa'my Lor', me no point can play
The hound, and fawn upon de most puissant Roy in de world;
A French-man bear the brave mind for dat.
So, so, I like him better.
Me gre tank you, now for de malady of de Princess,
Me one two, tree time, feel her pulse, and ron up and down all
De oder parts of her body, and find noting but dat
She be trobla with le gran desire of de man.
A great desire of a man?
A my trat it is verament, she lunge to do some ting in Love uponle gentle home.
Doctor thou hit'st her heart, it is there shoe's wounded,
By a poisoned Arrow, shot from a villains hand;
One Angelo of the Lot Family,
And till that head be plucked out, she will pine,
Unless controlled by some deep Art of thine.
All tings possibela me fall undergo, me ha read Gallon,
Hipocratus, Avicen, but no point can peeke out le remedy for de Madam in de briars of love.
No medicine you say in any of them for Love.
Aim, trat not worth a louse, only in my peregrination about le grand gloabe of de world, me find out a fine trick for make a de man, and Woman doe, dat is tickle in love.
The man and the woman doe? how doe, how doe?
To be cura, and all whole, Admirable vell.
As how pray?
Me have had under my finger, many brave vench, and most Noble gentle Dames, dat have bee much trouble, upon de wilde vorme in de tail for de man.
Very good.
And bee my tra my Lord, by experiment me find dat de heart of de man; you understand me.
Yes, yes, the heart of the man.
Wee wee, de heart of de man being all dry as peppera.
So so.
And rub upon de ting (vat you call it) fall make it molder all to crumble and dust.
Oh, oh, a Grater.
Ee by my tra you say vell, rub a de mans dry Art upon de Grater, and drink de powder in de pot le Vine, by de Gen∣tle-voman, and by gars-blor, she present amently kick up de heel at de man she love.
Excellent.
No point more remember, but cry out le French poo up∣on le varlet.
So she will hate her lover.
Be-gar, as my self hate le puz-cat, cry mew at my shin; and will have de rombling a de gut, for de other gentle home.
Thou come up close to me now, my brave Doctor.
Be-gar me hope so, and derfore my Lord apply le despe∣rate
Medicine, to le perilous malady, and have dis Angelo be cut in de troate, and be man-slaughtered.
You then advise me to have Angelo slain.
Wee.
And then to have my daughter drink his heart.
Wee, wee.
Grated and dried, and so—
Wee, wee, wee.
I wo'd I grip'd it fast now in this hand,
And eat it panting hot, to teach a peasant
To climb above his being, Doctor, hee dies.
Knock de pate down be-gar.
But stay, stay, hoe's fled Florence; It will bee
A work to find him first out, and being found,
A task to kill him; for our Gallants speak
Much of his worth; The varlet is valiant.
No matera for dat; for-two tree four crown, dar be
Rascals fall run him in on de backe-shide.
He shall be sought for, and being found, he dies.
Pray my lor' suffer le Princess and me for be in private,
Le Doctor uses for toucha doe Ooman—
Doe, so, whilst I for Angeloes death use speed,
For till I have his heart, mine own must bleed.
Oh my Baptist.
I have heard the thunder aimed at your life.
And it will strike me dead,
With a most sudden and Invisible blow.
Now that you see his vengeance apt to fall,
Fly from it.
How?
By fair, and free access,
Open your dangers to your Mistress eyes,
Where she stark mad, so she be mad for love,
You'll bring her to her wits, if wisely now
You put her intoth' way; Gold bared with locks,
Is best being stolen; steal her then.
It is but a wrack at most,
Oh on what boisterous Seas is True love tossed!
THis Room smells.
It has bin new perfumed.
Then it is your breeches; stand off—and shines there (say you) a Sun in our horizon full as glorious, as we our self?
So cry the common people.
The common people are Rascals, lying devils,
Dung-hills, whose savor poisons brave men's fems,
That Ape of greatness (imitating me)
I mean that slavish Lord Iacomo
Shall die a beggar, If at the years end,
His total of expense dares equal mine;
How is his house built?
Admirable fair.
Fair? Isle guild mine (like Pompey's Theater)
All ore to out-shine his; the richest hangings
Persian, or Turk, or Indian slaves can weave,
Shall from my purse be bought at any rates;
Isle pave my great hall with a floor of Clouds,
Wherein shall move an artificial Sun,
Reflecting round about me, golden beams,
Whose flames shall make the room seem all on fire,
And when it is night, just as that Sun goes down,
A silver Moon shall rise, drawn up by stars,
And as that moves, I standing in her Orb,
Will move with her, and be that man in the moon,
So mock't in old wives tales; then over head,
A roof of Woods, and Forests full of Dear,
Trees growing downwards, full of singing queers.
And this i'll doe that men with praise, may crown
My fame, for turning the world upside down:
And what brave gallants are Gentiles guests?
The Lord Iacomo Gentile feeds
All Beggars at his Table.
Hang Iacome,
My board shall be no manger for poor jades
To lick up provender in.
He welcomes soldiers.
Let soldiers beg and starve, or steal and hang.
Wo'd I had here ten-thousand Soldiers heads,
Their skulls set all in silver, to drink healths
To his confusion, first invented war,
And the health drunk to drown the bowls in the Sea,
That very name of Soldier, makes me shrug,
And think I crawl with vermin; give me Lutes,
Mischief on drums, for soldiers; fetch me whores,
These are men's bliss; those every Kingdoms soars,
Wee gave in charge to search through all the world
For the best Cooks, rarest musicians,
And fairest girls, that will sell sin for gold.
Some of all sorts you have
Let me have more
Then the grand Signior, And my change as rare,
Tall, low, and middle size, the browne, and fair;
Id give a Princes ransom now to kiss
Black Cleopatra's cheek; Only to drink
A richer perle, then that of Anthonyes,
That Fame (where his name stands) might put down mine.
Oh that my Mother had bin Paris Whore,
And I had lived to see a Troy on fire,
So that by that brave light, I might have danced
But one Lavalto with my Courtesan.
Pattern of all perfection breathed in man,
There's one without, before your Excellence
Desires access.
What creature?
Your own brother,
At least hee terms himself so.
Is he brave?
Hoe's new come from Sea.
It is true, that Iason
Rigged out a Fleet to fetch the Golden-Fleece;
It is a brave boy, all Elemental fire,
His ships are great with Child of Turkish Treasure,
And here shall be delivered; marshall him in
Like the seas proud commander give our charge—
Sound drums, and trumpets, for my Lord away.
Thou whoreson peasant, know me, burn that wind-fall,
It comes not to my head that drops so low,—Another
Hats for my Lord,—Hat's brought in 3. or 4.
It smells of earth, stood it again so high,
My head would on a dung-hill seem to lie.
How now? what scar-crow's this?
Scar-crow? thy brother,
His blood clear as thine own, but that it smokes not,
With perfumed fierce as thine doth.
Has the poor snake, a sting; can he hiss?
What begs the rogue for?
Vengeance
From the just thunderer to throw Lucifer down;
How high so ever thou rearest thy Babell-browes,
To thy confusion I this language speak:
I am thy fathers son.
Ha, ha, the Skipper raves.
The awed Venetian on St. Marks proud-day,
Never went forth to marry the rich-sea,
With casting in her lapp a ring of gold;
In greater bravery then my self did freight,
A fleet of gallant youthful Florentines,
All vowed to rescew Rhodes, from Turkish-slavery:
We went and waded up in our own bloods,
Till most of us were drowned.
Fair riddance on you.
Where such a Peacock durst not spread his plumes;
We fought and those that fell left Monuments
Of unmatch't valour to the whole race of man,
They that were taken, (amongst whom my self was chief)
Were three years chained up to the tugging o'er,
See here the realists of that misery, Chains,
If thou wu'd'st know more, read it on my back,
Printed with the Bulls-peezele.
Hang the dog.
What tell thou me of Peezeles?
It is thy brother tells thee so, note me.
I know thee not;
Set mastives on him, worry him from my gates.
The first unhappy breath I drew, moved here,
And here I'll spend my last, ever braved from hence,
Here I'll have meat and clothes.
Kick the cur out.
Who dares?
Take from that sumpter-horses back of thine,
Some of those gaudie trappings to clothe mine,
And keep it from the keen air, fetch me food,
You fawning spaniels
Some spirit of the buttery.
It should be by his hunger.
I am starved,
Thirsty, and pined to th'bare bones, here; I'll eat at thine
Own scornful board, on thine own meat, or tear it from
Thy throat as it is chewing down.
I'll try that; if my dinner be prepared,
Serve me in my great state along'st this way,
And as you pass two there with pistols stand.
To kill that ravenous Vulture; if he dare thrust his talents
Forth to make one dish his prey.
Now view my face, and tho perhaps you shamd
To own so poor a brother, let not my heart-strings,
In sunder crack, if we now being lone,
You still disdain me.
Wretch I know thee not,
And loath thy sight.
Slave, thou shalt know me then;
I'll beat thy brains out with my Gally-chaine.
Wilt murder thine own brother?
Pride doth it self confound,
What with both hands the Devil strove to have bound,
Heaven with one little finger hath entire,
This proves that thou majesty fall, because one blast
Shakes thee already, fear not, I'll not take
The whip out of your hand and though thou break
Laws of humanity, and brother-hood;
I'll not doe so, but as a beggar should
(Not as a brother) knock I at the gate
Of thy hard heart for pity to come forth,
And look upon my wretchedness, A shot
Toore to the keel that gally where I rowed;
Sunk her, the men slain, I by diving scoped,
And sat three leagues upon a broken-mast,
Washed with the salt tears of the Sea, which wept,
In pity, to behold my misery.
Pox on your, tarry misery.
And when heavens blest-hand hal'de me to a sure
To dry my wet-limbes, was I forced to fire,
A dead-mans straw-bed thrown into the street.
Foh, you are infectious.
Oh remember this!
He that does good deeds, here waits at a Table,
Where Angels are his fellow servitours.
I am no Robbin-red-breast to bring straws
To cover such a coarse.
Thou art turned devil,
Whore's thy great stomach, eat, stand, let him choose
What dish he likes.—snatches a pistol: ill fly off.
This then which I'll carve up
On thy base bosom, see thou Trivial fool,
Thou art a Tyrant (o'er me) of short reign,
This cock out crow's thee, and thy petty kings,
You are a proud-bird, but fliest with rotten wings;
To show how little for thy scorn I care,
See my revenge turn's all to idle-aire,
It upward flies and will from thence I fear
Shoot darts of lightning to confound thee here.
Farewell thou huge Leviathan, when you have drunk dry,
That Sea thou rowl'st in, on some base shore dye.
Where is the Traitor?
Now the house is fired,
You come to cast on waters; bar up my doors,
But one such tattered ensign here being spread,
Draws numbers hither, here must no rogues be fed;
Command my carpenters invent od engines.
To manacle base beggars, hands and feet,
And by my name call'em my whipping posts;
If you spy any man that has a look,
Stigmatically drawn, like to a furies,
(Able to fright) to such I'll give large pay,
To watch and ward for poor snakes night and day,
And whip'em soundly if they approach my gates;
The poor are but the earths-dung fit to lie
Cover d on much-heapes not to offend the eye.
Two Gentlemen sent from the Florence Duke,
Require speech with your Lord-ship—
Give'm entrance
What re you? and whence come you?
From the Duke.
Your business?
This, fame sounding forth your worth
For hospitable princely house-keeping;
Our Duke drawn by the wonder of report,
Invites himself (by us) to be your guest.
The honour of Ambassadors be yours;
Say to the Duke that Caesar never came;
More welcome to the Capitol of Rome,
Then he to us—healths to him—fill rich wines.
You have this wonder wrought, now rare to men;
By you they have found the golden age again.
Which I'll uphold, so long as there's a sun,
To play the Alchemist.
This proud fellow talks
As if he grasped the Indies in each hand.
Health to your Duke.
We pledge it on our knees.
I'll stand to what I do, but kneel to none.
Break not our custom (pray ye) with one beam;
The god of mettailes makes both gold and wine
To Imitate whose greatness; If on you
I can bestow Wine, I can give gold too,
Take them as free as Bacohus spends his blood;
And in them drink our health.
Your bounty far
Exceeds that of our Caesars.
Caesar ero, vel nihil ero:
What are Gold heaps? but a rich dust for Kings
To scatter with their breath, as chafe by wind?
Let him then that hath gold, bear a Kings mind,
And give till his arm aches, who bravely powers
But into a wenches lap his golden showers,
May be Ioves equal, oh but hee that spends
A world of wealth, makes a whole world his debtor,
And such a Noble spender is Ioves better;
That man Isle be, I'm Alexanders heir
To one part of his mind, I wish there were
Ten Worlds, yet not to conquer, but to sell.
For Alpine hills of silver, And that I.
Might at one feast, spend all that treasure dry;
Who hoards up wealth, is base; who spends it, brave,
Earth breeds gold, so I tread but on my slave;
Bear back our gratulations to your Duke.
Wee shall great sir.
Torrenti call you him; it is a proud rough stream.
Hoe's of the Roman Family indeed.
Lord Vane? rather my Lord Vanity.
And heaps of money sure have struck him mad.
He will soon pick up his wits, let him but bleed
Thus many ounces at one time; All day
Could I drink these dear healths, yet ne'er be drunk.
And carry it away most cleanly.
Not a pin the worse;
What might his father leave him?
A great estate,
Of some 300000 Crowns a year.
Strange hoe's not begged, for fools are now grown
An admirable Cocks-combe! (dear;
Let wonder pass,
Hoe's both a brave-Lord, and a golden Ass.
I pray you hush all, a little hush, le fair Lady by hee own vo unter disposition, has take a ting dat is of such a grand operation, it shall make a de stone for sleep.
What, Noble Doctor, is the name of it?
Tic not your fcurvie English Poppy, nor Mandragon, nor a ting so danger as Oppium, but tic de brave ting a de world, for knock a de brain asleep.
I am glad she takes this rest.
Peace, be gore it is snore and snore, two mile long; now if your grace will please for procure Music, be restore as brave as de fish.
Call for the Music.
Makea no noise, but bring in de Fiddlers, and play sweet▪
Oh out upon this Doctor; hang him, does he think to cure dejected Ladies with Fiddlers—
De grand French poo stopa de troate, pray void le Shambera.
All, all part softly; peace Nurse, let her sleep.
I, I, go out of her prospect, for shoe's not to bee cured with a song.
Baptist, see the door fast, watch that narrowly.
For one friend to keep door for another, is the office now amongst gallants, common as the Law; Isle bee your pore∣la Sir.
She does but slumber, Fiametta, Love.
The Pecan Prince comes: daggers at my heart.
Look up, I am not hee, but Angelo?
Ha! who names Angelo?
Angelo himself,
Who with one soot treads on the throat of death,
Whilst t'other steps to embrace thee, thus in the shape
Of a French Doctor.
Oh my life, my soul.
Hear me.
I me now not sick, Isle have no Physic,
But what thy self shall give me.
Let not Joy confound our happiness, I am but dead,
If it be known I am here.
Thou shalt not hence.
Be wise dear heart; see here the best of men,
Faithful Baptist———
Oh, I love Baptist,
Cause he loves thee; But my Angelo I love bove kings.
Madam you'll spoil,
Unless you join with us in the safe plot
Of our escape.
Sweet Fyametta hear me.
For you shall hence with us.
Over ten worlds,
But Isle not hence; my Angelo shall not hence,
True love, like gold, is best being tried in fire;
Isle defy Father, and a thousand deaths—for thee——
Undone, undone.
At the Court gate,
I see a Iebbit already, to hang's both;
Death! the Duke beats at the door.
He shall come in;
One frown at thee, my Tragedy shall begin;
See Father—
I told you that I heard—her tongue—
See Father. Floe. What sweet girl?
That's Angelo, and you shall pardon him.
With all my heart.
Hee says hee pardons thee with all his heart.
Me Lore, be all mad, le brain crow, and run whereabout like de windmill sail, pardon a moi, pore quoy my sweet Ma∣dam, pardon your povera Doctor.
Because thou art my banished Angelo.
Stark mad.
This her recovery?
Hee is no Doctor,
Nor that his man, but his dear friend Baptist;
Has blocked this beard like a Comoedian
To play the Mountebank; away, Isle marry
None but that Doctor, and leave Angelo.
I doe pray Artely, Madam.
Leave off thy gibberish, and I prithee speak
Thy Native language.
Par-ma-soy all French be-gor sheebe mad as the moon.
Sweet girl, with gentle hands sir, take her hence.
Stand from me, I must follow Angelo.
Thine eyes drink sleep from the sweet god of rest.
Oh, you shoot poisoned arrows thorough my breast.
What strange new fury now possesses her?
Begar her imaginashon be out a de vets, and so dazzle de two nyes, and come down so into de belly, and possibla for make her think me or you to be le shentle-man she love, and so she takea my man for a Iack-a-nape, me know not who.
For one Baptist.
Povera garshon a my trat.
I doe believe you both, but honest Doctor,
Strain all thy Art, and so thou leave her well,
I care not if you call up fiends from hell.
Dar be too much devil in de body all ready be my trat my Lore, me no stay here for ten hundred hundred Coronas, she cry upon me it is Master Angelo, you think so not one and two time, but a tired time, you smell a me out; And so cutta my troate; adieu my Lore.
Still your opinion holds to kill that villain,
And give her his heart dried.
In de pot a vine, wee, very fine.
This gold take for thy pains to make her sound,
There needs a desperate cure to a desperate wound.
How blows it now?
Fair, with a prosperous gale.
Poor love, thou still art struck with thine own fate;
My life hangs at a thread, friend I must fly.
How, to be safe?
I will take sanctuary,
I know a reverend Friar, in whose cell
Isle lurk till storms blow ore; If women knew
What men feel for them, None their scorns should rue.
Is it come to this, have the walls of the Castle been besie∣general
thus long, lien open for a breach; and dare you not
Give fire to once piece? oh you're a proper soldyor, good
Sister, brother follow your game more close, or i'll leave you.
What wu'd you have me doe?
Why I would ha'you (tho'you be in women's apparel) to be your self a man, and do what you come for.
I have bin giving her a thousand on sets,
And still a blushing cheek makes me retire;
I speak not three words, but my tongue is ready
To ask forgiveness of her.
Must thou needs at thy first encounter tell her thou art a man, why when you walk together, cannot you begin a tale to her, with once upon a time there was a loving couple that ha∣avenge tyred themselves with walking, sat down upon a bank, and kissed, and embraced, and plaid, and so by degrees bring the tale about to your own purpose. Can you not? fie, you are the worst at these things Sir.
I am sister indeed.
And the more fool you indeed: you see how the old stinking fox her husband is still rubbing me as if I had the palsy, Isle not have his withered hands (which are as moist as the side of stock-fish) lye piddling in my bosom, therefore determine some thing, or farewell.
I have dear sister, if you will but hear me.
Come on, out with it then.
Give you the old man promise of your love,
And the next night appoint him for your bed;
Raped with joy, he'll seigne business of state,
To leave his lady, and to lie alone,
Very good.
Then my request shall be, that for that night
She would accept me for her bed-fellow,
And there's no question sister of the grant,
Which being Enjoyed I doubt not but to manage
And carry all so even on level ground,
That my offence shall in my love seem drowned.
The clock for your business thus far goes true, but now for me, what shall I do with the old cock in my Roost?
Sister, you have some trick (no doubt) to keep
Him within compass.
No not I believe me, I know not what to doe with him,
unless I should give him a little Nux vomica, to make him sleep away the night, but brother, to pleasure you, Isle venture a joint, and yet it troubles me too, that I should prove a Traitor to my sex, I doe betray an Innocent Lady, to what ill I know not.
But Love the author of it will I hope
Turn it quite otherwise, and perhaps it may be
So welcome to her as a curtsy.
I doubt not but it shall.
We nothing can,
Unless man woman help, and woman man.
THou art my noble kinsman, and but thy mother
(Upon my soul) was chaste I should believe
Some Emperor begot thee,
Why pray Uncle?
Suppose all kingdoms on the earth were balls,
And that thou hold a racket in thy hand,
To toss 'em as thou wu'd'st, how wo'dst thou play?
Why? as with balls, bandy 'em quite away.
A tennes-court of kings could do no more;
But faith what doest thou think, that I now think,
Of thy this days expense?
That it was brave.
I think thee a proud vaine-glorious bragging knave,
That golden womb thy father left so full, thou
Vulture-like eat'st thorough: oh hears trimstuffe;
A good-mans state, in Gartyres, strings and ruff;
Hast not a saffron shirt on too? I fear you are
Troubled with the greene-sicknes, thou look wan.
With anger at thy snarling must my hoase
Match your old greasy cod-piece?
No, but I'd have thee live in compass.
Fool, I'll be
As the sun in the Zodiac; I am he
That wood take Phaetons fall, though I set fire
On the whole world to be heavens charioteer,
(As he was) but one day.
Vain riotous cockscomb,
Tha'st fier'd to much already, Parks, Forests, chases,
Have no part left of them, but names and places;
It is voiced abroad thy lands are all at pawn.
They are, what then?
And that the money went to
Entertain the Popes great Nuntio,
On whom you spent the ransom of a king.
You lye.
I thank you Sr,
Say all this true
That I spent millions, what's that to you.
Were there for every day i'th'yeare a Pope,
For every hour i'th'yeare a Cardinal;
I'd melt both Indies, but I'd feast'em all.
And leave your Courtesans bare, that leaving bare,
Will one day leave thee naked, one nights waking,
With a fresh-whore, cost thee 4000. ducats,
Else the bawd lies.
Were thou not mine uncle
I'd send thee with thy frozen-beard where furies
Should singe it off with fire-brands, touching
Winching, that art thy self an old rotten whore-master.
I a whore-master?
To show how much I hate it, hark, when next thy tomblers
Come to dance upon the ropes,
Play this jig to 'em.
Go, go, idle droane,
Thou enviest bees with stings, because thine is gone,
Plate, jewels, revenues all shall fly.
They shall.
And then Sir I'll turn pickled thief, a Pirate,
For as I to feed Rayot, a world did crave,
So nothing but the sea shall be my grave,
Mean time that circle few began l've run, though the
Devil stand in the Center.
What's that circle?
The vanity of all man-kinde be mine,
In me all prodigals looseness fresh shall flow,
Wine, harlots, surfeits, rich embroidered clothes,
Fashions, all sensual sins, all new coined oaths,
Shall feed me, fill me; Isle feast every sense,
Nought shall become me ill, but innocence.
I hope a wallet hanging at thy back,
Who spends all young, ere age comes, all will lack.
What sounds this trumpet for?
Dinner my Lord,
To feast whom this day are my tables spread?
For sea-men, wrack't, aged, or sick, or lame,
And the late ransomed captives from the Turk.
Cheer them with hearty welcomes in my name,
Attend them as great Lords, let no man dare,
To send'em sad hence, bounty shall be placed
At the boards upper end; For Mariners
Are clocks of danger that do ne'er stand still,
Their dialls-hand ere points to'th stroke of death,
And (albeit seldom windlass) loose their breath;
I love'em, for they eat the dearest bread,
That life can buy, when the elements make wars;
Water and air, they are said by their good stars.
And for the gally-slaves, make much of those, love that man
Who suffers only for being christian; What suitors waite?
Come near, one at once, keep back pray.
A sorry man, a very sorry man.
What makes thee sorry?
All I had is burnt, and that which touches me to the quick, a box of my sweet evidence my Lord.
Show me some proof of this.
Alas too good proof, all burnt, nor stick, nor stone, left.
What wodst have me doe?
Bestow but a bare 100. l. on me, to set me up.
Steward deliver him a 100. l.
Now all the—
Nay kneel not Sir, but hear me.
Oh my honey Lord!
Faces are speaking pictures, thine's a book,
Which if the leaf be truly printed shows
A page of close dissembling.
Oh my Lord!
But say thou art such, yet the monie's thine,
Which I to Charity give, not to her shrine;
If thou cheat'st me, thou art cheated? how? th'hast got
(Being licorish) rats-bane from a gally-pot,
Taking it for sugar; thou art now my debtor,
I am not hurt, nor thou I fear, much better; farewell.
Cannons defend me, Gun-powder of hell,
Whom doest thou blow up here?
Some honest scullar, row this lame dog to hanging.
What noise is that?
My Lord calls to you.
Was there ever called
A devil by name from hell? then this is one.
My friend, what is hee?
A City pestilence,
A mouth that eats up gowns, doublets and hose,
One that with Bills, leads smocks and shirts together
To linen close adultery, and upon them
Strowes lavender, so strongly, that the owners
Dare never smell them after; hoe's a broker.
Suppose all this, what hurt hath hee done thee?
More then my limbs loss; in one week he eat
My wife up, and three children, this christian Jew did;
He's a long lane of hellish Tenements,
Built all with pawns.
All that he had is burnt.
He keeps a whore indeed, this is the Raven,
Cried knock before you call, he may be fired,
His lousy wardropes are not; to this hell-hound
I pawned my weapons to buy browne bread
To seed my brats and me; (they forfited)
Twice so much as his money him I gave,
To have my Arms redeemed, the griping slave
Swore (not to save my soul) unless that I
Laid down my stump here, for the Interest,
And so hop home.
Unheard of villain!
Broker, is this true?
It were sin my Lord, to lie.
Soldier, what is it thou now crau'st at my hands?
This my Petition was, which now I tear,
My suite here was, When the next place did fall,
To be a Beades-man in your Hospital:
But now I come most piteously complaining
Against this three-pile rascal, widows decayer,
The Orphans beggerer, and the poores betrayer;
Give him the Russian law for all these sins.
How?
But one hundred blows on his bare shins
Come home and take thine Arms.
Isle have those legs
Broker, my soul foresaw goods thus ill got,
Would as ill thrive, you asked a hundred pound,
It is yours; but crafty Broker, you plaid the knave
To beg, not needing. This man now must have
His request too, it is honest, fair, and just,
Take hence that varlet therefore, and on his shins,
In ready payment, give him an hundred blows.
My Lord, my pitiful Lord.
I must bestir my stumps too. Justice; my Lord.
I will not ravill out time; Broker, I offer you
A hundred for a hundred.
That's his own usury.
A hundred pound, or else a hundred blows,
Give him that money, he shall release you those.
Take it, and may thou rot with it.
Follow thee thy curse,
Wo'd blows might make all Brokers still disburse.
What next?
The Party sir:
What party sir?
If honest, speak, I love no whisperer.
This Gentleman is a great shutter.
In a Long-bow? how far shoots hee?
To your Lordship, to be your Apothecary.
Vmph; what spy you in my face, that I sho'd buy
Your druggs and drenches? bears not my cheek a colour
As fresh as any old mans? doe my bones
Ache with youth's riots? or my blood boil hot
With severs? or is it num'd with dropsies, cold
Coughs, Rhumes, Catarrhes, Gowts, Apoplexy fits?
The common soars of age, on me never ran,
Nor Galenist, nor Paracelsian,
Shall ere read Physical Lecture upon me.
Two excellent fellows my Lord.
I honour their profession,
What the Creator does, they in part doe,
For a Phisician's a man-maker too,—but honest friend,
My kitchen is my Doctor, and my Garden,
Trusty Apothecary; when they give me pills,
So gently work they, I'm not choked with bills,
Which area stronger purge then the disease.
Alas my Lord, and it were not for bills, our shops wo'd
Sir, I believe you, bills nor pills Isle take; (down.
I stand on sickness shore, and see men tossed
From one disease to another, at last lost;
But to such seas of surfeits, where they're drowned,
I never ventering, am ever sound.
Ever sound my Lord? if all our gallants sho'd bee so, Do∣ctors, Apothecaries, and Barber-surgeons, might feed upon Any∣once and Butter-milke; ever sound! a brave world then.
It is their own fault, if they fear springs or falls,
Wine-glasses filled too fast, make urinals;
Man was at first borne sound, and hee grows ill
Seldom by course of nature, but by will—
Distempers are not ours, there should be then
(Were wee our selves) no Physic, men to men
Are both diseases cause, and the disease,
I'm free from (thanks good fate) either of these.
My 50. Crowns.
Not I.
No, must I give you a Glister?
Hist, hist.
If your Lordship will not allow me minister to your self, pray let me give your man a purgation.
Me a Purgation? my Lord, I'm passing well.
Him a Purge, why?
Or rather a vomit, that hee may cast up 50 Crowns—
Which he swallowed as a Bribe to prefer me.
My health is bought and sold sir then by you,
A Doctor baits you next, whose mesh of potions
Striking me full of ulcers, a gibberish Surgeon,
For 50. Crowns more, comes to draw my will,
For money, slaves their Sovereigns thus kill;
Nay, nay, so got, so keep it; for his Fifty,
Give him a 100. Crowns, because his will
Aimed at my health I know, and not at ill:
Fare you well sir.
Who pays me sir?
Follow me, I sir.
The fellow, my Lord, is fast.
What fellow sir?
The thief that stole this Jewel from your honour,
Hee came unto my stall my Lord.
So.
And asked me
Not the fourth part in money it was worth,
And so smelling him out.
You did.
I did sir,
Smell him out presently, and under hand
Sent for a Constable, examined him,
And finding that he is your Stewards man,
Committed him to the Eel.
What money had hee upon this Jewel of you?
None my good Lord, after I heard it yours.
Else you had bought it,
And been the thiefes receiver, you're a varlet,
Go to, a saucy knave; if I want money;
And send my servants servant (cause the world
Shall not take notice of it) to pawn, or sell
Jewels, or Plate, though I loose half in half,
Must you sir, play the Marshall, and commit him,
As if he were a rogue; go and release him,
Send him home presently, and pay his fees, doe you see sir.
My Lord, I do see.
Least by the Innocent fellow,
I lay you fast byth' heals, doe this you're best;
You may be gone.
Heere's a most excellent jest.
Hark you, the Duke of Florence sent me once
A Jewel, have ye'it? For you laid it up.
My Lord, I have it.
Are you sure you have it?
Why change you colour? Know you this? doe you know
Your man, you sent to sell it? You belike
Thought in my memory it had been dead,
And so your honesty too came buried,
It is well, out of mine eye; what wo'd you with me?
Your pity on a wretch late wrecked at sea,
Beaten a shore by penury, 3▪ years a Turkish
Gally-slave.
Your birth?
Such Sir,
As I dare write my self a gentleman,
In Florence stood my cradle, my house great,
In money, not in mercy; I am poor,
And dare not with the beggar pass their door.
Name them, they shall be forced to thy relief.
To steal compassion from them like a thief,
Good my Lord pardon me, under your noble wing,
I had rather sit, then on the highest tree sing,
That shadows their gay buildings.
Young man I doe commend thee, whore's my steward?
Give me thy hand, I entertain thee mine,
Make perfect your accounts, and see the books delivered
To this Gentleman.
This poor rogue Sir?
Thou art a villain, so to term the man,
Whom I to liking take; Sir I discharge you;
I regard no mans out-side, it is the lineings
Which I take care for,
Not if you knew how lousy they were.
Cast not thy scorn upon him, prove thou but just,
Isle raise the Cedars spring out first from dust.
Madam this night I have received from court,
A book of deep import, which I must read,
And for that purpose will I he alone.
Be Mr. of your own content my Lord.
Isle change you for some female bed-fellow.
With all my heart.
Pray madam then take me.
Doe prithee wife.
And Sr. she is most welcome.
Wo'ld I were at it, for it is a book,
My fingers itch till I be turning o'er;
Good rest fair Alphonsina you'll not fail.
No, fear me not.
All all to bed, to bed.
Mine eyes are full of sleep; Isle follow you.
I to my closet, and then bed-fellow
Expect your company
I will be for your Lady.
Madam so please you forfeit to my mother,
And let your self and I be bedfellows.
Dear heart I humbly thank you, but I must not.
Lady I rather wish your company,
Because I know one maiden best conceals,
What's bosomed in another: but Isle waite
With patience a time fitting.
Worthy Lady,
This time is yours and mine.
Thus I begin then,
And if I cannot woe relief from you,
Let me at least win pity, I have fixed
Mine eye upon your brother; whom I never
But once beheld here in this house yet wish
That he beheld me now and heard me;
You are so like your brother, that me thinks I speak to him,
And that provokes a blush to assail my cheek;
He smiles like you, his eyes like you; pray Lady
Where is the gentleman? it was for his sake
I would have lien with you, wo'd it were as lawful to fellow nights with him.
Troth I do wish it.
And if in this you enrich me with your counsel, Isle
Be a grateful taker.
Sure my brother
Is blessed in your affection, and shall have
Good time to understand so.
Alesandra
Madam.
A word, come quickly.
O ye heavens! how strangely one hour works upon an other. It was but now heart-sick, and longed for meat,
Which being set before me I abhor.
Brother.
What frights you thus from your chamber?
Such a fury as thou.
How now? hast lost thy wits?
Isle swear thou hast, for thou hast candled
Thy sweet but poisonous language to dishonour
Me thy most wretched sister, who no better then a vile
Instrument to thy desires, deserves to be styled,
Baud, worse then the bawds.
Who every day i'th'weeke shake hands with hell.
Have patience dearest sister; I protest,
By all the graces that become a man,
I have not wronged Dariene nor her Lord.
Thou shalt not then by heaven.
By all goodness, not
With a well blush discourse fair Alissandra
Supposing me your sister hath discovered
The true pangs of her fancy towards Tibaldo,
And in it craved my aide, which heard, Even then,
My Brutish purpose broke its neck, and I
Will prove the daughters husband, that came hither,
A traitor to the Mother.
My noble brother,
Our doings are alike, for by Trebatio
(Whom I with honour name) his fathers foulness shall be
Cut off and crossed.
Get to your chamber;
No longer will I play the women's part,
This night shall change my habit with my heart.
In this chamber she lies, and that's her window wo'd I were in: the air bites, but the bit that I shall bite anon sharpens. my stomach, the watch-word is a cornet, (Cornet within) it speaks, she bids me come without a lighr, and reason snes light enough herself; wink thou one-eyed baud, be thou an em∣blame of thy Mr. and burn in secret.
My Lord.
What says my most moist-handed sweet Lady.
Who is there with you?
No christian creature, I enter solves.
I fear I must entreat you to stay a little.
As long as thou desire, but-wilt come down?
I would be loath to loose all upon rest,
Shall I mount then?
For mine honour being once cracked.
Crack a pudding: Isle not meddle with thine honour.
Say you should get me with child.
I hope I am not the first Lord has got a lady with child.
Is the night hushed?
Ther's nothing stirring, the very mice are a sleeepe, as I am noble, Isle deal with thee like a gentleman.
Isle doe that then, which some Citizens will not doe, to some Lord.
What's that?
Take your word, I come.
Vd's my life!
What's the matter sir?
I hear a lute, and sure it comes this way.
My most loved Lord, step you aside, I would not have you seen for the saving of my right hand, preserve mine honour, as I preserve your love.
Pox on your Cats guts.
To an unworthy window, who is thus kind?
Look out of it, and it is the-richest casement
That ever let in Ayre.
Trebatio.
I, my most fair Mistress.
Neither of both good sir;
Pray play upon some other, you a buse me,
And that which seems worse, in your fathers house.
Brave girl.
But you are young enough to be forgiven,
If you will mend hereafter, the night has in it
Unwholesome fogs, and blasts; to bed my Lord,
Least they attach your beauty: nothing more,
Isle pay you for your song.
Are you gone so?
Well, you hard-hearted one, you shall not ever
Be Lady of your self—away.
Oh my Lord, I have stood Sentinel as you bad me, but I am frighted.
With what?
The Night-mare rides you, my Lady is conjured up.
Now the devil lay her down, prevented in the very Act.
She works by magic, and knows all.
Doe you shrink back my Lord? you may with shame;
Have I tan you napping my Lord?
But not with the manner my Lady.
Have you no bird to fly at, but what sits on your own sons fist?
How! my sons fist? (Harlot
Yes, the Lady whom you wrought to have bin your
Your son has long since won to be his bride,
Both they and I have this night exercised
Our wits to mock your dotage.
Am I then gulled?
Yes my Lord, and bulled too, yonders Tibaldo Neri come this morning.
So early, Is his sister with him?
Not that I saw, but I saw him kiss my young Mistress, three or four times, I think it were good to ask the banes of Matri∣money.
Wo't it were no worse, let's in, and give 'em the mornings Salutation.
Isle tell him all.
Sweet Lady, seal my pardon with a kiss,
He ne'er was borne, that never did amiss.
SIr, I have found Angelo with long and busy search.
And will he come?
Your honour (as you charged me) I impawn'd
For his safe passage.
By my life hee shall; when will hee come?
My friend brings him along.
Philippo Mutio, go and persuade our daughter
To walk, and take the ayre.
Isle play that Orator.
Attend the Duke of Pisa; prithee Piero
Discover where this Angelo lay lurking.
The world he has shut up, and now the book
He reads, is only here, see where he comes.
Way for my daughter; look you, there's Angelo.
Ha? yes, it is the star I sail by; hold me not,
Why doe you stick like rocks, to bar my way,
And utterly to wrack me?
Art thou mad?
Yes, I am mad, oh my best life, my soul!
Whom seek you Lady?
Doe you not know me sir?
Yes.
Doest thou not love me?
Yes.
At very heart?
Yes, at the very soul!
Burns not your love,
With that most holy fire, the god of marriage
Kindles in man and woman?
No.
Ha, no?
Hee says no.
Then so, quote dedi perdidi.
How can I love you Lady?
I have climbed too many of such fruitless trees.
Have you indeed?
Yes, and have pulled the apples.
Now I beshrew your fingers.
And when I touched 'em, found 'em turned to dust.
Why should you love me? I have changed my pleasure
In beauteous dames, more then I have my dreams,
Four in one night.
He will prove a lusty Larrence;
This is the star you sail by tho.
Why should you love me? I am but a Tomb,
Gay out-side, but within, rotten and foul.
Isle swear you are most diseased, even in thy soul;
Oh thou, thou most perfidious man alive,
So prosper, as my poor sick heart doth thrive;
Give me thy hand, I hate thee, fare-thee-well.
Come, I make thee my heaven, were it once my Hell.
I'm raped above the spheres, Joy strikes me dumb.
T'hast lent unto mine age a score of years,
More then ere nature promised, by thy loving
This Noble Prince; you are his then?
His—to prove it; hence
Thou from me; ne'er more behold mine eyes.
Now find I, that a Loversheart last dies.
I, I, so, so; If it die, it shall be buried.
Good reverend Sir, stay you, and as you witness
This my divorce, so shall you seal my contract.
I will, your pleasure.
Fyametta,
Make choice thy self of thine own wedding day.
To morrow be it, Loves poison is delay,
Gallants, pray stir betimes, and rouse your Mistresses;
Let some invite Lord Vane and his Lady;
Wee dine to day with Lord Iacomo,
Thither let's hasten: Sir, this holy man,
Shall be this night my confessor; about mid-night,
Expect my sending for you.
Your devotion
Commands my service. W'are least in the fryers stead.
The Prince be your confessor; girl prepare
To play the bride tomorrow, and then being laid,
O•e night past o'er think ne'er to rise a maid.
No more of complement, my Lord Gentile;
Such noble welcomes have we had this day,
We must take blushing leaves, cause we can pay
Nothing but thanks.
That's more then the whole debt comes to,
Ne'er saw I tables crowned with braver store;
I know no man that spends my nor gives more,
And yet a few•l sea still: why yonder fellow,
The brave mo•k-prodigall has spent all indeed,
He that made beggars proud, begs now himself for need.
But who relieves him now? none, for I know
He that in riotous feasting, wastes his store,
Is like a fair tree which in summer bore
Boughs laden till they cracked, with leaves and fruit;
Whose plenty lasting, all men came unto 't;
And plucked and filled their lips and carry away;
But when the boughs grow bare, and leaves decay:
And the great tree stands sapless, withered dry,
Then each one casts on it a scornful eye,
And grieves to see it stand, nay do not greeve,
Albeit the Axe down to the root it cleave;
The fall of such a tree, will I beware,
I know both when to spend, and when to spare.
It is nobly spoke
Nay good my Lord make hast.
Here's a child lost in the staying.
Get 2. at night for it.
What is the bride yet dressed?
She's rigging Sir.
It is well, music? from whence?
What chambers that?
It Ioynesclose to the
Lodgings of the bride.
Inquire.
If she be ready, Mutio, say her bridegroom
Attends on her below.
I shall my Lord.
Tarry, she looks her self out.
Come, come loiterer;
Fair welcome to your grace, and to that Prince,
That should have bin my bridegroom.
Should ha been?
Is the Moon changed already?
In her changes the
Moon is constant, man is only varying,
And never in one Circle long is tarrying,
But one man in the moon at once appears,
Such praise (being true to one) a woman bears.
Take thou that praise and to this Prince be true,
Come down and marry him.
What would the world say,
If I should marry two men in one day?
That villain has bewitched her.
Sir what villain?
That slave, the banished runagate.
Cast not on him
Such foul aspersions, till you know his guilt;
Even now you said he was a worthy spirit,
Crowned him with praise, and do you now condemn
An absent man unheard?
Isle hang thee traitor.
Locke all the gates of Florence, least he scope.
Our pardon, whosoever takes and kill him.
Oh! who would trust in Princes, the vain breath,
Who in a minute gives one man life and death?
Come forth thou threatened man, here kill him all,
Lower then what you stand on▪ none can fall.
I now must stand your arrows, but you shoot
Against a breast as innocent—
As a traitors.
Your patience Sir,
Talk thou of patience? that by thy most perfidious—
Hear me pray.
Or if not me, hear then this reverend man.
What makes that Fryer there?
Father speak your mind.
I was enjoined to be her confessor,
And came but then she won me to a vow,
By oath of all my orders, face to face,
To hear her speak unto Angelo, it was done,
He came, when falling down on both her knees,
Her eyes drowned all in tears, she ops a book,
Chardging him read his oaths and promises,
The contract of their hands, hearts, yea and souls,
And asked if Angelo would marry her.
Very good.
He looking pale as death, said faintly no.
Faintly, he then was willing?
Pray hear him out.
Thrice tried: he thrice cried no; At which this Lady
Desperately snatching from her side two knives,
Had stabbed her self to th'heart, but that we knit
Our force against it, what should I doe in this?
Not marry her, or rob her of heavens bliss?
Which glory had bin greater to have tan,
A husband from her, or to have seen her slain?
Then you have married her?
I have.
Brave girl.
Isle cut that knot asunder with my sword.
The hands which heaven hath joined, no man can part.
The hands they may, but never shall the heart,
Why did thou make to him thy promise then?
Women are borne, but to make fools of men.
She that's made sure to him, she loves not well,
Her banes are asked here, but she wedds in hell;
Parents that match their children against their will,
Teach them not how to live, but how to kill.
Parrot, Parrot,
Isle stop your prating, break into her chamber,
And lay the villain bleeding at her feet.
Villain? it is my husband.
Enter and kill him.
Enter, but kill him he that dares, I blush
To see two Princes so degenerate
Oh noble brother!
What would you have him doe?
He well deserves to have her to his wife;
Who gives to you a daughter, her a life,
In sight of angels she to him was given,
So that in striking him, you fight with heaven.
You see there is no remedy.
Troth none;
I threw at all (and gamesters luck) ell's gone;
Farewell brave spirited girl, he that against wind,
Fire and the sea, law and a women's mind,
Strives, is a fool, that's I, Isle now be wise,
And never more put trust in women's eyes.
I love thee for that word with-all my heart.
Will you come down pray?
Swear as you are a Duke.
Yet more a doe.
Will you not trust your father?
Why should I? you see there is no trust i'th'daughter;
Swear by your hopes of good you will not touch
His nail to hurt him.
By my hopes I swear.
And you too?
Yes, what's falling none can rear.
Wee come then noble friend, flag not thy wings,
In this war I defy a camp of Kings.
See, see, more shoals of friends, most beauteous Ladies,
Fair welcomes to you all.
My Lord those tides,
Are turned, these Ladies are transformed to brides.
We heard the happy news, and therefore sent,
To marry joys with joys, yours, with our own,
Yours (I see) prosper, ours are overthrown.
How mean you overthrown?
Your own eyes shall be witness how: nay, nay, pray rise,
I know your heart is up, tho your knees down.
All that we stand in fear of is your frown.
And all dear father which I beg of you,
Is that you love this man but as I doe.
What beg you of this Prince?
That he would take
One favour from me, which my self shall make.
Pray let it be of willow.
Well then it shall.
Why willow? is the noble Prince forsaken?
All women's faults, one for another taken,
Now in good sooth my Lord, she has but used you
As watermen use their fares, for she looked one way,
And rowed another, you but wore her glove,
The hand was Angeloes, and she dealt wisely.
Let woman ne'er love man, or if she doe,
Let him ne'er know it, make him write, waite woe,
Court, cog, and curse, and swear, and lie, and pine,
Till Love bring him to death's door, else hoe's not mine,
That flesh eats sweetest that's picked close to the bone,
Water drinks best, that's hewed even from the stone;
Men must be put to 't home.
He that loves ducking, let him come learn of thee.
She has good skill;
At table will wee hear a full discourse
Of all these changes, and these Marriages,
Both how they shuffled, cut, and dealt about,
What cards are best, after the trumps were out,
Who plaid false play, who true, who sought to save
An Ace ith'bottome, and turned up a knave;
For Love is but a Card-play, and ell's lost,
Unless you cog, hee that pack's best, wins must,
Since such good gamsters are together met,
As you like this, we'll play another set.

KNights, Gentlemen, and Yeomen,
attend her Graces service; sheele abroad.
Be vncoverd Gentlemen.
Rome there, back Beggars.
Bertie, deal mine Alms.
Pray for the Duchess, friends.
Heavens preserve your Grace.
What says thou? from my King? I kiss his 〈◊〉
As humbly as my infant penitence,
When due correction threatened mine offence:
I may entreat the Palatine with grace,
All courtesy and favours, for my Sovereigns sake,
I will present him with smooth countenance,
But for the point here touching Marriage,
Beseech my Prince of pardon, since, as yet,
My Widows tears are scarce wiped from my cheek,
Touching the business, bout Sir Roger Willowbie,
My dear near kinseman, Isle not return
You empty handed back, but send
His highness Parram Lordship to dispose,
And thank his gracious providence for him.
Return my salutations on my knee,
And say my whole possessions are all his,
Bertie reward his pains, On;
Stay, and know the reason of that guard,
How? give mine eyes the fullness of their wish,
Screen not my Joys, I pray stand all aside,
My Gossip Gardner led unto the Tower,
Tic pity, nay man leave your courtesy,
My passion has no tears to answer you,
Truth now I hope hath got a holiday,
The tyrant Wolf in hold, the Lambs may play,
Forward to Sussex house in Barnisby street:
More objects yet of comfort? what is he?
Boner commanded to the Martial sie.
Faggots will then grow cheap, they say, my Lord,
That you have bought up all our fire-wood,
To send vs in a shining flame to heaven,
But Bertie, see how lean has study made him,
And his care with sweating in repress of errors,
An Ell will hardly girdle his lean wast.
Sands, Isle defer your welcome yet from Cambridge,
To show you here a president of zeal.
Madam 〈◊〉 scorns live not with charity,
My conscience is cont•ned to bear this cross.
And mine as well content that thou should bear it,
think thou I will disburden thy content,
Good man thou art deceived, my charity
Shuts up the doors against thy misery,
I tell thee, all my sorrows are dried up,
With this sweet breath of comfort, to see thee,
Enfranchise truth by thy captivity.
Time flatters you awhile, heaven has a power,
Can change the White to Sable in an hour,
My wealthier thoughts, yet tell me I shall live,
these scorns to quittance, your free heart to grieve,
For time is rich in ransom, she may raise,
the scorned and captived Boner, ware those days.
If Englands sin deserves that curse again,
Doubtless my life the truth should still maintain.
The grace of heaven make strong that your resolve•
Tut Sands, I am no novice to bear off
The gusty shock of danger, here is proof,
Hath bid the Cannon of rough threatening grief,
The deaths of one dear Husband, and two Sons,
(Regenerate in the fame of their deserts.)
Have made a violent shot against this breast,
But by the manly courage of that joy,
Is knit unto my spirits, to behold
The exiled truth, now sojourning with time,
The rage of their repugnance recoils,
And I am Mistress of a Virgin heart.
With pardon gracious Madam,
Could Berties rude persuasion please your ears,
I wish it clothed with Hymens royalties:
A husband, like an Ammell, would enrich
Your golden virtues.
How Men can praise themselves.
Marriage is good, but wheres the husband good?
A loving husband, Bertie, true in touch
May swear, so they will be, few prove such.
Durst my opinion venture, but to speak him,
I could commend that merit to your heart,
As I presume, your fancy would embrace.
Void all the Chamber, Bertie, but your self,
The husband now, come man, fear not to speak,
You have absolution, ere you doe begin,
The husband can report his true deserts.
As much as observations greedy eye,
Could well retain, keeps warm upon my tongue,
Which to your noblest consideration was in honours womb,
And from her sucked his Nutriment of life,
His spirit like an ensign doth display
The worthiness of his heroic birth,
His more concealed virtues varnish that,
To make his Comet (merit,) wondered at,
Nature in moulding of his lineaments,
Has shamed the cunning workmanship of Art,
That he is Madam, as your wish would make,
The richer in desert for your words sake.
You have described the substance of a man,
Such as might ravish the most chastest thoughts,
Virginity could sin in wish of him,
For but on my decease•d Brandons breath,
Did never waite such rich perfections,
In them I shall but re-espouse mine own,
Marry one Husband twice, embrace the dead,
Hug in mine arms a Suffolk buried▪
If honourable Love live in a man,
It guides the vert•es of the Palatine.
The Palatine? has he your wishes voice.
Could it assure him of your fancies choice.
His stately honours are unmatched for mine.
His greatness reflects beams into your shine.
That greatness claims a duty from my heart.
No more then his love offers your desert.
Your humble eyes see's merit, his will not,
Our weaker words in Marriage are forgot.
Nay rather Madam Wedlock doth inroule,
The special essence of your rare deserts,
Remembering your perfections.
I, they cou•d live in your humility,
And my affections best afford them thee,
Whilst thy sweet tongue solicits for thy friend,
Into thy bosom all my thoughts I send.
Cranwell what news.
The County Pallatine, now king of Poland.
King of Poland?
Madam survey your thoughts,
Master your fears, and crown your happiness,
King of Poland?
You Queen my hopes would see.
Queen of my rich desires in marrying thee▪
What of this king of Poland?
He stays your graces leisure,
Accompanied with the Earl of Arundell.
Entreat their presence,
Welcome royal Prince,
My noble Lord.
Madam, my latest service comes to bring
An old affection from a new made king.
My Pristine gratulations thus accept
The humble proffer of your sovereign heart▪
But let me tell you, my thrice gracious Lord,
You deal not Kingly, by advantaged means
To set upon my infancy of Love,
To ambush lay it by intelligence:
You know my meaning, theres a privy thief
I know you set to pillage my affections,
He durst not else have broke my secrets up.
His travel has not loitered in your suit,
Nor will I be ungrateful to his pains.
The Duke Northumberland, with the Earl of Erbaigh,
Desire to have access unto your grace.
More suitors? well, they are all welcome; usher them in.
Health and fair fortune
Waite on Suffolks Duchess.
Your wishes return their virtues on your self.
The king salutes you in my vassal breath,
And bad me tell you, he received your gift
With thankful welcome, and bestowed the same▪
(Pieced out with honour, from his noble bounty)
Upon your cousin Sir Roger Willowby,
Creating him Lord Willowby of Parram,
To build remembrance of your gracious gift:
Further he prays you to entreat this Prince,
The Earl of Erbaigh with fair courtesy.
Madam, the love of your perfections▪
Hath called me hither, and of them I crave,
A welcome to my loyalty of heart.
I wish sir, my perfections of that wealth
To rate so high a merit as yours is:
But Princes, leave this cheapening of my love,
It is a bad thing dear.
Shall I beseech of you my Lord of Poland, and the rest,
Princes or whosoever tenders me
The humble service of his noble heart
As to digest my choice with patience:
Amongst you I will choose, and at this time
And in his like inter my vviddowhood,
Amongst a throng of merits one but enters,
One wins the Goal still▪ though a thousand venters,
This man must but poss•sse me, let the voice
Of my affections, please all with her choice.
Pleased or displeased, you women choose you• 〈◊〉
And reason you should have it, or else one
You'll take a fall to have it; fancies force
Makes honest plainness often speed the worse,
Choose Madam choose, and please thine own conten••
The king of Poland Madam.
How this fellow
Wakes my remembrance for the king of Poland,
As though my fancy hung upon his tongue,
I never shot a blunted arrow forth,
Nor shall my choice recoil upon his worth,
Whom Isle call mine; come worst of fate,
Bertie I choose thy self my marriage mate,
Upon this low foundation I erect
The Palace of mine honours, on this knee
I place the head of mine authority;
Let hand from hand exchange their offices,
Whats mine is thine, thine mine, sealed with this kiss.
How madcap Duchess; what and join lips
What ere we thought, I see it is a match.
You see blind fancies folly in my choice,
His worth prevails, nor will I change my voice.
By the dear loyalty my thoughts doe owe
To this unmeasured grace you heap on me,
And by the virtue of a Christian faith,
The relish of this blessing is so strong,
That when I leave to love, I live too long.
Princes, let your displeasure chide his meri••
Which stole my love your honours would inherit.
My fury thus bursts forth, to wish increase
Of your spouse virtues in your lives sweet peace.
My hatred dies not so, but I would see
Your merits live in your posterity.
Whereat frown you sir?
I hope it is no breach of duty, to conceal
Our close affections, they are privileged,
And I will keep them so, you have my service;
If it may pleasure, so; if not, I care not:
Isle morn mine own sins,
Take your Cloak and spare not.
If you be tired with the wearing it,
Good speed you, Isle not break you back with care.
You have my heart, whilst I an honest ass,
(For so I count all men of patience,)
Have laden it with whole loads of businesses▪
With iaunting on your errands, drudgt at home,
With so strong diligence, that sleep could scarce
Approach my eye•lids for a sennights space:
The honour of your Cellar lives in me,
You scarce command a throat can gulp a health,
You think I flatter, take good fellows words,
And him whose merit claims pre-eminence,
By their opinion, deal your recompense.
If you mean me, I will not canvas
With you for the voice of quaint opinion;
You'll way down the scales,
Her honourable love, the gift of fate,
Not due of merit, doth advance my state.
Why sir, might she not bestow her love on me?
She might.
She might, more fool she did not, but al's one
All friends now, hears my hand, my spleens down.
In this embrace I send a general love,
To all my fellow servitors:
I know some lours upon my happiness,
How undeserved, let my offices
Of love to you, and duty to her grace,
In their impartial verdict render up.
O, take my answer as the general voice,
For from my mouth breathes their opinions:
She lessens not her honours in your choice,
But makes you Lord of her affections,
And them we serve not, but her royalties,
Which, as they are not lessened, why should we
Shrink from their service; whom her love doth hon•••
May challenge from vs special reverence,
And so shall you, as homage for that love,
Whose sovereignty commands our services.
Consent I see is liberal to this match,
And offers frankly my applauding heart,
Wishing of heaven to smile upon your loves,
That from them may grow up such gallant spirits
As may renown this land with honoured merits.
Good morrow to my Lord of Winchester▪
How doe you like our ayre in the Marshalseas,
From that ith Tower? welcome toot my Lord.
Oh I thank your love,
But had we once our liberties,
We would set night upon these morning skies.
Oh that that hour were come, the king on•
Whats that my Lord of London?
I, pray man, pray, that heaven would take
Our good king Edward to yon happy land,
Hoe's sick, hoe's sick, heaven take the •nfant child▪
For this cracked world his virtues are too mild:
Is not this charitable, what say thou man?
But is the king sick?
And princes Mary well,
Oh how I long to hear his passing bell.
Soft who comes here.
Health to my honoured Lords.
That were, thou meanest.
That are, I bring your Lordships from our an 〈◊〉
Queen? is Edward dead?
King Edward, of that name the sixth, is dead, and
Who, who I beseech thee, guides the state?
She that repeales you to your former seats,
Royal Queen Mary.
See.
Good hold my back, this sudden blast of comfort
Blows me up, where is my rival Ridley and the rest,
They now shall fire for this.
Sent down to Oxford.
Thence they shall not stir,
Till fire consume them, if I be Winchester.
By me her highness greetes you with that sea,
Adding unto it, high Chancellor of England.
An office good my Lord may coin revenge
With Justice stamp to pay our enemies.
My Lord of London, thats your title now,
Restored unto it with her graces favour.
And if affection •enifie my duty▪
Let me respectless die without her favour.
Where be the Lords of Winchester &amp; London?
The good Lord Paget, welcome, pray, what news si•?
Her highness gives vs joint commission
By virtue of this Patent to peruse,
And cleanse the state of impious sectaries,
Wherewith it was infected in the days
Of her deceased brother Edwards reign,
Without affection of affinity.
Of any, not her sister is except.
Then let our Suffolkes Dowager expect
Answer for her scorned taunts, she threw on me of late
That hot spirit, fire and flax, Madam faggot stick,
If she recant not I will faggot her,
If all the wood in Middlesex can doo•,
Or Londons Bishopric have means to pay fort
Isle not niggard her bones and I doe, arayne my charit•
I have already sent Process for her husband•
Forth by Cluine.
My man, a trusty fellow
Worthy employment in the Lollards tower,
But here comes Bertie, welcome honest Clunie
It was well done, an honest knave, Isle gratify thy love•
As I will quittance such malignant hates.
As whose, ant please your Lordship.
A vengeance flatter you,
Your courteous ear, wears daggers in your heart.
My ear, my Lord, is servant to my heart.
They serve end•ed to guide the envious heart.
Sure I think Bertie be an honest man,
Religious was his education,
With our deceased Chancellor whom he served,
If since his Lady have not weaned him from it.
Your honour still shall find me the same man.
In substance, but how in Religion?
As then a member of the self same Church.
My good Lady your Wi•e sir, shees not so.
I doe beseech your Lordships to suspend
And smother your opinions till a trial
Blow up the embers to an open flame,
Then censure as you find, and giue's your doom.
If we but find her answers half so calm.
Yes as thunder, she calm? as a baited Bear,
I will oppose my disputation,
Against a College of best discipline,
Rather then with her brains, she sticks her i•sts▪
Like poisoned arrows, in our tender spleens:
Thinking the sanctuary of her high birth▪
To privilege her fond presumption,
My credit sir be pound.
Your credit• tut tut, she hangs upon the mercy of the Queen,
But it will cast off her opinion.
Should she be cold, my Lords, or set a frown
Upon the alteration of her faith,
Your Lordships know the somes of money due,
From Charles the Emperor to her in the right,
Of her departed husband, Suffolkes Duke,
Which if your honourable licence would
Assign me a free passage to those parts
To gather up your unexpected love,
Would heate her good opinion with the zeal.
Where now the strangeness makes her somewhat stagger.
Let him go my Lords, you shall go speed him hence
The way is broader unto our revenge,
Which I have sworn to take upon that Dame,
Whose scornful taunts did so deprave my fame.
What says my good Chancellor to this suit.
You have free passage Bertie, when you please.
To scope your envies, if we cross the seas.
Follow him Clunie and when thou think,
The solemn farewell of •ivorced lips,
Hath part this husband from his honoured wife,
With some especial servants of the Queen
Enter the Duchess house in Barbican,
Take a true inventory of all her goods,
Discharge her household, save a man or two.
One Woman, and the Nurse that suckles her Child,
And say you have commandment from the Queen
To stay there till her highness further pleasure,
That she shall walk the hie-way to the Tower,
Be gon, perform thine Office carefully,
And I will pay thy pains as liberally.
I go my Lord, but doe you hear the news?
How Doctor Sands is escaped from the kings bench, and fled.
Send forth our warrants into every Coast.
Towards Kent▪ towards Kent, post Cluine, run vile∣lain
How starest thou? pack.
Live in my bosom if thou bring him back,
This Sands is Chaplain to yon scornful Duchess,
And he has tayne this lesson from her brains,
That house of sly devises, shees all wit,
Nor shall I sleep until I ruin it.
Madam, my promise of your penitence,
Weighed with the puissance of your high birth,
Wherein you are allied unto the Queen,
Calmed the rough Menace of stout Gardner,
And set a reverence on sterne Boners tongue,
Humbly to wish your reformation.
The Queen is near and dear unto my bl•••
In the remembrance of our mothers loves,
Which charge greater sorrow at my heart,
Then the huge shock of their malignant threats;
My •whole hath lodged the Truth, it shall not thence,
Whilst this weak flesh displays her airy sense.
But Madam, let your wisdom shut her up,
Commit her not unto your state to guard,
But humble your hie spirit, sleek your speech,
That envy may not stumble at mistrust,
Or find a rub to start suspicion:
Wear a smooth brow in presence of your foes,
Be shaken with their threats, retreat your spirit,
Till they insult upon your patience:
The Conquest won in your submission,
They slake the eager pursue•e of revenge,
To give you time to purve• for your scope;
You know my leave of passage ore the seas,
And with what cunning I have coloured it,
To free my conscience from the gail of fear.
But still leave mine upon the rock of care.
I go to seek releasement of that care,
Freely to spread the ensign of your Faith:
A simple, rustic home of liberty,
Is worth your honours in captivity.
It is, it is, and would befit our ••ues,
To wear them out in contemplation:
There should we read•, upon the naked walls,
The first creation of our wretchedness;
There no intruding objects of gay clothes,
Embroidered hangings, or rich tapestry,
Shall wound the service which we owe to heaven.
Oh M. Bertie, there my wish would be;
Change honoured woe for poor felicity.
Isle lay a Bark at Leigh shall stay for you,
To be transported to me at Midelborow.
But who conducts me to that Bark at Leigh?
Fear is a trusty guide, it is, it is,
She that knows no way, that way will not miss,
I prithee go, my Conscience to set free,
My tender feet shall learn to follow thee.
I go.
Yet stay, nay go, alas which way?
And must we part?
We must,
My bodies hee•e, thou hast my heart along with thee
Make much of•t prithee, till we m•ete again,
M• body and my soul you both retain.
Slip not my duty, I beseech your love,
To her for whom my sorrows shed more tears▪
Then is my wounded Conscience charged with fears.
Patience, good Madam.
Passion Master Bertie,
M• spl••no is wounded with compassionate pity,
I could drop out my Liver, •obe my life
Of her dear essence, with immoderate sighs,
For that sweet Princes, wronged Eliz•beth▪
Now in the gripe of their pernicious hate,
A guard of Angels ring her life about,
From the malicious practise of her foes;
Rebate their furies, cross their treacherous ways,
Let truth in her outlive these bloody days.
Amen, amen, what shall I deliver to her from 〈…〉
A comfortable salutation
To that heart sorrowing Lady which my prayer
From heaven has carried to her heart before.
Will you ought else?
A kind embrace from you, exchange a tear, 〈◊〉
And so farewell.
Oh this doth clog me more, ways down my sp•••
Should bear our fortunes to a soft repose,
Not daring here to peep out of ou• thoughts,
Without the danger of the Vulters gripe,
Whose watching eyes of inquisition
Steals covertly upon our purposes,
And yet you lag me with your load of griefs.
I could toss woe for woe until to morrow,
But then weed wake the wolf with bleating sorrow.
With what unwillingness I part from you
Let that and these received.
Adieu, adieu.
Madam.
Now Cranwell, what would thou? thy M. go•
I am glad he stayed no•, to piece out our mon••
What heavy thought strains moisture frō thy he•••
〈◊〉 see your greatness struck with envies da••
Her highn•sse servants have attached your goods,
Discharging all your household officers.
What remedy? this was my expectation: I was a•••
With complete resolution, to abide
The rigorous wrestle of this streame-borne tide.
Faintst thou at this? then thou would swoon to see
My honoured state changed to ragged misery.
I will not line to see that.
Then thy love is tried:
I thought it wou•d have lack•ed by my side.
How mean you Madam?
When it tires in service of your Grace,
May I ne'er more have being on the earth,
Were you to pass th'extreamest of all woe,
Might I be worthy, I would share with you.
Upon thy trust, then I repose my life,
Provide me against this even a Citizens Gown,
Ath meanest fashion, like my present fortunes:
This night Isle hazard to escape from hence,
Putting my fears into the hand of fate,
To trample on or readvance my state,
Wilt thou about it?
With a winged speed:
To cure your sorrows this manly heart shall bleed.
Madam this world is changed.
Change thou with it.
Change, and I did it were no heresy:
These humours grapple with my honesty,
But they are frantic fits, I let them pass.
Sir what are you?
My name is Clunie, and now your graces keeper.
I hear you have discharged my household Ser∣vents.
It is her highness pleasure.
Or Boners hate, but I accept it with a thankfulness.
All are not yet discharged, but your choice
May call two men, a woman, and a Nurse.
Nay, Cranwell is all I will beseech of you.
Why Cranwell, more then Fox?
Because more staid, with him,
Because of most continuance,
And longest wearing in my services.
What mean you by this wearing? I am sir••
My vvits are vvorne as thin as a Paper-leafe:
But tic the fairest end of Serving•men,
When we have spent the pleasure of our youth,
En sweat it out with painful industry,
To have such itching slaves to eat vs out,
Doe you so light respect me? I as light
Will make of you, and it come within my power▪
Farewell, pull down thy stubbornness of 〈◊〉
There brea•hes no servant of more honesty▪
Wilt please your kindness, keeper, usher me,
To teach my steps to usher misery.
Now Thomas?
What will you doe now, Thomas?
Your Mistress has discharged you, and your coat, Tho•••
Which was as dear to you, as your skin, Thomas,
It is pulled over your ears, what remedy:
Has Fox ne'er a hole to hide's head in these extremities
Now I remember my Cozen Raynauld lives not far he••
To him Isle make repair, and feed on country poultr••
For a while, till I can cry Vindicta•on this Duchess.
Well what Isle doe my thoughts not yet approve,
Fox will prove true to trust, not false to love,
Ienkin where art thou, hark what a kenell of 〈◊〉
Gives vs our welcome into kent, set up, com• &amp; to th••••
Stamp the frost out of thy feet into the mortar for me,
Isle catch me a heate or Isle bear it out at'h stones.
A good fire would doe better with the fingers ends.
But a pot of Ale and a tossed would doe best of all
With a cold stomach, over go to the Cock
And see if he came a'th kind, if his ale will
Make a man crow, weal leave our implements here
They will not run away, and hears no great crowd
Of People ith town, but if they be stolen, we may find 'em
Come Ienken, nimbly and stay by it.
Whither now wilt thou dispose thy self
From the enraged pursuit of this search
That with their fresh breathings have oft tired thee,
After so many hazards, whence my care
Has sweat in water to redeem my fear,
Must I a• last be forc'• to yield and die
Oh grief, but who can slip his destiny
They come and I am tired,
Thank•s heaven I have found a means
I hope to shelter me in these extremes.
Follow, pursue with swiftness and hes ours,
Soft hears a Tiler, weal enquire of him
Which way he took, sir you Tiler ho
Durtdauber with a vengeance answer me,
•eaue singing of your neck verse, Rogue your best
Lest it prove so indeed, you'll answerer'
Tiler hoe.
Say you sir, say you.
Say you goodman rascal?
Saw you not a man pass this way
With a speedy course but now.
He crossed down that way.
How the devil did we miss him?
Tired I hold my life, and tayne some barn,
Or privy shed; come lets back, search every nook,
Ransack the bushes, in each corner look.
How strong my spirit is to call them back,
Armed with the steeled proof of inocence,
That can rebate the edge of tyranny,
Invulnerable innocence she would go,
But yet this flesh is frail and full of fears,
To keep the soul from yon Celestial spheres,
Thy will be done my maker, whose great hand
Hath now my life from scorching malice fanned.
Come away Hugh ti ti tiler,
Now we have lined our backs,
And warmd our bellies,
Lets doe our days work in an hour
And drink our selves drunk all the day after.
Whope, why the Cock ale has spurt thee already•
Thou art a Coxcomb to say so, I will run up, and
Come down my Ladder as nimble as a Squirrel.
For going up I know not, but thou't come dow•
With thy head forward.
Why then that's a trick more then ever thou saw•
in thy life, oh in my ale I can doe any thing, tumble like a
Elephant.
Now whore's this Tiler.
At hand quoth pickepurse,
Ha you any work for a tiler.
Not so much work sir as you have made for the searcher.
And which way crossed the man?
Should there not be two hundred of slates, say thou?
Answer me hobbihorse,
Which way crossed he you saw enough?
Who doe you speak to sir,
We have forgot the hobbihorse.
Yes truly sir,
Look well amongst your selves for him.
The man, the man sir Saunders, that you said you saw.
That I saw said you, all that I saw was a russet
Gentleman with a tosted Cullizance, and hee went down
Gutter-lane I assure you.
That's as true as Sands crossed this way, and wee not see him.
Did he cross this way and you not see him, the
more blind buzzard you.
You told vs sir enough, he went this way.
Who I, then I told you a lye, for I was then sipping
my morning draught.
Say fellows did not he direct vs thither.
I, who I? Ienken the Tiler.
I you.
Bless my slating, is the devil amongst you, that you
fall so fast a lying, if I saw any of you before would every
slate I have were in your bellies, why doe you not know
Ienken the Tiler.
Nor hugh the good Duchess of Suffolkes man.
The Duchess man, an Heretic.
Nay nay, thats most certain, whats an Erewig sir,
a good fellow I hope.
You shall have that defind,
When you come before my Lord▪
Oh by no means,
He spits nothing but fire and fagot-sticks.
No matter, I have ale enough in my belly to
Quench um.
So guard them safe, these villains have conveyed
That traitor Sands their fellow, hence.
Not I, I desire you, I renounce and confound you.
Dam up the brick bats mouth, convey them henc•
Tic they shall pay the price of Sands offence.
Cranwell.
Madam.
Speak softly, where is Nurse, speak softly pr•
thee Lord, why toyters she, but call her not: soft, soft, w••
creaking shoes hast thou got Cranw. to betray our fear•
put off them traitors.
Madam.
Thou speak too loud.
Neither my tongue, nor shoes, can reach an ear•
Yes Cranwell but they doe of jealous fear.
My life is on the hazard of this game
And I mistrust each step will cheat the same.
O that the poison of this fear were once remove
We should not then halt here
The poison hath the t•eason of my foes,
I wish but patience to abide their blows,
But who comes here, Nurse, with a candle light
Tic darkness woman must guide out our fear.
What light is that there ho?
Nurse what hast thou done?
Disperse away, to Lyon key begone.
What ho, will none speak there, awake the gua•
What stay you for, for heavens sake will you go•
Good Cranwell, sweet Nurse, linger not my woe.
How will you find that way you yet ne'er w••
Isle 'trust in him that guides the Innocent,
Give me my Child, &amp; Mantle, now heavens pleasure:
Frewell, come life or death, Isle hug my treasure,
Nay chide not pretty babe, our enemies come
Thy crying will pronounce thy mothers dome.
Shees gone, sh•es gone.
Not far, but be thou still
This gate may shade vs from their envious will.
Gone, gone, pursue her or we are undone.
Oh fear what art thou! lend me wings to file,
Direct me in this plunge of misery,
Nature has taught the Child obedience,
Thou hast bin humble to thy mothers wish,
Oh let me kiss these duteous lips of thine,
That would not kill thy mother with a cry,
Now forward whither heaven directs, for I
Can guide no better then thine infancy,
Here are two Pilgrims bound to Lyon-key,
And neither knows one footstep of the way,
Return you, then tic time to shift me hence.
Search every corner, here, behind this gate
Her mantle, oh the luck, had we but staid
To search this nook, when fury bore vs hence
With violence to overtake her course,
We had prevented her intended scope
But what heaven would not, could not, tic decreed,
Her innocent life, should not by envy bleed:
But here we stint not, to pursue her flight,
I know twill boyle up Boners rancorous spite.
Thus far, but Heaven knows where wee ha•• esca••
The eager pursuit of our enemies,
Having for guidance my attentive fear,
Still I look back, still start my tyred feet,
Which never till now measured London street,
My honours scorned that custom, they would ride,
Now forced to walk, more weary pain to bide:
Thou shalt not doe so child, Isle carry thee
In sorrows arms to welcome misery,
Custom must steel thy youth with pinching want,
That thy great birth, in age may bear with scant,
Sleep peaceably sweet duck, and make no noise
Me thinks each step is deaths aresting voice,
We shall meet Nurse anon, a dug will come
To please my quiet infant, when, Nurse, when?
Who's that calls Nurse?
Aye me I am oreheard.
Master Cranwell.
Who goes there? Nurse?
Cranwell.
Madam.
My sweet Lady.
Whist honest Nurse? how strangely are we 〈◊〉
It is the place where you appointed vs.
Then heaven is gracious to my ignorance,
For had this night worn on the pride of day,
By I it could not have found out the way.
Are you not weary Madam?
Admit I be, let patience ease all, theres no 〈◊〉
Within cry. For Grauesend hoe.
Whats that, he frighted me.
They call for their passengers to Graues-end.
Pass we our fears with them, there stays at Lee
A Bark that will redeem our liberty,
If you dare venture, with my fortunes go,
A tide of Joy, may turn this stream of Woe.
How you resolve of me, I know not, try,
And when I shrink, brand me with infamy.
In heavens name, on then, fellows all in sorrow,
When we stand need, weal mutual comfort borrow.
My Lord sit down, stand forth thou Ipocret.
I never drunk I pocrasse in my life sir,
It was strong Ale that I am guilty of.
Clunie give evidence against this wretch,
Hath set his hand to help a traitor hence.
Indeed my Lord I am no Traitor, I am a Tilor,
Clunie tells your Lordship a fable, we saw no such Man,
not vvee.
No, wilt thou obstinately stand in it,
Did not thou lend him a disguise, employ him
Amongst other laborers about thy work,
And yet wilt thou deny thou art no Traitor.
Slave, Villain, Dog,
Have we not here the honest testimony
Of mine own Parator, that saw him clothed
In thy apparel, and dare thou deny it,
Faggots, faggots, hence to the stake with him.
Oh good my Lord, I shall never endure it,
I was once but burnt ith hand, and I have bin
The worse fort ever since, doe but here me,
Prove that I had any other apparel this seven years,
Then that you see upon my back, and burn me not,
But cut me into rashers, and broil me for Carbonadoes.
My Lords as I am Clunie, and your Parator,
This counterfeit simplicitude was he,
That twixt the hours of 12. and 1. at Noon,
Convayed the impious Traitor from our fetch,
By shifting him into his homely rags.
Twixt 12. and 1. ne'er trust me, but at that
〈◊〉 time I and my fellow here, (can thou speak nothing•
thy self) were at dinner at mother Puttocks, with a pi••
of a Tripe and a blacke-Pudding, by the same token th••
was a candles end in it as long as my thumb.
So, so, yar a cunning Knave, but sir, sir,
This cannot serve your turn, you rescued him,
And that by the law is held as Capital,
As if thy self were guilty of the crime.
His crime my Lord is it not manifest,
That hes a favourite of these Sismatikes,
And what is that but flat rebellion.
Go too, he must fry fort, he, shall I say the wo•
Boner that ere long will purge this land with bonfiers,
We come not with the Olive branch of Peace,
But with the sword of Justice, these Hidraes-heads will 〈◊〉
Be flourishing, unless at once we gived a fatal stroke,
Let them convert to ashes, let them burn,
So shall the State be quiet • how now, what news?
What have you caught the Duchess.
Most strangely sir, she did escape my hands,
Besides at Billinsgate have I kept narrow search,
Yet for my life could set no eye on her.
But we have all this while taine a wrong cour•••
Shall we imagine being hunted thus:
She would commit the safeguard of her life
To common passage, where she was assured
There would be diligent weight laid for her:
No, shees more subtle, all the world, my Lord,
Shall not persuade, but shees in England still,
In Marget, Lee, or some such bordering town.
And in good time I met a man of hers,
One Fox, my Lord, a fellow, as it seems,
Disgrac't by her, that told me we were wide
In that we went about.
Where met you him.
Coming from Algate.
Would he not confess
Which way his Lady Mistress was escaped?
With much a doe my Lords, with threars and pro∣mises,
At last he told me he would bring
Where we might trace her, and entrap her too.
Why brought you not that fellow to our presence?
He shall have dispensation how he will,
So he be trusty, and perform his word.
He promised faithfully to meet me here.
Well if he come, your ear.
Now Fox devise to qualify
Thy nature to thy name,
These be mere Cannibals
That take no pleasure but in sucking blood,
And though unluckily it was thy chance,
To fall into their hands, yet be not thou
(How ever outward grievances may urge)
A traitor to thy Lady; smooth with these,
That under colour to betray the Duchess,
She may have safer liberty to pass.
See my Lords, hoe's come.
Come hither sir, you did serve the Duchess,
And tic no doubt but you can give vs notice
Which way shoe's fled, stand no upon nice terms
As fearing to incur some deadly sin,
But t•ll vs plainly which way she is gone.
My Lords, I cannot readily discover
Which way shoe's gone, by reason I have bin
Long in disgrace, and quite dismissed the house,
But sure it is, she went disguised from hence,
And tic not possible but she must lurk,
Within some Haven town near to the coast.
What Town, as thou imagine?
My Lords I think toward Dover,
Or the Downs of Kent.
Nay thats not likely, soft, some
News I hope.
Health to this honourable presence,
I come to certify your Lordships all,
That as we kept the Ports on Essex side,
It was credibly reported, that the Duchess
With little or no train, is lodged in Lee,
And for she is disguised, and our Commission
Expired the date, we crave a fresh supply,
And some direction how to intercept her.
No better means then to renew our warrant,
And send this fellow with it that doth know her,
Into what shape so ere she be transformed.
It shall be so, I thank thee Pursyvant
For thy good news, it glads me at the heart,
I shall at length be even with this proud Duchess,
At Lee in Essex, oh tic excellent:
But I will tell you how't shall be my Lord,
Fox shall not go alone, Clunie and I
Will bear him company, and withal, ha, ha,
I cannot choose but laugh to tell the rest,
As shoe's disguised to hide her from my flght,
So will I be, to take her, in her slight,
Is it not good, is it not rare my Lord,
Nay is it not the best that ere you heard,
When subtlety by fraud shall be debarred,
I warrant you shoe's ours Clunie, Fox come hither,
Provide you straight, Fox thou shalt go with me,
Ha, wilt thou not.
(A plague upon you,) I must answer, I.
How ere my heart abhor this treachery,
My Lord I will.
Why now thou please me,
And I will richly recompense thy pains,
But for we will not, our affairs at home,
In the mean time be slackt, or intermitted,
You my good Lords shall have a special care
About it straight, Fox, Clunie, follow me,
This is to Boner chief felicity.
Yes, I will follow,
Though not further ye,
I trust this is a means ordained of Heaven,
To bridle this bloodsuckers cruelty,
But how now, what art thou.
Marry sir an honest man and a Tiler, that was
sent for hither to bee examined about wan M. Sands, and it
seems for Joy they have to know where the Duchess is, they
have forgotten me, what were I best to doe.
What else but get thee home unto thy house,
Away be packing, since they have forgot thee,
Doe not thou tarty to revive their memory.
Nay if I put them in mind on it, let me be choked,
For want of drink, since Ale thou art so lucky,
Isle take the tother pot while it is nappy.
Most honoured Princes, think your self as sa••
In my protection at this town of Lee,
As in the strongest hold you doe possess.
Good M. Goseling now we fly to you
As to our harbour, in your hands it lies,
Either to comfort, or confound our lives?
We now are chased by many savage men,
That with bloodthirstiness pursue our deaths,
Being yet within the closure of their arms,
And desperate of all hope to you we fly.
Cousin Goseling amongst a world of other men
The providence of heaven chose out you,
Either to be made famous for true faith,
Or by disloyal dea•ing infamous,
Presuming on your perfect honesty,
I brought my noble mistress, this grave Doctor,
This infant Lady, and present vs all,
To your safe conduct: obetray our lives,
Boner will give you gold, woe to that good
That bad men get, by selling guiltless blood,
If any such thought have possessed your heart,
Make Merchandise of mine, let these escape,
For these are precious in the eyes of heaven,
Let them depart, lead me to Boner first,
Happy my blood, to quench his raging thirst.
Cousin I wonder, what desert of mine
Hath bred in you this bad opinion,
But I impute it rather to the zeal
You bear your Ladies safety, then the thought
Of any treason you discern in me,
Madam my life, yet out of dangers gripe,
I thrust into your peril, witness heaven,
I take upon me to conceal your flight,
And now I am as deep in Boners hate
As near to danger, as the next to death,
Be confident in me, the zeal I bear,
To the sincere profession of the truth,
Is a sure guard for you to trust upon.
The poorest Princes, only rich in faith,
Will pay you a large bounty of her prayer•,
Rememb•r then you call me Mistress White,
For by that name I past from Billings-gate,
Thence to Graues-end, and so from thence to Lee,
Where under your protection we remain.
In every place we here the Hue and Cry,
Pursue our fearful flight, in every town
We hear the voice of persecution.
And hark I here the officers within
If we be known, we are but dead.
Tush Mistress White,
That name shall give free scope unto your flight.
Good you, good even M. Gosseling,
Good you, good even.
Welcome good M. Constable,
whats the news with you▪
Marry wee have a warrant here from the high
Commission, to seek for a Duchess, and certain other
People, that are in her company, as Doctor Sands, and one
Master Cranwell, her Gentleman-vsher, we are commanded
to search your house for such suspected Persons.
See M. Constable, with me remains
No more then these, if Mistress White my daughter,
Come with her Child, and Nurse to visit me,
With this her husband, this her husbands father,
If you think her a Duchess, him a Doctor,
Then you may apprehend them at your pleasure,
If not, you had best to make a further search,
For I protest, no stranger more then these,
Harbors within my roof.
I take your word sir, and yet I will not, I will sea
She a Duchess bless her good Woman,
Good Mistress White you're welcome to Lee, as I may say wit•
We have an honest neighbor of your Father,
Is this your Child, heaven bless the little mops,
Alack, alack, it is as like the Grand-sire
As ever it may look, my pretty duck.
Whore's M. Constable, have you made search
In these suspicious houses.
Good heaven protect vs, now we are betrayed,
This Villain will, I fear, discover vs.
I know her, them, and all.
Good M. Goseling stand to vs now,
Or we are betrayed.
Get you into my house.
Stand there attend there M. Constable,
My M. Doctor Boner in disguise,
Stays at the gate, let me survey these parties.
Thou know vs Fox, wee have bin fellow va••
Confer the years past, with the present times,
And it will make thy flinty heart relent.
I know thee not.
O Fox, she hath bin the most honoured Mistress
That ever servant served, stay me,
And whilst their bloody hands are busied,
With ceising me, let her, and these escape.
Peace fellow, now no fellows, thy Mistr. when 〈◊〉
In prosperity, turned me off, and therefore I will not 〈◊〉
Her in extremity.
Wilt thou not know her in extremity,
Ungrateful villain.
No sir, I will not, I come to look a Duchess,
Woman be gon, I know thee not, thou a Doct, thou a dunce,
Get thee gon, Cranwell I knew, he was my fellow servant,
Thee I know not, thou art a paultrey fellow,
Away Goseling, take in your geese,
Ship them at your pleasure, when the coast is clear,
I my self will give you a watch-word.
The fellow may mean well, let vs withdraw.
I now perceive, I have done his faith much wrong,
His heart has no relation to his tongue.
Away, whirs the Constable.
Hears neither Cranwell, Sands, Duchess, nor Child,
Go call in my Lord Boner.
Fox.
My Lord.
What hast thou found them Fox?
My Lord we had a wrong intelligence,
But thus you shall surprise them, pass they cannot
But by this way, now will we watch these passages,
For now the tide's at height, if they intend
To ship themselves, it must be presently,
Place your self here, directly by this well,
By you Clunie, here I mean to stand,
Guard that place well, by me this shall be mand.
Stand by me Clunie, Fox, isle pay thee well,
If by thy means we catch these miscreants,
Twill bee thy making Fox, M. Cunstable where will you stand.
Let him keep that way, that bears to landward,
That way, I am sure they will not take,
Go make a strong watch there.
I warrant you M. Fox, let vs alone to guard that passage.
My Lord, you had best sit for your ease.
Oh I could watch hours, days, nights, months, year••
So I might see their hearts weep bloody tears.
Look you stand sure Lord Boner, for I hope,
Anon you•e need a bucket, and a rope.
Keep close together, lest you loose your train,
My bark is ready to receive you straight,
That way you need must take, Isle not be seen,
Heaven be your guide, with me you have not bin.
Good sir farewell, my prayers on you attend,
I will report you for a Princes friend.
Stand, trust me and keep on,
What ere you see shrink not, away begone,
My Lord they come, they come, away, away.
Help, help, for heavens sake help.
My Lord is in the well.
A rope for Bishop Boner, Clunie run,
Call help, a rope, or we are all undone.
Isle to the watch for help.
Help, help, good Fox.
Soft Boner, not too fast
Here is no coming out till they be past,
My arms too short my Lord, a rope is coming.
Here in this well, ropes, ropes my masters.
By this they are far enough,
Well done my Masters, lends your hands,
Draw Du• out of the ditch.
Draw, pull, help all, so, so, well done.
Oh Fox oh Clunie, oh my Masters all,
I am almost drowned, oh lead me to some fire.
Oh Fox, what meanest thou to rush with such rude force.
What would you have me doe, I saw them com∣ming,
And I had not the power to stay my self.
And are they past.
What stand you trifeling here, what seek you for?
If for the Duchess, if for Doctor Sands,
For Cranwell, and the rest, they in disguise,
Are got aboard a Ship, and with full sails,
Fly from the Shore.
Thou telst me a sad tale,
Post Fox, run Clunie, hire a •arc with speed,
Goseling we were suspicious of thy faith,
But by this message, thou hast cleared thy self,
See Goseling, I am almost drowned.
I am sorry for your honour, that you escaped.
Tush we trifle time in their vain pursuit,
Thou shalt have gold Fox; Clunie, thou reward,
Help me to fire good Goseling, Fox away,
We loose much expedition by thy stay.
Isle after them my Lord.
May all things prosper to thy hearts desire,
Come Goseling, prithee lead me to a fire.
And as I told you sir, with that excuse,
I grounded this my colorable passage,
And sent a ship, which stays for her at Lee,
Where by appointment she had promised meeting,
But She is so watched, so guarded, and so bard,
Of her true servants presence and access,
That I despair of her arrival here.
Good M. Bertie, cheer your drooping thoughts,
We are Walloones, but in subjection,
And strict obedience to the church of Rome,
Rewards and promises, are sent abroad,
To every foreign Prince, and Burgomaster,
To stay the Duchess, for the rumour runs,
She is escaped already from her house.
Tic very certain M. Pericell,
Now shall we hear some news,
Here's Doctor Sands.
News of the Duchess, that will please but ill,
I will forbear to speak of our escapes,
All which were winged, with fortune, and success,
And tell you of one haplesse accident,
We all took Ship at Lee, but not together,
For I alone past in a Hollander,
No sooner did the wind blow from the shore,
But rose a tempest, which dispersed our ships,
And we might see the Bark wherein she went,
By violence of the waives forced back again,
Even to the havens mouth.
Even to deaths lean arms,
Thy tragic news, hath slain me M. Sands,
We are as one, and what be•id her person,
I feel in a true essence of her grief.
In these exreames, tic good to hope the best.
Oh M. Perecill, the worst of ills,
Falls on her head, and can I hope the best,
Shees like a Lamb, trapt with a heard of Wolves,
A harmless Dove amongst a thousand Hawk,
If she returned, what providence can save,
A body doomed already to the grave.
See M. Bertie, lift up your sad eyes.
Bertie.
Madam.
Oh see the meeting of two faithful souls,
What a sweet union it doth make of hearts,
When one another mutrall joy imparts.
Defer the story, of our dangers past,
To acquaint vs with some comfortable aid.
Oh pardon me one minute gentle Madam,
If I delay your fair request a little,
To take my fellow servants by the hand,
Good M. Cranwell, the firm loyalty,
You bear you Mistress, in her great extremes,
Shall be recorded in a book of Brass.
Alas I have scanted of my duty much,
My liberal will's joined with unable power,
With my true service I doe join my life,
And owe them both, unto your princely Wife.
You are a Mirror, Nurse, so art thou,
Thy noble carriage, thus I Kiss with joy,
Alas poor Lady, thou, ere thou can go,
Art forced to leave thy country, thy return,
Will make them smile, that now are forced to morn,
Thy infancy in Pilgrimage is spent,
Yet thy abode hereafter shall be Kent,
And be an honoured Countess of that name,
For so my true divining spirits doe aim.
What Gentleman is that.
Tic a Walloone Feris de Ryviers, alias Perecell.
May we repose with him?
Madam you may not,
Neither in this place may I challenge you,
For I am noted, and your coming hither,
Both promised, and expected by great men,
Who to surprise you, have received reward,
All Ports are laid, all passages are stopped,
Search, and inquiry posts through every town.
Madam tic true, nor would I have you stay,
In Emden long, for you are laid for here.
What shall we then doe?
Madam, lets to Santon,
Let M. Bertie• stay with Perecell,
And meet vs there hereafter.
Content, let it be so,
Never two lovers, Married to more woe,
Here meet we, and here part we, oh short pleasure,
Which fortune serves vs, in too small a measure.
My body is divided in the midst,
That way goes half my heart, and this way tother,
Necessity thy sterne deeds I beshrow,
That thy rude hand, gives vs the parting blow,
At Santon I will meet you Madam, here
I dare not know you, so adieu my dear.
Bertie farewell, to Santon bound we are,
With these companions, and our conduct care,
You people happy in a land of peace,
That joy your consciences, with the worlds increase,
Look with indifference into my sad life,
Here my poor husband, dares not know his wife,
And I a Princes, to avoid like danger,
Must use my own dear husband, as a stranger,
Towards Santon we, through deserts, any way,
Though all should leave me, I for grief must stay.
Madam, you see what strictness, we are forced to.
Lets wing our feet, till we can get to Santon,
Madam, let me admire your constancy,
For heaven hath proved your patience every way,
Yet you are confident, and more your zeal to try,
Yo'r forced your loyal husband to deny,
Then what pale trembling cowards heart would faint,
To wade through danger with so pure a saint?
A booty, stend, despoil them, down with them.
We are beset with thieves.
Sands, thou must fly,
For weaponless, thou can no mastery try.
Thieves, thieves.
Pursue them not, lets ceise on them that stay,
Slaves, you have murderd me.
No matter, ceise on her, and rifle both,
Ha, by my faith a gallant lusty wench,
Tic the best booty, that we met this month.
Oh my true servants death, doth grieve me more,
Then all the sorrows that I felt before.
I am jealous of the safety of my wife,
And to escape the better through the woods,
I have clothed my self thus in an Out-lawes shape,
Oh, sight of ruth, my fellow Cranwell slain:
My wife grasped in the arms of ravishers,
Then heaven instruct me with some present means,
That I may find some aid to rescue them,
I have it, a booty, a booty, a brave booty:
But we want help, and aid to compass it,
Four wealthy Merchants, are come down this hill,
Some little aid, and we shall share them all.
Some of you look to see the Woman safe,
Isle help to take the booty.
And so will I.
One bird in the hand's worth two in the bush:
Isle take my present purchase.
Weal share a both sides, come conduct vs to them.
I will, stir not from hence with her,
Till we return.
My life for yours, come, will you uncase.
Doe not disrobe me of my clothes, as you're a man.
Tut, stand not upon terms,
I love to see a Woman naked.
Defend me heaven.
So ho, ho, I have lost a Jewel,
And left it here behind, when I departed hence.
What value.
More precious then thy soul, and this it is,
Villain, think not to scope, your mates are far enough▪
How goodman rascal.
Thus, Villain, for the world,
I would not stain my hands with thy base blood:
But rascal, I will bind you to the peace,
So now, let this ditch shelter you.
My Bertie? heaven be praised,
Though I am robed of all the wealth I have,
I am rich enough, in my possessing thee,
Is M. Cranwell slain?
But sorely hurt, and I am near to death.
Bind up your wounds, with this white hank• 〈◊〉
I am so used to misery, 〈◊〉
That it seems nothing, wheres the Nurse and Child?
Oh cross on cross, lets look about the wood•▪
My Susan lost, I will not stir one foot,
But to the Villains be a second prey,
Unless I find her.
Lend me your hand dear sir, get I once up,
Isle spend the remnant of my blood thats left,
In search of my young Mistress.
Oh whither shall I fly, to save my life,
From the rude hands of these fell ravishers?
My haplesse Lady, and her husband both,
By this, have felt the cruel stroke of death,
Or which is worse, are captive led away,
And to the Vulters gripes become a prey,
Oh hark, I hear them coming, hence begone,
Hard is thy hap, that must be left alone,
Dear babe forgive me, I am forced for life,
To ease my carriage, leave thee to their strife.
On forwards Madam, this way they are gone,
Heaven be propitions, direct vs in our search.
Amen, amen.
Oh I am lost, sink body to the earth,
Ascend my soul, amongst Saints receive new birth.
Help Bertie, help, tic Cranwell faints, oh help.
Speak to me man, look up, some wound belike
Is yet vnstopt, from whence proceeds this large effusion,
Its here, lend me some linen, so, so, he comes again,
And see heavens bounty, he at once hath given,
Your Servant, and your Child: look Madam, see,
Thrown in a bush, and smiles, and laughs at ye.
Having my Husband, Child, and this my servant,
I am the richest Princes on the earth,
But Bertie, whore's the Nurse, and Doctor Sands.
Both fled, but wherefore Madam look you pale.
Oh Bertie, I doe feel the time approach
Of my delivery, oh for help of Women.
What shall we doe, I am beyond my self.
Cranwell, what town is this that stands before.
Madam, they call it Weasel.
Go, begone,
Thy looks pleads for a cunning Surgeon,
We shall not need, thy help, thy wound is deep,
But stay you Bertie, you the Child must keep.
Madam, this storm, the cold, and my deep wounds,
May well excuse me, till my hurts are dressed.
Be gon I say.
How fare you Madam.
Sick I am, heaven knows,
Ready to die, with these my pinching throws,
It rains, and hails, and snows, and blows at once,
Where Bertie, may we hide vs from this storm.
Here in this Church-porch, Madam pray remon••
Help, and lead me thither, now lay the Ch•• down Ber•
Go gather sticks, to help to make a fire,
More plagues my sins doe merit year by year,
But these, good heavens, are more then I can bear.
Alas, alas, this is a homely place,
To bring a Princess of such state to bed,
A wide Church-porch, is made her bed-chamber,
And the cold stones her couch, here are no curtains,
But the bleke Winds, could Clouds and storms of hay••
And they begirt her round, heaven for thy mercy,
This poor distressed Princes shield and save,
Whose cold head lies upon some dead mans grave,
Here comes the Sexton, I will speak to him,
It may be, he may help vs to relief.
Gods sacrament vat maukt ye dare.
Patience good sir.
Vat bedlers in den kirk, looped hence strax.
Uncivil fellow, what thou speak, I know no▪
But thy ill meaning by thy deeds, I guess:
Take that to teach thee more civility.
Out skellum one hundred toucan devil.
Still fortune is against vs, this base fellow
Will raise some tumult to betray our lives,
Yet yonder comes &amp; man of gravity,
It may be he can speak the Latin tongue,
In that Isle let him vnderst and my grief:
Optima &amp; ornatissime fire, aunt quaeso.
Quis es queen tot clamoribus, &amp; tanta exclamation,
Non modo Divinum Cenatorij locum irreverenter &amp;
Orrose occupas, at vrbem tam claram cives{que} &amp; Senators,
Propter etates suas adoratissimas tam flactiose disturbs.
Si cum front tam generosa cor tuum humanum con∣sentire
Videtur, infortunij nostri miserere.
Erasmus Roterodamus propter miseries vestras toto corde
Dolet, colo perfections &amp; virtutes, quas intimo meo animo
Complectar, multi pinto.
Is this Erasmus borne in Rotterdam,
He that so highly loved Sir Thomas More?
Portate hanc ad domum Francisci de Rivers alias Perecell
Sic domino domino{que} Erafmus Rotero damus omnibus
Officijs est observantissimus.
Within this town hath Perecell a house,
There, by the credit of this learned man▪
We have got harbour till the month expire,
In which her heavy burden may be eased,
Good heaven look down upon her misery,
Comfort her in her grief, strengthen her weakness,
Lay not our woes to wretched Boners charge,
Free her sweet heaven, by thy Almighty hand,
That we may once revisit our own land.
Now cheer your self dear sir, here is a time,
To breath a space, this towne's a quiet port,
From the tempestuous gusts of Boners hate.
Some refuge I confess, but the distressed Dutch▪
In Child-bed torment is a fresh alarm
Of new sprung care, I cannot be at quiet,
Until her safe delivery be past.
Doubt not of that, the powerful hand of hey•••
In such extremities is ever strong.
Good heaven, when I recount the miseries
We have already past, me thinks the lottery
Of cruel Fortune, should be quite exhaust,
And yet when I record the name of Boner,
With his desire to become great by blood,
The greater part of woe seems still behind.
Doubtless hes of a most pernicious spirit,
But he that hath restrained his envious rage,
And hitherto repulsed him, still will curb him.
I trust he will, Cranwell I prithee step,
And listen from the women what good news.
Pray save that labour, we can bring the new•
Welcome good Doctor Sands,
What; in good health?
Sir, thanks to heaven, who never leaves his o••
Nor suffers them to perish in distress.
How fares the Duchess.
Gentle host resolve me.
Happy and well, cheer your declining though••
Well that her perilous conflict hath an end,
And happy that to comfort her withal,
Theres borne this day a young Lord Willobie.
A Boy.
A goodly Boy M. Bertie.
And one in whom already doth appear,
These signs of Courage, to revenge your wrongs.
Good heaven I thank thee,
This your news dear friend,
Is as a summons after death to life, the preservation
Of his mother in travel, was wondrous strange,
The place where he is borne is strange,
The loving hands, that did first entertain
His presence to this pilgrimage of life,
Are likewise strange, then as his birth hath bin,
So shall his name, weal call him Peregrine.
A stranger to his Country by that name,
But by his deeds hereafter time may prove,
None more adventured for his Countries love.
As it please his stars, but soft,
What Drum is this, some gall I fear,
To intermix our sweet,
Some sorrow to confound this sudden jioy.
Your servant Fox did vow to bring you word,
If any hurt were secretly pretended.
Is Fox arrived, upon what cause,
Is Fox arrived, upon what cause
Is he past over, doe you know gentle sir.
Himself make answer for himself.
Sir, be not you dismayed, in brief these drums,
And those that after these sad Music dance,
Are none that wish you, nor the Duchess good,
A Captain sent from England, and the bloodhound Clunie,
With them the Duke of Brunswicke, clad in arms,
And at the least, ten Ensigns after him,
These how ere they vizard their intents,
With other colour, as to vex the Emperor,
Yet their whole purpose, is to look for you,
The gates, and walls, are every way beset,
And through the Town, a privy search begun,
And but you presently devise some means,
To scope from hence, theyle take you in your lodging.
Escape, theres now no time to talk of scope,
No, no, the secret providence of heaven,
Hath so ordained, we should be Boners thrall,
And welcome wished death, the end of all.
My mind presages of a better speed.
What M. Bertie why not now escape,
As well as heretofore.
How can that be,
The painful Duchess, lying now in Child-bed.
Is there no art, no means to blind their eyes.
You are so many of you, tic impossible,
Besides the Duchess, she cannot remove.
Oh, were she safe, I cared not for my life.
Nor I for mine.
Nor I, had I ten thousand lives,
Cease you your passions, my brain hath tuto•• 〈◊〉
And in a cunning plot shall set you free.
Doe that, and Bertie is for ever thine.
Fox, and his sword, for that will be thy slave.
Thy friendship will I bear unto my grave.
What thou attempt'st,
My prayers shall help to second.
I neither doe expect thanks, nor reward,
But what I doe is of mere charity,
Then list unto me, there's a friend of mine,
A Country Gentleman, not far from hence,
Whose brother late returned from the wars,
And falling sick, within the City here,
Dyed some few days since, now this Gentleman,
Because his brother shall be buried,
Amongst his Ancestors, decrees this night,
To have his body in a Wagon brought,
Home to the Parish Church, where he remains,
And for that purpose hath his servants sent,
To see it safe conveyed: A waggon like to theirs,
Covered with black, shall be provided straight,
Into the which, by help of Women's hands,
The Duchess, and her Infant shall be lifted,
You, and the rest disguised in mourning weeds,
Shall follow after as the guard,
And in the dead Mans name without suspect,
Pass by the Soldiers, who if they chance,
To question who you are,
The Burgers being by, and made acquainted,
With such a herce, that is to pass that way,
Will quickly answer them, without more search,
How like you this.
It will I hope prove currant.
The pretext is fit, and for the Duchess ease:
Fox has no more sense then a batle-doore,
If in his judgment, we already be not
Delivered from the mischief of their hands.
Come Isle provide you all things necessary.
And after pray for your success therein.
Isle back to them, and help you what I can.
Great Duke of Brunswick, this your flexible,
And courteous disposition of your troops,
To be for Englands service, shall receive
The due belonged to so great a merit.
Noble Captain, I were much to be condemned,
If I neglect my duty to the Church,
But are you sure, these fugitives are here?
Clunie, thou touldst me, that thou saw a man
Of theirs, since we befit the town wast true?
Yes noble Captain, Cranwell the Duchess usher,
And there's no question, but the rest are here,
Well then Captain, the other Ports being guard••
Here with this company weal keep our station,
Where is the Portgraue? have you sent abroad,
Sufficient search amongst the private houses?
We have my Lord.
They cannot be in Weasel,
But either coming forth, or lurking here,
They must in all sorts be discovered by vs.
Oh they are politic, and passing subtle,
And if or art, or policy, can help them,
There's in their company, an Instrument.
Can plot a hundred wales for their escape.
Let them express their cunning, if they can,
And scope our hands, now we have scented them.
How now my Lord, oh I am out of breath,
In coming to you, yet I hope my hast,
Is little for your purpose, they are coming,
Stand on your guard, for this way they must pass,
Ther's Bertie, Cranwell, Sands, with them the Duchess,
It was well done Fox, there's thy reward, stand clo••
Or, now, or never, let vs show our care, stand, who g••there
Some funeral it seems.
It may be some device procured by them,
So to escape the danger of our watch, stand.
I can assure your Lordship, tic not so,
This is the body of young Vandermast,
Whose brother dwelling some four leagues from hence,
Although he died here, yet will have him buried,
Whereas his Ancestors are all entombed,
And for that cause, hath sent his servants for him.
Is it no otherwise.
No mighty Prince,
And would to heaven it had not bin so now:
Pass then, pass, it is not you we look for.
What was this Vandermast, a Citizen?
No my good Lord, he was a Soldier,
A proper Gentleman, and one had served
The Emperor, and others in their wars,
Yet was ordained, to end his days at home.
A thing no more then usual, but how now,
Whats here, an other funeral? nay then
It is a hazard, we are all deluded.
My thoughts began to prophecy as much,
Speak, are not you the parties that even now
Came this way, with a mourning funeral.
Not we my Lord, this is the first appearance,
We made this evening.
What have you there concealed.
Nothing my Lord, but a dead body Coffined,
The brother of our M. late deceased.
I, this is Vandermast, the other past,
Upon my life, was Bertie, and the Duchess.
They were unwilling to look up me thought.
And he that spake, spake with a fained voice.
It was they, it was they, oh, I could tear my hair,
To think we were so grossly overseen.
I said as much, come let vs follow them,
Send horsemen out, to every quarter straight,
My Lord of Brunswick.
You need not bid me ride,
This oversight, hath clapped wings to my thoughts.
Now for some pretty policy again,
To lead them forth the way, until the Duchess,
May reach Polonia, and deserve the prize,
Fox play thy part, some stratagem devise.
Where sits the wind, no news from German
If those malicious fugitives be tayne,
Our officers I fear, neglect their charge,
Our Captain deals but coldly with the States.
I dreamt my Lord, that Bertie and the Duchess▪
Were both advanced upon a regal throne,
And had their temples wreathed with glittering gold.
That throne doe I interpret, is the stage
Of horrid death, these wreathes of Gold, bright flames,
That shall not only circle in their brows,
But wind about their bodies, till they waste,
And be converted to a heap of ashes,
Me thinks this work of ours goes slowly forward,
The ayre of England freezes for defect
Of burning Meteors, to keep it warm.
See yet my Lord, there hath of late bin sacrifice••
In sundry places, many persons, of several qualities,
Whose names were tedious to relate.
Tut this is nothing, every town should blaze,
And every street, in every town look red,
With glowing sinders of the Miscreants:
Till like to Cockle, they were quite extinct,
And nothing seen to flourish but pure Corn:
The morning spends apace, where are these knaves,
Appointed to bring Faggots for the fire,
Wherein bold Latimer, and Ridley must expire.
They come my Lord.
Fie on you loitering knaves,
Why make you not more hast, be gon, I say,
And see the stake, and every thing be ready,
See how I am still procrastinated,
The Mayor of Oxford, means to dine I think,
Before he bring the Prisoners to the stake,
How now? where are they?
Hard at hand my Lord,
But the weak age of Latimer is such,
They cannot come so fast, as else they would,
Besides some disputations as they pass,
Had with the Scholars, hath detained their speed.
He have no disputations, bring them on.
Come brother Latimer, lend me your arm,
The weak, the weak, but not the blind, the blind,
This day in Oxford, shall be seen to guide.
My heart is jocund, brother Ridley, still,
And in my Spirit, I fly unto yon place,
But these weak withered sap•i• are too blame,
These legs of mine, that having now at least,
Full four score and eight winters done me service,
Should now deceive me trust me, but my soul is
Linct in charity, with all the world,
I could be well content, to chide with them.
These are those self iustifying Publicans,
Away with them, conduct them to the fire.
Come, come, spend no time in talk,
Will you convert, be sorry for your crime,
And you shall yet find favour with the Queen.
Fie, fie, spit at them, offer them no mercy.
Proceed in scorn, so was our Master used,
The servants are 〈◊〉 better then their Lord,
Drag them away there, hence away I say.
Stay, stay.
Which voice is that.
Some one thats prisoner in Bocardo here,
Oh stay my Lords, whom lead you there 〈◊〉
The reverent fathers, Ridley, and Latimer?
I Cranmer, but more favour rests for thee,
Because thou art converted from thine errors.
Did you not tell me, they were likewise change▪
And have you falsely circumvented me?
Oh heaven, forgive my •rayterous revolt,
And you the chosen vessels of his love,
Dear Latimer, sweet Ridley pardon me,
To make am•nds, Isle come and dye with you.
As your revolt, grave Cranmer, was our grief,
So to hear these repentant graceful words,
Infuse our hearts with joy, beyond compare.
Will Cranmer then turn, and return again.
To turn to virtue never comes to late.
Thy recantation underneath thy hand,
Is published, and wilt thou now contradict it.
Boner, to cut off needless circumstance,
Let this declare my resolution,
This hand that writ that faithless recantation,
Since I am bard from dying with my friends,
Mark how I punish in this lingering flame,
It shall burn off, as an assured sign,
Hereafter of my constant Martyrdom,
No scandal shall be left by my default,
Open you heavens, and entertain my willing sacrifice,
Yet this is but an earnest of that love,
Hereafter shall in greater measure shine.
Iay lore pull down that scismatick,
Lodge him within the dungeon, load his joints
With Iron fetters, let him fast from meat,
And have no comfort, but continual checks, dispatch, I say.
Farewell religious mates,
What earth doth separate, I hope ere long,
Shall meet in heaven, spite of proud Boners tongue.
Farewell kind brother, ne'er decline no more,
But follow vs, as we have gone before.
What stay we for, my quiet thoughts desire,
To cloth this flesh, in purple robes of fire.
You shall not need to urge our expedition,
Lead them away, their Tragedy once ended,
We will prepare attentive ears to hear,
News of the Duchess landing prisoner.
Yet we have escaped the danger of our foes,
And I that meanwhile was exceeding weak,
Through my hard travel in this infants birth,
Am now grown strong upon necessity,
How forwards are we towards Windam Castle.
Just half our way, but we have lost our friends,
Through the hot pursut• of our enemies.
We are not utterly devoid of friends,
Behold the young Lord Willowhy smiles on vs,
And tic great help, to have a Lord our Friend.
Good heaven I pray once sort to happy end,
This dangerous Pilgrimage, here undertook,
Sit on this bank a while, and rest our limbs,
Wearied with travail, as our minds with care.
You are a Captain of the Palsegraues band,
These are the other recreants, cease them both,
The hundred Crowns proposed, are surely yours,
I know him valiant, and therefore I will climb
Up in this tree, to see, and not be seen,
Pray lends a hand, whilst you surprise them,
I will laughing stand.
If I fit you not, ere you come down,
Say Fox is a Goose.
Sir I attach you as an enemy
Unto the Palsegraue, in whose land you are,
You and you ••ull, obey it ye were best,
Or in resistance hazard both your lives.
Attach me sir, I know no reason why,
Nor to my knowledge am an enemy,
Unto the Palsgraue, or the meanest man
Within his confines, were are Travellers,
And will immediately forsake the land.
You are a Lance knight, this your Concubine.
And these your Bastards, that by rapine live,
And thus disguised you come to undermine,
Our Countries government, then yield your selves.
Though misery hath stamped upon out brow
The mark of poverty, yet gentle stranger,
Doe not so far forget all manliness,
To be a slanderer of the Innocent.
Term me a slanderer.
And a Villain too, if thou maintain these defa∣motions
Term me a Thief, my wife a Concubine,
My Children base borne; by a soldiers faith,
Were thou the greatest spirit the Palesgraue hath,
I cannot brooke this slavish insolence,
That I am angry, witness this reply,
I will defend mine honour though I dye.
Villains I charge you all environ him,
So many to one silly passenger,
Then farewell woman weakness, welcome sword,
For once Isle play the man, to save my Lord.
Why this is excellent, now I hope to live
To see them apprehended or else slain.
These hopes Isle cross, by cutting down the branch
Whereon he builds this weak foundation.
Oh I shall fall, help me good M. Fox.
I, wherefore Clunie, to betray my Lady?
So hateful Boner, dived into the well,
So fall this damned Parator to hell,
And now Isle help my Mistress to my power,
Fox, come out a your hole, and take your Cozens part
Or Isle pull you out by the ears.
Help, help, our Captains ••••hered, raise the town.
The Captain slain then Fox tic best to fly,
And lest some sad mischance should second them,
I will convey these Children to the Woods,
That borders near at hand, oh heaven I pray,
Make this disastrous time a happy day.
 Help, help, our Captains slain.
I must down, bless my neck and care not.
 Follow, follow, follow.
Oh, my guts, a vengeance on this Fox.
 This way, this way follow.
What cries are these, oh hast thou slain the Cap.
If he be slain, require not heaven his blood,
Of miserable Bertie.
 Help, help, help.
A second volley of heart wounding words,
Oh fly my love, fly, fly, and save thy life,
Before the town be raised, shift for your self,
If you be taken, theres no way but death.
Within. Here, here, this way.
Why stir you not, our foes are hard at hand.
I am so amazed I know not where to go,
Isle take this way.
Rather dear Love take this.
That way they come.
What shall we doe,
Behold a Ladder raised against this house,
In happy time, mount up and save your life,
I will defend the bottom with my sword,
And though heaven knows I am orelaid with woe,
Isle rather dye then see your overthrow.
But I shall leave thee to thine enemies.
Shift for your own life, take, no care for mine▪
For heavens sake quickly, you delay the time.
Fear lend me wings, but oh my griefs so great,
It ways me down, and I must needs retreat.
 Come away, come away, ho! come away.
They are at hand, oh good my love mount up.
See where they are that made the fray.
You fellow, that run up the Ladder,
Down, down, or Isle pull you down in a ropes name.
He is my husband, and a Gentleman,
And Isle defend him from your tyranny.
A Woman fight.
Such are my fortunes now,
Therefore keep off, who ventures on this way,
Treads a path that leads to his death.
My friends what seek you, wherefore com••amm'd
You have slain a Captain of the Palsgraues •an••
Wounded his soldiers, and besides we hear,
You are a Lanceknight, this your Concubine,
And come disguised to undermine the State,
In whose defence these men have armed themselves.
You seem a Burgomaster, by your habit,
And they that mis-inform'd you were too blame,
Know gentle sir, I am an Englishman,
And on some special business bound this way,
Toward Windam-Castle, till we were disturbed,
By the oppression of the man that's slain.
I wreak not friend of what estate you are,
Nor to what end you travail through these parts,
You have slain a map, and you must answer it,
According to the law of Nations.
Down with him, he shall answer it with death.
Peace there, I charge you, in the Princes name.
It seems these men are thirsty for my blood,
And without law are set to take my life,
Then it were madness for a man to yield,
To abide a trial, and the judgment past:
Since I must dye, Isle choose the death my self,
And thats to stand on a defensive guard,
Except you swear as you're a Christian,
A Magistrate, and one that will doe right,
That I shall have due process of the Law
And be defended from the multitude.
Doe not, I pray, endanger so your life,
But trust unto the shelter you have got.
A sorry fortress to defend his life.
But will you take that oath.
By heaven I doe, and I will see it kept inviolate.
Then work the worst of fate, if right bear sway,
He cannot speed amiss that does no wrong,
Oh, innocence is bold, free, liberal,
Fearless of any danger, that may fall,
I 〈◊〉 me sir, a Prisoner to the law,
Justice is blind gaze not upon our persons,
Although our birth be near so mean or base,
But fix the eye of judgment on our case.
So, bind their hands, &amp; lead them to the statehouse
They shall have justice done immediately,
Oh stay a while, I have lost my little babes,
What savage hand hath tan my children hence,
Whilst we were busied in this luckless brawl.
My Children borne away! oh then I fear,
It is some treason to abridge our lives,
And that the Captain, that did wrong vs thus,
Did it to that intent.
Tic so, till now we ne'er were truly miserable,
Our other miseries were sunneshine days,
Compared unto the greatness of this storm,
Oh suffer me good sir, to seek them out,
For without them, I am but half my self.
A strict enquiry shall be made forthwith,
In every place that borders here abouts,
Grieve not too much, though such are poor men's treasure
What needy thief to steal them would take pleasure.
Right welcome's Erbaigh, to the Poland king,
Nich'as Van hove, our worthy Burgomaster,
What means this concourse of so many men,
And what are they that you lead bound with you.
Strangers, an please your excellence my Lord,
That have committed murder in your realm,
Slain Wisendrop a Captain of your band,
For which offence, our purpose is to lead them,
unto the State-house to receive their judgment.
If I mistake not, I should know that face,
Oh tic the virtuous Lady Katherine,
This M. Bertie, her espoused husband,
And has your good stars in your Pilgrimage,
Brought you amongst you Friends?
The Lady Katherine, what the Suffolks Duchess,
My quondam Love, held through the streets with cords,
And for the murder of a man that lives,
Oh tic uncivil usage, my good Lady,
Yar villains all unto our Sovereignty,
How dare you thus abuse her royal birth.
Pardon my Lord, we did not know her state.
Her heavenly face, then which theres none more fair,
In England, or the World,
Might without other witness of her state,
Suffice to tell you, she was nobly borne,
This is that Duchess, mirror of this age,
She whom the lordly Bishops of the Realm,
Boner, and Gardner, persecute so much,
Pardon me Madam, that I have so long,
Suffered your excellence to stay in bonds.
This your acknowledgment, most mighty king,
Amazes me, considering my distress,
For tic a common custom in the world,
To take no notice of the miserable.
I stand amazed at this strange accident,
The circumstance whereof weal hear elsewhere,
Mean time thrice welcome to the Polands king,
And much it grieves me that so great a Princes,
Should be so basely handled in my land.
Oh help dear Lord, and shield vs from our foe•▪
We are pursued by Brunswicke, and his Captains,
Who seek our lives, we fly to your protection.
Whence are you friends.
The truest friends we have▪
Of England mighty Prince, I know them both,
The first is Doctor Sands, a worthy man,
The other Cranwell, and my Secretary.
My Lord of Erbaigh, and the king of Poland,
Shield not those traitors, both to heaven and men,
From the due punishment of their offence,
Behold an Englishman, &amp; a Commander of a good esteem▪
Has his commission signed to apprehend,
This Sands, and Cranwell, fled to you for help,
Then as you tender the privilege of Princes,
Ore their subjects▪
Suffer this writ to have his current here,
As I have done through all my territories.
It ill beseems the noble duke of Brunswicke,
To be a persecutor of good men.
Or you good Captain, agent in this cause.
Thats recreant Bertie, and the Suffolks Duchess▪
They likewise are included in this scroll.
My Lord of Poland, we demand them all,
Then yield them royal sir, unto ou• hands.
First will I sacrifice ten thousand lives,
Ere suffer these religious souls to dye,
My Lord of Brunswicke, you are over bold,
To make so rash an entrance in my land,
Without our special licence granted first.
The league betwixt vs warrants my approach.
The League, for this time, is your privilege,
But as you dread the Palsgra•es puisance
And fear to violate our wrighten love,
Immediately vntred your forward steps,
Forsake the soil where you have set your foot,
Or look to be withstood with fire and sword,
These Lambs are fled into our folds for aid,
And weal defend them, say what may be said.
This disobedience draws upon your land,
Deserved malediction from the Church.
That weal dispense withal, and to let you know,
How we doe slight those stinglesse menaces,
Here I create this noble Gentleman,
Earl of Crozam, an Earldom under vs,
Religious Doctor Sands, our Chaplain,
And M. Cranwell our chief Secretary,
So tell Lord Boner, Gardner, and the rest.
Health and long life unto the King of Poland,
Captain, from Englands queen, I thus salute you,
Here is a countermand for your Commission,
By which you are enjoined to stay the search,
After the Suffolk Duchess, and her friends.
To stay the search? is our dread Sovereign,
Altered in her Religion, or is she dead:
Shoe's dead good sir, Queen Mary is deceas't,
And the most virtuous Lady Elizabeth,
Invested in the regal dignity,
My Sovereign hearing▪ that the Lady Katherine,
The Suffolk Duchess, her allie in blood,
Did live obscurely in these Provinces,
In want, in misery, and great distress,
Sends to repeal both her, and all her friends,
If such a Lady harbour in your land,
I doe entreat her highness Proclamation,
May have his currant course through every town.
In you dear sir the Proclamation ends,
Here is the Duchess, here are all her friends.
I kindly thank you, for your worthy pains▪
Hath the director of all humane lives,
Preserved my Sovereign, that heroic Maid,
From the entangling snares of blood and death,
And changed her prison, to a royal Throne?
Here on this ground, where first I heard the news,
I render thanks unto the gracious heavens,
Thou that send Balm of comfort to the wounded,
Joy to the bruised heart, oppressed for truth,
Lengthen her days as long as heaven hath stars,
Or this fair frame foundation for a world,
Or if it be thy gracious providence,
For to remove her to a happier place,
Let in her stead arise, and from her ashes come,
A Phoenix may enlighten Christendom,
Oh, had I now my Children lately lost,
I should survive as I had near bin crossed.
That comfort Madam on my bended knee,
Your servant Fox humbly presents your grace.
My Per•grin, my Susan, then for care
To make a mixture with this too much Joy,
Or I shall surfeit with the rarity.
Justice my Lord, Justice, Fox hath broke my no•ke
How comes it Fox, that he exclaims on thee?
Marry andt please your Majesty, it was thus,
This villainous rascal, followed to surprise my Lady,
And being afraid to venture himself, set on one of 〈◊〉
Palsegra•es Captains to doe it, whilst he climbed
Up into a tree and stood laughing, now sir, I cut the bow,
And he fell down, and if you have not broke your neck,
I would you had.
If this be true, he has bought his pleasure dear,
Sir begone, this justice I allow,
For his derision t•en, deride him now.
All things goes backward for our good,
Madam farewell, your punishment is past,
Now set your mind to punish vs at last.
Revenge shall be a stranger in my heart,
The tortures Isle inflict upon my foes,
Is kindness, for unkindness, grace for death,
For what's prosperity but a puff of breath,
My Lord of Brunswick, pray let vs be friends.
Withal my heart, since every heart befriends you.
It joys me that your sorrows here take end,
Wilt please you Madam, here to stay with vs
Or go for England, if you so resolve,
Isle see you furnished with a noble fleet.
To England with full sails, blow gentle wind,
I long to see my Sovereign noble maid,
Princes I humbly thank you for these honours,
Done to your handmaid, far unworthy them,
But time shall testify my thankfulness,
Be smooth rough sea, that I may pass a maine,
To doe my duty to my Sovereign.
Down with him, give vs leave to be revenged on him.
For all the tyranny that he hath used
What have I done, you should revile me thus?
What hast thou done to deserve our hate?
Defend me Officers, shall I without Law,
Be trod to death by the rude Multitude.
Keep off my Masters,
Tic her highness pleasure,
He shall not be convicted but by Law.
And whether goes he.
To the Marshalsea.
We will not leave him, till we see him in.
This is the Prison, here the Keeper comes,
And with him Master Grindall, Scory, Cox,
Such reverent men as, Boner, by your means,
These many years have suffered much distress▪
But now they are delivered, and their place,
Boner, you must an other while supply,
So says the strict Commission I have here.
Trust me, I glory not to see his fall.
Believe me▪ nor doe I.
Though wee know, had not our Keeper bin more• kind to v•
Then you were M. Boner, we might here,
Have starve•d for want of meat, but heaven forgive you,
We doe with all our hearts.
And we will labour too, so much as in vs lies,
Unto the Council, you may be favourably
Dealt withal, so fare you well.
Farewell, this course inconstant fortune keeps,
While wan one laughs, an other always weeps.
Such measure as to others he hath met,
The same let him receive, good M. Keeper.
Remember Lollards-tower.
Let his best diet be but from the basket,
Nay, bread and water, is too good for him,
His fat Shroue-tuesday sides may well endure,
A hungry Lent or two, and never hurt him▪
Here I deliver up my charge.
And I receive him,
Come M. Boner, you must go with me
Stay I have bethought me, Isle recant.
It cannot serve your turn.
Recant, he hath already twice or thrice done so.
Tut, he can turn with every weathercock,
Away with him.
Come sir, will you go.
Who wast that said the Duchess came through Southwark.
It was the Lord Clinton.
I left her Grace now at S. Georges Church,
Accompanied with M. Richard Bertie,
With Doctor Sands, Cranwell, and trusty Fox,
And diverse other Gentlemen attendants.
Here at the Martialsea weal stay her coming,
And hark, her trumpets sounds her near approach,
Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, I pray you all
By that dear love you owe her majesty,
To be officious in the entertain,
Of this renowned Lady Katherine.
 Heavens preserve your grace,
Your relief to poor Prisoners.
What Prison call you this?
The kings-bench Madam, where all these prisoners,
Are detained for debt.
If they be able to make satisfaction, &amp; will not,
They are worthy to lye there,
But if by cruelty of Creditors,
Tic Christian charity to succour such.
I have heard that some lie there in policy,
And have engrossed into their greedy hands,
The goods of divers thrifty minded men,
And though well able, yet they will not pay.
Great pity that such men escape unpunished,
But are they in the number that doe beg.
No Madden, they are laid on beds of Down,
Fare daintily, and never taste of want,
Except it be the want of Liberty,
And that's no want, because they have large walks,
As yards, and gardens, and fair bouling-allies,
With company at will to spend the time.
To them we wish a better Conscence,
But to the poor, and such as want indeed,
One of you give amongst them 40. Angels,
My troubles make me sensible of theirs:
Distress is sharply set, and bites too sore,
To be endured by such as are true poor,
So forwards Gentlemen.
Room for the Lords.
Thrice welcome is the noble Suffolks Duchess▪
To vs, and to her royal majesty,
In whose high favour, you are highly plac'•▪
In sign whereof her princely Majesty,
Restores you to your ancient Siegnories,
Entitles you, as due to you by title,
Baroness of Willowby▪ and Earsbie,
Duchess Dowager of Suffolk,
Her highness nearest and most dearest subject.
Your goods, and lands extracted violently,
Her Majesty restores to you again,
Heere's the true inventory of them all,
As they were ceis'd into the Bishops hands.
And that you may build on her Princely love,
It is her pleasure, M. Richard Bertie,
The husband of your troubles and your cares,
Should be chief Secretary to the State,
Till higher titles doe advance his worth.
An honour my good Lord Admiral,
That I esteem, and yet desire it not,
O be it not offensive to her Grace,
That I have leave to lead a private life,
After my painful travel in strange Lands.
Enjoy your minds contentment with your mind.
You, Doctor Sands, her highness, and the Clergy,
Doe consecrate Archbishop of York.
An honour far exceeding my desert.
Master Cranwell Gentleman usher to her grace,
Her highness will retain in self same place,
To attend her Majesty.
Withal my heart, I humbly tender a true sub∣jests
Yet might it please her royal Majesty,
Since I have served my Lady in distress,
Endured so many troubles for her sake
That I may live, and dye in serving her.
A virtuous inclination, hold it still,
It will renown thee more then to be great.
My Lord of Hunsdon, Clinton, Effingam,
I humbly thank her Majesty, and you,
Oh may I live to express a loving heart,
By some good action pleasing to you all.
Madam be good unto a company of poor Prisoners.
What other Prison Cranwell call you this.
This is the Prison of the Marshalsea,
Chiefly pretended for her Highness household,
But there are divers other prisoners.
Tic charity to help distressed men,
Of what estate so ere, cause they be men,
I leave their faults respect unto the Law,
Give them as much as the'ther Prisoners,
But what is he that with a downecast look,
Gives signs of discontentment.
Madam I am a Prisoner here,
But joy to see your Grace at liberty.
That face and voice, I oft have seen and heard,
Did not you sometime make abode in Lee.
Madam I did, and those that knew me called me Goseling.
Then I am sure, you knew one Mistress White,
This is the man that helped me to escape,
When we were near beset with Boners trains.
It is my kinseman Madam, now I know him,
What cause hath brought thee to this hard distress.
The cause even now aleaged.
Hath Boner bin so cruel to my friend,
Before mine eyelids wear the seal of sleep,
If heaven be pleased I will release thee Goseling.
And pay thy charges to the utmost farthing,
Oh my dear friend, it never shall be said
I was ungrateful, where I was befriended,
And now his troubles make me call to mind,
The faithful dealing of my servant Fox,
See Lords, a man whom I dismissed my service,
More through selfe-will, then any just offence,
Yet hath he quited that disgrace so well,
That I admire the strangeness of his art,
For Boner used him as a special means,
To seek my life, which oftentimes he saved,
Paying my great unkindness, with kind love,
Many such servants may this land afford,
That use their wits to such good purposes,
Here as a part of thy deserved reward,
I freely give thee a hundred pounds a year,
And when I dye my land shall make it good.
And when Fox fails you, let him dye in a ditch.
Gramercies gentle servant, now my Lords,
Lets bend our pace towards famous London-Bridge,
How pleasing is the prospect of the City,
Now I have bin five years a stranger here,
Thorough the same to White-hall to her grace,
That I may see my loving Sovereigns face.

